OF Scandal: Together with A Consideration of the Nature OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY
AND Things Indifferent. Wherein these weighty Questions are fully Discussed:
Whether Things Indifferent become necessary, when commanded by Authority? Neg.
Whether Scandalous things, being enjoined, may lawfully be done? Neg. Whether a
Restraint laid upon things indifferent, without a reasonable Ground, be not an
infringement of Christian Liberty? Aff. Who is to be judge, whether there be a
reasonable Ground or no, in such cases? How far forth we are bound in
Conscience to obey Humane Laws.


LONDON: Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel over against the Stocks-Market,
1680.

TO THE READER.
THere are but one or two things (by way of Preface) that I shall trouble the
Reader withal, in his passage to the ensuing Discourse; and they relate partly
to the Pedigree, and partly to the Age of this exposed Birth. When as the
Ceremonies, (those Dregs of Romish Superstition, and Troublers of our Nation)
which for diverse years together seemed to be dead (and were taken by many to be
deadly) began to be revived again, and pressed with more eagerness and
fierceness than ever; so that now there was no room left for Composition, but
every Minister must either pay the whole (I cannot say, Debt, but) demanded
Conformity, even to the least mite, and last farthing, or become Bankrupt; it
highly behoved every one to cast up his accounts, and consider with himself,
whether he were solvendo par, and could with a good conscience defray the great
and extraordinary charges of such an entire Compliance, as was required; or
whether he must not be constrained (in such a storm) to throw overboard, not
only (...), his tackling, (Acts 27.19) but also to part with, (...), (Mark
12.44.) all his living, to redeem and secure the life of his soul and
conscience. On the one hand, the Avengers of the blood of their
Diana-Ceremonies, pursued the scent so hotly, that there was no possibility of
escaping for any one who did not take sanctuary at their Altars: The storm was
so impetuous and outrageous, as threatened inevitable ruin (as to all outward
concerns) to every one who did not shelter himself under the Act of Uniformity,
and swim along with the stream that way that the Wind and Tide carried him. On
the other hand, there seemed to be such Gulfs, and Shelves, and Rocks, as
threatened evident shipwreck of a good conscience, or endangered drowning in the
passage and practice of what was enjoined: So that it was the great concernment
of every one that would look to the end of his Voyage, that is, beyond these
temporal things, to those that are eternal, and would secure his interest in
another world, to look about him, and to take care that he did not condemn
himself (in his judgment) in that thing which he allowed (in his practice), but
to be fully persuaded and satisfied in his own mind, that so he might not act
doubtingly, but in faith, as is required, Romans 14.22, 23. This posture of
affairs put me upon an impartial Examination and Consideration of what was
alleged on both sides; and finding that the resolution of the case in general
(besides the consideration of particulars) depended chiefly upon these Points
handled in the following Discourse (for if the command of Authority does not
alter the nature of things, and render that necessary, which before was but
indifferent, then (according to their own principles) the Law of Scandal takes
hold of me, and I am bound not to do that, at which another is offended. And
again, If that which is commanded remain still indifferent, then I am bound
also to assert my Christian Liberty, and not tamely to give it up (
Issachar-like) and so make my self a servant, yea a slave of men, by my own
consent and voluntary act;) Thereupon I entered upon a more narrow search of
these Principles, (as I may call them), and upon the whole, I came to that
result and issue in my thoughts, which I have Transcribed into these Papers.

Concerning the point of Scandal, though many have traveled in the same way
before me; yet they have left such hedges and ditches behind them, that would
put a man either to a stand, that he can go no further, or to a leap, or to a
turn, to get over, or pass by them. These I have endeavored to level (for I am
a great friend to such levelling) and to make every thing as smooth and plain
as possibly I could; and likewise to lay down such general Rules, as may lead
us to a determination of such other cases of the same nature as may occur.
These things were then scribled (and some of them delivered in a public
Auditory, before that fatal blow was given, Aug. 24.62.) and have lain in
obscurity ever since; and whether they are happily or unhappily now brought
forth, and exposed to public view, the event must determine.

I have but one word more, and that is a word of Request (and I think a very
reasonable one) viz. That the Reader will be so charitable, as to believe that
it was purely the powerfully convincing evidence of Truth shining in my eyes,
that inclined me (like a strong Bias) to run counter to my own interest. And
surely he must be highly uncharitable, that can imagine that any one person
(much less a considerable number of persons of unexceptionable Morals, and in
all other respects serious and sober) should be so desperately bent upon his
own undoing, as to shut his eyes against the light, and refuse to admit of
truths of such comfortable importance as these, tending to Conformity, are of.
Vale.

OF SCANDAL: Together with A Confideration of the Nature of Christian Liberty,
and Things Indifferent, etc.
1 Cor. X. 32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor
to the Church of God.


THE Apostle Paul, being consulted by the Corinthians, among other things,
concerning the lawfulness of eating meat offered in sacrifice to Idols, first
states the case, by distinguishing of those Idolothytes, and accordingly passes
a different Verdict and Sentence upon them. Some were eaten in the Idol's
Temple, some elsewhere. Some were eaten in the Idol's Temple (chap. Cudworths
True Notion, etc. In Exposit. Legis.
8. v. 10.) in the nature of a feast upon, or after, a sacrifice: A thing very
usual among the Heathen, as Abravanel has observed (...), In old time, says
he, whosoever sacrificed to Idols, presently made a feast of the sacrifices.
Hence that Invitation of one in Virgil's Eclogues to his friend,

Cum faciam vitula pro frugibus, ipse venito. And this was so usual, that
Plutarch somewhere remarks it for a strange and uncouth rite in the worship of
the Goddess Hecate, that they which offered sacrifice to her, did not partake
thereof. Now this practice of eating thus of Idolothytes in the Idols Temple,
and at the Idols Table, the Apostle absolutely condemns, as being a Communion
with Devils, and a partaking with them in their Idolatry, v. 20, 22. To eat
them thus, was to eat them under the very notion and formality of an
Idol-sacrifice, and so was a plain honoring of the Idol, and might easily be
interpreted an acknowledgment of their Deity, and an approbation of that
Idolatrous worship and service which was given them. But then, when they had
done feasting in the Temple, if any thing were left (as there was a great deal
sometimes) they were wont to carry part of it home to their houses, and make
merry with it there, as the Learned Scholiast upon Aristoph. in Plutus tells
us, (...), (...) They that went from a sacrifice, carried something of it to
their friends, according to a certain Law, viz that Law mentioned by Petite, in
his Collection of Attick Laws, That they that go home from a sacrifice, should
carry part of it to their friends. Hence that of Theocritus in Bucolicis, --
(...) And then after all this, that which remained, belonged to the Priests.
(...), Schol. Aristoph. in Vesp. There was a law, that the Priests should have
the Relics of the sacrifice; which Relics (as August. in his Expos. on Romans
2. tells us) were sometimes sold for them in the Market. Now both these sorts,
viz. which either they were invited to at the Tables of their unbelieving
neighbors, or had bought in the Market for their own private use, the Apostle
allows them to eat of, extra casum scandali, because the earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof, v. 26. i. e. their property could not be so altered by
that offering, but that still they remained the good creatures of God made for
our use, and which he has given us (in Christ) freely to enjoy; and to eat them
thus, was not to eat them under any Religious notion or capacity, but only as
meat; matter of food, and the good creatures of God. But in case any were
offended therewith, then they must forbear, v. 28. and that for another reason,
though expressed in the same words, The earth is the Lords, etc. i. e. There are
other good creatures enough, which may as well be had, that we may make use of,
without such offense. So that the Sum of the Apostles answer is, A caution
against two extremes (as P. Martyr observes). One of those, who, upon the
account of their knowledge, that an Idol was nothing (chap. 8. v. 4.) would eat
of these Sacrifices, even in the Idol's Temple. The other, of weak ones, who,
for fear they should chance to eat of such meat, would forbear all kind of
flesh-meat, and feed only upon herbs, Romans 14.2. The former he cautions against
eating, and would have them forbear; the latter, against forbearing, and would
have them eat. And then hereupon he shuts up his discourse with two general
Rules, whereby all the actions of our lives must be regulated, viz. The Rule of
Piety, and the Rule of Charity. The Rule of Piety, which is, That we should aim
at the glory of God in all, v. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. And the Rule of Charity, which is,
That we should have respect to the good of our brethren, and of all in general;
in the Text, Give none offense, etc. which he illustrates by his own example,
v. 33. Even as I please all men in all things; not seeking mine own profit, but
the profit of many, that they may be saved. It Is the Rule of Charity, that I
have made choice of for present Consideration, Give none offense, etc.

Which words divide themselves into a general caution, and the universal extent
thereof. The Caution in the former words, Give none offense.] viz. In the use
of such indifferent things, as he had been speaking of before. q. d. Though it
be not unlawful in it self, to eat any kind of meat that offers it self to your
use, either at your neighbors table, or in the shambles; yet in case any take
offense thereat, then you must govern your selves accordingly, and forbear it
in that case. The words in the Original are, (...), Be ye inoffensive, or,
without offense: The Ethiopick renders it, Be ye exemplary, (far enough from
the words, though not so far from the sense; for Tertull. defines Scandalum, by
Exemplum) The word (...) comes originally from (...), which signifies
primarily, and in general, to beat; and thence is, (...), rendered, to dash
against, Mat. 4.6. -- Lest at any time thou dash thy foot ((...)) against a
stone, to beat upon, c. 7. v. 27. the winds beat upon ((...)) that house. To
stumble (which is, when a man dashes, or beats, or hits his foot against any
thing) John 11.9. he stumbles not ((...)). So Romans 9.32, 33. and it is ranked
with, (...), Romans 14.21. which shows that it is translated from a literal and
natural, to a Metaphorical and Moral sense: so the Noun (...) signifies any
thing in the way against which a man may stumble and dash his foot; rendered
therefore a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 8.9. and Romans 14.13. and barely stumbling,
Romans 9.32. they stumbled against the stumbling-stone, or stone of stumbling,
(...), and offense, Romans 14.20. It is evil for that man that eats with
offense: And so the other Noun (...), is rendered, offense. Also 2 Cor. 6.3.
Give none offense. And from hence, immediately is derived the word of the Text,
(...), which is verbum ambiguum, says Erasm. And indeed, being absolutely
considered, it may seem (...), equally to incline to an active and passive
signification, and to admit of the construction both of giving and taking
offense. It is used only in three places. In one of them, Beza understands it
passively, Phil. 1.10. without offense ((...)) till the day of the Lord,
Inoffenso cursu pergatis, says he, i. e. walk so warily, as not to stumble at
any stumbling-stone you may meet with in your way, i. e. not to be offended, or
take offense. In another, it is undoubtedly taken actively, Acts 24.16. I
exercise my self to have a conscience void of offense ((...)) toward God, and
toward men, i. e. not to offend, either in sight of God or men; not to give
offense to God or men; not to do any thing for which my conscience may check me
as an offender either against God or men; or, for which, either God or men may
call me to account as a transgressor. Then for the Text (the only place else,
where the word is used), A lapide takes in both senses, Tam inoffensus, quam
non offendens, neither giving, nor taking offense to or from others; but the
active sense seems to me the most natural and unconstrained, and most agreeable
to the following words; and so our Translators took it, rendering it, Give none
offense. Thus Theodoret expressly, A vobis nulla oriatur causa scandali. And so
it is exactly paralleled with that other place, 2 Cor. 6.3. where it is expressed
plainly, (...), Giving no offense in any thing.

Thus for the Caution. The Extent thereof follows in the latter clause,

-- Neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.] Where,
by Jews and Gentiles, are meant such as are unconverted strangers and enemies
to the faith of Christ, distinguished therefore from the Church of God: So that
under these three ranks the Apostle understands all sorts of men in the world,
who were either Jews, or Gentiles, or Christians; none of which must be
offended by us, in the use of our liberty in things indifferent; so the Dutch
Annot. and so P. Martys Omnes status and omnia hominum genera voluit a nobis
respici ne scandalizentur, vel ab Evangelio avertantur, seu in ejus cursu
quoquomodo retardentur. And Chrysostom. to the same purpose, (...), (...) We must
not only not smite (i. e. offend) our Brethren, but also not those that are
without.

Thus I think I have made the way clear and plain before the face of the
Doctrine, which is this.

We must forbear the use of our liberty in things indifferent; when others are
offended and scandalized thereat. Or, nearer to the words of the Text, thus: We
ought not to give offense, by the use of Indifferences, to any persons
whatsoever. Even, as Nurses many times forbear several meats, though wholesome
in themselves, and suitable to their own stomachs, for their Nurselings sakes,
because they find them not agreeing with their constitutions, but hurtful and
prejudicial to them: And, as that man should do very ill, who, though he could
sit his horse, and run him full-speed without danger to himself, yet should
come scouring through a Town, where many Children are in the way, who, before
he is aware, may be rid over by him, and spoiled; so there are many things
lawful in themselves, and which, as to our own particulars, we might safely and
war ntably do, which yet we must forbear for others sakes, when their stomachs
will not bear them; when there are weak Christians in the way, which may be rid
over by us, and wounded thereby. This duty of inoffensive walking, in such
cases, is often inculcated upon us, Romans 14.13. -- but judge this rather, that
no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way,
(...). The Apostle here makes use of both the synonymous words for Scandal, to
enlarge and strengthen the prohibition: And this is spoken upon occasion of
indifferent things (as the Context, both precedent and subsequent clearly
shows) viz. of meats and drinks Levitically unclean, but which now under the
Gospel might indifferently be used as well as any other; and likewise of Jewish
Fasts and Festivals, the observation whereof was a while permitted and
indifferent, viz. till the Interrment of the Ceremonial Law in the ruins and
rubbish of the Temple. So that it is, as if he had said, Let persons forbear
the use of meats and drinks forbidden to the Jews (though now lawful to
Christians), and let them not be offended at their observation of their Fasts
and Festivals (though now but a cifer, without any signification). Then, again,
a little after he speaks very fully, v. 21. It is good neither to eat flesh,
nor drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or
is made weak. Here he proceeds to enlarge his Doctrine touching Scandal, beyond
the controversy that occasioned this his discourse. For (as Estius well
observes) he teaches that to avoid the offense and scandal of our Brethren, we
must abstain not only from things prohibited by the Law, (though that Law was
really now expired) but also from things not prohibited; from, flesh, wine, or
any indifferent thing whatever. It is good] not only accidentally, as Ex
accidente obligat lex, sive ratio scandali. Sanders. de Oblig. Consc. p. 116.
some would have it, but morally, and in it self, both in regard of God, being
very acceptable and pleasing unto him; In regard of our Brethren, being
profitable for them, and conducing to their Edification; and also in regard of
our selves, being a duty God requires of us, in performance whereof we shall
discharge our consciences, and have comfort. -- Neither to eat flesh, nor drink
wine, nor any thing (i. e. to make use of any indifferency whatever) whereby
thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak], (...). Three words
importing for substance one and the same thing (though Infirmitas nominat
promptitudinem ad Scandalum; offensio aucem nominat indignationemscandalum
autem importat ipsam impactionem ad ruinam. Aq. 22ae. q 43. a. 1.
some have endeavored to distinguish them) not without an observable Emphasis;
for hereby he insinuates the great heed, care and circumspection Christians
should take, lest any ways by the use of things indifferent, they should be an
occasion of offense to a weak Brother. So again in the very next Chapter, Romans
15.1. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves. i. e. Though a thing be not only lawful in it self, but that
wherein we take much pleasure and content in doing of it; yet if there be any
weak stomach by, which perhaps cannot away with such a dish, we must deny our
selves therein, and abridg our selves of our liberty, for their sakes. And the
like care he presses upon the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8.8. Take heed, lest by any
means this liberty of yours, become a stumbling block to them that are weak. i.
e. Though in some cases you may lawfully eat of things offered to Idols, yet
you must be sure you do not do it, to the offense of any. And as in these
places we have the Rule sufficiently confirmed, so elsewhere we may find
Examples hereof in Practice. The Example of Christ offers it self first to
consideration, who wrought a miracle for the avoiding of offense, Mat.
17.24-27. Nevertheless, lest we should offend them, go thou to the Sea, etc. q.
d. Though (as thou say) I am not bound to pay this Tax, but might make use
of my liberty herein, and refuse; yet lest we should give them occasion to
think or speak evil of us, as contemners of the Law and Temple of God (for
whose use this was paid; as Hilary and Ambrose among the Ancients; Brugensis,
Camero, and others of the Modern, conceive;) Or, as if we did teach and
encourage Subjects to rebel against their Governors (as Beza glosses it),
therefore I Will wave the use of my liberty, and do that which thou say I am
not bound to. We have the example of Paul also, who having given this charge
both to the Romans and Corinthians (as we have seen); does not, Pharisee-like,
lay a burden upon other men's shoulders, and put a yoke upon their necks, which
himself was not willing to touch or bear, but declares, both his Resolution in
this case, 1 Cor. 8.13. Wherefore if meat make my Brother to offend. I will eat
no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my Brother to offend. Mark, he
does not only say, I Will not give my Brother any just occasion of offense, but,
I Will not do that (if I may as lawfully leave it undone) whereupon he may take
occasion of offense; nor only, I Will not eat of things offered to Idols, but,
I Will eat no flesh; nor only, I Will forbear for a little while, or for some
certain time, but, I Will never eat thereof while the world stands; nor only,
I Will forbear in case of his damnation, but in case of his offense; if it make
him to offend. Conclusio Apostolico pectore dignissima, says Justinian. A
truly noble and imitable Resolution, which (though as to the amplification in
some particulars should be hyperbolical, as Calvin and P. Martyr think, yet in
the general) does most convincingly hold forth, that Christians should rather
abridge themselves in the use of their Christian Liberty, than be an occasion
of scandalizing any. And as here he declares his Resolution, so in the next
verse to the Text, his Practice. Even as I please all men in all things, 1 Cor.
10.33.
not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved. i.
e. Not in respect of any points of Faith, but in the use of my Christian
Libert, I do so accommodate my self to all, either by doing, or forbearing, as
may be most acceptable to them, gaining upon them, and profitable for their
souls. See also 1 Cor. 9.19-22. For though I be free from all men, yet have I
made my self a servant unto all, etc. Which general may be verified by many
particulars, as, his Purifying of himself, (Act. 21.24, 26.) his forbearing his
power to take wages of the Corinthians, and some other Churches, (1 Cor. 9.18.
1 Thessalonians. 2.6. and 2 Ep. 3.9.) his Circumcising of Timothy for the Jews sake (
Act. 16.3.) his not suffering Titus to be circumcised for the Gentiles sake. (
Gal. 2.3, 4, 5. That the truth of the Gospel might continue with you). And this
was the practice of the other Apostles also with him, 2 Cor. 6.3. Giving (or,
we giving) none offense in any thing. (...). Which words, though some (as
Anselme; and the Syriack Interpreter) understand as a Rule and Direction to the
Corinthians, yet generally, and more suitably to the Context, they are looked
upon, as Paul's Speech of himself, and some others with him, that they did so
behave themselves, as none might take offense at them. Ita in omnibus vitam
meam ac conversationem dirigo, ut, non dico accusationis, sed nec indignationis
locum, cuiquam tribuam, says Euthymius.

Thus much may serve for the present support of the point, to keep it from
sinking (in your thoughts) while we open the three principal spurs or roots of
it, by taking a survey of the Nature (1) of Christian Liberty; as to this
particular; (2) Of Things Indifferent; (3) Of Scandal; all rugged, thorny, and
disputable points, for each of them has some encumbrance upon it; some
considerable difficulty attending it, which will render our passage through them
the more operose and troublesome. But we shall endeavor briefly to remove the
several difficulties that occur, and make the way as plain and smooth as
possibly we can, that even a child may both run and read; and that by a narrow
Consideration and strict Examination of these three things (as I said).

1. What our Liberty is in things indifferent, which we must not make use of to
the scandal and offense of others.

2. What the nature of these Indifferencies are wherein we have this liberty.

3. What the nature of that Scandal is, for which we must forbear the use of
our liberty in these Indifferencies.

And first for the first, Liberty is in things indifferent. This Liberty, as it
is a freedom from the Mosaical Pedagogy and Ceremonies, is one branch of
Christian Liberty. Now that we may the better understand the nature of Liberty
as Christian, i. e. belonging to us as Christians, in opposition to, and
contradistinction from the Jews, we shall a little reflect upon Jewish bondage
to see what that was; for, as they say, Contraries are the best Commentaries,
and their mutual opposition, the most effectual exposition. Of Jewish bondage,
these were two principal branches.

1. A numerous train of external Rites and Ceremonious observances, which lay
like a mask or folded vail upon the fair face of spiritual worship, so that
they could scarce see wood for trees, discern the inward beauty thereof; or
were like the pictures in a book, which children look mostly at, not regarding
the sense. Now this was a burden and yoke, which galled their necks, and almost
broke their backs, Act. 15.10.
so that they were not able to bear it.

2. The restraint that lay upon them in reference to certain meats, days, and
other things in their own nature indifferent; concerning which it was said unto
them, Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. whereby their hands were tied, and
their mouths gagged, and a knife set to their throats; and so their liberty was
restrained, and they were brought into bondage and thraldom thereby. Now
Christian Liberty snaps asunder the bonds of both these Impositions; For,

1. It has discharged the Ceremonies from any further attendance upon the
worship of God, and admitted only a few plainer (in the two Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper) into their rooms; so that true Gospel-worshippers
do worship God in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.23.
eminently over what they did then.

2. That Ceremonial restraint is also now taken off, which lay upon the use of
indifferent things (which is the particular under present consideration) which
to us Christians God has cleansed ( Act. 10.15.) and made pure, ( Tit. 1.15.)
and given us freely to enjoy, (1 Timothy 6.17.) and therefore nothing is now to be
refused, (viz. upon any such account), (1 Timothy 4.4.) And this Liberty we are
bound strenuously to assert and stand fast in, not suffering our selves to be
again entangled with this yoke, ( Gal. 5.1.) nor subjecting our selves to any
humane Ordinances, either by way of Doctrine or Command, not to touch, taste,
handle, etc. ( Col. 2.20-22.) whereby any tie should lie upon us for a total
and universal abstinence from any of the good creatures of God.

So then, Christian Liberty allows a free use of things indifferent.

But now, notwithstanding this general permission, there may be a particular,
occasional, and accidental restraint of this liberty, pro hic and nunc, upon
several occasions, and in several cases: As,

(1) In case of Scandal to our selves, if we find them snares, and occasions of
sin to us, Mat. 5.29. If thy right eye offend thee, etc. Prove. 23.1. Put a
knife to thy throat, etc. So in case of Drunkenness, Prove. 23.31. Look not upon
the wine when it is red, etc.

(2) In case of Scandal to others, when it gives offense to them, and wounds
their conscience, Gal. 5.13. Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but
by love serve one another. i. e. So use your liberty, as may be consistent with
Charity. (But of this more hereafter).

(3) In case of a Vow, or Oath, or such like Engagement, Deuteronomy 23.23. That which
is gone out of thy lips, thou shall keep and perform. Wherein yet Christians
should be very careful that they don't unnecessarily entangle themselves.

(4) In case of Competition, or Interfering with any necessary duty. It was
free for the Jews to offer what they pleased for the service of the Temple; but
if their parents stood in need of it (their relief being a necessary duty) it
was a frustrating God's Command, to use their liberty in that case, Mat. 15.4-6.

(5) In case of Scruple or Prejudice, when Conscience either condemns, Romans
14.14. -- To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean;
or doubts of the lawfulness of such a practice, Romans 14.23. -- Whatsoever is
not of faith (i. e. of a persuasion that it is either prescribed, or permitted
by God, and so lawful to be done) is sin.

(6) In case of a just Prohibition by Authority, 1 King. 2.36. And the King
said unto Shimei, Build thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not
forth thence any whither. Jer. 35.6. But they said, We will drink no wine; for
Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no
wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever. Which practice of theirs was not only
allowed, but rewarded by God, as may be seen, v. 18, 19.

Now here lies the difficulty in this point of Christian Liberty in indifferent
things.

Whether a restraint laid upon an indifferent thing merely by humane authority,

This is a hard knot, which generally all that I have met with, have (in my
apprehension) rather cut asunder, than untied.

Some will have Christian Liberty herein, to consist both in Liberty of
judgment and practice; and that, If what Christ has left free do not still
remain as free as Christ left it, and we yield to it, and comply accordingly;
this is not to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. So
the Author of Beams of former Light, p. 69, 70. The common Doctrine is, That
Determination of the Practice, does not prejudice Christian Liberty. Thus P.
Martyr in Cor. De adiaphoris, libertas in animo retinenda est, non in action.
Sermon. p. 589. 4to. and so, De Consc. p. 211, etc.
And so Dr. Sanderson. The liberty of a Christian to any thing indifferent
consists in this, That his judgment is thoroughly persuaded of the indifferency
of it; and therefore it is the Determination of the judgment in the opinion of
the thing, not in the use of it, that takes away Christian Liberty. So others.
But I must needs profess my unsatisfiedness with this distinction, as not
being, to my apprehension, sufficiently countenanced by Scripture, but rather
disowned; and for other reasons also which follow afterward.

If I may have leave to try my skill for the untying of this knot, payment of
what is due to this question (at least, my shot and share of it) in these
several Sums following.

Prop. 1. It Is certain, that Civil Subjection, and Obedience to Magistrates,
and Christian Liberty do very well consist together. There Is a friendly
correspondence between them, without any jarring or discord. There are places
of Scripture which plainly enjoin the practice of both these. On the one hand,
Civil Subjection, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. On
the other hand, standing to our Christian Liberty, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Nay, there is one place seems to join
and marry them both together, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man (i. e. to all sorts of Magistrates; so called, because they
are of men's setting up, are for men's good; and the particular form usually left
to men's choice and determination) for the Lords sake. And lest any should
object, That this were to prejudice our Christian, Liberty; he adds, v. 16. As
free, which both Chrysostom. and Oecumenius join with the word submit, v. 13. as if
he had said, We may submit our selves, and yet be free too; we may be Bonus,
etiamsi serviat, liber est: malus autem etiamsi regnet, servus est; nec unius
hominis, sed, quod gravius est, tot Dominorum, quot vitiorum. Aug. de C. D. l.
4. c. 3.
obedient Subjects, and yet free Christians. Submission to every Ordinance of
man, and Christian freedom are not inconsistent.

Prop. 2. Christian Liberty lies originally in the judgment: In accounting and
judging those things about which it is conversant, or wherein it does consist,
to be neither commanded nor forbidden by God. The reason whereof is, Because
the Practice depends altogether upon this; so that if the judgment be once
leven'd with erroneous principles concerning these things, then the Practice is
for ever restrained, and so the whole being of Christian Liberty quite lost and
destroyed. Whereas, when the judgment is rightly informed, though in some
cases Liberty of Practice may be restrained, yet in all others it remains
entire. And therefore, though in several cases we may part with Liberty of
Practice (as has been showed), yet we must be sure to preserve Liberty of
Judgment entire, and stand fast in that. Which, I conceive, was one main
reason (and not, because Christian Liberty did consist only therein, as *
Stillingfl. Iren. p. 58.
a very learned Writer supposes) that Paul was so zealous in asserting and
contending for Liberty of Judgment, and opposing those who went about to
impose a Doctrinal necessity of observing Judaical Rites and Ceremonies, Gal.
2.4, 5. Whereas in matter of Practice he does occasionally yield in that, out
of tenderness toward weak Brethren, and compliance with them for their good.
Yet,

Prop. 3. Christian Liberty is not confined only to the Judgment: It does not
consist only in Liberty of Judgment; so that if that be left free, the
Practice may be totally and universally restrained, without any possibility of
a breach of Liberty thereby. But, Christian Liberty extends to the Practice
also; so that Liberty of Practice is a branch of Christian Liberty, as well as
Liberty of Judgment. You shall find the Apostle Paul condemns the restraint of
the Practice, as being a violation of their liberty, and a returning again into
bondage, Gal. 4.9, 10. Ye observe days, and months, etc. Col. 2.20, 21. Why are
ye subject to Ordinances? Touch not, etc. i. e. Why do you dance after their
pipe, tune your Fingers to their Tongues, and conform your Practice to their
Precepts and Doctrines? You ought not to do so: It Is a renouncing of your
interest in Christ's Death. Besides, Do you think a Magistrate might now forbid
his Subjects the use of all those things which God made unclean by the
Ceremonial Law, though he left their Judgments free? or command the use of all
those Rites then established, though not upon a sacred, but a civil account?

Prop. 4. The mere determination of the Practice, quatenus determination, does
not infringe our Liberty; for then it might not justly be determined in any
case whatsoever; but it may justly be determined in some cases without breach
of liberty, viz. in the cases before mentioned. The reason whereof is, Because
those things in such a case, put off (pro hic and nunc) the nature of
indifferency, and become necessary, and so lie without the verge and bounds of
Liberty. But,

Prop. 5. A needless and unnecessary deprivation of this Liberty of Practice,
is the direct and formal breach of it. Not merely the Determination, as was
said, but the needlesness of it, i. e. when there is no reason at all for it,
but merely the Determiners will. My reason is, Because it is an unjust
restraint of our liberty (as being made without reason, which is the rule and
foundation of Justice), and therefore, a breach of our liberty.

There Is a twofold goodness or necessity, Intrinsecal, or general, engraven in
the nature of things by some divine Command, natural or positive; as to pray,
read, be diligent in our callings, etc. and Extrinsecal, Circumstantial, or
Particular, arising only from circumstances; as, to take Physic when I am
sick, to recreate my self when I am tired out and wearied with the Duties of my
particular calling, to have a convenient place for the public Assemblies of
the Church, etc. Now every lawful humane constitution must have one of these to
vouch and warrant it. It must be grounded either upon the Intrinsecal goodness
of the thing; and therefore that is a lawful Constitution which enjoins persons
to assemble themselves together on the Lord's day for the public and solemn
worship of God. Or upon some Extrinsecal and Circumstantial goodness; and
therefore that is a lawful Statute, which prohibits the Exportation of Wool,
because it would deprive the Natives of a great part of their maintenance about
dressing and ordering of it; and that is a good Law which provides for the
convenience of place; etc. about public worship. But otherwise, those Laws
which have neither such an intrinsecal, nor circumstantial goodness, have not
the due and We must distinguish between an indifferency as to its nature, and
indifferency, as to its use and end; or, between an indifferency as to Law, and
indifferency as to Order and Peace. Here I say, that in things wholly
indifferent in both respects, that is, in a thing neither commanded nor
forbidden by God, nor that has any apparent respect to the Peace and Order of
the Church of God, there can be no rational account given, why the nature of
such indifferencies should be altered by any humane Laws and Constitutions. But
matters that are only indifferent as to a command, but are much conducing to
the peace and order of a Church, are the proper matter of humane Constitutions
concerning the Churches Polity. Stillingfl. Iren. p. 53. and the same may be
said of civil affairs.
proper matter of a good Law. For every Law should be for the public good;
which such Law cannot be, because they have nothing at all of goodness in them,
and consequently do entrench upon Christian Liberty.

Now that this circumstantial goodness is necessarily required to warrant the
determination of an indifferency, I prove thus:

Either the Magistrate must have regard to good and convenient circumstances in
the lawful determination of things in their own nature indifferent; or a thing
being so indifferent, he may cloth it with what circumstances he pleases. But
he may not do so, which I prove by these instances: To dig a pit, is in
general, and in its own nature an indifferent thing; but a Magistrate may not
command me to dig it in an highway, or in a street, or any great
thorough-fare, because it might occasion the ruin of many; and so is not only
inconvenient, but unlawful. Again, A Magistrate may lawfully command me to
cover my fire, and rake it up in a safe place; but he may not command me to lay
it among straw, or near Gunpowder; because this would be to the evident
endangering of my house, and consequently unlawful. Therefore to make a lawful
determination of an indifferency, so as thereby not to encroach on Christian
Liberty; there must be a concurrence of circumstances constituting a
circumstantial goodness, or necessity: without which, if the restraint depend
merely and solely upon the Lawmakers will, it is a direct breach of Liberty,
because Iniquam exercetis dominationem, si ideo negatis licere quia vultis, non
quia debuit non licere. Tertull. Apol. c. 4.

It were much more tolerable, if men would plead for the necessity of the
things, which it seems good unto them to command, and on that ground to command
their observance, than, granting them not necessary in themselves, to make them
necessary to be observed merely by virtue of their commands, for reasons,
which, they say, satisfy themselves, but come short of giving satisfaction to
them from whom obedience is required. For whereas the will of man can be no way
influenced unto obedience, but by mere acknowledged Sovereignty, or conviction
of reason in and from the things themselves, commands in and about things
wherein they own not that the Commanders have an absolute Sovereignty (as God
has in all things, and the Civil Supreme Magistrate, in things Civil, that are
good and lawful), nor can they find the reasons of the things themselves
cogent, are a yoke, which God has not designed the sons of men to bear.
Discourse conc. Liturgies and their Impos. p. 44.


unjust.

Besides, for any person to stamp and imprint the character of a Law upon his
own will in public affairs, which concern the practice and obedience of
others; and to say, Sic volo, sic jubeo; I will have it so, because I will have
it so, looks too like a flower of the Imperial Crown of Heaven for any creature
to wear in his bosom; and is such a badge of Sovereignty, as no creature ought
to usurp, or pretend to; being the peculiar Prerogative of the Supreme Majesty
of Heaven, whose property it is, to will, because he will, Romans 9, 15.

Nay further, Hereby you pull up the floodgates of Justice, and expose us to
an inundation of violence and oppression: you set infinite gins and snares to
entrap the conscience withal; you go about to legitimate any spurious brood
that shall be begotten between a brutish head and a wicked heart; you render
Christian Liberty a mere cifer, and insignificant thing, and make Christians
perfect slaves; For what is slavery, but to be subject to the will of another
without reason? Whereas, though we must submit, yet still, as free, as was
showed before. And hence I infer,

1. the Imposers would warrant its needfulness and necessity; yet if it be but
a pretense, and such a reason as will not hold water, nor endure the light and
weight of an impartial examination; it is equally offensive to Christian
Liberty, as if there were no reason at all; because it is really unjust, and so
really a breach of Liberty.

If it be here demanded, Who shall be judge of this, whether the reason of the
Determination of such Indifferencies be substantial and firm, or no?

I answer briefly and clearly. Every one must judge for his own share, and his
own work; for so much as concerns himself, and which he must be responsible and
accountable for to God. Every one must give an account of himself to God (Romans
14.12.) and of his actions, and therefore must first take account of himself
and his actions, whether he act according to Rule. (1) The Magistrate (not the
Subject) must judge for what concerns the making of the Law, and for what
belongs to him in his capacity; as, That the Law for the Matter of it, be not
only lawful, but expedient; that the Ends he propounds to himself be not
sinister and crooked, as to tyrannize over his Subjects, to maintain factions
and divisions among them, to get money for Dispensations, etc. but upright and
just, viz. to Aquinas, out of Isidore, makes three Conditions of a good Law.

(1) Quod religioni congruat, in quantum scilicet est proportionatum legi
divinae. (2) Quod disciplinae conveniat^ in quantum scilicet est proportionatum
legi naturae. (3) Quod saluti proficiat, in quantum scilicet est proportionatum
utilitati humanae, 12 ae. q. 95. a. 3.


promote the weal-publick, that his Subjects may lead peaceable and quiet lives
under him, in all godliness and honesty, as the Apostle expresses it, 1 Timothy
2.2. (2) Every Subject in particular, must judge for what concerns himself in
his place to do, in obeying the Law: He must look before he leap, and Camero
allows us not only to seek a reason of the Churches Laws, Non enim, says he,
verae Ecclesiae libet leges serre quarum non reddat rationem. (Praelect. Tom.
1. p. 367.) but he will likewise have us in such things as concern the glory of
God, not to obey the Laws of any Magistrates blindly and without reason. Ibid.
Engl. Pop. Cerem. p. 372.
consider whether the acts of obedience required, be agreeable to the Rule of
all our actions, viz. the revealed will of God, and such as he may safely
answer for both to God and his own conscience. This I take to be the reason why
generally in the Proem of Laws, the grounds and occasions of them are laid
down, that so the judgments of the Subjects may be satisfied about them; and
consequently that they may judge of those reasons, and of the Laws by those
reasons. Especially in religious affairs, every one must see that he do not
offer the sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 5.1.
who know not or consider not what they do, but must be careful to render to
God (...), a reasonable service, (Romans 12.1.) Such an examination, or judgment
of discretion or discerning, was allowed and commended in reference to those
Directions which were held forth even by persons infallibly inspired, Act.
17.11. They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily whether those things were so. Mark, they received readily, and
yet searched. They made no more haste than good speed. But when by trial they
had found the Doctrine delivered to be of the right stamp, they presently
received it for current coin. Now if this were commendable toward the Dictates
of persons immediately inspired, much more in case of merely humane
constitutions and injunctions, Laws or Canons. And as in the foregoing instance
they made use of their Judgment of discretion in reference to matters of
Doctrine, so we have also an example of it in point of Practice, 1. Cor. 10.15.
I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. And this is that Judicium privatae
discretionis, Judgment of discretion, or discerning, which all Protestants
generally maintain and plead for against Papists, as belonging to private
persons; who have eyes in their heads, as well as the Pope, or any other
Governors whatever; and without which you transform men into Qui hoc judicium
privatis eripiunt, homines in belluas plane transformant. Cum igitur dogma
proponitur credendum, aut praeceptum aliquid faciendum, quia credere and facere
sunt actus mei, si me hominem rationis participem praestarevelim, examinare
oportet quicquid proponitur ad scientiam meam. Daven. de Judice. cap. 3.
brutes and irrational tools. For a blind obedience is a brutish obedience;
yea even Papists themselves, viz. the State of Venice in case of the Interdict
by Paul the 5th maintained, Hist. of Quarrels of Paul 5. with State of Venice.
p. 205.
That when the Pope thunders out his censures, it is permitted to the Doctors,
(who in that case are but private persons, only better able to judge) to
consider whether he has proceeded clave errante, aut non errante.

If it be objected (as usually it is) that this will destroy all order, i
answer,

1. immediately (because he has commanded obedience) and mediately in his
Deputy, who has made such a Law, and enjoins such a Practice.

2. As to standing Laws concerning Civil affairs, this is a mere cavil, without
any ground in experience For where the people have an interest in the
Legislative power, they do so well and fully understand their own concernments,
that it is rare to find such Laws as are liable to just exceptions, and do not
tend to the public good, either for the maintaining propriety, encouraging
trade, restraining abuses, or the like; except where some intestine difference
has raised men's spirits, and begotten such animosities as set one party on work
to crush the other, and to make Laws for the very nonce. But otherwise
ordinarily they are such as no person of any thing like sober principles can
scruple them, because they restrain Liberty upon good and just grounds: And if
there are any other which possibly may have crept in by some corrupt custom, or
are the setlings of any Popish principle, or practice (as that about Divorce,
which by our Laws is only a mensa and thoro, but in no case a vinculo) or the
like, and do not stand upon this bottom of right reason; it is no breach of
order, or tendency to confusion, to question such Laws, and call them to
account for their tenure and title, whether they hold in capite, or no.

3. It Is true indeed in religious affairs, men are apt to be more imperious and
imposing, and to measure all others by their own line, and force them to a
compliance with their humors and mode; either (with the Tyrant Procrustes) by
stretching them out on the one hand to do what they would have them, or by
cutting them short on the other hand, and restraining them in what they like
not themselves; which is the temper of such persons especially, whose Religion
is confined within the narrow limits of bodily exercise, of some few beggarly
rites and ceremonies, and does not run parallel with that latitude, (Psalm.
119.96.) that is in God's Commandments. And this was the case, many times at
least, between the Bishops and Non-conformists formerly: If any would not keep
pace with them, and come up to their garb in matter of Ceremonies, they
endeavored to spur, and prick him on by all violent ways imaginable: But in
the more substantial and vital parts of Religion and Godliness, as, strict and
conscientious sanctification of the Sabbath, painfulness in Preaching, etc.
those that did outdo them, and out-go them herein, they were always checking,
and curbing, and laying rubs in their way. Now in this case; those persons are
guilty of the disorder (if any be) who go about to impose and enforce such
indifferencies and unnecessaries (if not nonlicets), and not those that insist
upon their just liberty.

4. For temporary, occasional commands of Magistrates, wherein perhaps some
Mysteries of State are involved, the more weighty the business is which is
required of the Subjects, (as engaging their lives, estates, or the like) the
more circumspect should they be, and the more diligent in pondering the path of
their feet, Prove. 4.26.
and not running rashly, hand over head, upon such undertakings. As on the one
hand we must not be pragmatically inquisitive into the reasons of them (as the
Reverend Presbyterian Divines well express it, in one of their Addresses to the
King); so on the other hand, we must not shut our eyes against the light, or
disown and deny our own reason, by obeying those commands which apparently
enterfere with common sense, and violate the rules of common honesty. Thus much
for this first Inference.

2. I infer further, no infringement of Liberty; yet if afterward that ground
fails, and that reason ceases, then to continue the restraint any longer is a
breach of liberty; for that which is the life and soul of the law being gone,
the law must needs expire, and remain a mere carcass. E. g. If eating of
flesh-meat be forbidden at a certain season of the year upon this Political
ground, and Reason of state, viz. for the Preservation and Propagation of
Cattle; then when there is a sufficient store and stock of Cattle, the ground
of the Law ceasing, the Law ought to cease; and if the Law continues any
longer, it is a breach of privilege, and an encroachment upon our liberty. So
when Paul enjoins Timothy the use of a little Wine for his stomachs sake, and
often infirmities; 1 Timothy 5.23.
when his infirmities are removed, and his stomach requires it not, he is no
longer bound to the use of Wine.

3. Civil Liberties of several Nations are different one from another,
according to the diversity of circumstances; yet in Christian Commonwealths
especially they should all agree in this general, not to be restrained but upon
good reasons.

4. Christian Liberty is as well concerned in Civil, as Ecclesiastical affairs;
and is not only subject to infringement by Ecclesiastical Laws (as Paraeus on
Gal. 5.1. affirms), but by Civil also. For though the power of Magistrates be
of larger extent in Civil than Ecclesiastical affairs, and God has left more
particulars to their determination in the former than in the latter, because
men's reason will carry them a great deal further in those than in these, (A
clear reason of the different extent of their power in these different cases,
though Dr. De Oblig. Consc. p. 240.
Sanderson say he never could meet with any thing like a reason for it) Yet so
far as his power reaches in these affairs (which is, in matters of Worship, not
to institute any new rites or ceremonies, as parts of, and appendages to the
worship of God; but only to regulate, according to the Rules of Decency, Order,
and Edification, those necessary circumstances which are common to that with
other actions of the like nature; so for Doctrinals, not to create any new
Article of faith, but to explain those already in being, according to
Scripture; and if controversies arise, to determine them by Scripture: and for
Discipline, not to make what Laws they please, but to proceed according to
Scripture-rules in the use of censures, and in absolving from them; I say, so
far as the Magistrates power reaches in these things) his Laws about them are
equally obligatory with those about Civil affairs, and one does no more
infringe Christian Liberty than another. For if either of them are without
reason, they infringe it; if both are grounded upon Reason, then neither of
them infringe it, no more one than another.

But what if there be an encroachment upon our Liberty, what must we do for the
preservation thereof?

Take heed you be not active therein, accessory and consenting thereto, and so
make it your own act, and betray your liberty: But,

(1) For Liberty of Judgment (which no one can deprive you of without your own
consent) be sure to stand fast in that, by not entertaining and sucking in any
opinions contrary thereto, as if you were bound in conscience to judge that God
did forbid, or command such or such things, and thereby lay a restraint upon
the use of them. Paul often admonishes us to take heed that none deceive,
spoil, or beguile us (Col. 2.8, 18. Beware lest any man spoil you: Let no man
beguile you. 2 These. 2.3. Let no man deceive you by any means); intimating,
that it is in our power to prevent it, and our fault, if we do not prevent it.

(2) For Liberty of practice, because that may be restrained whether we will or
no, by compulsion of the outward man, as by imprisonment, or the like, or in a
Moral way, by penalties; in this latter case (1) we must not look upon such
Impositions as laying any tie or obligation upon the conscience either
immediately or mediately; and therefore must not take our selves bound in
conscience to submit to them. 2. We must weigh the penalties we are to undergo
with the privileges we are to part with, and choose the lighter. E. g. For a
Minister to be hindered from executing his office, or a private person from
receving of the Sacrament is a penalty; and to serve God in that manner and
method which I judge most agreeable to the Rules of the word, and most
acceptable to him, is my privilege; but I will rather part with this
privilege, as to some circumstantial point, wherein the substance and stress
of the duty does not consist, than suffer that penalty of being deprived of the
Ordinances.

I^ the other case, when a force lies upon us, and our liberty is restrained
thereby, we are innocent and guiltless, because only passive, and it is done
without our consent, which only makes us culpable. We may not yield up our
liberties; yet if they be taken away from us, we may submit without sin.

Thus have I transcribed my thoughts, and stated the case as clearly as I could
in this ravel'd point of Christian Liberty, by showing wherein it does consist,
how far forth it is liable to be imposed upon, and baffled by humane
Constitutions, and what must be done for the asserting thereof.

The total Sum of the whole discourse is this: That though Obedience to
Magistrates and Christian Liberty are very consistent, yet for Magistrates to
lay a restraint upon Indifferencies merely, quia placet and libet, is an
abridgment and infringment of Christian Liberty, which we must not willingly
admit of, nor be accessory to, though we may submit. But if they do it quia
expedit, when there are sufficient reasons for it from any circumstantial
consideration, so long as those reasons hold good (of which every one is to be
judge, for so much as concerns his own practice), this is no breach at all. Our
liberty remains still entire to us, notwithstanding such a determination.

Now if any one shall stumble at this, and think it strange that I take off the
lawfulness of the determination from the Will (which perhaps they may call the
Authority) of the Lawgiver, and lay it upon a concurrence of circumstances, and
so attribute and ascribe that to circumstances, which I deny to Authority: I
shall offer this (which is very observable) for their further satisfaction,
viz. That a concurrence of circumstances (which I may call a Providential, or
emergent necessity constituting and making up such an extrinsecal goodness, as
I spoke of before) may do that which no humane Authority can. Providential
necessity may make that which is sinful scandalizing to be obedience to the 6th
Commandment ( as rather to eat Idolothytes than to starve), but the will of
Superiors can make no such change. Rutherf. of Scand. p. 78. Divine necessity
by Gods Ordinance alters the case, not humane, by enforcing authority. Tailor
of circumsp. Walk. c. 21.
For it can make that which (otherwise and abstracting from those
circumstances) is unlawful, to become lawful, much more then that which
otherwise is but indifferent, to be necessary. I say, a concurrence of
circumstances may make that which otherwise is unlawful to be lawful, as is
evident by David's eating the shewbread when he was an hungered, which
otherwise had been unlawful; and therefore the Jews, when there was no such
providential necessity, chose rather to dye than to eat swines-flesh, 2 Mac.
7.1.
(forbidden by God, as the shewbread was) though commanded by man. So if Saul
and his Army had been ready to starve, and could have got no other provision
but the Amalekites cattle, certainly God's preferring mercy before sacrifice,
would have warranted them to have killed and eaten thereof, though otherwise
they were commanded to destroy them, and reserve none. Now if that in those
things which otherwise are unlawful, a concurrence of circumstances can do that
which no humane authority can, viz. make them lawful; then much more in
Indifferencies may it do that which no humane authority can, viz. lay a
restraint upon the use of them, as is evident by this instance. Had Daniel
forborne the Ceremony of kneeling at prayer, or looking toward Jerusalem, out
of any natural necessity, or by reason of any infirmity whereby it might have
been prejudicial to his life, it had been none offense: But when there is no
such necessity, but only he is forbidden to pray by a Law, and that upon pain
of death, he will not obey. The reason whereof is very well rendered by the
learned Rutherford, Because God places, says he, Treat. of Scand. p. 81.
acts of providential necessity, as emergent significations of his approving
will, which are to us in place of a divine Commandment of God's revealed will;
and these providential acts of necessity do no less oblige us to moral
Obedience, than any of the express written Commandments of God. But then this
holds only (as he adds elsewhere) in commands affirmative and positive, p. 83.
so as there can be no sin eligible by such a case; but I think he should have
said, only in positive commands; for the command about the shewbread was
negative, yet David's necessity dispensed with it. Thus we have paid the first
General its portion, and discharged that Obligation.

Proceed we now to the second General, concerning Indifferency, in
consideration of this Question:

What is the general nature of those indifferent things about which Christians
have this liberty?

I answer, Indifferency is a Indifferent things are called (...).
lying in the middle between two extremes; or Bradsh. Treat. of things
indifferent, c. 1. sect. 5.
that whereby things do equally, without any difference agree to, or dissent
from, those extremes to which they have reference and relation. This is
twofold, This distinction, though first hammered out at my own Anvil, yet since
I have met with the substance of it (though clothed with other terms) in a
judicious learned Author (whereby I am confirmed in the use of it) Stillingst.
Iren. p. 53. whose words are quoted before, p. 24.
Intrinsecal, material, or specifical, and extrinsecal or circumstantial
(opposite to that twofold goodness I spoke of before). This I gather from the
Apostles words, 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful for me (i. e. all such
things as are intrinsecally and in their own nature indifferent), but all
things are not expedient, i. e. not indifferent in regard of circumstances. Let
this distinction be well marked, for (being dexterously managed) it will serve
as a clue to unlabyrinth us, a key to open most of the intricacies, and a
(...), to salve the difficulties, and solve the doubts in this point,
concerning the nature of this intrinsecal indifferency; I find some contest
about the extremes to which it should relate; the distinct and clear
determination whereof, is of great moment to the true state and resolution of
the Question. The acute Author of the * Part 4. c. 2. sect. 1.
Dispute against English-Popish Ceremonies, contends stiffly, that the extremes
are good and evil, and not necessary and unlawful. On the other side, The
Bishops commissioned for the Review and Alteration of the Liturgy, make the
extremes to be commanded and forbidden, not good and evil; for they say
expressly, indifferent things may be really good. Their words are these, Those
things which we call indifferent, because neither expressly commanded nor
forbidden by God, have in them a real goodness. Answ. to Except. N. 18. Sect.
8. Yea, Mr. Bradshaw too goes this way. Those things, says he, are called in a
moral respect indifferent (which is the indifferency we are speaking of)
(whether they be qualities, inclinations, habits or actions) that have in them
neither virtue nor vice. Treat. of Indifference, c. 8. sect. 6.
Herein such actions of man's will are most frequent that are neither commanded
nor forbidden in the word of God. And so another learned person The nature of
indifference lies not in any thing entermediate between good and bad, but in
something undetermined by divine Laws, as to the necessity of it; so that if we
speak as to the extremes of it, Stillingst. Iren. c. 3. sect. 8. p. 50.
it is something lying between a necessary duty, and an intrinsecal evil: and
so Ames, and many others. If this be any more than a Logomachy, and the
difference be not merely verbal (and if good and evil be understood of that
which is Morally so, for my part. I think it will scarce amount to any more,
because nothing is morally good or evil, but what is made so by some discovery
of God's will), then I cannot but cast in my mite and vote to the latter scale;
and accordingly shall give you the full notion and description of this
Intrinsecal indifferency, as I have gathered it out of several, rendering (in
the margent) to every one his peculiar due.

Those actions are intrinsecally indifferent, that have in their matter neither
Indifferency apparently carries in its notion, a negation of Moral goodness and
illness. I say, Signanter, of Moral goodness and illness, because the most
indifferent actions are transcendently, and may be naturally good. Jeanes's
Treat. of Indiff. page 2.
Moral goodness nor illness, Bradsh. Treat. of Indiff. c. 8. sect. 6.
virtue nor vice, as being Res mediae. sunt, quarum tota species nulia divina
lege (naturali vel positiva) aut pracipitur, aut prohibetur. Sanders. de Oblig.
Consc. praelect. 6. sect. 22. p. 235. Actus in suo genere indifferens est,
quando ejus objectum nihil includit, quod pertinet ad voluntatem Dei vel prae
cipientem vel prohibentem. Ames. Medull. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 14. Actiones quae
neque imperantur neque prohibentur, neque obedientiae, neque inobedientiae
rationem habent in sua intrinseca natura, sunt indifferentes aut mediae. Ames.
Cas. Consc. l. 3. c. 18. sect. 4.
in their whole kind neither commanded nor forbidden, either by the Bradsh. of
Indiff. c. 8. sect. 5.
Law of Nature, Reason, or Scripture, but The nature of things indifferent, is
neither to be commanded, nor forbidden, but left free and arbitrary. Hooker of
Eccl. Pol. p. 59.
left free and arbitrary, so that they may These things are implied in an
indifferent action. (1) Absolute undetermination, as to the general nature of
the act, by a divine Law, that God has left it free for men to do it or no. (2)
That one part has not more propension to the rule than the other. (3) That
neither part has any repugnancy to the rule. Stillingfl. Iren. c. 3. sect. 8.
p. 50.
either be done or not, without sin, or transgression of any Law; Or more
briefly, in the Apostles words (and therefore more safely), It Is that which
neither commends nor discommendeth us to God; by doing or forhearing whereof
we are either better or worse; more or less acceptable to him. To this purpose
the Apostle speaks (1 Cor. 8.8.) concerning meat and eating, i. e. not eating
in general (as some carry it) for that is a duty of the 6th Commandment; but
eating this or that, or any one kind of meat in particular; that is
indifferent, and commends us not to God: He that eats the fat, and drinks the
sweet, is no more acceptable to God, than he that eats the lean, and drinks the
sour: and this is applicable to a world of other things. Once more, That is
indifferent, which makes neither one way nor other, or not more one way than
another, for the glory of God; when equal glory is brought to God either way.
This notion of it I gather from Romans 14.6. He that regards a day, regards it
to the Lord; and he that regards not a day, to the Lord he does not regard
it, etc. i. e. both of them aim at God's honor, and real tribute of glory
redounds to him either way; and therefore both are lawful. So then, we may
conceive the case concerning these Indifferencies, thus: some things are
commanded Illud secundum speciem bonum est, quod lege Dei ita praeceptum est,
ut non sit fas homini illud negligere, aut quicquam facere, quod ei repugnet:
Et illud malum est, quod lege Dei ita prohibitum est, ut non sit fas homini
illud admittere, aut prascribere quocurque praetextu. Forbes. Iren. l. 1. c.
18. sect. 13.
in specie, and in their whole kind; as to pray, hear, give alms, etc. These
are intrinsecally, morally good, or necessary, and duties, which are in their
own nature pleasing and acceptable to God, and whereby glory redounds to him;
so that in the general, and abstracting from circumstances, it is better, and
more agreeable to God's will, and more pleasing to him, to pray, than not to
pray; and therefore though a man be not bound to pray at all times, yet always
to omit it, and never to pray, is sinful. Other things are forbidden in specie,
as to steal, lie, commit adultery, etc. These are in their own nature evil and
unlawful, and therefore can never be made good by any circumstances whatsoever.
Others are neither commanded, nor forbidden in specie, but lie between both by
way of contradiction, as not forbidden or unlawful, but lawful; not commanded
or necessary, but arbitrary or unnecessary; and so are left indifferent either
to be done, or not to be done, according as Indifferency taken in specie, as to
the nature of the act, inclines neither way; but supposing it lie under
positive determinations, either by Laws or Circumstances, it then necessarily
enclines either to the nature of good or evil. Stillingfl. Iren. p. 51.
circumstances require; so that though a man should never do them in all his
lifetime, he should not sin; as to laugh, ride, etc.

The first sort of actions are good per se; and if they be evil, it is only per
accidens; the second are evil per se, yet may be good per accidens, as God can
bring light out of darkness, etc. The third are neither good nor evil per se,
but may be either per accidens. The first cannot universally and always be
omitted without sin; the second cannot at any time whatsoever be done without
sin; the third may be either done, or left undone without sin. The first are
necessary to be done some time or other; the second necessary to be omitted,
and forborne at all times; the third neither necessary to be done, or left
undone, but may be either done or not, as circumstances require. The first
commends us to God, the second discommendeth, the third does neither. By the
first we are the better, by the second the worse, by the third neither better
nor worse. In the first, we must therefore set all circumstances in order,
because they must be done; In the last, we must therefore do them, because
cirrumstances call for it: one must be done, because the circumstances are
good; in the other, we must make the circumstances good, because they must be
done; as it is between Holy Days of God's and Man's institution; Holy duties
must be performed on God's Holy days, because the days are holy; but man's days
are holy, because holy Duties must be performed on them; and therefore for
man's days, it is more proper to say, they are Days set apart for holy Duties,
than that they are Holy Days. Thus much for the nature of things intrinsecally
indifferent.

Those things are Extrinsecally indifferent, which have their whole suit of
circumstances (as I may call it) wherein they are dressed up, indifferent, and
neither virtuous nor vicious, when there is no Moral goodness in any of the
circumstances. e. g. It Is indifferent whether a man dine in the Hall or Parlor;
at eleven a Clock, or twelve; on fish, or flesh, etc. These particular
circumstances are not determined either Pro or Con, by any Precept or
Prohibition, and therefore are indifferent. And here be it remarked and
remembered,

(1) That an action intrinsecally good, may have some indifferent circumstances
put on it; as, in hearing the word, it is indifferent whether I sit or stand,
wear a Cloak or a Coat, etc.

(2) An action intrinsecally indifferent may have some circumstances good,
which may render it necessary. e. g. If I have a commodity, it is indifferent
for me either to sell it, or use it my self; but if there comes one that has
extraordinary need of it, I am bound to let him have it; so in those several
cases before mentioned, wherein Liberty in things indifferent may be restrained.

(3) There are general Rules concerning circumstances, which must be brought
down and applied to particulars, by humane wisdom and discretion, for the
regulating and right ordering of them. e. g.

1. For Persons. When actions are peculiar to an office, or condition of life,
then none must perform them but persons in that capacity; either of the office,
as in the Ministry; or of the condition, as in Marriage.

2. For Place. Actions must be done in places suitable and convenient: so
Christ seeing the multitudes went up into a Mountain to preach ( Matthew. 5.1.)
as at other times in private houses, Luke 14.1, 12, 15.

3. For Means. Quibus auxiliis.
We must use only lawful means, and not do evil that good may come of it, Romans
3.8.

4. For the End. We must do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. L. 2. did.
40. qu. 1.
Which words (as Capreolus observes) may be understood two manner of ways.

(1) Negatively, That we must do nothing against God's glory, whereby he may be
dishonored.

(2) Affirmatively, And so actions may have a threefold reference to the glory
of God (as both Capreolus and Scotus, 2. Sent. did. 41. observe). (1)
Habitual, where there is the habit of grace: and this is not enough. (2)
Actual, when we actually think of, and aim at the glory of God: and this is
more than is required in all performances; for though it ought frequently to be
done, yet it is not necessary in every action. Well it may be our happiness in
the next life, but cannot be our duty in this, because it would leave no room
nor place for other duties. (3) Vertual, which presupposes the two former, and
adds further, (1) The Negation of any other end contrary to the glory of God,
and (2) a natural tendency of the action to some end subordinate to the glory
of God, and naturally referrible thereto.

5. Manner, whether in regard of the inward frame of spirit, or outward
behavior; and here are many rules in both respects, fitted for several
occasions, as it is faith, etc. decently, etc.

6. Time. It must be done in season, Psalm. 1.3. He brings forth fruit in due
season.

(4) Every action (though in its own nature, secundum speciem, and in regard of
the Matter it be in different, yet) when clothed with its whole suit, systeme,
and compages of individuating circumstances, is necessarily either good or
evil, according to its consonance or dissonance from the Rules before laid
down. Though it have not any antecedent good or evil, to render it necessary,
or unlawful, yet it must have a concomitant good or evil, whereby it becomes
necessarily either good or evil when it is done. There Is a great dust raised by
Scotus, Bonaventure, and others of the Schoolmen about this, who hold the
negative. I shall not wade far into the controsersie (you may see it learnedly,
clearly, and satisfactorily handled, Jeanes Scholast. and Pract. Divin. part.
2. p. 2. Engl. Pop. Cerem. part 4. c. 3.) only give you some brief hints about
it. Observe,

(1) The question is not to be understood of indeliberate actions, which
proceed either from the disposition of natural qualities, as to hunger, thirst,
etc. or from the force of imagination; as to scratch the head, etc. but of
actions properly humane.

(2) Not of actions considered only in regard of their matter, or object, but
circumstances.

(3) Nor of actions or circumstances compared one with another (for so there is
no question, but there may be some action or circumstance, neither better nor
worse (as far as we can judge) than another), but of things considered
absolutely, and by themselves.

(4) Nor of Indifference, as it lies between commanded and forbidden, but
between good and evil.

(5) Not of every particular circumstance, but of all together. And accordingly
I affirm, That no deliberate action considered absolutely and singly by it
self, and adequately with its whole suit of individuating circumstances, but is
either good or evil: And I prove it both by Scripture, Reason, and Authority.

1. For Scripture. Thus much is plainly intimated by Christ, Mat. 12.36. Every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment, i. e. for every unprofitable, unfruitful word, that brings good
neither to speaker nor hearer, then they are not indifferent; and if words,
when clothed with circumstances, cannot be indifferent, then neither Thoughts
nor Works, which are as much the issue and product of reason, as speech.

2. For Reason. It Is this: Either they are agreeable to those Rules laid down
in the Word of God, for regulating all our actions (before mentioned) or not
(for Contradictio caret omni medio): If they be agreeable to the Rule, they are
good (for goodness is Conformity to the Rule), if not, they are evil: Even as a
Statuary or carver of Images ('it is Ames's comparison) oft-times has no peculiar
reason to make this Image rather than that; Cas. Consc. l. 3. c. 18.
yet if he make any at all, either he follows the rules of his Art, and then he
makes a good statue, or he departs from those rules, and then he makes a bad
one, and does not work like an artist; so many times it may be to a Christian a
matter merely indifferent to do such a thing at this time or another, in this
place or another, etc. and may be left to his own choice and pleasure therein;
but yet as he is a Christian, he is obliged to regard such and such
circumstances in all his actions; and therefore whatsoever he does, he does it
either well or ill; for either he observes these circumstances, and then his
action is good; or he neglects them, and then it is bad.

3. For Authority. Aquinas determines the question thus: 12ae. q. 18. a. 9.
Quemvis actum humanum in individuo consideratum, quando ex deliberata ratione
procedit, bonum esse vel malum, necesse est. So another great Scholar of our
own, Nulla est individua actio humana quae est indifferens, sed propter
circumstantias necessario vel bona vel mala, si Thomae and omnibus Thomistis
credimus. Mort. Ap. part 1. l. 1. c. 47. I shall need to add no more, because
this last testimony is pregnant with many others. Yet for all this. I add,

(5) And lastly, An action even in individuo may be indifferent in respect of
any Precept or Prohibition, though not in respect of good and evil. There may
be the necessity of something in an action, when it is done, to make it good
(viz. bonitas intentionis, or directionis, and bonitas principii), and yet the
action it self pro hic and nunc, be no ways necessary, but indifferent, and a
matter of liberty. This is very well illustrated by one, by comparing it with
what is usually said of God's particular actions, Stillingfl. Iren p. 52.
That God is free in himself either to do, or not to do that action (as
suppose, the Creation of the world); but when he does it, he must necessarily
do it with that goodness, holiness, and wisdom, which is suitable to his
nature; so may many actions of men be in themselves indifferent, and yet there
must be a concomitant necessity of good intention and principle to make the
action good. But this concomitant necessity does not destroy the radical
indifferency of the action it self; it is only an antecedent necessity from the
obligation of the Law, which destroys indifferency. Thus much also for the
nature of this circumstantial, extrinsecal indifferency.

Again, This circumstantial indifferency is either Absolute, or Comparative.
Absolute, When a thing being considered alone by it self, without relation to
others, is neither good nor evil. Comparative, When a thing being compared with
others, is neither better nor worse than they, but they are indifferently and
alike good or evil; as to eat at ten a Clock, or eleven. etc. The use of these
two distinctions will appear anon.

Now the grand difficulty in this point is, Whether the command of Authority
does take away the indifferency of a thing, so as to make it become necessary,
and consequently, not the matter of scandal (given)? There Is great stickling
and struggling Pro and Con, between the Conformists and Non-conformists,
especially on the Conformists part, because this is the main Bulwark to which
they retreat, when beaten off from other arguments concerning the lawfulness,
expediency, necessity of the Ceremonies, that they are indifferent; and
therefore when commanded by authority, become necessary, because these
indifferent things are the Res adiapkora sunt legum humanarum propriissima and
maxim idonea materia. Sanders. de Oblig. Consc. p. 235. and paulo post,
Restant sola adiaphora, velut campus in quo se exerceat, exeratque; vim illa
suam inducendi obligationem ubi nulla praefuit potestas humana. p. 236.
proper matter of humane Laws.

I desire to render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to speak
indifferently (in this point of indifference) between Magistrate and Subject,
not encroaching (voluntarily) upon either. Therefore.

Solut. I answer in general, according to the grounds laid down, That where a
thing is indifferent intrinsecally, or in its own nature, but not
circumstantially, but has some circumstantial goodness and necessity, or, there
is some good reason from some circumstance for the enjoining of it, there the
command renders it necessary; but where there is not so much as any
circumstantial goodness and necessity, or any good reason from some
circumstance, there the command cannot make it It was not the force or
authority of the Canon (Act. 15.) but the reason and ground whereupon the Canon
was made, which caused the necessity of abstaining, says Sprint (an advocate
for Conformity) Reply to Ans. p. 258.
necessary. What God has left indifferent, and not made necessary neither in
its own nature, nor by any particular circumstance, no man has power to make
so; for no man has any authority or power, but what is given him from above,
John 19.11. Jam. 1.17. If it be answered, they have authority in the general,
which includes this particular. I reply: (1) No man has any authority at all,
either in general, or particular, directly, or indirectly, vertually, or
formally, to do injustice; but to take away a man's right and due (his liberty)
without any reason, is to do injustice. Ergo. Again, (2) Such a command cannot
render the thing commanded necessary, because it does not at all Where there is
no other reason to warrant the doing of what a humane Law prescribes, besides
the bare will and authority of the Lawmaker, in this case a humane Law cannot
bind us to obedience. Engl. Pop. Cerem. Epist. p. 14.
oblige, for it has no dependence upon, nor coherence with the Will of God; it
is no way agreeable to his Will, which I prove thus: That command which has no
Lex est aliquid pertinens ad rationem, quum sit regula and humanorum actuum
mensura. Aqu. 12ae. q. 90. a. 1.
reason for it, but only the will of the Lawgiver, has no Test Augustino,
nihil est justum ac legitimum in temporali lege, quod non sit ex aterna lege
profectum. Aqu. 12ae. q. 93. a. 3.
dependence upon the Will of God. nor coherence with it (for then that would be
a good and sufficient reason), or is no way agreeable to the Will of God,
either in general or particular, and therefore has no obligation following upon
it; for that Leges humanae obligant homines in foro conscientiae, ratione legis
aeternae, a qua derivantur. Id. q. 96. a. 4.
Obligation of a Law which we speak of, is nothing but the necessity of obeying
under pain of sin against God. That is an excellent notion of Petrus de Alliaco
(for which I am beholding to a Reverend and Learned Divine), Gilbert's Assize
Sermon. on Jam. 2.12. p. 12.
That as the will of God exerting and putting forth his natural power or
strength, is in natural things the first efficient Cause; so the will of God
exerting his moral power or authority, is in moral things the first obliging
Rule: And as all things in nature act dependingly upon the will of God, putting
forth his natural power as the first efficient cause; so in Morality, all Laws
oblige dependingly upon the will of God, putting forth his Moral power as the
first obliging Rule. Whence I infer, That where there is no intimation of God's
Will, neither express nor implicit, in the nature of the thing, nor in any
circumstance, there can no obligation arise. (3) That command which has no
Conformity to the rule and end of all Laws (the * Necesse est legem semper ad
bonum commune ordinari. Aqu. 12ae. q. 90 a. 2.
public good) can have no obligation at all following upon it; for the due
matter of a Law is wanting; but such a command has no Conformity, etc. Ergo.

(4) That the Command of Authority does not render such an indifferent thing
necessary, may be proved, I think, undeniably, from that passage, mentioned
Matthew. 15.1-9. Mark 7.1-13. concerning the Disciples eating with unwashen
hands; for which they are complained of by the Scribes and Pharisees (those
great Masters of Ceremonies) to Christ, as transgressors of the Tradition of
the Elders: But Christ is so far from condemning, that he justifies and
vindicates them for it; and on the contrary, condemns their Antagonists, for
standing so strictly, and laying so much stress upon such unnecessary trifles.
Here I observe, First, That the Rite, or Ceremony in question was in it self
indifferent, i. e. neither commanded nor forbidden by any Law of God; and so
far from being unlawful, that it seems rather a matter of civil decency and
good manners. Secondly, This was commanded by a lawful Authority; for (1) the
Scribes and Pharisees (who here urged it, and stickled for it) sat in Moses's
seat, ( Mat. 23.2.) i. e. were the Rulers of the people (or some of them at
least) who did succeed Moses in the ordinary office of Teaching and Ruling the
people. And (2) it was a Tradition of the Elders: Now the Elders were the
Sanhedrim, that is, the Supreme Authority of the Nation; and, a Tradition of
the Elders, is a Resolution, Constitution, or Determination of such a case made
by them, who therefore are called (...), Domini constitutionum juridicarum.
Thirdly, This constitution of Authority did not render this indifferent
practice, or usage, necessary, as is evident from the whole drift and scope of
our Savior Christ's discourse here. From all which, the conclusion or
inference holds firm and strong, That an indifferent thing commanded by lawful
Authority, is not thereby made necessary.

For the further clearing hereof, I shall pass from one end of my thoughts to
the other by these steps, having first prepared the way by these Distinctions.

First, I distinguish between the Matter and the Form of a Command; or, between
the thing commanded, and the stamp of Authority set upon it to make it current.
The ground of this distinction is plain in reason.

Secondly, I distinguish between an Intrinsecal and an Extrinsecal Indifference
(as before).

Thirdly, I distinguish between unlawful and inconvenient. This I ground upon
the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful for me, but all things
are not expedient. Where he supposes, that things may be lawful in some
respect, but inconvenient or inexpedient in others. Whence I gather, (1) That
unlawful and inconvenient are not the same, no more than lawful and convenient;
for Contrariorum eadem est ratio. (2) I further gather the nature of
inconvenient, or inexpedient, and how it differs from unlawful, viz. That
inconvenient or inexpedient is only an irregular circumstance of something in
its own nature lawful. He is there speaking of indifferent things, and tells
us, That though in their own nature these be all lawful to make use of, yet
they may be so circumstantiated, as to render them inconvenient, or
inexpedient. Which circumstantial irregularity puts on such a kind of evil, as
the good or rule it offends against, is of; if it be only against some debitum
natura, then it is malum physicum, or natural; as to fast to the detriment of a
man's health, to eat that which agrees not with his constitution: If against
good manners, then it is malum morale, as to be slovenly in eating: either of
these irregularities render a thing but inexpedient: But if it be against any
Command of God, then it is malum Theologicum, or peccatum, and so falls in with
unlawful.

Fourthly, I distinguish between a particular inconvenience, which is only so
to some particular persons, or at some particular time; and a general
inconvenience, which is alike inconvenient to all persons, at all times, and in
all places. This distinction has common experience to warrant its validity.

Fifthly, I distinguish between submission for wrath, and for conscience sake,
i. e. merely for fear of the penalty, or else for fear of sin, and to avoid
that which he should be guilty of in case of disobedience and nonsubmission.
This distinction the Apostle makes to my hand, Romans 13 5.

Sixthly, I distinguish between an arbitrary and a necessary submission; where
there is no sin in the submission, and yet it is not a duty, but free and
arbitrary; and where there is sin in the non-submission, and submission is a
duty and necessary. The ground of this distinction will appear afterward.

Now these distinctions I apply thus.

Prop. 1. It is certain that the Command of lawful authority, That Magistrates
ought to be obeyed in things good and lawful, does not arise from the authority
vested in themselves, but from the immediate command of God, that in such
things they ought to be obeyed. Discourse conc. Liturg. p. 55.
quatenus command, i. e. the form of the Command, does not necessarily bring an
obligation to obedience along with it: The obligation does not arise merely
from the form; for then every command, or every thing having the stamp of
Authority upon it, should oblige; which none will say. Therefore,

2. The Matter of the Command must have some influence into the obligation
thereof. There being only the Matter and Form, if the Form alone cannot do it,
then the Matter must do something toward it. Yet,

3. Not every Command neither de materia licita does oblige, because due
circumstances also must be observed (as was showed before), whereby it may be
prepared and made habitable for the form to dwell in. But,

4. The matter must be lawful (i. e. either necessary, or indifferent, at
least) and also duly circumstantiated. He is the Minister of God to thee for
good, says the Apostle, Romans 13.4. Therefore if it be not good, at least
extrinsecally, and in respect of circumstances (which an inconveniency or
inexpediency is not) he is not the Minister of God therein. Then,

5. That which is both lawful in its own nature, and moreover clothed with a
handsome dress of circumstances, when commanded, becomes necessary; and
submission thereto a duty, and must be done for conscience sake, and the
neglect thereof is a sin. I lay the formality of the obligation, neither upon
the matter nor form, singly considered, but upon the union, or concurrence of
both, so as that the matter must have some kind of goodness, either intrinsecal
or circumstantial, as the foundation; whence there arises obligatio
fundamentalis, and then the command, supervening upon that matter, produces
obligationem formalem; both together make the obligation perfect and complete:
Either alone is but like a single knot, which does not tie hard, but both
together make a double knot, which holds fast.

6. That which is lawful in its own nature, and generally convenient, and has
only some particular inconvenience attending it, does also become necessary
when commanded, because the general respect outweighs the particular; and
therefore, in general, all are bound to obey for conscience sake; and those
particular persons to whom it is inconvenient, must either get a dispensation,
or undergo the inconvenience for the general good. E. g. If the use of Fish be
convenient for a Nation, and thereupon a Law be made to enjoin the eating
thereof at such a time of the year, then obedience is necessary; and though
this be inconvenient for some persons, whose constitutions agree not with it,
yet they must either obey, and so endure the inconvenience, or procure a
dispensation. But,

7. That which is lawful in its own nature, if attended with some irregular
circumstances which render it generally inconvenient and inexpedient, though
commanded, does not become necessary, nor submission thereto a duty, nor
neglect thereof a sin. The reason is, because bare authority without reason,
lays no obligation upon the conscience (as was proved before): but here is only
bare authority without reason; for the reason of the command, where the matter
of it is indifferent, must be fetched from the expediency and convenience of
its circumstances; which not being to be found here in the case supposed, there
is no reason neither, and so obliges not the conscience: Submission is not a
duty; we are not bound to obey for conscience sake.

I know some are of opinion, that it may be a duty to obey, where it is a sin
to command. But against that Position, I have this argument. Obligation to
obedience, and authority to command, are Correlates; so that where there is no
authority to command, there can be no obligation to obey: ( viz. by virtue of
that Command; for possibly an obligation may arise upon some other account, as
we shall see presently, in Propos. 9.) But here is no authority to command; for
we suppose the Magistrate sins in commanding. Now sure, no man has authority to
sin. Besides, the Magistrates authority reaches only to that which is good, as
was before showed out of the Apostles words, Romans 13.4. and elsewhere he tells
us, all Ecclesiastical authority is for Edification only, Ephesians. 4.12. Yet,

8. Where the inconvenience attending the command, is only such as keeps within
the compass of some natural or civil evil, and sinks not down into a sin or
transgression of some Law of God, there, though obedience does not become
necessary and a duty, and I am not bound to obey for conscience sake, yet I may
submit for wrath, and for fear of such a penalty as will outweigh the advantage
I shall have by non-submission. And this by virtue of that Rule, Ex duobus
malis, minimum; it is better to undergo an inconvenience, than a mischief. E.g.
If I may not hear a Sermon with my hat on, under penalty of 5 l. though it be
something prejudicial to my health to sit uncovered, and so a natural
inconvenience; yet if the advantage I shall get by non-submission be not so
great as the penalty I shall incur, I may submit: So, if a Thief will either
make me swear to conceal him, or take away my life, though it be a Political
inconvenience; yet rather than lose my life, I may submit to it. Nay,

9. If the penalty be such as would hinder me from the performance of a
necessary duty, then obedience may accidentally, and in that respect become An
inconvenient mode of worship is a sin in the imposer, and in the chuser, and
voluntary user, that might offer God better, and will not, Mal. 1.13, 14. and
yet it may be not only lawful, but a duty to him, that by violence is
necessitated to offer up that or none. Grand Debate. Reply to Answ. sect. 5.
necessary, notwithstanding such a circumstantial inconvenience. E. g. If that
either I must kneel at receiving the Sacrament, or cannot be admitted to
partake thereof; if I judge kneeling (not unlawful in it self, but) only
inconvenient, in respect of its unsuitableness to the nature of the Ordinance,
then I am (accidentally) bound to kneel, rather than to omit receiving (a
necessary duty) for that inconvenience. Again, If I must either baptize a child
at the Font, or be deprived of the exercise of my Ministry, though I judge
Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism at the Font (which always stands at
the lower end of the Church, where the Congregation cannot so well hear) not so
convenient as at the reading-Pew; yet rather than be deprived of the exercise
of my Ministry for such a circumstance, I ought to submit to such an
inconvenience. So, though I judge such a form inconvenient, yet if I must use
that, or not exercise my Ministry; the latter being a duty, I ought to submit
to the former. On this ground, I suppose, Calvin went in using wafer-cakes in
the Administration of the Lords Supper: For, at first he refused to administer
the Communion with unleavened bread and wafer-cakes, and was thereupon
compelled to depart out of the City; but afterward he was received again upon
his allowance of that same kind of bread. De quo postea restitutus, nunquam
contendendum putavit; minime tamen dissimulans, quod alioqui magis esset
probaturus, says Beza. In all these cases. Edification is the end, Decency and
Order the means; now the end is that which principally we must be ruled by in
these things; and therefore where a more convenient means cannot be had, by
reason of any either natural or moral hinderance, there a less convenient
becomes necessary, so long as the End may be attained thereby. Yea further yet.

10. In the case put, I may not only do that which I judge to be inconvenient,
but suffer another to do that which I judge to be unlawful, rather than be
deprived of a necessary Ordinance. E. g. If either I must have my Child
baptized with the sign of the Cross, or not baptized at all, I may suffer it to
be done in that way, though I judge it an unlawful addition; because the manner
concerns him that does it, not me (at least, not so much) so long as there is
all the essence. He must be responsible for any irregularity in the manner, not
I. Thus Jacob took Laban's Oath, though by his Idols. And Christ did join with
the Jewish Church in their Administrations of God's Ordinances, though there
were many Corruptions therein, rather than not partake of the Ordinances at
all. But,

11. If the inconvenience be such as would overthrow the main end of the duty,
and is inconsistent therewith, then the indifferency is so far from becoming
necessary, that notwithstanding the command it is unlawful, and I may not obey,
whatever the penalty be. E. g. If I may not pray or read in the Congregation,
but with such a tone and modulation of the voice, as would Pender what is so
prayed or read unintelligible; I must rather suffer any penalty, than perform
the duty in such a manner, because the Congregation cannot be edified thereby,
nor understandingly join with me therein; and so I do but take God's name in
vain.

Lastly, In all these cases there is left unto every private person a Judgment
of Discretion, to discern and try whether the thing commanded be Ille judicat
(...), and per modum privatae discretionis, qui de sensu, aequitate, aut
veritate dogmatis, sive sententiae propositae a judicibus supra nominatis,
judicat, sine ulla potestate publica, tantum comprehendendo, approbando, and
intellectum suum admittendo. Actus enim intelligendi, non exercetur sine actu
judicandi -- De judicis cujuscunque subordinati definitionibus adhibetur hoc
judicium, non solum ut intelligatur ejus sententia, sed etiam ut Aequitas, seu
Veritas ejusdem, and consensio cum lege Supremi Judicis percipiatur, and
obedientis animo persuadeatur. Daven. de Judice. c. 3.
lawful, or no, and how far forth the reasons that are publicly held forth to
bottom the command upon, are solid and valid (as was showed before) Some indeed
object, That this will overthrow all obedience, if Children, Servants, etc. are
not bound to obey, till they be satisfied of the lawfulness of the Command. But
I answer, Though it is true, the same Command ( viz. the fifth) which enjoins
obedience to Parents and Masters, enjoins obedience to Magistrates also; yet I
conceive there is a different tie, and that Subjects are not so strictly bound
to Magistrates, as Children are to their Parents, or Servants to their Masters.
And therefore it is observable, that when the Apostle lays out the particulars
of this obedience, he bids Children obey their Parents in all things, Col.
3.20. viz. in the Lord (as he expounds it. Ephesians. 6.1.) i. e. in whatsoever is
agreeable to God's will, and not contrary thereto. And so it is for the
obedience of Servants, Col. 3.22. Servants obey in all things your Masters
according to the flesh. And so Wives must be subject to their own husbands, in
every thing, Ephesians. 5.24. but he says not the like for Subjects to Magistrates:
The reason whereof I conceive to be this, That Children are for their Parents,
and Servants for their Masters; but now Subjects are not for Princes, but
Princes for their Subjects, i. e. for their benefit and advantage; and
therefore Subjects are not so strictly bound to Magistrates, as Children are to
their Parents, and Servants to their Masters.

Thus having dispatched these preliminary Discourses concerning Liberty and
Indifferency, we pass on to the principal and fundamental point of Scandal;
where we are to consider the nature of that Scandal for which we must forbear
the use of our Liberty in things indifferent. And we shall view it, both as to
the Quid Nominis, and Quid Rei.

1. For the Quid Nominis. Much lies in that; neither have I met with any one
that gives a full and satisfactory account of it; and therefore I shall be the
more large and particular about it.

There are two words used in the N. T. translated, Scandal, and Offense, (...)
(whence our English word comes) and (...); the difference between which is but
small, if any; and concerning which, Critics are not agreed upon their
Verdict; and therefore I must return an Ignoramus. Of (...), I have spoken
before in opening the words of the Text. Now for (...), it is a Scripture-word,
Yet (...) nostras Gatakerus (...), conjectures it to have been of familiar use
formerly. In hanc classem (verborum) scilicet quorundam, quorum usus jam
evanuit, nec in veterum scriptis extat am plius, vestigia tamen adhuc residua
sunt, ex quibus olim familiaria fuisse, liquido possit deprehendi), redigi
potest (...); quod apud antiquos Graecae linguae autores deprehendere hactenus
nequiverunt, qui sunt rerum istarum indagatores diligentissimi atque acerrimi.
Verum apud Hellenistas, quos nuncupant, crebrum est atque admodum familiare.
Gatak. Adversar. Miscellan. cap. 41. p. 415.
never used by any profane Author, as H. Stevens observes. Critics say it
signifies properly the bridge in a trap, which when a Mouse or other Vermin
touches, the trap falls, and so they are taken. And indeed so (...) (a word
very near of kin to it) is used by Aristoph. in Acharn. (...), thou have set a
trap or snare of words; and thence it is used to signify any kind of snare in
general, whether proper or metaphorical; or omne id quod exitii causam praebe^,
says Grotius; whatsoever tends to the hurt or ruin of another, or whereby he
is drawn into sin, as a bird into a snare. Others will have it to signify
primarily any thing that makes a man to halt (from (...), claudico) or to go
lame; and thence, any thing that occasions a man to sin: And so, if there be
any difference between (...) and (...), it is this: the former signifies, that
which makes a man stumble; the latter, that which makes him halt; a common
effect of stumbling: It is rendered, A thing that does offend, Mat. 13.41. they
shall gather out of his kingdom, (...), all things that offend. An occasion to
fall, Romans 14.13. -- that no man put -- an occasion to fall in his Brothers
way. An occasion of stumbling, 1 John 2.10. -- there is none occasion of
stumbling in him. A stumbling block, Rev. 2.14. -- who taught Balac to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel. But commonly, An offense, as in
many places.

It Is taken by a Metonymy of the adjunct for persons guilty of scandalous sins,
Mat. 13.41. Omnia scandala, i. e. omnes illos, qui -- Ecclesiae permixti,
scandalo aliis fuerint, falsa doctrina, aut impura vita, aliis cadendi,
impingendi sive peccandi praebuerint occasionem Luc. Brug. in loc.
-- all things that offend, and them which work iniquity, i. e. all kind of
sinners, both open and secret, scandalous and hypocritical.

In the Metaphorical acceptance, as applied to spiritual things, it is most
frequently taken in the notion of Sin. When occasion is either given, or taken
of sin, either of Omission or Commission.

For occasion given of committing sin, Mat. 18.7. Woe to the world, because of
offenses. Luke 17.1. It Is impossible but that offenses will come. Romans 14, 13.
-- that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers
way: and 16.17. mark them which cause divisions and offenses. Rev. 2.14. Balaam
taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication. Romans 14.21. It is good
neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended. 1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my brother to offend.

For occasion taken of committing sin, Mat. 5.27, 30. If thy right eye, or hand
offend thee, i. e. If thou find thy self ensnared by the use of lawful
things, thou must carefully forbear them. Romans 11.9. All these comforts shall
serve to harden their hearts in sin, and lengthen their life therein, till they
fill up the measure of their iniquities. Dicson on Ps. 69.22.
Let the table be a snare, and trap, and stumbling block unto them, i. e. let
them take occasion by the blessings God bestows upon them, to sin against him,
and provoke him to their destruction. 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is offended, and I burn
not? i. e. Who is there that takes occasion of sinning against God, and I am
not affected therewith, troubled thereat?

Again in reference to neglect of Duty, or sins of Omission, I find it once
used for occasion given (though not taken) of such sin, Mat. 16.23. Thou art an
offense to me. i. e. Thou go about, as much as in thee lies, to hinder me
from the great work of Redemption, to be accomplished by my sufferings. Hic
scandalum sumitur late, says Aquinas, i. e. impedimentum ne pateretur. 22ae.
a. 5. q 43.

But frequently it is used for occasion taken (when none was given) of neglect
of duty, Mat. 11.6. Blessed is he who is not Qui nulla re, quae in me sit,
absterretur, ac ceu repellitur, quominus in me credat. Luc. Brug. in loc.
offended in me, i. e. is not hindered from believing, nor moved to apostatize
by any thing he sees in me: and Mal. 13.21 ( Mar. 4.19.) by and by he is
offended, i. e. Timore persecutionum resilit a fide. Idem.
turned out of the way of duty: and v. 57. ( Mark 6.3.) and they (his
Countrymen) were offended in (or, at) him, i. e. took occasion to disbelieve
and disrespect him: and c. 15.12. Know thou not that the Pharisees were
offended after they heard this saying, i. e. took occasion hereby (being
resolved to maintain their own opinions) to be more averse both to thy Person,
and the Doctrine thou teach: and c. 24.10. many shall be offended, i. e.
deserent fidem in me, timore mortis and tribulationis, odiique vitandi causa,
and fient ex fratribus hosts. Luc. Brug. in loc. and c. 26.31. ( Mark 14.27.)
all ye shall be offended because of me, i. e. shall take occasion by that which
befalls me to forsake me through unbelief, John 16.31, 32. so John 16.1. These
things have I spoken that you should not be offended. i. e. I have forewarned
you of the troubles you are like to meet withal, that you should not be
startled thereby, nor discouraged from constancy in your profession. Thus for
the use of it in the notion of sin (which is the most common).

Again, it is used for an occasion of censuring, or thinking ill of us as
transgressors of God's Law. So it is taken (according to the general current of
Interpreters), Mat. 17.27. Nevertheless lest we should offend them, i. e. (as I
said) administer occasion to them of censuring us as Contemners of God's Law,
or the Magistrate's Authority. However this is plainly intimated, that such an
evil does many times accompany Scandal, as in the Context, 1 Cor. 10.30. Why am
I evil spoken of for that, for which I give thanks? And v 29. he speaks of
judging, or censuring, Why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? i.
e. Why do I needlessly and unseasonably expose my Christian Liberty to the rash
censures of a weak Brother, who may be ready to traduce it, as profane
licentiousness? And likewise elsewhere we read of blame attending it, 2 Cor.
6.3. Giving no offense -- that the Ministry be not blamed.

There Is another sense of the word [ offense and offend] usual in our language,
viz. for matter of anger or displeasure: As when one is angry with us, or takes
exceptions at any thing, or takes any thing ill from us; we say, He is
offended. But I meet not with any Interpreters that own this sense in any place
of the New Testament. Though I must needs say, there are two or three places
(were I not biased by the current of Interpreters, and that I dare not venture
to swim against the stream) would otherwise seem to me very much to incline to
this sense. I shall lay them before you, and leave them to your consideration.
Mat. 16.23. Thou art an offense to me. Methinks it might very fairly and
naturally be paraphrased thus: Thou do trouble me to see how ignorant thou
art of the great work of Redemption by my death and sufferings. I am sorry the
Devil should take so much advantage of thy ignorance and weakness, to carry on
his own designs by thee. And c. 17.27. Nevertheless, lest we should offend
them, i. e. (say I) vex, anger, and displease them by refusing to pay this
tribute. And so indeed I have met with one (and that is a modern Author)
understands it; Tombs of Scand. p. 12.
i. e. says he, That we may not provoke them to anger or enmity against us.
Again, c. 15.12. Know thou not that the Pharisees were offended, i. e. (say
I) angry with thee for condemning and slighting their Traditions. But however,
whether these places will bear this sense or no, this I am sure of, that the
Apostle expresses Scandal by Grief, Romans 14.15. If thy brother be grieved with
thy meat, now walk thou not charitably. Grieved, i. e. by seeing thee do
that which he thinks unlawful. So P. Martyr. Quum videant alios secus facere,
quam ipsi judicent esse faciendum. Or by thinking he is slighted, and made no
reckoning of. So Justinian. Sive quod putet legem Dei violari, sive quod putet
negligi se, and pro nihilo haberi. And so the Dutch Annotators. When he sees
thee who art strong eat meat forbidden in the Old Testament, thinking that
therein thou sinnest against God, which grieves the godly; Or seeing that
thereby thou do, as it were despise and contemn him. And this sense of
Scandal seems further to be countenanced by John 6.60, 61. compared: verse. 60.
This is an hard saying. v. 61. Does this offend you? i. e. Are you distasted at
this Doctrine? Will it not down with you? Does it not relish with you, nor
please your palate? Can you not digest it? Does it stick in your stomach?
Although, I must confess, it may as fairly be understood in that sense before
given of several places, thus: Does this give you occasion to think hardly and
strangely of any of the mysteries I have delivered unto you, or tempt you to
forsake and lay down your profession of my Doctrine? There Is one place more to
which this notion of the word seems not altogether impertinent, Mat. 18.6. (
Mar. 9.42.) Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, etc. Offend, i. e.
by not receiving (for so it is opposed to receive, in the former verse), and so
grieve, and discourage him. But this sense is so doubtful and obscure, that I
find learned men do wholly wave and disown it in the consideration of Scandal.
So Dr. Hammond. To be angry, grieved, troubled at any action of another, is not
[to be offended] in Scripture-sense; nor consequently does it follow that I
have done amiss in doing that which another man is angry at, unless mine action
be in it self evil. Of Scand. p. 23. Dr. Jer. Tailor. He only gives Scandal,
who induces his Brother, directly or collaterally, into sin, as appears by all
the Discourses in Scripture guiding us in this duty. Life of Christ, Part 3.
Disc. 16. sect. 5. Edit. in 4to. And another. Scandal or offense is not the
grieving or displeasing my Brother; for peradventure when I grieve him or
displease him, I do edify him. Now Edification and Scandal are not compatible.
Engl. Pop. Cerem. part 2. c. 8. sect. 2. So that I dare not vouch the use of
the word [Scandal] in the notion of grief or displeasure in any place of
Scripture, except in that of Romans 14.15. Where it seems rather to be mentioned
as an adjunct or companion of Scandal, than the formalis ratio, or that wherein
properly it does consist. I have been the more large and particular in this,
because I apprehend an exact consideration of the propriety and use of the word
in Scripture will much conduce to the more full and clear handling this point,
and be of special use in our following discourse.

And the sum of all is this; That the word [Scandal] or [Offence] in Scripture
is most usually taken for occasion of sin; sometimes for occasion of censuring
or judging the person scandalizing as loose and licentious, and one that walks
not strictly according to the Rule of the Gospel; which may be attended with
grief of heart and trouble of spirit for that sin, which the party offended
conceives is committed against God.

Thus much for the Quid Nominis. The Quid Rei follows.

The nature of Scandal in general, may be thus expressed.

A Scandal is a word, or action, or omission of either, manifest to another,
which occasions his fall into sin or sorrow. If this word or action, or
omission, be a duty or any thing necessary pro hic and nunc, it is Scandal only
taken, and not given; if it be any thing evil, it is Scandal given, whether it
be taken or no; that alters not the case: but if it be indifferent, it is only
given, when it is taken. So then, to the business in hand.

Scandal in indifferencies is, an unnecessary word, or action, or omission of
either, manifest to another, whereby I know any one is scandalized, i. e. does
take occasion either to sin himself, or to be grieved at the supposed sin of
another.

I shall open every branch distinctly by it self.

1. It is a word] There are scandalous words, as well as actions. An offense
may be both given and taken at words, as well as deeds. Hence Scandalum est
dictum vel factum minus rectum, praebens alteri occasionem ruinae. 22ae. q. 43.
a. 1. and so others.
Aquinas inserts dictum, as well as factum into his definition of a Scandal.
Thus the Pharisees took offense at Christ's words, Matthew. 15.12. And Peter's
speech was an offense to Christ, Mat. 16.22, 23.

2. -- or action] As to eat Idolothytes in the Idols Temple, Rev. 2.14. Balaam
taught Balak to east a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication: This was a Scandal
given, whether it were taken or no. To preach Christ crucified, which was to
the Jews a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.23. this was Scandal taken, but not given.
To eat Idolothytes in private houses, 1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my Brother to
offend; This was Scandal given, if it were taken, but otherwise it was no
Scandal at all.

3. -- or omission of either] Men may be scandalized at the omission of that
which they look upon to be a duty, as well as at the commission of that which
they conceive to be a sin. Hence Christ to avoid scandal, pays tribute, Mat.
17.27. Nevertheless lest we should offend them, etc. implying, that the
omission there of might prove scandalous. So the Jews were offended at Paul's
omission of the Ceremonial Law, Act. 21.21, 24.

4. All this must be unnecessary.] An unnecessary speaking, doing, or omitting;
or, speaking, doing, or omitting that which is not necessary, or, which is
indifferent. And this makes the difference between Scandal given, and Scandal
taken, and makes the speaking, doing, or omitting to be culpable; for if my
speaking, doing, or omitting be a duty, or necessary, then I am not culpable,
though scandal follows upon it; but if it be not necessary, then I am. So that
this is the hinge upon which this business of Scandal turns, and the touchstone
by which we must try whether we be culpable, or no. And indeed here is the main
difficulty; for every one will grant, That that which is necessary, is not
matter of scandal given; or, I am not culpable though scandal follows: but then
they differ in assigning the extent of necessaries, and in defining what is
necessary, what not. The ordinary gloss on Mat. 15.12. resolves it thus:
Dimittendum est propter scandalum, quicquid dimitti potest, salva triplici
veritate, vitae, doctrinae, and justitiae. We must forbear in case of scandal,
whatsoever may be forborne, with a salvo to the threefold truth, of life, of
faith, and of justice. But this resolution may seem to labor with the malady
of obscurum per obscurius, and therefore we will dismiss it. Gregory says,
That whatsoever may be forborne without sin, must be forborne in case of Scandal.
Judicious and learned Ames limits it to that which is Tum autem scandalum
dicitur dari -- cum illud quod ex mandato Dei non est nobis necessarium --
temere committitur. Medul. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 53.
necessary by God's Command; but that seems to straiten it too much; for a
thing may be necessary by a concurrence of circumstances, as he himself speaks
elsewhere. Rutherford in his Which is annexed to his Divine Right of
Church Government.
Dispute touching Scandal, has several distinctions about things necessary,
qu. 6. p. 61. and lays down several Rules for regulating our practice therein,
p. 82. which I think not necessary here to mention. I think we may dispatch the
business, and solve the principal difficulty by a distinction or two (formerly
made use of).

There Is a twofold Necessity. Intrinsecal, imprinted upon the nature of things,
and so belonging to the whole kind, as to hear, pray, etc. Circumstantial,
which is not general, but particular, arising only from some circumstance,
which makes it necessary pro hic and nunc in such a particular respect; as, to
stand in a Pulpit, or some such high place, when I am Preaching, that I may be
the better heard; to be uncovered when I am praying in the Congregation in
token of reverence; to come to the Church to partake of the public Ordinances,
because that place is ordinarily more fit and convenient than another: to eat
meat offered to Idols, when no other can be had. Thus abstaining from blood and
things strangled, is called a necessary thing for the Gentiles, Act. 15.28.
viz. not intrinsecally from any general standing Law, but circumstantially, and
in that particular case, in respect of the Scandal the Jews did take at eating
of them. Now this kind of necessity admits of a very great latitude; so that
whatsoever has but any tolerable, considerable degree of convenience, whether
moral, natural, or civil, comes within the compass of this necessity. But then
we must take another distinction along with us.

This circumstantial necessity is either Absolute or Comparative. Absolute,
when a necessary end cannot be attained by other means. So, it is absolutely
necessary that but one at once should be speaking in the same Congregation, 1
Cor. 14.28-33.
because the contrary would breed disorder and confusion, destructive of
edification; and likewise that he that speaks should speak in a known tongue.
Comparative, when another means may serve as well, and be as convenient for
attaining the end, or at least the end may be attained thereby in some
tolerable manner, though it may be not so readily and conveniently. Thus a
Cloak may be as fitting and decent to Preach in as a Gown; a Divinity-School,
or some such like place, as convenient as a Church; a high Pew, as a Pulpit.
Now to apply these distinctions to our present purpose, I lay down these
Positions.

1. That which is necessary either intrinsecally or circumstantially with an
absolute necessity, is not matter of scandal given; i. e. if scandal do follow
upon the doing of it, he is not culpable that does it. In case one of the
Christian Corinthians could have gotten no other meat, but such as had been
offered to Idols, and must either have eaten that or starved; the eating of
this meat being absolutely necessary in this case for the preservation of his
life, and there being no other means in his power for the attaining this
necessary end, that would have excused him, and rendered him innocent and
blameless, though Scandal had followed upon it: but in case other meat might
conveniently have been gotten, and he might have eaten that, then the eating of
this particular meat in case of Scandal ought to have been forborne. So Christ's
Doctrine concerning the vain Traditions of the Elders being necessary to be
delivered, and that the people should be acquainted therewith, excused him from
blame, Mat. 15.10
though the Pharisees were offended thereat, and makes him regardless of their
scandal: and therefore he says concerning it, Let them alone, they be blind
leaders of the blind, v. 14. So, Churches being so necessary for the decent and
orderly meeting of the Congregation, and fitted for the several performances,
and in few places there being any other buildings that have any tolerable
degree of convenience; and because if these individual Churches should be
pulled down, there would not be others built in their rooms; therefore (though
some have been scandalized at the use of them in regard they have formerly been
abused with Idolatry) it is not matter of scandal given, nor does make us
culpable by using them.

2. That which has no degree of necessity, neither in its own nature, nor by
reason of any circumstance, or if it have, it is but a comparative necessity,
which may be compassed and attained by other means, must be forborne in case of
scandal. This is such a legible truth, and so palpably evident, that Papists
themselves subscribe to it; for both * Comment. in 22 a. q. 43. a. 7.
Cajetan and Domin. Bannes say, that we should abstain even a spiritualihus
nonnecessariis, when scandal arises out of them: and Maldonat in Mat. 17.27.
tells us that Christ shunned a Scandal, which would have been merely passive;
the reason whereof is rendered by Paraeus (in locum). Debebant enim exactores
non ignorare Christi immunitatem and dignitatem; quia tamen ignari ejus erant,
ne videretur scandalum dedisse, cedere potius sua liberate voluit. Ideo non
dicit tantum [ne scandalizentur] sed [ne scandalizemus eos] i. e. ne scandali
materiam iis demus; docens scandala cavenda esse, etiam cum cessione nostri
juris in rebus bus mediis. Hence, wearing a Surplice being scandalous, and
officiating in some other garment, being as decent, and every way tending as
much to the gravity and solemnity of the Administration, therefore it ought to
be forborne, where there is no more necessity for the using, than for the
forbearing. So Christ's insisting upon his privilege, and making up of his
liberty and freedom in case of paying tribute, not being necessary, he waves
it, when he saw scandal might have followed upon it, Mat. 17.25-27.

3. Though the end cannot be altogether so well and conveniently attained; yet
if it may be at all obtained without any considerable degree of inconvenience,
in case the other (though more convenient) means, prove scandalous, it renders
culpable by the use of it: Or more plainly thus. We are bound to part with some
conveniences (especially in civil matters) for the avoiding offense. This I
gather both from Paul's Resolution, 1 Cor. 8. ult. If meat make my brother to
offend, etc. Though possibly it might be inconvenient for him, and prejudicial
to his health totally to forbear the use of flesh, yet he resolves upon a total
abstinence to his dying day, rather than do that which should be offensive to
his brother. I know indeed Calvin looks upon his speech as hyperbolical, and
makes the plain meaning to be only this, Se nunquam potius usurum sua
liberate, quam ut sit infirmis offendiculo; and others limit it to the
subject matter spoken of, viz. flesh offered to Idols (which sense I confess is
not improbable), yet however the general terms and expressions he uses, do
countenance that Position for which I produced this Text. And so I find
Justinian expressly interpreting it, Non de Idolothytis tantum loquitur
Apostolus, sed etiam de quovis ciborum genere, quamvis carnes potissimum
nominet, quod hactenus de Idolothytis locutus sit-in specie genus ipsum
intelligit, quomodo apertissime explicant Ieronymiani Commentarii. And so
Paraeus. Quaestio tantum erat de carnibus immolatis, eam vero extendit ad
carnes in universum, quarum usus absque controversia est licitus. Besides, it is
agreeable to his Thesis, which he lays down in as general terms, Romans 14.21. It
is good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. This Position may be also further
confirmed by the instance concerning the Brazen Serpent. The Brazen Serpent was
preserved for a Memorial of that miraculous deliverance vouchsafed to the
Israelites in the Wilderness from the stinging of the fiery Serpents. This end,
though it might be attained by other means, viz. Records, and Scripture, and
Information, or Tradition, yet not so clearly and fully (for segnius irritant,
etc.) yet because it might sufficiently be attained otherwise, when the
continuance of it proved scandalous, and it became an object and occasion of
Idolatry; Hezekiah brake it in pieces, calling it Nehushtan, a piece of Brass:
which fact of his is registered by the Holy Ghost among his good deeds, and
ranked with other particulars of his destroying Idolatry, 2 Kings 18.4.

But now for the degrees of convenience or inconvenience, which render culpable
or excusable, Christian Prudence must determine them by a due weighing of
circumstances.

4. As for that necessity which arises from the Command of the Magistrate, it
has been spoken to already in the discourse about Indifferency; where we
showed, that so far forth as an indifferent thing is made convenient by
circumstances, when it is enjoined, it becomes necessary: and therefore without
any more ado, we now pass on in the Description of Scandal.

5. -- manifest unto others.] That which is done secretly without the privity
of any other, or which is only inward in the heart and soul, though it may be
an offense against God, and sinful, yet is not offensive to men, and
scandalous. Hence Tertullian defines scandalum by exemplum, something that is
exemplary.

6. -- whereby I know.] In this kind of Scandal, if it come not to my
knowledge, I am not culpable: therefore the Apostle says, v. 28. If any man
say unto thee, etc. q. d. If he acquaints thee with his scruple, then thou art
bound to forbear, otherwise not. Thus much also is implied, when he calls
scandalizing, a despising or setting at naught a weak Brother, Romans 14.3, 10.
Now I must first take notice of his scruple, before I can be said to neglect,
contemn or grieve him by using my liberty notwithstanding his scruple. The
reason hereof is, because in this case, Scandal consequent is but effectus per
accidens: Now however actions done by ignorance of God's Law are sins, yet
contingent events not foreseen by us, cannot make those actions of ours, which
otherwise are lawful, to become sinful, though the event be harmful, as Mr.
Tombs observes, p. 240. As it is in slaying by mere chance, mentioned Deuteronomy.
19.5. such a chance is a grievous misfortune, and in that respect to be
lamented, but not a sin, nor to be repented; so such casual scandal is to be
bewailed as a mishap, not mourned for as a sin.

7. -- any one] The too much officiousness of some has made a knot here in a
Bulrush. Much dust has been raised, and much more ado than needs, made
concerning the persons scandalized, as if their qualifications did alter the
case, and several limitations are given: as that of Aquinas, Sciendum est
seandali ex malitia (quod Pharisaicum recte nominatur) vitandi causa nullam
actionem, quae recta sit, omitti debere; propter alterum vero, quod vel ex
imbecillitate vel ignorantia nascitur declinandum, omnes quantumcunque rectas
aut utiles actiones, quae ad animi salutem non sint necessariae, declinandas,
vel occultandas, vel saltem in aliud tempus differendas esse. 22ae. q. 43. in
Axiomat. And that of the Dutch Annotations on the Text. Neither Christians, nor
Heathens, viz. if they be such persons of whom we have hope that thereby they
may be gained by us: and Dr. Jer. Tailor. We must not, Life of Christ, part 3.
p. 57. Edit. in 4to.
to please peevish or froward people, betray our liberty which Christ has given
us. But notwithstanding all this, upon due examination it will be found, that
it is all one who they be that are scandalized, and that the qualification of
the person has no influence at all into the business, so as to make Pro or Con,
to alter it one way or other; but that we must look altogether at the matter of
the scandal, and nothing at all at the person scandalized. We must not consider
what moves them, whether ignorance or malice, but what occasions it in our
selves: for if it be a necessary duty, we must not forbear for the weak; if
unnecessary, we must forbear even for the wicked. This is most evident by the
Apostle's enumeration in the Text: he makes no distinction, but includes all in
the prohibition; both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians; and his Practice was
answerable to his Precept, 1 Cor. 9.19-22. and c. 10. v. 33. Although it is
true, Because weak persons are most apt to be scandalized, therefore we must be
the most tender and careful of them (and therefore the Commination of our
Savior Christ is especially levelled against offending them, Luke 17.2. It
were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were cast into the Sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones).
Yet we must as well avoid what scandalizes the wicked, as the weak; as we must
no more defraud a rich man than a poor one; nor wound a strong man, than a weak
one, or a child; though we may more carefully avoid one than the other, because
they are less able to help and relieve themselves.

8. -- does take] not may, but does. This is one difference between things that
are scandalous per se, and in their own natures, viz. which either are
absolutely unlawful, or at least have a real appearance of evil, and scandal in
these indifferencies, that in the former it is enough quod de sui ratione habent
quod sint inductiva ad peccandum, 22 ae. q. 43. a. 1.
as Aquinas speaks. The possibility of Scandal subsequent does aggravate their
evil and sinfulness, though scandal does not actually follow; as we see in that
of Christ to Peter, Mat. 16.23. Thou art an offense to me. He does not say [ I
am offended with thee], but [Thou art an offence]. He checks him for laying a
stumbling block in his way; though he could not, was not capable of being
offended and stumbling at it, yet this did not excuse him. His sin was never
the less, but every whit as great, as if the effect had followed: But now in
these Indifferencies, it is only actual scandal following thereon that renders
a man culpable: and therefore I am not bound to forbear such an action, except
I know that it does give offense.

9. -- occasion.] The word, or action, or omission of one man can but occasion,
or be an imperfect cause, or cause by accident of the sin of another; for
nothing is properly the cause of a man's sin, but his own will. Thus Aquinas,
Nihil potest esse homini sufficiens causa peccati, -- nisi propria voluntas. --
Et propter hoc non dicitur, dans [causam] ruinae, sed dans [occasionem.] 22 ae.
q 43. a 1.

10. -- either to sin himself.] This seems to me to be that wherein the
formality, or, at least, the principal notion of Scandal in things indifferent
does consist, and which mostly, if not only, renders culpable, whenas another
takes occasion thereby to sin: For,

(1) The Scripture-use and acceptance of the word runs generally in this
channel (as was showed before), and those effects attributed to it by the
Apostle imply no less; as, wounding their weak conscience, 1 Cor. 8.12. i. e.
not only with a natural wound, by grief, but a moral, spiritual wound, by sin.
Verberatur alterius conscientia, says P. Martyr inloc. quando male
aedificatur, and ad ea impellitur agenda, de quibus aliter sentit, which is a
sin, Romans 14.23. and destroying, Romans 14.20. or, causing to perish, 1 Cor.
8.11. viz. morally too, by inducing into sin, which is the ruin and undoing of
the soul.

(2) In this also agree all Divines that I have met with, both ancient and
modern. Tertullian -- aedificans ad delictum. Aquin. -- praebens occasionem
ruinae. Spiritualis, etc. (22ae. q. 43. a. 1.) quae est peccatum, as himself
explains it, (a. 2.) -- quod aliis spiritualem perniciem affert, Ames. Medul.
l. 2. c. 16. sect. 53. -- quo alii possint vel excitari ad peccandum, vel
impediri aut retardari a benefaciendo, id. fect. 44. -- quo impeditur Evangelii
cursus, P. Martyr in 1 Cor. 8.8. -- quo alius deterior redditur, Polan. Synt.
-- quo aliquis possit a pietate and salute vel revocari vel impediri, Lucas.
which is or may be the occasion of another man's halting, or falling into sin,
or swerving from the straight way of righteousness, Gillesp. He only gives
scandal, who induces his Brother directly or collaterally into sin, Dr. Jer.
Tail.

(3) Because to be scandalized is sinful. So Aquin. 22 ae. q. 43. a. 2.
Scandalum passivum semper est peccatum in eo qui scandalizatur; non enim
scandalizatur nisi in quantum aliqualiter ruit spirituali ruira, quae est
peccatum.

Now the particular sin, which Scandal in things indifferent does occasion, is
ordinarily one of these two, with their concomitants and consequents, viz.
Either,

(1) A like speech, action or omission, but with a condemning, or at least with
a doubting conscience. Every example does animate and encourage him that
observes it, to do the like. The eye affects the heart, says Jeremy. Lam. 3.51.
But if he that is scandalized either think it unlawful, or be not satisfied of
its lawfulness, and yet takes example by the other, he falls into sin. This the
Apostle calls, being made weak (Romans 14.21.) i. e. apt to fall, brought into
danger of sin. This was the case Romans 14. It was, before the plenary
promulgation of the Gospel, and destruction of the Temple, lawful to observe
Jewish Festivals and distinction of meats, and yet not necessary, but
indifferent, (v. 14. I know and am persuaded that nothing is unclean of it
self), because Christ was come in the flesh: yet many of the
New-Convert-Christians were not so fully acquainted with, and satisfied about
their Liberty in these things, but did still esteem one day above another (v.
5.) and some meats unclean, (v. 14.) and consequently did condemn, or at least
scruple the non-observation of those days, and the eating of those meats: Now
such by seeing others which were higher Scholars perhaps in Christ's School
than themselves, to neglect those days, and that distinction of meats, were apt
to be drawn to act against their own consciences and judgments, which was a
great sin; for every man should be fully persuaded in his own mind, (v. 5.) but
to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, (v. 14.)
and therefore such an one is damned, or condemned by his own conscience, if he
eat, (v. 23.) which was scandalizing, and a heinous sin in those that did
occasion it. Neither was the case much unlike among the Christian Corinthians.
It was lawful to eat any meat bought in the shambles, or set before them at
their neighbors table, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27. yet sometimes some might be
scandalized thereby, which was when they did not think it lawful, yet by
another's example were emboldened to eat, as the Apostle speaks, c. 8. v. 10.

(2) The other sin which the use of Liberty in things indifferent does
occasion, is Censuring such a word, action or omission, as unlawful, and the
person as licentious, which because there is no ground for in the nature of the
thing, (it being, as I said, indifferent) it is the sin of rash judging;
condemned by Christ, Mat. 7.1. That this is one way whereby the person
scandalized may fall, is evident by the Apostle's words, 1 Cor. 10.29. Why is
my liberty judged of another man's conscience? q. d. I do culpably scandalize
another by doing such a thing, that I have (otherwise) liberty to do, or not to
do, if another judges or censures me for it: fo v. 30. For if I by grace be a
partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks? i. e.
though I may lawfully and comfortably make use of my liberty; yet if another
take occasion to reproach or condemn me for it, I do ill therein; I ought not
to do it. And Romans 14.16. Let not your good be evil spoken of. Thus we use to
say, There is a scandal lies upon such a man, for such a thing, i. e. he is
evil spoken of for it; he is censured and condemned for it, as a loose and
ungodly person; or at least, as one that does amiss in that particular. The
case is the same if Religion be evil spoken of, or scandalized by reason of any
unnecessary word, action, or omission of ours, then we are guilty of
scandalizing or, of the sin of scandal.

11. Lastly, -- or to sorrow, or be grieved at the supposed sin of another.]
There is one place, as I said before, and but one, that clearly brings this
within the compass of Scandal, viz. Romans 14.15. But if thy Brother be grieved
with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably; Grieved, viz because he
conceives that thereby thou sinnest against God: which kind of grief and
trouble is frequently found in godly persons upon such occasions. Psalm. 119.53.
Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law. v.
136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. v.
158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved. Psalm. 139.21. -- Am not I
grieved with them that rise up against thee? Now this renders the person
culpable who does so grieve or scandalize another, and therefore must be
avoided. For, as we must not grieve the Spirit of God in our own hearts. Ephesians.
4.30. so neither in the hearts of any of his people, our brethren and
fellow members of the same mystical body with our selves. God does not
willingly do so himself, Lam. 3.33. For he does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men; nor would he have us to do so. Ezekiel. 13.22. Because
with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, etc. And this is the
only kind of trouble, offense or displeasure that is considerable in the point
of Scandal, so as to render culpable, viz. that which is caused with respect to
God and his glory; as for that which arises upon any other account, as, from
any personal concernment, because my command is disobeyed, my opinion
contradicted, my will not taken for a law, or the like, it is not at all
considerable in the point of Scandal, and will not come within the verge of the
Scripturenotion thereof, for scandalizing is destroying; but such a displeasing
may tend to Edification; and therefore is not scandalizing.

Thus we have at length run through the Explication of every branch and
particular in the definition of Scandal; from whence we may observe, that there
are these three things considerable (though differently) in it.

(1) In respect of the person offended, there is an evil example in that which
he conceives to be unlawful and sinful, which naturally prompts him to the like.

(2) In respect of the person scandalizing, he lies under blame and consure for
doing that which the other conceives unlawful.

(3) If the person scandalized be Godly, and one who is tender of God's Honor,
then he is grieved for the wrong he conceives is done to God, and the offense
against him, and the reproach that redounds to Religion by that which he looks
upon as sinful. Each of which is proportionably culpable (and therefore more or
loss carefully to be avoided) according to the rank I have set them in. The
first, most; the second, next; the last, least. We have at last climbed the
Tree; let us now see what fruit it bears (for we shall not trouble you with
Reasons: you may find enough in Romans 14. and in other Authors).

Much useful fruit grows upon this subject, which I shall gather for you, and
lay before you.

Use 1. Is Scandal such a thing, as has been described? Then, let me hence in
the first place take occasion to offer a word of advice and direction to you,
and lay down some Rules (which indeed are little other than Inferences from
what has been said) for the better informing your judgments, and governing
your practice in this ticklish affair of Scandal.

1. Non est cessandum ab operibus bonis pro quocunque scandalo. Aug. Ep. 199.
No man is bound to forbear a necessary duty, by reason of scandal following
thereon; for they are (at most) but indifferencies that must be forborne for
Scandal's sake. We must use all lawful means to prevent sin in our Brother; but
as we must not do evil that good may come of it; so neither must we neglect
good, for fear of evil coming on it; and so run into sin our selves, to stop
another from it. We must not transgress duty, to express charity; be
uncharitable to our selves, to show it to others. It was the saying of a
Heathen ( Pericles, mentioned by Plutarch) (...). A friend must accommodate and
help his friend as far as the Altar, i. e. as far as he can go with a good
conscience, without intrenching upon Religion. And this the most judicious
Calvin expresses excellently, Quae necessaria sunt factu, says he, nullius
offendieuli timore omittenda sunt. Quemadmodum enim charitati subjicienda est
nostra libertas, ita sub fidei puritate subsidere vicissim ipsa charitas debet.
Equidem and hic Charitatis rationem haberi decet, sed Vsque ad aras, i. e. ne
in gratiam proximi Deum offendamus. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 19. sect. 13.
i. e. Those things which are necessary must not be omitted for fear of
scandal: for as our Liberty must give place unto Charity, so Charity it self
must give way unto Purity; so that though we must have respect unto Charity,
yet only so far forth as we may do it, without offending God. To which agrees
that of Austin, Praestat ut scandalum admittatur, quam veritas deseratur. It Is
better to admit of scandal, than forsake the truth; which Bishop Andrews
expresses thus: Hoc tenendum Vtilius nasci scandalum, quam deseri verum. The
Reason whereof is partly that which Aquinas gives, Aquin. Sum. 22 ae. q. 43. a.
7.
Secundum ordinem Charitatis, plus debet homo suam salutem spiritualem diligere
quam alterius. A well-ordered Charity begins ever at home, making a man chiefly
desire and endeavor the salvation of his own soul; and consequently more
sollicitous to avoid sin in himself, than to prevent it in another; and partly,
because This were to foster and nourish a principle of evil in the person for
whose sake we neglect our duty: for as Tertullian observes, Bonae res neminem
scandalizant nisi malam mentem. As the light of the Sun hurts not a sound eye,
but a sore one; so, necessary duties offend not a good heart, but a bad one. To
which we may also add, as another reason, that of Dr. Jer. Tailor. It is
pusillanimity, or hypocrisy, Life of Christ, part 3. disc. 16. sect. 2 Edit.
in 4to.
or denying of Christ before men, to comply with any man, and to offend God, or
omit a duty. Whatsoever is necessary to be done, and is made so by God, no
weakness nor peevishness of man can make necessary not to be done. For the
matter of scandal, is a duty beneath the prime obligations of Religion. But
though we may not omit a necessary duty, for the avoiding of Scandal, yet it is
generally granted that some duties may be omitted, viz. such wherein we have to
do with others; as reproving miscarriages, and punishing offenders: according
to that Rule, Pro vitando scandalo, cessat rigor disciplinae; not such wherein
our selves only are concerned; as praying, hearing, etc. And yet those must not
be generally omitted neither, so as to induce an universal non-obeying such
affirmative Precepts, but only pro hic and nunc, when we foresee, that upon the
doing thereof the weak and ignorant will commit great sins. Praecepta
affirmativa juris naturalis aliquando propter scandalum sunt dimittenda, --
quia praecepta affirmativa obligant quando and quomodo oportet. Bannes tom. 3.
m. 22. q. 43. art. 8. concl. 2. See Ruth. of Scand. p. 18. and Jeanes Schol.
and Pract Divin. part 2. p. 106.

2. Scandal by doing things, is more ordinary, than by forbearing them. Where
we meet with one instance in Scripture or Experience of the latter, we may
observe several of the former sort. For, Actions are more observable and
apparent, than Omissions. As, in point of Law, a Negative cannot be proved; so
here, Omissions cannot be so readily discerned and discovered; and therefore
Examples in such cases are not so influential and attractive, as in case of
positive practice. Besides, there may be so many reasons for the forbearing of
an action, that scarce any one who has but so much discretion as will serve him
for his every-days-wearing, will think much at it: whereas, positive practice,
or actions, that they may be good, must be attended with such a numerous train
of regular circumstances (bonum est ex integris causis) that it is a hard matter
so to rank and dispose and govern them, but some or other will be picking holes
in their coats, and finding faults, and taking occasion to censure them, or us
for them.

3. In things indifferent that may be scandalous at one time, or in one place,
which is not so at or in another: for since this kind of scandal does not arise
necessarily, or naturally from the action, but only from the apprehension of
the observer, and so recipitur ad modum recipientis, therefore one may be
scandalized, and not another; or the same person at one time, and not at
another. Now because all Scandal arises from some appearance of evil, either
real or imaginary, therefore I distinguish of a twofold appearance of evil.
Natural, which is an occasion of sin, as lying in the same bed with another
man's wife; or else a sign of sin, as keeping ill company: and Customary, when
a thing is commonly abused to evil, and is usually a sign of evil; as going to
Play Houses is commonly abused to evil, and used by none almost but loose,
debauched persons. Now what has an appearance of evil only by reason of Custom,
and being used only by those that are evil, if in process of time, the custom
alters, and it comes to be used promiscuously by all sorts, both good and bad,
then the appearance of evil is removed, and it ceases to be scandalous. E. g.
Taking Tobacco, at the first use of it amongst us, was scandalous, because
practiced by few, but such as were of the more ranting strain: but afterward,
when it came to be more generally made use of, then Custom took away the
Scandal of it. The case is the same in point of Place, as well as Time. That
which in some places carries a show of evil, as wearing a hood and tippet in a
Country Church, elsewhere perhaps is not suspected thereof; as wearing the same
habiliments in the University. So Timothy's Circumcision was scandalous among
the Gentiles, not among the Jews; and on the contrary, Uncircumcision was
scandalous among the Jews, not among the Gentiles. Hence that advice of
^^mbrose to Austin and Monica, which was respected by Austin as an answer of a
heavenly Oracle. Unto whatsoever Church ye shall come, observe the manner or
custom thereof, if ye will neither give nor take offense, Ep. 86. Which being
restrained unto things indifferent, may be very good

And here I conceive, regard is to be had especially to those upon that Place,
which is the scene of the action, and not so much too those reports which are
raised concerning it: therefore Paul, when he was among the Gentiles, would not
have them circumcised, though the report thereof scandalized the Jews at
Jerusalem, Act. 21.21. And so you shall find, that the Apostles always had
respect to the places where they were present, so as to do, or not to do, as
the exigence of that place required.

4. An action from whence scandal follows, may at first be innocent and
blameless, and yet afterward become culpable and guilty, viz. if it be
continued after the scandal is known to follow from it. Thus the Preservation
of Gideon's Ephod, and the Brazen Serpent, was neither evil, nor had any
appearance of evil, (they being Monuments of God's mercies) so that when the
people were first scandalized by them, the scandal was merely passive; but the
keeping and retaining of them, after it was known that scandal rose out of
them, was culpable (not being necessary) and made the scandal to become active
also.

5. Whatsoever must be forborne for the scandal of the weak, must also be
forborne for the scandal of the wicked and malicious. All readily acknowledge
that the weak are not to be scandalized; all the doubt is concerning the
malicious, or the scandalum Pharisaeorum, whether that be culpable, and to be
avoided. The Affirmative I prove by these Arguments.

(1) The Apostles prohibition in the Text is general, Give none offense; and
the particulars he enumerates include all persons in the world, Jews or
Gentiles, or Christians. Now both Jews and Gentiles were oft-times very
malicious against the Christians, as we find by many passages in the History of
the Acts; and yet even they must not be scandalized.

(2) We are bound to love even our greatest enemies, Mat. 5.44.
and to do good unto all; and therefore we must not prejudice any, though never
so wicked and malicious, by scandalizing of them.

(3) Those who are wicked and malicious at present, yet may be of the number of
those for whom Christ dyed; and therefore not to be destroyed with thy meat, i.
e. scandalized by the use of Indifferencies, Romans 14.15.

6. Information or rendering a reason is not sufficient to excuse in case of
scandal, if scruple in the party scandalized does still remain. Paul gave
strong reasons (as Rutherford observes) for the lawfulness of an ordinary and
common use of days and meats prohibited to the Jews, Of Scand. p. 20.
that so the weak Jews might be informed thereof, and not be scandalized at the
common use of them; but yet he thought not fit either to make any Canons for
that purpose, or to practice accordingly, but resolves rather to forbear while
the world stands, than to offend by such a use of them, 1 Cor. 8.13.

Conformists do endeavor to acquit themselves from the guilt of Scandal by
this pretense, among others, That people have been abundantly informed, both by
Word and Print, of the lawful use of the Ceremonies, and that therefore, if now
they are scandalized, it is their own fault, and at their own peril. But this
covering is too narrow for them to wrap themselves in. For,

(1) Suppose the worst that you can, viz. That they are wilfully, frowardly,
peevishly, stubbornly ignorant, and refuse instruction, yet the scandal even of
such is to be forborne, (as was showed in the last particular). But,

(2) We may very fairly and probably conjecture, that their ignorance may not
be affected, though their scruple still remain; For either it may arise (as
Cajetan and other Schoolmen in 22 ae. q. 43. a. 7. observe) from the power and
prejudice of Custom, either in Practice or Opinion, which may cast such a mist
before their eyes, that they cannot discern the strength of the Reasons
propounded; or from the nature of the points controverted, which may be too
nice (as is usual in these cases) for ordinary capacities to comprehend and
fathom the depth of (whatsoever * It is not to be imagined, but that they who
have natural parts sufficient to conceive the mysteries of faith, have natural
parts sufficient to conceive the Doctrine of the lawfulness of Christian
Liberty; if they can understand the one, they may understand the other; if they
understand neither, they may be termed more rightly Infidels, than weak in
faith; blind, than dim-sighted. Tombs of Scand. p. 225.
Mr. Tombs suggest to the contrary), and therefore may be free from any
considerable (if not from all) tincture of those odious aggravations he there
loads them withal: so that habendi sunt adhuc pr pusillis, as Ames says, C. C.
l. 5. c. 11. sect. 15 they are still to be accounted in the number of weak
ones; and consequently such actions, at which they are scandalized, are to be
forborne; as Bannes determines, -- Tunc quamvis sit illis reddita ratio, tamen
ab hujusmodi spiritualibus cessandum, quia tunc non ex malitia, sed ex
ignorantia scandalizantur. Tom. 3. m. 22. q. 43. art. 8. Yea even those who are
strong in Knowledge, may yet be weak * Those who excel in light, may be weak in
grace, and in hazard to be ensnared. Ruth. of Scand. p. 22.
in Grace, and have strong inclinations to a sinful compliance; and indeed it
is to be feared, that many Ministers are more prevailed with, by the Examples
of others, and the outward advantages that Conformity brings along with it,
than by the strength of the Reasons produced for it. Hence Dr. Tailor's censure
[It is a mantle cast over pride and frowardness, Tailor's Life of Christ, part
3. disc. 16. sect. 10. Edit. in 4to.
to think our selves able to teach others, and yet pretend offense and scandal]
(which seems to be levelled against Non-conformists, and such as scruple the
lawfulness of their Diana- and Dalila-rites and Ceremonies) will prove but a
brutum fulmen, a mere Squib or Pot-gun, and fall to the ground without doing
any Execution; because, as the Learned Rutherford has well observed, A
stumbling block may be laid before the inclination, no less than before the
blind mind. Of Scand. p. 20.

7. Scandal, in the primary and most proper sense of the word, cannot be given
both ways; both by doing and omitting. I say, given; so as that a man should be
culpable whether he acts or forbears. Some seem to deny it absolutely; that it
is not casus dabilis, that scandal should follow both upon doing and
forbearing. Talis perplexitas est absurdum quid, says Bannes. Tom. 3. in. 22.
q. 43. a. 8. con. 3. So Ames, Nulla datur talis perplexitas ut necessarium sit
pio homini, sive hoc vel illud saciat, sive non faciat, scandalum alicui dare,
C. C. l. 5. c. 11. sect. 18. On the contrary, others suppose that the case may
so fall out, that a man may give Scandal both ways; which they endeavor to
prove, both from Paul's circumcising Timothy in compliance with the Jews; and
not circumcising Titus, in compliance with the Gentiles: and also from the
example of Peter, and his Companions, who were, say they, in danger of a double
Scandal, of the Jews, by eating with the Gentiles; and of the Gentiles, by
refusing to converse with them. And in this case a man is bound, say they, to
avoid the greatest Scandal. Thus the Conformists generally; and therefore when
they are urged with the Scandal of the Ceremonies, they reply, That a greater
Scandal is given by neglect of them, viz. A scandal to the Magistrate, and to
the dutiful and obedient Sons of the Church. See Dr. Jer. Tailor, Life of
Christ, Part 3. disc. 16. n. 11. Edit. in 4to.

Thus far I think we may accommodate the business between them, That there may
some kind of scandal follow on both hands. Conformists themselves cannot deny,
Scandal arising from Conformity; and we must yield. That persons many times
pretend Scandal by Nonconformity; but then we deny that these Scandals are of
the same kind. We deny that the same kind of Scandal follows on both hands,
both by doing and forbearing. The Scandal arising from Conformity is drawing
others into sin, viz. to do that which they are not satisfied about the
lawfulness of, but do doubt that it is unlawful. But the Scandal arising from
Nonconformity is only, either being displeased with those persons that will
not comply with their judgments, and do as they do; or at most a censuring
them to be contentious, factious, peevish, refractory persons; and therefore
the scandal arising from Conformity is far greater, and of a more heinous and
malignant nature, than that which arises from Nonconformity, and consequently
more carefully to be avoided. But then I add further, by way of Reply to the
foregoing Cavil. There are weightier and stronger reasons for Nonconformity,
than for Conformity; for there is no reason for Conformity (at least which they
will stick to) but Authority; Now that is but argumentum inartificiale, and
barely of it self without a good foundation, no reason at all. It is but like a
cifer without a figure: Indeed where a figure goes before, a cifer adds much to
it, but of it self it is nothing: So where Reason goes before, Authority
strengthens the obligation, and ties the knot hard; but without Reason, it is
but a cifer. Reason edged with Authority, and Authority backed with Reason do
mutually strengthen each other; but Authority alone signifies little. But now
there are many and weighty arguments for Nonconformity; as may be seen fully in
all their Writings; which though we should grant to come short of that cogency
and demonstrativeness which some urge, yet certainly they carry such
probability with them, as far out-strips the best arguments for Conformity. And
therefore though they should not prove an absolute unlawfulness in the
Ceremonies, yet in this point of Scandal (where reasons on both sides are to be
weighed) the scale against Conformity will be far the heavier. So that we may
still keep our ground, and safely assert, That Scandal in its proper and
primary notion, for inducing into sin, can only arise one way (which is usually
by doing); and in this sense, I suppose, that passage of Ames before quoted, is
to be understood. (And therefore Mr. Tombes's arguments, p. 266, etc. of his
Treatise of Scandal are levelled at a wrong mark).

To the instances alleged by way of proof for a double Scandal, I answer to
the former:

That it was lawful for Paul to circumcise Timothy; because his Mother was a
Jewess ( Act. 16.1.) to whom the rites of Moses were permitted for a while,
viz. till the destruction of the Temple; and therefore, it being lawful to be
done, rather than scandalize the Jews, among whom he was now to exercise his
Ministry, in that case it became necessary to be done: But Titus being a Greek
( Gal. 2.3.) it was not lawful for him to be circumcised, nor for any of the
Gentiles to observe any of the Positive (which I oppose to Negative) parts of
the Ceremonial Law, as Ceremonial; and therefore though the Jews watched what
he would do, yet he absolutely refuses to circumcise him; not for fear of
scandalizing the Gentiles, but because it was not lawful to bring the Gentiles
under the bondage of the Ceremonial Law (which they would have been thereby,
Gal. 5.2, 3.) as Paul himself gives the reason, Gal. 2.4.

To the other I answer, That his eating with the Gentiles was a thing
necessary, and that for the avoiding of two great Scandals; one of the
Gentiles, who otherwise would have been tempted to Judaize; the other of the
Jews, who otherwise would have been confirmed in Judaism.

3. The whole business of Scandal, Vtendum est liberate nostra si in proximi
nostri aedificationem cedat; sin ita proximo non expediat, ea tunc abstinendum.
Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 19. sect. 12. Vbique studendum charitati, and spectanda
proximi nostri aedificatio. Id. Ibid.
is to be guided and governed by the Rule of Edification. That is the hinge
whereupon the door moves, whether to open or shut; whether to use or forbear.
Both Doing and Abstaining must be ordered by this Rule of Edification. This
indeed is the great end of all Church Matters: of the Word and Ordinances, that
we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. of the Ministerial Office, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. of Ministerial Power and Authority, it is for
Edification, 2 Cor. 10.8. of spiritual Gifts, which are for the edifying the
Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. of Christian Society and Communion; to edify one
another, 1 These. 5.11. And therefore this is that the Apostle still refers to,
Romans 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another. And 15.2. Let every one of us please
his neighbor for good to edification. Indeed the Rule is general, Let all
things be done to edifying. 1 Cor. 14.26. and so must take place in this case.
If the use of indifferent things be for Edification, then we must use them, as
Paul did Circumcision, to Timothy, Act. 16.3. for he being to be his companion
in his Ministry among the Jews, if he had not been circumcised, they would have
rejected his service, and never have given him the hearing. Or, if on the
contrary, not using them be for edification, then we must not use them, but
forbear; as the same Apostle did circumcision for Titus, Gal. 2.3. for if he
had done it, then the false Brethren would have drawn an argument from thence
for their own opinion, viz. That circumcision (and the observation of others
Judaical Ceremonies) was necessary to salvation. And hence, upon this account,
if persons are scandalized at an indifferency, and their Scandal arise from
some superstitious conceit and persuasion, and such as they have no tolerable
pretense or ground of * We read not of Scandals culpable in God's word, but
there is some apparent moral reason for them. Ruth. of Scand. p. 53.
reason for; as if any should be offended for eating flesh on a Friday, or
eating in a morning before receiving the Sacrament; they are rather to be
crossed, than complied with herein, because that is more like to tend to their
edification; and yielding to them would but nourish them up in their
superstitious fancy. As Solomon says concerning a fool ( Prove. 26.4, 5.)
Answer a fool ( i. e. a conceited fool) according to his folly, ( i. e.
smartly, let him not have his way and saying) lest he be wise in his own eyes.
But answer not (a tractable) fool, according to his folly, ( i. e. weakly) lest
thou be like him. So may I say in this case, * Docuerunt Apostoli in
indifferentibus faciendis vel omittendis, duo extrema esse cavenda; hinc quidem
scandalum infirmorum, inde pervicaciam falsorum fratrum. Si enim usu rerum
mediarum videamus vel illos offendi, h. e. in fide labe factari, vel istos in
falsa opinione obfirmari, omittendae potius sunt, quia tune per accidens fiunt
illicitae. Paraeus. Extraneorum nobis est habenda ratio, ne dum eis obsequimur,
ipsos in superstitione confirmemus. Beza.
Comply not with an obstinate person in his erroneous, irrational,
superstitious fancies, that thou bolster him not up therein; but yield unto a
weak Brother, lest thou show thy self as weak as he.

Obj. If it be objected, That that compliance which the Scripture enjoins and
gives instances of; as, the Gentiles abstaining from things strangled, and
blood, etc. Act. 15.29. and Paul's purifying himself, Act. 21.24. was in
compliance with the Jews, and so might sooth them up in their erroneous
opinion, that the Law of Moses was still in force; and therefore this is not a
sufficient cause to hinder us from complying with them, and make us regardless
whether we scandalize them or no; but that for all this we ought rather to
comply with them in their fancies, at least in abstinence from, and forbearance
of, such things as they disallow:

Ans. To this I answer. There is a vast difference between Ceremonies, or
customs and usages of Divine Institution and appointment, and those which are
merely of humane invention. These mentioned in the Objection, and all other
Scripture-instances of this kind relate only to things of Divine appointment,
and such as had been necessary Duties, as having been positively and
peremptorily enjoined by God. Now though those Ceremonies and Parts of the
Mosaical Law, were, after Christ's Death, really dead, and without any life and
soul, yet they were not as yet deadly; but were dispensed with for a time, (
viz. till the Destruction of the Temple) that in the mean while the converted
Jews might be thoroughly informed and instructed in their Christian Liberty
concerning them; and therefore a compliance with them in such things for a
while, was needful, and for their Edification. But the case is far otherwise
with us nowadays: There are no such Ceremonies urged on the one hand, or
scrupled on the other, which have any such Divine stamp upon them: There is no
such rational ground can be pleaded for a submission to these things: They are
generally such as have no foundation, but in the superstitious or erroneous
fancies of men; and therefore compliance with them would rather feed the ill
humor, than any way tend to correct, or evacuate it; and so would hinder their
Edification, and consequently ought not to be yielded to.

Lastly, From all, I infer the unlawfulness of the Ceremonies; and that upon
the account of all those points which have been the main subject of the
preceding discourse, viz. both in respect.

(1) Of their Scandalousness; which though we should suppose they are not in
their own nature, as not being absolutely evil, yet they are notoriously so in
their Use, and do render those Parts of worship to which they are annexed
nauseous and odious to many queazy stomachs; and make the offering of the Lord
to be abhorred, as Ely's sons did, 1 Samuel 2.17.

(2) Of their Incroachment upon, and Infringement of Christian Liberty; in as
much as they are an unnecessary Determination of those things, wherein at least
we ought to be left free, if we are not bound wholly to abstain from; and then

(3) Upon the account of their (pretended) indifferency; which if it really
were so, then they are not the fit and proper matter of an Imposition and
Constitution, as fully appears by what has been said before; and therefore I
only hint these things now, and enlarge not any further on them here.

Use 2. By way of Admonition, and that,

(1) In general, to All, to walk circumspectly and cautiously, lest in any
thing we offend any person, by any undue, unwarrantable use of our Liberty. O
take heed of any thing, of every thing which may be an occasion of stumbling to
another! O with what fear and trembling should we walk, lest at any time any
offense should come by our means! How careful should we be, not only not to
make pits wherein others should fall and break their bones, but to remove all
sticks and stones out of the way, whereat the weakest may stumble and hurt
himself! The Jews were commanded, when they built a new house, to make a
Battlement upon the roof of it ( Deuteronomy. 22.8.) for the safety and security of
men's bodies; and shall we not only not put up Battlements for the preservation
of men's souls, but leave the way slippery and full of snares?

We may observe in nature, that some things are moved contrary to their proper
inclinations for the good of the Universe: so must we forbear some things which
our particular inclinations would prompt us to, for the good of others, and
lest they should be offended and scandalized thereby. This is the express
Injunction of the Apostle often repeated, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own
(i. e. only that) but (also) every man another wealth; or, concerns, (...).
Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor. Gal. 5.13. Use not your
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. q. d.
Though Christ has made you free from the bondage and thraldom of the Ceremonial
Law, and so now you have liberty for the free use of many things, which before
his people were restrained from, yet since this is a privilege very subject to
abuse, and the flesh will be apt to take advantage thereof, for the fulfilling
its own lusts, and promoting and carrying on its own designs, desires and
interest, therefore you must be very wary and cautious in the use of it, and
govern it according to Rule, even the rule of Love, as knowing that though you
be now free from the Law of Moses, yet you are still Servants to the Law of
Love and Charity. In which respect we must not only be willing to purge out ill
and peccant humors, but to lop off even the best members of our bodies when
they offend, others, as well as our selves ( Mat. 18.8, 9) because we are bound
to love others as our selves; and therefore it is expressly made an argument of
Love, 1 John 2.10. He that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there
is none occasion of stumbling in him, i. e. he gives no occasion of offense:
Even as a loving husband will forbear the use of such food, though never so
pleasing to his own palate, which is offensive to his wife; at least while he
is in her company, and under her observation (and this Law of Scandal in
Indifferencies holds no further); and so the contrary practice is a breach of
Charity, Romans 14.15. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou
not charitably; and that not only in respect of the person scandalized, but of
others who take notice of it, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is offended, and I burn not?

Possibly thou may indeed carefully shun whatsoever is downright evil, and
be tender of doing any thing which is scandalously unlawful; O but thou must
also take heed of such things as others are apt to put an evil construction and
interpretation upon, and so do become unlawfully scandalous. Quantum mali est,
says Ambrose, per illicita non delinquere, and per ea quae concessa sunt
offendere; ut lex servetur in illicitis, and in licitis non custodiatur?

(2) More particularly, to several sorts: As.

1. To Magistrates and Governors to show themselves to be good Subjects to
Christ, by their obedience to this Law of his in the Text.

(1) Let them forbear making Laws to enjoin the practice of any thing which
themselves account indifferent, that yet is apparently and notoriously
scandalous in its use. For besides that they encroach upon Christian Liberty
thereby, as has been showed before; they transgress the Command of the Apostle
here, Give none offense. I see no dispensation or exemption they have, but it
runs indefinitely, and in general to all, Give none offense. As there is a
universality in respect of persons scandalized -- neither Jew nor Gentile, etc.
so in respect of persons scandalizing, Let no man do it. It Is bad enough indeed
in private persons to do such indifferent things whereat others are
scandalized, but far worse in Governors to establish such an iniquity by a
Law, and to enjoin the practice of such things by severe pains and penalties.
Exodus 21.33.
If others must cover pits wherein a beast may fall, certainly it cannot be
lawful for them to make pit-falls wherein the precious souls of men and women,
for which Christ died, and which all the world cannot ransom, should fall and
hurt themselves. True, they have power to destroy the bodies of men, and take
away their natural lives; but did God ever authorize them to destroy souls, and
enjoin that which has a direct tendency to the hazard and ruin of the
spiritual life? Could not Paul as easily have routed all those disputes in his
time about meats and days, and such circumstantials, with a bare word of his
mouth, and a peremptory sic volo, sic jubeo, if the mere injunction of a
superior had made indifferent things to become necessary, and so had been the
way to have ended such controversies? Where have any Governors nowadays more
power granted them in these spiritual affairs than he had? Or, why should they
not enjoin all persons to go after the same mode, or wear the same apparel? Nay
they might with as much reason punish all that are not of the same stature, or
complexion, or disposition with themselves; since the forming of the judgment
is no more in our own power, than these things, except there be reasons to sway
it one way or other. But suppose their commands should excuse some (which I
cannot grant in the least) in the use of those Indifferencies whereat others
are offended; yet what plea can they have for themselves before God, for the
commanding such things? What buckler will they find broad and strong enough to
secure them from that Woe that Christ denounces against all those by whom
offenses come? Luke 17.1. Be wise therefore, O ye Kings, and be instructed ye
Rulers and Governors of the Earth, and be tender of poor souls, which are
under your care and government.

(2) Let them Remove and Repeal such Laws as are already made, the matter
whereof is any scandalous Indifferency. Let them not only not dig pits, but
cover such as are already dug. Possibly such an inconvenient consequence
might not be foreseen at the first enacting of the Law, and so it might be made
inoffensively then; but when the mischief thereof appears, it cannot lawfully
be continued, but must have a due and sufficient remedy immediately applied to
it. When Hezekiah found that the children of Israel burnt incense to the Brazen
Serpent that Moses had made, though made at first by God's own direction, He
brake it in pieces, and called it Nehushtan, 2 King. 18.4. so should they as
much as in them lies remove out of their Kingdom all things that offend: to
allude to those words of Christ, Mat. 13.41.

(2) To Subjects; not to suffer themselves to be overruled by the commands or
threats of superiors to the practice of things scandalous and offensive. Will
the Law of man bear you out in a transgression of the Law of God? Do you ever
find that the Command of Authority did excuse any, for doing that which
otherwise ought not to have been done? Think not therefore to say within your
selves, We have the Precepts of our Governors to show for our warrant; for
this will not render thee inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that do such
things, since the Law of God here in the Text, is express and peremptory, and
universal to the contrary.

Especially Ministers (whose whole employment is about, and among Souls, whose
whole business is to promote the salvation of souls, and all whose power is for
the edification and building up of Souls, not for the making of them stumble,
and fall, and perish) should have a very tender respect to the good of poor
souls. For them to do any thing, whether upon their own heads, or upon the
command of others, which may be a pullback to souls in the way to Heaven, is
worse than others. Vbi sublimior praerogativa, ibi major culpa, says Salvian.
They are lights set upon an hill; their actions are more observed, and their
example more imitated than others. Ignorant and loose persons are apt to draw
large consequences, and wide and wild conclusions from small premises in them:
So that if a Minister do but lawfully use his Christian Liberty, the rude
vulgar will thereby open to themselves a gap to all licentiousness. If he be
but innocently pleasant, says one, think they, we may be mad; if he but sip,
we may carouse; if he spend but some few hours in his honest and lawful
recreations, the common gamester presently concludes, his mispence, both of
time and patrimony, to be thence justifiable.

(3) To the strong; Be you hence advised to show your strength by stooping and
condescending to the infirmities of the weak, and complying with them therein,
even to the denying your selves, and laying a restraint upon your selves, as to
those indifferences, wherein you have a greater latitude than they. This is
that which the Apostle holds forth as the duty of such, Romans 15.1. We then that
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves. Though it may be pleasurable and delightful to the strong to make use
of their liberty, yet they must rather forbear pleasing themselves, than
thereby to prejudice their Brethren. You should rather heal them and strengthen
them; than wound them and offend them. Hujusmodi hominibus medicina debetur,
non offensio, says Pet. Martyr. This was Paul's temper and resolution, 1 Cor.
8.13. If meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my Brother to offend. We use to say, That which is one man's
meat, is another man's poison: and De gustibus non est disputandum. And indeed
in all cases almost (even of sensible things, as objects of smelling, hearing,
seeing, etc. as well as tasting) there are such diversities of apprehensions,
that there is no possibility of establishing any uniformity in them, or laying
down, and prescribing any general Rule about them, that all persons should
either judge or practice alike, as to these things; so that the very nature of
man seems to call for, and require a latitude and liberty in them; and
therefore there must be a mutual forbearance of one another in all such cases,
and allowance of one another different sentiments without quarrelling and
imposing; yea and not so only, but also a complying with each others humors
and fancies, (Remember still that I am speaking of Compliance in
Indifferencies) and so to become All things to all men, as Paul did.

Though thou thy self can eat (though perhaps, not digest) onions and garlic
(even of Egypt), yet because there are many weak stomachs that cannot away with
the rank smell and savor thereof, and the use of these things renders thy
breath stinking unto them, therefore thou should forbear. Though thou thy
self could run along nimbly and securely in a rugged way, without any danger
of stumbling and falling, yet it will be, not so much civil, as Christian
kindness to stay and take others along with thee that have not that agility and
ability thou have. Though thou can sing a note above Ela thy self, yet thou
must so compose thy voice, as may make the best harmony with those thou art
joined in consort withal, and not strain it to the highest pitch thou can.

God by Moses pronounced a curse against him that made the blind to wander out
of the way, Deuteronomy. 27.18. Though thou have knowledge (1 Cor. 8.10.) and see
thy way plain enough before thee; yet if by thy example thou leadest him that
wants knowledge in a way he is either unacquainted with, or unsatisfied in,
thou will but bring a curse upon thy self.

(4) To the weak; Be you careful rightly to inform your selves concerning the
nature of Indifferencies, that you may not be scandalized thereby, and so
deprive the strong of their liberty therein. Liberty is a sweet thing, and the
very notion of restraint is irksome, and grating upon the fancy; as appears in
the case of that old man; who having lived all his life long in one place, and
never stirred from it, when he came to be confined to that place, and so
deprived of his liberty to go elsewhere, the very conceit of it killed him.
This restraint of liberty is a Moral kind of Imprisonment, and therefore the
strong may sue you for false imprisonment. Nay thereby you may expose your
Ministers to that tyranny and severity, which otherwise they might be free
from, and deprive them of that liberty, which otherwise they might enjoy. And
therefore (...), in this sense also, Be not apt to take offense. You can never
have any just or blameless cause of being offended, or taking offense, 22ae. q.
43. a. 2. Non solum scandalizare, sed and scandalizari, peccatum est, quia
infirmitatis est, says Maldon in Mat. 18.7.
as Aquinas shows. As it is the duty of the strong not to give offense, so of
the weak not to take offense. It Is the Apostle's Rule, Romans 14.3. Let not him
that eats not, judge him that eats. * Infirmorum est and ignoraentium,
firmioribus jus and libertatem suam relinquere, and edentem, gnarum suae
libertatis, non condemnare. Rivet. in Syn. pur. Theol. Disp. 35. Sect. 36.
Every one should be left to his own liberty in these things. Why should you
any more desire to have all others shrunk up, or cut shorter, to your size and
proportion, than they should desire such dwarfs as you are to be extended and
stretched out to their proportion? That Is an excellent Rule of Dr. Sanderson
(with which I shall conclude), The best and safest way for us in all
indifferent things, is to be indulgent to others, but strict to our selves; in
allowing them their liberty with the most, but taking our own liberty ever with
the least. Sermon. on 1 Pet. 2.16. sect. 34.

FINIS.
Good Sir,
HAving this safe way of conveyance, I return you the Manuscript you were
pleased to communicate to me, some time since. I have deliberately read it
over, and with much satisfaction; I do concur with you in your notions in all
things material, and I think the controversy is clearly stated, so as might
satisfy those that are impartial, and them that are not, nothing will
satisfy, but their own interest, and their own humor; but I have looked upon
the Question about Indifferent Things, and their Imposition, as managed by all
Churchmen, to be but a pretense to puzzle the Conscience with niceties, while
they maintained and increased among us Popish and carnal Ceremonies, to hinder
profitable Preaching, and the power of Godliness; and now we have lived to see
the Mask pulled off, when many of them are not ashamed to profess that they are
more afraid of Presbyterians than Papists, and that they had rather Papists
should prevail than Presbyterians; but the times are coming that will lay all
men open: the Lord make us faithful and prudent. Hearty thanks for the use of
your Book, from

Your assured Friend and Brother in the Lord,

AN EXERCITATION ON THAT Historical Relation, Matthew. 15.1-9. Mark. 7.1-13.

CONCERNING Eating with unwashen hands; By way of APPENDIX or SUPPLEMENT To the
Discourse, concerning IN DIFFERENCIES: AND More particularly, to Argument or
Reason the Fourth; to prove, That Indifferencies enjoined by Authority do not
thereby become necessary; or, That the Command of Authority does not render
indifferent things, necessary.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel over against the Stocks-Market,
1680.

Matthew. XV.
1. THen came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying,

2. Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders? for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread.

3. But he answered and said unto them, Why do you also transgress the
Commandment of God by your tradition?

4. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and he that
curses Father or Mother, let him dye the death.

5. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or his Mother, It is a gift,
by whatsoever thou might be profited by me,

6. And honor not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye
made the Commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.

7. Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying,

8. This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their
lips; but their heart is far from me.

9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of
men.

Mark VII.
1. THen came together to him the Pharisees, and certain of the Scribes which
came from Jerusalem.

2. And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled (that is to
say, with unwashen) hands, they found fault.

3. For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat
not, holding the tradition of the Elders.

4. And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And
many other things there be, which they have received to hold; as the washing of
cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of tables.

5. Then the Pharisees and Scribes asked him, Why walk not thy Disciples
according to the tradition of the Elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?

6. He answered and said unto them, Well has Esaias prophesied of you
hypocrites; as it is written, This people honors me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me.

7. Howbeit, in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrins the co^mandments
of men.

8. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as
the washing of pots and cups, and many other such like things ye do.

9. And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye
may keep your own tradition.

10. For Moses said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.

AN EXERCITATION ON Mat. 15.1-9. Mark 7.1-13.
Sect. 1. THE imposed use of Indifferencies has been (like the Canaanites to
the Israelites) pricks in the eyes, and thorns (or goads) in the sides of, i.
e. matter of much mischief and vexation to, the Church of God almost in all
ages; Especially, in the Jewish Church, when it drew toward the dregs, much of
this sediment appeared. How far the Papal, Antichristian Church is overrun
with this ill humor, is notorious: And it is one great evil which our English
Church now labors and groans under at this day. It Is this, which has been the
apple of contention, and bone of division; the stone of stumbling, and rock of
offense among us, ever since the beginning of the Reformation, in the time of
our Josiah, King Edward the 6th. And after many years freedom from this itch,
it brake out again some years since, to our great disturbance, and scratching
of one another.

Now for the better fixing our judgments concerning either our Liberty or
Restraint in such cases, I shall enter upon a strict examination, and narrow
consideration of this portion of Scripture, which furnishes us with one of the
most pregnant, and pertinent instances, or Historical passages to this purpose,
in the whole New Testament; which I shall examine from top to toe, that thereby
we may discover how far forth it will help us, either one way or other, i. e.
either for Conformity, or Nonconformity, in such like cases.

Sect. 2. The whole passage contains a discourse between Christ, and the
Scribes and Pharisees, concerning the observation of the Traditions of the
Elders, occasioned by the Disciples neglect thereof; for which the Scribes and
Pharisees implead them to their Master, and quarrel him about it: In which he
vindicates 'em at large, and blows up the very foundation of their complaint,
by showing the invalidity, yea impiety, of these Traditions. This is the
general prospect of the whole. In handling of which, I shall first distinctly
consider the several particulars; and then make such Reflections upon 'em, and
draw such Inferences from 'em, as they naturally afford, and may be conducible
to my present design.

The Particulars contained in the foregoing General, take as follows. Here are
(1) the Accusers. (2) The Accused. (3) The Accusation. (4) The Defense.

Sect. 3. First, The Accusers; Scribes and Pharisees which were of Jerusalem;
or, which came from Jerusalem. These may be considered both in reference to
their Condition, Scribes and Pharisees; and in reference to their Habitation,
or the place from whence they came, Jerusalem.

(1) Scribes; this is a Title of Function or Employment; they might be either
Priests or Levites, for we find Scribes of both sorts; Priests, as Neh. 8.9.
Ezra the Priest the Scribe. So Ezra 7.11. Levites, as a Chron. 34.13. Of the
Levites there were Scribes, etc. 1 Chronicles. 24.6. Shemajah, the son of Nethaneel
the Scribe, one of the Levites. But which soever they were, they were, as to
their Office and Employment, Teachers and Expounders of the Law in their
Schools and Synagogues; as Ezra 7.6. -- a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses. v.
10. He had prepared his heart to teach in Israel statutes and judgments. Neh.
8.1-9, 13. Matthew. 7.29. He taught them as one having authority, and not as the
Scribes: and so elsewhere. And hence

They were commonly the most learned and conversant in the Law; as is implied
by that question, Matthew. 17.10. Why say the Scribes that Elias must first come?
and therefore, says Gerard, Doctissimi quique (...) vocabantur: and Brugensis,
Scribae scientiae authoritatem sibi vendicabant. Upon this account Herod
consulted them about the place of Christ's Nativity, Matthew. 2.4.

(2) Sect. 4. Pharisees; they are generally spoken of as Teachers too, Matthew.
16.6, 12. -- leaven, i. e. the Doctrine of the Pharisees. These were such as
did separate themselves (as the word signifies) from other men; Yet

Negatively, (1) Not in regard of refraining their society and converse, either
public or private; for, they sat in the great Council with the Sadducees,
Acts 23.6. and Herodians, Mark 3.6. went into other men's houses, Mark 2.16.
conversed with all sorts of men to Proselyte 'em, Mat. 25.15. and conferred
ordinarily with Christ and his Disciples, as here, and elsewhere: Nor (2) in
refraining the public assemblies, and places of public worship; for Luke 6.6,
7. there were Pharisees in the Synagogue at public worship But,

Positively, In respect of a singularity of Holiness and Devotion, which they
pretended unto, and took upon them to have, above others. They Would seem to
transcend the Rule of the State-Religion, and common Devotion of the Nation; to
be in a higher Form than others, and to strain a note above Ela, in the scale
of Holiness; and that in these two things especially: (1) In extreme
ceremoniousness; as in frequent washings, large Phylacteries, etc. and (2) in
extraordinary devotion, as in long Prayers, much show of Fastings; tithing
Mint, etc.

(3) Scribes and Pharisees joined together. They were both of them, as has been
said, the great Preachers and Professors of the Law; and here, as frequently
elsewhere, they join together to oppose and oppress Christ and his Disciples,
and go hand in hand; that what they cannot effect by single strength, they may
obtain by their united forces. Scribes was a title of Function, and Pharisee of
Devotion: a Pharisaei perfectioris exteriorum observantiae exemplum, scribae
scientiae authoritatem sibi vendicabant. Brug.
the one were pretenders to more than ordinary strictness in Religion, the
other valued themselves upon the score of their learning: And thus under the
Banners and Colors of pretended devotion and learning, they fight against
Christ.

(4) From Jerusalem. (1) Not of the ordinary and common sort, such as did
belong to every Synagogue in inferior Cities, but of the chief City, Jerusalem;
and such were likely, a Hi doctrinae and religionis totius obtinebant arcem.
Brug. Judaei in Galilaea submiserunt Scribas and Pharisaeos, non vulgares
illos, quales in singulis Galilaeae Synagogis habebantur, sed qui Jerosolymis
erant praecipui, qui eruditione, solertia, and authoritate, addo etiam, and
malitia reliquos superabant. Ger. Har.
of the ablest and bitterest of them, and did excel the other Rusticks in
learning and craft, and perhaps, in malice too. (2) They came a great way:
Christ was now in the land of Gennesaret, Matthew. 14.34. Mark 6.53. which was a
great way from Jerusalem, near a hundred miles, as I find by the Map; whereby
we see, what pains wicked men will take to oppose Christ, and create trouble to
his Disciples and Servants.

Sect. 5. From all which particulars it is obvious to observe, That corrupt
Churchmen in high places, are the old, great sticklers for humane inventions,
and ceremonious observances. These great Rabbis of the first magnitude, who
shone with the greatest outward splendour, were the great Engines to withdraw
the people from Christ, and the chief Supporters and Pillars of their old
Mumpsimus customs. And so all along; None greater Enemies to pure, spiritual,
Gospelworship, than Ceremony-mongers, and superstitious Zealots. Luther had no
sorer opposites out of Alehouses, and Brothel-houses, than he had out of
Religious Houses, as they called them. None more dangerously wound Religion,
than they, who, before men, would seem the most zealous Patrons and Promoters
of it. It Is often seen, that the more learned, the more lewd: Wickedness is
thereby armed with weapons, both for Offense and Defense. Unsanctified
Learning, or learned wickedness, is (...), as Aristotle speaks. It is like a
Sword in a mad-mans hand, which enables him to cast about firebrands, arrows
and death; as it is Prove. 26.18. Nihil novi nec insolens est, ut illi qui
primatum sibi in Ecclesia vendicant, primi etiam sint, qui de opprimendo
Christo and ejus Evangelio, consilia agitent. Ger.
Hence Philosophers are called by the Fathers, Haereticorum Patriarchae; the
ringleaders and Captains of such as fight against Christ.

2. Sect. 6. The Accused; immediately and directly the Disciples, Why do thy
Disciples transgress, etc. but secretly and collaterally, Christ himself; they
shoot at him through the others sides; and seem to insinuate, as if he were to
be blamed for teaching 'em no better, and suffering 'em to walk so disorderly,
without reproving 'em for it: Thus they dealt also, Matthew. 9.14. -- Why do we
and the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not?

But I shall insist no further upon this, but hasten to that which I chiefly
aim at, which is, the two following Points, viz. The Accusation it self, and
the Defense.

3. Sect. 7. The Accusation it self, or the Practice, or Usage concerning which
the Contest and Dispute arose, which is,

In General, a Transgression of the Tradition of the Elders, or Disobedience to
the Injunctions of Authority.

Particularly, Eating with unwashen hands. The former relates to the Authority
enjoining; The latter is the Practice enjoined.

As to the former, the General, I shall consider (1) Who these Elders were. (2)
What was a Tradition of the Elders.

Sect. 8. First, Who these Elders were. The word [Elders] in its primary and
original sense, relates to Age, and denotes, either such as lived a great
while; even till they came to be old; or, such as lived a great while ago;
those of former times; as Deuteronomy. 32.7. Heb. 11.2. and so it is the same with
(...), Matthew. 5.21. and thence it is derived to signify most commonly, both
Dignity and Authority; and so we find both in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and English
(to name no more) the words importing Age or Eldership, viz. (...), Senatus,
Aldermen, do denote both Honor and Power. And

(1) This sense is very frequent both in the Old and New Testament. I shall
mention but a few places of the chief; as Deuteronomy. 22.15. -- the Elders of City in
the gate (the place of Judicature). And they are sometimes called, Elders of
the people, i. e. such who had authority over the people; as Elders of a City,
are they that are in power in that City. Thus Matthew. 26.3. Then assembled
together the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders of the people. So c. 27.1.
When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and Elders of the people took
counsel. etc.

Hence they are commonly joined with [Rulers]; as 2 King. 10.1. Jehu wrote
letters -- to the Rulers of Jezreel, and to the Elders. Act. 4.8. Ye Rulers and
Elders of Israel; and they are very frequently joined with [chief Priests, and
Scribes and Pharisees;] and then the distinction that was between them, I
conceive may be stated thus; As they were distinguished from the Priests, they
seem to be Laymen (as we call 'em), and as distinguished from Scribes, they
were such as were not brought up wholly in the study of the Law, or at least
did not make that their Profession; but were some of the Nobility and Gentry,
admitted to be Members of the Sanhedrim, as is most evident from these places
following, Acts 22.5. The High Priest does bear me witness, with all the estate
of the Elders; from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to
Damascus, to bring them which were there, bound unto Jerusalem, for to be
punished: and c. 24.1. Ananias the High Priest descended with the Elders, who
informed the Governor against Paul. Matthew. 26.59. Now the chief Priests and
Elders, and all the Council, sought false witness against Jesus, etc. Mark
15.1. The chief Priests held a consultation with the Elders and Scribes, and
the whole Council. So that nothing is more clear, than that they were Members
of the Council, and persons in, and of, Authority.

I have been the more full in this point, because Grotius in loc. thinks that
these Elders here mentioned, though they were learned and wise men, and so
possibly might be Members of the Sanhedrim upon that account; yet that the
mention made of 'em here, does not relate to any such capacity they were in;
but only, as celebrated Teachers, who were not only famous in their
Generations, but were had in great veneration and esteem in aftertimes, and
their judgments and dogmes were of great authority. And so Beza takes 'em too,
only for the ancient Doctors, and not for persons in authority. But even
Grotius himself elsewhere ( viz. in Acts 4.5.) gives this account of 'em,
Seniores, idem quod Senatores, and consules Vrbium. Elders are the same with
the Senate, or Court of Aldermen, or, at least, Common-council-men, and
Burgesses of Cities: And the places forementioned do most evidently and
undeniably evince, that they were persons in authority, and members of the
Sanhedrim (as I said before) or great Council of the Nation: And therefore

Sect. 9. (2) They were the proper Judges of Ecclesiastical affairs, to whose
cognizance matters of Religion did appertain. Hi doctrinae and religionis
totius obtinebant arcem, and inquisitionem proinde, censuramque doctrinarum
sibi arrogabant. Commoti igitur fama crehrescente de Jesu, emiserunt e suis
quosdam (sicut etiam Marc. 3.22.) qui observarent quid doceret, quidque
faceret, in Galilea, Jesus, novus ille Doctor, ab ipsis nec missus, nec
probatus, says Brugensis.

And particularly, It was the peculiar privilege of those Doctors who were
Members of the great Council to frame such Decrees, Constitutions or
Traditions. This I gather from that passage of the Targum on Eccles. 12.12.
where it is said, (...), which the Translation in our Polyglot Bible renders
Magistri Sanhedrim, scil, ductores viarum; as if (...) were to be taken
according to the proper signification of the word, from (...) ambulavit;
whereas it is most usually taken in the Metaphorical sense, for Consuetudo,
ratio, mos, ritus, judicium; and among the Rabbis and Talmudists it signifies
(says Buxtorf) Constitutio juris, sententia, decisio, traditio decisa; and usu
ac consuetudine recepta and approbata, secuadum quod incedendum and vivendum.
Lex. Talm. in voc. (...); and accordingly it is to be rendered here, Doctores
synedrii, qui sunt Domini consuetudinum, sive constitutionum juridicarum. The
Doctors of the Council, who are the grand Masters of Traditions. And hence

(3) We may easily imagine the reason why the Scribes and Pharisees here, were
so much concerned at this neglect of the Disciples, viz. because their own
Copyhold was touched, and their own authority lay at stake, inasmuch as they
were the Successors of these Elders; so that the slight that was put upon the
one, redounded to the disparagement of the other. Non mirum Scribas violatione
traditionum seniorum cito offensos fuisse, quod eo and ipsorum authoritas
elevari videretur, qui jam Seniorum locum tenerent, illorum successores, and
institutorum propagatores, says Brugensis. Hence Christ calls 'em your
Traditions.

So then, The Elders here meant were such as lived in former times, who were
persons of great Dignity and Authority, to whose cognizance matters of Religion
did appertain, and to whom it belonged to form and frame these Constitutions or
Traditions.

Where, by the way, you may take notice (and that you may take the more and
better notice of it, know, That it is the Observation of the prodigiously
learned Dr. Stillingfleet) That the word [Elder] or Presbyter, according to the
common use of it, has a higher Character, and is of more excellent import, than
the word [Bishop]; the former noting Dignity and Authority, (as has been
showed); the latter, only matter of Duty, Charge, Trouble and Business. His
words are, (...), a name importing Duty more than Honor, and not a Title above
Presbyter, but rather used by way of diminution and qualification of the power
implied in the name [Presbyter]. Iren. p. 286. But this by the by. Thus you
see, Who these Elders were.

2. The next thing to be spoken unto, is to show, What the Traditions of these
Elders were: And here I shall consider (1) their Nature. (2) Original. (3)
Validity, or, what stress they laid upon 'em.

Sect. 10. First, What a Tradition is. A Tradition, in general, is something
delivered from one to another: and it is twofold, Divine, and Humane.

(1) Divine, which is, either matters of Doctrine, delivered either by God
himself, or some immediately inspired by him; and so, both the Verb (...), and
the Noun (...) are used concerning the points of Christianity. Thus the Apostle
Paul received from God, and delivered to the Church the Doctrine of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23. and of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.3. yea, the whole Doctrine of the Gospel in general is
a Tradition, delivered or conveyed to us, Romans 6.17. 2 These. 2.15. Jude 3.
Again, Divine Traditions respect matters of Practice also; and these are
Constitutions, or Ordinances appointed by God, or some immediately inspired by
him, for the use of the Church, as the word seems to be taken, 1 Cor. 11.2. Now
I praise you Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Ordinances (Margin, Traditions) as I have delivered them to you. And more
plainly 2 These. 3.6.

(2) Humane; called here, Traditions of the Elders; your Traditions, v. 3, 6.
your own Traditions. Mark. 7.9. the Traditions of men, Mark 7.8. Col. 2 8. and
of the Fathers, Gal. 1.14. And these likewise are either Doctrinal, concerning
some points of Doctrine, as Matthew. 5.21, etc. and therefore are called expressly
the Doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Sadducees, Matthew. 16.12. Concerning
which, Grotius observes, That that which the Greek Philosophers called (...),
Christ here calls (...), a Doctrine, Instruction, Article, or point of Faith;
or else, they are Practical, being customs and external observances, invented
by men, and delivered from hand to hand from Father to Son: and such Traditions
were these here of the Elders; and those Col. 2.20, 21. And these are the
Traditions under Consideration.

Now such a Tradition, is an Ordinance, * (...), institutum hoc constitutionem
vertere possumus. Eras.
Institution, Canon, Constitution, Resolution, Decision, or Determination of
their Forefathers the Governors of the Church, delivered down from one to
another, enjoining the observation of such and such Rites, Ceremonies or
Practices.

The former of these sorts, viz. Divine Traditions, are the Rule and Ground of
our Faith, Worship and Obedience; The latter, Humane, do naturally produce
Superstition and Will Worship: and of this sort there were multitudes upon all
occasions, so that the whole Talmud is little else than a Collection of 'em.
I Will give you a taste, and but a taste of 'em. It was a Tradition, that on a
Festival-day it was not lawful to blow the fire with a pair of bellows, because
that had some resemblance of a Mechanic work; but they might blow it through a
hollow Cane. Again, On a Festival-day it was not lawful to lay wood on the fire
in an artificial manner, so as to resemble a building. But enough of these.

Sect. 11. Secondly, What was the ground they went upon, or the occasion of
their first broaching these Traditions? In general, it was, as they express it,
(...) To make a hedge to the Law, that men should not break in upon it to
transgress it: and this was a specious color for all their Traditions; for
they pretending to make Constitutions to fence the Law from violation, and to
raise the observance of it the higher, they multiplied inventions and fancies
of their own brains, and set 'em up for Laws, and so made the Law indeed
nothing worth. I shall give you an instance but in one of 'em. The written Law
forbad. Thou shall not seethe a kid in his Mothers milk, Exodus 23.19. Now to
make sure, as they pretended, that this Law should not be violated, they fenced
it with this Tradition, Thou shall not seethe any flesh whatsoever in any milk
whatsoever.

Thus we see, how very apt men are to set their posts by God's Pillars, to
light up their Candles to his Sun, to put their varnish upon his Gold, and,
like Botchers, to patch their inventions upon his Institutions. The Jewish
Rabbis, under a specious pretense of Piety, brought in whole loads of this
kind of trash, which they called Sepimenta legis, but were indeed but
impedimenta, because God's Commands were thereby frustrated, as our Savior
Christ shows here, in the sequel of this discourse. This is the general reason:
But

As for the particular grounds of particular Traditions, I shall have occasion
to mention some afterward.

Sect. 12. Thirdly, What was their Validity? Of what account they were among
the Jews, and what value they put upon 'em, appears by many passages in their
Authors. It is a saying of the Talmudists, (...) Verba Cabalae aequiparantur
verbis Legis. Here they set them cheek by jole (as we say) with the Commands of
God: but this is not all; they set 'em even above the Law of God it self, and
make that to lacquey behind: for this is another saying in the Talmud (as
Grotius quotes it) Plus est in verbis Scribarum quam in verbis Legis; There Is
more weight in the words of the Scribes, than in the words of the Law. And Dr.
Lightfoot quotes another to the same purpose, The words of the Elders are more
lovely than the words of the Law, and more weighty than the words of the
Prophets. Hence they say of this Tradition in particular, That he that eats his
bread with unwashen hands, sins as grievously as if he lay with a Whore. So
says R. Jose in Talm. Sota. c. 1. yea, says R. Akiba, he deserves to dye for
it; and accordingly, water being once brought to him both for drinking and
washing, and the greatest part of it being casually spilt, the remainder he
used for washing, saying, That it is better to dye, than to transgress the
tradition of the Elders. And this is a saying too, among them. Whosoever dwells
in the land of Israel, and eats his ordinary food after a cleanly manner, and
speaks in the holy language, and says over his Phylacteries morning and
evening, may be confident that he shall obtain happiness in the world to come.

But lest any should take these Traditions for matters of Counsel only, or bare
opinion, which laid no manner of obligation upon them, and because a passage of
Grotius, formerly quoted and animadverted upon, may seem to look that way
(though what has been said already under this last head, does abundantly prove
what an high opinion they had of them in point of their obligatoriness) Yet
further, as I showed before, that the word [Elder] denotes persons of a public
Character, and such as were in places of power and authority, and not only
persons in a private capacity; so I shall further prove, by several Arguments,
that the Traditions of these Elders were not points of opinion only, but
matters of injunction and command.

Sect. 13. (1) This Tradition is expressy called (...) a Precept of the wise
men, both by Maimonides in Hilchos Brachos, c. 6. sect. 2. (...). Washing the
hands is a precept of the wise men, to which we are absolutely bound to yield
obedience, according to what is written, Deuteronomy. 17.11. According to the sentence
of the Law which they shall teach thee -- thou shall do. And also by the
Talmud, Washing of hands is by reason of the command of the wise men. And
accordingly,

(2) These Traditions are called, Commandments of men, here by Christ, Mark
7.7. and opposed to the Commandments of God, v. 8. and what is called in one
verse, a Tradition, is called in the other, Commandments of men; so that they
seem to be convertible terms, Mark 7.7, 8. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men. For laying aside the Commandment of God,
ye hold the tradition of men, etc.

(3) The word [transgress] (Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of
the Elders?) implies, that they held them obligatory; and that these Traditions
laid an obligation upon them; for, why else do they tax the Disciples for the
transgression thereof, if they did not take 'em to have the nature of a law?
For, Transgression properly belongs to a law, or something that has a binding
power in it, 1 John 3.4.

(4) The drift and design of our Savior's Answer and Vindication, is to show
that the people were not obliged thereby, and that these Traditions were of no
force or validity at all; which shows that they looked upon 'em as obligatory.

(5) These Elders, who were the Authors of these Traditions, were members of
the Senate, and Rulers (as was proved before), and consequently, a Tradition, or
Decision of their's, had the nature of a law, and was of a binding power, being
the act of the whole body; as we find it was in this particular case: for the
whole body of the Council espoused the quarrel of this Rite; for they
Excommunicated R. Eliezer, because he slighted this Ceremony of washing of
hands; and then when he was dead they commanded a great stone to be laid on his
Coffin, in token of their detestation of him; or to note, That his Coffin was
to be stoned; says the Talmud, in Edajoth, cap. 5.

(6) The Hebrew Edition of Matthew by Munster, renders [traditions of the
Elders] by (...). Now (...) is rendered by Buxtorf, Pactum, decretum, statutum,
constitutio, sententia; from (...) decernere, statuere, definire.

And thus we have dispatched the consideration of the General ground of their
complaint, viz. A transgression of the Tradition of the Elders, by showing. Who
these Elders were: What a Tradition of the Elders was, both as to the Nature,
Ground, and Validity thereof.

Come we now to the particular cause of their quarrel, viz. Eating with
unwashen hands. And here many things offer themselves to our consideration: As

Sect. 14 (1) This Washing is called by the Jews (...) Lifting up the hands
(viz. to wash) for dinner; because in washing they lifted them up in a formal,
ceremonious manner (as we shall see anon), or, as St. Mark expresses it, (...)
diligently.

(2) The Rabbis say it was to be used only before the eating of ordinary
bread. Thus Maimon. in Hilchos Brachos, c. 6. sect. 1. Quicunque comedit panem
super quo convenit recitare benedictionem istam Benedictus, etc. qui educit
panem e terra, opus habet lavare manus ab initio and fine, etiamsi sit panis
communis. (The Reasons whereof the learned Reader may see in Buxtorf's
Discourse De lotione manuum, sect. 11.) And therefore you may observe that
express mention is made of bread here several times, Matthew. 15.2. Mark 7.2, 5.
And therefore they allowed a man to eat fruit, cheese, herbs or fish with
unwashen hands.

(3) This washing was from (...), the ends of the fingers, wherewith they took
their meat, (...) usque ad juncturam, to the joining; which some understand, of
the joining of the fingers to the hand, but most generally, of the joining of
the hands to the arm, at the wrist (and not of the joining up at the elbow, as
Capellus contends;) for which Buxtorf produces many passages in his Vindic.
Exercit. in hist. Institut. Coen. Domin. advers. animad. Lud. Capelli. sect. 55.

Sect. 15. (4) For the Manner, it was performed, either by pouring the water
upon the hands by another person, or by one's self, if none else were at hand
to do it; or else by dipping the hands in the water. If it were done by
pouring, the water was to be poured upon the hands two or three times. First,
If the hands be dirty, to cleanse 'em from the dirt; (2) To take away the moral
uncleanness (as they accounted it). (3) To cleanse them from that second water,
which took the moral uncleanness to it self, and therefore must all be washed
off.

Several other Rules and Directions are given, both as to the Quality and
Quantity of the water; as also concerning the Vessel that the water is to be
put into, which may be seen in the forementioned Author, sect. 24-28.

(5) They were to lift up their hands (whence it was called Netilas jadajim, as
was said) that the water might not run back from the hands to the fingers, and
so defile them again: for they held, that the water that was poured upon the
hands did contract moral defilement thereby, as was said.

(6) They were to pull off Rings, Plasters, or any such thing that was upon
the hands, and to rub 'em well, and then dry 'em thoroughly.

These things I have run over briefly, that I might hasten to the following
particulars, which are more to my purpose.

Sect. 16. (7) This usage or practice of washing the hands before meat, was not
contrary to the Word of God, or any where forbidden by it in particular; It is
no where said in the whole Bible, Thou shall not wash thy hands before meat, no
more than it is said any where, Thou shall not baptize with the sign of the
Cross; Thou shall not wear a Surplice, etc. Nay,

(8) It was so far from that, that they pretended a particular ground from
Scripture for it, viz. that command, Levit. 15.11. Whomsoever he touches that
has the issue, and has not rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his
clothes, etc. The account of which you have at large in the Talmud, Massecheth,
Col. 1. (as it is quoted by Buxtorf in the forementioned Discourse, sect. 4, 5.)
in these words, (...), Lotio manuum ad communem and prophanum cibum est propter
cohaesionem Trumae, (concerning which, see his Lex. Talm. Voc: (...)). Imo
etiam propter praeceptum sapientum. Quale praeceptum? Avai dixit, Illud
praeceptum, quo jubemur obtemperare verbis sapientum. Rabba dixit; Imo propter
id quod R. Eliezer ben Erech dixit, qui docuit, ex eo quod scriptum est Levit.
15.11. Omnis autem quem tetigerit seminifluus, and manus suas non abluerit
aqua, etc. collegisse ac decrevisse sapientes, lotionem manuum esse ex lege.
Grotius in loc. gives another account of it, viz. That these Jewish Rabbis
thought that if any uncircumcised person, or any one of their own Nation
legally unclean, had touched either the meat or drink, or any other thing that
did touch the meat or drink, as their hands wherewith they were to take the
meat or drink, or had touched the pots wherein the meat was boiled, or the cups
out of which they were to drink, that then the meat or drink was defiled, and
did communicate its defilement or uncleanness first to the body, and then to
the soul of the person that did eat or drink thereof: whereupon, as an Antidore
or Remedy hereof, these cleanly persons prescribed such a ceremonious,
methodical, artificial kind of washing. But I take the former account out of
their own Authors, to be the most authentic, and pertinent.

Whereby we may perceive that this Tradition of theirs has the advantage of our
Ceremonies, for there is no particular precept alleged for the establishment
or countenancing any of them; yea, there is little or nothing of Reason can be
said for 'em. (And in this respect indeed they may be called Innocent
Ceremonies; as we call those Innocents, who have nothing of Reason in 'em;) but
their Defenders, when assaulted with Reason, are fain to shelter themselves
under the wings of Authority, and cry King's Truce, as boys do, i. e. They are
commanded by Authority, and therefore we must yield obedience, when we are
enjoined nothing that is contrary to the Word of God: But though they pretended
warrant from Scripture, yet

(9) They did not enjoin it as immediately binding the conscience, or commanded
by God directly, but only by consequence; and therefore they called it (...),
(as was said before) a Precept of the wise men, and said it was (...) one of
the words or commands of the Scribes, but that it was not (...) any of the
commands of the law.

Nay (Lastly) it might seem to be a point of Civility, and a piece of
cleanliness, which no doubt but both Christ and the Disciples might use upon
occasion, though only as a matter of civility, wherein Religion was not
concerned either one way or other, whether it were done or not.

And this too is more than can be said on the behalf of our Ceremonies; for
there is no such, either Decency, or Convenience in the use of them.

But yet for all this Christ here opposes and condemns this Tradition, which
brings me to the last Point to be spoken unto, viz.

4. And lastly, ( Sect. 17.) The Defense, Plea or Vindication that Christ makes
in the behalf of his Disciples in this particular; which is (1) by way of
Retortion, or Recrimination, Why do you also transgress the conmand of God by
your tradition, Matthew. 15.3. (2) By way of Reprehension, or taxing them for
their hypocrisy, Mark 7.6. He answered and said unto them, Well has Esaias
prophesied of you hypocrites, etc. (3) By way of Instruction to the people,
Matthew. 15.10. And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear and
understand, etc.

1. By way of Retortion, or Recrimination, Why do you also transgress the
Command of God by your Tradition? For God commanded, saying, etc. They accuse
the Disciples for transgressing the Tradition of the Elders, and Christ accuses
them for transgressing the Command of God, by their observing these Traditions;
which was certainly much more blameworthy than the other. And here I observe,

(1) That in those words, v. 3. he undermines the very foundation upon which
all this tottering building of Traditions stood; For it was a principle among
them, That the Traditions of the Elders were to be observed most religiously,
without any exception, contradiction, or dispute; but now Christ here proves,
That some of their Traditions did palpably and evidently contradict and
enterfere with the Law of God; and therefore they were not all of 'em so
strictly and inviolably to be observed, as they held. And then,

(2) As to this particular instance he gives, v. 4-6. I observe, He does not so
much reply to their particular question, nor argue against this Tradition in
particular, which the Pharisees here stood up for, but chooses rather to
instance in one which did more evidently and by plain consequence overthrow one
of the Commands of God: so that hereby He seems to me plainly to intimate, and
insinuate, That all such Traditions, i. e. Ecclesiastical Canons,
Constitutions, Injunctions, and obligatory Determinations, concerning
unnecessary things, (whereby men endeavor to render that practice necessary,
which God has left free) are contrary to the Law of God, and consequently
invalid and non-obligatory. Understand it, of what is not necessary, neither in
its own Nature, nor by any Circumstance; according to what has been delivered
in the foregoing Discourse. Now that this is the drift of Christ in these
words, I prove thus:

Either He does here by this one instance argue against, and condemn all
Traditions in general, as well as this one, or he does not. If he does not,
then his arguing is inconsequent and unconcluding, as to the point in hand: For
the Pharisees might reply, Well! suppose you can pick out one Tradition, which
you say does plainly derogate from a Command of God, yet what is that to the
case before us? This that we implead your Disciples for, is none of those, but
founded upon a particular law; and therefore that stands firm, and ought to be
observed, as not liable to this exception; and so, they are guilty for not
observing it. But now that Christ should argue thus loosely and incoherently,
is by no means to be admitted. Shall He who gave to man the faculty of Reason,
be defective in any point of Reason himself? As the Psalmist argues concerning
God's Knowledge and Providence, Psalm. 94.9, 10. He that planted the ear, shall
not he hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? -- He that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he know? So may we say in this case. True, the Reason of
Christ's discourses sometimes lies very deep, that it is hard for us to fathom
it with our short understandings, and to attain to a clear apprehension of it:
but however, we cannot without blasphemy admit of any flaw in it, or deny it to
be firm, valid and concluding.

But then, if He did here argue against all such Traditions in general, my
Observation stands good, and I have gained my Point. And hence it will follow,

(3) That to observe such Traditions, and Institutions, is so far from being a
Duty, that it is a sin; because thereby the Law of God is transgressed.

Sect. 18.2: Christ's Reply is by way of Reprehension, and taxing their
hypocrisy, Matthew. 15.7-9. Ye hypocrites, etc. The people indeed had a great
veneration for them, and looked upon them as great Devoto's and Religionists:
but Christ puts off their vizor, uncovers their nakedness, and lays open their
hypocrisy; and that, by applying to them that prophecy of Isaiah. This people
draws nigh, etc. i. e. they pretend a great deal of Religion in their outward
carriage, and seem to be very diligent in all external duties, but all is but
from the teeth outward: their Religion is but a mere carcass, without any life,
or soul, or spirit in it; the heart is wanting. Here he opens the fountain of
this evil, which was, The placing all Religion in outward ceremonies, and
superstitious observances.

V. 9. But in vain do they worship me] i. e. They shall not only not get any
good by such worship, but shall bring upon themselves the wrath of God, and
consequently a great deal of evil and mischief, by their thus -- teaching for
Doctrines] i. e. instead of Doctrines, the commandments of men.] The word
[Doctrine] is usually taken for those points either of Faith or Duty, which are
delivered in Preaching; and here it must relate, particularly, to matters of
worship, as is evident, both because that is the business in hand, which Christ
is here speaking of; and also, by comparing these words with those of Isaiah,
whence they are taken, viz. Isa. 29.13. where the words run thus: -- and their
fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. Their fear toward me, i. e.
their worship of me; as fear is taken, 2 King. 17.32, 33. And then by [the
commandments of men] is meant, those Traditions of the Elders before mentioned;
what he calls [your traditions] and [your own traditions] before, here he calls
[the commandments of men.] i. e. All such humane inventions and institutions in
God's worship, which have no good ground, nor warrant from the Word of God,
though they may pretend some. Ea quae fundamentum habent in persuasione mere
humana, and non divinitus tradita, says Grotius.

So that the sense of the whole clause is this, -- Teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men] i. e. By their thus preaching up, and pressing the
observation of their Traditions and humane Inventions in the worship of God,
instead of those things which are of divine Institution and Appointment, they
render their worship vain. It Is the property of Scripture alone to be
profitable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16. Hence Titus is required to show
uncorruptness in doctrine, Tit. 2.7. i. e. to deliver the pure truths of God
not dashed with the water, nor alloy'd with the lead of humane inventions,
whereby it is corrupted, as wine is with water, and gold with lead. So that, as
the matter of all our Teaching is laid down Positively, in that Commission.
Matthew. 28. ult. Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you: So
here, teaching and urging any thing in the worship of God, not only contrary
to, but besides, the Word, is condemned in these words by Christ; and they that
take their measures in Worship, from the Commandments of men, their worship is
vain, bootless, and unprofitable, yea mischievous and abominable: And such
persons Christ pronounces to be Hypocrites; and such we must take 'em for,
except we will contradict his judgment. Your zealous assertors of, and great
sticklers for, the observation of humane inventions in God's worship, are great
hypocrites in Christ's account; and they that urge and impose such things as
strictly, or more strictly than the observation of divine Institutions, are
guilty of gross hypocrisy, whatever they pretend, as to Decency, Uniformity,
Authority, or the like. For, though a practice be really a matter of Decency
and Convenience, and thereupon some Rules and Directions may be given by
Authority about it; yet it ought not to be enjoined as strictly, or as much
stress laid upon it, as upon the substantials and vitals of Worship: as for
example. In point of Time, or Place, or Gesture, or Habit, it is to be supposed,
and I think we may well take it for granted, that generally, neither Ministers
nor People are such bruits, and so void of understanding, as to perform Duties
with such undue Circumstances, at such inconvenient Times, in such inconvenient
Places, with such rude Postures, in such undecent Habits, as may render the
service, or worship notoriously undecent, and wholly unprofitable, and
inconsistent with the Glory of God, and the good of Souls: or, if any
particulars should be guilty of such foul miscarriages, then let Governors
take notice thereof, and censure offenders proportionably to the demerit of the
crime; and not perdere substantiam propter accidentia, imbroil the whole Church
by, and silence hundreds or thousands of inoffensive Ministers for
noncompliance with, Impositions about such matters. Certainly the greatest
evil that can be imagined to follow upon some irregular, undue, circumstantial
miscarriage in worship, is not proportionable to the thousandth part of that
mischief which we have always found has followed upon these Impositions.

Sect. 19. 3. The last method that Christ uses for the Vindication of his
Disciples for their Nonconformity to this Imposition, is by way of
Instruction, to inform the people. What it is that really and properly does
pollute a man, Matthew. 15.10-20. Mark 7.14-23. Where, as before he undermined
the foundation of all their Traditions in general, so here he overthrows the
groundwork of this Tradition in particular, by teaching and proving, that
eating with unwashen hands defiles not a man, Matthew. 15.20. and if so, then
there is no need to wash before meat. But this being besides my present design,
I shall give it a discharge from any further attendance. And,

Sect. 20. For a close of all, I shall wind up the substance of all that has
been said in a narrow compass. Here was (1) A Law, Precept, Injunction,
Constitution, or call it what you will, it was something they looked upon as
obligatory; and that (2) made by lawful authority, yea, the Supreme authority
of the Nation: and this (3) about a lawful matter, viz. that which was not
anywhere forbidden by the Law of God, nor contrary to any command; yea (4) it
was a matter of civil Decency: and (5) that which they pretended some ground
from Scripture for. And yet for all this (6) this Law or Command did not
oblige: for then the neglect thereof would have been blameworthy; which yet it
was not, as appears by Christ's Vindication of his Disciples for it: though
they did not obey this Command, nor observe this Custom, yet he does not in the
least blame 'em for it. Nay,

(7) The Observation of it upon such an account, was not only not necessary,
but unlawful; as appears, in that Christ blames and taxes the Pharisees for
this and such like observances; and therefore (Lastly) Nonconformity herein was
so far from being a sin, that it was their Duty, and Conformity or Compliance
had been a sin; from all which I infer, That

A lawful practice, enjoined by lawful Authority, is not thereby, and purely on
that account, made necessary: but there is something else required, viz. That
the matter of the law be necessary antecedently to the law, either in its own
Nature, or in respect of some Circumstance (as has been showed in the foregoing
discourse about Indifferencies), or else it obliges not.

FINIS.
These Books following are Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible
over against the Stocks-Market.
MElius Inquirendum: or, an Inquiry into the Sober Inquiry, etc.

The Non-conformists Plea for Peace: the first Part: by Rich. Baxter.

A Defense of the Non-conformists Plea for Peace: against Mr. J. Cheyneys
Answer, called, The Nonconforming Conformist, etc. To which is added, a Letter
written by the Author of Melius Inquirendum.

The Royal Charter of Confirmation, Granted by King Charles the II. to the City
of London. Taken from the Records, and Translated into English by S. G.

A Seasonable Warning to Protestants. Being an Exact History of the Parisian
Massacre, August the 24th. 1672. With the Popes Bull to Encourage and Justify
the Massacre and Rebellion of Ireland.

A Word to Sinners, and a Word to Saints: by Tho. Gouge, Minister of the
Gospel. With any other Books of the same Author.

Jacob's Ladder: or, the Devout Souls Ascension to Heaven: by Jo. Hall, B. D.

Young's English Scholar: in Spelling, Reading and Writing. Enlarged: the 4th
Edition.


