Aurea Legenda, OR APOTHEGMS, SENTENCES, AND SAYINGS OF MANY Wise and Learned
men, USEFUL For all sorts of Persons. Collected out of many Authors by Sa.
Clark, sometimes Pastor in B. F.

The Preacher sought to find out acceptable Words, and that which was written,
was upright, even Words of Truth. The words of the Wise are as Goads and as
Nails fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies, which are given from one
Shepherd, Eccle. 12. 10. 11. London, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the
King's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

Some choice Sentences and Sayings concerning the Mischiefs, and Miseries which
attend an impure, unquiet, and guilty Conscience.
COnscience is God's spy, and Man's overseer: God's Deputy judge, holding its
Court in the whole Soul, bearing witness of all a Man's doings and Desires, and
accordingly excusing or accusing, absolving or Condemning, Comforting or
Tormenting: What art thou then the better when none is by, so long as thy
Conscience is by?

Conscience is the great Register, or Recorder of the World. It Is to every Man
his private Notary, keeping record of all his Acts and Deeds. It has ^he Pen
of a ready Writer, and takes from ^hy Mouth all that thou speak; yea, from
thy Heart all thou Contrivest; And tho its writing may be for the present (like
to the writing with the juice of an Onion, or Lemon) illegible: Yet when thou
come to the fire of Distress, it will then appear; or at farthest, in the
great Day of Judgment it will discover all.

Conscience always keeps Sentinel in a man's Soul, and, like a Register, Records
all our good and evil Actions. Tho the darkness of the Night may hide us from
others, and the darkness of the Mind may seem to hide us from our selves, yet
still the Conscience has an Eye to look in secret upon what ever we do: and
tho in many Men it sleeps in regard of motion, yet it never sleeps in regard of
Observation and Notice: It may be hard and seared, but it can never be Blinded:
That writing which in it now seems to be invisible, when it is brought to the
fire of Gods judgment will be most Clear.

There is nothing so much fastened in the Memory as that which Conscience
writes. All her Censures are written with indelible Characters never to be
bloted out. All, or most of our knowledge forsakes us in Death: Wit, acuteness,
Variety of language, Habits of Sciences, Arts, Policies, Inventions, etc. only
those things which Conscience imprinteth, shall be so far from being
obliterated by Death, that, they shall thereby be much more manifest, whether
they be impressions of Peace, or Horror.

Conscience is a most bribeless Worker. It never know's how to make a false
report of any of our ways: It Is Gods Historian (with reverence be it spoken)
that writes not Annals, but Jornals: The words, Deeds, and Cogitations of Hours
and Moments. Never was there so absolute a Compiler of Lives as Conscience is.
It comes not with prejudice, or acceptance of Persons, but dares speak the
truth of a Monarch, as well as of a Slave. Nero the Emperor shall find as great
a Fire burning in his Bosom, as he dares wrap the poor Christians in, to light
him to his Lusts.

Before and in the acting of Sin we will hear nothing; but afterward
Conscience will send forth a shrill and a sharp Voice which shall be heard all
the Soul over, as was that of Reuben to his Brethren, did not I warn you,
saying Sin not against the Child, etc.

It Is as proper for Sin to raise Terrors in the the Soul, as for rotten Flesh
or Wood to breed Worms. That worm which never dies is bred here in the froth
of filthy Lusts, and flagitious Courses, and it lies grubbing and gnawing upon
Men's inwards many times, in the Ruff of all their jollity. This made Saul to
call for his Music, Belshazzar for his carousing Cups, Cain for his Workmen to
build him a City; and others for other of the Devils Anodines to put by the
Pangs of their wounded Spirits, and throbbing Consciences.

One small drop of an evil Conscience will trouble a whole Sea of outward
Comforts and Contentments; A confluence whereof would no more ease a wounded
Conscience, than a Silken Stoking will do a broken Leg.

As a little water in a Leaden Vessel is heavy: So is a little trouble in an
evil Conscience.

An evil Conscience is a burden importable, able to quail the Courage, and
crush the Shoulders of the strongest Hercules, of the mightiest man upon Earth:
Hence Job preferred, and Judas chose strangling before it. Daniel chose rather
to be cast to the Lions, than to carry a Lion about with him in his Bosom an,
enraged Conscience. The primitive Christians also used to cry out, Ad leones
potius quam ad Lenones abjiciamur: Let us rather be cast to the Lions than to
be thrust into Brothel-houses.

What good is there in a Chest full of Goods, when the Conscience is empty of
goodness? such an one is like unto Naaman, a Rich man, but a Leper. For
excellent Parts and Gifts, without a good Conscience are but as so many sweet
Flowers upon a Dead man wrapped up in fair Linen: Or like to sounding Brass,
or a tinkling Cymbal.

Conscience is God's greatest Officer and Vicegerent in Man, set by him to be,
as it were thy Angel keeper, Monitor, Remembrancer, King, Prophet, Witness,
Examiner, Judge, yea, thy lower Heaven. If thou slightest and wrongest it, it
will be an Adversary unto thee, and an informer against thee, an Accuser,
Witness, Judge, Jailor, Tormenter, a Worm, Wrack, Dungeon unto thee; yea, thy
upper Hell.

An evil Conscience makes the Wicked fly when none pursues, Prove. 28. 1. Such a
fearful Fugitive was bloody Cain, such were those cursed Canaanites (Jos. 24.
12.) that were chased by Gods Hornets among them, that is, by the Bloodhounds
of their own Consciences. Such were those Syrians, who, struck with a Pannick
fear, fled for their Lives, and left their rich Camp for a Booty to the
Hunger-starved Israelites, 2 Kin. 7. 7. etc. The shadows of the Mountains
seemed to be armed men to guilty Gaal, Judge. 9. 36. The Burgundians, when ready
to join Battle with their Enemies, thought that long Thistles were Spears.

He that is delivered up to a seared Conscience, to a dead and dedolent
Disposition, is in a manner in a desperate condition. He heaps up wrath against
the Day of Wrath, etc. Romans 2. 5. this made a reverend Man say, I had rather be
in Hell with a sensible Conscience, than on Earth with a reprobate Mind.

Plutarch thought that the very Life of a vicious and a wicked man, was
punishment enough for him without either Gods or man's revenging hand. For
(says he) if they examine their Lives, they find themselves empty of Grace and
Goodness, destitute of Hope, laden with Fear, Sadness, uncheerfulness, and of
Suspicion of what will follow after. Their lives therefore are worse than the
life of a Dog: For a Dog lives without mental sufferings, and dies, and there
is an end of him: But this wicked man is always upon the Rack whilst he lives,
being perpetually tormented with the lashes of an Evil and accusing Conscience,
which is worse than Death.

As the Crocodile incautiously sleeping with his Mouth open, receives into his
Belly the Ichneumon, or Indian-Rat, which causes that he is never at quiet, his
entrails never being free from gnawings and Pain. One while he plunges into the
water, and anon runs again to the Land: No place will afford him case till
Death hinders his Motion: So it is with such as are tormented with the Worm of
Conscience; As we see in Nero, when he had murdered his Mother, and his Wives.
And in Otho the Emperor, when he had slain Galba, and Piso, In Herod, when he
had caused his Wife Mariamne to be put to Death. And in our King Richard the
third, when he had slain his two innocent Nephews in the Tower. In Spira;
Latomus, and many others: all which were so gnawed and grub'd with this Worm
that they could never be at rest, till, being utterly tired with continual
Vexation of Spirit, they either desperately flew themselves, or were dreadfully
dispatched by others.

In thy Commission of evil, fear no man so much as thy self; another is but one
Witness, but they Conscience is a Thousand. Another thou may avoid, but thy
Conscience thou can not. Wickedness is its own Punishment.

No man is able to stand before a guilty Conscience. The Conscience awakened is
like a Bear enraged; It tears a man in pieces: It falls upon him like some
mighty Tower, and crushes him to Powder. It is like a Gouty joint, so sore and
Painful, that it cannot endure it self; as Bernard speaks. How was David
wounded, his Bones bruised by it, etc. Psalm. 32. 3. etc? How many have we seen
to lie Panting and Groaning under the wounds of Conscience? Oh what Horrors,
Fears, apprehensions have the Tongues and Faces of some of God's own Children
implied to standers by! And if their Agonies have been such who have been but
in part wounded, and withal, secretly sustained, what then must the Case of the
wicked needs be, when his Conscience falls with a full weight upon him, and
there is no supporting? Prove. 18. 14. A wounded Spirit who can bear? The Gout,
Stone, and some other Diseases are in themselves almost insufferable: Yet the
Spirit of a man, sustained with hope and strengthened by God may somewhat tug
with them: But when the Spirit which sustains all, is it self wounded; when
God, that other where supports, becomes an Enemy, who can bear it? For

Here is not a Creature to a Creature, Weakness to weakness, but a finite
Creature must encounter with an infinite Power; Weakness must fight with
Strength; Man with God. Alas! when the Heavens fall upon a poor Worm, must he
not needs down? when Judas shall have the Earth against him, and Hell against
him, and Heaven against him, and himself against himself; must he not needs
shrink, and fall?

Oh! How miserable is the condition of every impenitent Sinner! Poor wretch, he
goes on in a sinful course and fears no harm. His Conscience sleeps, and he
hopes it will never awake: But when he has long pursued his Conscience, his
Conscience will at last pursue him; and after a long silence it will at last
speak, and Ring him such peal as will make him at his Wits end. Sometimes in
this Life a spark of Hell falls upon his Soul, and then where is he? Can he
quench this flame with the purest Wines? Shake of these fits with a peal of
Laughter? Can he out-ride the shriches of his Conscience as he fallows his
Games? Can he drown that noise with his cries, and Hubbubs? Can he forget those
gripings in his busiest Tales, and relations of News? Or can he leave his
Conscience behind him in any place?

No, no, his Conscience is his constant Companion, and cries upon him in the
Night sleeping, in the Day walking; In his greatest Mirth; In his busiest
Sports and Pastimes: Nay, his Heart is now employed about another business: His
desires are full of Solitariness; His Thoughts as black as Hell it self. The
Devil (says he) what Creature is he? My flesh trembles at the thoughts of him,
yet would I might see him. Hell (thinks he) what place is that? Since thither I
must, would I knew the worst. These, these be the thoughts of a desperate
Heart, and of a throbbing Conscience. Witness Judas! He comes to the Priests,
and looks upon them, but they cannot ease him. He takes his Money and looks
upon that, but it cannot help him. He walks forth and looks upon the Light, and
is weary of that. He passes by men, he has nothing to say; He is best alone,
nay, not alone; If there be any hope it is in Hell; If any Comfort it is among
the Devils; thither he will go to seek it. Oh misery! Oh Death! Oh Hell! when a
man must go to Hell for ease, to the damned Spirits for Comfort!

A guilty Conscience as it will prove the most inmost, so the utmost Enemy, and
that,

First, unavoidable: Do what thou can, thou can not shake it off: It lies
with thee; it sleeps with thee; it Rides with thee; it wakes with thee; it
walks with thee, in every place, beyond all times; when thou go it goes;
when thou flyest it runs; still it cries and raises the Country against thee.
It meets thee in the dark and makes the leap: It meets thee in the Day, and
makes the quake: It meets thee in thy Dreams and makes thee start: It meets
thee in every Corner and makes thee think every Bush to be a man, every man a
Devil, every Devil a messenger to carry thee quick to Hell?

Thou come to thy Chamber, there thy Conscience frights the: Thou come to
the Field there it turns thee: Thou turnest again, and their it Crosses the way
upon thee: Thou turn'st it turns: Thou cryest it cries: thou dare not call,
if thou do Conscience fears no Company.

Secondly, Unsufferable: An evil Conscience strips one of all Comfort at once:
If a sick Stomach will make one a weary of all Chairs, Beds, Meats, Drinks,
Friends, All: Oh what will a sick Conscience do!

Thirdly, It puts one to intolerable Pains. It racks the Memory and makes it
run back twenty years, as we see in Joseph's Brethren; and Aristocrates in
Plutarch. Yea, it twinges for Sins in youth as Job complain's. It racks the
understanding, and carries it forward beyond the Grave, and makes it feel the
very bittterness of Death and Hell before it sees them: It racks the Fantasy
and makes it see Ghosts in men, Lions in Children, as it is storied of some: It
troubles the Eye, and makes a murdering Theodorick see the Face of a Man in
the mouth of a Fish: It troubles the Ear, and makes a Bessus hear the cry of
Murder in the chattering of Birds: It racks all the Senses quite out of joint;
it makes a Sanders to run over the Irish Mountains quite out of his Wits till
he perish of hunger. In brief, it so oppresses that it causes the sweating
Soul to cry with David, Oh my Bones are broken! And with Moses, who know's the
power of his Wrath? And to join with Soloman, a wounded Spirit who can bear?
what Man? what Angel? Who under Christ? Nay, this stroke upon the Soul,
(separated from all Sin) drew from the Lord of Life, those sad cries, My God my
God why have thou forsaken me? That which a Thousand taunts, ten Thousand racks
could not have done, this one alone apprehended and felt, wrested from him. And
shall such a thing as this, so near, so great a Neighbor be offended?

Be we then of St. Paul's mind: Set Conscience at an high Price: Consider what
it will be worth in the Day of trouble, of Death, of Judgment, and resolve to
beg, starve, burn, dye a Thousand deaths to save Consciences life.

As a good Conscience (next to God its Master) is our best Friend in the World;
so Conscience offended is our forest Enemy. The greatest Friends are bitterest
Foes when divided. No Wars to Civil Wars, to domestical Wars. The nearer the
worse; and therefore the Conscience (being nearest) if it become an Enemy, is
the heaviest of all others. For

First, It Is an unavoidable Enemy, other Enemies may be kept off with strength,
or put off with skill; but so cannot Conscience; No Bars, no Bolts, no
Bulwarks can keep that from thy Table, or Bed. Dan. 5. 5. Belshazzar may sooner
keep out ten Thousand Medes and Persians, than one Conscience: That will pass
through all his Guards and Officers to his presence, and in the Face of his
Nobles and Concubines, arrest him, and shake him in despite of his security.
Nor will this Officer be bob'd with a bundle of Distinctions, and Evasions.
When God sets it a work, it marches furiously (like Jehu) and will take thee up
with his answer; What Peace so long as thy Whoredoms and sins remain? As there
is no Respondent like Conscience, so there is no Objector like to that. A man
may make a shift with a wrangling Sophister, yea, with the Devil himself,
better than with his Conscience. For no Devil knows that by me which I do by my
self. And the Conscience shall have the hearing when the Devil shall not. For
Conscience is the Kings Solicitor, and speaks for the great King.

Secondly, This Enemy is unsufferable. It strips us at one stroke of all other
Comforts; a sick Stomach makes that meat which before much pleased, now to
increase the Disease: So does a sick Conscience: It takes away the relish of
all natural Comforts, and of all spiritual Exercises, and Ordinances, and makes
a man a burden and terror to himself.

It fills one full of Horrors and unhappiness; the Violentest diseases may be
born; but when the Pillars are shaken, when that which bears up all is wounded:
when the Heavens fight against a man, and a poor Creature must wrestle against
infinite justice and power, Oh how hard a thing is this! The wrath of a King is
terrible, and the rage of Seas, of Fire, of Lions; but still here is Creature
against Creature, Weak to Weak; but who knows the power of Gods anger? Who can
stand before that consuming Fire? Not man: Not mountains: Not Angels. The
terrors of God and anguish of Spirit cast's the Devil himself into a frenzy and
makes him mad.

As those parts of the Nail next to the flesh, at first are softer than the
rest, but after a while they grow into that hardness which is in the remoter
parts: So the Consciences of all men have those seeds of insensibility in them,
which makes them at last deaf to every Charm, and secure against all the
thundering Judgments which are denounced against them.

As the operation of the Sun is always strongest there where it is not at all
seen; to Wit, in the Bowels of the Earth. So the judgments of God do often lie
heaviest there where they are least perceived, to Wit in an hard Heart, and
seared Conscience.

When men go about to extinguish and darken the light of direction which God
has put into their Hearts and Consciences to guide their paths by, he puts out
their light of Comfort, and leaves them to Darkness and Sorrow.

Other afflictions are but the taking some stars of Comfort out of the
Firmament, when others are left still to shine there: But when God's
countenance is hid from the Soul, the Sun it self (the fountain of Light) is
darkened to such, and so a general Darkness befalls them.

A light Load upon a raw Shoulder is very grievous: So is a little outward
grief to a wounded Conscience,

Every fowl that has a beautiful Feather has not the sweetest Flesh: Nor does
every Tree that bears a goodly Leaf, bring good Fruit. Glass gives a clearer
sound than Silver, and many things glister besides Gold: The wicked man's
jollity is but the Hypocrisy of mirth; It may wet the Mouth but cannot warm
the Heart: Smooth the Brow, but not fill the Breast. In the midst of his
greatest mirth he has many a secret gripe in his Conscience, and little knows
the World where his shoe pinches him. As Jezabel (no doubt) had a cold Heart
under a painted Face. So many a man's Heart aches, and quakes within him, when
yet his Face counterfeits a smile.

We have a cloud of Witnesses, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs who would hazard
themselves upon the angry Seas, Lions, Flames, rather than upon a displeased
Conscience.

Collected out of the Works of B. Reynolds, Dr. Harris; and Dr. Stoughton, by
S. C.

Some choice Sentences, and Sayings concerning the Blessings, and Benefits
which accompany a pure, peaceable and good Conscience.
COnscience is a Prime faculty of the reasonable Soul, there set to give notice
of its spiritual Estate, in what Terms it stands with God.

Conscience (says St. Austin) is like a Wife; the best of Comforts if good,
the worst of naughts if bad.

Deal friendly with Conscience, and, next to God, it will prove thy best friend
in the World.

First, Thy truest Friend that will never flatter thee, but make thee know thy
self.

Secondly, The surest Friend, that will never start from thee: It wll Ride with
thee; It will lie with thee; sleep with thee; Wake with thee; It will Walk with
thee; Be with thee in every place, beyond all times.

Thirdly, The sweetest Friend in the World. If natural cheerfulness be so good
an Housekeeper to a good man that it Feasts him daily (as Solomon says) Oh
then what will be the Banquets of a Conscience sanctified, purified, and
pacified! What joys those that will carry a man above ground, and make him
forget the best of Natures Comforts! what Comforts those that will make him
sing under the Whip, in the Stocks, at the Stake in despite of the Fire! Oh
what the strength of Conscience that can sooner tire the Tyrant than the
Martyr! And can carry weak Strength (as weak as Water, as it were) in Triumph
through a World of Bonds, Rods, Swords, Racks, Wheels, Flames, Strapadoes, and
whatsoever else is most terrible! These joys are impregnable, and unspeakable
indeed. This Peace is unconceivable, passes all understanding. This Friend is
unmatchable. Let not such an one so true, so fast, so good, be slighted, or
offended.

Therefore let us be of St. Paul's mind; set Conscience at an high Price:
Consider what it will be worth in a day of Trouble, of Death, of Judgment:
Weigh what the Price of Conscience would be at in Hell if men might buy their
Peace, and Rate it accordingly.

Look how chary a proud Woman is of her Beauty, a Wiseman of his Eye, a Weak
man of his Stomach: So, and much more than so should a Christian be careful of
his Conscience: Of his Heart, Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence,
etc. Pet. 23. 1. I have lived in all good Conscience before God, until this
day: Heb. 13. 18. We trust we have a good Conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly.

Give Conscience content and rest, and it will pay thee an Hundredfold. It
will round thee in the Ear and say, this is well however it be taken, and
therefore be not discouraged: This is naught however applauded and Painted:
It Is stark staring naught; It Is Pride, Hypocrisy, therefore amend it.

Other Friends go and come, and stand afar off, now at hand, now I know not
where; But Conscience is no starter. It Is never from our sides, out of our
Bosoms.

A pacified Conscience, what a Blessing is that? What joys be those, which will
carry a man out of the Earth, and make him say; Tho I have Wife, Children,
Friends, Wealth, House, Health, Ease, Honor, etc. after mine own Hearts
desire, yet these are nothing to my Comfort and Contentment within? Oh
Conscience! Thou have a special gift in Comforting, that can make the Patient
laugh and rejoice when the Spectators weep and mourn, and can carry frail
Flesh singing and rejoicing thorough a World of Miseries: These joys be strong
indeed, and pass man's understanding, Phil. 4. 7.

Other Friends love not to come to a Sick-mans Bedside; Or if they do, they
cannot abide to hear his groaning, to see a Dead man; At the most, they can but
follow him to the Grave: But Conscience will make a man's Bed in his sickness,
and cause him to lie the softer: It will stand by him when he groans, and
Comfort him: It will hearten him against Death when it is coming, and say, thy
Redeemer lives: It will whisper to him when departing, and say, Thy Warfare is
accomplished: It will lodge the Body in the Grave as in a Bed; accompany the
Soul into Heaven, and enable it to look God in the Face without any terror. So
fast a Friend is this, that when Riches, Husband, Parents, Friends, Breath,
Life; Nay, when Patience, Hope, Faith have left us in some measure, this will
not leave us.

That Is the best Glass which shows the smallest spots: The brightest Light that
shows the least Motes: The finest Flesh that is sensible of the least pricking:
So that Conscience that is sensible of the least Sin or failing, is the
Perfection of Christianity, whereunto we should all endeavor to attain.

If you lay an heavy burden upon a sound Shoulder, it goes away with it well
enough: So if the Soul and Conscience be sound, and God enable a man to bear
it, Diseases, Imprisonment, Disgrace etc, are easily born.

As the cleerest Blood makes the best Spirits: So does a good Life the quietest
Conscience. The purest air breeds the greatest agility, and the purest Life the
fairest Hope.

A natural Conscience shows only the danger of Sin; and so makes a man fear it;
But a spiritual Conscience shows the filthiness and pollution of Sin, and so
makes a man hate it.

A good Conscience appears in the Countenance, and looks merrily out at the
Windows of the Eyes. But this is not till Faith has healed the Conscience.
This made Stephen to look like an Angel, Act. 6. 15. and the Apostles to
rejoice in their sufferings, Act. 5. 41. This is Praemium ante praemium, even
Heaven aforehand: some Clusters of Grapes of that Celestial Canaan.

A good Conscience will not only stand under the greatest pressures, as we see
in St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 9. 12. We had the Sentence of Death in our selves, that
we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the Dead. For our
rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
Godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had
our Conversation in the World. But goes as merrily to Dye, in a good cause, as
ever he did to Dine, as we see in diverse of the Martyrs. Be the Air clear or
Cloudy, he enjoys a continual serenity, and sits always at the blessed Feast,
whereat the Angels are continually the blessed Cooks and Butlers (as Luther
phraseth it) and the three Persons of the Trinity are gladsome Guests.

A good Conscience is a full Feast, a lasting Feast, not for a day, as was
Nabal's: Nor for seven days, as was that of Sampson: No nor for ninescore
days, as was of that Ahasherus: But a durable Feast without intermission of
solace, or interruption of Society. Vis ergo (O Homo) semper epulari? Vis
nunquam tristis esse (says Bernard) Been vive. Would thou never be sad?
Would thou turn thy whole Life into a merry Festival? Get and keep a good
Conscience.

Prove. 17. 22. A merry Heart does good like a Medicine. All true mirth is from
the peace of Conscience: When Faith has healed the Conscience, there is a
Sabbath of rest, and blessed tranquillity lodged in the Soul, and then the Body
also is vigorous for the most part, and in good plight and healthful.

Eccles. 9. 7. etc. Go thy way (says Solomon there to one that has a good
Conscience) Eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart --
Let thy Garments be always White, and let thy Head lack no Ointment, etc. That
is, be merry at thy Meals, light-some in thy Clothes, painful and cheerful in
thy Calling, etc. all which do much further Health. Such shall renew their
strength: They shall mount up with wings as Eagles: They shall run and not be
Weary: And they shall walk and not Faint, Isa. 40. 31.

Let a man be sound within, and at Peace with his own Conscience, and he will
be able bravely to bear up under unspeakable Pressures, as did St. Paul, 2 Cor.
1. 9. 12. as an old beaten Porter to the Cross: Maluit toller are quam
deplorare: His stroke was heavier than his groaning, Job 23. 2.

Conscience is frequently in Scripture called the Spirit of a Man, as being
planted by God in every part of the reasonable Soul, where she produces,
occasionally, several Operations, as being the Souls Schoolmaster, Monitor,
and domestical Preacher: God's spy, and Man's Over-seer: The principal
Commander, and chief Controuler of all his Desires, and doings.

Conscience is a most Celestial gift* It is so of God and in Man, that it is a
kind of middle thing between God and Man; less than God, and yet above man* It
may be called our God, in the sense that Moses was called Pharaoh's God, having
Power to control and avenge our disobedience with greater plagues than ever
Moses brought upon Egypt.

Many seek for knowledge, few care for Conscience; yet is Conscience got with
more ease, and kept with more advantage than all our Science.

Keep Conscience pure, and it will keep thee in Peace. Let men, the World, and
the Devils do their worst, they cannot hurt him that has a good Conscience,
says Bernard.

A good Conscience is the Paradise that God walks in, the Throne that Christ
sits upon; the Temple that the holy Spirit dwells in; the Golden-pot wherein is
kept the hidden Manna, etc.

Conscience is the Book of Books; the ancientest piece of Scripture in the
world. The first Tables of God's own hewing, and Handwriting in the Heart of
Man, for whose sake all other Books since, yea, the Scripture it self, was
afterward written on purpose to Comment upon it. This is the Book that every
man should be well versed in. To study other Books will make thee a Scholar,
but to study this will make thee a Christian.

Peace of Conscience is worth our utmost endeavor: It will make a man sleep
without a Pillow, yea, without a Bed. Hence it was that Jacob took such good
rest upon a Stone: That Peter (laden with Iron Chains) could sleep so sweetly
tho (for ought he knew) he was to dye the next day: That Mr Philpot and his
fellow Prisoners could rouse as merrily in the Straw, in the B B of London's
Colehouse, as if they had been upon Down Beds in a Palace. It is a Feast with
any Food tho never so course and slender. It made those blessed Martyrs in the
Reign of Severus the Emperor (of whom Eusebius writes) that after long and hard
imprisonment, being released for a time, they appeared to the People as those
that came e Myrothecia non Ergastulo; rather out of Shops from among sweet
Ointments* than out of filthy Prisons. They were brought forth (says he)
rejoicing in their Torments, and carrying in their Countenances a certain
Divine aspect This inward peace of Conscience made the Prophet Isay cheerfully
to submit himself to the Saw: Jeremiah to be stoned: Paul to the Sword: Peter
to the Cross: Lawrence to the Grid-iron, etc.

Prove. 28. 1. -- The righteous is bold as a Lion. Conscintia pura semper
secura. A good Conscience has a secure Confidence, and he that has it, sits
(Noah-like) mediis tranquillus in undis: Quiet in the greatest Combustions:
Freed, if not from the common Destruction, yet from the common Distraction. For
he knows whom he has trusted, and is sure that neither Life nor Death, nor
things Present, nor things to come, can ever sunder him from God's love in
Christ, Romans 8. 38, 39.

Tho Saul could not be merry without a Fiddler: Ahab without Naboth's Vineyard:
Nor Haman without Mordecai's courtesy: Yet he that has a good Conscience can
be merry without all these: Yea, as the Lilly is fresh, beautiful, and looks
pleasantly tho among Thorns: So can such an one exult in the midst of troubles.
St. Paul (tho no man out of Hell ever suffered more then he) yet did he not
only Glory in Tribulations, but Over-abounded exceedingly with joy, 2 Cor. 7. 4.

There are four quiet Consciences, and never a one of them good.

First, The ignorant Conscience, which (with the blind Man) swallows many a
Fly, and know's it not, Ephe. 4. 18, 19.

Secondly, The Conscience that was never yet well awakened: The sleeping
Conscience: But Sin lies at the Door. His Bones are full of the Sin of his
youth, which shall lie down with him in the Dust, Job 20. 11. This is worse
than a troubled Conscience. Here the strong Man armed keeps possession, and
therefore all things are at Peace, Luke 11. 21.

Thirdly, The deluded Conscience, that Dreams of nothing but Visions of Peace,
Lam. 2. 14. being deluded by Satan and his Instruments, as Ahab was by his
false Prophets, 1 Kin. 22. 21, 22. Most men are in this condition, Zech. 1. 11.
-- Behold, all the Earth sits still, and is at rest, Zeph. 1. 11. -- I will
punish the men that are settled on their Lees, etc. These dye like Lambs and are
accounted happy, Jer. 51. 40.

Fourthly, The obdurate Conscience. These Treasure up wrath against the day of
Wrath, Romans 2. 5. Job 36. 13. There is no greater a Plague than such a
Conscience.

David, before he was smitten, either by God's hand, or by the Prophet's
reproof, his own sanctified Conscience did the Office of a faithful Monitor,
and household Chaplain; For his Heart presently mis-gave him, 1 Chronicles. 21. 8. 2 Samuel 24 10. Bee-Masters tell us that those are the best Hives that make the
greatest noise: Sure it is, that that is the best Conscience that suffers not a
man to sleep in Sin. David's heart smote him for numbering the People; It was
for his own, for a small, for a secret Sin; For failing in the manner only; For
he knew that a man might as well dye of an in ward bleeding, as of an outward
Wound. The good Soul is often afflicted for it is failings in those Duties which
others applaud and extol.

A good and a peaceable Conscience (says Bernard) est lectus Animae. The Bed
on which the Soul takes sweet repose.

Behold the Considence of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. when it
is parling with God by Prayer, and bold intercession! It dares plead with God
as Jeremy did, Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: Yet let me
talk with thee of thy Judgments, etc. Jer. 12. 1. And interrogates as St. Paul,
Romans 8. 33, 34, 35. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is
God that justifies: Who is he that Condemns, etc? And expostulates with God as
David often did. When God seems to be asleep he will awaken him: When to delay
he will quicken him: When to have lost his wonted kindness, he will find it for
him.

In pure Water the Face may be seen, not so in muddy: So in a pure Conscience
Gods Face may be seen, and no where else in the Earth.

As Faith makes the Conscience good before God, so Purity makes it good before
men.

The unlearned man with a good Conscience (says St. Austin) will go to Heaven,
when thou with all thy Learning shall be cast into Hell. Surgunt indocti and
rapiunt Regnum Coelorum, etc.

Faith looks to Promises; Fear to threats; Hope to futures; Obedience to
Duties; Repentance to Sins, etc. But Conscience looks to all.

A good Conscience will stand a Man instead when he appears before the great
Tribunal of God, where Courage dares not show it is Face; nor Eloquence open
it is Mouth; nor Majesty has any respect; nor Greatness has any favor; where
Money bears no Mastery (as that Martyr said) To be feasted with the Fruits of a
good Conscience is Angels food, and some of the Sweetmeats of Heaven, as a
tormenting Conscience is one of the greatest miseries of Hell.

No man can attain to a good Conscience, but by a careful and diligent keeping
of his Heart, says Bernard. A good Conscience has ever one Eye upon God, to
observe his Precepts, and the other up to God, by Prayer to beg his direction,
and Assistance.

Every man would willingly live and dye Comfortably. No way so to do but by
laying up a Foundation of Comfort in an holy Conversation: A wicked Man would
gladly forget himself, and run away from himself: He cannot look backward, or
inward to himself, without guilt and Horror: It was therefore good Counsel of
an old Rabbi, Ne sis impius coram te ipso: Be not wicked in thine own sight:
Learn to reverence thy Conscience. No such good Companion as a good Conscience:
A man may then dare to be acquainted with himself, as some men have written the
History of their own Lives. A Leper cares not much for a Looking-Glass, because
he shall see by it nothing but his own Deformity. A Bank-rupt cannot abide to
cast up his account, because he shall find himself worse than nothing: But he
that leads a holy Life is like to a man who has Traveled over a beautiful
Valley, and being on the top of the Hill, turns about with delight to take a
View of it again.

A good Conscience will be a Noah's Ark to save us from perishing with the
World: A Zoar to shelter us from Wrath to come. It will be a Simon to help us
to bear our Crosses. His Motto is, Miser sit qui miser esse potest: Let who
will be miserable, he cannot.

To get, and keep a good Conscience, we must dislodg two homebred Innmates:

1. Carnal delights. Rest not in these; in Wealth; in Men: Rely not on Wines,
Meats, Music, Pleasures, Company etc. These will deceive in times of Distress.
Besides, Nature soon putrifies and turns to Corruption, and so proves baneful.

2. Take heed of sinful Lusts: These War against the Peace and Comfort of the
Soul, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Yea, they are so far from Comforting that they oppress. The
end of such Mirth is heaviness of Spirit, Sorrow, Fear, Anguish, Tribulation,
and Woe upon every Soul, that wallow's in such sensual Sins. Conceive therefore
of Sin (yea of every Sin) as of a Disease, a Wound, an Enemy to Peace, and
Complain and strive against it. Still walk in the Light, and keep thy self in
God's presence, so Peace shall be upon thee, and thy Spirit shall be held up in
cheerfulness.

Oh the power of Conscience! As it makes an happy Estate miserable if bad: So a
miserable Condition blessed if Good. As will fully appear in this rare Example.

Anno Christi, 1555. There was one Algerius, a Student in Padua, a young man of
excellent Learning, who, having attained to the Knowledge of the Truth, ceased
not by Instruction and Example to teach it to others; for which, being accused
to the Pope, by his command he was cast into Prison, where he lay long, and
during that time he wrote a most affectionate Letter to the distressed Saints,
wherein, among many others sweet expressions, he thus writes: I cannot but
Communicate unto you some Portion of my delectations, and joys which I feel and
find: Who would believe that in this dark Dungeon I should find a Paradise of
Pleasure? For in this place of Sorrow and Death dwells Tranquillity, and hope
of Life: In an infernal Cave I have joy of Soul: I have found Honey in the
entrails of a Lion: Where others weep I rejoice: Where others tremble I have
strength and boldness, etc. All these things the sweet hand of the Lord does
minister unto me: He does Comfort me, and fills me with gladness: He drives
away all Sorrow, and strengthens, encourages, heals, refreshes, and advances
me, etc.

Collected out of the Works of B P. Reynolds, Dr. Harris, Dr. Stoughton, etc.
by S. C.

About CHARITY.
THe Emblem of Charity is a naked Child giving Honey to a Be without wings.
Naked because excuseless and simple; a Child, because tender and growing:
Giving Honey, because Honey is pleasant and Comfortable: To a Be, because a
Be is Painful and deserving: Without wings, because helpless and wanting. If
thou deniest unto such thou killest a Be: If thou give to other than such,
thou preservest a Drone.

Not to give to the Poor is to take from him: Not to feed the Hungry, if thou
have it, is to the utmost of thy Power to kill him. That therefore thou may
avoid both Sacriledg and Murder, be Charitable.

Be not too cautious in discerning the fit Objects of thy Charity, lest a
Person perish through thy discretion. What thou give to mistaken want, shall
return a Blessing to thy deceived Heart. It Is better in relieving idleness to
commit an accidental Evil, than in neglecting misery to omit an Essential good.
Better two Drones be preserved, than one Be perish.

God takes particular notice; and books down every Act and work of Mercy that
is done to his People, even to a little Cake of Bread, 1 Kin. 17. 30. And to a
Cup of cold Water, Mat. 10. 42. Water that is a cheap thing. Cold water; no
matter either of cost or Pains. Even this shall be rewarded.

Christ comes in his Flesh to you, when Poor Christians come to you: He
presents a pale Face, a thin Cheek: He presents a bare Arm or Leg to you. Will
you not do something to support Christ? And to cloth Christ in his Members?
Shall the Bones of Christ stare, and stand out? Shall the naked Flesh, and skin
of Christ pine away for want of succor?

Christians that come to you are your own Flesh, Isa. 58. 7. And shall the Head
do nothing for the Foot? And shall the Hand and Eyes do nothing for the Leg?
What! Not for it is own Flesh? And for those that be of the same Body?

Give cheerfully, and bless God that you have an Estate to give; and bless God
that you have an opportunity to give, and an Heart to give: and that hereby you
make God a sharer in your Wealth and Plenty, and your selves sharers in his
Blessedness. Therefore bless your self; bless your Houses; bless your Estates:
For it is a Blesseder thing to give than to receive, Act. 20. 35.

As Husbandmen cast some of their Corn back into a fruitful Soil, whereby (in
due time) they reap with advantage: So should we do with our Worldly blessings:
Sow them in the Bowels, and upon the Backs of the poor Members of Christ, and
in the day of Harvest we shall find a great increase.

Alms in Greek comes from a word that signifies to Pity, because they should
proceed from a merciful and pitiful Heart. And in the Hebrew and Syriack, it is
called Righteousness, as being by right due to the Poor.

In works of Charity, our scattering is an increasing: No spending but a
lending: No laying out but a laying up, Prove. 11. 24. There is that scatters,
and yet increases, etc. and Chap 19. 17. He that has Pity on the Poor,
lends unto the Lord: And that which he has given will he repay him again.

Bounty is the most compendious way to Plenty: Neither is getting, but giving
the best Thrift. The poor man's Hand is Christ's Treasury, and he that puts
therein Foeneratur Domino, lends to the Lord upon Usury; and the Lord binds
himself and gives it under his hand, that he will repay him fully and
abundantly; mostly in this World; but infallibly in the World to come.

'Thou know not (says Solomon, Eccles. 11. 2.) what Evil shall be upon the
Earth: Therefore lay up Lustily, or rather lay out Liberally, and so lay up for
a Rainy-day. Thou may soon be stripped of thy Goods, and as much need other
men's Mercy, as they now need thine. Sow therefore whilst thou have it, that
thou may reap again in due season. Water, that thou may be Watered again,
Prove. 11: 25. Lay up for thy self a good Foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6. 18. Part freely with that which thou art not fure to keep, that thou
may gain that which thou art sure never to lose, Prove. 28, 27. He that
gives to the Poor shall not lack.

As the Sun draws up Vapors into the Air, not to retain them there, but to
return them to the Earth, for the Comfort of the Creatures: So those that have
attracted to themselves much Riches, should pour them out plentifully for the
relief of the Poor, Eccle. 11. 3.

Rich men's Houses should be God's Storehouses. The righteous Rich man know's
it, and therefore he disperseth abroad, Psalm. 112. 9. His righteousness (and
his Riches too) endures for ever. Whereas the wicked Rich man retains his
Riches to Rot with him. He feeds upon Earth like the Serpent; and strives (with
the Toad) to dye with his mouth full of Earth. The rottenness of his Riches,
the Canker of his Cash, the Moth in his Garments shall be a Witness against him
(Jam. 5. 1. etc.) He shall surely be arraigned as an arrant Thief: As a cursed
Cousener, who having a better thing by him, brings a worse, Mal. 1. 14.

Some there be that make themselves Poor lest they should help the Poor: As
Pope Alexander said of himself, That when he was a B B. he was Rich, when a
Cardinal, Poor, and when he was a Pope a plain Beggar.

As the Be is abroad so soon as ever the Sun breaks forth: So should we be
always ready to every good work, Eccles. 11. 6. Sow mercy in the Morning: Sow
likewise in the Evening, as the bountiful Macedonians did, 2 Cor. 8. 3. Who to
their Power, yea, and beyond their Power were willing. Sow much, and sow often of
this Fruitful seed, and you shall be sure to reap at your greatest need. God is
not unrighteous to forget your Labor of Love, etc. Heb. 6. 10. tho men should
prove ungrateful. Happily, you may not Sow and reap on the same Day, as the
Widow of Sarepta did: The seed may lie some while under ground, and not be
quickened except it dye; But have patience a while; Nothing is more certain than
a crop of Comfort to the merciful.

What a shame is it for Christians that there is no Proportion between their
receipts from God, and their layings out for God? That those which are Rich in
this World should not be Rich in good works? That they lay not by for Pious,
and Charitable uses, according as God has blessed them; as they are exhorted,
1 Cor. 16. 2. But that they should be the richer the harder: Like Children that
have their Mouths full, and both their Hands-full, and yet will part with none,
but spill it rather. It Is observed of men that grow Fat, that they have so much
the less Blood; and so the Fatter that men are in their Estates, the less
Blood, Life, and Spirits they have for God.

Mercy should flow from men as Water does from a Fountain; or Light from the
Sun, Freely. It should not be wrung from them as Verjuice is from Crabs: Or as
distilled Water that is forced out by the heat of the Fire. The love of Christ
should constrain us to look out for some of his Receivers (as David did the
Posterity of Jonathan) to whom we may show Mercy for his sake.

In Case of Extraordinary necessity, and exigency, the Poor widow must part
with her little All. The Sareptan must be no niggard of her Oil tho it be at
the bottom. The deep Poverty of the Macedonians must abound to the Riches of
their Liberality, who to their Power, and beyond it too, were willing
thereunto, 2 Cor. 8. 2. 3. The Day-labourer must give something out of his
gets. The Servant out of his Wages, Ephe. 4. 28. The ruler must not exact his
right, Nehem. 5. 10. Nor the landed man spare to sell that he has, to give
Alms thereof, Luke 12. 33. As they did, Act. 4. 37.

God lays his solemn Charge upon us to be Rich in good Works. Now if God should
charge the Rocks, they would send forth Water: If the stones, they would become
Bread: If the Ravens, they would feed Elias: If the Quails, they would victual
the Camp: If the Clouds, they would Rain down food for his poor People. And
shall we be more Rocky than Rocks? More stony than Stones? More ravenous than
Ravens? More senseless than Birds? And more empty than the Clouds?

Provide you Bags that wax not old, says our blessed Savior, Luke 12. 21.
That are never the worse for wearing: Treasure in Heaven that fails not; but
the more you take from it, the more you add to it. It will grow in your Hands,
as the Loaves did in our Savior's: As the Oil did in the Widows Cruse. As the
water does in a living Spring.

Riches are a mere uncertainty, an obscurity, a fallacy. One while they appear;
another while they disappear, as Meteors in the Air; As Dive-dappers in the
Water: As a Flock of Birds in a Man's field, which he cannot call his own
because they sit there; For they betake them to their Wings and fly away.
Therefore we should take care; First, To keep them so long as we can: Secondly:
To use them so well as we can: But neither can we assure Riches, nor use them
better, than by bestowing them on the Poor.

Many miserly Muck-worms are like to the Muck-hill, that never does good till
it be carried out. Like the fat Hog that is good for nothing till he comes to
the Knife. Like the poor man's Box, that yields no Money till it be broken. Like
to Trees that let fall none of their Fruit till they be violently shaken.

It Is fabled of Midas, that whatsoever he touched was turned into Gold: Sure it
is that whatsoever the hand of Charity touches, tho it be but a Cup of cold
Water, it turns it, not into Gold, but into Heaven.

But Charity is now so fled, that Elias wants his Hostess of Sarepta: Elisha
the Sunamite: St. Paul cannot find the Purpuriss: Nor Peter the Tanner. Job we
have not: And Obadiah we find not. Captain Cornelius is a black Swan: And good
Onesiphorus is not to be heard of, most men have shut up their Bowels, and
buried them aforehand. Their Hearts are hardened, and their Hands are withered.

Of Mouth*mercy indeed there is good store, as there was in St. James' his
days: Go and be warmed fed, Clothed: But with what? A fire, a Feast, a Suit of
words: But a little hand-full were far better than many of these Mouth-fulls.
Were their blessing worth an Halfpenny (as the Beggar told the Cardinal they
would be advised how they parted with it.

Look how it is with the Moon, the fuller she is of Light the farther she is
from the Sun: And as the Sun moves slowest when he is highest in the Zodiac:
So are they usually slowest to give who are highest in their Estates.

1. Charity by the Ancients was pictured like a Child, because the Charitable
must be humble, and Courteous like a Child. She was pictured naked, because She
seeks not her own. She looked merrily, God loves a Cheerful giver: Charity
was covered with a Cloud: Alms must be given privately. Charity held a bloody
Heart in her right Hand: A good man is merciful; he first pittieth, and then
relieveth. Charity offered Honey to a Be without Wings: that is, Helps such as
would, but cannot help themselves.

Unworthy we are doubtless of such an Honor, as to relieve hungry, thirsty,
naked Christ in his poor Members. The Macedonians called and counted it a
Favor that they might have their Hand in so good a Work, 2 Cor. 8. 1. David
thanked God that of his own he would receive an Offering, 1 Chronicles. 29. 9.

Men Sow cheerfully upon good ground, and account their Seed better in the
Ground than in the Garner. And is not Mercy as sure a Grain as Vanity? Sow
therefore plentifully; Sow cheerfully, Mich. 6. 8. Love Mercy. God likes not
that our Alms should come from us as drops of Blood from our Heart; but like
life Honey from the Comb: That we be glad of an opportunity of showing Mercy,
and rather seek than want an Object for it.

The Liberal Soul shall be made Fat, and he that Waters shall be Watered
himself: His Soul shall-be like a watered Garden, etc. Isa. 58. 8, 9. Of
Stephen, King of Hungary; and of Oswald, one of our Saxon Kings, it is storied,
that their right Hands after Death never putrified, because they had been much
employed in relieving the Poor and afflicted. Sure it is that their Souls that
do it in a right manner, decay not, dye not, wither not, See Prove. 11. 17. Luke
16. 11, 12. etc.

And for the Bodies of such, see the Promise: If thou draw out thy Soul to the
Hungry, then shall thy Health spring out speedily, Isa. 58. 8. And if the
merciful man be sick, God will make his Bed in all his sicknss: God will stir
up the feathers under him: Mercy shall be his Cordial, and his Pillow of sweet
repose.

For the good names of such: The Liberal shall have love, and respect with men:
A good repute and report both alive and Dead; And this is better than precious
Ointments, Eccles. 7. 1. And than Riches, Prove. 22. 1. Whereas the Vile shall
not be called Liberal, nor Nabal be called Nadib: The Churl bountiful in
Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 32. 5.

For their Estates: The Liberal man devises Liberal things, and by Liberal
things he shall stand: A man would think, he should fall rather by being so
bountiful: But on the contrary, he takes a right Course to thrive: For getting
is not the way to abundance, but giving: The gainfulest Art is Almsgiving,
says St. Chrysostom. Whatsoever we scatter to the Poor, we gather for
ourselves; says another. Riches thus laid out, are laid up: Non pereunt sed
parturiunt; said a third. By our Liberality Christ accounts himself both
gratified and engaged, Prove. 19. 17. God will bless his Stock, and his Store,
Deuteronomy. 15. 10. His righteousness (and his Riches too) shall endure for ever,
Prove. 28. 27. He that gives to the Poor shall not lack.

Lastly: For his Posterity: The righteous is merciful and lends, and his Seed
is blessed, Psalm. 37. 26. Jonathan was paid for his kindness to David in his
Son Mephibosheth: Jethro, for his love to Moses in the Kenites, 1 Samuel 15. 6.
whereas the Children of unmerciful men are threatened, Psalm. 109. 12. 16.
Eccles 5. 14. For either he leaves it to a Prodigal, that Rides to Hell with
Golden Spurs; and Forks it abroad, as fast as the Miser, his Father raked it
together: Or if he be a good Husband, yet usually he thrives not, but it melts
away as Snow before the Sun.

And for the Life to come: Such lay hold upon Eternal Life, which is assured to
them whilst they live here, Prove. 14. 21. and 11. 17. Mat. 5. 7. Jam. 2. 13.
And enjoyed by them hereafter, Luke 16. 19. 1. Pet. 1. 7. Mat. 25. 34. etc.

He that denies to give God the interest of his gifts, by Charity, forfeits the
Principal: And he that takes in his worldly Commodities without paying to God
his Custom, shall lose the whole.

Of Judge Manwood it is recorded, that his Salary was not more fixed than his
Charity. He and the Poor had one Revenue; one Quarter-day: Instead of hiding
his Face from the Poor, it was his Practice to seek for them, laying out, by
Trustees for Pensioners, either hopeful, or indigent; whereof he had a
Catalogue, which made the best Comment upon that Text, The Liberal man devises
Liberal things. This is the best Conveyance that ever Lawyer made; To have and
to hold to him and his Heirs for ever.

When thou see Misery in thy Brother's Face, let him see mercy in thine Eye.
The more the Oil of mercy is poured on him by thy Pity, the more the Oil in
thy Cruse shall be increased by thy Piety.

Proportion thy Charity to the strength of thine Estate, lest God proportion
thine Estate to the weakness of thy Charity. Let the Lips of the Poor be the
Trumpets of thy Gifts, lest in seeking applause thou losest thy reward. Nothing
is more pleasing unto God than an open Hand, and a close Mouth.

Those reprobates spoken of, Mat. 25. 42. robbed not the Saints, but relieved
them not. Moab and Amon were Basterdized and banished the Sanctuary to the
tenth Generation for a mere omission, because they met not God's Israel with
Bread and Water in the Wilderness: And Edom is sore threat'ned for not
harboring them, in the Prophecy of Obadiah.

The Spirits of Wealth distilled in good works, do much Comfort a Man's
Conscience.

The Liberal are renowned in the Earth: As Abraham, that free-Hearted
Housekeeper: Obadiah: Zacheus: Cornelius: Gaius: Onesiphorus: Dorcas, etc.

Artaxerxes Longimanus was wont to say, That he had therefore one Hand longer
than another, that he might be readier to give than to receive.

Of Cyrus it is said, that he took more delight and content in giving, than in
receiving,

It was a greater trouble to Severus the Emperor to be asked nothing than to
give much. When any of his Courtiers had not made bold with him in that kind,
he would call him, and say, Quid est cur nihil petes? What meanest thou that
thou ask me nothing? He is worthily miserable that will not make himself
happy by asking.

They who are Divites opibus, must be Divites operibus too. Their Fruit must be
plentiful as well as their Estates. There may be a narrow Heart and a starved
Charity, where there is a large Estate, as in Nabal: And there may be a large
and bountiful Heart, where there is but a poor and narrow Estate, as in the
Poor Widow, Mat. 12. 43. And in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8. 2.

God's mercy to us should be a strong Argument to provoke us to show mercy to
our Brethren. His was to Enemies, ours is to Brethren: His to Debtors, ours to
Fellow Servants: His of Free Grace to me, mine a just Debt to a Brother, Romans
13. 8. His for ever to me, mine but for a moment to my Brother: His in Talents
to me, mine but in Pence to my Brother: His in Blood to me, mine but in Bread
to my Brother: His mercy enriches me, mine leaves my Brother poor still. If I
then live by the mercy that I do enjoy, and must be saved by the mercy that I
do expect, shall so much mercy shine on me, and none reflect from me upon my
poor Brother? Shall all the Waters of Life run from Christ unto me, as those of
Jordan into a dead Sea, to be lost and buried there? Wherefore does the Sun
shine, and the Rain fall upon the Earth, but that it may be Fruitful? Christ is
the Fountain, Rich men the Conduit, and Poor men the Vessels, which are there
and thence supplied.

God gives us all things Richly: The Earth empties into our Coffers her Silver
and her Gold: The Pastures send us in Cattle: The Fields Corn: The Sea Fish:
The Air Fowl: One Country sends us in Wine: Another Spices: One Silk, and
another Furs: One Delicates, and another Ornaments. God gives us the light of
the Sun; the influences of the Stars; The protection of Angels; The
righteousness of his Son; The Graces of his Spirit, and the hope of his Glory;
Yea, himself and the Allsufficiency of his power for our Portion, and shall not
all this move us to imitate his Example, in being Rich in good Works? If we do
not give, we shall not live. If we do not do good, we shall not receive good.
If we do not lay out, we shall not lay up. If we keep our Money, we shall
perish with our Money. If we return it unto Heaven, we shall be gainers by it.

Wares laid up in a low moist Room, will Rot and corrupt: but those that be
laid up in high Lofts will be kept sound and safe: So if we lay up our
Treasures only in this World, they will perish and come to nothing; but those
which (by Charity) we Treasure up in Heaven, will be ever sure and safe, Mat.
6. 20.

William Warham, A. B. of Canterbury, was so bountiful to the Poor in his Life
time, that at his Death he had in all his Treasury but thirty Pieces of Gold,
which when he heard of, it pleased him so well, that he said: It is well; I
always desired to die no Richer.

Philip Melancthon was so bountiful, even in a mean Estate, that every hour
something was given to the Poor at his Door.

The Motto of the good Emperor Tiberius Constantius was, Stips Pauperum
the-saurus Divitum; The rich man's Treasure is the Poor man's Stock.

Basil the Great in a time of Famine did not only liberally relieve the Poor
himself: But earnestly exhorted all others, especially the Rich to open their
Barns and do the like.

Some of Dr. Harris 's Speeches.
COncerning a good Woman under great Temptations and spiritual Desertion, that
could find no Comfort after all means used for the obtaining of it, he would
often say; that the difference was not great, whether Comfort came at Death or
an hour after, since Comfort would come assuredly.

In his last Sickness being desired to admit of Company, he said: I am alone in
Company: It Is all one to me to be left alone, or to have Friends with me. My
work is now to arm my self for Death which assaults me, and I apply my self (as
I am able) for that great encounter.

To all that came about him his frequent Counsel was, that above all things
they should get Faith: For (said he) It Is your Victory, your Peace, your Life,
your Crown, and your chief piece of spiritual Armor: Howbeit, get on all the
other Pieces, and then go forth in the Lord's might, stand to the Fight, and
the issue shall be glorious: Only forget not to call in the help of your
General: Do all from him and under him.

Being asked where his Comfort lay? He answered; in Christ, and in the free
Grace of God.

Some telling him that he might have much Comfort in his Labors, etc. He
replied; all is nothing without a Savior, without him my best Works would
condemn me. Oh! I am ashamed of them, being mixed with so much Sin. Oh! I am an
unprofitable Servant; I have not done any thing for God as I ought: Loss of
time sits heavy upon my Spirit. Work, work apace: Assure your self that nothing
will more trouble you when you come to dye, than that you have done no more for
God, who has done so much for you.

Sometimes he used thus to breath out himself, I never in all my Life saw the
worth of a Christ nor tasted the sweetness of God's love in that measure as now
I do.

When he was asked, what should be done for him? his Answer was: Do not only
pray for me, but praise God for his unspeakable mercy to me; and in particular,
that he has kept off Satan from me in this day of my Weakness. Oh! how good is
God! Entertain good thoughts of him. However it be with us, we cannot think too
well of him, nor too bad of our selves.

A reverend Doctor being to pray with him, asked him, what he would have
chiefly remembered? He answered: I praise God, he supports me, and keeps off
Satan from me: Beg that I may hold out: I am now in a good way home, even quite
spent. I am now at the Shore: I leave you tossing on the Sea. Oh! It Is a good
time to Dye in.

Another time being asked how he did? He answered: In no great pain (I praise
God) only aweary of mine unuseful Life. If God has no more Service for me to
do here, I could be gladly in Heaven, where I shall serve him better; free from
Sins and Distractions. I pass from one Death to another, yet I fear none. I
praise God I can Live, and I dare Dye. If God has more Work for me to do here,
I am willing to do it, tho my infirm Body be very weary.

Being asked whether Sickness, Pain etc. caused him to desire Death? he
answered, no: But I now do no good, and I hinder others which might be better
employed, if I were gone. Why should any desire to Live but to do God service?
Now I cease from that, I do not Live.

His usual saying was, that he valued no man for his Gifts, but for Humility
under them. Neither should he expect much from any man, were his Parts never so
great, till he was broken with Afflictions, and Temptations.

His Observation was, that the humblest Preachers converted most Souls, not the
choicest Scholars whilst unbroken.

He sometimes said, that it is better to be an Humble Devil than a proud Angel:
Which tho a seeming Contradiction, yet has it much Truth in it.

He often said, that he had rather pour Liquor into his Boots than into his
Mouth between Meals.

The Rule, which he gave to his Children was this: When you are Youths choose
your own Callings, when you are Men choose your own Wives, only take me along
with you: It may be an Old man may see further than you.

He used to say, that a Preacher has three Books to study, First the Bible,
Second himself: And thirdly the People.

That Preaching to his People was but one part of a Pastor's duty. He was to
live and dye in them, as well as for, and with them.

His counsel to young Preachers was, that they should rather Preach one Sermon
ten times over, than to speak any thing new without Preparation.

Concerning himself he said, that he never came off with less Comfort, and
worse Content to himself, than when he was in appearance best provided. And he
gave this reason for it, Not because he had used such diligence in preparing
(for that was his Duty) but because he was then aptest to depend upon himself,
and to neglect his dependence upon God.

Of the ancient Fathers his saying was, that unless it were for their
Polemical, and Historical parts, their Writings were more for Devotion and
Affection, than for their judgment and understanding.

Concerning the Times wherein he lived, some things lay sadly upon his Spirit.
As

1. He complained that the Power of Godliness, and Exercise of Love, and
Self-denial were much abated in these latter Days: And he much bewailed the
vast difference both in Garb, and Practice, between New and Old Professors.

2. That the Indulgence which was showed to tender Consciences, was much abused
to Profaneness, whilst men of no Conscience most pleaded that Liberty of
choosing their own Churches and Teachers, when indeed, on the Matter, they
abandoned all.

3. That Liberty of prophesying which some pretended to, was abused to mere
Licentiousness and Confusion, whilst some would have none, and others all
Prophets and Preachers.

4. That in the Universities few could be called constant Students in those
times, but the most made a short work of it, and Posted into the Pulpit before
they understood their Grounds; So that few were able to encounter with the
growing Errors of those times.

5. That in the Church, men were in their extremes, some pressing nothing but
the Law, others Preaching nothing but the Gospel and Christ.

6. He complained of the want of Catechizing, and instructing Youth in the
Principles of Religion, the want of which, he saw by experience, was a great
occasion of the Peoples giddiness.

7. But most of all he bewailed the readiness of many to side, and to make
Divisions: And himself loved not, either to use, or to hear used dividing Names
and Titles.

He observed that such as often changed their Principles, and Faith professed,
usually fell from Skepticism to Atheism.

That so much Humility any man had, so much Grace and worth he had, and no more.

That nothing was to be accounted good in or to any man, but that which was his
proper Fruit and done by virtue of his Calling, from a Principle of God and for
God.

That the best man has no security from any one Sin or fall, or Temptation,
any further, or longer than he is held up by God's hand and Christ's Mediation.

That God does oftentimes leave us to own Satan's suggestions for our own,
because we do not own God in his holy Motions and breathings.

That it is just with God to deny us the Comfort of our Graces, when we deny him
the Glory of them.

In himself he observed, that what he forgot in the Weekdays, would
unseasonably press in on the Lord's Day, so that he could (if he durst)
contrive more Worldly businesses upon the Lord's Day, than he could dispatch
all the week after.

That he found no greater Enemy than Discouragement; which he called, the Child
of Pride and unbelief.

He used to say, that some Duties which were often in men's Mouths as easy, he
found very difficult to him. As

1. To deny himself in all his Selfs, was a Work to be learning whilst he lived.

2. To live only by Faith and a bare Promise, without a Pawn, is a great work.

3. To give all to Free Grace, and to Christ alone, is a mighty Work.

4. To love where we meet with unlovingness and Contempt is no easy matter.

5. To do ones proper Work without some present Pay and Countenance from God
and Man, is a hard Task.

6. That it is a far harder work to adopt other men's* Comforts, than their
Sorrows, and to hold ones self exalted in another Exaltation.

7. That to dye in cold Blood, and to be active in it as an act of Obedience,
is the work of a Christian indeed.

In his last Sickness, upon sundry Occasions, he thus vented himself.
It Is a hard thing to think ill of our selves, and well of God at the same time.

It Is a hard thing for a Child of God to forgive himself some Faults, even when
God has forgiven them.

It Is hard to retain holy Thoughts long, and to confine them to another Man's
Prayers.

We know but little of Christ's Love till all be perfected, and spread before
us in Heaven.

His advice to his Wife was, that if she married again, she should remember her
own Observation, which was this; that second Husbands are usually very
Uxorious, and second Wives very prevalent: Therefore (said he) take heed that
you do no ill Offices by estranging your Husband from his former Children, or
Kindred. For you shall draw upon him a great Sin and judgment, if you kill
natural affections toward them.

His advice to his Children; was,
First, For your Souls: Trifle not in the main Point: Your Souls are immortal:
You have to deal with an infinite Majesty: You go upon Life and Death,
therefore here be serious: Do all to God in a serious manner. When you think of
him, speak of him, Pray to him; any way make your addresses to his great and
glorious. Majesty, be in good earnest. For have God and have all. More
particularly,

Get your pardon in Christ: It is not Impossible to get it assured to you, if
you will learn, 1. To deny your selves, 2. To live by Faith, 3. To understand
the nature of the new Covenant. Settle your judgments in these Points, and the
thing is feasible.

Secondly, Having gotten it, be still adding to your Evidences, and enjoy your
present Assurance. Do all to God as to your Father.

Next to this, think how you and I shall endure the sight, the thought one of
another at the last Day, if you appear in the Old Adam: Much less shall you
stand before Christ, unless you show the Image of Christ, in you; And therefore
never cease till you be made New Creatures, and study well what that is.

In the last place strive for those Graces most which concern your Places and
Conditions, and make head against those Sins which most threaten you: As 1.
Hereditary sins, 2. Sins of the Times, and Places where you live, 3. Of your
Constitutions and Age, 4. Of your Callings.

In short, do not talk and make a noise, to get a Name of forward men, but do
the thing. Be constant in secret Duties, and act Religion in your Callings: For
it is not a Name, or Notion. It Is a frame of Nature, and habit of living by the
divine Rule. What it is you will then know when you have it, in Truth first,
and in Power next, and not before. Only this for the present; It Is that which
you must Live and Dye by, that which you must rise and reign by. Therefore (my
Children) Be more than you seem: Do more than you talk of in Point of Religion.
Satisfy your own Consciences in what you do; All men you shall never satisfy;
Nay, some will not be satisfied tho they be convinced.

For your Bodies.
To prevent Hereditary Diseases: 1. Disclaim Hereditary Sins, 2. keep Heads
clean, Feet warm, and Hearts cheerful, 3. Be frequent in some bodily Exercise,
4. Shun late drinking, or studying, 5. Use light Suppers.

For your Callings.
First, Choose well, 1. A profitable Calling for the Public, 2. A full
Employment, 3. A Calling fit for your parts and means. It Is better to be a rich
Cobbler than a poor Merchant.

Secondly, Use your Calling well, 1. Make it an help, not a snare to your
Souls, 2. Be 1. Diligent, 2. Skilful, any honest Calling will honor you, if
thus you honor it.

For your Company.
Abandon all infectious, flattering, Self-serving Companions: When you have
once found them false, trust them no more. Sort with such as are able to do, or
receive good. Solomon gives you the best Counsel for this, in many places. Read
the Proverbs, and remember him in these, 1. For sake not an Old Friend, 2. Be
friendly and faithful to your Friends, 3. Never trouble or trust Friends
unless there be a necessity, 4. Be long in closing with Friends, and loath to
lose them upon Experience of them.

For your Marriages.
In Marriages you lay the Foundation of your present Woe or Weal: Therefore here
be not rash: Go not alone: Yet remember what St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. 2.
Nevertheless, to avoid Fornication, let every man have his own Wife, etc.
First, study whether you have a Calling to marry yea or no, and advise well of
that. If none, forbear: If so, advise with Friends before your Affections be
engaged. In your choice, aim at, 1. Grace, 2. Good nature, and Education. The
best Woman is not ever the best Wife; 3. Good parts of understanding,
Huswifery, etc. As for Portion, be it more or less, be upon Certainties, and
trust not Words. And for Parentage, let not the distance be too great lest you
despise or be despised. However, be sure that the Person likes not your fancy,
but your judgment.

For your Children.
Make it your chiefest Work to make them, First, Godly, 2. Useful. Bestow most
of their Portions in their Education: And if Grace make no difference, do you
make none in your Affections, Countenance, Portion; Partiality this way, ends
in nothing else but envy, strangness, etc.

For your selves among your selves.
My desire has been to carry an even hand toward you all, and have labored
to reduce you (as near as I could, all Circumstances considered) to an
equality; and therefore my last request and Charge is, that you will live
together in an undivided bond of Love. You are many, and if you join together
as one man, you need not want any thing, what Counsel, what Comfort, what
Money, what Friends may you not help your selves unto, if each will contribute
his aid? Wherefore (my dear Children) I pray, I beseech, I command, I adjure
you by all the Relations, and dearness that has ever been betwixt us, that you
know one another, Visit (as you may) one another; Comfort, Counsel, Relieve,
Succor, Help, admonish one another. Whilst your Mother lives, meet there if it
be possible, yearly. When she is Dead pitch upon some other place; if it may
be, let it be your elder Brother's House; and if you cannot meet, yet send to,
and hear one from another upon all occasions. And when you have neither Father
nor Mother, be so many Fathers and Mothers each to other; So you shall
understand the blessing mentioned, Psalm. 133. 1. Behold, how Good, and how
Pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! etc.

For your Estates.
Be not troubled that you are below others, it may be, of your Kindred. Get
more Wisdom, Humility, Goodness, and you will be above them: Only this do: 1.
Study Work more then Wages, 2. Deal with your Hearts to make them less, 3.
Begin low, 4. Join together to help one another, 5. Rest upon the Promises,
which are many and precious this way, 6. Sow mercy, and if all other means fail
you, that shall maintain you. Object not, but trust in God.

For the Public.
Bless God that you are born Englishmen, and Women, and bear your selves
dutifully, and Conscionably toward Authority. See God in the Magistrate, and
hold Order a precious thing. And for the Church neither set her above her
Husband, Christ, nor below her Children. Give her that Honor, Obedience, and
Respect that is her due. Be neither Authors, nor Fautors of any, either
Faction, or Novelty. It is true; This is not a rising way, but it is a free,
fair, and comfortable way for a man to follow his own judgment, without warping
to either hand.

A great Man told King Henry the 8 th. that Reason of State was reason of Law.
That the King should never stick at Law, in case of Public good; and yet that
all his Acts for Public good should come as near as possible to the Law.
Thomas, Marquess of Dorcet, finding King Henry the 8 th pensive, told him
boldly, That never was that Man merry that had more than one Woman in his Bed,
more than one Friend in his Bosom, and more than one Faith in his Heart. State
Worthies, p. 156.

He that is Master of my Heart (said a Wise man) is Master of my Life. If my
Shirt (said Metellus) knew my mind, I would burn it.

It Is pity he ever learned to speak, that know's not how to be silent. I would
first be so Wise (said a great Man) as to be mine own Counselor, and next so
secret as to be mine own Counsel-Keeper.

How dare thou be so Plain? said Heliogabalus to one of his Courtiers:
Because I dare Dye, said he. I can but Dye if I am Faithful, and I must Dye tho
I flatter.

It Is an excellent Rule; Ask an inferior Man's advice in private, that he may
be free and a Superior's in Public, that he may be respectful.

A Countryman in Spain coming to an Image, the first making whereof he could
well remember, and not finding from the same that respectful usage which he
expected: You need not (quoth he) be so Proud: for we have known you ever since
you were a Plumb-Tree.

Edward 3 d. King of England having sent to France to demand the Crown by his
Maternal right, the Council there sent him word, that the Crown of France was
not tied to a Distaff: To which he replied, that then he would tie it to his
Sword.

He was a wise Man that said: Delay has undone many for the other World: Haste
has undone more for this. Time well managed saves all in both.

It Is said of Grandees: That they are the first that find their own Griefs, and
the last that find their faults. Men of great Fortune are stangers to
themselves, and while they are in the puzzle of Business, have no time to
attend the Welfare, either of Body, or Soul, and therefore they should
withdraw from this World, before they retire into another. For, Illi mors
gravis incubat, qui notus nimis omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi.

Cato Major would say, That wise Men learn more of Fools than Fools do of wise
Men. King Charles the 1 st. would say, That it was Wisdom in Fools to jest with
wise Men; but madness for wise Men to jest with Fools. And another added: There
is no man that talks but I may gain by him: and none that holds his Tongue but
I may lose by him.

If a Man wrong me once (says the Italian) God forgive him: If he wrong me the
second time, God forgive me. And Cosmus, Duke of Florence, said: You shall
read, that we are commanded to forgive our Enemies, but you never read that we
are commanded to forgive our Friends.

A fat Man in Rome riding always upon a very lean Horse, being asked the Reason
thereof, answered, That he fed himself, but he trusted others to feed his
Horse: And a Judge of our own being asked, what was the best way to thrive said,
Never do any thing by another, tha^ you can do by your self.

One of our Judges said, that he durst not entertain a Gift, which (said he*
Conquers both the Foolish, and the Wise* which in Public places it is a Vice
to accept, and not a Virtue to offer; it being a Snare rather than a Favor.

Manners make a Man, says the Courtier. Money makes a Man, says the Citizen.
Learning makes a Man, says the Scholar: Conduct makes a Man, says the
Soldier: But sincerity in Religion makes a Man, says the Divine.

The Lord Chief Justice Mountague used to say, Meum est jus dicere, potius quam
jus dare. It Is my Duty rather to interpret than to give Laws.

Of Stephen Gardener, B B. of Winchester, it is recorded, that he never did
what he aimed at, never aimed at what he intended, never intended what he said,
and never said what he thought; whereby he carried it so, that others should do
his Business, when they opposed it, and he should undermine their's when he
seemed to promote it. A man he was that was to be traced like the Fox, and
read, like Hebrew backward. If you would know what he did, you must observe
what he did not.

Stephen Gardener, B B. of Winchester, in Queen Mary's days, concerning the
Princess Elizabeth, said: That it was in vain to Lop the Branches so long as
the Root remained. And concerning those that fled for Religion beyond Sea, he
said, That he would watch their Supplies, so that they should Eat their Nails
first, and then fee'd upon their Fingers ends.

After the defeat of the Devonshire Rebels in King Henry 8 th's time, one Sr.
William Kingston, who was Provest Marshal, went to Bodmin in Cornwwall, where
one Bowyer, the Major, had been enforced to assist them. To him Sr. William
sent word that he would come and Dine with him; for whose Entertainment the
Major made great Provision. A little before Dinner the Provest took the Major
aside and told him, that an Execution must that day be done in the Town, and
therefore he must set up two Gallows. The Major did so. After Dinner Sr.
William thanks him for his Entertainment, and then desires him to bring him to
the Gallows, where, when they were come, Sr. William asked him, whether they
were strong enough? I, i will warrant thee, said the Major: Then (said Sr.
William) get you up upon them. I hope (said the Major) you do not think as you
speak. Nay Sr, (says he) you must Dye; for you have been a busy Rebel; and so
without more ado, hanged him.

A Miller also that had been very busy in that Rebellion, fled, and left
another to take his Name upon him. Sr. William calls for the Miller; The
Servant tells him, that he was the Man: Then (says he) you must be hanged: Oh
Sr. (says he) I am not the Miller but his Servant. If you are not the Miller
(said Sr. William) you are a lying Knave: If you are the Miller you are a
Traitor, and how ever you must Dye. And so he did.

Sr. Nicholas Bacon, who was Lord Keeper in Queen Elizabeth's Days, the Queen
coming one day to his House, asked him, why his House was so little? He
answered: Madam, my House is not too little for me, but you have made me too
big for my House. He never affected nor attained to a great Estate. Mediocra
firma, was his Principle, and his Practice. He used to say, That he would never
forgive that Man, that loses his Friend to be rid of his jest.

William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, never would sue, nor ever was sued by Man.
Prudens qui patiens, was his saying.

Queen Elizabeth coming once to visit him, being sick of the Gout at Burleigh-
House in the Strand, and she being much heightened with her Head attire then in
fashion, the Lord's servant, who conducted her through the Door, said: May your
Highness be pleased to stoop? The Queen answered: For your Masters sake I will
stoop, but not for the King of Spains.

Some of this wise Lord's Sayings were these.

The World is a Shop of Instruments, whereof the Wise man is Master; and a
Kingdom but a Frame of Engines, whereunto he is the Wheel.

"Smoothness declineth Envy and Danger: Humility advances to Honor,
Moderation preserves us in it: Men come down by Domineering: Haste undoeth that
which a just delay ripeneth.

"It was his excellent Motto, Nolo Minor me timeat despiciatve Major.

My Inferiors shall not fear; my Superiors shall not despise me.

"Humility shuns Honor, and is the way to it. The purest Gold is most Ductile.
It Is commonly a good Blade that bends well. The Reed that bends, and is whole,
is better than the strong Oak, that, not bending, breaks.

"There is no such prevalent Workman as Sedulity, and Diligence. A man would
wonder at the mighty things which have been done by degrees, and gentle
Augmentations. Patience, Diligence, and Moderation are the common steps to
Excellency. It Is for Omnipotence to do mighty things in a Moment. But by
degrees to grow to greatness, is the course he has left for man."

We make our selves more injuries than are offered us; and the apprehension of
wrong does more harm than the smartest part of the wrong it self. It Is the Wise
man's Glory, and the Statesmans Prudence, to pass by offenses. A Fool struck
Cato in the Bath; and when he was sorry for it, Cato had forgot it. For (says
Seneca) Melius putavit non agnoscere, quam ignoscere. Light injuries are made
none by not regarding, which, with a pursuing revenge, grow both to height, and
burden, and live to mischief us, when they might die to secure us.

The upper Region is most composed. The Wisest men rage the least, knowing that
Observation, and Resentment do but provoke, and encourage the Malice, which
neglect and silence deads, and dissipates.

Discontent is the greatest Weakness of a generous Soul, which is always so
intent upon it is unhappiness, that it forgets it is Remedies.

Faction can be as little spared in a Monarchy, as an Eye, or an Ear, as
through which the Prince has a cleerer apprehension of his own, and other's
affairs, than he can have when his Followers are all agreed. But when Factions
are carried too high, and too Violent, it is a sign of Weakness in Princes, and
tends much to the Prejudice of their Authority, and Business. Queen Elizabeth
had a happy time of it. if it were but for this; That her Favorers Divisions
were her support: For thereby she attained the knowledge of all things that
happened: So as no Suit, or Design passed the Royal assent, before she
understood as much of Reason, as Enemies, or Friends could bring for, or
against it.

The Lord Willoughby (in Queen Elizabeth's days) having taken a Spanish Genet,
designed for a Present to that King, and being offered, either a Thousand
pound, or a Hundred pound a year in exchange for it, He nobly answered: If it
had been a Commander, he would freely have released him: but being only a
Horse, he saw no reason why he could not keep a good Horse, as well as the King
of Spain himself.

It Is a right noble Spirit, not to be so stupid as not to resent, nor so
unworthy as to retain a sense of Injuries. To have the Courage to observe an
affront, is to be even with an Adversary: To have the Patience to forgive it,
is to be above him.

Sr. Henry Wotton, as he was traveling to Rome, asked his Host at Siena (a Man
well versed in men and Business) what Rules he would give him for his Port,
Conduct, and Carriage? There is one short remembrance (said he) will carry you
safe through the World; nothing but this, Keep your thoughts close, and your
Countenance loose.

Seneca said: That the good things of Prosperity are to be wished, and the good
things of Adversity to be admired. Prosperity (said my Lord Bacon) is the
blessing of the Old Testament, and Adversity of the New.

We are consecrated by Dangers to Services; and we know not what we can do,
until we have seen all we can fear.

The common People (says one) are like Rivers, which seldom grow so impetuous
as to transcend the bounds of Obedience, but upon the Overflowing of a general
Oppression.

Good Husbandry may as well stand with great Honor, as Breadth may may consist
with Height.

Of Edward, Earl of Darby, it is recorded, That when he was buried, no
Tradesman could demand the Payment of a Groat that he owed him: Nor a
Neighbor the restitution of a Penny he had wronged him.

Sr. William Fitz-Williams (a brave Soldier) used to say: That he durst never
adventure upon War with Men till he had made his Peace with God: That a good
Conscience breeds great Resolutions, and the innocent Soul is impregnable.

Six things are recorded of him.

1. That he never made the Aged, the Young or the Weak, the Objects of his
Rage, that could not be so of his Fears.

2. That he never basely killed in cold Blood them that had nobly escaped his
Sword in Hot.

3. That he never led the Soldiers without pay, or quartered in the Country
without Money.

4. That tho he was second to none that acted in the War (such was his Valor)
yet he was the first that spoke for Peace (such his sweet Disposition)

5. That he would never suffer a Clergyman should be abused; A Church to be
violated, or the Dead to be un-buried.

6. That he would never force an Enemy unto necessity; always saying: Let us
disarm them of their best Weapons, Despair. Not fight an Enemy before he had
Skirmished him; Nor undertake a Design before he Consulted his God, his
Council, his Friends, his Map, and his History.

Sr. Walter Mildmay coming to the Court after he had founded his College
[Emanuel in Cambridg] Queen Elizabeth said to him: Sr. Walter, I hear that you
have erected a Puritan Foundation. No Madam (said he) far be it from me to
Countenance any thing contrary to your Established Laws: But I have set an
Acron, which, when it comes to be an Oak, God alone knows what will be the
Fruit of it.

The middle Region of the Air is coolest, as most distant from the direct Beams
that warm the Highest, and the reflexed, that heat the lowest. The mean man
that is as much below the Favor of the Court as above the Business of the
Country, is the most happy, and Composed man: This being the utmost of a
knowing Man's wish in England: That he were as much out of the reach of
Contempt, as to be above a Constable; and as much out of the Compass of
trouble, as to be below a Justice.

There is a Glory in the obscurity of worthy Men, who, as the Sun (which they
equal as well in common Influence as Luster) are most looked on when Eclipsed.

Cloths for necessity, warm Cloths for Health, cleanly for Decency, lasting for
Strength, was the Maxim, and Practice of Judge Manwood; insomuch as Queen
Elizabeth called him her Good Man Judge.

Tullies Offices (a Book which Boys read, and men understand) was so esteemed
by the Lord Burleigh, that to his dying Day, he always carried it about him,
either in his Bosom, or in his Pocket, as a complete Piece that, like
Aristotle's Rhetoric, would make both a Scholar, and an honest Man. Cicero's
magnificent Orations against Anthony, Cataline, and Verres, Caesar's great
Commentaries, which he wrote with the same Spirit that he fought. Flowing Livy:
Grave, Judicious, and Stately Tacitus: Eloquent, but faithful Curtius: Brief,
and rich Salust: Prudent, and brave Xenophon, whose Person was Themistocles's
Companion, as his Book was Scipio Affricanus his Pattern in all his Wars:
Ancient, and sweet Herodotus: Sententious, and observing Thucidides: Various,
and useful Polybius: Siculus: Halicarnassus: Trogus: Orosius: Justine, made up
Sr. Henry Killigrew's retinue in all his Travels, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign;
where he sat on the Stage of human Life, observing the great Circumstances of
Places, Persons, Times, Manners, Occasions, etc. and was made wife by their
Example, who had trod the Path of Error and Danger before him.

Choice Examples, Apothegms, and Sayings of very Wise men.
CArdinal Wolsey providing as magnificently for his Installation into his
Archbishopric of York, as a King should do for his Coronation, improved
thereby King Henry 8 th's jealousy to his ruin. For in the midst of his
Solemnities, he was arrested by the King's order, whose Wrath was the Messenger
of Death, and a while after breathed forth his Soul in these Words: If I had
served the God of Heaven as faithfully as I did my Master on Earth, he had not
forsaken me in my Old Age as the other has done. State Worthies, p. 19.

Plenty without Pomp, is Penury to Pride, which Kings may make humbled, God
only humble; He being able to take away the Fire, the Lust within; the other
only to withdraw the Fuel, the State without, p. 21.

Men die unpittied, that Live feared.

How many a Man had ended better if he had not begun so well. It Is the Emphasis
of misery, to be too soon happy. Prosperity growing up with Experience, makes a
Man in a firm settlement, inured to all events. I will always suspect the
smooth Waters for deepness. In my worst Estate I will hope; In my best I will
fear; in all, I will be Circumspect, and still.

Queen Elizabeth being to employ a famous Embassage into France, made choice of
two of the noblest Peers in her Realm, equal in Rank, equal in Virtue: but the
one excused it by a defect in his hearing, and the other by his ignorance, and
want of the French Language: To which the Queen smilingly replied: That it was
a miserable Estate, when her speaking Peers were Deaf, and her hearing Peers
were Dumb.

We should be very cautious in mentioning the Name of God in small matters,
according to that of the Poet,

Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice Nodus Inciderit. -- Name not God but in
matters of great moment. The Philosopher's division of men into three Ranks is
observable. Some (said he) are such as know good, and are willing to teach it
unto others; These are like Gods among men. Others, tho they know not good, yet
are willing to learn: These are like Men among Beasts: Others know not good,
and despise such as should teach them: These are as Beasts among men.

Those are the most miserable among Men, who running their Head into a Bush of
Confident ignorance, suppose that none see their Weakness, because they are not
willing to take notice of it themselves.

Integrity out-lasts Power, and Plainness survives Policy. An honest Heart
keeps the Head on the Shoulders. A noble and clear Virtue is lasting.

A. B B. Cranmer used to say (as Victorinus) There is a time to say nothing:
There is a time to say something: But never a time to say all things.

Some of Sr. Thomas Moor's Apothegms were these. He is not always merry that
Laugheth. The world is undone by looking on things at a distance. To aim at
Honor here, is to set up a Coat of Arms over a Prison Gate. If I would employ
my Goods well I may be contented to lase them; if ill, I should be glad. He
that is Covetous when he is Old, is as a Thief that steals when he is going to
the Gallows. Bags of Gold to us when Saints, will be but as Bags of
Pebble-stones when Men. The greatest Punishment in the World were to have our
Wishes. Pusillanimity is a great Temptation. Affliction undoes many; Pleasures
most. We go to Hell with more Pains than we might go to Heaven with. Who would
not send his Alms to Heaven? Who would not send his Estate whither he is to be
banished?

Archer (King James his Jester) made him sensible of the danger the Prince was
in, in Spain, by telling him that he came to change Caps with him. Why so?
(said the King;) because thou have sent the Prince into Spain from whence he is
never like to return. But (said the King) what will thou say, when thou see
him return back again? Marry (said he) I will take off the Fools Cap, which I
now put upon thy Head for sending him thither, and put it upon the King of
Spain's Head, for letting him return.

Sr. Thomas Wiat told King Henry 8 th, that he found out a Living of an Hundred
pounds in the year, more than enough, and prayed him to bestow it upon him:
Why? (said the King) we have none such in England. Yes (said Sr. Thomas) the
Provost-ship of Eaton, where a Man has his Diet, his Lodging, his Horse-meat,
his Servants Wages, his Riding-charges, and a 100 Pound Per annum besides.

Sr. Thomas Wiat's Jests were always confined to these Rules.

1. He never played upon a Man's unhappiness, or Deformity: It being inhumane
so to do.

2. Nor upon his Superiors, which is Sawciness, and undutifulness.

3. Nor on serious, or holy Matters: For that is irreligious, and profane:
Applying upon this occasion that of the Athenians, who would not suffer Pathus
to play his Comedies, where Euripides repeated his Tragedies.

4. He had much Salt but no Gall: Often jesting, but never jeering.

5. He observed Times, Persons, and Circumstances: knowing when to speak, and
when to hold his Peace too.

6. His apt, and handsome Reparties were rather natural than affected: Subtle,
and acute; Prompt and easy, yet not Careless: Never rendering himself
Contemptible to please others.

7. His gift was not an insipid changing of Words, but a smart retort of
Matters, which every Body was better pleased with than himself.

What is Prerogative but a great Name, when not exercised over a free People?
And what is Privilege but a fond imagination, when not secured under a a
powerful King, that may keep us from being Slaves one to another by an Anarchy,
while we strive to be free from his Tyranny.

We should not complain that we have little time, but that we spend much,
either in doing nothing, or in doing Evil, or in doing nothing to the Purpose.

Three things (said a Wise man) will settle a State. Good Godfathers, and
Godmothers performing their Vows. Good Householders over-looking their
Families: And good Schoolmasters educating Youth. This last is the most
useful, tho the most Contemptible Profession.

Reward (said the same Person when he was offered a sum of Money) should not
empty the King's Coffers; neither should Riches be the pay of worth, which are
merely the Wages of Labor. He that gives it, embaseth a Man; He that takes it,
vilifies himself: Who is so most rewarded, is least.

Secretary Walsingham would say: Stay a little and we shall have done the
sooner. Secretary Cecil would say: It shall never be said of me, that I will
defer till to Morrow what I can do to day. Sr. Richard Morison would say: Give
me this day, and take the next your self.

He that knows to speak well, knows also where he must hold his Peace, said
the Old Grecian. Think an Hour before you speak, and a Day before you Promise,
said one of our English Sages.

The two main Principles which Guide humane Nature (said Judge Dodderidg) are
Conscience and Law: By the former we are obliged in reference to another World,
by the latter in Relation to this.

When the Lord Chief Justice Fitz-James came upon the Bench, he knew no more
than Melchisedech, or Levi, Father, nor Mother, neither Friend, nor Interest.
For when a Cousin of his urged for a kindness; Come to my House (said the Judge)
and I will deny you nothing; Come to the King's Court, and I must do you
Justice.

Plato said, That a Man's mind is the Chariot, Reason the Coachman, Affections
the Horses, desire of Honor the Whips, both exciting to go forward, and awing
to be exact: Honor, always keeping up curiously the Honored Person in an
height of Action, that keeps an even Pace with admiration: Evenness, and
Constancy being the Crown of Virtue.

The Lord Gray was the first that brought a Coach into England: And Henry
Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, when he was Steward at King Edward the 6 th's
Coronation, was the first that rid in a Coach in England.

William Pawlet, Marquess of Winchester* was Servant to King Henry the 7 th,
and for Thirty years together Treasurer to King Henry the 8 th, King Edward the
6 th, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. Thus he served diverse Sovereigns in very
mutable Times, being (as he said of himself:) no Oak, but an Osier. He had the
rare happiness of setting in his full Splendor, having lived ninety seven
years, and seen a Hundred and three that descended out of his Body.

Sr. Henry Sidney's Motto was, I will never threaten. For, to threaten an Enemy
is to instruct him: A Superior, is to endanger my Person: And an Inferior, is
to disparage my Conduct.

The Character of a happy Life.
HOw happy is he born and taught
That serves not another's Will,
Whose Armor is his honest thought
And simple Truth his utmost skill?
Whose Passions not his Masters are,
Whose Soul is still prepared for Death;
Vnty'd unto the World by care
Of Public Fame, or private breath.
Who envies none whom Chance does raise:
Nor Vice has ever understood.
How deepest Wounds are given by Praise;
Nor Rules of State, but Rules of Good.
Who has his Life from Rumors freed;
Whose Conscience is his strong Retreat:
Whose State can neither Flatterers feed,
Nor ruin make Oppressors great.
Who God does late, and early pray,
More of his Grace, than Gifts to lend;
And entertains the harmless Day
With a Religious Book, or Friend.
This Man is freed from servile bands
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall;
Lord of himself tho not of Lands;
And having nothing, yet has all.
Sr. Henry Wotton.

It was an excellent Saying of Sr. John Packinton, in Queen Elizabeth's days,
that a sound Faith was the best Divinity: A good Conscience the best Law: And
Temperance the best Physic.

Upon the fall of the Earl of Somerset.
Dazzled still with height of place,
Whilst our Hopes our Wits beguile,
No Man marks the narrow space
'Twixt a Prison, and a smile.
Then since Fortunes favors fade,
You that in her Arms do sleep,
Learn to swim, and not to Wade;
For the Hearts of Kings are deep.
But if Greatness be so blind
As to trust in Towers of Air,
Let it be with Goodness lined,
That at least the fall be fair.
Then tho darkened, you shall say,
When Friends fail, and Princes frown,
Virtue is the roughest way,
But proves at Night a Bed of Down.
Sr. Henry Wotton.

It Is one of Machiavel's rules:: That they which rise very high, should descend
timely, and quit the Envy, lest they lose the Honor of their greatness.

When Charles the 5 th presented Secretary Eraso to his Son, Philip the 2 d. he
said: He gave him somewhat greater than his Estate, and more Royal than his
Empire.

I understand not (says mine Author speaking of James Hay, Earl of Carlisle)
the reason of his Ante-Suppers, the manner of which was, to have the Table
coverd at the first entrance of the Guests, with Dishes as high as a tall Man
could well reach, filled with the choicest, and dearest Viands Sea or Land
could afford. And all this once seen, and having feasted the Eyes of the
invited, was removed, and fresh was set on to the same height, having only this
advantage of the others, that it was hot: At one of these Meals, an Attendant
did Eat to his single share a whole Pie, reckoned to the Earl at Twenty pound,
being composed of Ambergris, Magisterial Pearl, Musk, etc. And another went
away with Forty pounds of Sweetmeats in his Cloak-bag.

When the most able Physicians, and his own Weakness had passed a Judgment upon
this Earl, that he could not live many days, he did not forbear his
Entertainments, but made diverse brave Cloths (as he said) to Outface naked,
and despicable Death, adding withal: That Nature wanted Wisdom, Power, or Love,
in making Man mortal, and subject to Diseases.

Sr. Thomas Lake was a Man of such dixterity, and dispatch, that he would
indite, Write, and Discourse at the same time, more exactly than most Men could
severally perform them; for which he was then called the swift-sure.

Of Sr. Edward Cook it is recorded, that he would never be persuaded privately
to retract that, which he had Publicly adjudged, Professing, That he was a
Judge in a Court, not in a Chamber. He was wont to say; No wise man would do
that in Prosperity, whereof he should repent in Adversity. His Motto was:
Prudens qui patiens.

It Is a sure Principle of rising, that great Persons esteem better of such as
they have done great Courtesies to, than those they have received great
Civilities from; looking upon this as their Disparagement, the other as their
Glory.

It Is an excellent Rule, that no man should let what is unjustifiable, or
Dangerous to appear under his Hand, thereby to give Envy a steady aim at his
Place, or Person: Nor mingle interests with great Men made desperate by Debts,
or Court injuries, whose falls have been ruinous to their wisest Followers: Nor
pry any farther into secrecy than rather to secure than show himself: Nor to
impart that to a Friend, that may empower him to be an Enemy.

It was the Saying of a great Man among us, that a through-paced Papist could
not be a true-hearted Subject.

It Is an excellent Character of great Men: In honor sine tumore: To be lifted
up with Honor, but not to be puffed up with Pride.

Sr. Henry Wotton directed that this only should be written on his plain
Marble: Hic jacet hujus sententiae Primus Auctor: Disputandi Pruritus fit
Ecclesiarum Scabies -- Nomen alias Quaere.

Choice Examples, Apothegms, and Sayings of very Wise men.
A Lexander the Great, when Antipater made great Complaints to him of his
Mother, replied, know thou not that she with one Tear will blot out all thy
Complaints? Much more available with God are the Tears of his Servants, which,
as precious Liquor, he preserves in his Bottles.

Agis King of Sparta thus answered a wicked man, that asked him, Quis
Spartanorum est Optimus? Who of the Spartans is the best? Qui tui dissimilimus:
Even he that is most unlike unto thee.

Lysander's saying was, Vbi Leonina pellis non sufficit, assumenda Vulpina.
Where a Lyon's skin will not serve, a Foxes skin must eke it out.

When the Grecians boasted of their seven liberal Arts, the Romans told them
that they had two Arts worth all their seven, namely the Arts of Commanding and
Obeying. Tacitus tells us that these are somewhat difficult at the First, but
being studied and Practiced they become as easy as they are safe and useful.

Two Parthian Ambassadors were sent to Rome, whereof the one was troubled with
the Megrim, and the other with the Gout, whereupon Cato said, That that Ambassy
had neither Head nor Foot.

Alexander the Great used to say, that his hungry Dinner was his Suppers Sauce.

Pythagoras said, That in two things we resemble God, 1. In telling the Truth:
2. In bestowing Benefits.

It was the prayer of an Heathen, that God would give what he knew would be
good for him, tho not asked in particular, and keep Evil from him tho desired.

In Mr. Farrel's time (who had been so much oppofed and threat'ned in reforming
Geneva, and some other Cities) they coined Medals with this Posie on the one
side, Lux post tenebras: Light after long Darkness: And on the other side, Deus
noster pugnat pro nobis: Our God fights for us.

Mr. Hooper, when he was B B. of Worcester, took for his Arms, a Lamb in a
flaming Bush, incircled with the Rays of the Sun beams, which may thus be
Blazoned. The Lamb signified an innocent Christian, and the burning Bush, the
Fire of Persecution; And the Sunbeams, the Glory and Beauty of the innocent
Christian in those sufferings.

Duarenus says of such as come to the University, That the first Year they are
Doctors, in their own conceit at least. The next Year they come to be Masters.
The third Year they are content to be Bachelors: And the fourth Scholars.

Horace, the Poet had blear and Watery Eyes, and Virgil used to sigh much,
whereupon Augustus Caesar sitting between them said, that he sat inter Suspiria
and Lachrymas: Between Sighs and Tears. Sabellic.

Diogenes being asked, why men used to give to the Blind and Lame, but not unto
Philosophers? Answered, because they think that themselves may one day come to
be Blind or Lame: But never hope to be Philosophers: So men's Affections being
Blind and Lame, and their Fantasies vainly bent, must needs delight in vain
and frothy Pamphlets which feed their Humors, but cannot brook such as would
Purge them out.

One of Terence his Comedies called Eunuchus was valued at eight Thousand
pieces of Silver, which made two Hundred Crowns: This was more than all
Tullie's Orations, and all his learned works were prized at (Ex Aelii Donati
praef. in Terentium) But (said a Wise man) the choice of Books should be as the
choice of Physicians: Medicus non jucundior, sed utilior eligitur. A man will
have a Physician rather for his Profit that can do him good, than for his
Pleasure, that will feed him with fine Words.

It was wise Counsel which Crates gave unto the Thebans. If he which has
wronged thee be Weaker than thy self, pardon him: For it is no Honor for a man
to strive against a Child; Nor for a Rich man to go to Law with a Beggar. If he
be more Mighty than thou art, pardon thy self: For thou shall never gain any
thing, by going to Law with a Mighty man. And if he be thine Equal, pardon both
thy self and him: For you shall both live by the loss, and shall hardly know
who is the Gainer. And therefore strive with no Man: But if it be Possible as
much as in you is, Live peaceably with all men, Heb. 12. 14.

I once saw painted on a Table (says Beza) where a Noble man had this Posie:
By my Sword I defend you all: The Clergyman: By my Prayers I preserve you all:
The Countryman, by my Labor I feed you all: Lastly, the Lawyer: By my Policy
I devour you all.

Daniel Heinsius, History-Professor at Leiden, Secretary, and Library Keeper of
that University, and appointed Notary in the Synod of Dort, said at last. Alas!
As to humane Learning, I may use Solomon 's Expressions, that which is crooked
cannot be made strait. Me thinks (said he) I could bid the World farewell, and
immure my self among my Books, and look forth no more (if this were a Lawful
Course) but shut the Doors upon me, and (as in the lap of Eternity) among those
Divine Souls employ my self with sweet Content, and Pity the Rich, and great
ones that know not this Happiness. Sure then it is a high delight indeed, which
is enjoyed in the true lap of Eternity.

Sr. Christopher Hatton, a little before his Death, advised his Relations to be
serious in the search after the Will of God in his Holy word. For (said he) it
is deservedly accounted a Piece of excellent knowledge for a Man to understand
the Law of the Land, and the Customs of his own Country: How much more to know
the Statutes of Heaven, and the Laws of Eternity: Those immutable and eternal
Laws of Justice, and Righteousness! To know the Will and Pleasure of the great
Monarch, and universal King of the World! I have seen an end of all Perfection:
But thy Commandments, O God, are exceeding broad.

Could a man by a vast, and imperious Mind, and a Heart as large as the Sand
upon the Seashore, command all the knowledge of Art, and Nature, of Words and
Things, could he attain to be a Master in all Languages, and sound the depth of
all Arts and Sciences: Could he Discourse the Interest of all States, the
Intrigues of Courts, the Reasons of all Civil Laws, and Constitutions, and give
an account of all Histories; and yet not know the Author of his Being, and the
Preserver of his Life, his Sovereign, and his Judge: His surest Refuge in
troubles; His best Friend, and worst Enemy; the Support of his Life, and the
Hope of his Death; his future Happiness, and his Portion for ever, he does but
Sapienter descendere in Infernum; with a great deal of Wisdom go down into Hell.

Robert, Earl of Leicester, the great Favorite in Queen Elizabeth's days, tho he
allowed himself in some things that were very inconsistent with Religon, yet
came at last to this resolution; That Man differs not from Beasts so much in
Reason as in Religion: And that Religion was the highest Reason, nothing being
more Rational than for the supreme Truth to be belivered, the highest Good to
be embraced, the first Cause, and almighty Maker of all things to be owned and
feared: and for those who were made by God and live wholly upon him, to improve
all for him, and to live wholly to him, as Romans 12. 1. Give up your Souls and
Bodies to him, etc.

It was the Observation of a learned Man, That however men may for a time offer
violence to their Reason and Conscience, subduing their understanding to their
Wills and Appetites; Yet when these Faculties get but a little Liberty to
examine themselves, or to view the World, or are alarumed with Thunder,
Earthquakes, or some violent Sickness, they feel a sense of a Deity brought
back upon them, with greater force and Power, than before they shook it off
with. These and such like Considerations wrought upon Functius, the learned
Chronologer, who reflecting upon his deserting the Calling of a Divine, to
embrace the Honor of a privy Counselor, he left this warning to Posterity.

Disce mei Exemplo mandato munere fungi,
Et fuge ceu Postem, (...).
Justus Jonas, Left this Legacy to all that came after him.

Quid juvatinnumeros scire, and evolvere casus,
Si facienda fugis, si fugienda facis.
Sr. Philip Sidney when he lay upon his Deathbed left this Farewell among his
Friends: Love my memory, Cherish my Friends; their Faith to me may assure you
that they are honest: But above all govern your Wills and Affections by the
Will, and Word of your Creator. In me behold the end of this World, and all
it is Vanities.

Sr. John Mason, Privy Counselor to King Henry the 8 th, and King Edward the 6
th, upon his Deathbed, called for his Clerk, and his Steward, and delivered
himself to this Purpose. "I have seen five Princes, and have been Privy
Counselor to four: I have seen the most remarkable observables in foreign
Parts, and been present at most State-Transactions for Thirty years together,
and I have learned this after so many years Experience, that seriousness is the
greatest Wisdom, Temperance is the best Physic, a good Conscience is the best
Estate; and were I to live again I would change the Court for a Cloister, my
Privy Counselors bustles for an Hermits retirement, and the whole Life I lived
in the Palace, for one hours Enjoyment of God in the Chapel. Now all things
forsake me besides my God, my Duty, and my Prayer."

Apothegms, Sayings of very Wise men.
SIR Francis Walsingham, toward the latter end of his Life, grew very
Melancholy, and writing to Lord Chancellor Burleigh, he said thus: We have
lived enough to our Country, to our Fortune, and to our Sovereign: It is now
high time that we begin to live to our selves, and to our God. In the multitude
of Affairs which passed through our Hands, there must be some Miscarriages, for
which a whole Kingdom cannot make our Peace. And when some Court-Humorists were
sent to divert him. Ah (said he) while we Laugh, all things are serious round
about us. God is serious, when he preserves us, and has Patience toward us:
Christ is serious when he Dies for us: The Holy Ghost is serious, when he
striveth with us: The Holy Scripture is serious when it is read before us:
Sacraments are serious when they are administered to us: The whole Creation is
serious, in serving God and us: They in Hell and Heaven are serious: And shall
a Man that has one foot in the Grave, jest, and Laugh.

Salmatius, whom the learned of his time never mention, without such
Expressions as these: Vir nunquam satis laudandus, nec temere sine laud
nominandus. Guil. Riv. Totius Reipublicae Literariae decus: When he came to
Dye, went out of the World with this Expression: Oh I have lost a World of
time: Time, that most precious thing in the World, whereof, had I but one hour
longer, it should be spent in David 's Psalms, and Paul 's Epistles. Oh Sirs
(said he) Mind the World less, and God more: All the learning in the World
without Piety, and the true fear of God is nothing Worth. The Fear of the Lord
that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil that is understanding.

Grotius, after an exact survey of all the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Learning:
After so many Elaborate discourses in Divinity, and other Parts of Learning,
concluded his Life with this Protestation. That he would give all his Learning
and Honor for the Plain Integrity, and harmless Innocence of Jean Urick (a
devout poor Man, that spent eight hours of the day in Prayer, etc. Eight in
Labor; and but eight in Sleep, and other necessary occasions:) He also
complained to another, that admired his astonishing Industry, saying, Ah! Vitam
perdidi, operose nihil agendo: I have lost my Life with busily doing nothing.
And he gave this Direction to a Third, that desired him in his great Wisdom and
Learning, in brief to teach him what to do? Be serious, said he.

Edward Peito, Esquire, told his Physicians, "that when God had sent him his
Summons, all the Sins of his former Life did even kick him in the Face; and
that he now saw, that the Evil attending Well-doing was short, but the Good
eternal: If we do ill, the Pleasures of ill doing pass away, but the Pain
remains:" And his chief charge about his Children was, "that they should be
educated Religiously, that they might have God for their Portion as well as his
Estate."

Prince Henry his last Words were, O Christ! Thou art my Redeemer, and I know
that thou have Redeemed me. I wholly depend upon thy Providence, and Mercy:
From the very bottom of my Heart I commend my Soul into thy Hand.

A Person of quality waiting upon him in this his last sickness, who had been
his constant Companion at Tennis, and asking him how he did? He answered: "Ah
Tom; I in Vain wish for that time which I lost with thee and others in vain
Recreations.

"Now my Soul be glad; For at all the Parts of this Prison the Lord has set
his Aid to loose thee: Head, Feet, Milt, and Liver are failing. Arise therefore
and shake off thy Fetters: Mount from this Body, and go thy way."

This gracious Prince used to say, that "he knew no sport worth an Oath: And
that he knew not what they called Puritan preaching, but he loved that
Preaching best, which went nearest his Heart, and that spoke as if that
Preacher knew the mind of God."

Sr. Thomas Coventry hearing some Gallants jesting with Religion, said to them:
"That there was no greater Argument of a Foolish and inconsiderate Person, than
profanely to droll at Religion. For (said he) it is a sign that he has no
regard of himself, and that he is not touched with a Sense of his own interest
who Plays with Life, and Death, and makes nothing of his Soul." To examine
severely, and debate seriously the Principles of Religion is a thing worthy of
a Wise man. For whosoever turns Religion into Railery, and abuses it with two
or three bold Jests, renders not Religion but himself Ridiculous, in the
Opinions of all Wise, and considerate Men, and that because he sports with his
own Life. For it was the saying of a Wise man: "That if the Principles of
Religion were doubtful, yet they concern us so nearly, that we ought to be
serious in the Examination of them."

Charles le Main, at the Coronation of his Son, used these serious Words: "My
dear Son, it is to day that I Die to the Empires, of the World, and that Heaven
makes me born again in your Person. If you will Reign happily, fear God who is
the strength of Empires, and the Sovereign Father of all Dominions: Keep his
Commandments, and cause them to be observed with inviolable fidelity. Serve you
first of all for an Example to all the World, and lead before God and Man a
Life unreprovable."

These latter were collected out of the Warning to a careless World.

Magnates sunt Magnetes: Great ones, like Load-stones, draw many by their
Examples, and Inferiors look upon them as their Looking-Glasses by which they
usually dress themselves.

Godliness is the High way to Happiness, the good old way that has ever been
beaten by all those Saints that now find rest to their Souls.

What Aeneas Silvius said of Learning, may be much more truly said of Religion,
and Righteousness: The Vulgar should esteem it as Silver; Noble men as Gold;
and Princes should prize it above their chiefest Pearls.

Semen Sanctum Statumen Terrae: The holy Seed is the substance of the Earth.
The Saints are the People of God's purchase, that comprehend all his gettings,
and are much more dear to him, than Naboth's Vineyard was to him. He sets them
before his Face for ever [Psal. 41. 12.] as Loving to look upon them; Yea, upon
the very Walls of their Houses where they dwell [Isa. 49. 16. They are his
Portion, Deuteronomy. 32 9.] His Inheritance, [Isa. 49. 16.] The dearly Beloved of his
Soul: [Jer. 12. 7.] and his Glory. [Isa. 46. 13.]

And thus they are, tho accompanied with many Weaknesses: For as David saw
nothing in lame Mephibosheth, but what was lovely, because he saw in him the
Features of his Friend Jonathan: So God beholding his offending Saints in the
Face of his Son, takes no notice of any thing that is amiss in them.

The Saints are lowly in their Speeches, but lofty in their Actions, but
especially in their Affections, which are carried above all earthly Objects,
and are not content till they are got to Heaven. These Stars, tho they are seen
sometimes in a Puddle, tho they reflect there, yet they have their situation in
Heaven. These Birds of Paradise, tho they may happily touch sometimes upon the
Earth; yet they are mostly upon the Wing, and these outward Comforts and
Creatures are to them but Scalae, and Alae, Wings, and Wind in their Wings to
carry them upwards.

Resolute sinners would have dissolute Teachers: They would have the Law
according to their Lives, not their Lives according to the Law. That pleases
best which is sweet to their Sense, not that which is wholesome to their
Conscience. Foul Faces would have false Glasses. Diomedes must have a crooked
Shoe for his wry Foot.

Caligula would be adored for a God tho he lived like a Devil.

They which will not tell thee of thy Faults, will be very ready to tell others
of them; whereas he that Loves thee, and respects the profit of thy Soul, more
than the pleasing of thy Senses, will speak of thy Faults to thy Face, and of
thy Virtues behind thy back, which is the greatest Evidence of Love and true
faithfulness.

The most lewd are most Loud.

When God says I will Laugh, as Prove. 1. 26. Psalm. 2. 4. Then Man has most
cause to weep.

Schola Crucis, Schola Lucis. Adversity is the best University.

Prove. 4. 6. Forsake her not. Falling Stars were never but Meteors.

The Heart is the chief Monarch in the Isle of Man.

By Handmaids [the Affections] Satan Wooes the Mistress.

A whore is Helen without, but Hecuba within.

Abraham might see Sodom burning, but Lot might not look that way.

That little Man in the Eye cannot be touched, but it will be distempered.

Toilsom Toys are but laborious loss of time.

Morsels of Sin are murdering Morsels, not nourishings.

We should labor for Wealth without Woe; Store without sore; Gold without
guilt of Sin, or a guilty Conscience.

Where Pride is in the Saddle, Shame is in the Crooper.

Riches were never true to any that trusted in them. Exoriuntur ut Exurantur.

The Godly's Afflictions are not Penal but Medicinal, or Probational.

The Venom of a Wicked man's Heart blisters his Tongue, that it breaks out at
his Lips to his own ruin.

He that makes a match with Mischief, shall have his Belly full of it. Prove. 1.
31. and 14. 14.

The Godly pass from the Jaws of Death to the Joys of Heaven.

Affections without Endeavors, are like Rachel, Beautiful but barren. We must
Work as well as Will and Wish, and do as well as Desire, Perform as well as
Promise. 2. Chor. 8.

Many lie long Languishing at Hopes Hospital, as he at the Pool of Bethesda
before cured.

Sin and Punishment are linked together with Chains of Adamant.

Goodness is it is own reward, both in Hand and in Hope.

Anger may rush into a wise Man's Bosom, but rests not there, Eccl. 7. 9. Jam.
1. 19. 20.

A Covetous man Fires his own Nest when he thinks to Feather it, and troubles
all his House with haste and hurry, to get gain. Prove. 15. 27.

Before Honor is Humility. Prove. 15. 33. The lower the Ebb the higher is the
Tide. The lower the Foundation of Humility is laid, the higher shall the Roof
of Honor be over-laid; Honor follows him that flies from it, as the shadow
does the Body.

God can crack the strongest Sinew that is in all the Arm of Flesh, Isa. 22. 11.

Ingratitude is a Monster in Nature. To render good for Evil is Divine. Good
for Good is Humane. Evil for Evil is sinful and Brutish: But evil for Good is
Devilish, Jer. 15. 20. 21. Prove. 17. 13. Prove. 17. 17. and 18. 24. and 27. 17.

Scilicet ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus Aurum,
Tempore sic duro est experienda Fides.
We must ask God to give what he commands us to have.

A King that sits, etc. Prove. 20. 8. The Sword of Justice is to be furbished
with the Oil of Mercy, yet there are Cases wherein severity should cast the
Scale.

Prove. 21. 16. Wandreth, etc. Yet can he not wander so wide as to miss of Hell,
Prove. 2. 8. Isa. 50. 11. in that Congregation House of Gehenna-Gyants, where is
Punishment without Pity, Misery without Mercy, Sorrow without Succor, Crying
without Comfort, and Mischief without Measure.

Prudence is better than Puissance, Eccle. 7. 19. and 9. 15. 16. Prove. 21, 22.
and 24. 5. 2 Samuel 20. 21, 22.

Omnia si perdas Famam servare memento

Prove. 22. 3. A Prudent man foreseeth etc. He looks before he Leaps. Sees a
Tempest in the Clouds and seeks seasonable shelter under the Hollow of God's
Hand, Eccles. 11. 14. and 10. 2.

Buy the Truth, etc. Prove. 23. 23. Either live with it, or Dye for it, Tit. 1.
9. Phil. 1. 27, Jude 3. Man has no Trial of his strength till he be in
Trouble, Prove. 24. 10.

A Be can suck Honey out of a Flower which a Fly cannot do. A spiritual Man
can extract good out of other men's Faults and Follies: Can gather Grapes of
Thorns, and Figs of Thistles.

Prove. 24. 33. 34. Yet a little Sleep. A little, and yet Sleeps, in the Plural.
A little he ask, but a little will not serve hi^ turn, the Beggar shall catch
him by Back swiftly, and irresistably.

There is a sinful and foolish Pity, when men would not have Justice executed
upon notorious Offenders, and such Pitt^ to the wicked is truly called, Cruelty
to the Good. For he that is Pitiful to the Wolf is Cruel to the sheep.

Man's Tongue is a Sword, Thin* Broad, and Long, and of a fiery Color, [See
Psalm. 42. 10. and 64. 3^ Prove. 12. 18.] David cries out of the murdering
Weapon in his Bones, whereby they killed him alive, as with a Rapier, and
Buried him in their Throats, those gaping Graves, and open Sepulchers, Psalm. 5.
9.

God and Nature has taught us, By the sight of the Tongue in the Mouth, to
take heed to it, and when all is done, to Pray, with David, to God to keep it,
Psalm. 141. 3. The Tongue is ever in Vdo, in a moisture, but yet tied by the
Root, and may not stir out of it is place. And it is guarded with a Portcullis of
Teeth, and with a two-leaved Gate of Lips, which must be carefully kept by us;
specially having Enemies so near us.

Cave ne Lingua tua feriat Collum tuum, says the Arabian Proverb. Take heed
that thy Tongue do not cut thy Throat. And Solomon says: He that keeps his
Tongue keeps his Life, Prove. 13. 3. and ^1. 23.

Fruitful Christians perfume the very Air they breath in, by their Gracious,
and savory Communication: Ephe. 4. ^9. Yea, the very Company they come unto; As
a man cannot come where sweet ^pices, and Odours are beaten, but he shall carry
away the scent of it in his Cloths.

Evil Speech defiles the Conscience* wounds the Heart, and disposes it to
farther Evils. It leaves both a Sting, and a stain in our Souls, and does much
mischief to the Spirits, and manners of others that are corrupted by it. Prove.
15. 4. A wholesome Tongue is a Tree of Life; but Perverseness therein is a breach
in the Spirit.

Some have reckoned as many Sins in the Tongue, as there are Letters in the
Alphabet.

A righteous Man carries as it were, a pair of Balances between his Lips, and
weighs his. Words, before he utters them, Prove. 10. 32. Et prodesse Volens and
delectare; willing to speak things, both acceptable and profitable.

A Pope once began to question how the State of Venice came to challenge the
Dominion of the Adriatic Gulf; and asked her Ambassador, what Warrant she had
for it? The Ambassador answered, If your Holiness please to produce the
Instrument, whereby the Emperor Constantine passed over the City of Rome to
your Predecessors, upon the back of that Grant your Holiness will find the
Venetian Charter to the Dominion of that Gulf.

Pope Gregory the 13 th, threatening to Excommunicate the Duke and State of
Venice about a Controversy concerning the bounds of their Territories, Nick*
Pontanus answered, That the Pontifical Censure of Excommunication, is like a
Sword sheathed up in a Scabbard, which ought not to be rashly drawn out, lest
men might learn to slight that kind of Weapon.

It is not in Venice as in other Places, where young men make Laws for Old men
to observe (they abhor that inversion of Nature) But gray Headse sway, and
Green Headse obey.

A grave Historian speaking of Sparta, said, Sparta diu stetit, non quod Rex
been imperabat, sed quia Populus been parebat: Sparta stood and Flourished so
long, not so much because the Prince did Command well, as that the People did
obey well.

Pacheco, the Spanish Ambassador, out of Curiosity coming to see the Treasury
of St. Mark in Venice, fell a groping whether it had any Bottom: And being
asked why he did it? Answered; In this among other things my great Master's
Treasures differ from yours, that his has no Bottom, as I find yours to have;
Alluding thereby to the Mines of Mexico, and Potosy.

It Is an old Rule, that Eodem modo Res conservatur, quo acquiritur: By the same
means things are Conserved whereby they are got. Insomuch that if Holland
follow the Humors of her first Founders, she will love War better than Peace,
and happly be incited thereunto by this old Prophecy that runs of her,

Mart triumphabis, Batavia, pace peribis.
Holland, by War thou shall increase,
Thou will destroy thy self by Peace.
This we have seen fulfilled in these late Years.

How good soever a Prince is, we may easily discern fewer sighs and groans at
his Funeral, than Cries, or Acclamations of joy at the Coronation of his
Successor: which proceeds from the Humors of men, never satisfied with the
present Condition of affairs, but fancy new Felicities in their Imaginations of
things to come. Men are like to sick People, who think they shall receive
refreshment by change of their Place.

An old Soldier told his General, that the Enemies were twenty times more than
they: But he replied gallantly; And for how many do thou reckon me? Another
told his General, that the Enemies shot Arrows like Showers of Hail: He
instantly replied, It Is so much the better for us: For we shall then fight but
against empty Quivers and Shadows of men.

When one Person offends he is to be punished without Dispute, to terrify
others from being Malefactors: But when multitudes become criminous, it is
Wisdom to draw advantage from their strength, rather than to exterminate their
Persons.

Soldiers that are generous ought to fear nothing more than Dishonor, and to
hope for no other thing than Victory.

Policy is a most necessary Guide to Government, and it is then best, when
Regulated by the Maxims of Religion, whose sacred direction permits not Power
to transgress beyond the Bounds of Reason, Truth, and Equity: Otherwise Policy
is but like a keen Sword in the hand of a Madman.

Innocence and true Nobleness are things of a most precious Quality, and more
full of Majesty than Robes of Purple and Crowns of Gold.

The quiet and tranquillity which springs from a good Conscience, gives a sweet
relish and satisfaction to the Soul, which no Throne, by it is own Virtue can
afford.

Public Faith, the Laws of Nations, and natural Equity ought to be sacred and
inviolable Bonds, which in all Ages and in all Nations ought most Religiously
to be observed.

Princes are ordinarily the Rules of their Subjects actions; And are as the
Primum Mobile to all their Motions. Their great Examples are imitated, and
followed by the People: Each one sees, observes, and strives to follow their
Prince as their Guide. If the Prince be virtuous the People are of that
Inclination: If wicked and Vicious, the Subject are apt Scholars to such a bad
Lesson.

The Lives of glorious Princes ought to be as unspotted as the purest Crystal.
For certain it is, if a Prince lose his Honor, that loss is irreparable for
ever. The Crimes of private Persons may be concealed in the obscurity of their
quality, and buried in Oblivion as well as their Memory; But the Actions of
Princes, whether good or bad survive to Posterity.

The Sun shines as well on the wicked as the good. God pardons more often
than he punishes. His Clemency spreads more Universally than his Justice.

A seasonable act of Justice (and thereby an Effusion of a little Blood)
sometimes prevents an inundation of Misery, and takes away the cause of ample
Pardons and unlimited Clemency.

The King of the Bees has (they say) no Sting, which teaches Princes not to
be transported with the Violence of their Passions, and to meditate rather on
Clemency, as more Natural, than on Rigours, which Nature declines.

Of all Wars the Defensive is most just and Glorious. That right which permits
of a repulsion of force by force is as ancient as the Foundation of the World:
Nature it self inspires it, the Laws permit it, the Casuists dispute it, but in
Conclusion, the best Divines Authorize it.

Great wounds in the more Noble parts endanger the Body, and Dissensions in the
Royal Family, are commonly Destructive and fatal to the whole Line.

Youth is an Age wherein the acquisition of ill Habits are more facile than the
infusions of good and Virtuous dispositions.

The Founders of Rome were Brethren and Twins: Yet those that had lain together
in one Womb, could not sit quietly together in one Throne, and nothing would
serve until the Blood of the one was mingled in the Mortar, and laid in the
Foundation of the Walls of that glorious City.

Silla and Marius never were in Peace, nor could they rest while their Power
was equal.

The Triumvirat (a Composition of three of the choicest men) could not continue
long. Anthony and Lepidus were forced to surrender to the Fortune of Augustus.

Marcus Aurelius (with all his Philosophy and Wisdom) found it an unsupportable
burden to bear Sail with the Factions of Lucius Verus, his Colleague in the
Empire.

Bassianus Caracalla was Voluntarily a Fratricide in his Brother Geta, that he
night reign alone.

Gallienus creating Odenate his Colleague, hastened his own Death, with the
ruin of the Empire. And in brief, all Examples in this kind easily demonstrate,
that the admission of a Companion in the Throne, is neither facile nor
tolerable.

Humble Virtues are as commendable as aspiring and Tumultuous Honor, and to
reign in Peace with Justice, is as Glorious as to Conquer triumphantly in War.
It is fit for a Prince to have the Theory of severity, but not to Practice it
if possibly he can avoid it.

The Oblivion of injuries is an Act every way more noble than Revenge.

A Prince who raigns without Honor, cannot Live a moment without Danger.

He that scorns his own Life may easily become Master of another's.

He who makes Friendship his Treasure may be liberal when he pleases without
Danger of Profusion.

He has true repose of Spirit who preserves his Reason entire, and neither
lies down, nor rises up in fear.

It Is the usual fate of Great men seldom to be content with their present
State. They think that either their own merits. are not rewarded enough, or
their Inferiors too much, and so through discontent, striving to be higher,
they fall lower.

It Is an excellent Point of skill in a Commander to know when his strength has
attained it is just bounds of Conquest, and there stopping his Desires of
gaining more, to fix upon the good Government of what he has already gotten.

It was Augustus his Lot, after a long and honorable Reign, to dye, and yet
Tum quidem Pauci luxerunt, postea Omnes: Few mourned at his Death, afterward
All. For Tiberius succeeded him, who was as wicked as Augustus was good.

We must not live to eat, but eat to live. We should eat less than Nature
desires, and yet so much as to refresh nature, and to make us fit for the
service of God and Man: Luke 21. 34. Nature is content with a little; Grace
with less.

Aristotle says, that the Ass-Fish of all other Creatures has his Heart in
his Belly. And Solinus observes, that the Dolphin has his Mouth almost in his
Belly. Such are our greedy Cormorants, who, as it were, wear their Guts in
their Heads, and their Brains in their Bellies.

If you will be careful to please Dionysius you need not feed upon green Herbs,
said the Parasite to the Philosopher. And if you can be content to feed upon
green Herbs (said the Philosopher to the Parasite) you need not care to please
Dionysius.

Spend-thrifts entomb their Ancestors in their Bowels. They turn their Rents
into Ruffs, their Lands into Laces: Hang their Patrimonies in their Ears (as
says Seneca) wear a pretty Grove; Hang a handsome Farm on their Backs. And
thus they waste their substance with Riotous living, as did that Prodigal, Luke
16. 13.

Tenuis mensa sanitatis Matter, says St. Chrysostom: A slender Diet is the
Mother of Health. Augustus the Emperor never drank but thirce at one meal, and
lived till he was almost four-score years old.

Queen Elizabeth (of blessed Memory) did seldom Eat but of one sort of Meat at
one Meal, and rose ever with an Appetite, and lived till she was about seventy
years old. King Edward, her Brother called her by no other name, than His sweet
Sister Temperance. They knew full well, that much Meat much Malady.

Of the Lord of Worcester (in Queen Elizabeth's days) it is recorded, that his
Father, by his Temperance reached to the ninety seventh year of his Age,
because he did never Eat but one Meal a day; and his Son's sparingness attained
to eighty four, because he never Eat but of one Dish at one Meal.

The Belly was the first Sword that the Devil drew against us; and does it
still, so that if we let out our Appetites it may cut our Throats. For many
more perish by intemperance than by Violence; By surfeiting than by suffering.
Meat kills as many as the Musket. Multitudes dig their own Graves with their
Teeth. The Board kills more than the Sword.

The Cardinal of Burbon would not part with his Part in Paris for his Part in
Paridise.

Cardinal Wolsey rode through London with twenty Sumpter Mules: Caused his
Cardinals Hat (when it was first sent him from Rome) to be set upon a Cupboard
in Westminster-Abbey, with Tapers round about it, so that the greatest Duke in
the Land must make courtesy unto it, yea, to his empty Seat when he was away.
He had as great yearly Revenues as all the Bishops and Deans in this Kingdom
put together. And for his Household Attendants he had one Earl, nine Barons, a
great number of Knights and Esquires; and of others of an inferior Rank, four
Hundred at the least. He used to wear Shoes of Silver and guilt, beset with
Pearls and precious Stones.

When none other would lift up Hildebrand into 'St. Peter's Chair, he got up
himself: For who (said he) can judge better of my fitness than my self.

Harden thy Forehead (said Calvus to Vatinius) and say boldly, that thou
deservest the Praetorship better than Cato.

Cyprian and St. Austin say, That Pride in Apparel is worse than Whoredom: For
that Whoredom only corrupts Chastity, but this corrupts Nature.

Humility is the Ornament of Angels, and Pride the deformity of Devils. If
Heaven will not keep in a Proud Angel, it will keep out a Proud Soul. In all
Conditions of highness we should take heed of High-mindedness. It Is said of
Nazianzen that he was high in his Works, but lowly in his Thoughts.

Anger is a Leprosy breaking out of a burning, as Levit. 13. 5. It renders a
man unfit for all Civil Society. A man's unruly Passions make him like unto the
torrid Zone, too hot for any to live near him. The Dog Days continue with him
all the year long, and he is fit only to live alone, as Dragons and wild Beasts
do.

Weakness disposes a man to Anger, because such men are most tender to feel an
injury, most suspicious to fear it, and most interpreting to over-judg it: All
which being Circumstances of aggravation to increase a wrong, are likewise
means to add degrees and heat unto our Passions.

Anger begins in Rashness; abounds in Transgression, and ends in Repentance.

Anger (says Seneca) is the foulest, fiercest, and maddest affection of all
others. The angry Person discovers it by his Words, by his Looks, by his
Actions. His Words are wild, and many times thrust forward, so many at once and
in such haste as puts the man to silence, as we see in a Crowd, hastening to get
out of an House at once, stops up the Passage, so that they stick in the Door.
The looks of an angry man are sometimes furiously red, and sometimes ghastly
Pale. His Lips tremble; His Teeth grin; His Hair stare; He swells like a Toad;
He glows like a Devil, etc. So that for the time that it Continues, it is the
foulest, and maddest of the Affections; As we see in Achitophel, who being
enraged that his Counsel was rejected, went home and hanged himself.

The Heathens in their Sacrifices to Apollo, offered Ivy to him, to show that
Learning could not Prosper and grow unless it were supported by the Civil
Magistrate.

Sure none will follow Virtuous studies when
Equal rewards shall cease from Virtuous men.
Great is the sweetness even of Humane Learning to those who have gotten but a
taste of it, as it was to Pythagoras and Plato, who traveled far for it. To
Julian the Apostate, who preferred the study of it before all Pastimes
whatsoever. To Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, who said, he would not leave the
Knowledge he might learn in one hour for all the Gold that he Possessed. To
Alphonsus King of Arragon, who preferred his study in the Mathematics before
the Empire of Germany when it was offered to him. He professed that he would
rather part with all his Jewels than his Books; yea, all his Kingdoms rather
than that little Learning he had attained unto.

St. Hierom got his skill in the Hebrew with the peril of his Life, and that in
his old Age and yet accounted it a good Bargain. He went by stealth in the
Night to the Jew that taught him. For if it had been known, the other Jews
would have been the Death of them both.

Pythagoras lived in a Cave for a whole year together, that, being sequestered
from the Society of men, he might the better meditate upon the abstruser parts
of Philosophy. He used also with a Thread to tie the hair of his Head to a Beam
over him, that so, when he did but nod by reason of Sleep, he might be awaked
thereby.

Alphonsus King of Sicity, called his Books his best Counselors; for that they
would tell him the Truth, when none else durst.

Julius Caesar wrote his own Acts, and modestly called them, not Histories but
Commentaries. He would be carved standing upon a Globe of the World, having in
one Hand a Book, and in the other a Sword, with this Motto, Ex utroque Caesar.

Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt gave Answers her self to the Ambassadors of the
Aethiopians, Arabians, Hebrews, Syrians, Medes, Parthians in their own
Languages. And could tune her Tongue (like an Instrument of many strings, says
Plutarch) to whatsoever Dialect she listed.

The Emperor Trajan highly esteemed Learning in Pliny and others, whom he
Prized and preferred; no less than did Antoninus the Philosopher, who was not
ashamed, even after he was made Emperor, to resort daily to his Doctor. And
when he came to Athens and was admitted into that University, he granted to it
large Privileges, did the Students great Honors, and founded many Lectures
with a liberal Allowance of maintenance to them.

Aeneas Silvius (afterward Pope) was wont to say of Learning, that Popular men
should esteem it as Silver, Noblemen as Gold, and Princes as Pearls.

How much Plato preferred Books before Money well appeared when he gave for
three Books thirty Thousand Florens.

Of Ruchline it is storied, that he gave the Jew a Crown an hour that read
Hebrew to him at Rome.

Cleanthus parted with all he had for Learning.

Sigismond the Emperor, in his old Age applied himself to learn Latin, and he
much bewailed the matter at the Council of Constance, that neither he, nor any
of his great Courtiers, or Counselors, were able to answer a foreign
Ambassador in the Latin Tongue.

Julian the Lawyer used to say, that when he had one foot in the Grave, he
would have the other in the Schools.

Queen Elizabeth was wont to qualify the tediousness of her affairs, with the
sweet Recreation of Letters. She either read or wrote something every Day: She
translated Boethius his Books De Consolatione into handsome English. She
answered several Ambassadors in their several Languages. The Lady Jane Gray,
for her Age, was learned to a Miracle.

The famous Olympia Fulva Morata of Ferrara in Italy, publicly, and with great
Commendation Professed the Greek, and Latin Tongues, at Heidleberg in the
Palatinate, Anno Christi, 1554.

Such as write any tender matter to their Friends should remember the Motto of
a very Wise man, who wrote upon the Mantle of his Chimney, where he used to
keep a good Fire, Optimus Secretariorum: This is the best keeper of Secrets.

I will conclude all with an Hymn, Composed by Sr. Henry Wotton after his
recovery from a fit of Sickness.

Oh Thou great Power, in whom I move,
For whom I Live, to whom I Dye,
Behold me through thy Beams of Love
Whilst on this Couch of Tears I lie;
And cleanse my sordid Soul within,
By thy Christ's Blood, the Bath of Sin.
No hallowed Oils, no Grains I need,
No Rags of Saints, no purging Fire,
One Rosy drop from David's seed
Was worlds of Seas to quench thine Ire.
Oh precious Ransom! which once Paid,
That Consummatum est was said.
And said by him, that said no more,
But sealed it by his sacred Breath.
Thou then that have dispung'd my score,
And dying wast the Death of Death;
Be to me now, on thee I call,
My Life, my Strength, my Joy, my All.
FINIS.

