A DESCRIPTION OF The Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers OF CHRIST, And Also Of
those called Ministers of England, by men which say they are Ministers of
CHRIST, but are found to be Blasphemers and Liars, and none of the Ministers of
Christ Jesus; and wherein the difference plainly appears, and they made
manifest.

With an Exhortation to the People of England; to forsake them, their
Blind-Guides, and to follow Christ Jesus, the Shephard of their Souls; the Way,
the Truth, and Life, who says, come learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, My
Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And the good
Shepherd goes before his Sheep, and they follow him, for they know his voice;
and a stranger they will not follow, but will fly from him, for they own not
the voice of strangers: John the 10. chap.

Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Thus says the
Lord, what House will ye build me? and where is the place of my rest? but to
this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word, Isa. 66.1, 2. And dwell with him that is of an humble and
contrite spirit, Isa. 57.15. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not
tremble at my presence? but this people has a revolting and a rebellious
heart, they are revolted and gone; neither say they in their hearts, let us
fear the Lord our God, Ier. 5.22, 23, 24.



Given forth to undeceive the simple hearted; by him whose Name in the Flesh
is, HENRY CLARK.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Black-spread-Eagle near the West end of Paul's. 1655.

A Description of the Prophets, Apostles and Ministers of Christ, etc.
THE Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of Christ are called and chosen and
approved out of God, sent out of their own countries, their fathers house and
kindred, into all Countries and Cities to declare the message of their Lord and
Master Jesus Christ.

But those called Ministers and Teachers in England, they are only chosen and
approved off by men, and not called of God; so that they are no Ministers of
Christ, but are men's Ministers, sent forth by men into a particular Parish to
preach; but the sheep of Christ them they follow not, nor their voice do they
own, because they are strangers and aliens from the life and covenant of Grace.

The Apostles and Ministers of Christ forsake Father and mother, Brethren and
sisters, Wife and children, House and lands, Trades or occupations, honors and
pleasures, and delights; deny themselves of all, and take up their cross daily,
and follow Christ Jesus whethersoever he goes, and goes where he sends them, as
lambs amongst wolves.

Those called Ministers of England, have not forsaken nor denied themselves of
any thing, but enjoy all things, as Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters,
Wife and children, house and land, honors, profits, pleasures and delights,
tithes and money, for which they preach in the Parish where they are settled by
men, and stay, being not sent thither of God; so that Christ they follow not,
but are such who mind earthly things, whose God is their belly, whose glory is
in their shame, and are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, and therefore are no Ministers of Christ.

The Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, have a dispensation of the Gospel
committed to them, and a command from the Lord Jesus Christ to go into all
countries, or nations, to preach the Gospel in every creature, and woe unto them
if they preach not that Gospel; which command they obey, and go out into all
countries, and provide neither gold nor silver in their purse, nor two coats,
neither shoes, nor scrip for their journey, neither staff in their hands,
neither are they to stay in a parish to take tithes, gifts, nor rewards, but to
go from city to city, and from one town to another, and as they have freely
received, so freely give, without taking thought for the morrow, what they
shall eat or what they shall drink, or wherewith they shall be clothed, but
cast their care upon him, who takes care and provideth things convenient for
them, without taking tithes, gifts or rewards.

Those called Ministers of England have no dispensation of the Gospel committed
to them by the Lord Jesus Christ, neither are they by the Lord of the Harvest,
sent to labor in his Vineyard, neither in it do they labor, but are sent by
men to preach in a parishes high place, where they being settled, have for their
preaching, some 40, 50, 60, 80: or 100. l. a year, which they know of before
they will be settled there, which is in tithes, gifts, and rewards, to cloth
themselves in long Robes, and rich Black Attire, and their Wives in Silk, Gold
and Silver Lace, Rings, and costly Raiment, with changeable suits of Apparel;
and yet with this they are not contented, but seek for gain from their
Quarters, and if they can hear of a Parish, whose Minister is dead, or turned
out of his place, and if there be but 10, 20, or 30. l. a year more than he had
from the people of the parish where he is, if all the means and friends he can
make, can and will help him into it, that for his preaching he may get more
money, which is the Root of all evil; he will leave his Flock, and like a
Hireling fly away, because he is an Hireling, to the other, where none pursues
him, or else will seek a Lecturers place, as they call it, in another parish,
where he may have 20. or 30. l. a year more, and no further will they go to
preach, than for their own advantage, as witness their Funeral Sermons, so
called, that when a Rich man or woman is dead, and to be buried, for 10. s. 13.
s. 4: d. or 20. s. they will preach a Sermon; but if a poor man or woman dye,
that has not 10. s: to give them, they will not preach nor give them praise as
they do the rich for their money, when they are dead; therefore it does plainly
appear they are none of the Ministers of Christ, but such as go when they are
not sent, and come when they are not called of God, and cloathe themselves with
the fleece, and feed themselves with the fat, and take no care for their Flock,
but for their gain; and such the true Prophets and Apostles of the Lord Jesus
Christ were, and are, sent to cry woe against.

The Ministers, Prophets, and Apostles of Christ, they wandered about in
sheepskins, and Goat Skins, in Deserts, and Mountains, and lad in dens and
caves of the earth, and had no certain dwelling place on the earth, being
destitute, affl cted, tormented, and suffered cruel mockings, stripes, and
imprisonments, having their Legs put in the Stocks, yet were no Vagabonds,
Vagrants, nor Wandering disorderly idle persons, but Fellow Laborers in the
Gospel, whose habitation is with God, and for his sake, who loves them with an
everlasting love, and for the peoples sakes, wom they are contented to spend
and be spent; for the gaining of their souls to life, do they suffer all things.

But the Ministers of England, and Preachers, so called, they set themselves
down in a Parish, in one of the best livings, and fairest houses therein, or it
will not serve their turn, but til they can get a better, or more money, and
never go abroad into all Nations, but live at their homes at ease with their
wives and children, and friends, eating and drinking of the best of the land,
and of the finest of the Wheat, and are merry, taking their pleasures,
receiving their profits, Gifts and Rewards, Tithes, and Eeaster Reckonings,
which comes unto them by the sweat of other men's Brows, themselves feeling no
Sorrow, nor being in Trouble, as other men, being invited to Feasts, set
uppermost in the room, and are called of men Master, stand praying in Satan's
Synagogue, and for a pretense make long prayer, to be seen of men, and think to
be heard for their much babbling; but the prayers of the wicked are abomination
to the Lord, and he will not hear their prayers, because their hands are full of
blood, who murder by consent, for those that put into their mouths they cry
peace to, let them be what they will, but those that do not bring unto them,
and put in their mouths, they prepare war against, by suing men at Law for
tithes, and making distress upon their goods for treble damages, or imprisoning
their bodies, to the (...) undoing of them, their wives and families, which the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ never did, nor had any command so to do, and
where the life and power of Godliness appears in any to their faces, they so
hate them that live in it, that they stir up both Magistrates and people to
hail them out of their high places, where their Steeple and Bells are, to be
sent to prison, stocks, and Bridewel to be whipped, and are mocked, and scofft,
and beaten, and stoned by those they teach so to do: Oh! what a horrible thing
is here committed in England? the Ministers thereof so called by men, but not
of God, preach for hire, gifts and rewards, and the Rulers and people bear rule
by their means: Oh woe unto you! what will your end be, now the Lord God is
coming to visit you for all these things!

The Gospel that the Ministers of Christ preach, came not to them by man,
neither were they taught it of man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, and
by Christ alone without man are they made able Ministers, not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit, and have power given them from above of the Father to go
labor in his vineyard, and to feed the Lambs and sheep of Christ, and to bare
their testimony of Christ the everlasting Gospel, whose name is the Word of
God, who is the light of the world, and is the true light that enlightens every
one that comes into the word, and that God is light, and in him is no darkness
at all, which is their message, work, and the gift of God to turn people from
darkness to the light Christ Jesus, and from the power of Satan unto God, who
is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

The Ministers and Teachers of England, so called by men, are set to School
when they are children, to learn to read English, Latin, Greek and Hebrew, and
to construe their Latin, Greek and Hebrew they learn into English; and when
they are by their Schoolmaster thought fit, then they are sent to Oxford and
Cambridge to learn of men how to preach, and not of Christ; and when they have
learned of their tutors, how to compact up together out of the ancient Fathers
writings which was beyond Sea, and the ancient Fathers writings here in
England, as they call them, the Histories and Scriptures, of all together a
form of words in writing which they get over and over, as a Scholar does his
lesson before he comes to his master to hear if he can say it perfectly; so
likewise do they before their tutors, and others, with their notes writ and
laid before them, in their Bibles, and if they can say their studied form of
prayer, which they have got into their memory, and that which they have
compacted together in writing, perfectly in a pulpit, an hour by a glass
without stuttering or stammering, and can come down again out of their
Pulpits with their brazen faces undaunted, then they are approved of by men to
be expert young men, and good Scholars, and will make able Preachers of the
Gospel, as they judge; so they receive their degrees of Arts, and are set at
Liberty from Oxford and Cambridge, to go have a further approving off by men,
and of men do receive their commission to Preach, and not of God; so that how
to preach is taught them by man, and not of God, and what they do Preach they
have it not by Revelation from Jesus Christ, but from the Letter, and by works
of other men's, their own study and maginations, which comes out of the
bottomless Pit, and ascends up like a smoke; take away from them the dead
letter and the dead Fathers writings which they have had from beyond the Sea,
and the dead Fathers writings, histories, and records which are in England,
which are the instruments and means by which they preach, and not by the
Spirit, as their studies full of books will witness; and then it will appear in
one quarter of a year you shall scarce have a Sermon preached by any of them
that have the weakest memories, and very few by them that have the strongest
memories: so that it does plainly appear that they are but Ministers of the
Letter, and not of the Spirit; therefore I deny them all to be any of the
Ministers of Christ Jesus, and I deny their teachers and approvers, and
commission-givers, all, from the greatest to the least, to have any thing to do
in this work, for it is the proper work of Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of the
Harvest, and says the Harvest is great, and the Laborers are few, pray ye
therefore, says he, that the Lord of the Harvest would send forth more
Laborers into his Vineyard: Therefore ye Commissions givers, and Approvers,
and senders forth of Ministers, as you call them, who take this work upon your
selves, cease from your actings herein, and consider with your selves what
account you will give unto the Lord of the Harvest who is coming, and will say
unto you, who has required this at your hands that ye have done.

The Ministers of Christ Jesus do declare by the Spirit, that which was from
the beginning, which they have heard, and seen with their eyes, and looked
upon; and their hands have handled of the word of life, and that life which is
manifested unto them, and live in; whose fellowship is with the Father and the
Son, they declare:

But those in England, called Ministers and teachers, having gotten a form of
some sound words from the Scriptures, and help of others, they preach by the
Letter, and not from the life and power of those that gave the Scriptures
forth; so that in what they preach they err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor
the power of God, neither have they heard that which was from the beginning,
nor seen nor tasted of the word of life, by the Spirit of life, which they
preach of, but are as ignorant of the life and power, as they that hear them,
whom their words profit not at all, because they come not from the life of them
that gave the Scriptures forth, nor stand in the counsel of the Lord,
therefore they are no Ministers of Christ, but are the many deceivers that are
entered into the World, which by their works deny Christ come in the flesh.

The Ministers and Apostles of Jesus Christ, they are sent to turn people from
darkness to the light, Christ Jesus, the savior of their souls, the light and
life of men, the way to the Father, and the truth, and from the power of Satan
unto God, who is Light, and in him is no darkness at all, and did and do turn
many to righteousness, and for so doing are counted deceivers by this
Generation, as they have been by former Generations, but are true, and the
truth is in them, they being of God, and the whole world lying in wickedness.

Bur the Ministers, so called, in England, which preach in the high places,
teach the people lies, and so lead the people into darkness from the light; and
now I appeal to that of God in all your consciences, both Ministers, so called,
and people, for who has taught the people to call the high places, with the
steeples and bells in them the Church? have not you their Ministers? and is
this any other than a lie, for the Church is in God, the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the body of Christ is the church, which is the ground and
pillar of truth, made up of living stones, Christ Jesus being the chief
cornerstone, which you builders, called Ministers, refuse, and is become a
stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense to you, but you that stumble thereat,
great shall be your fall. And who has taught the people that God dwells in
those places, called the church, in a more special manner than in any other
place, but you their teachers? and is not that another lie? for God dwells not
in temples made with hands: and who teaches the people to say God is worshipped
in those places, but you their Ministers, so called? and is not that a lie? for
God is a spirit, and is worshipped in spirit and in truth, and not in those
high places. And when a company of proud high minded people, scoffers,
scorners, covetous, earthly minded, lovers of Money, the Root of all evil,
Whores, and Whore-mongers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Thieves, Cursers, swearers,
Liars, Drunkards, Fighters Quarrellers Reprobates which know not that Christ is
in them, are all gathered together at your call and invitation, to come
customarily to that which you call a SACRAMENT, and set together to eat the
Bread that you break, and when you give it to them, that they must take and eat
this in remembrance that Christ dyed for them, and be thankful; and when you
pour out the wine, do not you tell them that the blood of Jesus Christ was shed
for them, and for the Remission of their Sins? Do not you herein tell them
lies? Are not the wicked reserved for the day of judgment? And the wicked, and
all they that forget God, shall be turned into hell, their condemnation is
ordained of old, being none of the seed that the promise is to, nor the Sheep
that the good Shepherd laid down his life for.

And who has taught the people to call that which you call a Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, the Supper of the Lord, and the Table of the Lord?
have not you their Ministers (so called) taught them, both by preaching and
writing, which are lies? for I tell both you, and all such persons before named,
that the Lord Jesus Christ neither Sups with you, nor you with him, for there
is no fellowship betwixt Christ and Beliall, nor no communication betwixt Light
and Darkness: and that which you call the table of the Lord, you make it a
table of devils, for it is no other, for he that commits sin is of the
devil: and are not ye, and all such aforementioned, committers of sin? and so
of the Devil your Father, whose works you all do, and ye cannot partake of the
table of the Lord, and the table of devils.

And who has taught the people and made them believe that when their children
are sprinkled with a little water on their faces, which you call baptism, that
then they become members of the church, and christians; do not you their
teachers teach them so, that they become members of Harlots, and Members of the
Synagogue of Satan, setting together in the Idolls-temple, being led captive by
you, ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth by your
preaching, so that ye are none of the Ministers of Christ, but are the evil
men and seducers, that wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; Ah!
woe unto you ye blind guides, called Ministers of England) which lead the blind
out of their way, ye are all under the Curse of God, for cursed is he that
leads the blind out of his way, and the wrath of God is to be revealed
against you all, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, tribulation and anguish
be upon every soul that does evil, ye workers of iniquity.

And again who teaches the people to make songs of the Saints conditions, and
to turn the Scriptures, which is a Declaration of the things, which are most
certainly known and believed amongst us, into lies and blasphemies? do not you
the Ministers of this Nation, so called, teach them who are proud heady, high
minded people, drunkards, swearers, liars, whores, and whore-mongers, covetous,
envious, malicious, scorners, scoffers, thieves and murderers, when they are
met together in the high places of the Nations; Come (say they) let us sing to
the Praise and Glory of God, Psalm: 116.1, 2: I love the Lord, because my voice
and prayer heard has he, whenas they that walk in Darkness hate the Light, for
God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and the wicked through the
pride of his heart, will not seek after God, for God is not in all his thoughts:
The wicked say unto God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, and what is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit
should we have if we pray unto him? say the wicked that are friends of the
world and enemies to God; yet their teachers will teach them to lie, and say, I
love the Lord, because he has heard my prayers, when the prayers of the wicked
is abominable to the Lord.

And again, Psalm. 119. ver. 97: where they are taught to sing, What great
desire and fervent love do I bear to thy Law? whenas the wicked turn away their
ears from hearing the law of God, cast it behind their backs, and will have
none of his counsel, but despise reproof, crying, it is a hard saying, who can
bear it? they will have none of his ways, because they hate knowledge, and chose
not the fear of the Lord, and yet say in their songs, they delight in his Law,
of which they are not ashamed.

And again, Psalm. 139: ver. 21, 22. say they, let us sing to the praise and
glory of God, Hate J not them that hate the Lord? I hate them with unfeigned
hate: but the world love their own, and hate those that are not of the world,
the wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth, and
blesses the covetous whom the Lord abhors, his mouth is full of cursing,
deceit and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and vanity, he sets in
lurking places; in secret places does he mu der the innocent, and in his pride
does persecute the upright in heart.

And yet they will sing Psalm. 16. ver. 2, 3. That they give their Goods to the
Saints, the Faithful Flock that in virtue excel: But says Christ, when saw
ye me an hungry, and gave me meat; thirsty, and gave me drink; naked, and
clothed me, or the least of these my little ones? Did not the wicked give the
just and pure in heart, Gall for his meat, and in his thirst, Vinegar to drink?
Do they not cause the naked to lodge without clothing, so that they have no
covering in the cold? and here the mercies of the wicked are cruelty, and yet
their Ministers; so called, teaches and leads the wicked to sing that they give
their goods to the Saints on earth.

And in the 119. Psalm. 139. they sing; With zeal and wrath I am consumed, and
even pined away; when at the very same time the eyes of some stick out with
fatness, and in their own fat they are encloased, and have more than heart can
wish, his breasts are full of Milk, and his bones are full of Marrow, and he
increases in riches, and is not in sorrow like other men:

Again they say, let us sing to the praise and glory of God, Psalm. 96: verse
12. If I for grief and pain of heart, in Sackcloath use to walk; and at the
very same time their filthy Flesh is adorned with Silk, and Gold and Silver
Lace, Rings, and Rich Attire, costly Arraiment, and not with modest Apparel,
but are haughty, and walk with stretched out Necks, with wanton Eyes, and
tinckling with their Feet as they go along, spending their days in Pleasures
and Vanity, upon the VIAL TIMBRELL and HARP, and rejoice at the sound of the
ORGAN, living in Chambring and Wantonness, Rioteousness, Gluttony, and
Drunkenness, and never wear Sackcloath in all their lives, nor you their
teachers neither:

Now all you that are called Ministers, do but see and behold what you do, do
you not teach the people to Sing and say that which they do not, nor your
selves neither, so that you teach the people to Lie, and Blaspheme, which is
the work of the Devil, your Father, who was a Liar from the beginning, whose
Children ye are, and for him are compassing Sea and Land to make one profit,
and when he is made, you make him two fold more the Child of Hell then he was
before, by leading them from Light into Darkness, and from the TRUTH into LIES,
as is here made manifest; Depart ye Workers of Iniquity into utter Darkness,
and receive your Portion among the Hypocrites, and all the Damned in Hell, for
I deny you all to be any Ministers of Christ.

The MINISTERS of CHRIST are all of one heart, and one mind, and agree
together in the Unity of the SPIRIT and live in the Bond of Love and Peace,
being guided, by the spirit of GOD, which is one, and leads up to one God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Cnrist, one Faith, one Baptism, one Truth, and
Savior of their souls, Christ Jesus the Light, one in all, the Light of the
World, that enlightens every one that comes into the World, and is the
Condemnation of all the World that walk in Darkness and Hate the Light, God is
Light, and in him is no darkness at all, and this is their message which they
declare, in which they all agree:

Those in England, called Ministers, they agree not in one, for they cry, lo
here says one, lo here says another, and says the Episcopal Government is
the true way to worship God in: Another he says the Presbyterian Government is
the true way, and in it is God worshipped in spirit and in truth: Others are
for the Independent Government, and they separate themselves a little from the
other too, and say that is the way to worship God, and this, say they, is the
true way. But being all in the many forms of bodyly exercise, which profits
little, and out of the true worshipping of God in spirit and truth, which is
profitable unto all things.

One says that sprinckling of Infants, with the words spoken by him, is
Baptism, and an Ordinance of God, and so he is for having all men and women's
children baptized, as he calls it: Another he says that none ought to be
baptized but the children of believing parents, and will baptize no other, as
he calls them: Another says that believers that can give a good account of
their faith, are to be baptized by dipping, or plunging all the body in water,
and no other: and so here they are all in the many baptisms, not baptizing, nor
being baptized with that one Baptism of Christ, which is by Fire and the Spirit
into his death, by one Spirit, into the one Body, wherein there is Unity, which
they are all out of.

Neither do they agree in the one Faith, for they tell people of miraculous
Faith, and of Historical Faith, and of a dead Faith, and a justifying Faith,
which they know not, nor are in, but are in the many Faiths, and out of that
one Faith the just lives by, that purifies their hearts, and is their Victory
by which they overcome the world:

Some of them will receive all that come to their Sacrament, as they call it;
others will receive none to partake with them of their Sacrament, but those who
are of their own judgment and practice in worship with them; but at their
Sacrament none of them sit at the Lords Table, nor discern the Lords Body, nor
eat nor drink of the bread and water of life, but feed upon that which is
carnal and not spiritual.

Again, one preaches one Doctrine, another he preaches contrary to it, and one
says this is the meaning of this Scripture, and another says it must be taken
in another sense; another says that the Hebrew, or the Greek Translation
(which they call the Original, but is the confounded languages) renders it
thus; another he comes and says, this is the true meaning, and he brings his
Author for it, an old Fathers writing that is dead long ago; but none of them
have the sense and true meaning of the Scriptures from the life, which the
spirit of God that gave the Scriptures forth, which is the Key of David, that
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens, but the sense and meaning
is by them in their many meanings given out contrary, which is from their own
imaginations, the bottomless pit, and being written, or preached by them, is
the smoke that ascends thereout, and thus they twist and twine here and there,
beguiling unstable souls, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the
simple hearted, which are ever learning of them, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, because they are led by those blind guides, which know
not the way to the father of life, nor to Christ Jesus the savior of their
souls; so the blind leading the blind, fall both into the ditch, because they
see not the way they go in, and yet these leaders are called Ministers and
Pastors, but are not, but are blasphemers and liars, turning here and turning
there, saying this is the way, and that is the way; O ye serpents, ye
generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell? as were your
Fathers so are ye; fill you up therefore the measure of their iniquities, that
all the righteous judgments of God may be poured out upon you all, who hold the
truth of God in unrighteousness? for now is the Lord God gathering his army
together, and coming to Battle, their weapons are not carnal but spiritual,
and mighty to the throwing down of strong holds, and the Beast, and the Whore,
and the false Prophet which deceive them that received the mark of the Beast,
and worship his Image, shall be taken, and together cast into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, your just reward, ye serpents.

To the Ministers and Apostles of Christ, is given the gift of the spirit, to
profit withal in the work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints,
and for the edifying of the body of Christ, till they all come into the unity
of the faith and the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ their Master, and for their so
doing their praise is not of man, but of God the father of Light, with whom
their reward is, and from whence every good and perfect gift comes that they
have received, and the wisdom they have received is from above, and is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

But the wisdom that the Ministers (so called in England by men) have, is not
from above, because it is earthly, and scornful, and devilish, by which
wisdom neither they, nor the rest of the world, know God, neither can they know
him that has not the son, for God has no union with them, neither does he
make himself manifest unto them who live in strife, and bitter envying and
confusion, and every evil work as they do, by stirring up the Magistrates and
people to take counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed,
and if the Magistrates will not do as they would have them, they will rail
against them openly in their Pulpits, and wrest the Scriptures to their
disgrace, and their own destruction; and those Magistrates that will cause the
people to hale the Servants of the Lord out of their Synagogues to the Stocks,
and Prisons, and Bride-wells, to be whipped and beat, and put into Dungeons (as
the Rulers, Elders, Scribes, and high Priests did in the days of the Apostles)
such Magistrates and Rulers shall have their praise; but says Christ, what ye
do to the least of these my little ones, I take as done unto my self, and it
were better for you that a Millstone were hanged about your necks, and ye cast
into the Sea, then that you should offend the least of these little ones, for
you that touch them touch the Apple of his eye: and plainly I tell you all that
are of men called Ministers, that all the stuff you labor for, and by your
works have got together (it being not the gift of God) does not perfect the
Saints, nor edify the body of Christ, for you your selves being dead in
trespasses and sins, cannot by your dead Letter, dead Works of Doctrines,
Reasons, and uses raise the dead; for it is the living that raises the dead to
praise the Lord in the Land of the living, as in the Scriptures you may read,
that it was Christ that raised up Lazarus out of the grave, where he lay dead,
which is to you a mystery: Woe unto you hypocrites, that do all to be heard and
seen of men: And woe unto you that all men speak well of, whose praise is of the
men of the world, and not of God, that are respected of men, and do respect the
men's persons of the world, and have the great men's persons of the world in
admiration for advantage sake, and love salutations by the way, and greeting in
the Market places, and to be called of men Masters; seeing ye thus to be out of
the Doctrine of Christ, and in the practice of the Heathen, Scribes, Pharisees,
and Hypocrites, therefore I deny you all to be any of the Ministers of Christ
Jesus, and your voice I disown, it being the voice of a stranger which I am
fled from. And now all you that are by men called Ministers of England, you are
weighed in the balance, and found too light; your Kingdom is divided and
shall be taken from you, for it is given to another, even to him to whom all
the ends of the Earth are given for his possession, who will break you with a
Rod of Iron, and dash you in pieces like a Potters Vessel, for the
blood-thirstie and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Weep and
howl, weep and howl, all ye who are called of men Ministers of England, who
have sat at ease, decked like a Queen, and faired deliciously, and have felt no
sorrow like other men, for now is your misery coming upon you like an armed
man, prepare your selves, put on your strength, make ready your weopens, and
come and see if you can withstand the Lord in his fury, or overcome him by all
your strength. God gave the Woman Iezebell, that calls her self a Prophettess,
and takes upon her to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication with
her, space to repent of her fornication, and she has not repented; therefore
behold, says the Lord, I will cast her upon a bed of torments, and them that
have committed adultery with her, and great shall be their tribulation, except
they repent, therefore while you have a little time prize it, and break of your
sins by repentance, cease from the evil of your doings, and learn of God to do
well, and if you will return, return to the Lord God, who is gracious and
merciful, and in patience has born long with ye all the time that ye were
learning to preach, who then saw what you were going about to do, and all your
actings in that time, and all the time you have been preaching, which has
brought forth nothing but vanity and lies, for all the profession of Religion
that you have taught the people all this while stands in a lie, and their fear
of the Lord is taught them by your precepts, who are men; for what do you, or
they all possess of what you profess? nothing at all, therefore it is
lightness, and vanity, and is unto the Lord as loath some, as if you cut off a
Dogs head, or offered to him Swines Flesh in abominable broth; nay he will not
accept of the hire of a whore that you bring before him, it all stincks in his
Nostrills, and is cast out from before him, as a filthy Dunghill. Your
sacrifice is abomination, and all your works are as filthy Rags; and as the
cloth of a monstrious woman, ye are defiled, and with your defilements you
defile. Oh stop your mouths and be silent, ye men who are called. Ministers of
the Gospel, but are not the Ministers of Christ! and let shame cover your
faces in the presence of the Lord God of life and power, who is of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity.

Therefore all people, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, who have
been hearing and learning for many years together of those you call Ministers,
and are not the Ministers of Christ, by whose Ministry ye are not yet come to
the knowledge of the truth by their long preaching: Cease from man, whose breath
is in his Nostrills, and spend not your money for that which is not bread, nor
your labor for that which satisfies not, but return to the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Light, the Savior, and Bishop of your souls, who says, come learn of me,
hearken diligently, hear and your souls shall live, who fills the hungry with
good things, and the rich he sends empty away: A Prophet has the Lord God
raised up amongst you, hear ye him, says the Lord, in all things, who teaches
the way of truth and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, and this
is my beloved Son, says God, he that refuses to hear him shall be cut off from
the land of the living, for God so loved the world, that he sent his only
begotten Son into the world, and this is the condemnation, the light which is
into the world come, Christ Jesus the Son of God the light of the world that
makes manifest in you sin and evil deeds, and shows you all things that ever
you have done in your life time; and this is Christ the Prophet, that meets
with you whithersoever you go, and shows you that sin which you have committed
in secret, which none can reprove you for but he that sees in secret and in
the dark places; and this is Christ the light of the world, that enlightneth
every one that comes into the world, and is made manifest in the conscience,
and to as many as receive him, and believe on his name, he gives them power to
become the Sons of God; whom he teaches in his ways, so that they need not
another to teach them, being the children of the Lord, are taught of the Lord,
and Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God into all truth, and can read the
Law writ in their hearts. Now people every one of you, mind that which makes
manifest your sin unto you, and checks you for the sin you commit, by bringing
upon you tribulation, and anguish upon every one that does evil. Those that
walk in darkness hate Christ Jesus, the light that is come into the world, and
is the condemnation of those that love darkness and not the light because their
deeds be evil, and the light reproves them because their works are of the
Devil; but he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be tried
whether they be of God, who is light, and in him is no darkness at all: Now
people ye have a Light in your consciences, which makes manifest your sin unto
you, unto which ye do well if ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts, which is
the sure word of prophecy; and the Son of righteousness that rises with
healing in his wings, therefore come to him that ye may have life, wait upon
him who is worthy of waiting on, who will anoint you with an unction, by which
you shall know al things, so that you need not to be taught of man, and gives to
every one freely, without money, and without price, bread to the hungry, water
to the thirsty soul, clothing to the naked, eye salve to the blind; the poor
he fills with good things, and those that fear him shall not want; but the whole
need no Physician, and the rich he sends empty away: Therefore while you have
time, people prize it, draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you;
cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded, cease
from evil, and put not from you the evil day afarr off, but put away from you
the evil of your doings, and learn the fear of the Lord, which is to depart
from sin, and the beginning of pure wisdom, which teaches how to do
righteouslie, justly, and to walk humbly with the Lord, and this is the grace
of God that appears to all men, that brings salvation, and teaches men to deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberlie, righteouslie, and
godlike, holy as he is holy, in this present world, in all manner of
conversation; here is life and death set before you, people, choose which you
will; for if you neglect so great salvation, how do you think to escape the
damnation of hell? Therefore people in the fear of the Lord, search and try all
things, forsake the evil and hold fast that which is good of God, who is
faithful and deceives none, for the Kingdom of heaven is within you, and the
many deceivers are in the world, look not out at them, neither go after them,
but keep your heart with all diligence, for out of them are the issues of life,
for in Israel abides in his tents, and do not say but in your lifetime you
have been warned of the many deceivers, by him who is a lover of your souls;
who is known by the name of

Henry Clark.

Does a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Can the
Fig Tree, my brethren, bare olive-berries, either a Vine Figs? so can no
Fountain both yield salt water and fresh, Jam. 3.12.

Here follows a Declaration of some Laws made by the pope, and the popish
Saxon Kings, who governed England, and were the first erecters of all the
Abbeys, Monasteries, Fryer-houses, Chantry-houses, Cathedrals, etc. as J have
them out of the first and second volums of the Books of Martyrs.

BEnedict, an Abbot of the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Wirr, brought with
him from Rome one John, the Arch-chantler, who first taugt in England how to
sing in the Quire after the manner of Rome.

In the year 747. at the beginning of King Edgberts reign, the Synod of Bishops
disputed the profit of singing of the Psalms in the Church as they called it,
and made a decree that with a modest voice they should sing in the Church, so
by them called.

In the Year 747. at the beginning of King Edgberts Reign, the Sinod of Bishops
disputed the profit of singing the Psalms in the Church, as they called it, and
made a decree that with a modest voice they should sing in the Church, so by
them called.

In the Year 924. King Ethelstone, alias Atelstone, made a Law that fifty
Psalms should be daily sung in the Church, as he called it, for the King.

In the Year DCCXII. King Inas alias Ina, or Iue, made a Law, that Infants
should be baptized within thirty days: This King Ina or Iue, gave up the
Government of the Kingdom of England unto Ethelardus his Nephew, and he
himself took upon him the habit of a poor man, and with great devotion
traveled to Rome, and was there made a Monk, and the said King Ina made a Law,
that the first fruits of all that was sown, to be paid at the day of St
Martine, as he called it, and about 720 he caused thorowout his Dominions, that
every house that had a chimney should pay a penny to the Pope in the name of
Saint Peter: this King was the first that brought up Peter Pence in England.

In the Year 933. King Atelstone made a Law, that Tithes should be paid of all
the proper Goods, as well of living Cattle as of Corn, and first fruits of the
Ground.

In the Year 940. King Edmond made a Law, that Tithes, with the first Fruits of
every man's crap, should be duly paid.

In the Year 959. King Edgar ordained and decreed, concerning Liberties and
Freedoms of the Church, as they called it, that Tithes, and first fruits of
Corn, and Peter Pence, be all paid.

Pope Innocent the third (with all his Rabble of Monks and Friars) was the
first that brought in private Tithes, to be paid at Easter, about the time of
King John's reign in England.

Now people here you may in part see who were the authors of Tithes to be paid
out of the fruits of your labor. So here follows what the Church was the
tithes were paid to, and in particular, what the tithes were that was paid and
received.

THeir Church was a company of strange Puissant, counterfeit, holy, idle
Vagabonds, and ravening wolves, so called (by one Simond Fish) which were
Abbuts, Priors, Deacons, Archdeacons, Suffragans, Priests, Monks, Canons,
Friars, Pardoners, and Sumners, these had the goodliest Lordships, Manors,
Lands, and Territories in the Land in their possession, and in particular, the
tithes they had was the tenth part of all the Corn, Meadow, Pasture, Grass,
Wood, Coults, Calves, Lambs, Pigs, Geese, and Chickens, and the tenth part of
every servants wages, the tenth part of Wool, Milk, Honey, Wax, Cheese and
Butter; and they looked so narrowly to their profits, that if they had not
every tenth Egg, the women could not have their due at Easter, but were counted
Heretics. Again they had four offering-dayes, privy-tythes, offerings to their
Pilgrimages, money for Diriges to be sung at the Burial of every man and
child, or else they would accuse their friends of Heresy: And besides this
they had money for probates of Testaments Mortuaries, and Confessions hallowing
of Churches, Alters, super Alters, chappells, and Bells, by cursing of men, and
absolving them again: Finally, the infinite number of the five Orders of
Friars, who had of every house a penny a year; the five Orders of Friars had
five pence a year of every house; and in King Henry the eights days, the sum
being cast up to him, what came in yearly to these five Orders of Friars, it
did amount to 430333. 6. s. 8. d. a year, as is set down in the Book of Martyrs
(by one Simond Fish) and not above four hundred years before that time, they
had not one penny, for the ancient Britains ever stood free from such burdens,
till that time that the pope and the Saxon Kings laid them on us, who now bear
the same in part, as hereafter is made appear.

And now you shall see if those now in England, called Ministers, do not tread
in the same steps, and how far they come short of their forefathers: First, it
is undeniable that they baptize Infants within thirty days, according to the
law of the Monkish King, Ina, and not according to any law of God (that they
have to sprinckle little children on the face with water, and call it baptism)
but by the popes, and their own imaginations, consequences, and conceivings of
the Scriptures:

And according to the Bishops decree, and the Kings law, they sing, and teach
to be sung in the high places where the Steeples and Bells are, the Psalms and
Saints conditions, that they two Poets, Sternhold and Hopkins, with others,
have turned into Meeter, by their fallen wisdom, and not by the spirit of God;
but they will say they have a rule in the Scripture to sing Psalms by, Is any
merry? let him sing Psalms: but what have drunkards swearers, proud and
covetous persons to do to make songs of the Saints conditions, that was never
none of their own? or to take the name of God in their mouths, seeing they
hate to be reformed; therefore ye singers, stop your mouths, and be silent
before the Lord God of heaven and earth, for it were better for you to be in
the house of mourning, than in the high places of mirth, for the day of the
Lord is coming, wherein your songs shall be turned into howling, and your joie
into bitter lamentation,

And as concerning Tithes, do not the Ministers of England, so called, take
tithes of the people, even the tenth part of their Corn, and Hey; Wool, Lambs,
Pigs, Geese, Eggs; and have they not tithes of Coults, Calves, and dead
sheepskins, and of Bees, from whence the honey and wax comes, and tithe
apples, pears, hemp and flax, and in some places of this land tithe milk, and
at Easter some part of the servants wages, and Easter Reckonings; they have two
pence of the husband, and two pence for the wife, and two pence for the
chimney, and herein they outstrip the pope, for he had but a penny a chimney,
and they have got beyond the five Orders of Friars, for they had but five pence
a year of a house, and they have six pence a year, besides the two pence for a
son, and two pence for a daughter, and two pence for a prentice, if a man have
them, and they come to their Sacrament: And have they not money for burial of
the dead, and as it was the Monks office to mourn, so will they put on a black
mourning suit of the parties gift that is dead, and imitate the Monk in his
dissembling-mourning, heathen-like, who made cuttings in their flesh, and
bauldness between their eyes for the dead, which the children of Israel were
not to do, because God had chosen them to be a holy and peculiar people to
himself.

And again, if the people did not pay the Abbuts, Priors, Priests, etc. their
tithes and money, they accused them for heretics, and so for heresy they
proceeded against them; and you may see in the Book of Martyrs what became of
Heretics, they were tied to a stake, and fire and faggots put to them and
burnt by that bloody generation of men.

And do not these in England, called Ministers? if men who own Christ, and for
conscience sake cannot pay them tithes, they will sue them at Law, and proceed
to make distress upon their goods for trebble damages, or get an Order from a
Court to send their bodies to prison, there to lie at great charges to the
undoing of them and their families; and the same spirit that c^rcies them on to
do this, will carry them on to do more if they had but a Popish King, and a law,
and popish Magistrates that would put it in execution, And again, have they not
the best livings and fairest houses, that are in most Country Villages in
England, yea and in some Towns to: and now people you may see how far your
Preachers, called Ministers, go in the steps of their forefathers, as their
forefathers were so are they; but they will say they deny the pope, and the
Bishops, and their orders: I answer, I know they do in words, but in their
works they own them; so in their words they profess Christ, but in their works
they deny him, for they that pay tithes, and they that receive tithes, both by
their works deny Christ come in the flesh, for Christ is the end of the Law,
for righteousness to every one that believes; the priesthood, and the Levites
tithes, and first fruit-offerings and sacrifices, ordained by the Law of Moses,
the Alter and Tabernacle, and the Temple, were all but figures and shadows of
good things to come; now Christ Jesus, the sum and substance of all these,
being come, the priesthood is changed into one, who is made after the power of
an endless life; there is of necessity made a change of the law also, by which
law they had a command to take tithes of the people; but Christ being come, put
down the priests and the Levites, that were maintained by the first fruits and
tithes, and he himself being in their place, he did not take tithes, for he had
no storehouse to put them in; for says he, the Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has no where to lay his head,
ye may read in the Scriptures; and so he had no certain dwelling place on the
earth; for he was sometimes on the seaside, sometimes upon the sea, and in the
WILDERNESS and in desert places, sometimes at Jerusalem, and went round about
the villages teaching, and upon the mountains, and went into the land of
Genazereth, into the villages, cities, and countries to Tire and Sidon, and
from thence to the sea of Gallilee, through the midst of the coasts of
Decapolis, he being come to do the will of his father; he had no long time to
stay in a place to take tithes, neither did he give any command to his Apostles
and Disciples to receive any tithes, for he commanded them to go into all
Nations, Mat. 28. and he sent them by two and two, Mark 6. ver. 7: and he sent
them to preach the Kingdom of heaven, and to heal the sick, and they departed
and went through the towns, preaching the Gospel, and healing every where,
Luke. 9. ver. 2.6. and says Christ to them, freely have ye received, freely
give, Mat. 10. ver: 8. and into whatsoever city ye enter into, and they receive
you, eat such things as are set before you: and into whatsoever House ye enter,
first say, peace be to this house, and if the Son of peace be there, your peace
shall rest upon it, and in the same House abide til ye depart, eating and
drinking such things as they give, for the labourer is worthy of his Hire, Luke
10: ver. 7, 8. Mark. 6. ver. 10, so that their meat and their drink that was
set before them by these that received them, was their wages, and not tithes.
Here it plainly appears that those that owned Christ and received his Apostles,
they paid no tithes, neither did the Apostles receive any tithes, nor Christ
neither,

To whom were tithes paid? and who were they that paid tithes? those that did
not own Christ Jesus, but denied him to be the Son of God, saying, is not this
the carpenter, the Son of Mary, the brothers of James and Joseph, etc. but the
chief priests, scribes, and pharisees, rulers and elders, these received not
Christ, not owned him to be the Son of God, these paid tithes of mint and
comin, annis, rue, and all manner of herbs, and crucified the Lord of glory; so
that it is plainly seen, that those that pleaded for tithes, and paid and
received tithes after Christ came, were those that denied Christ come in the
flesh, both by their words and works; and as it was then, so it is now, for
those now in these days, that profess Christ in word to be the Son of God, and
pay tithes, and receive tithes, as the people and Ministers of England, so
called, do by their works deny him: and those that deny him to be Priest and
Prophet, deny him to be King and Lawgiver; as the Pope, and popish Kings and
Priests, who (contrary to his Law, Swear not at all) in their own wills made
several forms of oaths and laws to compel people to swear by, one form of an
Oath to swear by to the Pope, another form of Oath, called the Oath of
Supremisie; another form of an Oath, called the Oath of Allegience; another
form of Oath, called the Oath of Abjuration, one form of an Oath for Judges and
other Magistrates and Officers to swear by, and so likewise for witnesses, and
all were to swear upon the four Evangelists, or their hand upon the Bible, or
else they must hold their hands up and swear, all which way of swearing is
contrary to the Law which is holy, just, and good, which is given out by the
pure Lawgiver, Christ Jesus, Emanuel, God with us, who says swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne, nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the living God; nor by thy
head, for thou can not make one hair white nor black; he that swears by
the Altar, swears by all things thereon, and he that swears by the Temple,
swears hy him that dwells therein; and he that swears by Heaven, swears
by the throne of God, and by him that sits thereon: and he that swears by
the Bible, swears not only by it, but swears at once by all things therein
declared of; and he that holds up his hand, and swears by it, swears by
him that made it; and he that swears commits sin, and is a Transgressor of
the righteous Law of God, and he that commits sin is of the Devil. And now
thou Pope that was the inventer of the forms of Oaths, and ye Popish Kings and
Rulers, which make Laws to compel men to swear, and you who are called
Ministers, who teach people, and say that they might swear when they are called
before Magistrates: Oh ye enemies of God! by whom do your children cast out
devils? Does not he that commits sin by swearing, punish, or cause to be
punished, him that transgresses your Law, or else without an oath, he that is
a transgressor is not punished? Do not you herein go about to cast out devils
by the power of Beelzebub? Or do you think ever to cleanse the Land of evil doers
by swearing? I tell you nay, the Land is not cleansed of evil doers, because
justice is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are
set on to do evil; and where are the hands of wicked men more strengthened, and
evil doers more encouraged to do evil, than by lying so long together in
Goals? Let the transgressors be speedily brought to justice, and the innocent
quit, least he be defiled by him that is guilty: So long as the murderer lives
after the murder is committed, the land lies polluted in blood. Let the thief
that is taken stealing restore fourfold, and if he have not wherewith to
restore, let him be sold for his theft, that he steal no more, but labor with
his hands the thing that is good, and in the sweat of his brows to eat his own
bread. A word is enough to the wise, but a fool will not hear, nor learn wisdom.

The Ministers of Christ Jesus taught the people, saying, above all things, my
brethren, swear not at all, neither by heaven, neither by earth, neither by any
other oath, least ye fall into condemnation, but let your yea be yea, and your
nay nay, for says Christ, whatsoever is more than these comes of evil, Iam.
5.12. Mat. 5. Swear not at all: But you will say, this of Christ is meant by
ordinary swearing, but whoever thou art, by thy earthly carnal wisdom know
not what Christ means, it being hid from thy eyes. And the natural man
perceives not the things of God, neither can he do, because they are
spiritually discerned: And again, Is there not in this Land swearing before
Magistrates every day in one place or other, City or Town, before one
Magistrate or other, or else the Goals would not be filled so full as they be,
and so many bound over to appear at Assizes and Sessions, besides other
convictions for swearing, and drunkenness, and yet there is never the less; and
I am sure it is common enough, swearing at Terms, Sizes, Quarter Sessions,
Court-Leets, and other Courts; and would you have it commonner then every day?
Oh pitiful! the Land mourns, because of Oaths, and you who are called
Ministers, stop your mouths for shame, and preach no more contrary to Christ's
command, whose Law which is pure, ye make of none effect, by upholding men's
traditions: And now all ye who are swearing by any oath whatsoever, be ye
warned, for the day of the Lord God is coming, wherein ye shall give an account
for every idle word, and for every oath you swear, and for all things done in
the body whatsoever, the flying Role is gone forth, and the curse is entering
into the house of the thief, and into the house of the swearer, and the Lord
God will be a swift witness against him that swears and against him that
swears falsely.

But some will say an Oath binds men to speak the truth; therefore it is
necessary that witnesses should swear, that they may speak truth.

Answer, It is in a man's mind before he come to a court or magistrate, what he
knows of the thing he is to speak of, and so likewise there is a resolution in
the party what he will speak, whether it be truth or a lie, although he swear
or not swear, but Christ says, Swear not at all, men must not do evil, that
good may come of it, nor sin that grace may abound. And again, If the witness
be resolved to speak falsely, and the Magistrate or Judge put upon him an Oath,
he is the means to cause him to add sin unto sin: Now to prevent both
swearing and lying by Witnesses, observe what here follows, one witness shall
not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin in any sin that
he sins, at the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of three Witnesses
shall the matter be established; if a false Witness rise up against any man, to
testify against him that which is wrong, then both the men between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the Priest and the Judges,
which shall be in those days, and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition;
and behold, if the Witness be a false Witness, and has testified falsely
against his brother, then shall he do unto him as he had thought to have done
unto his brother; so shall thou put away evil from among you, and those which
remain shall hear and fear, and shall from henceforth commit no more such evil
among you, and thine eye shall not pity, but life shall go for life, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, Deuteronomy. 19.15, 16. You may
see here was no command for witnesses to swear, therefore the Rulers, Judges,
and Justices, here is righteousness and equity for you to act by, according to
that of God in your consciences, and so shall you bring the liar and the false
Witness to justice, and prevent men for transgressing the Law of God, which is
pure and good, by swearing, and so put away swearing out of the land, and do
not compel men to swear, nor fine them that obey the commandment of the Lord
Jesus Christ, by refusing to swear, but lay your Sword of Justice upon the
evil doers, for whom it is appointed, and follow no longer the tradition of
the Heathen, and do thereby, making the commandments of GOD of none effect; it
is not good to respect men's persons in judgment:

And he set Judges in all the Land, throughout all the fenced cities of Judah,
city by city, and he said to the Judges, Take heed what you do; for you judge
not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment; wherefore now let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no
iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19; 5, 6, 7.

Babels Prophets are four hundred and fifty men, and the Prophets of the Groves
that fed at Jesabels table four hundred, and but one, even one Prophet of
Elijah that had bread and flesh brought to him by Ravens, and he drank water of
the brook, and cherisht and walked in the strength of the meat and cruse of
water 40 days, and 40 nights, which was brought him in the wilderness as he lay
a sleep under the juniper tree, and 400. of the Lords Prophets hid by fifty in
a cave, and fed with bread and water, 1 Kings 18.19.

If the Lord be God, follow him, if Baal be God, follow him still.

PAge 1. line 2 read out on. p. 3. l. 17. r. lay, p. 6. l, 26. dele. of those,
l. 32 dele. of them. p, 8. l: 18. r. communion, p. 11. l. 10, r. profit
proselyte, p: 14. l. 12 r. scornful sensual.

Page l. 18. 5 li. dee in, p: 19. l. 7 r. Wirr Wire, p. 28. l. 8, r. Babels
Paul's l. 20. r. one Prophet of the Lord Elijah, l. 12. r. brook Cherith.

FJNJS.

