A SEASONABLE WORD To the Parliament Men, To take with them when they go into
the HOUSE: Wherein is showed, The first part of their present Work, and what is
expected from them, to satisfy their true and real Friends. Likewise A
VVatchword, how they prefer not again such Persons to Places of Trust who have
lately Betrayed the Privileges of Parliaments, and the Just Rights of the
People, into the hands of a Single Person. By JOHN CAN.

If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? and if thou do not well,
sin lies at the door, Genesis 4.7. To do justice and Judgment is more acceptable
to the Lord then sacrifice, Prove. 21.3. LONDON: Printed by J.C. for L. Chapman.
1659.

A Seasonable word for the Parliament Men to take with them when they go into
the House.
SIRS:
WHat has God done? As your Sitting again is by a Wonderful hand of
Providence; so doubtless, the effect (whatever it be) will speak out to the
Nation something more then ordinary. Though I cannot say what it will be, yet
with some confidence I dare say, the Lord by you, either intends to heal the
great Breaches of this miserable Nation, and thereby make your Memories
blessed; or, to bring us yet lower, and make our Wounds greater and deeper, and
that by you. However things fall out, I worship God with my Soul, that I have
lived to see this late Revolution, and that there is a door open to me, to
speak soberly and humbly once more to You: I say once more, for Truth and
Righteousness, and for the Interest of Christ and his People.

I need not tell you (for my mind gives me, You are very sensible of it) never
were more eyes upon men then are now upon you; and Your Motions will be
narrowly looked into, both by friends and foes: you cannot halt nor turn to the
right hand nor to the left, but one or other will spy it presently. It was a
good saying of David, Let integrity and uprightness preserve me. Verily, (Sirs)
it is honesty, and doing just things that must keep you, for nothing else will
do it: and the neglect of this, was the cause, why others lately were laid
aside, and nothing remains of them (among the faithful of the Land) but the
infamous memory of their falsehood and hypocrisy. And no marvel, for they were
like the Dogs set in Capitolio, to fray away thieves by night, who left the
thieves, and fell to bark at true men walking by day. It is well known under
the Last Government of a Single Person, very few, except Turncoats and
Time-servers, (Virtutem qui verba putant, ut lucum ligna, as Horace speaks)
Men of corrupt minds, who suppose that gain is godliness: I say, except such as
would make shipwreck of faith and a good Conscience, few else had either
countenance or safety. But that snare is broken, and we are escaped.

To You therefore that are now sitting at the Helm of this Commonwealth, I do
desire (without giving flattering Titles) to propound a few things.

1. In the fear of God, give me leave to remind You, what were the Great and
General Complaints of people against the Long Parliament. I shall not engage as
to the truth of the Reports, but only tell you what was commonly said.

1. That there was a preferring of unworthy men unto places of greatest trust
and profit; Relations and other worldly respects swayed more then due
qualifications: and hence grew up (a while after) such a generation of men, as
filled the Land with violence and oppression; so that there was nothing but a
great cry every where: yea, it is said, since a Stop was put to that
Parliament, none have been more active and forward to exercise an Arbitrary
power over the good People of the Nation, then the persons whom they preferred.

2. The Report went, that some of that Parliament more endeavored to enrich
themselves by Delinquents Estates, then to be any ways useful or serviceable
for the public good of the Nation. It was Isaac's question to Jacob, How is it
that thou have found it so quickly my son? If it be true, that in a few years
some got a thousand pound per annum, others fifteen hundred, some two thousand,
it was quickly gotten.

3. Another General Complaint, was, their taking little heed to their Promises.
As the Domestique servants of the late King were wont to say, They could not
depend on his Promises, nor believe what he said. I shall conclude nothing
here; but certain it is, the Complaint was general, that they would give their
friends fair words and large promises, but never mind their Cause, though they
were quite undone by it.

I shall not enlarge upon those particulars; for my scope and purpose is not to
discover any man's nakedness, but to prevent (what I can) future miscarriages.
Truly, my desire and prayer to God is, that this Parliament may do worthily in
Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem. Only let me tell You, if some men, who for
betraying the just Rights of their Country (had they their deserts) ought to he
punished, should they notwithstanding be trusted again with the places and
power they had, it will very much sadden the hearts of your true friends, and
they will have the less hope to see much good done by you.

Sirs, As for good men, and such as will faithfully serve you and their
Country, it is below their Principles to be running after you for places; such
a practice suits not with their spirits, but with a sort of servile mercenarie
fellows, that will hire out themselves to do any thing for their belly. And
therefore I do beseech You, for Gods sake, and for your Countries sake, and for
the Good Old Cause sake, take heed how you do put such persons into places, who
(betraying their trust) sought to betray the Commonwealth.

Secondly, As you are sensible of the grievances of the people, and will
endeavor (I hope) to remove them, as you are able: So it is desired and
expected by the Godly, that you will be mindful of the great reproach which
has lay'n these 5 or six years upon the Name of God, and the holy profession
of the Gospel. It will be little comfort to many of your friends, to see the
Civil Rights and Liberties of the people restored, and nothing done to the
vindication of Gods glory, which has suffered so much through the Late
Apostacy.

3. It will be now your wisdom, seriously to heed what the Lord has signally
owned, and wonderfully upheld in spite of all opposition; I say, what the Gates
of Hell have been against, but could not prevail. Again, on the other hand,
observe where his public rebukes have been, and what that Power and Policy
is, which the Lord from Heaven has cursed: and take heed you be not gathering
where God is scattering, not designing against THAT upon which he has
engraven, GRACE, GRACE. A word is enough to the wise.

4. Whereas the Army of late has declared for the Good Old Cause, and many
thousands in and about this City and elsewhere, have engaged by their
Application to the General Council of the Officers of the Army, to stand with
them in the prosecution thereof: I humbly offer to your consideration, Seeing
it has pleased God to put you again into a capacity for the carrying on of the
Lords work, Whether it may not be necessary, that something also be declared by
you in reference to the said Good Old Cause (if you really intend to carry it
on) so that it may be known far and near, what a happy accord there is between
the Parliament, Army, and the Good people of the Nation, and how former
divisions and breaches are healed. But,

5. Give me leave to tell you of the Spirit of God now raised higher in the
hearts of his Saints, for the Interest of Christ and his People, then it was at
your former sitting. And it is such a Spirit, that many waters cannot quench
it, neither can the floods drown it; it is a Spirit that will not close with
any corrupt Interest, neither be silent if men take unrighteous courses. O. P.
knew this well enough: for though he gained upon other men, and turned the
Nations upside down, and brake Parliaments at his pleasure, yet still this
Spirit got ground of him, and the more he wrestled and strove against it, the
more it grew and prospered.

True it is, You need not question but to have Followers enough, what way
soever you lead; there are Lawyers, Priests, Courtiers, Tryers, Office or
place-Beggers, etc. that are for any change, like Gnato in Terence, Ais, aio;
neges, nego: If you say it is thus, so do I; if you say nay, so do I. Mutor pro
ratione temporis, as one said; such who the other day defied a Commonwealth,
and gave it under their hands, that they would fight against it, will now
crouch to you for a morsel of bread. But there are people which fear God more
then men, and will not be partakers of other men's sins; these were they, who in
the strength of the Lord, held forth a public Testimony against the Apostacy,
and kept alive the Good Old Cause; yea, let me tell you, You had not sat where
you now do, if the Spirit of God in these men had not shaken the very
foundation of the last Government.

6. I should not be faithful, either to God, or to you, or to my own Soul, if I
did not call upon you, to give Jesus Christ his RIGHTS. Indeed, this should be
more minded of you then the Civil Rights of the People: God has made him both
Lord and Christ; not only King of Saints, but King of Nations; and all the
Kingdoms of the world shall be his, and he the ONLY POTENTATE. It is true,
this Stone hitherto the Masterbuilders have rejected, and hence God has
destroyed the work of their hands one after another. How far you are enlightened
concerning the visible and glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, I know not; but
this is certain, if you honor him, he will honor you; and if you make it your
work to prepare the way for him, he will protect you against all men, and make
you a blessing to the Nation.

The Army before their declension eminently declared for Jesus Christ, and THIS
THEN was the chief part of the Good Old Cause, viz. NO KING BUT JESUS; his
Kingdom, Laws, People, etc. was THEN the Good Old Cause, and they thought
themselves to be the Army of the Lamb, his sanctified ones, and the Lords
mighty Host to pour out vengeance upon Babylon; they have promised once more
before God, Angels, and men, to maintain the Good Old Cause, and they have told
us what they mean by it, namely, No King but Jesus. Now let them take heed, for
God will not be mocked, and it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands.

7. I might likewise remind you of the breaking the Long Parliament: I confess
as things have appeared since, we have cause to think, he who did it, sought
only himself, and not Gods glory, nor the Public interest of the People.
Nevertheless, looking beyond men, we shall see a righteous God who loves
righteousness; and doubtless, the only wise God would not have had it so, but
for some good end. And why (among other ends) may not this be one; namely, by
such a way and means, to purge out your dross and tin, and to make you the more
meet for the masters use?

I have but one word more, and it is to tell you what God is now doing in the
Assemblies and great Councils of men; namely, more visibly cursing the craft of
subtle men, and more sensibly blessing plain and honest dealing then formerly.
So that this I dare say (and could wish it were written on the walls of Your
House) Politicians by their cunning tricks, and brain-working, some years past,
might have expected to speed better, and their deep designs to stand longer,
then they will do now. For as the Lord is now bringing in Truth and
Righteousness to the Nations, so the sincere and upright doings of plain Jacobs
and Nathaniels shall stand, whilst the deep workings of Achitophels and
Machiavels shall fall, as Dagon did before the Ark.

Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee,
Joh. 5.14.
FINIS.

