CANTERBVRY CHRISTMAS: OR, A True Relation of the Insurrection in CANTERBVRY on
Christmas day last, with the great hurt that befell diverse persons thereby.

Written by a Citizen there, to his friend in London.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Harward. 1648.

CANTERBVRY CHRISTMAS: OR, A True Relation of the Insurrection in Canterbury on
Christmas Day last, with the great hurt that befell diverse persons thereby.
Upon Wednesday, December. 22. the Crier of Canterbury by the appointment of
Master Major, openly proclaimed, that Christmas day, and all other
Superstitious Festivals should be put down, and that a Market should be kept
upon Christmas day.

Which being not observed, (but very ill taken by the Country) the town was
thereby unserved with provision and trading very much hindered; which
occasioned great discontent among the people, caused them to rise in a
Rebellious way.

The Major being slighted, and his Commands observed (only of a few) who opened
their Shops, to the number of 12 at the most: They were commanded by the
multitude to shut up again, but refusing to obey, their ware was thrown up and
down, and they at last forced to shut in.

The Major and his assistants used their best endeavor to qualify the tumult,
but the fire-being once kindled, was not easily quenched.

The Sheriff laying hold of a fellow, was stoutly resisted; which the Major
perceiving, took a Cudgel, and struck the man: who being: now puny, pulled up
his spirit, and knocked down the Major, whereby his Cloak was much torn and
durty, besides the hurt he received.

The Major hereupon made strict Proclamation for keeping the Peace, and that
every man depart to his own house.

The multitude hollowing thereat, in disorderly manner; the Aldermen and
Constables caught two or three of the rout, and sent them to the Jaile, but
they soon broke loose, and Jeered Master Alderman.

Soon after issued forth the Commanders of this Rabble, with an addition of
Soldiers into the high street, and brought with them two Foot-bales, whereby
their company increased. Which the Major and Aldermen perceiving took what
prisoners they had got, and would have carried them to the Jayle. But the
multitude following after to the Kings Bench, were opposed by Captain Bridge,
who was straight knocked down and had his head broke in two places, not being
able to withstand the multitude, who getting betwixt him and the Jayle, rescued
their fellows, and beat the Major and Aldermen into their houses, and then
cried conquest.

Where leaving them to breath a while, they went to one Whites a Barber, (a man
noted to be a busy fellow) whose windows they pulled down to the ground: The
like they did to diverse others, till night overtook them, and they were forced
to depart, continuing peaceable the next day, it being the Saboth.

On Monday morning the Multitude coming, the Major set a strong watch with
Muskers and Holbards in the City, both at the Gates and at S. Andrews Church,
the Captain of the Guard was White the Barber.

Till noon they were quiet, then came one Joyce a Hackney man, whom White bid
stand, the fellow asked what the matter was, and withal called him Roundhead;
whereat White being moved, cocked his Pistol and would have shot him, but the
Major wished him to hold: Nevertheless he shot, and the fellow fell down but
was not dead. Whence arose a sunden clamor that a man was murdered, whereupon
the people came forth with clubs, The Major and Aldermen made haste away; the
Town Rose again and the Country came in, took possession of the Gates, and
made enquiry for White, they found him in a hay-loft, where they broke his
head, and dragged him in the streets, setting open the Prison doors and
releasing those that were in hold.

Next they vowed revenge on the Major, pulling up his posts, breaking his
windows, but at last, being persuaded by Sir William Man, Master Lovelise,
Master Harris, and Master Purser had much a do to persuade them from taking of
his Person; so came tumultuously into the high street, and their demands were
so high, that those Gentlemen could not persuade them. Afterward meeting Master
Burly the Town Clark, demanded the Keys of the Prison from him, which being
granted, they with those Gentlemen formerly named, went again to the Town Hall
to Treat, and came to an agreement, which was, that forty or fifty of their own
men should keep the Town that night, being completely armed, which being
performed (the morning issued) and they continued in arms till Tuesday morning:
There are none as yet dead, but diverse dangerously hurt.

Master Sheriff taking Whites part, and striving to keep the Peace, was knocked
down, and his head fearfully broke, it was Gods mercy his brains were not beat
out, but it should seem he had a clung pate of own.

They went also without S. Georges-gate, and did much injury to M. Lee.

As I am credibly informed, the injuries that are done are these.

They have beat down all the windows of M. Majors House, burnt the Stoups at
the coming in of his door. Master Reeves windows were broke. Master Page, and
Master Pollen, one Buchurst, Captain Bridge, Thomas Harris, a busy prating
fellow, and others were sorely wounded.

It is Ordered, that Richard White and Robert Hues, being in fetters, be tried
according to the Law, and upon fair Composition, the multitude have delivered
their Arms into the Hands of the City, upon engagements of the best of the
City, that no man shall further question or trouble them.

FINIS.

