Hyporites Unmasked, OR, THE HYPOCRISY OF The New Usurpers discovered, and
their often saying. God set it on their Hearts; In a few Questions propounded
to the Inferior Officers and Soldiers of the Army, whom some do now endeavor
to seduce from their obedience to their Masters the PARLIAMENT.

Wherein the Parliament, and their General MONCK are Vindicated, from the
aspersions cast upon them by their Enemies: in which General Monck is proved to
have been always true to his Trust, And that he has no Design to set up the
KING or his Interest.

Propounded by a Lover of his Country, and a sufferer for the Good Old Cause.

ISAY 8.12. Say not a confederacy with them with whom these men say a
confederacy, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Goodman Constant, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Faithful Soldier, right against Turn-Coat-Hall, 1659.

Hypocrites unmasked.
WHether it is not Blasphemy in a high degree, to attribute to God the
contradictious imaginations which arise in men's minds through the Temptations
of Satan, working with their ambitious and covitious desires, to say that God
has set such things upon their hearts, though contrary to the written word of
of God, and Principles of Law and Reason, the only guides of all sober
Englishmen in all actings both as men and Christians? And whether this has not
been the constant course of some Enthusiasts, or pretenders to immediate
inspiration in the Army, and especially the ringleaders of this late Rebellion
against the Parliament, viz. Lambert, Packer, Creed, etc. For did they not say
in the year 1653, when they met at the Cockpit to seek God, That he had set it
upon their hearts to dissolve (as they called it) the long Parliament; and in
the same year, they pretended that God had set it upon their hearts to call the
little Juncto, which called it self a Parliament; and in the latter end of the
same year, they pretended to seek God again, and then they said, God had set it
upon their hearts for to put the Government of the Nation upon their General
Oliver Crumwel, whom they called a Protector by an Instrument of Government
made by themselves, as Oliver himself upbraided them, eight of them having the
making of the said Instrument, Lambert some time after carrying the Sword
before him at the Instalments; and they met in the year 54 at St. Jameses, and
told us they had 4 things set upon their hearts, as the Fruit of their seeking
God three days, one of which was the necessity of Successive yearly
Parliaments; But finding themselves pretty warm, and well at case till 1659, at
which time Richard's Parliament began to question their good Penny-worths that
they had purchased, and they saw their Interest began to decay, and some of
them like to be questioned for their Arbitrary and Tyrannical Actions, done in
their Protectors time, then they sought God again, as they said, and repented,
and took shame to themselves, and then God set it upon their hearts (as they
said, to invite all the Members of the Parliament that were interrupted the
20th of April 53 to sit again, who they averr in their invitation, were the
Asserters of the Good Old Cause, in whose hands God made it to prosper, and
that if they would be pleased to return to the diicharge of their Trust
committed to them, they would stand by them, according to their duty, that they
might sit in safety.

After the victory which God gave the Parliaments Army (as Lambert in his
Letters called them) over Sir Geo^ge Booth, by taking away the Hearts and
Resolutions of the Enemies, so that the contest was so small, and the opposition
of Booth's party so weak, that not above two men (that ever we heard of) were
killed on the Parliaments party, so that the victory seemed rather from Heaven
then from men; After this they say, they sought God at Darby, what they should
do to improve that victory, and then they say, he set it upon their hearts to
offer those Proposals to the Parliament which were sent up from the Northern
Brigade to Fleetwood, which (when the Parliament having knowledge of it) did
not well rescent; but some Officers or London put the said Proposals into
another form, and presented it to the Parliament, which whilst it was under
consideration, they again pretended that God set it upon their hearts, that a
Letter subscribed by 9 Grand Officers of the Parliaments Army, should be sent
with a Copy of the Proposals to each Regiment in the three Nations, inviting
all the Soldiers to subscribe them, that so, if God did not set it upon the
Parliaments hearts, to give them an Answer suitable to their ambitious design,
the whole Army might be by them drawn in, and engaged to force the Parliament.
Whereupon the Parliament, having the Letter aforesaid brought into the House,
to put a stop to this dangerous design, Voted the Commissions of those 9
Subscribers void; Whereupon they pretended, that God set it upon their hearts
to interrupt the Parliament again. And because they would put all good people
out of hopes that ever there should be a reconciliation betwixt them and the
Parliament, (which was then propounded by many well-affected persons in and
about the City of London, as the only expedient in their understanding to
prevent more bloodshed) they met about the 15 of October in White Hall
Chapel, and repented that they had invited this Parliament to sit again, and
of all their former Repentances. Thus attributing all their Contradictions,
hypocritical Actions, Rebellions, Self-seekings, to the immediate Inspiration
of the God of Righteousness, Truth, Constancy, Order, with whom there is no
shadow, of turning or change.

But whether it is not the God of this World, the Prine that rules in the Air
of Covetous and Ambitious minds, that promses his Wotshippers the Kingdoms of
this world, and the Pompes and Glories thereof, that has set all these
contradictuios things upon the Officers hearts, let all sober Christians judge.
And it were well if these late Officers of the Army and their Accomplices,
would for their own Souls sake lay to heart ere it be too late, and seriously
consider, that God will not be mocked, nor the people deluded, as the Scripture
of God assures, and all the reason in the world confirms.

Whether it is not the most rediculous nonsense that ever was heard of, that
they who in their representations of October the 5th, confessed the Army was
the Parliaments Army, and themselves their faithful Servants, and in their
Proposals of April the 15th, called them the supreme Authority of the Nation,
and upon that account took their Commissions from them, that these men I say,
should in their late Pamphlet called the Armies Declaration (the greatest abuse
that ever was offered to the Army, that a few Officers should put out things of
such nature in the name of the honest Soldiers of the three Nations) make it
their chief charge against their Master the Parliament, that they would have
made the said Officers of the Army subject to them; as if it were a crime to
expect subjection from their hired Servants.

Whether the Officers of the Army: (viz) those lately Cashired, and their
accomplices calling all their Papers the Papers of the Army, and presuming the
whole Soldiery of the three Nations to be engaged in all their Ambitious
Actions and quarrels does not plainly declare that the said great Officers
account the inferior Officers and Soldiers to be their menial Servants,
Lackeys, and Gromes, to whom they give Housing, Food, and Clothing, whereby
they are obliged implicitly to espouse all their Lords and Masters quarrels,
as the manner of Servants is to do right or wrong.

And whether these great Officers thus thinking, do not abuse themselves and
their Brethren the inferior Officers and Soldiers, who are only Servants to the
Commonwealth and their Parliament, from whom they have their Pay, and from
whom they may expect lawful preferment.

Whether it is not a thing Incongreuous to say, and scarce Imaginable to think
that Genesis Monck should bring in the King, or be for his Interest, as some would
maliciously Insinuate, seeing he has always as well as now been true to the
trust Committed to him, and never was so forward to set up a Single Person as
these men which have now Interrupted the Parliament in October. 12 59. who were
the men which contrary to all Vows, Covenants, Promises and Engagements, did
set up the late Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, and his Son Richard. And whether Genesis
Monck has not given a sufficient testimony to all the World, that he is
against the Kings Interest, for when Sir George Booths party was up, he caused
all the Lords and great men in Scotland to take an Oath, not to stir for, or in
the behalf of the King, and has now again Engaged them to stand by the
Parliament.

And is it not great Folly and Madness to think that these nine men which were
once Officers of the Army, and their Confederates who have now violently thrust
out the Parliament, should reform our Laws, and take away Tithes, or do us
any good who have already laid violent hands upon that fundamental Law, which
of all other is the most ease and greatest security to the people, that is to
say the Act again asserted or made by this Parliament, October. 11th, 59. (viz)
that no money should be Levied but by consent in Parliament, which indeed is
not a new Law, but that old Fundamental Law which all our Parliaments have
asserted and the late King in the Petition of Right confirmed, and all our
Forefathers have challenged it as their Indubetable Right, that no money
should be Levied on them upon any pretense whatsoever, without consent in
Parliament, by which Law, and by no other means our Estates are secured from
all Tyrants; And no King or Single Person though the greatest Tyrant that ever
was set over us durst presume to violate that old standing Law, and hence it
was that Cromwell (though he and his Confederates were in their hearts against
Parliaments) yet they was fain to call pretended Parliaments to get them money
of the people, and indeed riches were an Intolerable burden, if the
Possessors were not the Master thereof, and allow any in supreme Authority but
the Power or Right to take a penny without consent in Parliament, and they may
if they please take a pound and by the same rule ten pounds, and so all that
any man has and the people have no way to relieve themselves, but by the Sword
of Military Justice.

But had these nine men which the Parliament voted out of Commission, and these
their Confederates that are in Commission still in the Army power to Abollish
Laws, and a mind to do the people any good, they would first have Abollished
those Laws which were grievous to the people, the Law by which the Lords of
Manners vex the poor people of England, and the Law for Excise and new Impost,
and such other Laws, by which the Persons and Estates of men are prejudiced,
but instead of so doing they have pretended to Abolish and have declared that
Law void, by which the peoples purs is eased, and there Estates secured from
being at the Wills of Usurpers. Oh blind Souls which cannot see that these men
do but flatter us with good words, and fair promises of good things, and in the
mean time they do us all the evil they can. But one thing is very observable in
these men, when they declare against our good Laws they are peremptory, but
when they talk of doing us good, then its doubtful whether they can or not;
and therefore they tell they will do their endeavor to reform the Law; suppose
they should presume to give Laws that might seem good, yet should we accept of
any thing at their hands, we should therein make our selves slaves for ever.
Some say that if we receive any thing of the Devil, though it be but the worth
of a pin, we make our selves his slaves forever; Whether that be true or not
yet I am sure, if we should receive any Laws of these men, or own them for our
Masters once, we should therein make our selves slaves to them for ever.

Whether the War with the King and the contest which the Parliament had with
Sir George Booth and his party was upon any other account then this that they
denied the Parliament to be the Supreme Authority of the Nation, and that the
Parliament only had the dispose of the Militia, and of the Purss of the Nation,
and that none had power to make or Abolish Laws, but the Supreme Authority of
the Nation (viz) the Parliament.

In all which Wars these men and their Confederates served the Parliament in
Asserting these things; And do they not now stand condemned in their own
Consciences whilst they do the contraty things, According to that of the
Apostle, Romans 2.1. therefore you are In-excusable O men, which have fought
against the King and his party, Sr. George Booth and his party, and yet do the
same things your selves; dare you slay thousands, sire Towns, destroy
Familyes, and all to assert the Parliaments power, to despose of the Militia,
and to make and Abolish Laws, and da^e you now fight against the Parliament,
sure the Judgment of God according to truth is against you which commit such
things, Romans 2.2. but I know you are Scripture proof, who have forsoken the
Laws of God and Reason, Nature and Nations, and follow the sudden rash figments
of your own brains, and call it the leadings of Gods providence, because you
had not half an hours time to consider, and resolve upon the Treason and
rebellion committed against the Parliament, Oct. 13.59. as if Traitors and
Rebels were the more to be commended, because they do their business quickly.
See your Letter Oct. 29. to General Monk, and the Officers in Scotland, 2.
Papraph. 3.4. Laines.

Whether it is not great madness and folly to believe the promises of these men
now, whose present actions are contrary to all the Promises, Engagements, Oaths
and Declarations that ever they made in their lives; yea contrary to the Solemn
Promises made when they received their Commissions of the Parliament.

Whether its safe for the Commissioners of the Fxcise or Custom, or any
Treasures of the Nation to part with any money to Lambert, and his party, seeing
all men know they have not power to demand a penny, or authority to command on
man, their Commissions being taken away by Authority of Parliament; yea by the
same authority of Parliament, which gave them and all other men the Authority
by which they act as servants of the Commonwealth.

Good people keep your Money, and then no body will care for, (or strive) to be
Lords over you.

Whether such Commissioners of Excise and Custom, will not be in as much danger
as Packer, and the rest of them that were partys in that conspiracy, and to
suffer as Rebels and Traitors or at least to repay the money out of their own
Estates again, which they pay at their command?

Why the Queries signed by Will. Clark Secretary, and the other Papers, as the
Declarations and Letters from Genesis Monck may not be seen and understood by the
honest people in the City, that if they be good we may adhere unto them, if bad
we may bear our Testimony against them?

And whether the Lieutenant of the Tower will not fall under the same
condemnation of high Treason, if he shall furnish them with Arms and Ammunition?

Thus have we discovered by these Queries, the spirit of the men of this age,
who have presumed to put the examples of heathen Soldiers in rebellion, And
yet pretend to be Christians in Religion.

FINIS.

