A Letter to the King.
LET thy mind Oh King, attend on Reading, Hearing, and Instruction and reject
not the Counsel of the Lord spoken to thee by his Servants and Handmaids, but
mind it till thou art truly reformed into the way of Truth and Life of him that
brings Salvation near, through the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; which Gospel
is to be Preached to all Nations before the end come, though it be Foolishness
to that Wisdom that stands not in the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit
that gives Life and Liberty to the Just; for the world by wisdom knew not God,
and it pleased him by his infinite Wisdom through the Foolishness of Preaching
to save them that Believe; and this is the infinite Wisdom of the invisible
wise God, who is incomprehensible and full of Glory; Oh this infinite wise God,
that founded all things in Wisdom, and man by his Earthly Knowledge cannot find
it out; this is he that has given unto us a Savior, him that is the Light to
lighten the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation to the ends of the Earth; and all
must come to the measure of him in themselves, to the manifestation of his pure
Spirit, which is Truth and Life, that comes to know the depth of the Wisdom of
God; the Mystery of this Kingdom stands not in words, but in power, and
demonstration of the pure Spirit of Life, which Spirit breaths through and helps
the infirmity of all that trust to it, and believes in it; and blessed are all
they that are joined to it, for it ever lives to make intercession with sighs
and groans that cannot be uttered.

So dear Friend, if thou will be endowed with pure Wisdom from above, wait in
love and soberness of mind, to receive the Spirit of Life from God, and that is
more than all the World, and will be more comfort to thy soul, than all the
Dominions that the Earth can afford; for the first man is but of the Earth
Earthly, but the second is the Lord from Heaven, the quickening Spirit, which
Spirit if it be received, is it that works the Reformation, for it is grieved
with Evil where ever it meets with it, at home or abroad; and so long as
Iniquity bears Rule, it suffers, and it interceeds unto God from whence it
came: Oh dear Friend, that this were descended into thy lowermost part^, that
thou might feel him rise, and Eternally know the power of his Resurrection,
then assuredly thou would suffer no Evil to be done in thy Name, nor in thy
Nation, and then the fruit of thy Goodness would spring forth, and thy Glory
and Renown spread unto the Nations round about thee, and this wholesome Wisdom
would be a Crown of Glory to thee, and as a Royal Diamond in the hand of the
Lord thou would be found, and thy Name would be had in Everlasting
remembrance, with succeeding Generations; which if thou do not mind the Glory
of the Lord, and be tender of the birth Immortal, and relieve the Oppressed;
then thy Name will ^ot, as others that is gone before thee.

Oh therefore seek the Glory of God, and the good of his People, that thy Soul
may live and be refreshed with his virtue; so with diligence and suffering,
wait to know the coming of the just One in thy own particular, the
manifestations of his Eternal Spirit, that thou may answer his Love, which
must be with his own, if ever thou please him, who thou see rents the Kingdom
from men, and overturns, and will overturn till he come to Reign whose Right it
is, even them that will fear him, that they may give Glory to his Name.

So dear Heart, as the Lords Love has been large unto you, mind the Wisdom
that will answer his dear Goodness unto you; for it was his Love indeed unto
you, and great cause you have to remember it, and not to let his Benefits slip
out of your mind, lest you forget his Goodness which has been great unto you;
for this I can say, who am the least of many thousands, as in the Mystery and
Life of Truth, which reveals the secrets of the Lord, that I saw and felt in
the Spirit that reaches over Sea and Land, your Coming before you came, and my
spirit breathed to the Lord for you; and I felt three, and one was a Woman, and
that I spoke of then, that my spirit reached forth unto three; and they said
you were three Brethren, but I said that one of the three that I felt was a
Woman, and still that did abide with me; and now that you are come, my spirit
breaths to the Lord, desiring him to subdue that in you, that will not glorify
him, that the Kingdoms may not be rent from you; So mind the fear, and remember
how he rent the Kingdoms from Saul because of his Disobedience, and he is the
same still, holy and pure, and though he wait to be gracious, yet he will not
always strive with man, but he will take to him his great Power, and rend the
Kingdom from man, and will overturn, overturn, till he come to Reign whose
Right it is, the SON of Equity the KING of Justice; So in Love (...)nd Fear
Rule the Nations, that thou may be found in the Land of the Living.

From a Lover of thy Soul, ANNE CLAYTON.


