The Deceitful Spirit discovered, in its secret and mysterious working; and in
the Power of God is Judged and Condemned by one that was once ensnared thereby.
DEar Friends, I am constrained, even from the powerful working and sense of
Gods Love in me, to write these Lines to you, and to acquaint you with the
merciful dealings, and tender Visitations of Gods Love to me: Since I was with
you at the Meeting, the Lord has had mercy on me, even for his Seeds sake, and
has enlightened my understanding, and has convinced me of the evil for which I
stood, and his Light has clearly showed me, that that Spirit which had led me
to keep on my Hat in the time of Friends being in Prayer, was not the right
spirit, but the evil spirit. O dear Friends! how is my strength broken, my
confidence spoiled, and all dashed? which that dark spirit had brought forth,
and I am weak as water; this is the Lords doing, he has done it when no man
could; he has had a good regard unto me: I am overcome in the sense of his
Love to me, and your labor and love to mewards is made sensible to me. O my
Soul praise the Lord, for his goodness has not failed thee; his mercies endure
for ever. O let all the Righteous Seed praise him for ever. This in the sense
of the Work of the Lord in me have I written, who through mercy am your little
Brother in the Truth,

William Cleevelye.


FRiends, since I wrote the former Lines to you, which was written and
delivered to some Friends the first day of the sixth month, 1667, at the
Meeting at John Elsons, it has been laid upon me to write something more, by
way of discovering the subtilty of that spirit which led me to the keeping on
my Hat in the time of Friends being in Prayer: First, It led my mind out to be
looking at others, and got my mind there looking at the backslidings and
haltings of others, (of which indeed has been too much.) Thus this
Serpent-like spirit drew my mind out to be looking at the falling and
backsliding of others, that by it he might destroy that simplicity and young
birth which the Lord brought forth in me: for while I was looking out, coldness
and deadness got over me within; and my mind became darkened, and the pure Life
in me clouded, and Meetings unprofitable to me, and I found not the sweet
refreshments at Meetings as before, and then the subtilty of this Enemy of
Truth was such, that he sought to beget a belief in me, that Friends were grown
formal, and that there was not that powerfulness in them of the Ministry as
formerly. Thus when this subtle Spirit had darkened my understanding, in that
dark understanding he would lead me to judge others to be formal, and without
the Power; but whilst I stood gazing at others, the Witness of God arose in me,
and bid me, Turn my mind to within; and the Light showed me that I was but
formal my self, and it judged me and troubled me; then the wicked spirit sought
to pervert the Righteous Judgment of Truth in me, which judged the bad in me,
and subtly did infuse into my mind, that the putting off the Hat was formal,
without the Power, and a customary thing only by most that did it. Thus being
under judgment, for my formal appearing in the outward, being deadned within.
Now the wicked one got a persuasion in me to keep on my Hat; but the Spirit of
the Lord strove in me much, that I was not brought to it presently; yet this
dark spirit having gotten some footing in me, the pure which once shone in me,
became so veiled and clouded in me, and my mind so full of muddle, that I could
not discern the good Spirit from that which wrought in the mystery of iniquity;
so that subtle spirit prevailed with me to keep on my Hat in the time of
Prayer. But, O what a cross it was to the pure Seed of God in me! (though then
I did not so discern it) O what pantings was in my heart, and breast, like as it
were an Hammer beating; paleness got over my face, and I sweat with the
strivings that was in me, at the time of my standing with my Hat on; and thus
for many times was I, insomuch that a questioning arose in me, whether I did
well or no? and sometimes put my Hat off again. In this bewildered state the
wicked one, who works in the mystery of iniquity, begot a persuasion in me,
that it was in the cross to my own will, and that I must stand in the cross,
and the like.

Thus when Gods Witness arose in me, and troubled me, (the which was crossed in
me) then this Enemy of Truth, who had darkened my understanding, through my
giving way to his subtle invasions, got in me a persuasion that the cross was
to my own will; so there was a striving in me, against the pure in me, which
strove for my good, and I came to keep on my Hat, and thought I did well in so
doing; thus having gone from the Light, which gave me a discerning between the
good and the evil, I took the evil for the good, there being a thick cloud got
over me, and I could keep on my Hat with less trouble and more boldness; then
was I persuaded that I was at more peace with God when I could stand in the
(...) with less trouble; but the Spirit of the Lord would not leave striving
with me, but pierced through the Cloud, and judged the deadness, hardness of
heart, and unprofitableness; then my peace was broken which the enemy of Truth
had begotten in me; for the peace which I had was not durable, neither had I
true satisfaction in it, but doubtings and questionings did still arise; then I
put it off again, and sometimes put it off, and sometimes on, as that spirit of
confusion (being let in) did suggest into my mind: thus being off, my watch,
like the fool, with my eyes out of my head, the enemy soon got in and made
spoil of the good. And what did this enemy bring forth but polluted dead
things, as I have declared, and stirred up enmity, and strove to beget
prejudice in me against Friends? But there was a sweet Love sprang up in my
heart still toward Friends, and the Light brought to my remembrance the
abounding goodness of God, which flowed forth from the Light through their
Vessels, by which I was refreshed often, and strengtned in the inward man,
whilst I kept faithful to my measure; the remembrance of which was as a bridle
to me, and did likewise restrain me from breaking forth against Friends, when
the enemy tempted to it: for when the Lord had stirred up his Servants to seek
me, and in the Light found me in my scattered lost state, and reproved me, and
exhorted me that I might return; I did not render railings, neither used many
words, though I had in my reason comprehended much to plead for the thing
aforementioned; but the Power of the Lord stood over me, and fear fell upon me,
the Witness being reached in me, from that of God in them, yet many shifting
words did break forth to save that alive which was for death; but when I came
to commune with my own heart in stilness, waiting upon the Lord, the Witness
which was reached in me break through the cloud, and in its Light made manifest
the foundation upon which mine enemy has builded, and judged the ground, and
all the fruit that it had brought forth? Thus was I convinced of my error by
the Immortal Light; then joining to that which convinced me, I was made to see
my own weakness and nakedness; then sorrow seized upon me, yet Joy sprang up
from the pure Seed in me, and in the sorrow and joy of my heart, was I made to
take shame to my self, and to declare to Friends my error, and also the
goodness of the Lord to me, and consulted no longer with my own fleshly reason;
then the Spirit of the Lord arose in me, which had lain grieved and oppressed
in me, and judged the usurping Oppressor down, and in his Light made manifest
to me his deceivable ways, and working with me. And dear Friends,
notwithstanding that which I have wrote to you before upon my convincement, it
has further been laid upon me, and I was pressed in my Spirit to write what I
have here wrote, as the Lord in his Light has brought to my remembrance; who
in mercy and long-suffering suffering has begotten me, and has broken my
heart, has rent the Vail, and raised up the head of the oppressed; he has
plucked my foot out of the snare, he has judged the Oppressor. O go on, is the
desire of my Soul, in thy Righteous Judgment, O God, till all be destroyed in
me, which the enemy has brought forth; then shall I praise thee from the pure
in the heart, for thou art worthy. O Lord God thou have mercy on me, even for
thy Seeds sake, which breathed after thee, and could not be satisfied in any
thing but the enjoyment of thy living Presence. O Lord, when I was scattered
thou soughtest me out, and art bringing me even to thy fold, to feed with thy
Lambs again, praises be unto thee; O let the Righteous Praise thee for ever, O
Lord God of my Salvation.

Written by my own hand, and given to be read at the Meeting, the 23. day of
the seventh month, William Cleevelye.

The desire of my heart is the good of all, and my end in this my writing, is
not to applause or set up the Person of any, but must give the glory to God who
is the Fountain of all good, and has of the riches of his Grace given unto his
Servants to be helps one to another, and I have peace in what I did write:
Neither have I had any secret reserve or aim at any thing but the honor of
Gods Immortal Truth, and the good of such who may be deceived as I have been,
or in any other manner, by the subtle enemy, who works by diverse ways to
deceive; and therefore let them to whom it may come, read it without prejudice,
for I can truly say, That I have waited in the pure fear of the Lord for what I
should write, and durst not to write any thing but what was Truth: But some may
say, I might have forborne to have writ what I have. To such I say, Had not the
Power of God laid it upon me I could have forborne. The Woman when she had found
the lost Groat, called her Neighbors that they might rejoice with her.

W. C.

THE END.

