ARTHVR Lord CAPELL Lieutenant General under the Prince His Highness of His
Majesty's Forces, in the Counties of Worcester, Salop, and Chester, and the
sixth Northern Counties of Wales.
To all Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, and to all other His MAJESTY'S
Subjects whatsoever, whom these presents shall or may in anywise concern.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, having a tender Regard and gracious
Care of the preservation of the Goods and Estates of his loving and
well-affected Subjects, has, by two several Proclamations, the one of the
fifth of November last, the other of the seventeenth of March last, inhibited
all His Majesty's Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers of His Armies to commit
any Spoil, Robbery, Plunder or Pillage upon any His Majesty's Subjects, or
their Goods, with direction for a strict and severe proceeding against the
Offenders by the Law Martial, Notwithstanding which His Majesty's gracious and
tender Provision for His People, complaints have been made to me of some
Outrages, and Plunders committed by some Soldiers in His Majesty's Service
since the said Proclamations, and before my coming into these Counties and
Parts within the Command abovesaid, which occasioneth much Fear and Doubt in
His Majesty's well-affected People in these Counties and Parts, and may become
exceedingly disadvantagious to the present Service: I hereby signify and
Declare, That if any Officer, of what Degree or Quality soever, or any Soldier
under their Commands, within the Counties abovesaid, shall at any time
hereafter wilfully do, or permit, or countenance to be done any Spoil,
Robbery, Plunder or Pillage upon any the Persons, Goods, Horses, Cattle, or
Provisions of Corn, Hay, or Victual of His Majesty's Subjects in the said
Counties, contrary to His Majesty's said Proclamations, That I shall
undoubtedly, upon Complaint exhibited, and due proof thereof to me made,
proceed strictly, according to the exact Tenor of His Majesty's said
Proclamations, and according to the latitude of my own Commission from His
Majesty, agreeable with the Discipline of War, severely to punish the
Offenders, and every of them.

And whereas there are diverse Persons within the Counties and Parts abovesaid,
notoriously known to be disaffected to His Majesty, his righteous Cause, and
his present Service, whose Estates are obnoxious and liable to Seizure and
Confiscation; These are to signify and declare, That when and as often as any
such seizure shall be made, the same shall not otherwise be done but by
particular Warrant and Direction of His Majesty, or such who shall have the
immediate Command in Chief of the Forces of these Counties and Parts: And that
due care shall be had and taken for the punctual Inventorying and valuable
Apprizing of such Moneys, Goods, Cattle, or other Estate which shall be so
seized, to the end that Account may be given thereof to His Majesty; And that
the Party and Parties, Owners thereof, in case they shall acquit themselves of
the Crimes to their Charges laid, may have a fitting Recompense and Restorement.

And I do hereby further signify and declare, That all such ready Moneys, and
Moneys to be raised by disposal of any Goods or Cattle so at any time from
such known Disaffected Persons to be seized, shall be disposed wholly and as
thriftily as may be in His Majesty's present Service, for defense of the said
Counties and Parts, and as much as in me lies, for the ease of the Burden and
Charge which may otherwise fall upon those His Majesty's good Subjects, who
have readily, and in good proportion expressed their affections to the Cause and
Service. Hereby Willing, and straightly Charging and Commanding, That no Officers
or Soldiers presume to intermeddle with any estate of any man under the Notion
or Reputation of a Malignant, without my special Warrant and Authority, him or
them thereunto enabling.

And I do further direct and require all Officers under my Command, That this
my Command be published in all the Quarters within the said Counties and Parts
wherein His Majesty's Commanders and Soldiers are, or hereafter shall happen
to be Quartered, by the sounding of Trumpets and beating of Drumms for the
monition of Officers and Soldiers in their duties. And that care be taken that
the same may be likewise published in all Churches and Chappells within these
Counties and Parts abovesaid, for the satisfaction of His Majesty's good and
well-affected Subjects.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms this Third day of April. 1643. ARTHVR
CAPELL.

Imprinted at Shrewsbury by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Ma^^stie* And by the Assigns of ^OHN BILL. 1643.


