THE Cloak in its Colors; OR THE Presbyterian Unmasked. AND Proved as
Dangerous as PAPISTS To the CHURCH of ENGLAND. Together with a Brief and
Seasonable ANSWER To their late Unseasonable QUERIES, AND LIST of the
Pensioners, Humbly offered to all true PROTESTANT Conformists.

Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly
they are Ravening Wolves, Matthew. 7.15. LONDON, Printed for the Author, ANNO
DOM. 1679.

THE Cloak in its Colors; OR, THE Presbyterians Unmasked,
SIRS,
IF ever we wanted Circumspection or Conduct, if ever we had need of the Spirit
of Discretion, to discern between our feigned Friends and real Well-wishers,
between undermining Zealots and true Patriots, this must be the time; a time,
wherein our Religion, our Lives our Liberties, our Estates; and, in Fine, our
All, lies at stake, either to be settled and secured by our prudent proceedings
in this grand Concern; or we to be hopelesly fooled of all, by the subtilty and
guile of our Adversaries; a time, wherein we are to steer our course between
the two dangerous Gulfs of Scylla and Charybdis, of Popery and Presbytery; and
therefore, like wise Pilots, must carefully endeavor as well to shun the one
as avoid the other, lest at any time it may be said of us,

Incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim. The experience of so many years
does sufficiently tell us that Presbyterians and Papists do always design the
subversion both of our Church and State; and they are both assured, that if
they could but once suppress our Religion, they might soon advance their own.
And therefore wise Statesmen do hold it an approved Maxim, that the Church of
England can never be more secure, than when these two Sects are kept in even
balance, both being equally countenanced, or equally suppressed.

I remember to have read in the Ecclesiastical Histories, how the Orthodox
Christians of the Primitive Church always held it more dangerous to converse
with Heretics than with the most obstinate Heathens; their reason was, because
Heathens were open enemies to the name of Christ, and therefore all Christians,
from the greatest Divine to the meanest Peasant, were sufficiently forewarned
not to believe them; but Heretics came in Sheeps clothing, and, under the
name of Christ, labored to destroy Christ's Flock: Whence the great Divine.
Gregory Nazianzen, Tract. de Fidei, says, Nothing is more dangerous than these
Heretics, who are upright and Orthodox, in all the rest; yet by one word, as
by a drop of poison, do infect the true Faith

I think we may now with as much reason make use of this prudent method, as the
Primitive Christians have done, and thereupon no less, if not more suspect our
bigoted Presbyterians, who under the name of Protestants, and reformed
Christians, do endeavor to destroy our Church and State, than the
Superstitious Papists, who openly profess themselves sworn enemies to our
Reformation. All the Protestants of England are so fully prepossess^d with the
grossness of Popery, that it is altogether impossible they should ever believe
such ridiculous Opinions: But the Presbyterians, with their pretended Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, do so work, upon the well-meaning and short-sighted
Vulgar, that under the color of drawing them from Popish Superstitions, they
poison them unwittingly with Pharisaical hypocrisy. Papists do attempt by
their private Plots and Conspiracies to destroy our King and Country; but the
Presbyterians, first, by their feign^d pretenses of Religion, do rob their King
of the hearts of his Subjects, and then dispose of his Life and Kingdom as they
please. The Papists did but attempt the former, the Presbyterians have actually
done the latter, and, if not timely prevented by the faithful Children of the
Church of England, I am afraid, will endeavor once more to complete their
wickedness.

How active and ready they are at present with their seditious Pamphlets to sow
the seed of dissension between our Gracious King and his Loyal Subjects? nay,
they scruple not to charge his Sacred Majesty with corrupting and bribing his
Parliament. Obstupescitecoeli, supor hoc, as the Prophet speaks, Jex. 2.13.
Be astonished, O ye heavens, both at the unparallel^d impudence of these
Miscreants, and at the extraordinary clemency of our Gracious Sovereign, who
suffers such Villains to live, and enjoy their liberties, who are not worthy to
breath the common air. For if ordinary Robbers deserve to receive their last
reward at Tiburn, what do they not deserve who not only deprive their
Fellow Subjects of their chiefest comfort and earthly happiness, the gracious
savor and benevolence of their King; but do also 10l their Sovereign of his
richest Treasures, and greatest Strength, the love of hi^ Subjects: For, as the
Learned Philosopher Seneca says, Vnum est Regi inexpugnabile munimentum, amor
civium.

All wise men have hitherto esteemed the Interest of Prince and People to be
one and the same individual Commonweal: And it is a common Maxim in our own
Laws, Thesaurus Regis respicit Regem and Regnum. And again, Census Regis,
est^a^ima Reipublicae, firmamentum belli, and ornament um pacis; apud Coke upon
Littleton, sect. 153 page 106. What shall we say then of these sactious
Spirits, who labor to divide them, and draw a partition between them? Or what
reason have the blind Zealots to think so ill of his Sacred Majesty? Could they
expect a Prince more meek, more just, or more loving to his People? Or, (as the
Prophet Samuel said) Whose Ox or Ass has he taken? whom has he defrauded, or
whom has he oppressed? 1 Samuel 12.3. If we grumble at his Majesty, like those
foolish Members in the Fable, who grudged that the Belly received so much of
the fruit of their labors, we shall at last, like them, find the (...)

If our King, the Father of our Country, be suspected to sell us, whom shall
we trust to? If God's Representative, and lively Image upon Earth, (whom the
All seeing Providence has miraculously restored to heal up the wounds of this
bleeding Nation) be thought to betray his Trust, or that Government, which God
committed to his charge; how can we have any assurance of our own
Representatives fair dealings with us, who these many years are Elected, not by
prudence or discretion, but by favor and Faction, and by people who must
always see double before ever they begin their Election?

If we doubt of his Majesty's Integrity and Fatherly love toward us, he must
of necessity doubt of our Loyalty toward him; and then, what a Hell it shall
be for us to live under such a King, and for such a King to rule over us? Are
we not much beholding to these infernal Emissaries, who thus make it their
business to deprive both Prince and People of all worldly felicities; nay, to
create unto us a hell upon earth, and draw the whole Kingdom into a Babylonian
confusion, that so themselves may fish in troubled Waters? If these be not the
proceedings of the Rump-Parliament, let any man be judge.

Then, the Presbyterians by their specious hypocrisy persuaded the Kings
Subjects not to comply with his Majesty in disbursing Money toward the
necessary expenses of the Crown, and also the securing and fortifying the
Kingdom against all Foreign Invasion; though soon after, through the just
judgment of God, they were forced to pay Oliver at least 60000 pounds a month,
and had no thanks for their pains: Now the World knows, how they insist upon
the same terms, and what the end shall be, the Lord alone can tell: but God
send they be not, for their obstinacy and perverseness to so good a King, left
by the Divine Providence as a Prey to a Foreign, as then they were to a
Domestic, Tyrant.

Then, whosoever stood for the Church of England against those blind
Religionaries, was presently cried down for one Popishly inclined, or
disaffected to the Protestant Religion, i. e. to the Genevesian Gospel. Now
they bring us a List of about 200 Members of the Parliament dissolved in
January last, as the Kings Pensioners and sworn Voters, and consequently no
great well-wishers of the new Gospel of John, and his only complete
Reformation, warning us to choose no such persons again, because (like the
Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.15.) they are neither hot nor cold, neither Popish
nor Reformed, as Alexander Henderson, a notorious Presbyterian, disputing
against our Royal Martyr, scrupled not to say of the whole Church of England
(in the Book entitled, Reliquiae Carolinae, part 1. page 329.) And surely, we
have reason enough not to choose these Gentlemen for our Representatives in
Parliament, since they are no Presbyterians, and consequently no true
Protestants, which, in our new found Logic now in fashion, must be Synomyns,
or Termini convertibiles. O tempor^! O mores! Bloody Presbyterians must be
entrusted with our Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and true-hearted
Protestants excluded and rejected. These 200 persons, because no Presbyterians,
must be laid aside, notwithstanding their eminent services both to the King and
Kingdom for many years together in the late Parliament, which are so numerous,
and (...) deserve so (...) P^^^^rick^ in praise both of their Loyalty to their
King, and fidelity to their Country: Yet nevertheless we must use them now (so
John's new Gospel commands us) as the Athenians and Lacedaemonians used their
Leading-men and greatest Hero's, who most obliged them, and best defended their
Country; for which they were paid with hatred, and rewarded with ingratitude;
nay, often persecuted, as betraying that Country, which several times they had
saved from apparent ruin and destruction.

But awake, my beloved Patriots, and as you tender the welfare of your loving
Mother the Church of England, cast off this unseasonable slumber, rub your eyes
and look about you; let us make it our business to secure in time our Church
and State against those undermining Engineers, and, as the Apostle says, Dum
tempus habemus, operemur bonum, Gal. 6.10. Let us make choice of those worthy
persons, who by their singular constancy in maintaining the Church of England
against all Fanatical Opposers, became thus formidable to these Pharisaical
Incendiaries of our Country; surely we cannot but have reason enough to love
them, since the Presbyterians do so vehemently hate them. Let us use all
possible endeavors, that as Papists so Presbyterians, and all Non-conformists,
may be for ever excluded from sitting in Parliament; and let not their specious
hypocrisy, or plausible pretenses of abolishing Popish Superstitions, or
maintaining the Protestant Religion, work upon our credulity to countenance
their contrivances, or encourage them in the pernicious designs.

Now they will tell us how ready they are to combine with the Church of England
to pull down Popery, and that Scarlet Whore of Babylon; but you must withal
give them leave to root out all Popish Relics and Rubbish; and then good
Bishops, look to your selves, your Gowns and Surplices. You were lately like to
be brought upon the Stage, not only as burdensome to the Nation, but also as
Popishly inclined, nay, countenancing the horrid Plot of the Papists: And had
not his Sacred Majesty, like his glorious Father, interposed himself, and stood
your Shield, you might ere now most truly have said, Fuimus Troes. But if the
Shepherds be thus threatened by these ravenous Wolves, what kind usage can the
Flock expect at their hands? Yet as for my own particular I must confess, I
cannot handsomely excuse our Shepherds themselves, or their unseasonable
carelessness in this desperate juncture of Affairs, for bearing in a great
proportion the blame of all those dangers, which are now apparently eminent
both to themselves and their Flocks together, when I consider how plainly they
see with what pernicious contrivances the whole Church is menaced by the fiery
Presbyterians, and yet they are so silent, nay, so dumb, (like those who by the
Prophet are called, canes muti, non valentes latrare, Isa. 56.10.) yet they
dare not mutter against them, nor make the People sensible how to prevent their
wicked designs, as easily they might, if in their Sermons and Exhortations they
would take so much pains, as to persuade their Auditors to make choice of such
and such select persons, whom th^^ (...) co^^ant and exact in observing the
Rites and Religion of the Church of England, and withal, zealous to propagate
her Doctrines, and able and resolute to maintain it. Had this, I say, been
duly performed, we might soon assure our selves of a firm settlement both of
Church and State, and never apprehend any danger from those Fanatical
Sectaries, who, like Samson's Foxes, are tied together by the tail of Sedition,
(though otherwise divided) to burn and destroy our whole Harvest.

Likewise they will tell us further, they only differ from the Church of
England in some lesser points, and small Ceremonies; but (to omit, that hereby
they acknowledge themselves wicked Schismatics, who upon so trivial a cause
have departed from the Mother Church believe me, had they but the upper hand,
be the differences never so small, adieu to the Church of England, as the
Rump-Parliament has sufficiently informed us

Wherefore, my beloved Churchmen and Contrymen, suffer not your selves to
be gull^d by these blind excuses or frivolous pretenses; and do but seriously
examine in your own judgments, with what color of truth can these
super-sanctified Hypocrites affirm, that they differ only in such small
punctilio's from the Church of England? Or are they very Fundamentals of our
Government such trivial matters in their Gospel? It Is evident, I suppose, to
all the world, that Papists were never persecuted in this Kingdom for any
Scholastical niceties, or speculative subtilties of Christian Religion, but
were always abhorred, and held unworthy of all humane Society for their
pernicious Tenets concerning the Power and Authority of Secular Princes? But
what, if I do here briefly demonstrate, that the Presbyterians common doctrine
and practice is altogether as pernicious, if not far more destructive, to
Monarchical Government, than the most desperate principles of the Papists; will
not you then more carefully look about you, and hereafter be more cautious how
you deal with such subtle underminers of our Church and State?

To give you therefore full satisfaction concerning the Presbyterians
unexemplary Loyalty, I shall trace down the current of their Gospel from the
very source and original of its being, and will begin with their super
illuminated Patriarch, the famous Calvin, sometimes Pope of Geneva, who was
inspired by the Spirit (you know whom) thus to speak of Temporal Sovereigns,
Earthly Princes do deprive themselves of all Power when they oppose God; nay,
they are not worthy to be held in the number of men: we must therefore rather
spit in their faces than obey them. In Dan. c. 6. v. 22, 25. Neither is his
worthy Darling, Dr. Beza, any thing behind in this point, of whom, Mr.
Suttcliffe, in his Answer to a certain Libel Supplicatory, thus speaks; Beza,
in his Book, De Jure Magistratus, does arm the Subject against the Prince, and,
in effect, overthrows the Authority of Christian Kings and Magistrates --
Suttcliffe (^oco ci^.) writes in these words: Noblemen (says Knox) ought to
reform Religion, if the King will not: If the Prince will not yield to his
Nobles and People, he armeth them with power to depose him. Nay, (says he
further) if Princes be Tyrants against God and his truth, their Subjects are
freed from their Oaths o^ obedience. With him accords Buchanan, he says,
The People is more excellent than the King, and has right to bestow the Crown
at pleasure: That the People may arraign the King: That albeit St. Paul
commanded obedience to Tyrants, yet it was in respect of the times, and the
people that were weak, and not able to take arms. And Dr. Bancroft, Archbishop
of Canterbury, in his Book of Dangerous Positions, gives this general Censure
of them all. Such Divinity as this, is not holden by Knox and Buchanan alone,
but generally, for ought I can perceive, by the chief Consistorians beyond the
Seas. He means Calvin, Beza, and the rest of the Genevesian Sanhedrim.

Now let any man be judge, how well these Gospellary principles of our
Presbyterians agree with the practice and Doctrine of the holy Apostles, who
(as Dr. Bilson, in his Christian Subject, faith) obeyed Tyrants, that commanded
all things against Religion: And in those thing that were commanded against
God, they did submit themselves with meekness to endure the Magistrates
pleasure but not to obey his will.

But we need not much admire, that they differ so much from the blessed
Apostles, when we find the dregs of Christians, the ^apists themselves, in
great number so far beyond them in teaching Allegiance and Fidelity to Secular
Princes, that as far as Protestants are beyond Papists in this particular, so
far are many Papists beyond the bigoted Presbyterians: Subjects (say the
Rhemists, in Romans c, 13.) are bound in temporal things to obey even the
Heathen, being their lawful Kings, and to be subject to them for conscience, to
observe their temporal Laws, to pay them Tribute, to pray for them, and to
perform all other Duties of natural Allegiance. Nay, so far were many Papists
from holding this Antichristian Gospel of Knox and his Boutefous, that they
declared it absolutely erroneous and Heretical in any Christian to believe it,
as appears by their Council of Constance, Sess. 15. in these words, The holy
Synod has been lately informed, that certain erroneous Opinions were held,
contrary to the peace and welfare of the Commonwealth, viz. That a Tyrant may
be lawfully and meritoriously taken away and killed by any Subject or Vassal of
his, notwithstanding any Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance that he had made to
him. Such Doctrine (says the Council) is contrary both to Faith and Manners;
and whosoever shall hold it obstinately, are Heretics, and as such to be
proceeded against according to the Canons.

Now do but compare this Decree of a Popish Council, to that Diabolical
expression of Knox, (that Delphian Oracle of the Presbyterian Scottish
Reformation) in his History of Scotland, page 372. where he declares, That he
could be content, that there were public rewards appointed for such
Assassinates and Murderers of Tyrants, as there are for such as kill Wolves.
And then I leave it to your Conscience to judge, whether the Presbyterians be
not the worst Subjects that ever owned the name of Christ.

But let us proceed a little further, and see what worthy fruit has this holy
Gospel of theirs produced these hundred years past in this Island of great
Britain, and we shall find it very true Non potest arbor mala bonos fructus
facere, Matthew. 7.18. Nay, we shall find, that the Papists themselves, since the
beginning of the Reformation in this Island; were never convicted of half such
wicked and diabolical practices against their Prince, as the Presbyterians have
undeniably committed against their undoubted Sovereign. It Is true, many wicked
Papists, by their Plots and Conspiracies, have often attempted, in (...) most
inhumane manner, to destroy our King, and subvert our Government: But the brave
Presbyterians, scorning to trust always to such pitiful contrivances
underhand, have at several times publicly raised whole Armies in open
Rebellion against their Prince and have not only attempted, but actually
completed the destruction of Kings and Kingdoms.

I do not wonder indeed, how cruelly they dealt with our present Sovereigns
Great Grandmother, Queen Mary of Scotland, (a professed Papist) in dethroning
and banishing her the Kingdom, and allowing her no liberty of exercising her
Religion either in private or public; of which unworthy usage, King James, of
glorious memory, speaking of those Puritan Hypocrites, complains in these
words, How they used that poor Lady, my Mother, is not unknown, and with grief
I may remember it, who desired only a private Chapel, wherein to serve God
after her manner with some selected persons, but could not obtain it at their
hands. In the sum of the Conference before his Majesty, between the Bishops and
others of the Clergy, Anno 1604. page 81. I wonder not, I say, at these
inhumane dealings against a Papist, when we have so late an example of their
unparalled cruelty, in the Tragical and never to be forgotten murder, not
only of a Protestant Prince, but also of the most meek, the most just, and the
most Religious of Princes, King Charles the I. and this dismal Tragedy
perpetrated, not by any private Desperado's of that Faction, as Popish
contrivances for the most part have been; but by the general Vote and consent
of all; and perpetrated, not by any secret contrivances, but (which mainly
aggravates the crime, if possible) by a public formality of Justice, and
pretense of securing the true Faith and Worship of God. For since it is
manifest, (as the Roman Orator well observed) that of all injustice, none is
more odious and abominable, than where men act their Villainies under a vizard
and pretense of good; what crime can be more diabolical, than for Subjects to
Arraign their Sovereign, and the best of Kings, as a Tyrant, subverting the
Government and true Protestant Religion; and under these specious pretenses,
and that Usurped Title, God with us, not only Sacrifice his Sacred Person to
their Fury, but also (to multiply their Villainy) endeavor to destroy his Fame
and Reputation for ever.

And though this execrable and unparalled Murder has been unexpectedly
pardoned, through the excessive clemency of our present Sovereign, which
graciously extended it self, not only to the seduced Multitude, but even to
the sparing the unworthy lives of some of the grand Pilates themselves; yet so
far is this favor from working its due effects upon these ungrateful
Miscreants, that, like Spiders, which suck poison out of the finest Flowers,
they grow daily worse by his Majesty's gracious condescensions to them, always
watching an opportunity, either by secret Contrivances and Conspiracies, to
subvert the Government, as the Fanatical Rabble of Cromwell's Adherents in
Ireland conspired in the year 1665 to murder his Majesty's Lord Lieutenant
there, and surprise his Castle and City of Dublin; or to draw whole Armies into
the Field in open Rebellion against his Majesty, as they have lately done in
Scotland, not only in the year 1677, but also this last Summer, immediately
upon the Proroguing the Parliament here: And to have their God propitious to
their holy designs, they zealously consecrated their Gospellary Rebellion with
the most inhumane Butchery of the Right Reverend Father in God, the Primate of
that Kingdom; and withal most arrogantly burnt his Majesty's Laws and Statutes
in the public place of Execution.

And yet notwithstanding all these insufferable indignities, we see the
Presbyterians, both here and there, are still in vogue, and in good hopes too,
by their expected Interest in the next Parliament, ere long to lay a sure
foundation for the Genevesian Gospel in these three Kingdoms, and refine our
imperfect Reformation, and purge it from all those heaps of Popish Rubbish and
Superstitions, which their Patriarch Calvin, ( Ep. 26.) affirms are still
remaining in the Church of England: We see, the intended Conspiracies of others
is daily exaggerated by the Pens of Learned Men; but the Presbyterians open
Treacheries sealed with the deepest silence. And it is very remarkable, how the
late horrid Plot was no sooner discovered in London, but all the Papists of
these three Kingdom were presently under a Cloud, and, as it were, struck with
a sudden damp, and bereaved of all vital motions: But the Presbyterians actual
Rebellion in Scotland, (and that for Religion too, as appears by their
Declarations) was so far from daunting the rest of that Faction here, that they
writ out several Pamphlets to extenuate their Brethren's wickedness, and excuse
their Insurrection.

But certainly, had the Papists of this Kingdom been as evidently proved guilty
of Justice Godfrey's Murder, as the Presbyterians of Seotland have been
undeniably criminal of the Bishop of St. Andrew's bloody Tragedy; or could the
former be as unquestionably proved to have conspired his Sacred Majesty's
death, or the subversion of the Government, as the latter have undoubtedly
designed both, in their late execrable Rebellion, as appears by their
Declarations, wherein, Puritan-like, they scruple not to charge his Sacred
Majesty with perjury, and violation of the Covenant, together with several
other Presbyterian expressions; and besides, their very Insurrection makes it
undeniable: For (as Dr. Bilson, loco supra cit. well observes) He that may
fight, may kill; and war against the Prince, and killing the Prince, are of
consequence inevitable. Could these things, I say, be thus indisputably proved
against the Papists, surely all Protestants wou^d unanimously rise against such
bloody Tigers, and quite extirpate them root and branch out of this Island for
ever. How strangely then comes it to pass, that Papists are so unfortunate in
their wickedness. as still to be exclaimed against for crimes, in the judgment
of many wise and judicious men, not yet unexceptionably proved against them,
and the Presbyterians undeniable wickedness presently buried in oblivion?

Believe me, Sirs, the case is of a very dangerous consequence, and it
prognostics no good to the Church of England; it plainly shows, how the
dissembling Hypocrites, by their plausible pretenses, have gained the hearts of
the seduced people. And we may be fully persuaded, they could never (...) to
write such seditious Pamphlets, and presume to charge, not only the chief
Bishop, but also the whole Church of England, with erroneous Doctrine, and
withal endeavor to justify their own Schismatical separation from her
Communion, as plainly they do in several Libels, and particularly in one, by
them called, The Countrey's Vindication, had they not been sure of a strong
party to second their attempts, and justify their proceedings.

Let us therefore beware in time, and take heed, lest while we are intentive to
drive away the Wolf from our Flock, the Fox may come in and destroy our
Vineyard. Forty years are not yet expired, since we were forced to make use
even of the Papists themselves, to defend our King and Country from the
Rebellious Presbyterians; God send we be not again, through our stupid
carelessness, reduced to that extremity.

We see how continually active the restless Spirits are, and what cunning
stratagems they use, to sow the seed of jealousy and division between the most
true-hearted Children of the Church of England; and how whomsoever they find
courageous and resolute in maintaining the Rights of the Church, and
Prerogatives of the Crown, presently (as in the Long Parliament) they exclaim
against him, as one of the King's evil Counselors, or as a downright Papist,
or at least Popishly inclined.

They bring us four and twenty Quaeries, or so many Impertinencies, in order to
the choice of a new Parliament; new indeed, because, if possible, it must
wholly consist of Presbyterians, and other Fanatical Sectaries, which, but in
the Rump-parliaments time, was never seen in England. In most of these Queries,
they tell us of the Papists cruelty, I wish they had joined the Presbyterians
too, for England has sufficiently tasted of the bloody contrivances of both
parties. If the Monument at London Bridge be a Memorandum of the Papists fiery
Zeal, what does Charing Cross speak of the Presbyterians bloody devotion? We
know full well which of the later have been either Actors or Abettors in
murdering our King, but we could never certainly find which of the former has
been concerned in firing our City: Yet the busy Spirits must cry Whore first,
and by thus crying so loud against the horrid Treacheries of the Papists, they
think to divert our eyes from discerning their own pernicious designs.

But we would gladly give them leave to spit their venom against the Papists,
and rail at them with all virulent invectives imaginable, had themselves been
so Loyal in their actions, as not to surpass them in wickedness; or so dutiful
in their expressions, as not to snarl at his Sacred Majesty, nor with such
arrogance openly censure his Princely wisdom, in proroguing and Dissolving his
Parliaments, as if he designed to encourage the Plotters to murder himself, as
though, forsooth, the blood-thirsty Presbyterians should wish his Majesty
better than himself can do; whereas it is apparent to the World, their main
design is to tread the footsteps of their Fathers, and raise again the
Cromwellian Gospel and Government.

To this end, the Oliverian Presbyterians of Ireland, having ill spent what
they have worse acquired in that Kingdom, do daily flock over hither in whole
Swarms, and under the color of this late Popish Plot, do leave no stone
unremoved to bring that Nation again into intestine troubles, thereby to leave
that remnant of true Protestants, which God has miraculoufly preserved in that
Kingdom, to the merciless mercy either of the cruel Papists, or bloody
Fanatics: Nay, they make it their business to blow the Bellows of Rebellion
here, as lately they have done in Scotland, though, by God's providence, to
their own utter confusion.

Let us therefore, dear Contrymen, beware in time of these hypocritical
Religionaries, and as we tender the peace and welfare, nay, the very being of
our beloved Mother, the Church of England, let us use all our endeavors in
this our choice of a new Parliament, that no Presbyterian, Papist, or other
Fanatic, be ever admitted to sit in that Honorable House. Let us not be so
credulous as to believe, that Schismatical Sectaries, who daily undervalue the
Laws of the Church, will ever endeavor to make Laws to establish the Church:
We may as well believe, that Wolves will make Folds to preserve the Flock from
ravenous Beasts, as that Presbyterians or other Fanatics will ever pass any
Laws for securing either Church or State against their own undermining
contrivances. I think the abomination of desolation, which through your unlucky
Election of treacherous Presbyterians for your Representatives in Parliament,
happened to the amazement of the World in the Year (48) speaks loud enough to
dissuade you from such desperate choice for the future. Be wise therefore now,
and circumspective, and while by one days prudent choice of faithful and
true-hearted Representatives, you can secure your Lives and Liberties, and
prevent all eminent dangers which threaten our Church and State, make use of so
fair an opportunity: Believe me, if you let it slip, you may for ever lament,
but never be able to redress your losses. Remember the old saying, Post est
occasio calva. Therefore,

Principiis obsta: sero medicina paratur,
Cummala per longas invaluere moras.

FINIS.

