The Case of Dame Fancces Clifton the Relict of Sir Clifford Clifton Baronet
deceased, and William Clifton, Katharine and Arabella Clifton, the Son and
Daughters of the said Sir Clifford, Humbly presented to the Consideration of
the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
IN Michaelmas Term 9 Car. 1. Sir Jervis Clifton Knight and Baronet, and Jervis
his Son and Heir apparent Esquire, levied a Fine Sur cognizance de droit come
ceo, to Timothy Pusye Esquire, and by Indenture Dated the 20 September 9 Car.
1. made between the said Sir Jervis, and Jervis his Son, of the one part, and
the said Timothy of the other part, declared the Uses thereof, by which said
Deed, Fine, and other Conveyances since made Sir Clifford Clifton deceased,
was, during his life seized of and in the Manor of Clifton and diverse other
Manors, Mesuages, Cottages, Lands, Advowsons, Tenements, Meadows, Closes,
Pastures, etc. In the Parishes of Clifton Wilford, etc. for Term of his life,
with the immediate remainder thereof to William his eldest Son, and the Heirs
males of the body of the said William, Remainder over to all other the Sons of
the said Sir Clifford Clifton in Tail successively, Remainder to all other the
Sons of Sir Jervit Clifton. (except Sir Jervis Clifton) his eldest Son) in Tail
male, successively Remainder to all the Daughters of the said Sir Jervis
Clifton the Father in Tail, Remander to the use of the Daughters of the said
Jervis Clifton the Son in Tail, Remainder to the Daughters of Sir Clifford
Clifton in Tail, Remainder to Sir Jervis Clifton the Son, Sir Clifford Clifton,
Robert Waring, Robert Butler Gent* their Heirs and Assigns for ever, with power
to Sir Clifford, to make any Lease or Leases of the Premises, except the
Mannor-house of Clifton and Hodsock, and the Park for 21 years or under, or
three Lives, or for years determinable upon two or three Lives, so as the
Leases take commencement from the time of making, or a time then past, and the
accustomary Rent be thereupon reserved, with further power by his Deeds or last
Will in Writing to Grant or Devise two third parts of the Premises, with or
without reservation of any Rents to any Persons for any number of years, to
take commencement from his death, so as the same determine upon the death of
the Heirs male of the said Sir Clifford Clifton's Body or his attaining the age
of 21 years.

That Sir Clifford Clifton became engaged for great Debts, which his Father
contracted by reason of the late unhappy War, and was otherwise indebted in
several Sums of Money himself, the which he intended to satisfy by the taking
of several Fines, for the renewing of several Leases of the Premises
accordinng to the power given him as aforesaid, for the Terms of years or lives
as aforesaid, which before he could accomplish, he was surprised by Death.

That Sir Clifford Clifton by Will dated the 11 of August 21 Car 2. did give to
the Lady Frances his Wife, and Jervis Holland his Kinsman, two third parts of
the Premises until William his Son should attain the Age of 21 years or die
without Issue male of his body.

But if the said Lady Frances should be in senite with a Son, at the time of
the said Sir Cliffords death, and should be born alive, then the said Sir
Clifford did appoint, that the said Lady Frances, and Jervis Holland, should
enjoy the two third parts, until such after-born Son, should attain the age of
twenty one years, or die without Issue male of his Body.

In trust for payment of his debts, afterward in trust for him or them, to
whom the Freehold of the premises should appertain; and appointed the said
Dame Frances and Jervis Holland his Executors, and William Sacheverill, and the
said Jervis Holland, Guardians of his said Son William, and by his said Will
bequeathed to Katharine and Arabella his two Daughters, 4000 l. a piece, with
this his said further direction, that if either of them dyed before Marriage,
the Survivor should have 6000 l. to her Portion.

Sir William afterward dyed seized of the premises, leaving William his Son,
of the age of eight years, and Katherine and Arabella his two Daughters and no
other Children.

The said Sir Clifford, being by death prevented from executing such Leases as
aforesaid, (the which Leases he had agreed to make, and were drawn, and some of
them Sealed) and his personal Estate being but small, his debts and Daughters
portions cannot be satisfied, unless such Leases be made for raising of the
Fines, which he had in his life time agreed for, and the profits of the said
two third parts of the said Estate, be employed to those purposes, during the
minority of the said William Clifton.

The Bill therefore prays, that it may be Enacted, that the said William
Sacheverill, the Lady Frances Clifton, and Jervis Holland, and the Survivors or
Survior of them, may have Power and Authority: And it is Enacted, that they and
the Survivor of them, are enabled and empowered, during the minority of the said
William, by writing indented under their or the Survivors or Survivor, of their
Hands and Seals, to make such Leases of the premises or of any part of them,
(except as aforesaid) to any person or persons, for any time not exceeding
twenty one years, or three Lives, in possession and not in Reversion to take
effect from the making thereof, under the ancient and accustomary yearly Rents,
which Rents, are to go along with the Reversion and Remainder of the premises,
immediately expectant upon such Estate for years or Lives, and to be recovered
by him or them, who shall be seized from time to time, of or in the next
immediate Remainder or Reversion, expectant upon such Estate for years or
Lives, in such manner as if such Leases and Estates, had been made by Sir
Clifford in his life time, and such Leases to be as effectual, as if made by
Sir Clifford himself.

It does further Enact, that two third parts of the said Manors and Premises,
shall be vested in the said Lady Frances, and Jervis, -- Holland, and the
Survivor of them; and the Executors and Administrators of such Survivor, till
Wiliam Clifton die without Issue Male, or attain to the age of twenty one
years, which shall first happen, discharged at the Trust of Sir Cliffords Will;
but subject to the Estates and of Leases for years or Lives made by Sir
Clifford in his life time, according to the aforesaid settlement, and with the
Estates for years or Lives, which shall be madeby the aforesaid William
Sachervill, Lady Frances Clifton, and Jervis Holland, or their Survivors in
persuance of this Act.

And it does further Enact, that the Moneys raised by Fines upon such Estates
to be granted by the persons aforesaid, and the Moneys raised out of the said
two third parts of the said premises by the said Lady Frances and Iervis
Holland, reasonable and convenient maintenance for the said Katherine and
Arabella Clifton, being first according to the direction of (...) deducted and
allowed, shall be applied to the payment of the just debts, owing by Sir
Clifford at the time of his decease; and after the debts paid, then to raise
such Portions for the said Katherine and Arabella as is appointed by the Will
aforesaid.

And if such Portions cannot be raised after such Debts paid, then such Moneys
as shall be raised, shall be equally paid between the said Katherine and
Arabella (so far as the same shall extend) for their Portions, and if there
shall be a Surplusage after the Debts and Portions paid, the same shall be paid
to William Clifton, his Executors or Administrators, with a General saving of
all Persons Rights, Titles and Interests, excepting William Clifton and the
Heirs males of his body, and such other person and persons to whom any Estate
of or in any the said Premises is limited or appointed by the Indenture
aforesaid, and his or their Heirs of their bodies or Heirs males of their
bodies or Heirs General and Assignees.

It is humbly Offered, that all Parties concerned are consenting to the passing
of this Act desired.


