THE SECT Every where Spoken against: Or, the Reproached DOCTRINE of ELY. As it
was held forth in several Sermons in the Year, MDCLI.

By CHRISTOPHER COB, Layman, Minister of an United People in ELY.

Collected and Analized for a private Use, by Hampden Reeve, Master of Arts,
one of that Society, and a constant Hearer.

Now published by the Assent of the whole Society (as a short Character, at
present, of Them and their Way, till an opportunity of a farther and fuller
discovery) for satisfaction in General.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for Giles Calvert, at the black Spred-Eagle at
the West end of Paul's, 1651

THE PREFACE OF THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
Have thou not read, that in the days of Christ, a Roman Senator abiding at
JERUSALEM, and wondering at his virtuous Life and Miracles, sent to the Senate
at Rome to receive Jesus for a God? They put it to the Question; and in the end
voted, That Rome could not receive Jesus for a God, because He admitted of no
more Gods but Himself: And that whosoever would not accept of him alone, upon
his own terms, which was, to leave all, and follow him, was not worthy of him.
But the Worship of Rome consisted of many, and therefore Jesus and their gods
could not stand together; and accordingly rejected him, and left him to be
tried for his Life by the Law. We have a Law, and by this he ought to dye, said
the People.

Reader, That People are not dead to this day: And to this day, whatever Man,
Sect, or People, shall profess that Name of Jesus according to his Law left in
his Gospel, he must be baptized into his Cup, hated of all Men for that Name
sake, reproached, persecuted.

The Portion of the true Remnant in all ages: and in this day the very
condition of this despised Sect without a name, the People of ELY: judged of
all, known of none, owned of none; a shame to be for it, a danger to be of it,
a sin to be in it: But well; They whom Jew, Greek, and Roman refused, do this
People seek after for a God; And accordingly think no relation dear unto them,
if possibly they may attain to his Cross, and be found worthy to drink of his
Cup together.

And for this Cause, for this Profession, and this Practice, are they called in
Question, at this day, in this present year 1651. both Minister and People,
after twenty years faithful service in the Gospel, day and night declaring this
Name; And accordingly stand indicted (as is publicly known) for an unlawful
and most uncivil Assembly, gathered and united contrary to the Laws of this
Commonwealth. How unjust and erroneous this scandal is, is well known to them
that lie under the burden; and to him that is able to clear them in his own
way and day.

In the mean space, friendly Reader, they thought it their duty, in the midst
of these distractions, to endevor a right apprehension of their Way and Life;
and as much as in them lies, to remove the block of offense, which is for the
most part no other then Ignorance, and a misunderstanding of them; the very
cause that too many speak too headily, and fall too foully on them: As for them
that speak evil through malice, they may go on till they be met with.

But because that some eminent and much honored persons, with many others in
afflicted conditions of spirit, have earnestly desired to see some Declaration
come forth in public, manifesting their Practice and Doctrine* The People
have given their joint consent to print this small Volume of Sermons, or
Collections rather, (being only the faithful gleanings of a diligent hand after
a full vintage) as a true and some small Testimony of them by it. By the
Doctrine thou may know the People, and by the People the Doctrine, as a
Banner of Truth displayed; the Ensign stands open, the Colors are flying, the
Motto is, Love and Truth. He that runs if he have eyes, may read. If that be
not sufficient, to run and read; then come and see: peradventure an Interpreter
may be joined to thy Charet; and besides, thou know not what good may come
out of Nazareth. Reader, I speak as a Witness and Publisher both, having made
certain trial, That to be the accepted Servant of this despised People, this
House of mourning, is an Honor this World cannot give; a Mercy of Mercies; to
be prized before all conditions of glory in Place or Court. Farewell.

Thine, so far as thou art Theirs, John Mason, Esquire
From my Abode in the College Ely, August, 1651.
The Summary CONTENTS Of Each SERMON.
SERMON. I. WHat the meaning of the Precious Promises spoke of is: How they are
concerning Life, Godliness, Glory, and Virtue. What it is truly to live, and
how many things belong to it. The true Being of Godliness, Glory, and Virtue
opened. The Divine Nature, what is meant by it, and the several ways by which
the Soul is made partaker of it. SERMON. II. How the Soul breaks off from God,
and procures its wound: what it is to return; to whom it must be, and by what
means it is wrought. The ways God makes use of in healing the wound made by
himself. What is meant by reviving, and how God revives; with application of
all to particulars. SERMON. III. The Parties pointed out, who they are that may
kill the Body: how, and by what means: Grounds why they are not to be feared,
and in what respects. The worth of Soul and Body considered, and who is indeed
to be feared. What it is to have the Soul destroyed, and the ways used by God
to that purpose. What Hell is, and what it is to be in Hell. SERMON. IV. What the
City Jerusalem means, and what sort of people are typed out by it. How Christ
is said to come near this City. Why he weeps over it? both for joy and grief:
and in what respects. What Jerusalems great ignorance was. The metaphor of a
Hen gathering her Chickens under her wing largely opened and applied.
Jerusalems misery hinted for neglecting her Day of Visitation. SERMON. V. Who
Christ is; what he comes down from Heaven to do in the World. Considerations
about the uncontrollable Will of God, and the two main Branches of it. How, and
in what relations a people are given to Christ, as Children, as a Sister, as a
Spouse. Observations upon each of these. What it is to be utterly lost, and why
all are not lost, with its grounds and application. SERMON. VI. The whole Parable
concerning the Prodigal: His going out from, returning home to, and
entertainment by, his Father, with all the material circumstances mentioned in
that story, mysteriously opened; and in all cases paralleld to the like
condition befalling the Soul. SERMON. VII. What the things not seen were, which
Noah is warned of; and how we in the present day are warned of God in the same
cases. How Noah was affected with this Warning, and the several Considerations
moving him to fear; with the case paralleld to our present conditions. What the
Ark types out, and what was signified by its three stories, etc. SERMON. VIII.
The Effects consequent upon Noah's building the Ark: How He saved his House by
it; with Considerations about the way and manner of it. How this building of
the Ark condemns the whole World; and in what particulars. How Noah became Heir
of the Righteousness by Faith: Where is opened, what the Inheritance of the
Saints is, what it is to be an Heir, and how the Soul comes to partake and have
use of both. SERMON. IX. How all men lay at first in one lump: How the difference
was put, in choosing some, and not others. What it is to choose, with several
considerations touching the nature of it. What it is to be of the royal
Priesthood, with the Privileges belonging to it. Certain Marks and Characters
to distinguish the chosen Generation from all others, etc. SERMON. X. How and in
what respects the people of God may be expressed under the notion of a City: Why
a little City: How it is said, few men are in it, and in what Considerations.
Who the great King is, and what his bulwarks, with the manner of his raising
them. The poor wise man, who he is, where to be found, by what certain
characters he may be known, and how he delivers the City, etc. SERMON. XI. What
sort of People the Lords house was a type of: why God will have a House built:
What are the true materials of it: Why the Soul is backward to this work, and
pleads, It is not time to build; with an Explication of the miseries for not
building, on the one hand; on the other, the great Privileges that attend the
work. SERMON. XII. That the way God chooses to make out himself to his people is
by a Prophet; and for what Reasons. How this Prophet goes near to God, and what
that implies. What the main things are God speaks to his people by this
Prophet, and would have them know; viz. their present place, their next Way,
their utmost End. What the true nature of Hearing is, with Considerations about
it. SERMON. XIII. Four great Dispensations or Times of Man's, the Devils, Christ's
and Gods Reign opened. What the Souls several Woes are under the Devils reign:
What the Devils main armor is; How and by what means Christ overcomes him, and
how he divides the spoil; with Application of all. SERMON. XIV. The Lepers
present misery opened in its several Branches, and paralleled to the Souls
condition: Their hopeless Case ever to be recovered hence; and where the point
of the Strait lay: The great Submission wrought in their spirits to venture
their lives, with Considerations about it, parallelling all to the inward work
of Salvation. SERMON. XV. Christ's great Submission in being brought to say that
word, Thy Will be done, opened in all its Branches; His betraying by Judas,
delivering up into the hands of Sinners, unjust Arraignment, ignominious Death,
Disciples forsaking, His Father withdrawing, He Dumb under all; what all these
Cases meant, and how verified in the work upon the Soul.
Precious PROMISES AND THE Divine Nature Opened and Unfolded.
SERMON. I. March 16. 1650/1.
2 PET. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine Nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
The Analysis.
THree things in general were observed from the words.

1. What are these exceeding great and precious Promises? 2. What is it to
partake of the divine Nature? 3. Who are They that are to be partakers, both of
these precious Promises, and divine Nature? Those that have escaped the
corruption of the world through lust.
First, These exceeding great and precious Promises concern four things spoke
of in the former Verse, Life, Godliness, Glory Virtue.

The first great Promise is of Life; to have life given from the dead, to
receive it of God: the world are all dead while living. This promise of Life
takes in three things: 1. To be freed for ever from fears of Death; now dye no
more. 2. To be capable of instruction: Dead men can learn nothing. 3. A fitness
for action and employment: The Living, the Living shall praise, etc.
2. The second Promise is of Godliness; a God-like mind, in all like the
pattern; Just, patient, merciful, holy, etc. 3. Glory is promised; Moses face
shone: There is a luster and glory in the Truth, which very Enemies must own
and bow under. 4. Virtue, a quick and lively power in Truth: no dry thing, but
a savor of life, or a savor of death.
The Uses were to two sorts.

1. To some, to enquire seriously what they seek in coming and going, life or
death; whether a need and strait for life. Then, 2. If a want and stress for
life, yet on what terms would you have it? Is it promised to you? else why hope
you? 3. To consider, what you would have life for; for ease, peace, safety to
your selves; or the service of Truth?
2. To others, that are indeed in the grave, bound in fetters of darkness and
sin, as if never deliverance should be, to mind such that the promise of Life
is surely made, That Sarah shall conceive according to the time of life, etc.
Secondly, What is it to partake of the divine Nature? This divine Nature is
the Holy Ghost, and to partake of this, implies, 1. An indwelling, a settling
abode of it; not as a wayfaring man, but as a well of living waters within. 2.
It implies a known and felt receiving of this Divinity; the man made to know,
and feel, and close with it. 3. This Divine Nature, where it is given and
received, is fruitful, brings forth of its kind and image, moulds the man into
it.


The Uses were, 1. Enquire what we would come to; whether ready to receive and
be married to this Divine Nature? else never expect children. 2. To inform that
the door is yet open: the Promise and Call are yet to us, why are we no more
minding it! etc.


2 PET. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
etc.
THree things in general I would this day open to you. 1. What are these
exceeding great and precious Promises. 2. What it is to be partakers of the
divine Nature. 3. Who they are that shall be partakers both of the precious
Promises and Divine Nature: not all men, all are not fitted for it; but such as
have escaped the corruption of the world through lust. For there is a great
deal in us that seems to be for God, which is but lust, if well examined: the
Heart of man is full of cheats, and deceitful above measure; but God will not
be mocked: none shall partake of his Nature and Being but such as have escaped
lust: He will have no fellowship with the stool of iniquity.

First, What are these exceeding great and precious Promises? Whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious Promises: The words have relation to the
foregoing Verse; According as his divine power has given us all things that
pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of Him that has called us
to glory and virtue: Where four things are laid down, in which these precious
Promises are fulfilled; Life, Godliness, Glory, Virtue. These are the exceeding
great things promised to be, though not yet attained: For it is one thing to
have a Promise given, and another to see the accomplishment of it: as Christ
says to his Disciples, I will send you the promise of my Father: the Holy
Ghost was promised before, but yet to be sent by Christ.

1. The first thing promised, to which you are called, is Life, as the promise
was to Sarah, That according to the time of Life God would surely visit her,
and she should conceive, etc. The Spirit of Life is promised to you, though yet
the Thing is to be accomplished: For how do we lie at present in our graves?
like Dead men long out of mind? how dry and desolate and waste, because the
Spirit of Life, that should quicken and enliven, is not come! The time of Life
is not accomplished; but the promise is gone forth, that at the set time He
will surely visit Sarah, and the dry womb shall conceive; though Abraham's body
be dead, and Sarahs womb dead, and all seem to work to the contrary: For great
is the desolation now upon us; We are sealed in our graves under death; but yet
this is the promise, That the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and
live: And This is an exceeding large and precious Promise.

1. Life implies in it a freedom from death, a recovery and deliverance out of
its power: Alas, to Live is another manner of thing then we have conceived it!
We have gone about, and acted, and spoke like living men; but have we Lived in
all this! have we been yet ever acquitted and freed from fears of death? The
Terrors of Death made me afraid (says David.) Are you not yet kept all your
life time under this fear of Death? You can never have rest nor quiet because
the Jailer is ever at your heels: you are not yet freed from him. Death
reigned, it is said, from Adam to Moses: now Adam was made a Living Soul: He
had a life to see and know good and evil, but yet he could not come at it,
could not reach the Tree of life; a sword was set to keep him off there: But
the second Adam is a quickening Spirit, He has life in Himself; He was raised
up by the power of God, never to dye more: and this is life indeed. Now how
many in the World are there that never yet came to be Living Souls! to have
understanding and light to know good and evil! but when brought to that, yet
there is no freedom from Death: Death reigns from Adam to Moses; to that
farther light, which comes in by the Law opened and read to the Soul: When the
Commandment came (says Paul) sin revived, and I dyed: Death yet reigned. And
now to be freed from this cruel Tyrant, from eternal Death, and to be made
partakers of Life, is an exceeding great and precious mercy: Who can value it!

2. The Man that is alive, is capable of instruction and teaching; He can hear
and learn from others: but the Dead know nothing at all (says Solomon:) while
we lie dead in darkness, fears, unbelief, faintings of spirit; so long we know
nothing, hear nothing; we are capable of nothing of the mind of God: All is
confused and without order in this land of Death. What is the reason (think
you) there is such a stupid, senceless, careless Heart upon you; not an
ecchoing back, as was in David's Heart; When Thou said, Seek my face, My Heart
answered, Thy face Lord will I seek? Why is not this mind, and quickness, and
breathings of Truth in you? Why, you are dead: Death reigns, sin has dominion;
you are not yet freed from that body of Death: For were you but alive, it were
impossible but you should hear the voice of the Son of God: Truth would touch
you; and that is the first thing to be done, to give you life, and then sense
and hearing will follow. But you are now as unsensible at times as a post in
the house; and therefore you come and go, and come and go, and nothing is done;
why? because you are under death: It is not yet the time of Life; and He will
make us know we cannot quicken our own souls. Adam would have been reaching to
the Tree of Life when his Eyes were opened to know Good and Evil: I, but a
flaming sword is set, turning every way, to keep the Tree of Life: and if ever
Adam live again, it must be upon other terms; He must be raised by another
power, and that freely of gift: For he is now a dead man, and cannot quicken
his own Soul, unless that quickening spirit of Life be put within: and here
lies the great strait, to lie at the mercy of another, whether He will ever
again give life or not; and if he will, yet it must be in his own time too, and
not ours: and therefore the Church is at a strait, and complains, There was
none could tell her how long: How long we must lie in the dust, in our graves,
before Life shall be given, we know not: we cannot get it out of his hand.
Truth would never be good and sweet if we could attain it by our reachings.
Many may press in to take the Kingdom by violence and stealth, but the Examiner
will come; Friend, how came you in hither? But of a certain this Promise of
Life is given to some of us; Hear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken: The word
is gone forth, that you shall surely be visited at the Time of Life; and till
this be accomplished you cannot be capable of instruction: Your reason and
thoughts cannot reach it, but are to sit silent in your graves till Christ
shall call, Lazarus, come forth; and so life be given and put within: and this
will be an eternal Life, never to dye any more; Death is no more to have
dominion, but yet it reigns. This is your hour (says Christ) and the power of
darkness; and whilst this government is up, and those noises of Hell are
within, we cannot hear the voice of Truth; till the Soul is freed from the
stormy wind and tempest, and a calm be made. We many times go about to quicken
our selves, and get life at our own hands, and so reach up hopes, and
conclusions, and promises to bear up a while: but alas! all must down again;
we must to our center, to our graves, till the spirit of Life be put in. We are
asking what we should do, and what is our way? as if then we could easily turn
and do it; but alas, there is a mistake in the bottom, Life must first be
given us, and we must rest in our graves till then, and sit in silence in our
darkness and bonds till we are freed; and that is our way, if indeed we would
know it: but how foolish and preposterous are we! we would be walking before we
are made alive. But then,

3. A man that is alive, as He is capable of Instruction and teaching, so he is
fit for any employment, to speak, and walk, and act what is set before him: He
may run the ways of Gods Commandments; He may speak well of God: The Living He
shall praise thee (says Hezekiah:) The father to the children shall make known
thy Truth: Then indeed there will be a capableness of that other precious
Promise, to be partakers of Godliness, to walk with God, to be of his Council.
But now is a dead man fit company for God? Can God have fellowship with such as
lie stinking in their graves? Is there any communion to be had with dry bones?
Can you have any content and pleasure in a dead man's presence? No: you must
first be partakers of Life, before you can partake of Godliness; to have his
mind and nature and disposition in you. God commanded Moses to speak to the
people, not to break into the Mount to gaze, lest they were destroyed: We are
reaching to come near and near, and plead for it, to be taken in to know the
mind and counsels of Truth: Alas, we are not fit! Can we dwell with
everlasting burning? Can we come near God, and not be consumed? Alas! we know
not what we have desired: The old bottles would burst in pieces if this new
wine should be put in. There must be a new Life given before that new mind can
grow: Before we ^^n partake of godliness, to have that God-like mind in all
things, to love Justice and Mercy, and walk humbly with our God, we must first
be Living Men: And it is but yet a promise to us, though it be exceeding great
and precious; the Thing is yet to be done: and therefore that which concerns us
at present, is, to sit still in our graves, in our bonds and darkness and
sorrows, till He calls us; as They told the blind man; Be of good cheer, for He
calls Thee: In the mean time it is in vain, and dangerous for us, to run and
gaze.

These precious Promises are not made to all; I would not have you all thrust
in as sharers: you may come and gaze for fashion-sake, but I know there are
among you in whom the love of God is not; as Christ said to the Jews; I know
you have not the love of God abiding in you: You come not out of a love to
Truth, or mind to be instructed, but either as to hear a matter of news, or to
lie at catch to make a mischief. Therefore beware what you do, God will not be
mocked by you; It is dangerous tampering in Holy things with a deceitful heart;
we have paid dearly for it amongst us: and He will surely divide between
thoughts and intentions, and separate betwixt the sheep and the goats. He has
indeed promised all things belonging to Life, Godliness, Glory and Virtue, but
to whom? Whereby are given TO US (says the Apostle) exceeding great and
precious Promises: TO US, and not to all. And,

1. That Promise of Life; I told you what it was to Live: to be freed of all
snares and bonds and fears of Death, which keep down the Soul a close Prisoner,
that it can stir neither hand nor foot: But none will come in here but such as
are close hunted and put out of all their holes and shiftings, that they can no
ways get Life at their own hand: For so long as there is any fhift, that we can
either get up hopes, or prayers, or desires, or resolutions of our own; so long
we are not dead men; as God says, Thou have abased thy self to Hell, yet have
Thou not said, There is no hope: And till a man be dead, there is no need of
raising Him to Life: and now to live, is to be brought out of the grave, and
recovered by this free word of Promise. You all live, and walk, and act, but
upon what terms? Is it by this Promise of Life given to Abraham? Have your
lives been given you? Have you been raised up by the same power that raised up
Jesus? Christ says, All that the Father has given me shall come unto me; and
I will raise them up at the last day: They shall be raised up; and when? at the
last day, not presently: The best wine is not brought out first, but at the
last Day: When Christ who is your Life shall appear, then shall you also appear
with him in glory: and this is an exceeding precious Promise indeed, to as many
as God has given it; but not by any's thrusting themselves in that were never
bidden: The King will come and look over his guests, and find the man without
the wedding garment.

2. The second great and precious Promise is of Godliness; to have a God-like
mind, to be Just, Patient, Merciful, Single, Holy as God is Holy, etc. to be
knowing, and in the light as he is in the light; to be fashioned into the very
mind of the Father. This is godliness that has great gain belonging to it,
having the promises of this life and that which is to come; to submit thus, to
be God-like in all things, to pray indeed, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is
in Heaven; We would have our wills reign and be done in Heaven, as they are in
Earth: We would have Gods mind come to ours, and Heaven stoop to Earth: There
is something yet dear to us that we save and keep alive, and would not every
where and in all cases be like to God: But this is the only happiness and
content, to attain this life of godliness, for a people to join together in one
heart and Soul, strengthening and building up one another in their most holy
Faith, provoking one another to good works, seeking the good of one another as
their own, and ready to lay down their lives for their Brother. How many people
have we seen in our day to change and altar their Gods according to their own
thoughts and imaginations! as the complaint was against Israel; According to
thy Cities, so are thy Gods, O Israel; such a changing, tossing, and variable
thing is in the heart of man: but where the mind of God is planted, and
spreads it self forth in the Soul, and makes it partaker of Godliness, that is
a standing principle, abiding for ever.

3. A third great and precious promise is, to be partakers of Glory; There is a
glory that follows and flows from godliness; Moses face shone when he came down
from God: and the Church in her worst day, yet says of her self, I am black,
but comely: and Christ yet owns and calls Her, O thou fairest among women! And
I am confident, however we are found in our selves weak and foolish, and
sinners; yet we sit in the Consciences of our worst Enemies, if they would
speak their hearts freely, That sure we are beyond them, and honester then
They: There is something that judges, and gets above them, do what they can:
and however they envy, hate, and oppose, and will not stoop under it, yet such
a glory there is in the Truth, such a luster and shining, as will manifest it
self: and therefore the promise is, The Righteous shall shine as the Sun in the
firmament.

4. The fourth great and precious Promise is to be Partakers of Virtue: Now
Virtue is either taken for a quick and lively fresh power in any thing; as when
we say, such an herb is full of virtue to smell on, or such meat is full of
virtue to taste on: or else Virtue is some secret hidden power, which can
neither be smelt nor tasted, but yet is perceived. As in the Loadstone there is
a hidden virtue to draw Iron, etc. So there is a lively Virtuous Power in the
Word of Life, it will take some effect or other, and not return in vain; for
either it meets with its own kind in us, and that relishes and tastes, and
finds a sweetness in it; as David says, Thy Word is sweeter unto me then the
honey and the honeycomb; It is a sweet smelling savor to that, a savor of
life unto life; but if it meet with the enemy, that evil principle in us, that
curses, and rages, and rends, and teers the child at the sight of Jesus, it is
a savor of death unto death to That. Who ever they are that neither taste a
sweetness in Truth, nor smell a savor of rest from it; yet there is a secret
virtue that will cut them to the heart. Nabal's heart dies and faints in him,
do what he can; It strikes a secret blow, and gets in between the joints of the
armor: There is a living virtue in it, and like a potion of Physic it will
work one way or other, either make better or worse. And thus the first thing is
opened to you, What are these great and precious Promises? And before I come to
the next thing, to open what it is to partake of the Divine Nature, I would
have this I have said well looked over by you: For who of you is yet fit to be
married to Christ? He will not take another man's wife: whilst we have a
husband living, any created thing, in whose bosom we lie, and take delight and
pleasure, so long we are not a wife for Christ; and if our hearts be pulled off
by force only, and the way hedged up, that we cannot find our Lovers, this is
not that which pleases him neither; He will not marry a divorced woman, but
only a chaste Virgin, a Heart that stands loose and clean from all corruptible
things, such a heart only is a fit Spouse for Christ, to be Partaker of this
divine Nature. But,

1. It concerns some of you to enquire what ^it is you seek, Life or Death:
None of you, I know, will say Death; you would all have Life. But what then
mean the bleatings? the cryings and huntings after perishing Things, where
Death is in the pot? Why are you living in the creatures, in your own wills and
counsels? Why are you not at a strait to cry out to be saved, if Life be the
Thing you seek? There are many Seekers in the World; the Greeks seek after
wisdom, and the Jews they seek a sign: some seek ease, and quiet, and rest from
their torment; some seek wisdom, and knowledge, and parts, to be great and
honored; but Death is in all this. See then what would you have? Is Life the
thing you seek for? or have you it already? If you are partakers of Life
indeed, then the rest will follow: Godliness will then come in, a God-like
mind, to be just, single, merciful, h ly, like to the Pattern; and then Glory
will follow, your good works will shine before men, and then a virtue will go
forth which may be savored and relished in all your words and actions. But now
do these things appear in us? what is it we seek? what would we have? is Life
the Thing? would we have Christ to dwell in us? No, we would not all come so
near; we would have Christ a great way off, at the right hand of God, to save
us at the last gasp, when we come to dye, but not live the life of the
Righteous: But be not deceived, it is in vain to come hither, if we seek not
Life. But then,

2. Suppose a stress be upon you, that indeed you would reach out to the Tree
of Life, because you are smit to the ground, and cannot escape the hand, but it
will bring you to Death do what you can: But now enquire upon what grounds
would thou have Life? upon what account? why do thou hope or expect it? is
it promised to thee? is the word gone forth from Christ, that He will raise
thee up at the last day? what ground have you to hope more then all the world?
though you may seek it, yet that will not do it neither. Esau sought the
blessing with tears: And (Christ says) Many shall seek to enter, and shall not
be able: And ( Paul says) That Israel obtained not what they sought after, but
the Election obtained it. There is a People which shall surely be Partakers of
Life, to whom the Promise is made, but no other: The Promise is sure to all the
Seed; therefore see, how stand thou in all thy seeking and hoping for Life?
Had thou ever a Promise of Life given thee, either to thy self, witnessed to
thy own Soul, or given to any of his People for thee, that Thou shall Live?
etc. For a vain thing it is, to go and take Promises up out of the Scripture,
and make them our own: Promises made to Abraham, and David, and the rest, what
are these to thee? unless God make them over, and give them to thee, as He did
to them. And then,

3. Enquire what would you have Life for? would you have it to please your
selves? to live to your wills? to be at ease, and be freed from troubles? Alas,
this is not a right seeking of it! As Jehu answered the Kings messenger
concerning Peace, What have thou to do with Peace? So, what have thou to do
with Life? it belongs not to thee, unless there be that end in it, to live for
another service, and not thy own: Therefore it is of great concernment to know
what we are about. I wonder sometimes on what uncertain bottoms you stand; you
know not whither you go, nor what you would have in all your hearings; but like
the picture of a rampant Lion on the wall, come seven years hence, and that is
still in the same place: So I have known some of you these many years, to be
Seekers, and Professors, and Talkers, but you are still where you were seven
years ago, as carnal, sensual, as blind and ignorant in the ways of God, as
much glued to the world, and seeking your selves, not removed a step nearer God
then you were, etc.

But then,

For some of you, whom indeed I know, and who yet lie dead in your graves, fast
bound in chains and fetters, under darkness, and fears, and sorrows, and are no
ways able ever to get out; to you this promise of Life is made, That God will
make the dry bones live, and raise you out of your graves. It concerns you to
look after it; For he has promised, and will perform; He will surely keep his
Word unto Jacob, and his Covenant to Israel. God will say to all that keep us
down in chains and bondage, Let my People go, that they may serve me; Let my
Captives go free. The time will come, when he will turn our mourning into joy,
and fill our tongues with laughter, and our mouths with praises, when he shall
bring back the Captivity of Israel, when the Time of Life is come.

And now it follows to go on, That you might be made Partakers of the Divine
Nature: All this I have spoken of, is to pass upon the Soul before there can be
this partaking of the Divine Nature, to be joined in, and married to it: There
may be somewhat of Life, and Godliness, and Glory, and Virtue springing in the
Soul, but yet it may be but one alone, as a chaste Virgin indeed, single and
loose from all, and fit for a Husband, but not yet married; the House must be
thus swept, and provided, and made fit, but yet the King is to come to lodge in
it; It is yet a farther thing to become fruitful, and have children in the
Truth; therefore the next thing to enquire into, is,

Secondly, What is it to partake of the Divine Nature?

The Holy Ghost is this Divine Nature spoke of: Now Christ says, He will give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask it; only to such as ask it, such as are at a
strait to cry for it, and only living men can cry and ask, and to them he will
give this Holy Spirit: God communicates and gives in to the Soul a Holy Seed,
of his own Nature and Being, as really as in the outward generation of a man. A
seed must first be given and received, before ever a child can be brought
forth: So is it with the Soul, a seed of God must be really planted in, and
sown there, somewhat of his own Being and Substance left behind in the Soul, to
stay and abide, and grow and spread, or else there can never be fruitfulness
expected. If God only come and go as a wayfaring man, and take not up his
abode, so long we shall never be settled down to any thing truly unmovable, but
up and down, as His coming or going away is. As the Spirit came on Saul, and
came on Balaam, so long they prophesied, and spoke of God, and were as it were
new men; but the Spirit departs again, and then they are as other men, the same
they were before. But now to have God dwell in man, to take up his abode, This
is my Rest, here will I dwell for ever, this is a mighty thing indeed.

2. To be made Partakers of the Divine Nature, as it implies an abiding and
settled planting in of a seed of God, so it is secondly a known and felt-thing
in the Soul; there is a certain close and meet of the man; He receives the seed
in; the man is brought to hear, and feel, and know that God is nigh.

3. This Divine Nature, where it is thus given in by God, and received by the
man, it brings forth of its own kind and Image: He gives to every seed its own
body. Adam begets a son in his own likeness, natural, and carnal, and earthly,
and selfish, having his center wholly downwards: And so the Lord, He begets
Children like Himself, in Patience, Love, Singleness, Justice, Meekness, etc.
Where this Divine Nature is sown, it will surely grow up into the likeness of
its Father, it will own its Father in its countenance, it will turn the man
into the same mind, and will, and desires; and if not so, yet do the man what
he can, whether he will or not, this Truth will act and stir, and bring forth
like it self: and in this it will deal plainly and truly, and show the man
where he is; it will not be bribed to dawb with untempered mortar; and yet is
merciful too, tenderhearted, easy to be entreated, full of all good fruits,
etc.

Now then,

1. This may be of Use to enquire, what it is we would come to? would we
receive this Divine Nature, and join in and be married to it? It is certain you
can never have children, nor be fruitful in the Truth, unless you are married
in here: Though you should be Virgins, and be brought to stand clear and loose
from all intanglements, yet you can never have children, to keep your name
alive in Israel; you will live and dye alone, without you are brought to join
into this Spirit of Christ: Though we may have Fathers and Instructers to care
and provide for us, yet that Promise cannot take place, In stead of fathers
thou shall have children, whom thou may make Princes in all Lands. We can
never leave a seed after us, that may grow up to be Princes in the Truth, to
make it spread in the world, and run, and be glorious: but at present we are
far from this; there is a very ill spirit in us, not willing to see another
thrive and prosper in the Truth: We would neither enter in our selves, nor
suffer them that would. How few of us are yet reached out to this Thing, to
long for and desire to be Partakers of the Divine Nature? We would rather
starve, and live on any Husks, any shifts and sharkings, then come near God for
a Feast; our hearts choose rather a Dogs life, hunger and ease. Hungry indeed
we are many times, at a want for somewhat; but if we can get but a little ease
in our want, we can bear it, and so the strait gets off; and this may discover
that great ill will that is in us to the thriving and prospering of the Truth,
etc.

2. This may inform you what the End of all is; all the Promises of Life, and
Godliness, and Glory, and Virtue, they all tend to this end, That you might be
Partakers of the Divine Nature: The Door is yet open, the Promise and Call is
yet after you; It belongs to you, as it did to Ruths kinsman to marry Ruth, and
purchase the Inheritance: but if you shall slight it, and say as he did, I
cannot redeem it, for it will spoil my own Inheritance; if we shall answer so,
No, we cannot come so near, to partake of the Divine Nature, to dwell with God,
He will be a consuming fire, He will cross and spoil all our wills, and
delights, and designs: If we shall thus judge our selves unworthy of eternal
Life, then Lo He turns to the Gentiles: He will turn to another people; for
sure He will find out some that will be glad to receive Him, whose Souls will
be at a strait, and thirst after the living God. But as yet the Door is open to
you; what is the reason you are no more upon it? They are exceeding great and
precious Promises in themselves, why are they not precious to us? Sure they
would, had we but a Heart. Therefore consider of it, it is offered to you; and
if you shall follow on to know the Lord, you shall surely know Him. Consider,
the Door is open, the precious Promises are given to you, of Life and Glory,
etc. Why then are you passing away your days on such low, trivial, and dying
things? Joseph's blessing was large, reached out to the utmost bounds of the
Everlasting Hills; and why are we so scant-hearted and low in our desires? Why
are we not upon these great and precious Things promised? and to partake of
this Divine Nature, and thence be fruitful in the Truth, and bring forth
somewhat that may stand and live for ever after us!

THE SOULS TRUE Wound and Cure. SERMON. II. March 30.1651.
HOSEA 6.1, 2. Come, and let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and He
will heal us: He has smitten, and He will bind us up.

After two days will He revive us, in the third day will He raise us up, and we
shall live in his Sight, etc.


The Analysis.
IN the words were intimated the three days Works of the Father, Son, and
Spirit in their order.

1. The Work of the Father, to pull down and wound, and thither the Return must
be, to Him that smites. 2. The Work of the Son, to revive; After two days He
will revive us, etc. 3. The Work of the Spirit, to raise; In the third day He
will raise us up, etc.
I. In this Returning three Things are considerable.

1. They that return must truly know they are out of the way; a true sense of
that must be: And that was here in two things: 1. In breaking prison and
running from the strait; The Princes of Judah like them that removed the bound,
etc. 2. They were out in seeking to cure themselves before the day came, Hos.
5.13. but a secret moth blasts all. The Uses were,
1. To look home, whether not our own Case; have we not removed the Bound? run
from the strait? and not endured? etc. 2. To take us off of looking on another
sin, and keep close to our own strait, lie under our own misery, till delivered.

2. It Is considerable in this Return; there must be counsel and calling to it;
Come, and let us return, else not stir a foot. 3. This Return is to the Lord:
He that had wounded, He will heal. Many heal themselves, but there is a wound
too hard. And these several ways God takes for healing. 1. He removes the ill
humor that feeds the sore, Sense and Reason. 2. He asswages the anguish and
smart and pain of the Soul, else all in vain. 3. He applies a plaster of
loving kindness and mercy. 4. He points the Soul to wait for the set time, till
that come.

II. The second Work is the Sons; He will revive: After two days He will revive
us, etc. And that by these means: 1. He takes off all bonds and chains, fears
and perplexities, which keep down the Soul from stiring. 2. He unswadles and
opens Himself: I am Joseph your Brother. 3. He preaches Peace and Love; He, the
Prince of Peace. 4. He revives by preaching the everlasting Gospel: the eternal
Love and good will of God to the Soul, this enliveneth.


All was brought home by Use, to see how much of the work had passed on us
there, all the four Pa ticulars.

HOSEA 6.1, 2, etc. Come, and let us return unto the Lord; for He has torn,
and He will heal us, etc.
IN the former Chapter great complaint is made against Israel and Ephraim, that
they were Revolters, that they committed whoredom, and will not frame their
doings to seek unto their God, Verse. 3, 4. And this is that misery that befalls
such as transgress against the Lord, that received not the Truth in the love of
it, that obeyed not counsel; the Hand of the Lord will surely meet with such;
He will teer and wound them: There shall be no peace to the wicked. When Israel
was a child, then I loved Him, says God; then He was tender, and soft, and
pliable to be ordered: but as They called them, so They went from them, Hosea
11.2. As the Prophets called them indeed to come up, and come nigh God, then
there is a going backward from Him; He is bent to a backsliding heart: But
Israel and Ephraim shall be sure to be dealt with and made desolate: A Time
comes wherein God will meet with Him. The Pride of Israel testifies to his
face; therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity: v. 5. And this
is our case; The Pride has been such, we thought we had been Somebody, and
could live alone of our selves; and like the Prodigal have asked to have our
portion, and we would be gone and shift for our selves: But alas! all is soon
spent with riotous living, and desolation and famine have come upon us,
rendings and teerings, perplexities, disquiets and troubles in all our ways. I
will be unto Ephraim as a Lion; I will teer, and go away; I will take away, and
none shall rescue: Hos. 5.14. And when thus it shall be in the midst of the
Land, when this is the Souls condition, to be rent and torn by God, and then
left and forsaken, that He cannot be found, but He hides Himself; though Job go
forward and backward, to the right hand and to the left, yet He is gone and
cannot be found. He feeds among the lillies (^aith the Church) until the day
dawn, and the shadows fly away: As if she should say, Alas, I am unclean, but
He feeds among the clean ones, among the Lillies that are spotless, the Lillies
that grow without toyling and caring, there are his walks; but I am no company
for him, He is withdrawn from Me, until the day dawn, etc. This is a hard day
indeed, when the Soul is left in this desolate case; there is now need to think
of returning: The Prophet He feels the need, and therefore calls to the People,
Come and let us return to the Lord. And so all along the Scriptures, the
Prophets are brought in as sensible and crying under the misery, though their
People were senceless, and careless, and stupid. How do Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Samuel, Hosea, and so all the Prophets, stand in the gap for their people, and
call upon them in their desolation to come in and return to the Lord! But whom
do they call to return? not all men, not such as never was nigh to the Lord;
No: Only Ephraim, and Israel, and Judah, his own people, that have been once
nigh, and are backslidden, and turned Prodigals from their fathers house: Only
to such is the Call; and in the worst time of all, when torn, and wounded, and
left of God: (yet, says the Prophet,) Come, and let us return to the Lord; for
He has torn, and He will heal, etc.

In this Return these things are considerable.

First, They that return know surely that They are out of the way: the Soul
must first be made truly knowing and sensible of that, when it is met with in
its gaddings, as Hagar was by the Angel, and examined strictly; Whence come
Thou Hagar? and whither will Thou go? Thou art quite out of the way in flying
from thy Mistress Sarah: Return, and submit unto her. The going out is thus
clearly opened and laid upon the Soul.

But wherein were They gone out of the way, that

They are called on to return?

1. They were out of the way, in that they broke prison, and ran away from the
strait; as Chap. 5.10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the
Bound: A Bound was set to keep them in a narrower compass, that God might the
better come nigh to deal with them: as it is in Job; If They be bound in
fetters, and holden in the cords of affliction; then He shows man his sin,
and his transgression, how he has exceeded: Then is a time when God can come
near to search and dress the sore, when the Soul is laid fast from running
away; when it is held in the Bond of the spirit, then the heart is opened, the
wickedness discovered, what a wretched case man is in, hopeless and helpless.
And this is the way God takes to hide pride from man's eyes, and lay him low in
the dust. And how have we gone out of the way in this? We have removed the
Bond, and run away, and would not endure the strait, nor stick to our
conditions, to lie so low, and wretched, and helpless: We have flown out from
this, and said as They, No, but we are Lords, and will come no more at him.
Here have we turned out; and if ever we return, we must come in sensibly guilty
under this, of removing the Bound, and running away from our conditions, living
at our hands and own counsels at a distance from God. And now here it is
needful for all of you to enquire, how it stands with you? Have you all turned
out here in removing the Bound? or were you yet never in it? I know some of you
were never as yet in this Bond of the Spirit, but have been left to your own
wills, and runnings of heart, and never yet were brought to this narrow
compass. But some of you, I know, have removed this Bound, have got from your
sin, and guilt, and misery, when opened to you: You have turned your eyes away
from your own sore, and looked asquint on another faults, and pryed into their
miscarriages; have spyed out the mote there, but would not see the beam in our
own eye, but have covered that close, and hid it: and therefore is the stroke
now come upon us. God has found us out, though man could not; and there is a
secret moth has eaten and consumed us, and spoiled all our good, because we
have run away, and would not endure the bond to be put upon us. I know
assuredly the time when God would have brought some of you to a strait, that
nothing should have contented you without the knowledge of the Love of God; what
the eternal thoughts are concerning you, and what should become of us in the
latter end, that we might not live on notions, or words, or knowledge, or
operations, nor any thing short of this: but here have we broke away, and would
not endure to come at it. But,

2. They were out of the way in going about to cure themselves before the day
came, the time of deliverance: Chap. 5.13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
Judah his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb; yet
He could not heal you: such a reaching has there been after ease and cure and
deliverance before the time was come; Therefore (says God) I will be as a moth
and rottenness to Ephraim: a secret hand has followed us, as David says; I am
consumed by the blow of thy hand: a secret consumption, and mouldring away, and
coming to nothing; and of all deaths this is most miserable, to dye so by
degrees, fall in pieces, and melt away to nothing like a snail: and thus has
the Lord dealt with us, such a wasting and decaying has been upon us, but yet
the thing is not laid heart: None speaks aright, nor says, What have I done?
what is the cause of this desolation? Why is the hand against me? How has a
secret moth eaten up all our good? Time was there was a tender conscience, an
awe of spirit, and fear to offend, a watchfulness over all our ways, and
thoughts, and words; but now all is gone: The Lord has smitten us, and our
flower fades.

And now if this were indeed but sensibly upon us, it would make us look home,
and not have our eyes in every corner* to pry into one another failings; but
it would be work enough to look on our own guilt, to see how we have broke the
bonds, and got away from owning our shame, and lying under our misery, and have
not stayed till we were washed from our blood, but have washed our selves, and
forced our selves (as Saul did) to offer sacrifice, when we heard but a report
of deliverance: Behold, this is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the World: Yea presently we reckoned all this our own, and clambered up to get
into the liberty, before we were called for our of our prisons; and we must
therefore down again to our bonds: we were but an untimely birth, and must not
live to see the Sun. We tarryed not in our graves till that word came from
Christ, Damosel, Arise; Lazarus, Come forth; but we broke away by force, as a
Servant runs from his Master; and that shows we broke from him, in that there
is no heart to return: we never cared for the Lord, nor loved him since, but as
we have been forced to Him for a little ease; and when we have got that, we
have been gone presently, and cared for no more.

Secondly, The second Thing considerable in this Return, is from the Call and
Counsel of the Prophet, Come, and let us return, etc. Being once out, we cannot
return of our selves without counsel: The Soul knows not what to do, nor which
way to turn, being once lost, it is in such an amaze; so foolish a thing is
man: and therefore if we are never brought to that strait, to cry out for some
to counsel, and lead, and tell us what to do, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do to be saved? without this there will be no returning.

For out we are got, that is certain, and have miserably lost our selves: For
some of us were formerly truly touched and visited, and taken out of the world,
were made to see and understand the vanity of our former ways, and in what a
miserable and dangerous estate we lay, if the Lord stepped not in to help us out;
and whether this would ever be or not, we knew not; and here we were made to
own, and bow, and lie under our conditions as undone Persons, if Mercy helped
not out: Thus we lay low for a time under this bond; but soon as ever we heard
a report of Deliverance, and were pointed out to it, as John pointed to Christ,
Behold the Lamb of God, etc. Here is one that can cure you, and bring you out,
This is the Savior of the World; when a Light came to show us this, we
presently reached at it, and called all our own, and would not lie in our
misery till he called us to come, till the Lord Himself delivered us; but
thought now that we saw the medicine lie before us, we were wise enough to take
it, and to cure our selves; we thought we could now live of our selves, without
being beholding to God; that our Light and Instruction into the Truth, that the
sight of Salvation had been enough: And here we went out like Prodigals, till
all was spent, and Poverty came upon us as an armed man: We got out, and
promised our selves liberty and ease, (as Paul says of some,) who promising
liberty, Themselves became the servants of corruption. We were the farther off,
and the more entangled; that which Job speaks of, If I wash my self (says he)
mine own clothes shall defile me: We have indeed washed and washed our selves,
but that will not do; we put on our own clothes again, and we are presently all
dirt, as bad as ever: Here has been our going out, and now we are out, we
would never stir home again. But the Call and Counsel is to us, Come, and let
us return; That Charge is laid against us, Thou have forsaken thy first Love;
remember whence thou art fallen, and repent. This I speak is a Deep Parable, if
the Soul be not led in, to read the meaning: The Hypocrite he cannot know it;
he will ever be hoping and clambering up some way or other to get life, and
never endure these bonds, though he perish for ever; and how many are thus
utterly lost! And the Sons of God They cannot know this neither, until it cost
them dear, till a dart strike through their Liver: They will taste of the
Whores dainties, of her sweet morsels, till they are made to vomit all up
again, and lose the sweet words. We have taken up words of Scripture, and
Hopes, and Promises to our selves, but who gave us them? The Door was open, and
we thought we might venture in, and take what we pleased. But the Spouse could
give a better account; He brought me into the banqueting house, etc. Did He
thus take us by the hand, and bring us in? No, no, we thrust in without the
wedding garment; we stayed not till the Angel was sent to roll away the stone
from the mouth of the Sepulcher, till Christ Himself came to loosen the Prison
doors, and let the Captives go free. And now to all you that have thus turned
out, and therefore have had a blast, a mildew, a secret moth consuming and
destroying all your greenness, and liveliness, and freshness in the Truth, (for
how dead and sapless do you now lie!) to you yet is this Counsel given, and the
Call made, Come, and let us return to the Lord, for he has smitten, etc. Lie
under the hand, and turn to him that smites you. And that is,

Thirdly, The third Thing considerable in this Return, It is to the Lord, who
has wounded, that he may heal. Many they are wounded indeed, but they can heal
themselves; run to the Promises, and wariness, and resolvings, and they are
presently whole: But when the Lord wounds indeed with the wound of a cruel one,
when he rends, and teers, and goes away, then shall no healing medicine be
found out; when God comes to a strict enquiry once, and searches Jerusalem with
candles, looks into every dark corner, and asks for an account of the bottom of
the matter; if we know what shall become of us for ever, how our everlasting
Condition hangs, whether all we have, all the strong reasons, and hopes, and
conclusions from the operations, and enlargements, and powers of Truth, will
all these prove our condition good for ever? Was not Saul also among the
Prophets? and was not the Spirit of God upon Balaam? and yet both fell short. I
wonder sometimes how we can pass it over from day to day, and not consider what
the end shall be; but it is because the wound is not deep, we have no sense to
feel, but are like a post in the wall: but when He shall wound home indeed, and
strike the blow to the heart, then it will seize; it shall not be so easy
getting from it; then, if ever we be cured, the same hand must do it that
struck the Blow, all other Physicians will be of no value: but, Come, let us
return to the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal, etc.

And He will heal us. Now,

What Ways does the Lord take to Cure this Wound?

1. The first Way to cure a Wound thoroughly, is by removing the ill humor that
feeds and maintains the sore, else all plasters and salves applied to heal are
in vain, and to no purpose. So God deals with the Soul; He goes first to the
Root, to stench the corrupt humor, the bitter Fountain that feeds and supplies
all the streams; Sensse and Reason they have been the ill humor which have fed
the sore all along, whilst we could wring, and wrestle, and murmur, and
complain against God, saying, Why has he made me thus? Why has he brought us
into this Wilderness to destroy us? Who has resisted his Will? Whilst these
pleadings and reasonings live, it is impossible our conditions should be mended;
these will fester and corrupt, use what means we will for healing; therefore
God promises, I will heal their backslidings; that way He takes when he
intends a Cure. Whilst we go about to cure our selves, and flee upon Horses,
because they are swift, so long the case grows worse with us, the wound
increases; but stand still, and see the Salvation of God, says Moses: Let him
alone, and He will never leave, till he has met with the bitter Root that
spoils all our prospering.

2. Another way of healing a wound, is by taking away or asswaging the
extremity of the anguish and smart of the sore, else the violence of the pain
will let nothing take place: So is it with the Soul, sometimes there is such an
extremity of anguish that perplexes and torments it, that nothing of hope or
encouragement can come near it: When it is made to look over all its
rebellions, and standings out, and provocations, what it has done, how it has
grieved the Holy Spirit, and refused mercy, and brought all this that it now
lies under on its own head; You may thank your self for this, says the
Accuser, this is your own will, and way, and choice; and this causes a felt
anguish and torture in the Soul, when all circumstances come up of sins done
seven years since, as if but newly acted: How Thou provokedst God, and broke
prison at such a time, and slightedst and turnedst back: This eats, and
corrodes, and frets the Soul, and gives it no rest, to hear, or hope, or
believe any thing from God. And therefore this is the next Thing God does in
going to cure; He removes all the guilt, and sin, and shame, and unbelief, that
lay upon the Soul, and lays all upon the scapegoat, to be carried into the
land of forgetfulness; that though the iniquity of Judah and Israel be sought
for, yet it cannot be found: I will remember their sin no more (says God;) and
this pacifies and asswages the pain, and calms the Soul: He makes the storm a
calm, and so brings them to their desired haven, etc.

3. Another way God takes in healing, is, by applying a plaster of mercy and
loving kindness: Then He speaks kindly and friendly to the Soul, comes with
words of peace; he comes enquiring, Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no
Physician there? Is not the Lord in Zion? is not her King in her? The Lord
opens to the Soul a sovereign Balm that can heal all sores: He discovers his
Son the Lord Jesus, that seed of Truth that lies within; This is my
well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Now He comes gently to the Soul,
and moves and stirs in it; not altogether to despair and cut off it self from
hope; but an enquiry is made in the Soul, Is not the Lord in Zion? Is there not
hope in Israel concerning this thing? However desperate the case seems, yet
hope gets up; Who can tell but he may be gracious? It is one thing to have
Truth manifested to be within the Soul, and another thing to have the use and
enjoyment of it; one thing to have a healing plaster applied, and another
thing to be healed: In the third day He will raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight: To be raised out of this pit of mire and clay, out of this dark
dungeon, to live in his sight; to be brought out of darkness into his marvelous
light, this is wonderful! And how beautiful are the feet of them that bring
glad tidings of peace! These good tidings are a sweet reviving plaster to the
dying Soul. When just now at the brink of the Pit; and the Life draws nigh to
the grave; then for an Interpreter to come, one of a thousand, to show to Man
his righteousness, to open that seed and principle of Life that is within, and
so save his life from going down to the pit; Is not such a Balm as this able to
cure all wounds? how does this calm and quiet the Soul, and beget admirings! O
who would ever think any good should grow here! that Truth should lie hid in
such a filthy, defiled and polluted heart! as Jacob breaks forth, God was in
this place, and I knew it not: and Hagar, I did not think to have met with the
Lord here: What! when all hope of life is gone, yet then to have salvation and
deliverance opened; out of the Eater to have meat; in the midst of all guilt
and shame and sin and lusts that oppress and torment, yet to have this opened,
That such a Soul as this is no less then the gate of Heaven, where God and
Angels are to pass in and out; This is a pleasant plaster indeed: This heals
the dying inwards, when it is given in by God, not taken up by man's gatherings,
and conclusions, and hopings, as all the healings before were.

4. The Lord heals this sore by setting a time, appointing a day for
deliverance, and putting the Soul in a posture of waiting till that come: so
the Angel opens to Daniel, Seventy weeks are determined, to finish
transgression, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness. And so in the Psalms,
the Church pleads with God, that It is time to have mercy upon Zion, yea the
set time is come: But what is this set time for Zion to be built? Why, it
follows, For it pities thy servants to see her stones lie scattered in the
dust. This is the set time, when the hearts of any are raised to pity and take
to heart the desolation and ruins of Zion: and when the Soul is pitched upon
this, to lie in the dust, lost and scattered, and undone as it is, till the
heart of some or other be raised to pity it. It is impossible you should ever
be brought forth as children of the Truth, unless the Heart of some be turned
toward you to be a Father; as the Text says of Elias, He shall turn the
hearts of Fathers to Children, and Children to their Fathers. The Soul is laid
down here, it cannot get up it self, but must lie wounded and half dead, till
some good Samaritan pass by and take it up; and this is the greatest trial and
hardest thing to bear, that ever could come to man's heart, That He must lie
thus buckled and submitted to another, till his Brother come to pity and take
him up: And now if the heart scorns, and will not come in here to be thus
beholding to another, it may lie long enough, and not yet the time of healing
is come: If thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it: if thou scorn this thing,
to lie as thou art till the heart of some father be turned to thee, thou may
go long enough without cure: But the Soul that God has indeed pitched upon
this, as the way for its cure, that, is ever looking when some shall turn in to
pity it, and ask how it does, and take it out of the dirt where it sticks fast;
and therefore it is ever crying out, Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?
Is there none that minds my sorrows? Was ever grief like mine? And is there
none to pity and lay my case to heart, and travel, and pray, and cry for me!
Such a breaking out is there, not murmuringly nor commandingly, but bewailing
and crying out, out of the sense of misery, and longing for cure; O that there
were some to pity! Nothing else can content, because it is pitched upon that as
the way for its cure; all other plasters cannot reach the sore: and therefore
it cries for some to help it, as the blind man cried after Christ; Thou Son of
David, have mercy on me: and no rebukes from others, to hold his peace and be
still, can prevail with him, but still the cry goes on, till the cure is done.

But it follows:

After two days He will raise us up, and we shall live, etc.

The second days work now follows, the day of reviving; no man shall seek the
Lord in vain. The Prophet here invites and calls to come and return: and if any
shall be prevailed with, they shall not lose their labor in the Lord: Verily
there is a reward for the Righteous: Mark the upright man, and consider the
perfect; for the end of that man is peace. After two days He will revive such
as return, and in the third day He will raise them up; and this is a strange
cure indeed, for such a wound to be so soon cured, in two days! This is
wonderful; when, as David cries out, My wounds stink, and are corrupt; when,
with onah, the Soul lies in the bottom of Hell, and cries out, The Earth with
her bars is about me for ever; when all hope of life is taken away, and the
Soul concludes, My wound is incurable; yet within two days a cure is wrought,
the case is altered; the man possessed with a Devil now sits at the feet of
Jesus, sober and clothed. Here is a Physician of value indeed; That when Peter
sleeps fast bound between two Soldiers, and the next day it is concluded He
should be brought forth to be executed; then in a nick of time an Angel is
sent, the chains fall off, and the iron gates open of their own accord, and
Peter is delivered; At midngiht a cry was heard, The Bridegroom comes. In a
moment, in a time unthought of, the stream is turned: Though grief endure for a
night, yet joy comes in the morning: it is soon done, but a word with Christ;
Peace, be still, and a great calm is wrought: Speak but the word (says the
Centurion) and my servant shall be healed. After two days He will revive us.
But,

How does He revive? what way takes He to it?

1. He takes off all the bonds and chains and fetters that hamper and keep down
the Soul: He lets the Prisoners go free, and so makes a release. The Enemy
comes in, with many fears and perplexities, and mists of darkness, and hard
conclusions; Sure God has forsaken and left me for ever; I shall come to
nothing; He has brought me into this wilderness to destroy me: These bonds lie
hard, and oppress and keep down the Soul. But now Christ comes and discharges
the Enemy, and takes him that does let and will let out of the way: All
iniquity is made to stop her mouth; and the poor has hope: And this is one way
he takes to revive.

2. Christ revives and chears the Soul by unswadling and opening Himself to it:
I am Joseph your Brother: And this revives the heart indeed, when Christ is
opened and revealed to be within, when the Soul is made to see it is of kind
to Christ, of the same stock, having the same Father: He that sanctifies, and
they that are sanctified, are all of one. When this is opened, that there can
be a clear witnessing, This is the voice of my Beloved; This is He my Soul
longed for: He is come, He is come, as the Martyr cried out at the stake: and
they in Isaiah, This is our God, we have waited for him; we will rejoice and be
glad in his Salvation. This is a reviving Cordial.

3. He revives the Soul by preaching Peace and good will to it: When this voice
comes nigh, Peace be to this house: Christ is called the Prince of peace, and
none can speak peace to the Soul but He only; and before He comes and gets up
in the heart, there is nothing but mists and darkness and confusions,
perplexities and troubles, which vex and disquiet the Soul: but Christ comes
preaching Peace to them that are nigh, and them that are afar off: That message
is brought by an Angel, Peace be on Earth, and good will toward men. And this
revives the heart, to have these glad tidings of peace published, to have peace
in all thy ways, peace at home, and peace abroad, peace in thy coming in, and
peace in going out: Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. This is a way of sweetness indeed.

4. He revives the Soul by preaching the everlasting Gospel to it. There is a
Gospel, and an everlasting Gospel; the Gospel is offered, and tendered, and
preached to all, to every Creature; I, but the everlasting Gospel, the tidings
of that everlasting Love and good will to the Soul, this is another manner of
Gospel, to have this preached by Christ, Fear not little flock, It is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: This takes and revives the
heart, and chears and strengthens it, and makes it able to run through all
snares and bonds and intanglements, when this everlasting good will is
preached, which shall sound in the Ears to all Eternity. And this is the second
days work: After two days He will revive us, etc.

And before I leave this, I would you should enquire and see, whether you have
ever known this work of Christ or not? Has the Son ever revived you?

1. Has Christ ever set the Prisoner free in you? Has he taken you out of the
Lions mouth? Has He broke all your bonds and chains, fears and scruples, and
unbelief, all silenced and stopped? Have you known this time, when the strong
man was bound, and cast out, and spoiled of all his armor? Did ever the Father
lift up his Son in your view? Were you ever yet removed out of the Kingdom of
Darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son? The Light might shine upon you in
the first days work, in the work of the Father, as the light shines upon a
wall, but enters not through it: The Light shined in the Darkness, but the
Darkness comprehended it not. But now see, has he translated you out of the
Kingdom of Darkness into his marvelous Light? If you are not made to know
clearly and distinctly where you stand, and what has passed upon you, and what
not; without this you can never go forward, unless this Son be manifest in you,
this Deliverer sent from Heaven, who has the keys with him to open all doors,
and take off all bonds and fetters of fear and unbelief.

2. Have you ever known the time when Christ unswadled and opened Himself unto
you? Can you tell the day and time and place and strait you were at, when this
was opened clearly, I am Joseph your Brother? This was a reviving indeed; if
your Souls ever had such an Answer as this in such a strait, this would call,
and raise up from the dead. And then,

3. Have you ever heard that everlasting Gospel of Love and good will preached?
That you are indeed his chosen, that you have a seed of his own in you, that
you were chosen in the well-beloved before the foundations of the World were
laid? However we may lean, and hope, and expect, and promise our selves, yet
till this everlasting Gospel be preached to us, we are but uncertain in the
bottom of all, and, for ought we know, may be for ever miserable.

Who is to be Feared; OR The True Ground of Fear. SERMON. III. April 6. 1651.
MATTHEW. 10.28. And fear not them that can kill the Body, and are not able to
kill the Soul; but rather fear Him that is able to destroy both Soul and Body
in Hell.
The Analysis.
SEven Things in general were observed out of the words.

I. Who are They that will kill the Body?

They are hinted out Verse. 17, 21. Beware of men. And they are ranked into four
sorts.

1. Governors, Which are set to defend and protect; yet beware of these, they
shall be against you. 2. Kings, Which are set to defend and protect; yet beware
of these, they shall be against you. 3. Brethren: Brother shall betray Brother
to Death, etc. 4. Children: and Children against their Parents, etc. This
wonderful unnatural; yet all made true in our own experience.
II. What is it to kill the Body? what ways may they take to do that?

1. By taking away estate and means, which maintain the Body. 2. By reproaches
and evil reports, that none will Trade with us. 3. By binding our hands, that
we may not defend our selves. 4. By ensnaring and making an evil of our words.
5. By tentering the Law to the utmost, that no stirring, but we may be found
offenders. 6. By false witness, as against Christ, when He innocent. 7. They
may kill by their Law, when we clear by Law of God. These several ways may They
kill the Body, if the Lord prevent not.
III. The Exhortation: Fear not them. Why should not They be feared that kill
the Body?

1. Fear them not in respect of themselves. For, 1. They are vanity, a nothing,
fade as the grass. 2. They but instruments; the sword cannot cut without the
hand. 3. Pity them; It Is their woe and misery to do this work. 4. Before their
Plots are ripe They may be cut off; so Haman was, and the Powder Treason
prevented in very nick.


2. Fear not, in regard of the Body which they can kill.

1. The Body is but the outside, the cask, the shell. 2. It Is a perishing
thing, and will soon dye of it self. 3. This is not to enter into glory, but
must first put on incorruption: therefore this but a small thing, to kill the
Body.
IV. Whom ought we to Fear? FEAR HIM that can destroy Soul and Body: And that
for these Reasons.

1. He is our Maker; our Being and all we have is of Him 2. He can bring down,
and twist away thy life, and all in a moment. 3. He has no Controuler; none
can rescue out of his hand. 4. In thy own conscience He has many just
occasions against thee. 5. He will certainly bring to judgment and account for
all, thoughts, words, actions; Therefore there is good ground to fear Him. 6.
Fear Him, because there is mercy with Him.
VI. What is it to have the Soul destroyed? what ways does God take to bring
this about? Five several ways.

1. By withdrawing the sap; when God leaves striving and motioning, the Soul
dies of it self, if not fed, upheld, maintained. 2. By giving up the Soul to
believe lies, wholly filled with them. 3. By leaving it alone, without one to
pity, pray, or care for it. 4. By shutting out all prayers and means, that
nothing shall prevail. 5. By taking away all doors and gates, that all lusts
and floods of ungodliness may break in, and mould the Soul into the image of
the Devil.
VII. What is it to be in Hell? In three Things.

1. When the Soul sensibly feels it is excluded from God. Many are in Hell, and
know it not; the thing is not opened. 2. To feel the torments and pains of
Hell, the warm that dies not. 3. To have the everlasting sentence of this
condition witnessed to the Soul; this makes up all: the saved ones may be in
the two former.
All summed up in a word of Use.

1. If possible, to warn some of this woe, That They may never come into this
place of torment. 2. To mind such as shall be saved, (both by hintings in
themselves, and witness from others:) yet see how near destruction you may
come. 3. To counsel us to stand in awe, always to fear, not knowing what we may
be left to, lest that day come unawares, etc.
MATTHEW. 10.28. And fear not them that can kill the Body, and are not able to
kill the Soul, etc.
I Would propound these several things to you to be considered of out of, this
Scripture.

1. Who they be that will kill the Body. 2. What it is to kill the Body. 3. Why
should they not be feared that can kill the Body? 4. Whom ought we to fear?
Fear Him, etc. 5. Why should we fear Him? what cause for it? 6. What is it to
have the Soul destroyed? 7. What is it to be in Hell?
First, Who are they that will kill the Body?

You may see in the Verses before; Christ speaks to his Disciples, Behold, I
send you forth as sheep amongst Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and
innocent as Doves: But beware of MEN; for they will deliver you up to the
Councels, etc. And it is farther explained, who these MEN be, of whom they
should beware; Ver. 18. And you shall be brought before Governors and Kings for
my sake, for a testimony against them. And verse. 21. And the Brother shall
deliver up the Brother to death, and the Father the Child; and Children shall
rise up against their Parents, and cause them to be put to death.

So that these MEN are of these four sorts, Governors, Kings, Brethren, and
Parents.

1. Beware of Kings: Kings should preserve their People; and Solomon says, The
Glory of a King is in the multitude of his People: And we can truly witness for
our selves, and God is our Witness, that we have been and are as true,
faithful, and loyal to the present Government of the Kingdom, as any other who
ever; yet we know not how their hearts may be ordered to consider of us: Such
cases have been, we know, as that Kings have been let out to undo, and pillage,
and kill their own Subjects: And though we may yet truly own the many mercies
and liberties we have enjoyed by this Parliament; yet who knows how Things may
be turned against us? such a case may be; Christ bids, beware of Kings.

2. Beware of Governors: Now Governors and Rulers are appointed of God to be a
Terror of evil works, but not of good: They were set to be Defenders and
Protectors of them that do well, to defend, to secure, to do them right and
justice against such as falsely reproach, slander, or any ways wrong and injure
them; yet Beware of men (says Christ:) Governors themselves shall be against
you, such as should defend and secure you. And we have lately had some
experience of this, how our Governors, which should have been our safeguard and
protection, that they have slighted our Cause, and rather inclined to the false
accusations of our adversaries, then hear us speak the Truth for our selves;
nay if the Lord had not prevented it, we might have been knocked on head, and
have lost our lives by the rude and envious multitude which were set against us.

3. Brethren: Brother shall betray Brother, etc. Beware of Brethren. And how
has this been made true upon us also? Who are they that have been our
Accusers? that have secretly informed and raised mischief against us, and made
an evil of what they have heard and seen amongst us? were they not our
Brethren? such as were in society with us, men of our own house, and we walked
together into the House of God as friends! such as have heard, and prayed, and
joined with us, and yet have gone out, because they were not of us? These have
been our greatest Enemies.

4. Children shall rise up against their Parents to put them to death. And how
has this proved true, in my my own child coming as the main Witness against
me? He that came out of my bowels, he was not ashamed to witness falsely against
me, and to say to my face, He would take a hundread oaths, if he might but
ensnare me. And then, Parents against their children: This I have proved true
also. Those that have looked upon themselves as my Fathers in Christ, from whom
I have first received the Truth, such as have traveled and prayed, yea and
witnessed for me, that I belonged to God; yet how are these now secretly turned
against me, and in a treacherous undermining way have wrought, and do work what
they can to undo me? Such a strange unnaturalness is there among men, and if
the Lord favor us not, we know not but they may see their wills accomplished
against us, and take away our lives: We know not what They may be suffered to
do against us; For, This is not our Country; our Kingdom is not of this world:
And it is certain, there is malice and envy enough in all these relations
against us, in Kings, Governors, Brethren, Parents, Children; therefore beware
of men, though your Cause be never so just and innocent.

Secondly, What is it to kill the Body? How may men do that? what ways may they
find out to bring this about? For though it be not the main thing, or that
which we should fear, if called to lay down our lives; yet it may be of Use to
be informed in the several ways men may take to destroy our Body, if the Lord
prevent not.

1. This way they may take to destroy the Body, by taking away our estates and
means, that which should maintain and keep up our bodies: Our bread may be
taken out of our mouths; we may be so impoverished by Lawyers, and Jaylors, and
Fines, and strange ways that may be found out by our Enemies to waste our
estates, that we shall not be able to maintain our selves. Such dealings some
of our Fathers and the Martyrs have met with in their days.

2. Men may destroy the Body, by raising strange reproaches, and scandals, and
such evil reports against us, that all men will be shy of dealing with us; all
our trading and commerce with men, (by which our lives are outwardly
maintained,) may be thus taken from us: As I heard some say in my own hearing,
Hang them (speaking of Us) they are a base reproached people, we will not buy of
them of all others. And thus, by such scandalous reports as these, it may grow
to that pass, that we may have neither liberty to buy nor sell, etc.

3. Another way by which men may destroy the Body, is, by binding our hands
that we may not defend our selves, who ever set upon us: And thus we have been
dealt with; some of us bound to our good behavior, that we may not so much as
strike a Dog to defend our selves; and who ever will, may come and set upon us,
and we have no remedy in our hands, we may not stir against them for our
defense.

4. Another way they may take to destroy our Bodies, is, by lying at the catch
to ensnare and entrap, and make an evil in wresting words contrary to our real
intentions and purposes: As my own son was not ashamed to say to my face, I Will
take a hundred oaths, if I could ensnare you. Now what a miserable case is
this, if a word should slip either unadvisedly, or out of ignorance, that this
should be catched at, and a thing never once thought of, nor intended, charged
upon us, even to the hazard of our lives, for ought we know.

5. They may do it another way, as by making an evil, in tentering our words
beyond their meaning, so by tentering out the Law to the utmost exactness and
rigor in all points against us; so that a man can hardly speak to another, or
stir any ways in his business, but if the Law be reached out, and tentered to
the utmost, he may be found liable to some forfeiture or other. You that are
strangers this day, and come without any ill intent into this House to hear me
speak, you might be troubled for coming into the House, or passing through a
Close without leave; such strange ways may be to tenter out the Law, if the
Lord shall suffer men in this to stir against us.

6. Men may destroy the Body, by raising false Witnesses against us, and charge
us of that falsely which we are no ways guilty of: And thus was Christ dealt
with; and many of the People of God have been falsely accused, falsely witnessed
against, and so condemned to death. And in our late Indictment charged upon us,
those that have appeared against us, what utter falsness has been in their
oaths, and witnessing against us? and what further they may be suffered to
swear against us, we cannot tell: and at last two false Witnesses came
point blank against Christ, and so took away his life.

7. Our Life may be taken away by the Law of Man sometimes, when we may be no
ways guilty by the Law of God. So I remember, when the Bishops Courts were up,
some have said to me there, You may be Honest, and your way may be good and
harmless for ought we know, but how ever the Law will not bear you out in it.
We have a Law (say they to Pilate,) and according to that Law He ought to dye.
And here you see are Ways, and Means, and Doors enough open, if the Lord stand
not for us, and prevent it, by which men may break in upon us, and destroy the
Body.

And thus I have spoke to you of two of the general Points from the words. 1.
Who they be that will kill the Body; that Christ bids Beware of, Kings,
Governors, Brethren, Parents, and Children: This seems wonderful unnatural,
that these of all others should do it, to be for signs and for wonders in
Israel, as Christ complains, I and the children that God has given me, are for
Signs and Wonders in Israel. Were it in Turkey, or some foreign Land to meet
with this usage, it would not be so much: But, Thou my Familiar, my Friend, we
took sweet Counsel together, and walked into the House of God as Friends, to be
Signs and Wonders, a scorn, and reproach, and laughing stock in Israel, amongst
men of our own house, our own Rulers, and Brethren, and Children, this is very
unnatural: But, Beware of men. And then I have showed you seven Ways by which,
if the Lord prevent not, men may come in upon us to destroy the Body. Now I
come to the next general Thing, Viz.

Thirdly, The Exhortation given, Fear not them that can kill the Body: And why
should not They be feared?

1. Fear not, in regard of them that shall do it. 2. Fear not, in regard it is
but the Body they kill.
1. Fear not them that can kill the Body: Fear not the men, the persons that
shall do it; and that for these four Reasons.

1. Because they are but men, and man at his best estate is altogether vanity.
Alas, They that go about to kill this body, what are they themselves, but a
vain thing, a nothing, a shadow, how ever strong and high conceited they may
be; yet alas, all Nations are but as the drop of a bucket; and what is a man,
that shall soon fade as the grass, that he should be feared?

2. Fear them not, because they are but the Instrument, the Rod in the hand of
another, and they cannot move nor stir a foot or hand, farther then they shall
be suffered, and permitted, and ordered. They are but like the wheels of a
Clock, take off the weights, and the Clock stirs not. Alas, though they may
threaten, and resolve, and take counsel never so strongly, yet they are not
their own Lords; they shall do neither more nor less then the hand will make
use of the sword; and therefore our Fathers in all their sufferings have looked
through and beyond the instrument, to the hand that rules and acts all: I was
dumb (says David) and kept silence, because it was thy doing.

3. Fear them not, but rather pity them: Alas, it is woe, and misery enough to
all such as shall have a hand in this work; They are employed about a hard
service, it is their misery, they are hackned by the Devil to do this mischief
against the Truth: As Christ says of Judas, It had been good for that man he
had never been born: Who ever shall be an instrument in this work, alas it is
mis^ry enough; their case may be pitied by us, rather then their malice feared.

4. Fear them not in this respect, because before their plots be ripe they may
be cut off, and dye, and be laid in their graves. How many such Cases have been
known? Haman, what a strange plot, and how surely had he laid it, to cut off
the Jews root and branch? I, but the mischief returns upon his own head, before
his plot comes to an issue, he is cut off himself. Alas, how soon is it done!
His breath is but taken away, and man turns to his earth; and in that very day
all his thoughts perish: All plots, and designs, and contrivances come to
nothing. Remember, O my People (says God) what Balack consulted, and what
Balaam answered: And yet see how all their designs were frustrate, and blasted,
and came to nothing! And in our own Kingdom, how many plots have been thus
prevented, when they have been even ripe for execution? So in that Powder
Treason, when all was fit, and but now a candle only wanting to destroy and
blow up all, yet in the very nick it is found out and prevented: Therefore fear
them not; if God will prevent, he can soon do it; be they never so strong, and
desperate, and malicious, yet He can but take away their breath, and alas they
may be rotten and stink in their graves before their plots are accomplished.
When the wicked flourish like the grass, and the workers of iniquity like the
green herb, yet then it is that they might be cut off for ever. So that were we
but truly principled and instructed, we might have our greatest encouragement,
where we make our greatest fears, viz. from the strength, and height, and
flourishing of our Enemies, when they carry all before them; yet Fear them not.

2. Fear not them that can kill the Body, in regard of the Body which they can
kill: They can reach no farther then the Body; and what is the Body?

1. That is but a poor outside, a shadow; it is but as the cracking of a shell,
to kill the Body.

2. The Body is a perishing thing, that will soon dye of it self; if none
should take a sword against it, it will soon dye and moulder; 'twill fall of it
self: like the fruit of a Tree, let it but alone till it come to be ripe, and
you need not shake it, the fruit will drop and fall of themselves. Therefore
Fear not them that can kill the Body: They kill but a dead man, cut down a
little grass; like Jonas gourd, up in a night, and gone in a night.

3. Fear them not, for they kill but the Body, and that is not that which is to
enter into glory; this body is to turn to dust, this flesh and blood which you
see is not to inherit the Kingdom, this Corruptible, must put on Incorruption;
this Corn must dye, before it shall bring forth that Body which is to abide.
God gives to every seed his own body as it pleases Him: He will give a Body,
but not this body, this flesh and blood, which is sown in Corruption; therefore
Fear not them that can kill the Body. And I could wish, that always in all our
fears and threatenings from men, these seven Considerations might stick by us,
to keep us up from fearing, both in respect of the men themselves, and also the
Body, that only is in their power to kill: Alas, it is but a poor Cask, when
they have done their worst, that they can touch; that which will soon dye
alone, and save the labor of being killed; and should it hold out never so
long, yet this is not it, that is to enter into glory; it must break, and go to
the grave at the last: Earth must go to Earth; Corruption cannot inherit
Incorruption; No unclean thing must enter into that City; and this is an
unclean house, a Body of Death and Sin: In my Body (says Paul) I find no good
thing, but a Law of Sin in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind; and
that must dye, and not enter into life.

And thus far you heard the Negative opened, What you are not to fear; Fear not
them that kill the Body, etc. And how have most of our days hitherto been spent
about this body! and how are the world, all of them lost and drowned in carings
and providings about this? what to eat, and what to drink, and what to put on?
We have been more foolish in this, then the Lillies, and Sparrows, and Ravens;
they take not these cutting and perplexing cares, and yet they are preserved
and provided for; and what have all our carings brought about to us but sorrows
and misery? they have not added the least cubit to our stature. But now we come
to the fourth thing.

4. Who then is to be feared? Fear him that can destroy both soul and body in
hell: Fear Him, fear the Lord, He that made thee, He that Rules and Orders all,
Fear Him; but why should we fear him?

1. Fear him because we are his Workmanship, he is our Maker; he is the Potter
and we are his clay: we had our Being and Frame and mould, and all we have from
him.

2. Fear Him, Because he can bring thee down on a sudden; He can secretly twist
away thy life, and all thou have, thou know not how. How soon was Judas
striped and twisted out of all his mercy, and presently left to ruin? He was
but now among the Disciples, and looked upon as one of them, (for they all
questioned themselves as much as him,) and by and by he hangs himself, when he
is but left to have his run; and therefore (says David) Thou hold our souls
in life; if he do not hold and maintain and keep up thy life every moment, alas
thou art soon gone and wilt sink to nothing: when thou art in thy jollity and
mirth, in the midst of thy bouls, if a hand writing do but come against thee,
how soon may thy mirth be quashed, the knees tremble and knock together, and
the face be turned to paleness? Alas, therefore should thou not fear him?
When I consider Him I am afraid of Him (says Job) for He is of one mind, and
he will bring to pass the thing appointed for me; He can turn all upside down
in a moment; at such an uncertainty stand all our ways and enjoyments, when at
the best, much like a stout resolved Soldier, riding up bravely furnished, and
with a courage to charge in the face of an Enemy, but on a sudden a bullet
comes and lays him down, and all his strength and courage is gone in a moment;
so soon can this Lord take thee off, in any of thy enjoyments, therefore Fear
Him.

3. Fear Him, because he does all without let (...) control, nothing shall
hinder; when He begins He will make an end. All men and all creatures have a
Controuler that can frustrate their enterprises, but the great God has no
controuler, He gives no account of his matters* if he will not favor a man
either in Soul or body, but lets a blast seize upon him, alas! the man must
fall, and all the world cannot help him.

4. Fear Him, because in thy own Conscience tho^ can witness, Thou have
justly offended Him: he has occasions and advantages enough against thee; O
Lord, how many ways might He justly take thee off! might he not stop thy breath
when thou sleep? might he not make thy meat to be thy poison? art thou not a
sinner in all, and liable to Him, if He should take advantage? therefore, Stand
in awe, and Fear before Him.

5. Fear Him, because He will certainly bring thee to judgment; he will call
thee to an account for all thy ways That which has been done in secret, which
no eye saw, and no man could ever charge thee with; all thy secret thoughts,
thy covetings, and lustings, and envyings, the secret turnings within, He will
bring all upon the stage, nothing shall pass: therefore fear this Judge; for
Thou know not at what hour thy Lord may come. And, Good Lord! if He come in
a time unthought of, and find thee froward, and fretting, and envying, and
lusting, and saving thy life in any creature; Alas! what then will become of
thee? if thou be thus surprised, (and surprise thee He may;) For we know not
the hour when the Thief will come; therefore there is cause to fear.

6. Fear Him, because there is mercy with Him, that He may be feared: He will
have a reward for them that fear him. If thou fear men, either they may
neglect, and not mind to reward thee; or else may not be able: but the Lord
will surely reward them that fear Him, and those that wait on Him shall not be
ashamed. And therefore there is great reason from these several Particulars,
why He should be feared.

And now I shall speak of the two other general Points from the words, which
come in as an enlargement and farther ground of this Exhortation; Fear Him that
can destroy both Soul and Body in Hell: where these two things are yet to be
opened; What it is to have the Soul destroyed? and then what it is to be in
Hell?

Fifthly, What is it to have the Soul destroyed? what ways does God take to do
that?

1. He destroys the Soul by withdrawing the sap which should maintain it; when
God gives up the Soul to it self, and leaves striving, and motioning, and
knocking; this is one way by which it is surely destroyed: For it will soon dye
and sink of it self, if it be not followed, and hunted, and kept up, and
maintained daily.

2. Another way of destroying the Soul, is, when God gives it up to believe
lies, to feed on ashes; and that, like a canker, will soon eat out all the life
and power and spirit of Truth: The Soul is made incapable of receiving Truth,
nothing can enter nor seize: Though there be never such a power and strength
and clearness in the Word, yet nothing can take place: and this is the wonder
that God speaks; I will work a wonder in your days that a man shall not
believe, though it be told him; I will destroy the wisdom of the wise. And
again; In hearing they shall hear, and not perceive; and in seeing they shall
not see; because a deceived heart has turned them aside, given up to believe
lies, etc.

3. Another way of destroying the Soul, is, by leaving it alone out of the
Nursery, out of the heart and care of the People of God, that there is none to
take it in, none to look over it, nor enquire after it; none to turn aside to
ask how it does: Alas! this will soon destroy the Soul, to be thus cast off,
and left alone, without the care and counsel and pity and encouragement of the
Truth; to have none to plant, nor water, nor till it; that ground can bring
forth nothing but briars and thorns, and so is nigh unto cursing, etc.

4. Another way God takes, when the Decrees are gone forth, to undo a Soul, is
this; He shuts out all prayers, and entreaties, and means, that are used to
turn his heart to the creature, that nothing shall prevail with Him; though
there should be any to stand up to pray and plead, yet He will not hear. Though
Samuel and Moses and Daniel should stand up, yet could not my heart be turned
toward this people: Put them out of my sight (says God.) And so to Samuel God
answers; Why prayest thou any more for Saul? I have cast him off. And this is a
sure way of undoing the Soul indeed: If God be against it, who can stand for
it? who can deliver out of his hand?

5. Another way the Soul is destroyed by, is, when God takes away all its gates
and fences, and lays it open to sin and Satan to have their full course and
run, without stop or let: All the floods of ungodliness and troops of
wickedness may come in at pleasure, and overflow and overspread the Soul, so
that nothing at all can be seen, but envy, and lust, malice, and deceits: the
man is molded and changed into the very image of the Devil. I have known some
men so wholly drunk up of the Devil, that no Reason nor Sense, nothing of parts
and reasonableness, has been left, but the very mind and disposition of the
Devil has been in all. And this is to be undone indeed, it is the very
destruction. And this is a sad condition sure, to have the Soul thus destroyed:
Was ever sorrow or misery like this? Is there not reason He should be feared
that can destroy the Soul with such a destruction as this? Look over it again:
1. If God withdraws his sap, that which enlivens and quickens and keeps up the
Soul, how surely does all dye of it self, and decay and wither! And may He not
withdraw if He please? Is he bound to us? Then, 2. To be given up to believe
lies, to lie under the power of deceit, that nothing of Truth can reach the
Soul; how miserable is this? And then, 3. To be left here in the mire; to be
left thus wounded of Thieves, and half dead, and no good Samaritan to take
pity, nor look for cure, for it; to have none to care, nor support, nor look
after it, but be like a member cut off from the body; how soon must that needs
dye and wither! And then, 4. To have the anger of God so far kindled and gone
forth, that He will not hear any prayers or cries that shall be put up for the
Soul; Pray no more for this people. When God will by no means be entreated to
have mercy, this is sad. And lastly, To be wholly left and given up into the
hands and will of the Devil, to be ruled at his pleasure, and left wholly to be
swallowed up of sin and ungodliness, that nothing else appears but the very
Image of Hell and the Devil; this is a whole destruction indeed: and woe to the
man or woman that is thus beset, that has no place to turn to, nor way for
help or cure: This is a destruction to be feared indeed: Fear Him that can thus
destroy Soul and Body. Take heed (says the Apostle) lest there be any profane
person as Esau, who for one morsel sold his birthright; and if you are not
here prevented, you are for ever miserable: and the same thing, is in you, that
would thus desperately throw away Life, and Heaven, and all, for a trifle, any
vain lust: and to be here prevented, and not suffered to undo our selves, is a
mercy worth ten thousand worlds: Therefore fear not them that can kill the
Body. Alas! that is but a poor thing, not worth the speaking of, in compare of
this destroying the Soul: but Fear Him who can destroy with this destruction.
This I would have you mind, That Men, whom Christ counsels not to fear, they
can reach but the Body, there they begin and there end, in killing the Body:
But God, when he sets against a man, He begins with the Soul; Fear Him that can
destroy Soul and Body: the Soul first; and that may be struck at, and have a
wound, though the Body live; He begins there to strike and blast; the Soul
first, and then the Body that will soon pine and fall and dye and come to
nothing. And now to the last thing.

Seventhly, What is it to be in Hell? Fear Him that can destroy both Soul and
Body in Hell.

It has these three degrees in it.

1. To be in Hell is to be sensibly knowing that the Soul is excluded from God,
and has no fellowship nor communion with him. All the World are in Hell; they
have no knowledge nor fellowship nor union with God: I, but the sense is not
upon them; they know it not, but cover themselves with a covering of falsehood
and lies; and hope and believe that God loves them, when they have no ground,
nor know any such thing. But now* when any shall be awakened, and rouzed, and
made to see their condition, and sensibly know they are ignorant of God; live
at a distance from him, and are so shut out and excluded, as they cannot turn
any ways to get to Him; and know not whether ever they shall be brought to see
the Kings face, or not; whether they shall be so far favored or not: I say, the
felt sense of this exclusion from God is the first degree of Hell. And this God
can soon do* He can soon awake and rouse, and open how the case stands with the
Soul, that it may cry out with Cain, My Punishment is greater then I can bear.
There are many in the world, were they but brought to a strait to know their
conditions, would be found here in Cains case, shut out from the Presence of
God; and therefore they hate the Light, and are afraid to come to be judged by
it.

2. Another degree of being in Hell is, when the Soul is made to feel the very
Pains and Torments of Hell, to go under the gnaw of that worm of conscience,
which continually dogs, and gnaws, and torments the Soul day and night; The
pains of Hell took hold upon me (says David,) the sorrows of Death encompassed
me. He was brought to this step of Hell, to have no rest nor quiet in all his
ways; but he was not given over unto Death; The Pit did not shut her mouth upon
him: Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell (says he,) nor suffer thy Holy One to
see corruption: That was his mercy and salvation, etc.

3. The last step of Hell, which makes all up, (for, as I said, the children of
God may, and do many times pass through the two former,) but this makes it up
to be Hell indeed, when Everlastingness is added to the condition, Go ye cursed
into Everlasting Fire; when there is an everlasting Sentence of Exclusion; when
the great gulf is set, as Abraham answered, Between us and you is a great
gulf set, that they that would come from you to us, cannot, etc. This is the
Hell indeed. And the Time is coming that this will grow up to be more known in
the World, that men shall have their Hell opened, and their sentence read in
their own consciences* For how have all things been in the dark hitherto! How
few of the Children of God in former days have had a clear, evident and certain
knowledge of their Salvation? And so for the children of the Devil, how few have
had their consciences opened, and condemnation sealed* but have slept out their
days sottishly, and gone hood-winked to Hell. But as the Truth shall get up to
open Salvation to the sons of God, that that is their lot and portion; so
certainly will it grow up for others to be divided to their own stock and
kind, and go under the feeling and sense of their condemnation; as the Apostle
says of some, whose damnation slumbreth not.

And now what shall I say to you more? but this:

1. If it be possible, that some of you might be warned never to come to this
place of torment, to taste the sorrows of Death, and feel the pains of Hell; to
have the Soul destroyed, to be turned into Hell with the ungodly. Oh! who can
express the misery? What have we been upon, caring and fearing about the Body,
and them that can kill it? but alas! this is the thing to be feared, to have
Soul and Body destroyed in Hell.

3. Then you that are to be saved, and truly belong to God, and have had true
hints in your selves, and a witness from others to that purpose; yet see what
may befall you, how far you may be let go, how near destruction you may come:
you may be cast into the belly of Hell, so was Jonah; and feel the pains of
Hell, so did David; and be shut out from all enjoyment of God, so was Job, that
he could not find him: though he went forward and backward, on the right hand
and on the left, yet no entrance could be found: but their mercy and salvation
was in being brought out of Hell. But now because you have yet no certain
knowledge of your latter end, how God will deal with you; if the sense of what I
have said were upon you, it would put you to a great strait to know the end.

3. Stand in awe, lest this day overtake you unawares; you know not what shall
happen, therefore stand in awe, and fear.

CHRIST Weeping over JERUSALEM; OR Truths Bowels toward its own. SERMON. IV.
April 13. 1651.
LUKE 19.41, 42, etc. And when He was come near, He beheld the City and wept
over it,

Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
that belong to thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes, etc.


The Analysis.
FRom the words these Things in general observed.

I. What City this is?

Ans. It is Jerusalem, the Beloved City, a City compact, a City built on a
Hill, typing out the People of God.

1. As they are the beloved and chosen ones of God. 2. Compact and made up of
the Divinity and Humanity, God in Man. 3. Built on a sure Rock, the everlasting
Love and good will.
II. And when he came near, etc. Whence this observed:

That the great care and business of Christ is to come near this City, these
saved ones; to gather Jacob, to find the lost sheep, to seek up the sons of
Peace.

III. He beheld the City and wept over it. Why weeps He?

Weeping arises either from 1. Joy. 2. Grief.
On both these accounts Christ weeps.

1. He weeps for Joy that He had found Jerusalem; so Truth when it meets with
the sons of peace: And that for three Reasons.

1. For joy, that however now in their blood, yet it is the beloved City; they
are the people where Christ is to do his great cure. 2. For joy, that God had
left the wise and prudent, and chose such Babes; Truth rejoices at it. 3. For
joy (however now they deal with Him) that they shall accept and say, Blessed be
He that comes in the name of the Lord.
2. He weeps for Grief, to find Jerusalem in her sin, killing her Prophets.
Where these three Aggravations.

1. It Is an unnatural sin, in killing the Prophets they kill themselves. 2. An
ungrateful sin, to reward evil for all the good done. 3. A desperate and
venturous sin, to kill their present Prophets, and know not whether ever
another shall be sent to them, or not.
3. He weeps to see Jerusalems miserable ignorance, that They knew not the
things that belong to their Peace; how He would have gathered them as a Hen her
chickens, etc.

This was paralleled to Truths Dealings with us.

1. A Hen calls and clocks her chickens after her; so Truth called us together
out of several places, conditions, relations, etc. 2. The Hen sits down when
her chickens gathered; so Truth sat down with us. 3. She spreads her wings to
take in and receive he^ chickens. 4. She gathers them under her wings to
cherish, and warm, and heat them. 5. She does it, the better to secure and
prote^^ them. 6. She does it, that she may nurse up, and bring them to
perfection, to shift for themselves. In (...) these Cases Truth has dealt with
us.
4. He weeps from an unsatisfied Desire and Love toward Jerusalem: O that thou
had known, eve^ Thou, etc.

5. He weeps for the miserable Condition He foresaw coming on them; that, is
intimated in sever^^ expressions.

1. But now they are hid from thine eyes. 2. Thine Enemies shall cast a Trench
about thee, 3. And compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, 4. And
lay thee even with the ground, 5. And thy children within thee. 6. And not
leave one stone upon another in thee. 7. This is added as an aggravation of
all; Because thou knew not the day of thy visitation. Here is a full woe
indeed.
LUKE 19.41, 42, etc. And when He came near, and beheld the City, He wept over
it, And said, If thou had known, even thou, in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes, etc.
THe occasion of these words from Christ, arises partly from the Pharisees
envying the Discipl s joy, singing Hosanna to Christ, and rejoicing to see
their King come, meekly riding on an Asses colt, toward Jerusalem. Christ
tells them, If these should hold their peace, the very stones would cry out:
secretly reproving them; Well, you will not regard it, you rejoice not; you are
not glad to see your King coming toward you, you embrace not the Salvation
offered: but if you hold your peace, and these should hold their peace; yet He
will have a people, though He raise them out of the dust: Of very stones he
will raise up children to Abraham: He will yet have a City, a Jerusalem, which
shall receive him at last, and be glad of their King, what usage soever at
present He may find from them; how sad and miserable soever their case now is:
And when He came near, He beheld the City, and wept over it, etc.

From the words I would have you consider these several Things.

I. What City this is that Christ beheld and weeps over?

It is Jerusalem, the beloved and chosen Ciey, where He had placed his Name,
and Worship, and Ordinances. 2. Jerusalem the compact City, that is at unity in
it self. 3. Jerusalem, a City built upon a Hill, standing aloft on a sure
foundation, which cannot be moved. And this was but a Type of the people of
God, the Jerusalem which is from above. 1. They are the chosen and beloved
people, chosen out of the World, redeemed from among Men, gathered out of all
Nations, and Countries, and People, and Tongues, to be a peculiar treasure to
Him. 2. The compact City, such as are made up and compact of God and Man in one
person (according to the Pattern their elder Brother Christ) the Humanity and
Divinity joined in together, God with man and in man; Christ in you the hope of
glory: For all others (in whom something of God is not) are but a mere outside
and shadow; but where ever in any man this Divinity is joined, in, and to, the
Humanity, there is the compact Jerusalem: of such members is that City made:
the Jerusalem from above, which is the Mother of us all. And, 3. These are the
City built upon a Hill: What is that? what Hill? It is the everlasting Love and
good will of God, that unchangeable purpose, which is a Hill too high for any
thing to reach and come near, to destroy and undo them; though the winds blow,
and storms beat, and floods come; yet the House stands, because it is built on a
Rock, unmovable as Mount Sion: And this is the Jerusalem, this the City, these
the People, that Christ weeps over.

II. And when He drew near the City. Whence consider;

That the great care and business of Christ is to draw near this City
Jerusalem, to come nigh his people.

This is the thing He minds above all other things; Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God: That was the great work He laid upon his Disciples, to seek up this
Kingdom, to look up the sons of Peace, such as are to be saved: It is his meat
and drink to do the Will of Him that sent Him: And that was his Will, That He
should lose none that were given Him of his Father. All this have I said (says
Christ) that you might be saved. And how contrary is this to the way of the
Ministers of the World! They seek Livings, and Honors, and respect: they seek a
multitude to follow them, and to be called Rabbi. But Christ; the true
Shepherd, He seeks his own sheep; where ever they straggle and wander, He
follows and searches them up: among Harlots and Publicans, by the high ways and
hedges, where ever He may find the sons of peace, there lies his way. And this
mind of Christ has been in all his people in their day: Not seeking yours,
but you, (says Paul.) This is the thing Christ ayms at in all his seekings and
labors and travels, in leaving his glory and crown and ease, in taking upon Him
the form of a servant; was not this the cause of all, That He might come nearer
to his Brethren? Because the children were partakers of flesh and blood, He
also took part of the same: That was the thing He came for, to visit his
Brethren, to gather up Jacob, to seek the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

III. How is Christ affected when He comes near and beholds Jerusalem? He wept
over it.

Now weeping is a passion or affection of the Soul, being moved and stirred
either with joy or grief; and both these have a share in Christ's weeping over
his People.

1. He weeps for joy that He had found the City of a blessing, the beloved
people, His own Brethren; His Soul is glad at it, and breaks in him for joy: So
Joseph, when he saw his brother Benjamin, his bowels were moved, he could
refrain no longer, but weeps over him for joy. But what joy can there be to see
Jerusalem in this case? killing her Prophets, stoning them that are sent to
her? lying at present in a dead and senseless condition? How can Truth be
affected with joy to find a people in this case, though truly belonging to God?

Yes. Christ weeps for joy, in these three Considerations.

1. For joy, that however the present case stand with them, that they are dead,
in their graves, and now ready to stink, in all appearance past recovery; yet
They are such Dead, as (He knows) shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and
live: such Dead, whose Souls shall not be left in Hell, nor they suffered to
see corruption. He has met with such Dead, where a great Miracle is to be
wrought, and the glory of God shall be manifest, and this is Joy to Truth: When
He came to Lazarus his grave, He wept: Why? what was the cause? He breaks out
thus; I thank thee, O Father, that thou have heard me; and I know thou hear
me always. Why, Lazarus was yet in his grave, and the thing not wrought, of
raising him to Life: I, but Christ weep^ for joy to see the thing shall be:
There was a hope and faith in the thing, as if already done: He joys that He
has met with one where a cure is to be wrought; there is a work and service
for Him to do, to honor his Father by: The beggarly, the poor, the outcasts
that no man looks after, but lie in their graves, like dead men out of mind;
That He meets with these, where there is work for Him to do, to set the Beggar
with the Princes of his people; this Truth joys at, to be employed to help its
Brethren: We have a little Sister (says the Church) and she has no breasts;
what shall we do for our Sister? etc.

2. He weeps for joy, to think that God has hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them to Babes: That God has chose the weak, and poor,
and foolish things of this world, to confound the great, and wise, and
honorable: This breaks his heart, to see the hungry Soul fed, and the rich sent
empty away: They had their good things in this Life; their Heaven, and solace,
and content; but Lazarus his evil things: I, but now, he is comforted, and the
other tormented. And this pleases and contents Truth, to see these equal
proceedings of God: Therefore, I thank thee, O Father, etc. That the proud and
scornful are not always suffered to reign, and lord it, and carry all before
them; but a day comes, of doing right to the meek of the Earth: this Christ
joys at. And certainly it is as great a content to Truth, to see the rich, and
wise, and proud, and scornful, that scorn and trample all under their feet; to
see these cut off: as to see the Beggar lifted out of the dunghill, to see the
poor ones saved.

3. He weeps for joy, that this Jerusalem, how ever she be now against her
Prophets, and her own good; yet the day will come when they shall say, Bl^ssed
be He that comes in the Name of the Lord. They shall be willing, and embrace
and receive Him, in the day of his power; they shall be a willing people: and
this He joys at; in hope that he shall see Jerusalem recovered; that his people
shall not always be scorning, and despising, and kicking against the Truth;
that they shall not always be covering and hiding themselves, and stand out
against their own mercies: but the year of Jubilee will come, the day will be,
when God will break the yoke from off their neck, and set them free: And then
(says David) I will run the ways of thy Commandments, when thou have set my
feet at liberty. Then all his Love will be owned, and received, and prized: He
shall be welcome to them then; even the feet of such as bring glad tidings of
peace: Then will the Soul say with Abigail, Let me wash the feet of the
servants of my Lord the King. He shall be welcome indeed in that day: And this
glads, and rejoices, and keeps up his spirit, to think on this time. I had
verily fainted (says David) unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the Land of the Living: That bare up his heart. There is hope in the
latter end (says God to Rachel) that thy Children shall come again to their
own borders. How ever they are now in captivity, and lie scattered and broken,
as if utterly forsaken; yet they shall return. And for these causes Christ
weeps over Jerusalem, over his people, out of joy, where ever and in what case
soever he finds them: yet this joy lives in the bottom. I would you might never
forget these Particulars. But,

2. And when He beheld the City, He wept. Another Reason why He weeps, is out
of sorrow, because He finds them in their blood: He grieves to see Ierusalems
wickedness, to see her hands embrued in blood; to see her killing the Prophets,
and opposing and fighting against her own good. There is no other way for Her
ever to be saved, but by hearing the voice of her Prophets, and obeying them:
And now, to thrust these away, saying, We will not have this man rule over us;
for Truth to find the sons of peace, the saved ones, in this strange
condition, hating and striking against their own chief good, and best friends,
This causes a weeping. It is a gladness indeed to find the sons of peace; to
see a Nathanael, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile; one in whom
the Spirit of Life, the Seed of God, is planted; Truth joys at this: and if
this be not in the bottom, there is no ground for Truth to work upon: No
Physician goes about to take a dead man to cure. If there be not a Seed of
Life, there is nothing for Truth to care for, and pray and weep over: But now
where that seed is, yet to find such a Soul, or such a people, stoning their
Prophets; to find his own Children rebelling and standing against Him; this
causes Truth to weep: And when He beheld the City, He wept, etc.

Now this Sin has three Aggravations in it, which cause Truth to weep.

1. It is an unnatural sin for them to kill their Prophets, which came to
instruct and inform them in the way of Life. Alas! in killing your Prophets,
you kill your selves; you murder your own Souls: And what murder is so cruel
and unnatural as that? Who shall save you, if you kill your Savior? Him whom
God has sent to be a Savior and Deliverer? If you thrust away this Moses, who
shall bring you out of Egypt, and lead through the Wilderness? Nothing so
unnatural as for a man to cut his own Throat; such a thing is it for any to
slight and contemn that Truth which comes to save them.

2. It is an ungrateful Sin. It is not right, nor allowable, to render evil for
evil, to hate our Enemies: But to reward evil for good, to return hatred for
love and mercy and bowels showed us; (Am I therefore your Enemy (says Paul)
because I tell you the truth?) This is wonderful ungrateful. I will send my
Son, sure they will reverence Him: but now after all to take this Son too, and
kill Him, that was sent out of love and exceeding tenderness; this is the
ungratefullest sin in the World: To refuse Him that speaks from Heaven, that
can open to you the mind and heart and love and good will of God; this Christ
weeps at, to find them in so ungrateful a sin.

3. It is a venturous and desperate sin; That moves Christ to weep, to see the
hard venture: what, to sleep upon the top of a Mast! To venture to kill their
Prophets, and the present offer of Grace, and know not whether ever another
Prophet shall be sent them or no; O what a venture is it! God has truly sent
me to you, to warn you to come out of Sodom, and to tell you, God has purposed
to destroy the City; and will you venture to linger in it still? Had Lot stayed
but one hour longer, he had been destroyed with them: but the Angel laid hands
on him, and pulled him out, the Lord being merciful to him: This is the next to
that unpardonable sin, which David prays against; O keep me from presumptuous
sins, that I may be innocent from the great Transgression. The Lord warn and
prevent you, and lay it to your heart to consider, how guilty we are in all
these Particulars; how unnatural we have been and cruel to our own Souls, to
murder the Truth sent to gather us; and then of all transgressions it is the
most ungrateful. What people in all the world have been so kindly dealt with?
so followed, and waited on, and born with? Line upon Line, Instruction, and
Counsel, and Love, have followed us; and to murder this Truth after all, how
ungrateful is it? And then how desperate have we been and venturous, in a
Passion (like the profane Esau) to sell all for one morsel of bread, to venture
all at a blow? and what ever comes on it, desperately resolve, We will not have
this man rule over us. Well may God say to us, Because I would have purged you,
and you would not be purged, therefore you shall not be purged till you dye. Do
you hear what is spoke? It concerns all; you are all guilty, the Lord lay it
not to your charge. I know not a People in the World so venturing all at a
cast, as we have been. Come Life or Death, yet there has been a punctual
standing out and slighting the Call of Truth, to have our wills.

Thirdly, Another Cause Christ weeps over Jerusalem, is, to find her in that
miserable condition of ignorance, that she knew not the Things which belonged
to her Peace: O that Thou had known, even Thou, in this thy day, etc. But
They knew not the day of their Visitation, they knew not their time; this
Christ grieves at. Work whilst it is day, whilst you have the Light with you;
for the night comes wherein no man can work. But they had played in Summer,
they slighted their seasons and opportunities, and knew them not; knew not the
Things belonging to their Peace. Man naturally looks after the things that
concern his ease, but is not so minding what belongs to his peace. But it is
this Peace only that must stick by us in a strait, in a time of need; when
ease, and enlargements, and all fail, then will this Peace abide; and this
Christ weeps for, to see their ignorance, though it is well in one respect that
they were ignorant: I obtained mercy (says Paul) because I did it ignorantly.
And had we done what we have done, fully knowing, we had sinned that
unpardonable Sin, and there could have been no mercy for us.

But What was Jerusalem ignorant of?

She was ignorant of her Day: O that thou had known in this thy Day! It was
the time and day of her Visitation, and she knows it not. This day (says
Samuel to Saul) would the Lord have established the Kingdom upon thee, had he
known the time, and stood in that nick; but falling there, he lost all. So the
woman of Samaria, she looked for the Messiah to come, and that He would tell
her all things; but she was ignorant of the present season, she knew not that
He was the Messiah who now talked with her. So have we been hoping, and
expecting, and promising our selves great things for the future; but have not
known the present day, and the present mercies offered us. For my own part, had
I known my time and day afforded me, I can truly say, I had been prevented of
many of the miseries, mischiefs and miscarries that I have fallen into: And how
many times have you killed the strugglings and motionings of the Spirit in you,
and said, To morrow we will consider of it, and hear and come up to what is
called for? when alas, to morrow is not ours, we know not but this may be the
day; and if this be slipped over by us, it may never be offered more: but we are
reasoning and disputing away the time, saying, Sure this is not the call and
mind of Truth, this would make me a scorn and hissing stock to all, sure this
would undo me: And thus we are keeping off our mercies. No, but we judge amiss;
He would bring thee to Himself, to know the things that belong to thy Peace, to
have Peace in all thou go about, which is worth all. We have now no Peace in
all our ways, turn whither we will, to eating, and drinking, and trading, to
all our employments and enjoyments; yet nothing shall give rest and ease to
them that are to be saved, till this Peace be given, and this Christ weeps for,
that this Peace should be no more known nor minded by Jerusalem; but the time
slipped over, and lost and gone, whilst we stand and oppose our own Salvation,
and would never come at it. But you will say, Is such a Thing in man that would
not be saved, and come to know the things which belong to his Peace, and
everlasting good? I, there is that which opposes it to the Death, if the Lord
prevent not. But how ever the Soul may be saved in the day of the Lord, yet a
great Loss may come, the inlargements and seize may be lost. But now they
are hid from thine eyes, etc. and much misery and sorrows may be brought on our
heads, as in the Verse following, Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee,
and keep thee in on every side, and not leave one stone upon another, etc.
Methinks while I read and consider it, to whom he speaks, to Jerusalem, that
God should deal thus exactly, and be so severe and harsh to his own People,
this is marvelous, and makes my heart ache to think on it, and yet thus He will
deal with Jerusalem. I told you, the high nature of their sin to destroy their
Prophets, is, 1. An unnatural sin, it is to kill their own Souls. And, 2. An
ungrateful sin, against all love, and mercy, and tenderness, a requiting of the
greatest evil for the greatest good. And then, 3. What a venture is it to run
such a desperate hazard? who, that should see this in himself, and have the
sense seize upon him, would not cry out, O what have I done! I remember it was
so with me in my day, when Christ was offered to me, and my Soul drew back, and
refused the Lamb of God, that which I had so long cried, and prayed, and longed
for; yet when offered to me, Lo here is my Son, that then I should refuse it,
Lord (I said to my Soul) what have I done! what will become of me! what now can
save me! Then another Cause of Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, I told you, was
their Ignorance, that They knew not the things which belonged to their Peace;
and what Things were they? Why (says Christ,) How often would I have gathered
thee, as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and you would not? They
knew not the goodness of the Lord, the day of Grace offered, that then He was
calling, and inviting, and gathering them to Himself.

Now this I would bring home to our selves, to see how it will parallel with
our conditions, whether the Lord has not thus sought to gather us in our day
as a Hen gathers her Chickens.

In which these several things are Considerable.

1. A Hen calls her Chickens after her, she goes before and clocks, and
clocks to call them together, to follow her, till she gets them all about her;
and so has the Lord dealt with us, the Call of Truth has reached us, and
brought us together out of several Countries, and places, and conditions; one
Call of the Truth has met with us, and brought us together.

2. The Hen, after she has gathered her chickens about her, she sits down and
settles in some place; and so has Truth; now it has gathered us together, it
has sat down amongst us, it has taken up a settled place of abode, that we are
not now wanderlng abroad to find a Truth, or a People to join with.

3. After the Hen has called her chickens together, and sat down in her place,
the next thing she does, is this, she spreads forth and opens her wings to
receive and take them in: so has the Truth opened and spread forth the wings
of its favor, and goodness, and entertainment; the way is open and free, all
that will may come under and find acceptance and tendering, all that are the
chickens indeed, that belong to this Hen, to this Truth, and not of a false
brood.

4. The Hen receives her chickens under her wings to warm, cherish, and revive
them; and that is the end of Truths gathering and opening it self to receive
and take us in, to fellowship, and counsel, and unity; it is that we might be
warmed, and helped, and relieved, and prosper. If two lie together, there is
heat; but how can one be warm alone? Take a quick coal out of the fire, and it
dies presently: And the Holy Ghost says, Woe to him that is alone. But the
Prospering way that Truth calls to, is, where Brethren live together in unity,
to come under one wing, for counsel, and help, and direction in all our ways.

5. The Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, as to warm and cherish them,
so to protect and keep them out of danger and harms; the Kite, or some ravenous
thing or other, soon catches them, when they leave the Hen, and straggle alone:
And this is a certainty, whilst we stand alone by our selves out of the
counsel, and care, and submission under Truth, we are open to a thousand
dangers and miscarriages, we lie exposed to all ravenous beasts: The Avenger of
Blood he may justly take us, when we are out of our City of Refuge; and this
wandering has been the Cause of all our desolation, and misery, and sorrows.

6. The last thing in the Hens calling, and gathering, and receiving, and
warming, and protecting her chickens, all is, that she may nurse them up to
perfection, to be like her self, to be able to shift abroad, and defend
themselves: And this end Truth has had in all its dealings with us, and
followings after us, and waitings upon us, that we might grow up to be
like-minded to it self, to see us wrought, and molded, and fashioned into the
same likeness, that the same mind might dwell in us which dwelt in Christ
Jesus, etc.

Now look it over again: Have you known these things which belong to your
Peace? Have you known that all these dealings and calls of Truth, and strivings
with you, were in love and goodness? that this was the day of Visitation? and
have you accepted of this Love? See: 1. Have you not been called out of several
places, many miles asunder, to come together? Has not the sound of Truth gone
forth, and reached you, and called you to it? And, 2. Do you not see that the
Hen is now sat down? that the Truth is pitched, and has taken up a settled
place and People? and now if we should be broken in pieces, and shattered
hither and thither to our former scattering in the world, would it not be sad
and miserable? And this I fear may befall us, because we have slighted, and not
taken notice of this day of our mercies. Then, 3. Have we not known and felt
the warmings and cheerings of the Powers of Truth? How often have we found our
hearts touched within, and heat, and warmed, and turned? and yet for all this
we are loath to come under the wing, but are upon our reasonings, and
deferrings, and scruples. Then, 4. Have we not known what a shelter and
safeguard it is, to sit under the wing of Truth? what a defense and safety? how
safe we are under the wings of the Almighty? We do not at present so consider
this: But they that are deprived of this mercy, and violently taken away from
us by wicked hands, They now feel the loss, and bitterly complain and mourn
under it; They find what snares, and baits, and ravenous beasts lie daily at
watch ready to devour them; and if the Lord prevent not beyond our deservings,
we know not what miseries and sorrows may befall us, if a scattering day come.
And lastly, I told you, the Hen nurses her chickens, to bring them up to be
like her self: And has not this been aimed at in all the dealings of Truth
with us, that we might grow up to be like it self, and be molded into the same
Image? And we can never grow up, whilst we live at a distance from the Hen,
the place where she sits down to warm, and brood, and cherish her young ones:
And therefore at what a strait was David, when driven into the Wilderness by
his son? How does he cry out, That his Soul was athirst for the living God? How
does he then prize the Sanctuary, the Place and People of Gods Worship? How
does he envy the Sparrow and Swallow, which could make their nests there, when
he was forced to live at a distance? For there he knew the Blessing was
commanded, and life for evermore.

Now these are the Things which belong to our Peace, to be gathered under this
wing of Truth: If we should have all the world, and yet no Peace in it, what
were we the better? And this we are called to, to know this present day of our
Visitation, lest the Door be shut, and that which follows fall upon us, But now
they are hid from thine eyes. O Lord! it makes my heart shake to think upon it,
to have the Eyes shut, and closed up, to be left to grope, and wander, and
stumble in darkness, and not to see when good comes, and all for slipping the
present opportunity, not knowing the things that belong to our Peace.

There are yet two other Reasons behind, why Christ weeps over Jerusalem.

Fourthly, He weeps from an unsatisfied Love and Desire after Jerusalem: O that
thou had known, even Thou, in this thy Day, etc. At length the fire breaks
forth, and He can hold no longer, but must weep over His Brother Benjamin. But
why Jerusalem above all, that He weeps over Her, and cries out for her, O that
Thou had known? etc. Why, Jerusalem was the Beloved One, the choice One of
her Mother, born out of the Love and Heart of God: Thou above all others; O
that Thou had harkened, then had thy Peace been as a River, etc.

Fifthly, Christ weeps from the sight of the miserable and lamentable condition
which he knows is coming upon them; not only shut out from the day of her
mercies, and the things that belong to her Peace; but now they are hid from
thine eyes: and that is not all; but now God is departing, all woes and
miseries are coming upon Her. 1. Thine Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee.
And then, 2. Compass thee in on every side. And, 3. Shall lay thee even with
the ground, and thy children within thee. And then, 4. Not leave in thee one
stone upon another. And then, 5. This added to all the rest, Her own guilt,
which brought all this evil upon her own head; Because Thou knew not the day
of thy Visitation. If all these Circumstances and Aggravations were opened, and
seized upon your hearts, it would appear a sad condition indeed, and all for
slipping the time, the day of Visitation.

Christ Buckling TO HIS FATHER, OR THE Absoluteness of the Divine Will. SERMON.
V. April 20. 1651.
JOHN 6.38, 39. For I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the
Will of Him that sent me.

And this is the Fathers Will which has sent me, that of all which He has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.


The Analysis.
FRom the words was considered:

I. Who this [I] spoke of, i^^.

It is the Son of God, the Mind, the Heart, the Will of the Father brought
forth: This is He that came from Heaven, etc.

II. What does he come to do?

Not His own Will, but the Will of His Father; That Will of God is the sure
uncontrollable Rule, to which Christ Himself submits.

Whence three Considerations were proposed.

1. To see the ground of all happiness; It is this good will of God. 2. All
Things must buckle to this Will, even the Son Himself. 3. This Will of God cuts
off all our wills; nothing that comes into our thoughts must be at all.
III. What is this Will of the Father? That of all which He has given me, I
should lose nothing, etc.

Where two Branches of this Will.

1. A People are given to Christ by this Will, and that in three Relations.

1. As His Children, and so Christ stands as a Mother. 1. A Mother brings forth
her Children out of her own Bowels. 2. She nurses up her Children to
perfection. So Christ.
2. A People are given to Christ as his Sister; and hence three Privileges
spring up to them. 1. That they are of the same stock and kindred with Christ.
2. They have right to the same portion and privileges. 3. Hence they are
liable to be Christ's Wife; He must not marry out of his own kindred.
3. A People are given to Christ as his Wife: In which two Things called for.
1. Serviceableness; the woman is to be subject to her Husband. 2. Fruitfulness;
no children without a Husband, and no name to live after us, if not children in
the Truth to keep it alive.

2. Another Branch of the Will of the Father, is, That none of these that are
thus given to Christ should be lost.

Where two Things considered.

1. What it is to be lost? Opened in these Particulars. 1. To be lost, is to be
left out of that good will of God. 2. Not to be of that stock which the Lord
Christ is sent to gather. 3. To have the eyes blinded: Our Gospel hid to them
that are lost. 4. To be given up to believe a Lie, to feed on ashes. 5. To have
in evil eye, and grudg all done to Truth, as Judas. 6. To be left without any
to gather up, or take the care of the Soul. 7. To be left without restraint,
that wickedness may take its full course, and grow to cursing and madness
against God.
2. Why are not all lost, since all wander and turn Prodigals? It comes from
these Grounds. 1. From this Will of God; it is his Will to give Christ a
People. 2. They are nigh related to Christ; He cannot see them lost. 3. They
must not be lost, because Christ cannot be perfect without his Members; He must
have a Body, etc.

The Uses were, 1. Thoroughly to understand on what bottom Salvation stands. 2.
To enquire, Do you know your Lot here? Are you given to Christ? 3. To comfort
all drooping hearts that lie under sense of their misery, as if quite lost: No,
Christ is to lose none given to Him.


JOHN 6.38, 39. For I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the
Will of Him that sent me, etc.
I Am daily and continually minding you, that you might understand the sure
principles and ground of Things, that you might know the Foundation and Cause
whence all springs, in those that are saved, and those that are lost. For
whilst we are judging according to appearance and effects, all is uncertain
and doubtful, till we come to be unmoveably principled into the Foundation of
all, how that stands. For Things are not as man judges; for it is not what man
would; if he would be saved, and labors, and struggles to press in, alas, that
is not the thing: It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs. And then
it is not what man would not; if he stands out, and opposes, and would never
come in, yet if the word goes forth, Go and compel them, it must be done: It
stands upon the Will of God; what He will, what He has ordered and appointed,
all must stoop to that; Christ himself submits here.

I came not to do my own Will, but the Will of Him that sent me, etc.

Where consider,

I. Who this [I] spoke of, is. I came not, etc.

This I, is the Son of God, the Mind of God, the Heart and Will of the Father
brought forth; and this Mind of his He has pleased to put into earthen
vessels, into his People in all days: This Son of his it was that spoke in his
Prophets, and opened the Counsel and Purposes of God to them; that which was
hidden and laid up in his own Bosom from the foundations of the world, that is
now made manifest by the appearance of Jesus Christ, by this Bosom, and Heart,
and Mind of his, sent forth into his Prophets; that opened, and does yet open,
what was before the world began, and what shall be after that comes to an end:
This opens the deep things of God. None knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son shall reveal him. There can be no coming near to God, no knowing,
no being like him, unless this Son, this Mind and Heart be sent out, and
opened, and grow up in the Soul. Alas, the Deity in it self is too large and
infinite for man to conceive of: If ever you come to have apprehensions of the
Godhead, it will drink and swallow you up: No man can see my face and live
(says God to Moses,) therefore He hides him in the cleft of a Rock till his
Glory pass before him. Man is not able to come nigh that infinite Majesty; and
therefore He is pleased to send forth of Himself, His own Heart and Mind, His
Son into his People: As He was once sent out in the flesh of Christ, our elder
Brother; so is He now to be sent into his People, the same Mind of God to grow
up by degrees and degrees, as we are able to bear.

II. What is this Son of God, this Mind of His, sent out to do? what comes it
for?

I came not (says Christ) to do my own Will, but the Will of Him that sent me.
It is a strange Mystery, (if you know not somewhat of it in your selves;) That
this Heart and Mind of God that comes forth from God, and is God Himself, that
yet this Son must not do his own Will, but the Will of the Father; that the
Truth, and Christ Himself, though his desires be just, and good, and right, yet
He must not have them unless his Father please; His will must suffer, and be
crossed, and denied; therefore it is said, He learned obedience by the things
he suffered. It is strange how God seems to contradict himself, that his own
Heart, and Mind, and Truth must yet be denied, and suffer and submit to do this
Will of the Father, though it be against it self; so great, and Lord-like, and
commanding is this Will of the Lord our God. He does (says David) what ever
pleases him, both in Heaven and Earth: What ever he will do, that comes to
pass. If he bring some far on in the way to Life, that they come even to the
door, yea into the very room; yet if he will then turn them out, and enquire,
Friend, how came thou hither without the wedding garment? The man is
speechless, and must be turned out presently, if He will not have mercy, etc.
And on the other hand, if a man run never so far from him, with Jonah into the
bottom of Hell, that all seems utterly lost; yet if he will recover, and bring
back from thence, if He will have mercy, nothing shall hinder; so absolute,
uncontrollable, and overruling is this Will of the great Lord, without giving
any account of his matters.

And hence I would have you consider three Things.

1. What is the ground and foundation all the happiness and favor that we or
any are ever like to enjoy; It must only be from this good will of God: What he
has set and purposed for, or against, any, that shall stand. What ever his
Soul desires, that he does, (says Job;) therefore he adds, When I consider
him, I am afraid of him. Have any of you this favor, to have a lot and portion
in eternal life? It is his will that has done it, his good will, his good
pleasure, nothing can hinder it; If He will have mercy, who shall hinder?
Again, are any left to destruction, to ruin and undo themselves for ever?
Alas, it is this Will that has left them out, and destruction must then needs
follow. What if God will harden Pharaoh, and make some vessels of wrath? If he
will not show mercy, who shall turn him?

2. As this will is the foundation of all that comes to pass; so secondly,
Consider how resolved it is, and all must buckle to it, even Things in Heaven
and Earth, the Son himself must be subject; He comes down from Heaven, leaves
his Crown and Glory, and must fulfill this Will by suffering: All things must
stoop to this great Lord, so mighty is he, such a Lord Paramount, so great a
Ruler. Alas, Things come not to pass according to men's thoughts and
propoundings, but according to this Will of God.

3. Then Consider, How this Will of God quite cuts off all our wills. Nothing
that comes into your thoughts shall be at all, (says God.) And again, Many are
the devises of man's heart, but the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand. And He
cries out against Jerusalem, How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? All
our thoughts are vain; if our thoughts are to save our selves, or if to condemn
and undo our selves, they are all but vain: The Counsel of the Lord that shall
stand; and the thing is done already before the foundations of the world were
laid. When we have tried all, and run out all our runs, there is but one door
to go to in all our needs, the Will and Purpose of God; and if we find no
relief there, alas, the case is miserable; man can never help himself: So that
the great matter lies there, to know what that Will of God concerning us is,
how that stands, what his thoughts are, and to be truly informed here, and laid
submitted to this Will; This is all we have to do, for the thing is done
already. In the Salvation of them that are to be saved, how contrary are all
things to Reason? how do they oppose and stand out more then any? Had the
mighty works (says Christ) been done in Sodom and Gomorrah, which were done in
thee, they would have repented them in sackcloth and ashes: There would not
have been so much opposition from them; but yet if he will save, he will save,
nothing shall hinder. And so in those that perish, though they seek the
blessing with tears, as Esau did; though there be never so earnest a crying,
and weeping, and pleading, Lord open to us, we have cast out Devils in thy
Name, and Thou have taught in our streets; yet all will not do, if his will be
set once, and the doors shut, then Depart from me, I know you not, etc. If we
were but truly informed and principled in this thing, it would be a great
settling to our minds. We have many strange and vain wandering thoughts and
troubles, for want of a true principling, and setting down here, that all must
come to pass according to this Will. Thou will perhaps say, But I have the
Truth in me, and that cries, and desires, and longs. Well, but the Son himself
must be subject; the Truth in thee, the right desires of thy Soul, must submit
to his pleasure, whether to be answered or denied. The Son himself says, Not my
Will, but thy Will be done: And it is said, He learned obedience by the things
he suffered. And if the Son of God, the Truth it self, which comes out of his
Bosom into the world, into the man, if that cannot alter nor change his mind,
but must submit its Will to the Will of its Father; then sure, the man, who is
but dust and ashes, he can do nothing in it; his prayers and cries cannot alter
this Will.

Therefore, what ever thy desires are set upon, and how right and single soever
they may be; yet this is to be looked at in all; but, What is the Will of the
Lord? what is his pleasure? Christ, according to his tenderness, He would have
all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth: He desired many things by
his own Will, but He must come in again, and lay all those desires at his
Fathers foot, and say, Yet not my Will, but Thine.

Now are any of you at a strait and pinch, to know what shall become of you?
Here the thing stands, it depends only upon this mind of God; and nothing (I
know) can or will ever satisfy you, till that, which the Disciples ask for* be
granted you; Show us the Father, and that will suffice. Christ had been long
with them, tendering, exhorting, instructing, and bearing up their heads; yet
that was not enough to them: they are at a want still, till that word comes
from Christ; And I say not, that I will pray for you; for the Father Himself
loves you: And this stays them indeed: Now speak thou plainly, and no
Parable. This is more content and satisfaction, then all He had ever spoke
before to them; this is the ground of all your Happiness, if your Souls were
but surely principled and settled in it. But then,

III. What is this Will of the Father that He comes to do?

This is the Will of Him that sent me (says Christ) that of all that the
Father has given me, I should lose nothings. There are two things in this Will.

1. A people are given to Christ to be his, by this Will of God. 2. It is the
Will of the Father, that none of these should be lost, but that Christ should
raise them up in the last day; That they should be recovered, how desperate
soever the case be with them.
And thus far I have gone, to show you, who this He, spoke of, is; the heart,
the mind of God sent forth, tht Son of God. And, 2. What He was sent out for;
and that is, to do the Will of the Father, to submit to that: And I told you
how all stands in this Will of God; That if Christ Himself would save a man,
yet He cannot do it without this Will of the Father: Therefore He submits, Not
my Will, but thine, etc. Christ would that all should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth: but He must lay it down at his Fathers Will. And had I
no more then my own desires and love toward you to carry me forth, I should
surely have flagged and left you before this time; were not those eternal
thoughts of God, and that settled Will concerning you, discovered to me. But now
I come to open,

What this Will of God is.

And I told you there were two branches of it.

1. That a People were given to Christ by this Will of God: All that the Father
has given me, (says Christ.) Now there is a threefold giving of a people to
Christ.

1. He gives Him a people as his children, to be nursed and tendered by him; and
so He speaks to his Disciples several times, calling them children: Children,
have you understood these things? etc. They were but in the condition and state
of children, though they were men. And here God puts Christ in the place of it
Mother and Nurse, to bring up those that are thus given Him.

1. A Mother receives a seed from her Husband, which is to be molded, and
formed, and grow up in the womb, till it be a perfect child: such a seed is
given to Christ, to warm and cherish, till it grow up to the mind of God, and
have the true proportions of a child, and be like its Father: And therefore it
is said, The Promise is sure to all the seed: And again, A seed shall serve
Him, it shall be to the Lord for a generation.

2. A Mother nurses up her Children when they are born; she feeds, and tends,
and oversees them, till they are grown up to live of themselves: And thus are a
People given to Truth, that it may nourish, and care for, and deal tenderly,
and lead them on, till they grow up to be strong men in the Truth. How does a
Mother bear, and go through all with her child? all its frowardness, and
crossness, she takes it up willingly. So this Love of Truth to its children; it
is not easily provoked, it is not soon moved, but endures all things, and
ways, and hopes all things: It spares from it self to give to its children:
such a Nurse is Truth, so tender and careful: I have been as a nurse amongst
you (says Paul.) If you perceive not this dealing of Truth toward you, it is
all but as a Riddle; If you are not seeing, how tenderly and patiently you have
been dealt with all along from your Cradles; nothing hard and unbearable has
ever been put upon you, but some issue has been made for deliverance: You have
been given into the care and nursery of Truth, to look after, and provide for,
you: nothing more is put upon you; but, open thy mouth wide, and I will fill
it, etc. There has been one with you to care for you, when you have slept, and
slighted, and not considered the day of your visitation. You have little
considered what it has cost to enjoy the breasts that you may suck at daily;
what a living Ministry you are entrusted with, and yet waits upon you: It
reaches all that come near it; none that have come amongst us, have gone hence
without the power of this Truth, convincing, and making them acknowledge, that
of a truth God is amongst us.

2. God gives Christ a people as his Brethren, when they are grown up to that
state, as He calls the Church, My Sister, my Spouse. And in being thus given to
Christ, He manifests these three Things to the Soul.

1. He opens, that it is of the same stock and kindred with Himself; as it is
said, At the second time Joseph was made known to his Brethren. Now that the
Soul of man and the Word of Life should be so nigh related as a Brother and
Sister, this is wonderful! It is too high to be expressed by me, in words, or for
you to conceive of: But yet there is a generation, a people, that shall
justify this wisdom, that shall know this portion is befallen them, That they
are of the same stock with the Lord Jesus, the Word of Life, That they are born
from above; I am not of this world, and these are not of this world (says
Christ:) They are of one World, and one Kingdom, and one Country: Therefore he
says, My sheep hear my voice, and the voice of a stranger they will not hear;
they know not the voice of strangers: They are not of that Country nor
language, and so can understand no other language but the Word of Life. This is
opened to the Soul, when it is thus given over to Christ, as a Sister, one of
the same stock, born from the same Love, as it is in Jeremy, I have loved thee
of old with an everlasting love, etc.

2. Christ opens to the Soul, when it is thus given to him, the Privileges it
is to have with Him; That it is born to the same inheritance and portion that
He himself has: and without this, what is all preaching to you, if this
portion be not made known as belonging to you? And none can read this
seven-sealed Book but the Word of Life: unless He read thy portion to thee,
thou can never know it; unless He witness to thy Soul, as He did to his
Disciples, The Father Himself loves you: And if he ever open this to you, it
must be, when you are grown up to this stature, to be given him as a Sister, as
Brethren: For whilst Children and Babes, you have not understanding; you are
not capable to know it, though it be never so often told you. O Lord, That you
were at a strait to have this opened! For your lives will ever hang in doubt,
till this portion shall stablish, and settle, and put you out of all fears.

3. Hence this follows, and is opened to the Soul, That it is now liable to be
married to Christ, and become his Wife: It was a true Type among the people of
Israel, they were not to marry out of their own stock and kindred; All strange
wives were forbidden: So Christ marries not out of his own line, out of his own
stock; He cannot join to the stock of the Devil: But such as are his Sister,
born of one Father, sprang from one Love, they may become a Wife for Him: Those
two links are joined together in the Canticles, My Sister, my Spouse; but if no
Sister first, it is impossible to be his Spouse. I have told you often, gold
and sand cannot be run together into one lump: and it will surely grow up more
manifest, that all relations, what ever, will dye, and come to nothing, where
Truth lives in one party, if nothing of the same kind appears to maintain the
tie in the other: A Husband, a Wife, a Child, all these relations will dye,
etc. if there be not a surer bond to hold fast for ever.

3. God gives a people to Christ, as a spouse, a wife given into his bosom. And
here two things come in.

1. Serviceableness and subjection to the Husband; That was the Law given at
the Creation; Thy Desire shall be subject to thy Husband, and He shall rule
over thee. Christ will now rule, and expects to be obeyed; He puts the Soul
upon service now, it must no more be its own now, at its own hand and
disposing: The Wife must not please her self, but her Husband. If ever you come
to be Christ's Wife, you must do something for him: Do you look always to live
as children, to be nursed, and tendered, and fed, and never to do some service
for the Truth? etc. And then,

2. If you come to be a Wife to Christ, it will be expected you should be
fruitful, to bring forth children to keep the name of Truth alive after you:
Will you only leave a stone behind you, like Absalom, to keep up your names?
Shall it be said of you, Here a stony heart lies, that dyed without any service
done for the Truth; He has left no children behind to speak for him? Would you
be content to dye in this condition? and thus dye you must, if you never come
to be married to Christ: you can have no true children without a Husband, if
you be not given by God into his bosom, as his Wife. And thus I have opened to
you one branch of this Will of the Father, in giving a people to his Son
Christ, and that in a threefold relation: 1. In the relation of Children. 2. In
the relation of a Sister. 3. In the relation of a Wife. Which are but several
steps and degrees, according as the growing up of the Truth is, etc.

2. Another branch of this Will of God is, That Christ should lose none of
those that are thus given Him.

And this is the happy thing, to be given of God to Christ in any relation: If
but His in the lowest station, if but as children, or if higher, given him as a
Sister, though not yet a Spouse; yet this is the Happiness, That this is the
Will of the Father, that of all that He has given me (says Christ) I should
lose nothing: If but His in the lowest degree, the case is happy: And therefore
this is the great and weighty matter to be known, as the ground of all; Would
you know what shall become of you? would you know whether you shall be lost or
not? Why, are you given to Christ, into his charge and care? do you know that?
Are you his children? in the lowest degree His? Else if you are not children,
then you can be no heirs; you have no right nor portion with Him: and if you be
children, it will appear; the Truth will be stirring toward you, nursing, and
serving, and ministering to the Soul; dealing gently and tenderly, as a Nurse or
a Mother, that you may not be lost, etc.

About this two things were considered.

1. What it is to be lost? 2. How comes it, that All are not lost? since all
are Prodigals, and wander like the lost sheep, why not all lost?
1. What is it to be lost? It has these several things in it.

1. To be lost, is, not to be of that stock and kindred which the Lord Christ
is sent to gather: The great and main thing which is the cause of perishing,
is, the being left to a man's self; That is enough to undo a man: Thy
destruction is of thy self (O Israel.) Men are already sure enough in Hell and
destruction, if there be not a recovery, (were but the sense of the thing upon
them:) The carnal mind is enmity to God, and is not subject, neither can be,
to his Will. And now to be but left here, not to be saved out, ans plucked out
of the fire; this is to be lost: not to be of that number, not to be that lost
sheep which Christ seeks up, as he says, Ye are not of my sheep. And when some
plead, Oh, open! we have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in
our streets: yet He answers, I know you not, you are none of my sheep; the
Father gave me no charge over you, to seek and gather you; and therefore Depart
from me. This is to be lost.

2. To be lost, is, to have the Gospel hid: If our Gospel be hid (says the
Apostle) it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has
blinded their eyes, etc. That is a token of a lost condition, when the Soul is
blinded, that there is neither a knowing of the Mercy, nor a knowing of the
Judgment: I will sing of mercy and of judgment (says David.) Many they get up
Gospel-words, and speak of Mercy, but they know it not: They can live loosely,
and vainly, and carnally, and as they lift: But the Gospel is for Judgment, as
well as Mercy; That sends a sword: The Word of the Lord is quick and lively,
more piercing then a two-edged sword; It cuts, and divides, and squares, and
orders: And if either of these be hid, either the Mercy, or the Judgment; if
this Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

3. To be lost, is, to be given up to believe a lie, to be settled down to
deceit, that nothing of Truth can seize, or enter: Charm the Charmer never so
wisely, yet the Ear is stopped: I Will hold my hold, says the heart: there is such a
secret resolvedness in the Soul when it is given up to believe a lie: And this
is to be lost, to be left here to feed on ashes, on any thing that is short of
a sure condition; That which will not endure the fire, nor stand in the day of
Trial, though it may carry never so fair a show before man. If man may judge, by
his own wisdom; of himself, He is the bravest thing in the World; so long as he
may believe his own thoughts, and feed on a lie; But if Truth comes indeed to
search and judge him, then he will be found the basest thing in the World, the
most vile and wretched.

4. To be lost, is, to be given up to an evil Eye; to think much at the
prospering of the Truth, and grudg all that is done to, and for, it; A
Judas-like spirit, that grudged the ointment should be spent upon Christ, and
thought it too good. This evil Eye to grudg at another enjoyment, this is a
certain canker that will destroy us, if we are not delivered. It is a dangerous
thing to take offense, and dispute, and reason against the Truth; to speak evil
of the things we know not: And to be left to this evil Eye, to grudg, and think
evil, and turn Traitor to Truth, is to be lost and undone.

5. A fifth thing that makes to a lost condition, is, to be left out of the
care and heart of the people of God; to have none to look after the Soul, nor
mind it: as the Curse is in the Psalms against Judas his children; Let there
be none to take care of his fatherless children; let them be vagabonds, and beg
their bread: And if there be not some to stand in the gap for you, you are in a
miserable case, to be left without the prayers of the Lord Jesus in his people
for you; to be left out of the care and cries of that one Spirit; as the
Apostle says, The Spirit it self makes intercession for us with sighs and
groans that cannot be uttered. Christ, and His Spirit, and His People, cannot
be divided; He is with his Body, and that Body is but one, and the spirit that
cries and groans in them is one Spirit: and if we have no share nor portion in
the care, and counsels, and prayers of his people; none to gather us into this
Body; This is to be miserable.

7. To be left to a man's cursing, and rage, and devilishness of spirit; to be
swallowed up and drowned by the floods of ungodliness; and wholly transformed
into the image of the Devil, and to be left here; This is to be lost. And to
this height will the least seed of Sin grow at last, if Mercy be not showed to
prevent from it. But this is Christ's charge, and this is the happiness and
security of his People, That the Will of God stands in it, for the Salvation of
his people: It is the Will of Him that sent me, that of all which He has given
me, I should lose nothing, etc.

But now, if you come sometimes, you may find some of the saved ones, that are
most dear to God, (Precious to the Lord is the Death of his Saints,) yet these
dear ones are sometimes left to taste of all these conditions: You may find
them blinded, and given up to believe lies; They are secure, and senseless; and
in all appearance they are sunk in the mire as deep as any. Jonah, he cries,
out of the bottom of Hell, I went down to the bottom of the Mountains; the
Earth with her bars was about me for ever, etc. And David cries out, I had
almost said as they; my foot had welnigh slipped. And so in the Proverbs, He
that followed the whorish woman, came to that pass at last, to cry out, I was
almost in all evil, etc. Prove. 5.14. They come to the pits brink; nay, David
was in the pit, and therefore cries out, O let not the Pit shut her mouth upon
me. How comes it about then that they are not quite lost?

It stands upon these three grounds.

1. They cannot be quite lost, because the Will of God is set to save them:
Their Safety and Security stands in that free and unchangeable Will. It is the
Will of Him that sent me, that of all He has given me, I should lose nothing.
And nothing can alter, nor turn his thoughts.

2. They are nighly related to Christ, and therefore cannot be lost; they are
his children: Behold, I, and the children God has given me. And again: I said
of them, They are my people, Children that will not lie. And sure He will not
see his Children killed, and not rise up to save them. Farther, They are his
Brethren; He is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. They are his
Sister, his Spouse, that lies in his bosom, and He cannot bear to see them
lost: He is not able to see any of them in the Lions mouth, but he must rescue
them out, and slay the Lion: His bowels are turned to see them in misery; and
therefore He waits to be gracious. He stands pleading and entreating at their
doors; O why will ye dye? Do you indeed hear? and do you consider that this is
the cause why you are not lost and undone before this time? This is a wonderful
mystery, That such a tie and near relation should be to the Word of Life, to
the Lord Himself, that He should take such a care and charge over thee, and so
wait and attend at all times to do thee good: It is from this near relation to
Him; He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one: And
this is the only cause you are not lost. And therefore what have any of you to
boast on? Why are you not as base and vile as any? Why not lost as well as
others? It is not any thing that springs from thee which makes the difference:
We must all become guilty before God; we are the worst of sinners: But because
He has put his Son in you, and made you so nigh to Christ, therefore will He
save you.

3. They are not lost, because Christ Jesus cannot be perfect, nor subsist,
without his Members: nothing will content the Son of God, the Truth, till all
that belong to it are gathered into an Union with the Head. Many vainly
imagine, and flatter their thoughts, They shall be saved, and gathered to
Christ when they dye; but it is to be done here, if it be ever done: The Soul
must be brought into Union with the Truth, joined to that one Head, and receive
sap, and nourishment, and life from Christ sooner or later; This must be done
in all that are to be saved: And this Christ prays for his Disciples, That, the
same Love, wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them: Such an
Union and Oneness, to stand on the same foundation with Christ, and suck the
same breasts, and be supplied with the same sap; this is a condition where
Salvation stands; and none that are brought to this must be lost.

The Uses hence may be,

1st, To consider and hear for your selves, That you may come to be settled on
sure principles: Do you understand on what bottom Salvation stands? Do you know
what the ground and foundation is of all your happiness or misery? of all your
enjoyments or sufferings? that it lies up in this will of God? Are you set down
in this Principle, and submitted under this Will?

2ly, Enquire farther; Do you know your lot and portion in this good will of
God? Is that opened to you? If not, How can you sleep upon the top of a Mast!
and be secure, when your case lies so dangerous? Do you know you were ever
given to any? into their hearts? to travel for you in the bowels of Christ? It
is certain there are a lost number that are not given to Christ: Now what
security have you for your selves? Will that save you, that you have knowledge,
and parts, and hear the Truth preached? Alas! many followed Christ, but at
last came to a hard saying, and there they fell off, and left him: Therefore it
concerns you to enquire, whether you have that which will carry you out, and
give you a certainty you shall not perish for ever? If you hear, and hear ten
thousand years, and hear not that you have a portion in this good will, all is
as nothing.

3ly, This may be of Use for encouragement, to comfort all the drooping hearts,
that are ready to cast off all, as if they were now quite lost: Zion said, The
Lord has forsaken me, etc. No, no; there is no such thing where his Will is
once pitched: Having loved his own, he loved them to the end, Joh. 13.1. It is
his Will, that none that He has given to his Son should be lost: And
therefore, however hard and dangerous the case seems at present, yet you that
are given to this charge of Christ, and are under this Love, this might
encourage you, That you have One that will look after you, and care for you: No
man ever hated his own flesh, but cherishes and nourishes it: so tender will
Christ be to his own Body, if your lot be fallen in that good ground.

Therefore have your thoughts about you, and consider the ground of your
happiness or misery; Happiness, if you be accepted in that good will of the
Father, and by that Will given to Christ to be his charge; this is a sure token
he will save thee: These are the two main pillars on which your Salvation
stands. For, if it were possible* not one man would ever be saved, but go on in
darkness and ignorance all their days, and lie down in misery. But God has
provided a way, and taken a sure course, to save all his by: and therefore
enquire for the old way, the way that the Ransomed have passed; All the saved
ones have been saved this way, by this Will of God; not by any willings, or
reachings, or desirings of their own; not of Works, but of Grace: And
therefore, if the Lord be for thee, it is enough; but if He undertake it not,
thou art lost, and wilt be lost, etc.

THE Prodigals sad Pilgrimage, AND SAFE RETVRN; OR, The Woeful Case of
Wandering, though saved. SERMON. VI. Febr. 23. 1650/1.
LUKE 15.11, 12, etc. And He said (meaning Christ,) A certain man had two sons:

And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of
goods that falls to me. And he divided to them his Living, etc.


The Analysis.
THis Parable of the Prodigal may have a threefold relation.

1. To the Jew and the Gentile, the elder and younger son. 2. To the union of
Brethren in the Truth, in the same society. 3. To the two sons, two nations,
two principles, in one man, Good, Evil.
Three general Things observed about the Prodigal.

I. His going out from his Father. In which consider, 1. He was grown up to
know Him to be a Father. 2. He claims his Portion as due: Give me the portion,
etc. 3. His Father grants his desire, divides his Substance. 4. Having his
Portion, He presently takes his Journey, etc. 5. He spends all, and a Famine
comes upon Him: And that, 1. As a just Judgment for his riotous living. 2. To
show him the evil nature of the Country he is in. 3. To pinch him out thence,
and press him homeward.



II. His Return home again. Where consider, 1. He comes to Himself; He was out
of his wits before. 2. Bethinks himself that he was a Son, though in this case.
3. Considers the plenty at home: The servants have bread enough, and to spare.
4. Resolves at last; I will arise, and go to my Father etc.


Where consider, 1. His sense of his misery, and that no help is there to be
had. 2. He goes at a peradventure what he shall meet with from his father. 3.
Goes as he is, ragged, tattered, and torn, etc.


III. His Entertainment upon his return. And that opened in five Particulars.

First, The best robe is put on; that is the first thing: And for these ends; 1.
To cover his nakedness, that that may be hid. 2. To take off his shame: The
sinner is ashamed. 3. To stop his fears: being guilty, he dare not look up,
till his sin be covered.


Secondly, A Ring is put on his hand, to adorn it: And that in three cases.

1. With Skill; He is now made wise in the work of Truth. 2. With Diligence;
Now he learns to redeem his time, etc. 3. With weightiness of employment; He
has done with toys, etc.
Thirdly, Shoes are put on his feet: The feet express the love and affections,
by which the Soul moves; to which shoes bear a threefold Usefulness: 1. To
fence them to go through all briars and thorns. 2. To quicken them to run
swifter. 3. To make solid, that they may hold out the journey, etc.


Fourthly, The fatted Calf is killed; There is now meat for him: And that has
these Considerations.

1. Meat refreshes the faint and weary. 2. It strengthens, to endure labor and
employment. 3. It makes to look well, and gives a good countenance.
Fifthly, There Is Mirth and Music to complete all; Let us eat and be merry,
etc. And that for three Reasons.

1. Because this Son was dead, and is alive. 2. Was lost, and is found. 3.
Because he received him safe and sound. 1st, Safe: That implies, 1. To be well
fenced about and guarded. 2. To be where no harm nor danger comes. 3. To be in
an incapacity of harming one's self.
2ly, Sound: That holds out, 1. To be free of all taint and rottenness. 2. To
be perfect in its kind, without deficiency.


All this paralleled in the inward work upon the Soul.

Uses hence.

1. (If possible) To forewarn some from turning Prodigals. 2. To inform of the
certain misery that will follow. 3. Yet to encourage and envite such as are
Prodigals, to return.
LUKE 15.11, 12, etc. And he said, (meaning Christ,) A certain man had two sons:

And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of
goods that falls to me: And he divided to them his Living, etc.


THis Parable may have relation to three sorts of People: And a certain man had
two sons, etc. It may be taken thus.

1. These two sons may be the Jew, and the Gentile, which once were in the
House together, in the days of Righteous Noah, when he built an Ark, to the
saving of his household: But Japhet the Gentile went out, and from hence came
forth that Prayer, or Prophecy, God shall persuade Japhet, and he shall dwell
in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. And now was the time of prevailing with him,
(for at this time was the calling of the Gentiles;) but this younger son (the
Gentile) would needs go from Jerusalem to Jericho, from the City of a blessing
to a curse: So is it with the heart, as the horse rusheth into the battle,
without fear, and knows not but that a spear may strike through his bowels; and
as Job says, as the sparks fly upwards; so natural is it for man to go to
cursing. But,

2. A certain man had two sons; a son that abode in the house, and a son that
loves to wander: And this may have relation to a People joined together in the
Truth, being of one Family, as amongst our selves; and yet we may wander one
from another; we may not all of us so love our Fathers house, nor our Brethren,
nor have a mind to retain God in our counsels, but stand and seem wiser in our
own conceits then seven men that can give a Reason. But,

3. It may also have relation to the two sons in one man: (For what ever we see
in the great World without us, the same is comprehended in one particular man,
if it were discovered:) There are the two Nations in the womb, (as it is said of
Rebecca;) there is the natural son, and the spiritual son; there is the Jew, and
the Gentile; the Jew is a natural branch, the Gentile contrary to nature; the
Son of God, and the son of man. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, (says Christ.) A man, viz. the will, the understanding, the
Soul, (for this house, the body that we carry about with us, that is not the
man, where the Son of God dwells; as Paul says, He that has not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his;) Now where that Spirit is, the Father brings that
man to be his son, to a new birth; not to a new birth in the full sense; for
there is a twofold birth; first, there is a birth to see the Kingdom, and then a
birth to enter into the Kingdom of God: To the first the Prodigal was brought.
And this we can truly witness, We are born in the house, have eaten and drunk
in his presence, and heard him teach in our streets; we have lived at his
Table, we have had bread enough and to spare, having the world at will (says
David,) etc. But now we girded our selves (in this day) with Peter, we could
walk upon the Sea to Christ, and thought our selves safe, etc. till at last
getting up our portion, we wandered from our fathers house. And this
Interpretation I intend to follow: For though the other two are true, yet if we
come not to particulars, what is this to me? to hear of a Jew, and a Gentile
without me; or to hear of a Prodigal wandering from his fathers house, etc. if
all this while I be not this man, I this Prodigal spoke of? I shall now go on
to the several Observations rising from the carriage of this Prodigal son.

1. The son said to his father, etc. Hence is considerable, the distinct
knowing that God of his mercy has brought him to, to know the Truth. It Is not
said, that one said, or that a certain man said thus; but, the son said to his
father. And herein have we exceedingly made an evil of the goodness of the
Lord: And it makes my heart tremble to think what want will come upon this
Prodigal for it. But,

2. The second thing considerable in this Prodigal, is this; And the son said
to his father, Give me the portion of goods that belongs to me. You shall see,
if you mind it, another manner of carriage in him, when he returns from his
Prodigality: Now he is upon his claiming, Give me my portion; but when he
returns home, he does not say, (though greatly pined with hunger,) kill the
fatted Calf; but he comes thus, I am not worthy to be called thy son, make me
as one of thy hired servants.

In the days of our Ignorance, how do we claim our portions, looking for a
reward as due to us? But no greater token that want is coming, then this; and
this is a certain thing, that all our losses have come from this, and will
come, whilst you command God, and his servants, saying, Why do'nt he regard me
more? And so there is a claiming of our portions, and taking them out of the
hands of Truth, and so we thrust our selves out of the house, as the Prodigal,
and say, He will be such a hard Master to me, I had better have it in my own
hand. Thus has there been an evil entreating of the Son of God: Now is that
presuming, and desperate venturing, that we are able to go alone.

But I would you might read all along as you go, that those of you who are not
fallen (if possible) might be warned; and if you are fallen, that you might
learn Instruction how to return. How did destruction come upon Korah for his
evil reaching? What, are not all the Lords People holy? Will you put out the
eyes of these men? But, by and by you shall know (says Moses:) And indeed how
did they know to their woe? How did the fire of the Lord consume some, and the
Earth swallow up others? etc. Oh that you might take warning! But,

3ly. The father gives him his deresi; a sad case! And he divided to them his
substance. When Israel murmured against God, complaining of the light Manna,
and craving for Quails, God heard their cries, He gave them their hearts lust,
but sent them leanness of Soul. When I consider the cries of our hearts, those
evil reachings for the Truth, it makes my heart tremble, lest God may take
advantage in giving us our desires: We think, because we reach after the things
of God, we do well; But when I think what Lot got by desiring to go to Zoar,
(though God gave him his choice to go, yet) how did his heart reproach his
mouth? When he had it, he could not abide there, but feared to dwell in Zoar;
Zoar now will not maintain him; the time comes, when neither wisdom, nor
knowledge, nor discerning will serve the turn. Though I had the gift of
Prophecy, (says Paul,) and could understand all mysteries; If I had all
knowledge, and faith, that I could remove mountains, it would profit me nothing,
if I had not Love, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3. When I enjoyed the world at will, when my
bough was green, when the dew lay upon my branch all night; then I said in my
prosperity, I shall never be moved; thou Lord of thy goodness had made my
mountain so strong, (says David.) I know thy works (says the Angel to the
Church of Ephesus) thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear
with them that are evil; and have tried them which say they are Apostles, and
are not, and have found them liars, etc. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against
thee, because thou have left thy first Love: As if God should say, I know thy
gifts have not sprung from the garden of Nature, but I have given them, they
were my Wool, and my Flax; but you have decked your Idols with them, therefore
they are taken away. But he gives a portion to his eldest son, that never shall
be taken away; He says to him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have
is thine: But to the younger son he gives that which may be spent, the common
Faith; as Paul writes to Titus, Titus, my dear son (says he) according to the
Common Faith. But yet what a loss came to the Prodigal, though truly a son?
Such a loss may the Soul come to, to be as naked as a child that is newly born.
So foolish and ignorant was I (says David) as a beast before thee. Behold
(says God) I make the Earth utterly empty, without an Inhabitant: And then (as
Christ said) you shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and
shall not see them. As a dead man out of mind (says David.) If we were aware
of this, it would make us afraid of what we reach after. I know many of you
have an aspiring mind to be high, and accounted eminent in the Church; but if
you would know for no better end then this, only to satisfy your reaching
heart, if you employ not your Masters goods to the best advantage, better had
you never had the Truth, then to make an evil use of it; as Christ declares in
the next Chapter, a Parable of a Steward that wasted his Masters goods, and
enriched himself by it. Ephraim is a fruitful Vine to himself: But (as Solomon
says) Riches are given to some for their hurts. And here you may see, that if
riches and honor, etc. shall be the way to bring a man down, God will give him
them. Eve shall eat of the Apple, though forbidden, (because (said she) its
good to make one wise, etc.) that so she might be brought under the curse:
Though all shall not have their hearts brought down that way; for some shall
have their hearts discovered by their foolishness, they shall have no knowledge,
but be ignorant, and brutish as a beast: What strange ways does God take to
bring down man's heart, before he can know that he stands by grace, that he is
not able to think a good thought of himself? As the Prodigal here, as soon as
ever he can get all together, he is gone, he thinks he is well now: As soon as
God gives understanding, knowledge, discerning, then comes Pride, then we think
we are something, because we have something: But alas (may we cry out as the
man did to Elijah) it was but borrowed; and he that lent it, may call for it
when it pleases him: Therefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall. How proud is this Peacock? how does she spread out her tail? but when
she sees her black feet, then she hangs down her head.

4ly. The Prodigal having gathered all together he has, then he goes forth
gallantly adorned: Now I can give Reproof, Instruction, and Counsel (says he;)
and thus he looks upon his plume of Feathers: but by and by his portion is
gone, his Feathers are plucked, and then how naked and ashamed is he? If you be
made wise, to see and be warned, then happy are you: We never come to our
losses, but by this prying upon our selves; (as the Apostle says,) We measure
our selves by our selves, saying, I am better then I was; and amongst our
selves, when we look upon others, we say, I am better then this and the other;
but in this you are not wise, etc. But who of us desires the Truth as David
did, O deal kindly with me (says he,) that I may keep thy Commandments? We
say, Let me have the Truth; but for what end? to be proud of it? We often
enquire and enquire, as the Pharisees did of the blind man, But how came thine
eyes open? as if we would be his Disciples: But is it indeed for that end? I
beseech you enquire, why would you know the hidden Mysteries of God, and be of
his Counsel? etc. If you have no mind to be his Disciples, there is great danger
in it; there is great need to enquire wherefore you would know God: Would you
know him, to fear him? fear him, to serve him? serve him, to love him? to love
him, not your selves; is this in all your hearings, desirings, and prayings?
etc. What would you have him for? is it to get honor to your selves? or is it
for the honor of him? That in all your desirings, this may be set before you,
to say thus; Did the Prodigal desire? and did the father give him his desire?
But what did he with it? He gathered all together, and ran from his father. We
never undertake to be desperately evil, but we first plot how to carry it out:
As a thief that is resolved to steal, he plots how to carry away what he
intends to steal. When you look over, how you are wiser, and have more
discerning then others, how good is prophesied concerning you, etc. then you
gather up your portions, and arm your selves against the Truth to fight with
it. All you that have gone far from God, have not gone naked; we have made use
of what God had given us, to carry us out from him: We could never have gone
into a Land of wasting, of hunger and famine, had we not once been in a Land of
plenty; You have not gone out hoodwinked: How have you promised your selves,
when you have gone into evil company, you would only go to learn experience,
and return again presently?

But whither have you carried your riches? even as the Prodigal, to a Citizen
of that Country, where self-love, pride, envy, etc. dwells, where the
Ishmaelites dwell, the Tabernacles of Edom, of Moab, and the Hagarens, Gebal,
and Ammon, and Amlaeck, etc. Psalm. 83.6, 7. All the kindred that are against
Truth, Pride, Self-love, Envy, etc. are the Countrymen whither the Prodigal
carries his riches. And what does he now do? does he go to God in this loss?
No, he joins himself to this Citizen, one of the same kind; for such as a man's
heart is, such is his society he joins himself to: If the heart is let out to
Envy, then to the envious; if to Self-love, Pride, unmercifulness, it seeks for
such; and therefore must our high thoughts come down: And whosoever of you
shall be so wise to take warning by this, might be afraid to ask of God riches
any more, since we have spent them upon our lusts. We have gone from Jerusalem
to that cursed Jericho, and as the Prodigal, spent all our substance.

And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in the Land, and he
began to be in want, etc. And so it will be; all the virtue, strength, power,
wisdom, fear, love, etc. what ever we have enjoyed that sprung from Truth, will
be spent, and the famine will arise.

But for what Cause?

1. As a just Judgment.

When David had numbered the people, God sent unto him three Judgments, bidding
him choose which he would: Shall seven years of famine come unto thy Land
(says God?) or will thou fly three months before thine enemies? or shall
three days Pestilence be in thy Land? etc. 2 Samuel 24.13. This was to come as a
Judgment upon him: Therefore now in this strait, what great need have you of
one to make an atonement for you! When you have had the exercise of Truth
lively upon you, how have you babbled it to every one? You have thought, Sure I
have riches enough; and so have run it out as long as ever you had breath; as a
drunken man that has money, he spends all, never considering how hardly he came
by it, and how soon he may want: Not like that wise man Christ speaks of, who
when he has found the treasure hid in a field, presently goes and hides it
again, Mat. 13.44. But as soon as we are a little brought out but to see our
way, etc. how do we tell it abroad to every one we meet? My heart shall never
reproach my mouth (says Job,) I, but it did; for how did he curse the day of
his Being, etc. though he had once spoke well of God? The Prodigal sure once
thought, when he was in his fathers house, that he should never be so base as
to leave his father, and join to a Citizen of a strange Country; but you see he
did it: But shall not God visit for such things as these? I will surely bring
upon them (says God) all the days of Baalim, when they offered sacrifice to
their Idols. God is a just God: Moses, when Miriam was smitten, prayed, O Lord,
let her not be as one dead; heal her now: No (says God,) she shall be shut out
of the Camp seven days, till she bear her shame; according to the transgression
of her Sabbaths when she enjoyed them, so many Sabbaths shall she be without a
Priest, or an Ephod: Here Is the Judgment indeed. God does not afflict
willingly; but because you would not hear, therefore He cries out, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem! that stonest thy Prophets, etc. He bewails over you, because you
have slept away your time, all the days of his patience, and long-suffering,
and daily calling upon you. It was possible to have turned his anger away,
while he was waiting, and enduring the frowardness and rebellions; but when he
saw that Israel would not for all this return, therefore (says God) will I let
go all my wrath. And yet be comforted in this, He is righteous in all his
Judgments, and holy in all his ways; the ministration of condemnation is
glorious: And now to accept of the punishment of iniquity, this God would have
you do; for if we wring and wrestle never so in the chain, he will be too hard
for us. But,

2. There arises a famine to this purpose, to show us, there is no increase in
this Land; we may carry much in, but bring nothing out again: Woe unto me (said
the Prophet,) that I am constrained to dwell with them that hate Peace. When we
go into the Land of slanders, backbitings, envyings, etc. these are not like
the garden of Eden; A Land of plenty of all things is this Land, where Brethren
dwell together in unity: But in this going out, the Lord will have no
fellowship with the stool of iniquity: And though a man should have a great
substance, and gather it all together, and carry it into a Land where nothing
grows, it would soon waste. They that go down to destruction, they cannot
celebrate thy praise; there is nothing grows in that Land. You are wondering why
you are so desolate and empty, so void of exercise, etc. alas, there grows
nothing in this Land; you are gone out of the Land of plenty, and can it be
expected that men can gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? The time
comes that all will be spent, and you shall wonder at the desolation that shall
come; you shall say, Where is the Land of Increase that once I was in? The
Deeps they say, It is not in me; the Sea says, It is not in me: But (says
Job,) Sure there is a place where Gold is found, and a vein for the Silver, Job
28.14. But as for the place of wisdom and understanding, where is it? It Is not
in the wise world, it is not in sleepiness, nor envy, nor pride; where then?
where the fear of the Lord grows; they that fear the Lord, they are the men
that get wisdom. They have forsaken the Fountain of living water, and dug to
themselves Cisterns that will hold no water. It Is no wonder we are barren,
because we have not had the fear of the Lord before our eyes. Again,

3. The famine arises for this Cause, that the Prodigal might be pincht out of
his place. When a General of an Army goes to storm a dangerous place, he first
considers, May it not be taken by starving them out, says he? So the Lord
deals with his Prodigals; they are gone far off from hearing, believing, etc.
but there comes a want, because the Father intends to starve them out. This
misery befell the son of Josiah; he was carried into Captivity, and Manasseh,
being in chains, cried unto the Lord, and because he was of those good Figs,
God brought him out: But there is a misery that befalls some, (as God bids the
Prophet Jeremiah, that he should not weep nor pray for a people,) some go into
Captivity, and shall return no more: But here is the mercy, God brought out his
Prodigal, he was carried into Captivity for his good, into a Land of famine,
nakedness, etc. to make him remember his fathers house; and where this want is,
there is no greater token of deliverance. The restless Dove finds no footing,
till she return home to the Ark, whence she went out; but the Raven went out,
and returned no more: Some are brought into famine for their instruction, and
some for their destruction. There were some invited to the feast, and because
they would not come, God swore, they should never taste of his Supper. But it
was not so with Peter; he went a great way off, but the Cock did but crow, his
Conscience was awakened, and Christ gave him but a look, and that broke his
heart; for it was that look of Christ that was his deliverance, though his
Conscience was awakened before. It was not so with Judas, he went out, but
returned not again: And here lies the ^avour of them God intends good to, they
shall return.

Therefore because it has been thus with us, that we are all Prodigals, and
have gone out, and are in a very dangerous way, here lies the fear now, whether
Truth will look upon us with an eye of favor or no: The Cock will of a certain
crow, your Consciences will be awakened, and your guilt will fly in your faces;
but if that were all, our cases would be the same with Judas.

Thus you see the three Causes, why this famine is come: 1. As a Judgment: 2.
To show us, that no enlargement, no increase of Truth grows in that Country. 3.
To pinch the Soul home to its Father; he must find no rest, he must have no
bread, he is glad to serve swine, and would fain eat husks with them, but must
have none; and here is his mercy, that he has none. Here Is the difference; two
Thieves are crucified with Christ, the one is saved, the other left.

Therefore consider, Though you are all sinners together, you don't know
whether you shall all return together; therefore if the famine be come, the
great thing is to know the end, whether there must be a return; for all comes
but for this one end, that we might return home to our Father. And he began to
be in want: The time will come, that the want will be felt, hunger that may be
felt, a hard heart, a blinded mind that may be felt, then the want will come
nigh. A mad man feels no want. Wh le we have been mad in our huntings after
folly, etc. we have not felt the want of Truth: But the time will come when we
shall feel it; but why is he now in want? There is a twofold want, and I would
have you distinguish them: There is a certain need when a man's head is
plotting, yet there is a fainting of the heart, the dart strikes him: how do we
often famble in speaking of our conditions? There Is a want within, we want God;
but we would carry it out fairly still, shuffle it off, and say, as Elisha's
servant did, Thy servant went no whither. When we have been rioting in an
Harlots house, our heads are plotting, though we in want. Never would the
Prodigal return, if possible, but that none would receive him when all is
spent. How did Jacob change his wages ten times, because he loved Labans
service? Before we will cry out, and own what we have done, how we have taken
his Wool, and his Flax, and called them our portions, and spent them upon
Harlots, it must be a want indeed.

But now is the Prodigal left to his last shift, and being once gone from his
father, the heart is like a runaway child, though he can be received no where,
yet he had rather lie in a ditch, or a stable, any out-house, then come and
buckle to his father: Though he was in a Land of pits, and deserts, of
emptiness, where no good grows, a Land of thorns, (therefore he came home
ragged and torn;) yet for all this, his head is plotting still to carry it out.
Though Saul had forsaken the Lord, yet he comes to Samuel to ask counsel in his
want, when the Philistines were upon him, etc. Though Israel walked not
steadfastly with God, but contemned the counsel of the most High, etc. yet in
their afflictions (says God) they will seek me. The Prodigal joined himself to
a Citizen of that Country, not to a stranger, for then had it been possible,
they might have gone out of this evil Country together; but he is joined to a
Citizen, to the King of darkness, the Spirit of Antichrist, a dweller in that
Land; and now to have him to be his Counselor, that cursed Sense and Reason to
rule all, to become one with that King of darkness, to be molded into that
soil, O what misery is it! Your League with Hell shall be broken, and your
Covenant with Death shall be disanulled: But as yet it is not broken in us;
there has not been a translation out of the Kingdom of Darkness into the
Kingdom of Light: We can truly say, we have been born again, and have seen the
Kingdom; but Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit (says Christ) he
cannot enter; that birth has not been: Therefore what fellowship and society
has the Prodigal? why such as is suitable to him: for now the heart is afraid
of the righteous, the clean and just ones; now it invents, saying, How shall I
spend my days? etc. And now he is joined to the Citizen, he must do his
service; and what is that? he must now be a server of swine; Alas, alas! what a
case is he in! Now Princes go on foot (indeed,) and servants ride on horses:
What, for a Prince to feed swine! The Church says, O thou whom my Soul loves,
tell me where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon; for why am I turned aside
by the flocks of thy companions? Alas, to be with swine! there is no harmony;
yet he would fain have eaten husks with the swine, but no man gave him; upon
any thing would the heart feed, rather then repent, then come to the Land of
the living, it had rather feed swine in the Land of Death.

But here was his mercy, that he had no mercy showed him; and this was a token
God would bring him out, because the hearts of them he would have had favor
from, were closed to him. If indeed God has a favor to a man that is entangled
in the world, and will bring him out, he will let him find no favor. When God
had a purpose to bring Israel out of Egypt, he turned the hearts of the
Egyptians to hate them. But might the Prodigal have said, Why don't you favor
me? I am joined to you; I have as swinish an heart as any of you: But though
there would be a cleaving, yet because God has a mind to bring him out, he
will make a separation, and all things shall work to make a disagreement; and
here you see the end of his race.

I shall speak next of his Return, and then of his Entertainment by his father.

By and by he comes to himself, and now he says, How many hired servants in my
fathers house have bread enough and to spare, and I pine with hunger? But where
had he been? Why, all this while he was out of his wits, he was not himself, he
was enchanted; But when he came to consider what he once enjoyed, and the
present misery he was in, Alas! (as if he should say) what a case am I in? I,
that am a son, who have a father, etc. He remembers the time that he was
brought forth by the Truth, and truly born to be a Child: He is not now as one
that knows not who he belongs to, and is not able to go to a father; but he
knows him: And if this be not in your returning, you will never return.

Two Considerations there are must move you to it.

1. To consider that you are children; for if you know not this, you will never
return: He that comes to God must first believe that He is, before he can set
one step to come to him: Turn to your strong holds, you prisoners of hope. But
while you stand disputing, Am I a son or not? etc. here you have forgotten that
you were once cleansed, that God is your Father; but when once you shall come
to your selves, you will then consider, and say, Thou art our Father, we are
thy Children. The way to come to the blessing of the Birthright, is, to set an
high price upon it, not to dis-esteem it, and count it light (as Esau,) for
therefore he lost it. Now though you have spent your portion, and lost it, and
squandred it away you know not how; yet there is hope: but if you had despised
it, and trod it under foot as a light thing, then had there been no hope; but
(as Paul says) Brethren, I know that through ignorance you have done it: You
have gone out with this Saying, That sure you are well, it will maintain you,
etc. But No, it was not given for that end. I beseech you consider, that you be
not of them that draw back to perdition; I know you have not so properly been
there in despising, but here you have been, You have left your first Love: If
there had been a contemning your Birthright, and saying as the man that had
but one Talent, What Is this? etc. if a despising, then had there been no
return: but you have been cheated of your portion, the subtle Enemy has got
beyond you; all that you have cared for has been, that you might have meat for
your lusts; as Eve, she did not sell her birthright, but the serpent beguiled
her, and she did eat. If indeed there is to be a return in you, I beseech you
consider; (for it is in vain to think of returning, if no fathers house) if thou
were never born to see the Kingdom, there can never be an entering in.

2. This encourages him in his Return, when he considers with himself thus, How
many hired servants in my fathers house have bread enough and to spare? Who
have no portion, they have been followed, and dandled upon the knee; but I,
being a son, have been cheated of my portion. How are you made to cry out
sometimes, Woe is me, for the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously with
me! You have been enchanted, your iniquities have hindered good things from you;
but when he considers these two things, then he says, I will arise and go to my
father.

And this is beyond all that went before; for while he was under the judgment,
under the plague, pinched with want, yet this makes him not arise; but now he
says, I will arise and go, when he considers he is a son, and that he is worse
then any hired servant in his fathers house that has no portion. Oh that the
Lord would be pleased to call you according to purpose, that you might have no
rest till you return. When Jacob saw the charets that were sent from Joseph (he
could not believe, for all the former reports, but his heart fainted still; yet
now) the spirit of old Jacob revived, Genes. 45, 27, 28. He resolves, I will
arise and go, what ever it cost me.

In this arising of the Prodigal these things are considerable.

1. He is made sensible of the want he is in; that there is neither bread, nor
clothing, nothing that is good where he is; therefore he says, Well, I will
arise and go to my father, for there the servants have bread enough, etc. much
more I that am a son, might: Now he bethinks himself where he is, how beset on
every side. And here consider, what a stubbornness there is in man, an evil
malignity against God: for we may say, Why cannot he return without this stir?
Why, because of that evil-disposedness in the heart that would not love the
Lord: Why? What evil have I done (says God) to you, that you would none of me?
Have I been a wilderness or a land of darkness to Israel? No; all arises from
an evil will that lies in the bottom, and is at enmity with God: But when the
Soul is brought to such a pinch, that there is no remedy, (for God will never
leave hunting and hunting (as a blood-hound) till he finds out its iniquity;)
then the Soul is made at last to say as David, Whither shall I fly from thy
presence? If I take the wings of the morning, and fly up to Heaven, thou art
there; if I go down to Hell, there will thy hand find me out, etc. At last,
when pinched out of all, and no other shift, I will arise (says he) and go to
my father.

2ly, I will arise, etc. As though he should say, Well, against all my fears
and gainsayings, etc. I will arise, what ever I shall meet with; I will forget
all my shame, all my ill dealing, etc. nothing shall stand in my way to hinder,
now there is a going as Benhadads servants with ropes about their necks; and as
Esther, though it was death for any to go in before the King, yet (in such a
case of necessity) she is resolved to venture, and goes thus, If I perish, I
perish.

O all you Prodigals, that have gone astray from your fathers house, etc. when
will you venture into the hands of Justice (as the Prodigal here) and say, I
will arise? We are like a man that stands betwixt hope and fear, that would
^ain venture to leap over a ditch, but dares not a great while; but when his
mind is strong enough, then at last he is made to venture. When you shall
consider and say, Why should I not hope? Is he not my father? If we sit here
(said the Lepers) we perish; and if we arise and go upon our Enemies, we can
but dye; Need forces them at last: So here (says the Prodigal) I will arise;
see, prove him, if he will not open the windows of Heaven to you, and receive
you. But,

3ly, Does he take off his filthy garments when he arises? No; but though he be
naked and desolate, yet, I will arise (says he) and go to my father, and say,
Father, I have sinned, etc. He does not lay his grievings of his Father aside,
how ill he has dealt with him, but that he carries on his back: When ever your
Souls shall arise, think not to leave your iniquity behind you, and come
clear; but come as you are, owning and confessing the thing as it is, saying, I
once lived nigh thee, in the house, in the counsel; but I thought it not good
to keep there, but have chosen rather to wander from thee: I have sinned
against Heaven (thy people) and before thee, etc. For now, being once born
again, and turning out, we defile not only our selves by our sin, but one
another, either by our evil counsel, or not standing, or not helping others to
stand; yet thus he arises and goes to his father; he bears his sin, and sight
of it, he goes as he is.

And when his father saw him a great way off, he ran and met him, and fell upon
his neck and kissed him: And the son said, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: Make me
as one of thy hired servants. Here appears the pride of our hearts; we would
not begin with a morsel of bread: But when the father saw him a great way off,
[saw his mind coming] he ran and met him; He waits to be gracious: And, If any
man say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it did not
profit me; then he will deliver his Soul from death, etc. Job 33.27, 28.

But now consider, If you should lie owning and confessing all your lifetime,
and should not stir in your ownings, there would be no meeting of you; there is
a certain savoring of a returning mind: but while he was feeding swine, and
pined with hunger, he might have said, Sure my father will look for me, he will
not leave me: No, no; there is no looking after him, so long as he is loving to
feed swine: No, says God, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone.

Therefore all you Prodigals think upon this; Truth does not regard you while
you love darkness rather then light: but as soon as the Prodigal does but
return, then says the father, Come bring the best robe and put it on him, etc.
But did he think to find such entertainment as this? He proposed but to be as
an hired servant, but while he claims nothing he enjoys something; and while he
was claiming something, he spent all and had nothing: a strange way that God
takes; He sets the Beggar, that is taken out of the dunghill, with the Princes of
his people, but the rich he sends empty away. That such as lie reaching to be
great should be sent empty away; and such as lie, and say, I have sinned, I
have sinned against Heaven, I have hindered this people, I am conscious of it, I
have been a block in the way; yet that He should be received, this is strange!
But what is he saluted with? not with the remembrance of his sin, but bring the
best robe, which is that everlasting righteousness, that clean Love, (for if
the Prodigal does but return, he will never go out again,) and Love covers a
multitude of sins: Bring the best robe; that is his best robe; He has beheld no
iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel, Numb. 23. He
does as Noah's best son did to his father, go backward to cover his nakedness;
so, before he can well see him, he cries, Come, bring the best robe: You don't
know when you shall return thus buckled and bowed, owning the thing as it is,
how the Father will reward you! Be not discouraged, do but cry out, Lord, I
have sinned; what would thou have me to do? And though thou shall say, but I
cannot speak a word as I ought, nor think a good thought; yet let not this
hinder thee, Come as thou art; Remember thou have heard it reported, the
Prodigal came thus, and his father received him: better to be an hired servant
in the house, then a son a great way off: better is it to wipe the childrens
shoes, then to be in a Kings house amongst ravenous beasts.

All this is written for our learning, that we through patient waiting might
have hope, and return with this saying, Peradventure he will receive me, though
we come forlorn, etc. yet see what his Prodigal received, for God waits to be
gracious; O that I could but hear the sound of a right word! All your
complainings, rising only from being tormented, etc. are nothing to me,
because you still love to be in them; but if there were but a mind to return,
see what entertainment it would find! Then he had the fatted Calf set before
him, the music and dancing; O the sweet harmony, when God and man are at
unity! From this time it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, What has God
wrought?

But mind this of a certain, That all your forced confessings for fear, etc.
bring no turn in you, nor turns Truth to you; but where truly the Soul is
buckled, it ventures, and comes in to its Father, and is received: and this
kind of entertainment the son finds, not a word of upbraiding for what he had
done: Though the servant owed his Lord ten thousand Talents, and is not able to
pay one penny of it, yet in that he lies down at his Lords feet, and owns the
thing as it is, saying, Lord, have compassion on me, all is forgiven him; and
had he stood here, his Lord had quite forgiven him for ever; but because he
began to lord it over his fellow servant that owed him a hundred pence, taking
him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe me; and though he fell down
and besought him, yet he would not have compassion on him; therefore his Lord
was grieved, and cast him (again) into prison, till he should pay the uttermost
farthing: Matt. 18.24, etc.

Therefore mind what will be the benefit of the Prodigals returning; see what
shall follow it: but no man can beget Truth where it is not, nor raise it where
it is, before its time: but were you sensible of the reward that shall follow a
right turning, it were enough to make the worst heart in the world to bow: For
we propound, He is a hard Master; No, there is nothing remembered against him,
but bring the best rob, etc.

There are five dishes which are set before this son for his entertainment.

1st, (Says the father) Bring the best robe. 2ly, Put Rings on his fingers.
3ly, Put shoes on his feet. 4ly, Kill the fatted Calf. 5ly, There Is gladness;
Come, let us eat and be merry; for this my son was dead, and is alive again, was
lost, and is found, etc.
Here will be considered the order next, And why not meat for his belly first?
for he was now almost starved by reason of famine: Yet (says the father) in
the first place, Come bring the best robe. Wherein you may consider these three
things.

1. The best robe is brought to cover his nakedness, for there is no standing
else before God; there is no disputing with him at all except the sin be
covered: while there is any guilt upon the heart, there cannot be a neerness
betwixt God and man. But in all reason he should have had meat for his belly
first; yet that must not be till he has the best robe, [the Fathers best Love
upon his back;] because there can be no standing in his sight to speak a word
without it: For who can stand before everlasting burning? And God is a
consuming fire. Where this Love is not first a covering, they will rather cry
to the rocks and the mountains to fall on them; for who can stand before God in
his guilt? Therefore first this is most needful, to be covered with the best
robe. But,

2. Bring the best robe, because the sinner stands with such a shame upon him:
for while he stands guilty, there can be no boldness nor freeness to receive
any thing from his Father. The poor sinner says, I know not why he gives me
this and the other; for ought I know it is for my greater condemnation: for (as
Solomon says) Some have riches given them for their hurt: And how many
patterns do we see of it!

3. The fear will remain till it be discovered that the sin is taken away:
therefore says the Father, Bring the best robe; for the Father has robes that
will wax old, which the servants are clothed with: I will turn them out of my
house (says he) and love them no more. But after the Prodigal is thus adorned,
when the Love of God has covered him, that he is made able to stand spotless
and blameless before him in love, now he stands covered in this long white
robe: he had none of this garment upon him when he went out, for then had he
never gone; but he was covered with that which could be taken from him; And you
shall know (says God) the breach of a Promise: But there is Love that cannot
be changed; a Covenant that can never be broken; a Foundation that cannot be
shaken; and now there is a boldness to appear before God: but so long as any
guiltiness remains, the Soul is afraid of God: I remembered God (says David)
and was troubled: Therefore he cries, O cleanse me from my blood guiltiness.
The Father is sensible how the Soul stands trembling, therefore Make haste,
bring the best robe; make haste to cover his nakedness (says the Father)
because our guilt is upon us. How do we pull charging of sin upon our selves
when God charges not, and hide our sin, when God would charge us! but the best
robe clears all: it intimates the Father had others. It Is said of Elkanah, he
gave portions to all his wives, but to Hannah he gave a worthy portion, because
he loved her. I have loved thee with an everlasting Love (says God,) therefore
with loving kindness have I drawn thee, That where sin abounded, Grace might
superabound; for yet in the worst day the Soul is made to say, but my wisdom
remained with me. The Prodigal in the worst day retained his sonship still,
though when he returns he is made to confess the thing as it is. But first he
arises, and that is beyond all that howl upon their beds; In their sickness-time
and straits they will cry out, Oh, what a wretch am I! but their iniquities are
still upon their backs; they arise not, they dare not approach before God: But
the Prodigal, though he comes bowing and blushing, yet he comes knowing and
hoping; and he never says that word, Father, I have sinned, but the Father
says presently, Bring the best robe. But,

2. I told you this was considerable the Father says, And put a Ring on his
hand: Do you consider what Rings are used for? They are not put on to
strengthen the hands, but to adorn them: But what is the hand for? It Is for
work: O prosper thou the work of our hands (says David.) Now what must the
hand, the work be adorned with? There are these three ornaments for it.

1. The Prodigal must be adorned with Skill; as it is said of David concerning
Israel, He fed them in the integrity of his heart, and guided them with the
skilfulness of his hand, Psalm. 78.72. It has taught the Prodigal skill indeed;
he can say now as David, Come ^y Brethren, and I can tell you what God has done
for my Soul; how he delivered me, and instructed me; now I am made able to
divide the word aright: There Is great need of skill to know when to speak, how
to speak, to what to speak, for what purpose to speak, either for edification
or destruction. All the while before he had no heart to pity strangers, till he
was fallen amongst thieves, etc. and now after his coming home, he is able to
instruct and teach others; If there be a messenger, one of a thousand, to show
unto man his righteousness, etc. Now he has learnt expereince by his wandering:
But all the while we were in the house, we were Novices; we had learned no
skill how to instruct others, for we had learned none our selves. But now the
burnt child dreads the fire; when we have run our rounds, tried what is in
madness and folly, it brings forth skill: And who are fit to bring up a people
in the wisdom and fear of the Lord, but such as have gone down to the deeps, as
Joseph did? First he had been proved and tried himself; he was separated from
his brethren, as Christ said of Peter, Satan has desired to sift thee, and he
shall, etc. but when thou art converted, then strengthen thy brethren. But,

2. The second thing the hand is to be adorned with, is, Diligence; being now
once brought from his prodigality, he will redeem the time, and be more
watchful and diligent then ever: Be you vigilant, for your Enemy the Devil goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. It Is an ornament to the
work when it goes on with diligence, not sleepingly: we say of such a man, sure
the work is never like to come to perfection. The Lord expects a diligent hand
in all your services, and that beautifies the work; but to beautify a slothful
hand, is like to the putting a Ring in a swines snout: He will not reward the
slothful hand, but the diligent he rewards: The Soul, that is diligent night
and day, how to further the work of the Lord; therefore Be you always abounding
in the work of the Lord (says Paul,) knowing that your labor is not in vain,
etc. But alas! while we are in the Land of Harlots, we are ashamed of our
work. A man that has no meat to eat, nor clothes to put on, nor a friend to go
to, to impart his grief, what a miserable case is he in! such a Land are you
in, where there is no growing of any thing that good is; nothing but leanness
and ill-favoredness, because you have outed your selves of all friends: But
when you shall be brought home, then will you say, Well, I will be diligent:
Then will you set an high price upon the Truth, and say as David, O what shall
I render to the Lord? etc. I know how many precious days and seasons you have
trodden under foot, but the time will come that you will be glad to glean them
up again, and say, I will be more diligent to hear, and lay up every word, and
Look: The least smile of Truth will be laid up; every Mercy will you be made to
prize: There will be no more a claiming, (as the Prodigal,) Give me my portion;
and saying to me, You are bound to preach, and look after me, and give me this
and the other: No, there will be a diligent hand prizing and improving to the
utmost the least mercy. But,

3. A third Ring that adorns his hand, is, the weightiness of employment, when
the hand shall be employed in things of great concernment: When we pass and see
a man at work in carving some curious piece, and not busied upon baubles and
trifles (like children that make dirt-pyes) we stand and prize the work: This
will adorn the hand, when it shall be employed about things that profit, to be
about a work which shall abide for ever; Let all your words be full of grace,
seasoned with salt. To be employed about such a work, which neither fire nor
water can hurt, this adorns the hand indeed: But alas! what a little of our
work will endure the fire? but we shall know the difference. I shrink to think
what I shall say: But must you all go a prodigalling? Will you all see your
hearts by desperate venturings? Indeed Travelers learn experience, but they
pay dear for it: None will know how to distinguish between works and works, but
they that have traded through them. When I was a child (says Paul) I did as a
child, and spoke as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish
things. The Prodigal did foolishly in forsaking his Fathers house, and going to
Harlots, etc. but God shall say to him at his return, Be not grieved that you
sold me, etc. He has lost nothing by it, he is made now to love him the more:
When God shall say, 'Twas not you that sold me, etc. 'I sent you into the
wilderness to learn you experience, that when you are converted, you might
strengthen your Brethren.

Thus you may see of what use Rings are: and this is wonderful, that God should
so adorn the hand with his Rings; To be, 1. Skilled in the works of Truth. 2.
To be diligent in the work of Truth. And, 3. To be garnished with this, to be
busied about things of worth, to be exercised in things that abide for ever:
Let all your things (says Paul) be done to edification: Let nothing be out of
strife or vain glory, but all for the building of something that shall stand
for ever. But yet this son is wanting still; as if the Father should say, What
if we clothe him with the best robe, and put Rings on his hands; yet if his
feet be not shod too, how can he go? Therefore,

3. This is the third thing, And put shoes on his feet, etc. Let him be shod
with the Preparation of the Everlasting Gospel of Peace.

The feet are the Affections, which are to be wrought upon.

1. To go, but how? why, Let all your things (says Paul) be done in Love:
There Is need your feet be prepared to serve the Lord in Love: And that our
loves might be prepared, there is need of shoes to put on, that the feet might
be enabled to go upon the briars and thorns, to endure the frost and the snow;
need to have the Love made strong, to endure hardness: Love (says Paul)
suffers long, and is kind, envyeth not, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
Truth, etc. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6. It had need be shod indeed.

When God said to Moses, Thou shall carry this people in thy bosom as a Mother
does her child, etc. Alas, (pleads he) how can I carry all this people? If
thou dealest thus with me, I pray thee take me away, that I may not see my
wretchedness: He had not Love enough to carry him through; There Is need of
great preparations, if such a service be in hand. And now the Prodigal shall be
made to endure, to bless when he is cursed, because he knows now the heart of a
stranger: We our selves (says Paul) were sometimes strangers and aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, hateful, and hating one another: He having a
knowledge into this, was made to endure, Though the more abundantly I love
(says he) the less I be loved. That there may not be a shrinking here, this is
one main thing he has need of, of the shoes, of that which may be a fence, a
safeguard to his feet; that no fiery darts; no discontents, etc. may stop or
overturn him. But then,

2. The shoes are, that the Love might run the swifter, without fear: Withhold
thy Feet from being UNSHOD (says God) and thy throat from thirst, Jerem. 2.25.
Thou make my Feet like HINDES FEET (says David:) But when the Love is cold,
then the heart by and by waxes feeble and faint. Ezra was astonished, and sat
seven days so, because he had said, The Lord was able to save them; therefore
(said he) I was ashamed to go to the King for a band of men: His Love began to
be feeble at last. And Job sat astonished seven days; his Love was cold; he
could not have offended, had that been alive: Great Peace have they that love
thy Law, and nothing can offend them. How do we stand, and pick and choose? But
when we shall be made able to say as Paul, I am not only ready to be bound for
the Name of Christ, but to suffer death also; When so shod, then shall we go
boldly without fear: when the Love is shod with quickness, then, I shall run
the way of thy Commands: When thou have set my feet at liberty (says David,)
then will the Soul readily love the Lord with all the heart, and all the soul,
and all its strength. But when it is not quick and lively, there come in the
miscarriages. For, 1. It Is not shod to endure: And, 2ly, then it has not
quickness to speed on the work; but through reasoning and disputing the case,
the Love waxes cold: And the Prodigal shall be made to see, to his cost, when
he returns home, what his Leaden-heel'd Love was. But,

3. The third thing that prepares the Love, is, singleness, solidness, and
faithfulness; these are the shoes that garnish his feet; these are the
Affections to be shod with: The double minded man (says James) is unstable in
all his ways. When the Prodigal comes home, and sees how double he had been
before in all his ways, now he is made to say, It was good for me that I was
afflicted, for thereby I learned thy Law: Now he can say, One thing have I
desired, which (now) I will seek after, That I may dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever, to enquire daily in his Temple, etc. Now the Prodigal has
learned this, He knows what it is to put his hand to the plow, looking
backwards: Now his Love is singly fixed upon its object; but when it was not
single, how did he soon wander from it! He was barefoot then, but when he
comes home, then the Father puts on his shoes; they were not of his putting
on, but the Fathers, done by his command.

But all along, while I am speaking to you, and am seeing what divided hearts
you come with, and the great loss that is come upon you, there is great need to
pray to the Father, that he would bring the shoes (his Love) to set the
Affections right, to love with rightness, readiness, and singleness; for if He
bring them not, this evil and hypocritical will will be our undoing: But (says
God) You shall find me, when you shall seek me with all your heart, and all
your soul: He will be sought to of the house of Israel; And he has not said to
the house of Jacob, Seek my face in vain: But he that offers to the Lord for a
sacrifice, that which is torn or lame, and has a male in his flock* He abhors
that man's offering; He will receive none but that which is without blemish, and
that will make our works accepted, (as Paul says) Faith, that works by Love,
and does all in singleness of Soul, That will make every thing acceptable in
his sight.

4. A fourth thing the Soul is to be shod with, is, Soberness; for there may be
a real singleness of spirit, and yet a great headiness: Therefore (says Paul)
let your Moderation be seen in all things: For if we cannot say as Job, The
Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord,
there is not a sober love: Therefore, Put off thy shoes (said God to Moses;)
He was yet over-heady, and not fit to walk; as you may see in his strait
concerning Miriam, because God had stricken her with Leprosy, he prays, Lord,
heal her now: But (as if God should have said) No, thy love is too heady; Let
her go out of the Camp seven days, and bear her shame, and then let her be
received again. But Paul could say, I have learned in all things to be
contented, both how to abound, and how to want: And this is that which God
delights in; Sober love, ordered love. He that rules over men must be just
(says David,) ruling in the Fear of God, in Soberness, in Humility, etc. to be
wise, slow to do evil, swift to do good, more ready to hear then to offer the
sacrifice of fools. What, need of this! When we are but a little brought from
our hypocrisy, and can truly say, our love is single, then we think, sure this
is enough: No, but yet be you sober; that is the counsel.

But who will be wise? none but the Prodigal that has learned experience. Peter
meant singly when he said to Christ, I will lay down my life for thy sake: But
how heady was it? He was unsober in it; He knew not that was to be fulfilled,
that was ordained before of God, that he should deny him. All you shall this
night (says Christ to him) be offended because of me, and shall leave me; for
it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered
abroad: He little thought of this.

Alas, is there no other way to find this Soberness, but through sorrows,
through banishments, sending into Captivity? This is hard dealing indeed. But
now the Prodigal can tell this Mystery, now he has learned Sobriety, he is made
to admire at the way his father took to make him a sober man: Now he can say
(as David,) It was good for me that I was afflicted: A friend loves at all
times: And now he sees, That Love is as strong as Death: It has Hinds feet, it
has quickness, singleness, and soberness; and when you shall be thus shod,
then love as much as you can, nay then you cannot but love: And thus the son is
welcomed, Bring hither the best robe, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on
his feet.

And if ever we shall see this Return, then shall we be made to say as Paul,
Thanks be to God that we are the servants of sin. But who would fetch pearls
from the bottom of the Sea? It Is ten thousand to one not to be spoiled in this
venture: For there shall be but a remnant saved; here and there one; as the
shaking of an Olive tree, here and there one in an uppermost branch. What, to
be found dead and stinking in the grave, as Lazarus! to be incompast about with
Harlots, etc. and yet get home again! Sure the Prodigal did not discover
himself to the Citizen he joined to, that he was a Jew, for then he would not
have received him; he was fain to use all the shifts he could for
entertainment: And so do we, and yet we can find none that pities us, we cannot
so much as feed with the swine. But what has God wrought! that no enchantment
nor divination should be against him. Oh the wonder! that ever he should welcome
his Prodigal with such entertainment as I have showed you. But,

4. The next thing considerable in his Entertainment, is, And kill the fatted
Calf, etc. The Robe I showed you what it was; I also showed you why he must
have that put on before he has meat, and why the rings and shoes go first,
seeing he came out of the Land of famine; and the main cause that moved him to
return, was because his father he knew had bread enough, and he perished for
hunger. I showed you the Reasons, etc. But why must he have such abundance? And
this is not all neither, Bring the music; there must be dancing and mirth too:
Well may this be likened to Jacobs ladder, for it reached to Heaven. The fatted
Calf, what is that?

The Everlasting Righteousness, to be established with the free Spirit. Seventy
weeks (says Daniel) are determined, to finish transgression, and make an end
of sin, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in the EVERLASTING
RIGHTEOUSNESS, etc. Dan. 10.24. This David cries out for, when his
blood-guiltiness lies upon him, O deliver me from my blood-guiltiness (says
he,) establish me with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51.14, 12. With that Spirit
Christ could say, It Is my meat and drink to do the Will of my Father. This made
David say, Thy Word is dearer to me then my necessary food.

But what benefit is it to the man or woman that eats this fatted Calf?

There are three Benefits considerable that comes to him by this meat.

1. There Is refreshment to the weary Soul: When the Inwards are dying, and
sinking, and tired quite out, when hunger has smit the Inwards for want of the
enjoyment of God, how good then is the Spirit of Truth to refresh to the heart?
After a great abstinence, after a long time of distance, then Christ says, But
I will send the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who shall abide with you for ever.
After many a weary step, and hard pang, for want of meat, a man's inwards close
together, and (as it were) devour themselves. Is it not enough that I take my
flesh in my teeth (says Job?) I looked on my left hand, and none stood by me,
and on my right hand, and found none to comfort me: And O that I could find
him! (says Job.) Alas, Hope deferred, makes the heart sick; but when the
desire is come, it is a tree of life. After a weary journey, and long want,
every morsel is good, nay bitter things become sweet. But,

2. The second use of meat, is to strengthen man's heart; so is the Communion of
the Holy Ghost, a Strengthener to the Soul: As Paul prays concerning the
Ephesians, That you might be strengthened (says he) in your spirit with might
in the inward man, that Christ might dwell in your hearts by faith, that you
being rooted and grounded in love, etc. Rooted and grounded: As if he should
say, That now you may be able to stand strongly and unshakeably through
temptations, and provings, and all storms; as the Prodigal here, now never more
having a mind to wander from his fathers house; and this will be your happiness
indeed, if ever you attain to it. We have had many deliverances, and
experiences, and helps in the wotk, but are not yet made able to stand: but (as
David says) we mount up to Heaven, and down again to the deeps; not yet come
home: But when God shall have given victory, then will there be a sure
standing; we shall then move no more, when once established upon mount Sion,
that steady Foundation, which shall never change, nor wax old as a garment;
then shall we stick to our Principles, and not after a vow enquire, as now we
do. But,

3. Meat (if a blessing be with it) makes a man look well, have a good
countenance; but how through want does a man look lean and ill favored? Woe is
me (says Jeremy,) my leanness, my leanness, the treacherous Dealers have dealt
treacherously, etc. God gave Israel their hearts desire, but sent leanness into
their Souls. How uncomely does a lean man look? 'Twas not so with the Spouse;
Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice (says Christ,) for sweet is
thy voice, and thy countenance comely; she was in the banqueting house, and her
looks show it: How often does Christ commend her? though she says, I am black,
yet still she is comely: I look like one of thine (says David.) If a man's
heart be down and under, how feeble is his countenance? but when he is up and
refreshed, how is he bold as a Lion? The Righteous are bold as a Lion, etc.
When we are in bypath, how do we hang down the head, and creep into a corner,
and are loath to be seen? But surely the Promise is, that we shall be fat, and
well-liking, and bring forth more fruit in old age. But what a day of leanness
is it now with us! We spend our days in a Consumption, a lingering disease has
taken hold; but when we shall return, then shall the flesh come again as the
flesh of a young child. When you shall look over all the Entertainment, and
view it well together, it will be wonderful: but you must first be wearied out
of all; and when they shall be weary, then they shall curse their King and
their God, and look upwards.

5. The Entertainment of this Prodigal still goes on, And let us eat and be
merry; which is more strange then all the rest, and has more in it: and yet
that this joy should accompany his Return, who had so slighted his father, and
abused all his mercies, now to be entertained thus, this is strange: The Father
sets him up again amongst the Princes at his own Table: Now he needs not be
ashamed to sit with them in the gate, when they all see how the King smiles
upon him. This is beyond all expression, that ever he that was a beggar should
be so adorned, so accepted and encompassed with mercies on all sides: The
Father calls all his friends to see his glory, and invites them to this great
feast, Come, let us eat and be merry; he calls his servants, all the Angels,
those noble Spirits, he makes them ministering Spirits: But to which of them
does he say, Sit thou at my right hand? But to man he says, Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee. There Is more joy in Heaven over one sinner that
repents, then over the ninety and nine just persons (the Angels) that need no
repentance. Those glorious Angels are made but ministering Spirits to attend
daily upon those that shall be saved: But to be born of God, to be coheirs
with Christ, this is beyond all the Angels portions. Come (says the Father,)
let us eat and be merry. But for what Cause must there be so much mirth? etc.

It arises from these two Causes.

1. From the liberty the Father had in himself. And,

2. From the contentedness he had in his son: It signifies he was now eased of
his grief; for when he went out, he grieved for him, he had no content in that;
as if he had said, Well, my son will never be at quiet till he has had his run
in Prodigality; well, I will let him go, though with many a sad and a king
heart for him. He yet cries after him, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou had
harkened to me, then had thy Peace been as a River. And (as David for Absalom)
O my son Absalom, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, etc. It
appeared well that he loved him; for how does he at his Return give him the
best of every thing? clothes him with the best robe, puts rings on his hands,
kills the fated Calf for him, and now has full contentedness in receiving his
son, Let Us eat and be merry; as though he should say, I have enough, I have my
son again. But,

What particular Grounds are there of all his mirth? why these three.

1. (Says the father,) Because this my son was dead, and is alive again. And,

2. He was lost, and is found.

3. Because I have received him safe and sound.

Here Is cause indeed of Joy, if all this be true: What, to have recovery after
banishment! Here Is Joy indeed, both in his recovering, and in the fathers
receiving him. But,

1. Because he was dead, and is alive, etc. If any of you should have a child
fall into a Well, and in all appearance should be drowned; now to have this
child revive again, how would you prize him above all you did before, and above
all your other children? A man that is dead, is without hearing, seeing,
savoring of any thing: A dead man is burdensome to every one, yea to his dearest
friends, every one is weary of his company, and afraid of getting a taint from
him: There Is no hope of a dead man: Things dead turn to rottenness presently.
Such was this Prodigal, he was dead, without sense, unsuitable to any society.
The dead cannot praise thee; but (says Hezekiah) the living, the living, they
shall praise thee, etc. Well may the father rejoice, when he considers the case
his son was in, This my son was dead; well might they eat and be merry at the
receiving of this dead son alive again. When I consider how you lie, as dead
men, so void of understanding, and senseless, would I not rather say as Jeremy,
O that I had a Cottage in the Wilderness, etc. that I might fly away from this
people, and be at rest, rather then to endure with you? But if ever deliverance
be, would there not be rejoicing in me indeed, to receive you, as Moses, drawn
out of the water; or as Jonah, out of the Whales belly? There Is cause indeed of
mirth, when the graves shall give up their dead, and the Sea give up its dead,
then shall we sing in the height of Sion: Why the Promise is, that God will
comfort the mourners. But,

2. This is not all neither; but, This my son was lost, and is found. A man
that is drowned in a River, and cannot be found again; whosoever was the friend
of that man, it is a far greater grief to him (if any of you have experience of
it) to have him lost, then to have him drowned; it is a great and restless
disquiet to think what is become of his friend. So the father cannot find this
son, he is such a fugitive; he goes to Heaven, to Hell, to seek his Church, and
cannot tell where to find them. Such runagates are you, the Lord knows not
where to meet with you, that he might say to the dead, Arise, your heart is so
lost, and settled upon nothing: But if once Christ could but come to your graves
(as to Lazarus,) and find you there, if you were but brought to a narrow
compass, there were hope. But to be lost, that is above all your misery, that
Truth cannot tell where to find you: Could it but find you! though in a Goal,
or Stocks, amongst Harlots, or any where in the dirtiest hole that could be, it
would be a gladness. But to be as runaways, every where, and yet no where,
sometime in this Harlots house, and sometimes in another, this is a great woe
and sorrow. But let us be merry (says the father) for I have found my son again
that was lost. If you could but come forth, and say to the Lord, Here I am, and
declare the very particular place where you lie, and stick, 'twere happy. As a
man in a mist (when quite lost) is glad to hallow, and call to any to give
notice he is lost, and tells them where they shall find him. But we slight it,
and say, It Is true, I am in a lost condition, but what will any telling another
do me good? We think there must be no crying out: But the time will come, that
you will cry before delivered, both to instruct others, saying, O come not
here! as (the Lepers were to cry out to all, O come not to me; I am unclean, I
am unclean:) and then there will be a crying, Can you help me? can you tell me
which way God delivered you? Though the Father sent forth his word, to seek up
his son, yet he came not till he was alive, quick, and sensible of his wants;
and this made him arise and go to his father, etc.

The last thing yet remains, wherein lies the conclusion of all; and it is
marvelous to consider how the work hangs together.

A third Reason why the Father is merry, is, the safe return of his Prodigal:
When the other son came out of the field, and heard the music and dancing, he
asked one of the servants what those things meant? Why (says he) Thy Brother
is come, and thy Father has killed for him the fatted Calf, because he has
received him safe and sound. And if this should not be, all would be an
incomplete Salvation still. But while I speak the word, I sigh to speak it;
Shall we ever see the day to be thus adorned? to have the best robe, the
shoes, the ring, and the fatted Calf? to sit at the Kings Table, and have the
presence and favor of the Father? to hear that concord between Heaven and
Earth, that music and harmony? to hear the gladness of the Father and all
those holy Angels? to see the Earth, which is his footstool, brought to the
Will of the Heavenly? to have Heaven and Earth brought together to a meet and
close? Therefore Let Us eat and be merry: 1. Because my son was dead, and is
alive again. 2. He was lost, and is found. And, 3. He has received Him safe
and sound. And this is wonderful, that one so far gone, that had been dead and
lost, that Lazarus lying four days stinking in his grave, should be raised and
made a sound man again; that there should be no deadness, nor confusion, nor
taint in the Principle of Life, but all return sound; this will be a wonder!
That there shall be no taint nor smell of any ill savor in all our words and
ways left; it will be wonderful indeed, to have such a Resurrection!

There are three things considerable from this word To be Safe.

1. That which is safe is well fenced about, as Solomon says, The Name of the
Lord is a strong Tower; the Righteous runs into it, and is safe, Prove.
18.10. But what is the Name of the Lord? He proclaims his Name thus; The Lord,
the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and
truth; Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin,
and that will by no means let the guilty go free, etc. Exodus 34.6, 7. When the
Prodigal is compassed about with this Name, he is safe to purpose, with
long-suffering, gentleness, etc. and with remembrance of this also, That he
will by no means let the guilty go free; then is he made to give glory to his
Father: This will be a strong tower where the Soul may be safe.

2. To be safe, is to be where no harm can come at him: In time of trouble
(says David) he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his Tabernacle
shall he hide me, Psalm. 27.5. A pavilion stands in the midst of the Army, and
what harm can touch one there? To be in the City of Refuge, there the Avenger
of blood cannot come near: Now he is under the wings of his Father, no
Witchcraft nor Enchantment can touch him: And when ever God shall make such a
fence about you, your estate will be good indeed, when thus fenced about with
the Name of the Lord. But,

3. A man may be said to be safe, when he cannot run away to harm himself
neither: When God makes this Covenant with Israel, he says, And I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, That I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but will put my Fear into their hearts, that they SHALL NOT DEPART FROM
ME, Jer. 32.40. A man that is locked in the Stocks, or in a Gaol, we use to
say, such a man is safe, because he cannot get away: So when God has put his
Fear into the heart, it is made as an hook or anchor to the Soul, it cannot get
away from him: But happy are they whom God will bring back again with the
Prodigal, from the Land of their captivity into his presence: There Is the place
of rest and quiet; there the Father rejoices over his Prodigal, because he has
received him safe and sound.

To be Sound has these things considerable in it.

1. A thing that is sound may be considered thus, to be without rottenness,
without fault, firm and durable: Now the Prodigal (before his return) has a
heart with a taint in it; and 'twill be wonderful if ever we shall be brought
out clean, spotless, unblameable, etc. It Is nothing to keep a man from stealing
when he can come at no prize; but to have the Babylonish garments and the
wedges of gold lie before the Soul, and now not to have an Achans heart, to
covet them; here will be the trial: O let me not taste of their dainties (says
David.) The time was, he was envious at the prosperity of the wicked: But now
to see them prosper, and enjoy their portions, and yet not envy, nor cover; [in
nothing to be tainted;] here will be the wonder! But,

2. To be Sound, is to be complete, and without deficiency; as of a Horse that
is fit for service, we say, He is a sound Horse, sound wind and limb, complete,
etc. The Prodigal came home completed, (as Paul says,) That you may be wholly
complete in him, not having any spot or blemish, or any such thing: And, My
Beloved (says the Church) is wholly delectable, complete in beauty: O that my
heart were so direct (says David) [that I were sound in thy Law!] O Lord, how
far off are we from this complete soundness! We complain because we cannot have
our evil wills; but when David was delivered, O let me never taste of their
dainties (says he:) Thus did the Father receive the Prodigal safe and sound.
But,

He received him so] Which intimates, That no unclean thing shall enter: The
Child shall be in the wilderness till he know how to refuse the evil, and
choose the good: but we put it off, and would never learn, saying, When God
comes indeed, we shall be so: But we must be brought to choose the thing; our
wills must buckle to be of his mind, not his Will to ours; all this curious
work was wrought in the dark: I was curiously fashioned (says David) in the
lower-most parts of the Earth, etc. When the Prodigal came to himself, when he
first returned, the Father received him safe and sound; so sure was he fenced
about with the Name of the Lord; a strong fence indeed! The Father finds him
in this Name, and in this he receives him; as Christ says of Mary, She loved
much, therefore much was forgiven her: So, safe and sound does the Father
receive him; Safe, in that he is free from all evil, nothing can touch him; and
then safe, in that he cannot get away: and sound, not having an evil tincture
of an old rotten heart in him: Now he has no mind to return to Sodom: I
remember (in that day) I looked for all my fears that had plagued me, and could
not find them; the mind was set on fire for God alone. Well may the Father be
merry now, to receive a son that was once forlorn, that had neither clothes to
his back, nor meat for his belly; that had no fellowship but Rogues, fit for
every base Harlots house, taking all opportunities of destruction; yet he is
saved out of all, and comes home safe: and now for a King to entertain him
thus, it was a token he was a son indeed; for who else could have the face to
own such a Father (such a case as he was now in?) but he ventures, and calls
him Father; and the Father own^ him, and is glad to receive him, in how
miserable a case soever he finds him.

Thus have you seen the progress of all the Prodigal's way: Did you see him in
his pride and bravery? (wiser then seven men that can give a reason?) full of
wealth and store, having got his portion into his hands? and have you seen what
he does with it? The rich man's wealth (says Solomon) is a high wall in his own
conceit; ('it is but in his own conceit:) But before destruction (says he) a
man's heart is haughty, Prove. 18.11, 12. And if you see him a while after, where
is it all become? The time comes he is glad of an husk, if he could but feed
with the swine; but he may not. And now he is put to his last shift, either to
dye with hunger, or to return home to his Father, at a peradventure whether he
will receive him or no: he proposes to himself, if he might but be received as
a servant, it was far better to be so, then as he was, for they had no want,
but he starved with hunger: And because he comes home thus buckled, owning his
shame, confessing he had so sinned, and was not worthy any more of the name of
a son, (now his commanding and claiming spirit is laid down;) but while he
comes thus, he is largely entertained with abundance of mercies; as has been
showed you.

Now from all this you may consider these Uses.

1. In the first place, here might be an Use of Information, or forewarning, to
all those that are sons or daughters of this Father, That (if possible) you
might take warning, and not gain this loss to your selves by wandering. If a
man be a Drunkard, or Swearer, etc. yet he will (many times) counsel his child,
that he should not follow his way: And as Paul said, so I say to you, (...)
would you were all as I am, except my bonds: I would you might never have a
mind to wander as the Prodigal did; you see what it brought him to: And all
the Examples you hear of, they are all written for your admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come: And as you have seen the end of the World, so
you would see an end of Truth too (were it in your power.) The Prodigal did not
spend the Worlds, but his own portion; you have made an evil use of all the
Creatures, and will you make an evil use of Truth too? O that you might learn
instruction, and be wise! That the days past might suffice, in which you have
walked perversely; that hence-forward you might be warned to keep out of the
snare.

2. It may be of Use for Instruction, to let us know of a certain, That where
ever Pride goes before, Destruction will follow after: The Prodigal for his
riotous living was rewarded with famine. It were well if you would never
venture; but if you do, know of a certain the Famine will overtake you:
Therefore (as Paul says) Forsake not the assembling of your selves together,
as the manner of some is, who are thereby hardened: Where presumption goes
before, hardness of heart will follow: Therefore it is no marvel to see us lean
and barren; it is because that proud spirit has gone before; which has brought
it on us; that promised you, you should not be poor, but sit as a Lady for
ever, etc. We have promised our selves we would be diligent and watchful, not
envy nor despise any; but when the heart is once out, it is hard to come in
again: When David's heart had got out to look upon the woman, he presently sends
for her Husband, then makes him drunk, then sends him with a Letter to the
Army, to take his life away; and all that he might enjoy his Wife: So when the
heart is once out, how does it heap one lie and mischief upon another! O
therefore consider how you get out; for if you are once gone, it is not such an
easy thing to come in again: The beginning of strife (says Solomon) is like
the breaking out of water; The gap is made bigger and bigger, till at last it
cannot be stopped.

3. And lastly, This may be for Encouragement to all those Wanderers that are
gone a long journey, and would never think of returning; that count God such an
hard Master: Do but consider his works of old, as David did; he was encouraged
by it, and had hope: Our fathers hoped in thee (says he) and were not ashamed.
Remember the Prodigal, though a poor forlorn wretch, yet he returned to his
Father as he was; and see what entertainment he found.

Therefore now enquire with what Principle thou could come in; Art thou dead?
and thy fear is, thou shall not be revived again? or is thy fear because of a
dissembling unsound spirit thou have, which twists about thee do what thou
can? Yet see; Is thy strait for a single and upright heart? Does thy Soul
choose it, however thou art found? That Is the thing; If thou can but come in
this Name of the Lord, then be encouraged, that he will receive thee, he will
make thee a feast of fat things, and of wine well refined on the lees: He will
sit down at Table with thee, and say, Eat my friends, eat abundantly; Come and
let us be merry, etc. for Fury is not in him (as we suppose;) He waits to be
gracious, and is more glad of one sinner that repents, then of ninety nine just
persons that need no repentance.

O therefore return thou Prodigal, return; say to thy Soul a thousand times
over, O return to thy strong hold: Take hold on the horns of the Altar as thou
art, and be safe: Say not, If I were clothed I would come; if I were shod, and
had Rings on my hands, and were filled with the spirit of power, then I could
come; But enquire, Is there not life in thee? Is not the principle quite dead?
then be encouraged (for where there is life, there is hope) the Father will
entertain thee: But, O Lord! how long shall we neglect so great Salvation?

O Lord, the thing is too much to expect, That ever the sinner should be so
received, to stand before him spotless and blameless, safe and sound: But
surely the Scripture has not said it in vain; nor is that principle in you in
vain, that gasps and pants after it. O therefore mind and consider, that we
might enjoy this portion, and return from our Prodigality; and the good Lord
bring you in at the right door, for there only will he find you: and where is
that? Why, in the Name of the Lord. But so long as this pride and envy, etc
lives, we would never come to admire and say, O the forbearance and
long-suffering of our God! We would never clear him, and own the thing as it
is: but this is the door by which the righteous enter, and are safe.

Noah Warned OF Things not Seen; OR Faith piercing into Invisibles. SERMON. VII.
April 27. 1651.
HEBR. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by which he condemned
the world, and became heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith.
The Analysis.
FRom the words was observed in general:

I. What Things Noah was warned of by God?

And they were these three.

1. That all flesh was corrupt, how fair and specious soever to sight. 2. That
the end of all flesh was come, though all seemed quiet and well. 3. He is
warned to prepare an Ark, to the saving of his house: None of these things were
yet seen, but Noah sticks to the Word.
This brought home, to show, we have been warned in all these Cases.

1. That all flesh is corrupt: We have been warned of that three ways. 1. By
the Word of the Crier, that has witnessed it. 2. We have proved it over and
over again by Trial in our selves. 3. Warned by Providence; the world let out
against us, and the breach begun.
2. We have been warned, the end of all flesh is at hand; often witnessed to
us, That He will not always wink and bear, but call to an account. 3. The
warning has often been to us, to provide an Ark, a sure resting place and
shelter from storms, [to know our portion in the eternal Love.]
II. How is Noah affected? Moved with Fear, etc. A Fear and awe seizes on him,
and that in five Particulars.

1. From the warning, that all flesh was corrupt; [All in the man, sin;] a Fear
touches the Soul: Lord is the case so with me! 2. Moved with Fear, because the
end of all flesh was come; Judgment ready to seize, the Flood coming; this
moves a Fear. 3. Because he was naked, and had not an Ark provided. 4. Moved
with Fear, lest he should slip over the present day and Call. 5. Lest the Flood
should come before his Ark be finished: And this moves the Soul, and makes it
haste to the work.
All this brought home to Particulars, to enquire, whether we were moved with
this Fear, with much power and searching.

III. Consider, He prepared an Ark; the Fear took place.

The Ark was a Type of Christ: It had three Stories, which expressed the three
Conditions Christ went through, and All His must follow.

1. A day of weakness, sufferings, and Death; and this lowest story, all that
will prepare an Ark, must first build.

In this Death of Christ was considered, 1. He dyed to all things; not only
unlawful, but lawful; just Rights and Privileges; became poor for others. 2.
He did it willingly, and quietly, not grudging, none took his Life from him.
This the pattern of the first story of the Ark.


2. The day of his Resurrection to Life, that a second story.

3. His ascending into Glory, answerable to the third.

HEBR. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with Fear, prepared an Ark, etc.
IN all Times God had some to whom He has been pleased to communicate his mind
about what was to befall the world; and therefore he says, He will do nothing
but he will reveal it to his servants the Prophets; and to them, the
forewarning they have had from God, has not been a slight Thing, an idle Tale,
or a Fable, but it has taken impression: As with many of the Prophets, how
have they cried out in bitter distress, That they were pained at the very
heart, and their bowels shook within, etc. at the sight of the miseries which
were to come on a People, before the thing was done, or any present danger in
view! And so here, Noah is warned of God of things to come, (though not at all
yet seen,) and see what place it took: He was moved with fear, and that fear
was not in vain neither, but put him upon a work: He prepared an Ark to the
saving of himself and his house. And therefore where ever we hear of great high
words, of great discoveries and revealings of God to any (which many now in the
world pretend to,) and yet all they speak of takes no place upon their spirits,
(there is no fear, nor awe, nor dread, no paining of heart, nor shaking of
inwards, but they can live still as loosely and vainly as ever, after their own
fleshly wills,) this is a token God has not spoke there; but speak a false
Vision of their own hearts. But God has in all Ages had some to whom he has
revealed what he has intended to do, to give warning to the world beforehand,
that when the Judgment comes, they may know it comes not by chance and hap, but
that he has a hand in it. So Christ to his Disciples, When these things come
to pass, you may remember that I have told you. And it is often mentioned, That
such and such things came to pass, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled: The
Word which God had spoke to his servants, that must not fall to the ground. And
thus was Noah warned of God of Things not yet seen; He had only a word for it,
and yet believes: So Abraham, but a word from God to call him, and He goes out,
not knowing whither he went. Consider,

I. WHAT THINGS THEY WERE THAT NOAH WAS WARNED OF? These three.

1. He was warned, That all flesh had corrupted its way, Genesis 6.12. This Word
came to him from God, first, before the thing was so proved and known to him,
that all flesh was so corrupt, nothing at all good in man; but the imaginations
of his heart altogether evil, and that continually. Now there is a birth of the
flesh that seems very like the Child of God, but yet it will not be owned, it
must not be Heir with Isaac: What ever is born of the flesh, is flesh; it is no
better, and the best of flesh is corrupt; All flesh, how fair and specious
soever it may seem. And the same warning is now sent to you this day, That All
in you is corrupt before God; an evil taint runs in all, in the best we do; a
dead Fly spoils the whole Box of ointment: In my flesh (says Paul) dwells no
good thing. But we plead, we do not so see this, that we are so wrong and
guilty in all. Well, but Noah is warned of God of things not yet seen, not yet
so clear to his eyes, and he believes the Word, and the warning sent, and
stands not to parl the case with God.

2. He was warned, that the end of all flesh was come before God; that a day of
account was coming, a Judgment, a Flood to drown all flesh. God will not always
strive and bear, but the end comes: And this Word Noah believes, though nothing
as yet is seen, but all is well, and at peace, eating and drinking, marrying,
and giving in marriage; yet he observes the warning, and believes the Word, and
submits and cleaves to it: The warning is given him, Depart from the tents of
these wicked men, left ye perish with them, etc. and he obeys.

3. He is warned of God to prepare an Ark for the safeguard of himself and his
house: And what a strange and mad thing would this seem to all the rest of the
world? They could not but laugh and mock at it; What does this man intend? is
he wiser then all the World? and will he go contrary to all? to build an Ark
when no Flood nor danger appears; this seems a mad way to Reason. Well, but
Noah was warned of God, and that is enough to him; though the thing is not yet
seen, yet he believes the Word, and sets to the work, and goes on alone; let
them say what they will to him, and mock on, he observes the warning; as Genesis
6.22. And Noah did according to all that God had commanded him; so did he. Now
to bring this home to our conditions; (for Noah is dead, and the Word yet
concerns us:) It is certain we have been warned of God, as he was, in all these
three Cases. And,

1. That all flesh has corrupted its way, we have been warned of God these
three ways.

1. By a word of true report: God has told you again and again, That all flesh
is grass, that there is no good thing in man. How long has the Crier cried
this, That all flesh is wholly corrupted? Though it be never so fair and
goodly, and the Sepulcher painted, yet there is nothing but rottenness and
filthiness within. The man's fleshly wisdom, that which is his guide and
Counselor, the eyes that he sees with, the feet he walks with, even that has
been a corrupt taint in all our ways; and this has often and often been told
you, and yet you go on, and pass the Condition over, and sleep desperately upon
the top of a Mast, and go contrary to all that comes to cut down flesh, and
destroy your wisdom, and vain imaginations.

2. You have been warned of this, by a work upon your own spirits: And if you
believe not the Word, yet will you not believe for the Works sake? Have you not
been spoiled and ruined by the charms and false flatteries of this whorish
woman [the flesh] all along your days? Have you not proved out the thing
thoroughly? And yet we plead, we do not so see it: We would justify our selves
in something according to the flesh. But have we not seen? have we not felt it
to our loss, what a treacherous dealer this flesh has been? It is then,
because we would not see it, but blind our eyes; and if we stand here pleading,
we may stick long enough in the mire, and see no deliverance, if we will first
see, and not at all believe our misery and danger. Noah was warned of things
not seen, and he believes the Word told him. Now you call me your Guide, and
witness that God is with me: But how appears it you judge so indeed? Would you
not live after your own counsels still; rather then the Truths? Would you not
see with your own eyes? and not stir a step farther then your own Reason can
reach? But whose heart trembles, when the Word goes forth from Christ, One of
you shall betray me; to say, Lord, is it I? or, Is it I? Who fears, and lays it
to heart, when the Crier tells you day by day (and complains bitterly under
it,) That All flesh is corrupted? Who is touched to enquire, Good Lord, is it
so with me! is all in me corrupted? all my hopings, and resolvings, and
turnings, and puttings off the strait? is there a taint in all, which way
soever I turn me! and does not our experience prove this out to us also? Have
we not seen an end of all perfection? and yet how strangely do we stick to our
shadows, which we have proved out to be dry and empty? and like the foolish
Be, light again and again upon the same flower, when it can yield no more
honey. And thus your days may be worn out, and spent, and come to nothing, if
you will neither be warned of God, nor your own experience, to lie down in the
dust, and abhor your selves in ashes, and own your own wretchedness. All I
speak, is, to bring you to a strait for help, and to see it is not in your
selves; it grows not in that soil, though you till and manure it never so
carefully. What is the Reason (think you) we are not removed, not translated
into another Kingdom, another condition, but stick still where we were seven
years ago? What are we molded and wrought into of the mind and likeness of God?
We have more light indeed then we had, but what has it brought us to? What
have we submitted under and parted with of our lives and wills! etc. We turn
like the door upon the hinges, so the sluggard upon his bed; and if we turn,
and turn never so often, upon a fleshly bed, alas, all comes to nothing, so
long as we move upon that center of fleshly wisdom, and will believe God no
farther then we can see him, but keep off our misery; though we are warned by
the voice of the Crier, and warned by our own hearts, to know how deceiveably
they have dealt with us; yet we will hold our hold, and not give up all flesh
for corrupt and wretched, and cry out, In me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing: Till this, we must welter in our misery, no Cure will come.

3. We have been warned by Providence of this; an ordering Hand of God has
preached, That all flesh is grass. How has it taken away some of us by Death?
and how has the world a late been let loose upon the rest? What plots and
contrivances are there on foot to break us a pieces, if the Lord prevent not?
What stirings are there and waitings for our halting? And what mean all these
stirs and hurly-burlies? Sure they have an end, they come for the destruction
of the flesh, they come to show that flesh yet lives, that there is a fleshly
coming together, fleshly hearing and trusting in our outward mercies, crying,
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and so rest in the shadow, and
come not to the preparing of an Ark indeed: And therefore you see how it has
fallen upon some of us, to be divided, and taken away by force; and carried to
strange Trials: And think not with your selves, that they were greater sinners
then the rest; No, but certainly unless we repent (that are yet left together)
the Hand will go against us, and the men of the world shall have their wills to
root us out from being a People.

Therefore if we shall be warned this day to lay it to heart, it will be well;
if the Word, and the Work, and the present hand of Providence, if all make you
consider and know that all flesh has corrupted its way, and that out of flesh
you must come, then it is well. Out of Sodom you must come, that is certain; and
if one thing will not do it, another shall. We have certainly lived all of us
besides the mercies afforded: We might have been Teachers of others for the
time; but alas, we have been dull of hearing, and have need to be taught into
the first Principles of repentance from dead works: Therefore there is need now
at the last you should be warned, That all flesh is grass; and this you will
grant in a word: But come to particulars, and there your fleshly wisdom will be
Judge, what is right, and what is wrong; and flesh will never judge it self: and
so all is kept off from seizing upon the heart; for certainly else you could
never keep up to live alone, as you do (upon your own thoughts and counsels)
without the Lord: As it is said, God is not in all their thoughts. Oh
therefore, Consider this all you that forget God! And whilst it is called to
day, harden not your hearts. Fall under the mighty hand, and own your misery;
and if you know it not, be jealous, and enquire with fear, What means this
voice of the Crier? 'Am I indeed so corrupt and miserable, and know it not! Say
with Job, What I know not, teach thou me, till the Thing be opened; for some
way or other this Lesson must be learned you, That All flesh is grass; and the
Lord spares none of you, and nothing in any of you; but All flesh, the whole
House of Israel have corrupted their way: You are all guilty, and have turned
aside to vain things, and have forsaken the Lord days without number, and the
strait is not yet upon you: The Lord make you sensible where you stand! But
then,

2. We have been warned of that too (as Noah was) That the End of all flesh is
come before God. How often has this been told you, That He will not always
bear, His Spirit will not ever strive? The Patience will wear out at the last,
nay it is even expired; and if the Lord move you not with fear, as Noah was
moved, to prepare an Ark, desolation will surely come, the Flood will overtake
you some way or other; either Death will come and bind us fast from our wills
in the grave, or sufferings from unreasonable men will come to shatter us
asunder, and break us in pieces; and then whither shall we turn for counsel and
help in our straits? How may we then prize the days which we now slight? Surely
one way or other God will take to bring All Flesh to an end: And if we have no
other hope nor confidence but in the flesh, if we stick still in our
self-wills, and fleshly minds, we shall not be able to stand in that day. It is
not your high looks nor great thoughts that will then carry you out; not your
knowledge of Scriptures, nor understanding of Mysteries; none of your carnal
hopes, nor carnal fears, nor carnal reasonings, will now stand, as they have
done formerly; but the Flood will sweep away all that is born of the flesh.
Therefore if we shall be made to judge our selves beforehand, and cry out, O
search me, and try me, if there be any way of wickedness in me! and bow under
the Judgment, then it is well for us: But if there be such a saying within, I
shall have peace in the way of my own heart; this evil shall not come that is
spoke of; I shall have ease and rest, and dye in my nest (says Job;) if thus
you put the evil day far from you, it will surely overtake you unawares, in a
day when you think not of it; when they were eating, and drinking, and
marrying, the Flood came! etc.

3. We have been also warned (as Noah was) to prepare an Ark: We have been
minded often, both from a Word without, and stirrings within, to look after a
sure testing place, a Refuge, a shelter, that which will keep off all Floods,
and storms, and Trials. Though the Earth be moved into the midst of the Sea,
yet (says David) I will not fear; His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord:
And in another place, My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed: There is,
sure, such a place whither the Righteous can flee, and they are safe; In the
Name of the Lord, in that Tower, under his wing, in the secret of his
Pavilions, in his Bosom [in his Love] when that is opened to the Soul, and a
mansion given it there. Now if thou have all parts, and knowledge, and
operations, and good desires, and good resolvings, all these will not save thee
in the day of the Flood: The Waters will get above, over all the high
Mountains, the whole Earth, how high soever it be; yet if it be of the Earth,
if it be born of the flesh, and the will of man, it will not stand. But There
is a Rest for the People of God: Wast thou ever brought into that? Has the
Lord Jesus ever showed thee thy lot and portion in that Eternal Love? that thou
art chosen there, in the Beloved? Nothing else will carry it out against the
Flood; when that comes to overflow, nothing then but that everlasting Rock.
Many are wise, and great, and honorable, and knowing in their generation,
famous, and men of renown; but alas! when they come to dye, they have no
understanding, but are found like the beast that perish; They are to seek their
shelter when the storms beat. But now to have a portion made over to thee in
that Eternal Love, that will be a sure Ark in the time of the Deluge; this will
be the happiness: And such a condition as this you have been warned of God, and
are warned, to press after, and to rest in nothing till this Ark be prepared
for you.

II. Consider next, He being moved with Fear, etc.

The Warning takes place upon him, and leaves an impression behind, it moves
and touches his heart, and that from these five Considerations.

1. He was moved with fear, from that warning to him, That All flesh was
corrupt; a fear seizes on him, and makes him enquire, Is it indeed so as the
Lord has spoken? Though I see not so clearly, that All is so corrupt and vile,
yet what means this warning from God? Surely the case is worse then I yet see
it; sure I am leaning and hoping in some wrong thing, some arm of flesh or
other, that the Lord warns me thus. Hence the Fear moves upon him, and makes
him look inwards.

Now does this come home to your doors? Do you enquire whether these things are
so or not? Alas, how is it with me? How stands the case between God and Me?
What means the complaint and cry, That All is corrupt? Does the Lion roar, and
are you not afraid? Or do you stand upon your terms with Corah, and say, All
the Lords People are holy? [We are not so base and vile as you would make us
believe.] If you plead so, you shall know shortly (as Moses said to them) who
are the Lords People, and who are not: The search and dividing will come; and
if thy money be good, thou art not afraid to bring it out; Thou will not shrink
from being enquired into; Thou will come to the Light, if thy works be good.
But this will be a testimony the case is bad, if either there be a snuffing and
taking it ill to be put thus on the Trial, or if a shuffling it off and laying
it aside till to morrow; or if a fear, and shrinking, and covering the
condition close to your selves; or if a wilful stubbornness and scorning to
come to the Touchstone: If thou be a scorner, thou alone shall bear it, that
is certain, thou shall be alone by thy self; and woe to him that is alone. Who
ever is in an Error, or evil way, he is surely alone in it: There are not two
in the whole world that are fully together in an evil way, but some flaw and
difference creeps in do what they can; for it is a spirit of confusion and
division; and there is no true Union and Oneness but in the Spirit of Love and
Truth: Therefore enquire if there be not a canker-worm, a taint, in all thy
best things, in thy Knowledge, Fear, Hope, Believing, Desiring, etc. if all be
not corrupt: And will not this cause a Fear?

2. He was moved with Fear, to consider, Is an end of all flesh coming? Is a
Judgment so near? Is it certain that an Account will be called for from me in
all my ways, and nothing of flesh shall stand? and do I sleep in this
condition? Am I secure, and the Judgment so nigh at the door, ready to destroy
all? Hence the Fear moves and works upon the sensible Soul.

Now enquire, whether this Fear touch upon you or not: If you are not brought
to be knit up to the Lord Christ, and be made one Spirit with him, you will be
sure to be left behind to the perishing world. I wonder sometimes how you can
have any rest upon your spirits; how you can go through your business, and eat,
and sleep, and talk, or mind any thing, whilst your Souls hang at such an
uncertainty; and thou know not what shall become of thee in the latter end:
If there be nothing but flesh in thee, though never so high, and fair, and
refined, yet it will come to an end, it will not stand in the fire; for what is
the chaff to the wheat (says the Lord?) Now if thou searchest into thy self,
art thou sure thou can find any thing better then flesh? another spirit seed
of God? and then art thou sure that this is thine, and shall ever abide with
thee, and be in thee? (For if the Spirit be taken from thee, as it was from
Saul, then thou art miserable,) for that alone must stand in this day.
Therefore art thou sure thou have that which will carry thee out through Death
and Hell, when the Flood comes to drown the whole Earth? Now you are at ease,
and quiet, and in health, and go and come at will; but do you not think a Flood
will come and sweep away all flesh? Do you not think you must dye, and part
with all your wills, and loves, and desires that are not born of God? Therefore
what need is there this Fear should seize upon you, lest you should not be able
to stand in that day?

3. He was moved with Fear in this Consideration, That he is naked, and has no
Ark to betake him to: The Judgment is at hand, the Deluge ready to seize, and
he has no shelter nor place to turn to; and this makes the case harder to him,
then the rest of the World, which saw not the danger: and hence the Fear
seizes; Alas, his shelter is not yet prepared, the Ark not made!

Now, do you search and enquire into this? Have you an Ark at hand, to receive
you, or not? Are you provided for such a day or no? Are you sure you shall
stand in the fire, and not be consumed? Do you know you shall go through with
your building, and that mock not fall upon you, This man began to build, but
was not able to finish? Does this Fear touch upon your Souls, as it did on
Noah's? There is a Rest for the people of God, that is sure; an Inheritance in
Light, reserved for the Saints: But is it your portion, or is it not? I wonder
I hear not that voice among you to cry out, Oh, who shall stand when God does
this? when the Searcher comes with his fan in his hand, with refiners fire, and
fullers soap! when every plant shall be plucked up that my heavenly Father has
not planted! This may seem light, now, and a vain enquiry to many that are
high, and at ease, and think to dye in their nests; (as sure, they could not
but mock at Noah in his day: What is this Fool doing? What need of all this
stir to build an Ark? what need is there? to what purpose?) I, but when the
Flood comes where are the Mockers then? What is the Hypocrites hope?

4. Another thing that might move Noah to fear, might be this, lest he should
slip over the present instruction and warning given him; lest he should neglect
the present day, and then it may be too late: Therefore the Soul that is
sensible is afraid, a jealousy strikes the heart; O what would come on me, if
I should withstand my Mercy? How were many envited to the Feast? but because
they made excuses, and neglected the offer, the door is shut; and he swears,
They shall not taste of his Supper. But now Josiahs heart was tender when the
Judgments were read before him out of the Law; it took place in his Soul: And
Mordecai says to Esther, Who knows but thou were raised up for such a time as
this? [If now thou show not thy self, thou may never have another offer:]
And here the Fear comes in, Lest the day slip, and can never be recalled again:
and therefore Christ weeps over Jerusalem, O that thou had known in this thy
Day the things that belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

Now see; does this Fear touch your Souls? Are you struck with an awe of
spirit, lest you should slip away the present day of Mercy? Does it press upon
you, That whilst it is called to day, you harden not your hearts? and then the
word go forth, You shall never enter into his Rest? Truly the venture is hard,
were our Souls but awakened: If thou slip the nick, and know not the time of
thy Visitation, He may never speak more of the things concerning thy Peace; but
that sad conclusion may come, Now they are hid from thine eyes.

5. Noah might be moved with Fear out of this consideration, lest the Flood
should take him unawares, before his Ark was finished; and therefore he sets to
the work presently: And Noah did as the Lord commanded him, so did he; lest he
should be prevented, and not finish his Ark in time, and then all his labor and
pains are lost; this strikes him with fear.

Now consider; does it take this place upon thy spirit? Does it set thy Soul to
the work presently, now [this very season,] to say, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? Does it make you look out for a guide to lead you on,
and counsel you in the work? For an Interpreter, one of a thousand, to show to
man His Righteousness? Sure the Idol gods keep the room, (some base lusts, or
hopes, or promising your selves Peace,) or else you would be afraid: and all
that God intends that everlasting good to, sure the strait will come, That they
shall not be suffered to let their eyes sleep, nor their eyelids slumber, till
they shall find out an habitation for the God of Jacob. Do these things take
place upon you or not? if not, what is the cause? what hinders, you are not
baptized? Are you senseless and carnal, living in the flesh, upon any seen
thing? Alas! That is miserable, the Flood will come and sweep away all of that
kind: Whilst they were eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in
marriage, unawares the Flood came. Or can thou give a good account what will
be thy latter end? and can say with the Apostle, We know, that if this
earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building, not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens? I would you could say that word indeed. But, O Lord,
when I think of it! what if he should come now unawares this night! where are
your minds? Are you fit to go out and meet the Bridegroom? Are not your Hearts
either cavilling, or reasoning, or murmuring, or hunting and lusting after
somewhat? or fearing and sinking under your bonds? But who has a mind prepared
to meet the Lord in the air, and so be for ever with him?

Thus I have showed you what the things not seen were, of which Noah is warned.
1. God tells him, All flesh is corrupt. 2. That the end of all flesh is come.
3. He invites him to build an Ark to save himself. And this I applied to our
present condition; for Noah is dead, and this is written for our instruction. I
told you how we have been warned in these cases; And that, 1. By a word that
has cried long to us, All flesh is grass. 2. By the proof of our hearts. 3. By
a voice of Providence, letting out the world, and the outcries of men against
us, if it be possible, to break us asunder, and not leave a stone upon a stone.
Then I told you how the thing took place with Noah, He was moved with Fear,
from five Considerations; all which might seize upon us, and cause an awful
dread and enquiry in our spirits: 1. To see what is our confidence and hope
that we lean on; Is it not born of the flesh? And then, though it be never so
fair-spun a thread, though never so wise, and sober, and patient, and meek; yet
if it spring not from a good root, if it be born of the flesh, all is nothing:
You cannot love Him unless it be opened that He first loves you. Now many
pretend that they love God, and prize and honor him; do you so? but are you
sure that he loves you? What if he shall answer you in that day, when you
plead, Lord, we have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our
streets; (well, but for all that) I know you not (says Christ,) Depart from
me, etc. How will your Love to God then stand? Have you indeed an Ark prepared
to receive you in the great overflowing Deluge? in the day of desperate sorrow,
that shall come to try all that dwell upon the Earth? The Day will surely come
ere long; now are you sure you have that which will carry you through? It Is not
your Learning, nor Knowing (if you knew all Mysteries,) it is not your Parts,
nor Hopes, nor man's conclusions will do it. Many measure themselves by
themselves; [they are not as they were, they are more strict and observant:] I,
but what then? Will that carry you out? And many measure themselves with
others, and say, I am better then such and such; I am not like this Publican:
Well; but they that thus measure themselves with themselves, and others, are
not wise (says Paul:) the root and principle may yet be Self, and then what
the better? Then,

2. This might move us to fear, That the end of all flesh is come: God will not
always wink as he has done in the days of Ignorance; if he should, we would
never come up to any thing: And will not this strike upon you an awe? That the
Judgment lies at the door; Death is entering in at the windows, and nothing of
flesh, nor man's Will, though never so fairly painted and gilded over, will be
able to stand! Is it not time to fear?

3. Have you an Ark prepared to shelter you? a sure resting place from all
storms? if not, is there not great cause of fear and trembling? I know not one
of you, if you were called this night to dye, that are at a certainty for your
conditions, what shall become of you; you have nothing certain to stick to: If
you look over all your treasure, your hopes, and promises, and operations from
Truth; yet the bed is too short, and the covering too narrow. I remember the
saying of an old Professor, which was long my Guide and Teacher, and many years
had been zealous, and strong, and forward in Religion; yet when he lay upon his
deathbed, and great things were expected from him, I know not (says he)
whether all that ever I have done in all my life has not been in hypocrisy.
All his great confidence was gone in a moment, and he at a pitiful uncertainty
what should become of him. I am sure it made my heart startle, to hear it, and
say in my Soul, Art thou now to seek after all? then what shall become of me
who am far short, and but a new beginner!

4. This Consideration may move you to fear, Not knowing how soon the day of
Mercy may be slipped over, and the day of Visitation hid from our eyes. It has
been no small Mercy, the peaceable Government we have lived under, we have had
Liberty and Peace to meet together; it is more then was afforded in my day, it
cost me dearer. But now do you think it will last always? Is there not a fear
upon you, lest the day be gone, and a breaking and scattering should befall us?
And then we may remember Sion, and weep by the Rivers of Babylon in our bonds!

5. This moved Noah with Fear, lest the Deluge should come before his Ark was
finished; and therefore he presently hastens to the work, and did as the Lord
commanded him. Now does it take this place? Are your Souls afraid lest the day
should come unawares, and prevent you? Sure if you are, it will put you out of
hand to look after a shelter, and presently to set upon the work to prepare an
Ark.

III. The next general Thing to be Considered, will be,

WHAT THIS ARK WAS? How to be built? And what a Type of?

This Ark typed out Christ (all confess:) He is that Alone Refuge for all the
saved ones to hide themselves in, when ruin, and desolation, and destruction
comes upon the whole world beside. Now the Ark had three Stories, which type
out three Conditions and states that Christ went through, to finish and
complete the great Work of Salvation.

1. A day of Christ's weakness and Death. This the 1. Story Of the Ark. 2. A day
of his Resurrection from the Grave. This the 2. Story Of the Ark. 3. A day of
ascending and entering into Glory. This the 3. Story Of the Ark.
And all the saved ones must tread in the same steps, and go through these
three conditions in the work of Salvation, etc.

I. Christ had a day of weakness, a day of death and sufferings; He was
crucified out of weakness: And if ever you will build this Ark, to the saving
of your souls, you must begin at this lowest Story: If we are planted into the
likeness of his Death, we shall be also into the likeness of his Resurrection:
If you suffer with him, you shall reign with him: If you take up his cross, and
be faithful to the Death, He will give you a crown of Life: But if you deny
him, he will deny you: If we drink not with him in the cup of Vinegar and Gall,
we shall not drink of that new wine with him in the Kingdom of God. If you will
indeed be like Him, you must begin here. No man can build a Castle in the Air,
if there be no Foundation; and there is no other Foundation but JESUS CHRIST,
AND HIM CRUCIFIED. Now this Death of Christ takes in a large compass; and who
will follow him here?

1. He dyed to all things, both lawful and unlawful: He sought not Himself in
any thing: He could have prayed to his Father, and have commanded Legions of
Angels to save him: He was Lord of all, and yet became poor, and made himself
of no reputation: He laid down all his just Rights and Privileges, and comes
not to do his own Will, but the Will of another. Now if you look it over, how
hard are we to part with unlawful things! We are holding what in our own
Consciences belongs not to us, and we have no right to; nor can we have peace
in the enjoyment of it: and yet how is the heart gathering, and reaching, and
coveting! O fill my belly, clothe my back, pity my case, consider my trials:
And thus every one would scramble all to himself, and never care what becomes
of another, though in our Consciences we know these reachings are utterly
sinful and unlawful. But now who will follow Christ in that other Branch? Who
will begin to dye to lawful things? that which we may justly plead a right and
title to? To clear our selves where we are innocent, to have our Love answered
with Love, to have others deal with us as we deal with them; This we say we may
justly plead for: I, but to suffer wrongfully, to be numbered with
Transgressors, to be counted a wine-bibber, a companion of Publicans and
Sinners, one having a Devil, a Deceiver, a Blasphemer; Thus it was with Christ,
though he was without sin; neither was guile found in his mouth: And yet this
he takes up, and lies under, and lays down his neck to the block and submits:
This is your hour, and the power of Darkness; No more but so: Who will follow
Christ here? to suffer servants to ride on horseback, and thou, though a Prince
(one truly belonging to God) yet to go on foot? Thus did Christ; He went on,
taking up his Cross daily; and this Cross was not only outward sufferings and
reproaches, and denyals from the World; but alas! it takes in a parting with,
and dying to, all seen things, all that the Will sticks to, all that the Soul
chooses, all that is dear and precious, to give up all: Christ could justly
have pleaded, That he had a right to God, a right to all the Creatures; He
might have enjoyed of the best the World affords: No; but He resigns up his
Will to the Will of his Father: He gives up all; and though He was rich, yet
became poor, etc. And if you come not to this, to follow him here, you shall
never build this Ark: And woe to the wantons of this world, that talk highly and
largely for God, but live loosely, and reproach the Cross of Christ as much as
any; will not enter themselves, nor suffer others.

2. He did not only dye to all things lawful and unlawful, but He did it
quietly and patiently; He took it well, He gave up his life, He laid it down,
none took it from him: But how far are we from this? When any thing is hard
indeed, and pinches us to the heart, how do we struggle, and take it ill! There
is an envying arises against the Truth, that searches and tries, and will give
us no rest; They envyed Moses and Aaron, the Saints of the Lord etc. The heart
is unruly and unsubmitted, and its life is torn and rent from it; but this is
not the giving up, not the free will offering that God looks after; He loves a
cheerful giver, and not of constraint: When they offered, and would by force
have made Christ a King, he refuses: and Moses chose afflictions with the
people of God; his heart chose the thing: And if you are yet upon those terms,
to have a hankering mind upon honor, or ease, or quiet, or any seen things, you
are not Christ's followers: and you can never build this Ark of Salvation,
unless you lay the foundation thus low with Christ; all you build (though never
so fair and beautiful) it will not stand without this bottom, unless there be a
heart to take up the Cross and give up your lives, unless you are willing to go
through Hell with him. Many may abase themselves to Hell; I, but they make that
their Heaven; they say not, There is no hope: the pains of Hell are not indeed
felt and endured. But Christ was brought to that pinch, that his Hope was lost;
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! If the Fear of God seize upon you,
you will be jealous every step you take in this work; it will put an awe upon
your spirits, lest you should miscarry in any thing from the pattern. How ever
the words you hear from me may be rude, yet the Knowledge is sure (so far as God
has led me;) and if you pass not through the condition, [the thing spoke of,]
I am sure the building will not stand: The man that thrust himself in without
the wedding garment, when he was enquired into, Friend, how came thou hither?
he was found speechless: But those that were compelled to come in, from the
highways and hedges, they can answer, Lord, I came hither thus, I was drawn,
(None comes to me (says Christ) except the Father draw him,) I would never
have come of my self; I stood out to the last; and had I not been compelled and
forced, I had never been here. If you cannot give an account you have passed
this way, That you have been drawn and haled to it contrary to your wills, and
been made to lay down your lives with Christ, your building will not stand:
This is the way God takes with his own; He turns man to destruction; and then
he says, Return you children of men: He will give no other sign but the sign of
Jonah the Prophet; and this way He passes, He goes down to the bottom of Hell,
He cries out, I am cast out of thy sight; and the Earth with her bars was above
me for ever: [as if he was now quite lost and gone;] and hence deliverance
comes, but not before: And this first story of the Ark you must build, [go
through the Death,] if ever you think to attain the second and third Stories,
the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.

It will be afterward considered,

II. About the Resurrection: Which had three ends in it.

1. To show the mighty power and free Grace in raising, when all hope gone. 2.
That the Man may tread on the neck of his Enemies. 3. That the Soul might
declare and preach his praise.
III. About the Ascension of Christ into Glory.

Three things in it also.

1. A taking up of the Soul into the third Heaven, [from all Earth.] 2. I heard
unspeakable words (says Paul:) [The Decrees of Life opened.] 3. The Soul is
given into Union with the Divinity, married to Christ.
Several other things may be observed, about the length, breadth, and height of
the Ark, the pitching it within and without: All which had a meaning of Truth
in them.

Noah's Ark IN THE WORLDS DELVGE; OR, Truth a Savior and a Judge. SERMON. VIII.
HEBR. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by which he condemned
the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith.
The Analysis.
NOw a proceeding forward to declare the Effects and Consequents of this Ark
being built: And they were three.

1. He did it to the saving of his house; [a people he had a charge of,] not
himself chiefly. 2. By which he condemned the World, etc. This judges them. 3.
And became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith.
I. About Noah's saving his house three things considered: 1. He saves them by
being a Hearer himself: He is first warned of God, and preaches to them what he
received from the Lord. 2. He takes the charge over them, makes them as his own
Soul. 3. He follows on, till the thing be brought about; He does the work, He
does save them, etc.


II. Another Consequent of this Ark-building, is, He condemns the World: And
that in seven Particulars.

1. He believes God, and is warned: and this the World is condemned by, they do
not so. 2. He believes, though the things not seen as yet: The World they are
upon their Reason, and consult with flesh and blood. 3. He sets to build the
Ark alone; The World look for company of wise and learned, and follow them
only: this judges the World. 4. He builds an Ark, a complete one: This judges
the World, to look after a complete Salvation; they content with broken pieces.
5. He builds an Ark pitched within and without; [a sure and certain condition to
keep out all doubtings, etc.] This the World can never reach. 6. Noah not
satisfied with the Ark, but sends out a Dove to enquire of God: The World is
condemned by this; they have no holy Ghost to enquire of God by. 7. He condemns
the World by doing a Work; He does save his house: They build and build, but it
comes to nothing, none are saved by it.
III. A third Consequent, He became Heir of the Righteousness by Faith.

1. What is this Inheritance he enjoys? The Lord himself: The Lord is my
portion; an Inheritance that fades not away. 2. What is it to be an Heir? To
have an Inheritance fall by right, which cannot be sold nor given away; This is
wonderful! 3. How comes he to this? By Faith He became Heir: That Is the way the
Soul is made to prosper in, by beginning with Faith.
HEB. 11.7. Prepared an Ark to the saving etc.
I Have been speaking from these words all the last week; in which many things
have been opened to you at large. I showed you, how in all ages God has had
some, to whom he has revealed his mind and secrets: And here Noah is picked
out for the man; of whom God thus witnesses; Thee only have I found righteous
in this generation; and to him he opens his counsel, what he intends to do
concerning the destruction of the World, and that the End of all flesh was come
before him. I opened to you, 1. What the Principle was he went upon, That was
Faith; by Faith he did it. 2. I told you the effect it left behind; the Word
from God took place, He was warned. 3. What things was Noah warned of? Not
things in present view, which appeared to Sense and Reason; but of things not
seen as yet: Though no danger at all could be seen or thought of at present,
yet he believes, and is warned. Then, 4. I told you the great impression it
made upon his spirit: 'twas not a light warning, a matter of talk, (as the
Religion of all the World is,) but it comes near, and touches upon his heart
deeply; He was moved with Fear: [Work out you Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; not talking, and thinking, and resolving; but (the thing comes to
the heart) with Fear and Trembling.] Then, 5. I told you what a real work this
produces in him; he is not only warned, nor only moved with Fear; but goes on
to a great work, He prepared an Ark. I told you this Ark was a Type and Figure
of Christ, of a Savior, of a sure and safe condition, which will carry through
all storms what ever: which sure condition I told you was made up of three
several works, answerable to the three Stories of the Ark. 1. The work of
Death, of being made conformable to the Death of Christ, [to dye to all things
both lawful and unlawful;] To let all dye, all man's reason, and wisdom, and
hopes, and confidence; all created enjoyments, how dear soever, to part with
all. 2. The second story of this Ark, or the second work of Salvation, is the
work of the Resurrection: If by any means (says Paul) I may attain to the
Resurrection of the Dead; [To be raised again by the same power that raised up
Christ:] Else if we part with all, and give our bodies to be burned, and be
left there in Death, That will be miserable: If that word of the Curse
threatened to Adam light on us, In dying thou shall dye; if left in the grave,
This is to be utterly lost. Many have been brought to that strait, that they
could not keep alive their own Souls, had no ways to turn from the stroke: Cain
was brought to this, Saul brought to this, Judas brought to this: I, but here
lay their misery; they were left in Hell, they dyed in dying, and never came to
the Resurrection. 3. The Ark is not yet fully built, the work of Salvation not
yet complete, till it is made conformable to the Ascension of Christ into his
glory, to be accepted there of his Father, and for ever settled in an Eternal
Life, never to dye more. And in this last Story of Salvation I opened three
things to you: 1. That the Soul is here taken up (as Paul says) into the third
Heaven: It is quite translated, and separated, and divided from all seen
things, [the whole World,] nothing touches it below. 2. Here the Soul hears
words spoke to it which cannot b uttered: Here the seven-sealed Book is opened,
and the eternal Decrees read; This is my beloved Son, etc. 3. Here the Soul is
married to Christ, joined into the union with the Divinity; the Holy Ghost put
in it, as a well of living waters, springing up to eternal Life: And this is
that long Life spoke of; He asked Life of thee, and thou gave him a LONG
LIFE, for ever and ever: This is that Eternal Life, never to dye more. Now such
a condition may be, of having Life, but not the eternal Life; they may dye
again: therefore it is said of some, Twice dead, plucked up by the roots:
Therefore the Ark is not complete, the condition not fully sure and safe, till
the Soul be settled in the Eternal Life, (as Christ said to his Disciples,) And
I give unto them Eternal Life.

Then I spoke to you of the proportions, how the Ark was to be made; the length
of it three hundred cubits, the breadth fifty cubits, and the height (yet less)
but thirty cubits: All which was not without a farther meaning.

1. It was three hundred cubits long, pointing out the long Life, the eternal
Life, that all have which attain this safe condition; a long walk, from
Eternity to Eternity.

2. But yet the breadth is not so large, that but fifty cubits; not so large a
compass here in this Life, not such full room and liberty to walk round about
without any straitness; not so to run the ways of his Commandments, to go on
without let and control. But,

3. The height less still, that but thirty cubits; to show, how the Soul is
greatly kept down there; it can have least room of all upwards: The Ark is but
low, but little liberty Heavenward; the Soul when it has attained most, yet
it cries out, O how short am I! and this is to pinch it on still, not to sit
down here, but to cry for the Kingdom to come, when all bonds and stops shall
be taken out of the way, and a river of broad streams be given; [everyways
liberty enough:] but now ever and anon darkness and mists rise up, an earthly
cloud gets between the Soul and its Happiness, that it can see but a little way
off: But then (says Paul) shall I know as I am known.

Then I told you, this Ark was to be pitched within and without, to keep out
all waters; which pointed out the exceeding firmness and safety of a good
condition, That who ever builds such an Ark, (is so conformed to the Death of
Christ, and attained to his Resurrection, and ascended, and established in the
same Inheritance, made a coheir with Christ in his glory;) nothing can ever
shake this condition; no waters can get in, it is so surely pitched round: no
doubtings nor fears can take place, either from within or without, to shake it:
It is built upon the rock, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

Then the Ark was to be finished in a Cubit, which had this meaning, That the
nearer and higher we come toward God, our way will grow more strait and
narrow. They came out of Egypt full-handed, with Dough on their shoulders, and
rings on their hands, etc. but before they enter into Canaan, all that trash
that came out of Egypt was spent; their compass was narrower: Therefore the
Crier cries, Make straight paths for our God, etc. But yet, I told you, there
was some compass left; it was finished in a Cubits breadth, not an Inch, not
without any breadth at all; No: All our Fathers have had some flaw or other
here, their Ark has had somewhat in it, like to this world: They have had some
sore and weak part; some Canaanites left behind to afflict and vex their Souls:
And this was to put them to a strait, to cry for the Kingdom to come, where no
spot nor wrinkle shall be left, nothing of sin or imperfection; but all tears
wiped away.

Then I told you, this Ark contained the whole Creation in it; All creatures
were here to be preserved, both clean and unclean: And this man would never
choose, to have these contrary beings live so near together. If the soul be once
in the Ministry of circumcision, with Peter, then it would by no means touch
any thing common or unclean: But the Promise is, That the Lion and the Lamb,
and the Ox and the Bear shall lie down together, and yet do no hurt in all the
holy Mountain.

Yet observe, there is a difference made; but two of a sort of all the unclean
were to be kept, but of all the clean seven couple, which had this in it, to
show, That however here sin and righteousness dwell together in the Ark, yet
there are more for us then against us: Seven couple of the clean sort [a
complete number of the righteous seed;] and but some few relics of sin; yet a
spawn lives, to keep the Soul in awe always, lest it should increase and
multiply, and that there might ever be a crying out against this Body of Death;
for it is a wearisom condition at best, and full of snares: These unclean Beasts
cannot but be ill companions for the clean, having always a devouring mind if
it were possible to destroy them.

Then in this Ark Noah had a Dove to send out, to bring tidings to him how it
went abroad, which had this meaning in it, That who ever have indeed built this
Ark, [attained to a certain estate of Salvation,] the Holy Ghost is given them,
to go to God for them in all straits. We know not how to pray, but the Spirit
it self helps our infirmities: This is the Messenger between God and the Soul
in all straits and distresses. What time as I am afflicted (says David) I will
pray unto thee. O Lord, if you had but a heart to consider it! When your house
is on fire, and the Enemies at hand, when you are compassed about with fears,
and miseries, and distresses (as you will be) and yet no Messenger is at hand
to send to enquire of God, and know his meaning, and what he intends, and what
the end shall be: O how miserable is it to be left alone without this
Comforter! There are many that set themselves to pray, and speak words, but
alas he hears not any for their much babbling, if there be not this Holy Ghost
that proceeded from him, to go to him; He hears not other cries and noyses:
Though they howl on their beds, and abase themselves to Hell, he matters not.
The Father will hear none but his own Spirit, and that knows how to get nigh
him, to hold him fast, and plead with him: I will not let thee go, unless thou
bless me. And if this Dove return once without the Olive branch, yet it has no
rest, but goes out again, till it obtain a blessing, and bring tidings of
Peace. Now can any of you answer that question of Peter's, Have you received
this Holy Ghost after you believed? You have believed indeed (I know,) and it
lives in your Consciences, that Truth is here, and God is amongst us, that here
are the words of eternal life: But now have thou received the Holy Ghost after
this believing? Else what a miserable plunge must thou needs be at when straits
and Trials come as thick as Hail, and thou have none to send to God to enquire
the meaning, none to intercede for thee, and plead thy Cause; but art left (as
the whole world) to live in darkness, and judge all things like beasts, which
know no farther then they feel in all that befalls them.

Now I would proceed to speak of the Consequents or Effects which follow this
building of the Ark, and they are laid down in the words to be these three.

1. Noah did it, to the saving of his house. 2. He condemned the world by it.
3. He became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith.
1. He saved his house by it; it is worth noting: It is not said He did it to
the saving himself, though that was included in it; yet a farther thing was in
it, to save his house. The servants of God in all times have had that reward of
their labor, to save a People; That has been their care and work, to seek up
the lost sheep, to turn others to Righteousness.

And in this saving of his household, three Things are considerable, How Noah
did it.

1. He saved his house, (that great work,) by being a Hearer first himself: He
was first warned of God himself, and had an ear open to receive and learn the
lesson before he can teach his house. What I received of the Lord (says Paul)
that I delivered to you. Many go to teach others, and were never taught
themselves: Alas, how can their work stand! They preach they know not what, nor
to whom; They would be Teachers of the Law, not knowing the things whereof they
affirm: They never heard his voice at any time, nor saw his shape, (as Christ
said to the Jews;) and how can they save a People? They are blind Leaders of
the blind; and therefore woe to the Preachers that have not first learned of the
Lord themselves; and woe to the People that are left to such Guides; for both
the wall and the Dawber shall fall together. But Noah was first warned of God
himself.

2. He saves his house, by taking charge of them, and standing engaged for them
as for his own Soul. Take heed (says Paul) of the flock, of whom the Holy
Ghost has made you Overseers. The Holy Ghost lays the charge upon Gods
Ministers, and they are made to receive it, and wait, and tend, and look after
their People, as their own Souls: As Judah says of Benjamin, If I bring him
not back again to thee, let me bear the blame for ever: Such a weighty charge
they take upon them. But where is now in our days such a Noah, such a Preacher
of Righteousness? Many Preach indeed, and they take the charge of a People, as
they say; but how long? Till another hundred pound a year comes, and then they
are gone; or till some suffering and hardship or inconvenience come, and then
they are gone: They fly at the sight of the Wolf. O wicked generation, God will
find them out! But Noah takes charge of his People; they are his house, his
family, his life, and therefore sticks to the saving of them.

3. That is the third thing, He sticks close to them, and follows on till the
thing be done, till he has indeed saved them, till brought them into the same
condition with himself: He will lay down his life for his sheep; and this is a
true Shepherd indeed, that cries out with Moses, Nay rather blot my name out of
the Book of Life, then that this People should be destroyed: And Paul he is at
a strait, and could wish himself accursed from Christ for his Brethrens sake.
Now to have such a Savior to stand in the gap, to travel for a People, and
never leave till Christ be formed in them, this is the great Mercy, and after
this sort do the Noah's in all Ages save the People committed to them. Moses he
stands up in the gap, and the anger is turned away: Phinehas he stands up and
the Plague ceased: David he stands up and takes the sin and the blow upon
himself, 1 Chronicles. 21.17. It is even I that have sinned and done evil, but as
for these sheep what have they done? Let thine hand be upon me I pray thee,
etc. Thus he stands up till the destroying Angel puts up his sword, till the
thing be done he requests for: and thus Noah and all the preachers of
righteousness prepare an Ark to the saving of their House [the people committed
to them].

II. Another Consequent upon Noah's building an Ark, is this, by which he
condemned the world: all the world is condemned by it and that in these seven
particulars.

1. Noah believes Gods Word and is Warned, God tells him Noah, all flesh has
corrupted his way, and it repents me I have made man, wherefore their end is
come before me, and I will surely bring a Deluge to destroy them all; now
therefore look to it, stay not in all the plain; get away from the tents of
these wicked men; hasten and build an Ark to keep off the danger, that thou
perish not with them; and he believed God, it is said, etc. But who will believe
this report now? if God Himself should speak or an Angel from Heaven, if one
from the dead should come, we would not believe, if we believe not Moses and
the Prophets. Now who will believe, if such a certain word as this be witnessed
to them? Well, deceive not your selves I can surely tell you from God, that
misery and destruction is certainly coming on, if you stick in this condition,
if you get not an Ark, a sure shelter and refuge, astrong Tower to fly to, you
will never be able to stand, therefore, Knowing the terrors of the Lord we
persuade you; lay the thing to heart, defer it no longer. I, but who will be
warned by all this? none of the world will, the world within us and the world
without, that will go on its old way, do and say what you can; Charm the
charmer never so wisely the Blackmore will not change his skin, nor the Leopard
his spots; this carnal and sensual and Devilish mind within us, it will yet
feed on carrion; though it be a thousand times warned, it will not be warned;
though it be told, and told, and told, Well, this way will surely undo you, if
you stick on any seen things, and come not to give up all, and lay down your
lives, you will certainly be miserable and loose your lives: yet this spirit in
us will not believe, but it will put the evil day far off, and mock at the
making of an Ark. It will plead, what need is there of this ado? and God he is
merciful: one shift or other, this world will ever find to be at ease, but woe
to them that are at ease in Syon etc. Noah he is warned; [the new Heart, the
sensible Spirit, that hears the Word and stands always in awe and trembling,
that is warned,] and this is that which Judges the world, for they are not.

2. Noah believes though he be warned of things not seen as yet, he disputes
not with flesh and blood about the matter, but believes, and this condemns the
world: who would not argue? But what shall we have if we leave all? and what
need is there of it yet, till more danger appears? who would build an Ark, when
no flood is seen? and not say with Job, No, I am well, I shall dye in my nest?
who that is strong, and in health, and has all enjoyments about him, will then
believe a change will come? Who breaks through all snares and entanglements,
and says, Let me go, stand aside, all is uncertain, all may soon be taken from
me; this life is a mortal life, and all my enjoyments are nothing if the Deluge
come; therefore strive not to comfort me, let me go about the work, to prepare
an Ark? Who breaks through thus resolvedly? No, the heart stands rather to
dispute, Sure this man says he knows not what, there is no such danger: And thus
the time is reasoned out. And if you will stand thus pleading, till the Flood
come unawares, and take you; yet remember I have told you these things; I have
dealt truly in warning you: And (as Christ says) all this have I said that you
might be saved. But yet you are disputing and reasoning, Alas! what can I do to
help my self? And thus we linger and come to nothing: Sure all this which I
speak to you, is as a Tale that is told. Lord, how I feel the hardness of your
heart, and that the Word enters not into the stone! But sure it is, if the Word
take no place, the Blow shall; the Flood will come, and destroy this world.

3. He condemns the world in this, He sets to build an Ark alone: He stays not
for great and wise ones to join with him in the work, but builds alone, though
all scoff and say, What will this Babbler say? what is this fool doing? Will he
bring in new Laws and Ordinances, and go contrary to all Customs, and Orders,
and Rules of our Fathers, and Leaders, and wise ones? Well, but this moves him
not. Do ye what you will, (says Joshuah,) I and my house will serve the Lord:
I must go on, says Noah. The Soul that is indeed at a strait, must go through
all Lets, and set upon the work: It must leave all Relations, Father, and
Mother, and Friends, and say to all, If you will not go with me, I must leave
you: Let the dead bury their dead, but follow thou me; (says Christ.) But this
is the pleading of all the world; Do any of the great ones, the Scribes and
Pharisees believe on him? Do the Minsters and godly Divines go this way? And
here they sit down, saying, We Will not be wiser then all men, but follow our
Teachers. Well, says the Soul that is indeed at a strait, Go they as they
will, yet I must go this way; there is a press within, I know not what shall
become of me; and it is time now to look out: if neither Father nor Brother, if
none in the World will join with me, yet I must go to Zion: Alas, I am at a
strait! Alas, what shall become of me in the latter end! This strait will
surely come upon your spirits, and run through all enjoyments; your eating and
drinking, and buying and selling, nothing shall give you rest: And were you
indeed here, you would not stay for company; you would look out for bread to
eat, were you ready to starve. And who ever is thus pressed on through all, to
build this Ark, he condemns the World, who all sit down at ease: And thus that
world in us is condemned by that restless spirit of Truth, that is always
reaching, and crying, and pressing forward.

4. This condemns the World, That Noah builds an Ark, a whole Ark, not a piece
of one: Now the best of the World, how do they sit down contented, if they get
but a broken board or two, or a sorry cock-boat! They think all is safe then:
I, but when the storms come, and the rain beats, where is the Cock-boat then?
Will that secure them, and be a complete shelter? Many are contented with a so
far saving; they are not the same they were, they are not like this Publican:
they have escaped some of the pollutions of the world through lust, and this
they judge enough: Now, Soul, take thine case: No, but this will not do: What if
a people be saved out of Egypt, and yet perish in the Wilderness? And if there
be a saving through the red Sea, yet if the Soul enter not into Canaan, if it
fall short of Salvation, if it be not saved to the utmost; what will come of
all? Men preach much against Papists, for holding there can be no perfect
Assurance in this Life; but the best Faith is Doubting: And in effect our
Divines all hold the same Doctrine; They say, that in the best there may be
fears and doubtings concerning their conditions in times of desertion and
trials: But it is not so; for had they ever been saved to the utmost, they
should never doubt that work more. If the condition be indeed once made sure,
it is so without all doubts and scruples; it is clear and unquestionable, and
can never be shaken in that point more; The gates of Hell cannot prevail
against it. And this sure and unmovable work of Truth is that which will
condemn the World: If the Lord count you worthy to be the people to rest no
where short, till the Ark be completely built, and a sure condition of life
attained; [not to settle on flashes, nor true stirrings of spirit, nor
operations; not to rest in a half Salvation, but to be saved throughout, to the
utmost;] That will judge and condemn the World. You may go far, and be mighty in
show, get a high nest, and reach to the clouds; but Lucifer must come from his
Throne, and go down to the Pit: God says of Ishmael, He shall be great also;
He shall beget twelve Princes: [This flesh brings forth great and high births,]
but yet it shall not be heir with Isaac; it shall not enter and inherit Life:
Though it may fare deliciously, and be clothed in scarlet, yet a time of dying
comes, and then this rich man is found in Hell. How many servants in my Fathers
house (says the Prodigal) have bread enough, and to spare? I, but the
Inheritance is not their own: The servant abides not in the house for ever.
Therefore, what shall I say to warn you? As the Martyr (Bishop Latimer) said,
being to preach from those words, Beware of Covetousness; If I should do
nothing but repeat over this Text an hour together, it were preaching enough
(said he) to them that could hear: So if whole days and weeks I should only
warn you of this; Take heed, be sure you sit no where short of the mountain;
rest no where till you have an Ark built, a safe condition to stick to in all
storms: All this warning would be little enough to warn you.

Thus I have spoke something of the Effects following upon Noah's building the
Ark: 1. He saves his house: 2. Condemns the World thereby. And I told you he
condemned it in seven Particulars, four of which I have spoke to; the other are
yet behind. 1. He condemned the World, in taking Gods Word and being warned:
The wise man foresees an evil, and hides himself: but this carnal, sensual, and
devilish spirit, this World in us, and out of us, will never be warned, till it
be destroyed. 2. He believes concerning things not seen; He disputes not with
flesh and blood, as all the World do: Even children can plead, Alas, I am
young and childish, what can be expected from me? The strong plead, Why, no
need of such haste, I may live long. And others plead, 'Sure God is not so
extreme; He is merciful, and will pass by failings: And thus all the World
shift it off till the Deluge come. And how hardly has it gone with some of the
people of God because of this lingering and disputing spirit! Moses reasons and
reasons, till the anger is kindled against him; and Lot lingers in Sodom till
he is almost in the burning: and thus dangerously have we ventured to dispute
and reason, till our Day may be over; and then woe to us! 3. He begins this work
alone, though there be not one to join with him in it: and the Soul that is
truly sensible of its want, and is indeed at a strait, That must look out for
help: if none will go with it, to cry for a certainty, What shall become of
them? yet that must; That must have bread, or it starves. So the blind man, he
cries and cries after Christ, and rebuke him who will, yet there is no stopping
of his mouth till the cry be answered. And this condemns the World; they are
for company, they follow the wise and learned, go with the multitude; but
alas, it never was, that the great ones and wise ones of the World were the
Followers of Christ! not whole Colleges and Congregations; No: The Prophets of
Balaam are four hundred and fifty, they go by Troops; but only one poor
despised Micaiah for the Lord, and he never prophesied good to Ahab, but evil;
This true Spirit is the Troubler of the World, and judges them: nothings and
vanities will content them, but this cries for substance, for bread indeed; it
looks after an Ark, a certain condition, and nothing less will serve it. 4. He
condemns the World, in that he builds a complete Ark, [ceases not till the work
of Salvation be gone through with, and finished;] till the Soul be conformed to
the Death of Christ, and to the Resurrection of Christ, and to the Ascension of
Christ; till the Soul be brought to know the heart and counsels of God
concerning it. Now the World are contented with halves, with piece-meals, with
some broken scraps belonging to Salvation, but have not the thing it self, are
not saved to the utmost: They cry for Parts, and Light into Scriptures, and
enlargements, and peace of Conscience, and ease; and they have their penny they
agreed for, God gives it them; but this will not satisfy the Noah's, [nothing
but an Ark.]

5. This condemns the World, That Noah builds an Ark, and pitcheth it within
and without; a sure shelter, that not the least water can soak into it. Now as
all the World, and all their Ministers can never reach to this, but some
crevise is open, some flaw sticks to the best conditions, where questionings
and doubtings will get in, do what they can: And this cuts them to the heart,
That no other condition should be approved of, and pass for good and safe, but
that which is thus pitched within and without; That which will stand in the
fire, and live in the water; That which nothing can shake. But so far as the
Salvation has wrought a work indeed, the Soul can say with David, Though the
Earth be moved, and the Mountains cast into the midst of the Sea, yet in this
will I be confident, etc. So far as I am saved, I am saved: Death, where is thy
sting? Hell, where is thy victory? This condemns and judges the World, That this
Ark takes in no water; That there should be no staggering in the Soul, but like
Mount Zion, which cannot be moved: Will thou still hold thine integrity? (said
that cursed Wife:) I, says Job, till I dye, I will not give up my integrity.
But the man (be he who he will, be he never so wise, bold, and resolute to
carry it out) who has not this Assurance by a sure and tried work in his Soul
(I dare lay down my life for it) there are times of staggerings and doubtings
within, calling his condition in question, do what he can. Let him nail his god
never so fast, yet Dagon must fall before the Ark; some searching word of Truth
will get in between the joints of the closest armor, and pierce their
confidence, do what they can.

6. Noah condemns the World in this, That though he be safe in the Ark, and
has attained a sure refuge from the Flood, yet this satisfies him not; he is
not at rest yet, but sends forth the Dove to enquire about the abatement of the
waters. There is a condition beyond a sure and safe condition; when Christ
himself (the Savior) is to deliver up the Kingdom to the Father; when He
promises to pray the Father to send them ANOTHER COMFORTER, the Spirit of
Truth, to abide with them for ever: And this is that Dove, which the Soul can
now send forth to carry out its requests to God, and bring tidings from him:
And this is that which condemns the World, That they have no such intercourse
with God; they have no such Spirit given, to make their requests known by:
Though they may cut themselves, and cry aloud, O Baal save us! yet no Answer
comes: there is not this Dove which Noah sends forth, that can bring an Olive
branch of Peace in its mouth, and give a sure intelligence that the waters are
abated, [that the wrath is ceased.]

7. He condemns the World by the real work of saving his house; He prepared an
Ark to that purpose, to save his house; and it did the thing intended, He did
save them: And this judges all the World, who though they build much, yet they
save none; The wall and the dawber fall together: They flee from their sheep
when the Wolf comes, and leave their eggs in the dust like the Ostrich: But
Noah did the thing, he did save his house; He left them not in the mid way,
till he brings them into the Ark: He travels, and is pained in Soul, till
Christ be formed in them: This is that Interpreter, one of a thousand, that can
show to man his righteousness, and never leaves till that be done; and this
condemns the World: That sensual and devilish part will never endure thus to
stick to the work, to cleave to a people, through all gainsayings, opposings
and ill requitals. Many can preach, so long as they may have honor, and gain,
and be well thought of; but now take away their Money, or cross their Wills,
let them be despised and dishonored, and they can presently be gone, and leave
their people, and rid their hands of trouble: so that they will stick to none
farther then they can serve themselves, and their own ends; and thus nothing
comes of their preaching: They bring their people to nothing in the conclusion.
I have known some Ministers my self, that have been preaching these thirty
years, and not a man converted by them: What a miserable case is this! But
alas, they were never taught themselves, and how can they teach others? But
the Noah's they have a charge given them over their people, they cannot get from
them so easily: You shall not see my face unless your youngest Brother be with
you, (said Joseph:) They must not leave a hoof behind that belongs to Israel.
Such a charge as this is laid upon me concerning some of your Souls, That if
you fall short, I shall bear the blame for ever: The blood will be required at
my hand, if I deal not faithfully, and bring you home, if you are not saved to
the utmost. But the encouragement to me, is, That some have gone through this
work: Noah did save his house, his labor was not in vain; and the Promise to
Christ is, He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied. Noah is
rewarded for his many years labor, He saves his house: And if the Lord would
please (after all my twenty years Travel and Preaching) but to give me a People
that might indeed build this Ark, and attain to a sure knowledge of their
Eternal Condition, That they shall LIVE FOR EVER; It would requite me for all:
if some of you might come forth thus to be Judges of the World, and build such
an Ark of Truth, as that all the Dagons, and Idol-worships of the World, must
fall before it.

III. The third Effect that follows this building of the Ark, is this; He
became an Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. And about this, three
things may be considered.

1. What is this Inheritance?
It is a very large Inheritance; it is to enjoy the Lord, to be joined and made
one Spirit with him; The Lord is my portion (says David:) [The Lord is my lot,
my refuge, the lifter up of my head;] This is a wonderful large Inheritance!
Great is the Portion of his People: Thus shall it be done to the man whom he
delights to honor; He shall have an Inheritance in Light, an Inheritance
incorruptible, and that fades not away; no altering of it: When I awake, I am
still with thee, (says David:) His Inheritance abides sure to him. Many have a
great Portion to look on, they have a great stock of Peace, and Knowledge, and
Hopes, and Confidence; I, but a worm eats through the Gourd in a night; Riches
make them wings and flee away: Thus is the hope of the Hypocrite; His house
falls when he comes to lean on it: His great bulk of confidence is but a heap
of chaff, which the wind soon blows away: But David could say, The Lord is my
Portion; I have enough: The Lord lives, and blessed be the Rock of my Salvation.

2. What is it to be an Heir?
To be an Heir, is to be born with a right and title to an Inheritance; to have
an Estate fall to one by right, so that it cannot be cut off; it can neither be
sold nor given away from the Heir: Now this is wonderful, To be born with such
a right and title to Eternal Life, such a near Interest in the Lord, that
nothing can separate from him; neither tribulation, nor sufferings, nor life,
nor death, things present, nor things to come: None can pluck them out of my
Fathers hand (says Christ:) This is wonderful!

3. How came Noah to this Inheritance?
He became Heir of the Righteousness which is by FAITH: He came to it by
believing; That is the way how this Portion is made over to all the Noah's, even
by Faith: Though it belongs to them before, yet they enjoy but as they receive;
and they receive as they believe: Be it unto thee according to thy Faith. They
begin but with a little flock, a little believing; O ye of little Faith! (says
Christ;) but a small grain of mustard seed: A little Faith to set up with, and
that too of things not yet seen, things out of sight, out of hand: and yet, by
improving this little, how does it grow and grow, and spread to a large Tree?
What increase comes of it? It leaves not growing, till it brings up the Soul,
and joins it in, to God himself; till Noah is made an Heir of Righteousness:
And therefore, O Lord, that you were but brought to stick to this small
beginning! to believe the word of Prophecy which is gone forth concerning you!
How might it grow and increase to a mighty and large Portion?

I have thus spoke many and great things to you from these words; but the Sum
of all has been to this purpose:

1. To show, how short you yet are; where you lie and stick in the mire, and
have no Ark to receive you; know not what shall become of you in the latter end.

2. That your Souls might be put to a strait, to look after such an Ark as Noah
prepared; such an Assurance and Security as may hold out in a Deluge; such a
sure, certain, and unquestionable estate, as may stand in all storms, and judge
all the false ways and rotten shelters of the World. And now, if the Lord seize
not the thing upon your hearts, but it slip off like water (as many words do)
then I know you will have no peace in your own consciences, and you will never
be Judges of the World, nor come to Honor: Noah was moved with Fear to the
building of an Ark; but now if that will not do it, if Fear move not; yet, Will
not such an Inheritance, such a security move you, as may be attained to? There
is a sure place, there is a Rest, there is a way of Wisdom, which no fowl has
seen, where no ravenous beast destroys, which nothing can reach nor disturb;
The Lord seize it home upon your hearts to consider it.

THE Chosen generation AND ROYAL PRIESTHOOD, WITH THEIR True Marks and
Characters. SERMON. IX. May 11. 1651.
1 PET. 2.9. But ye are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation,
a Peculiar People, that ye should show forth the Praises of Him, who has
called you out of Darkness into his marvelous Light.
The Analysis.
I. A CHOSEN GENERATION: At first all lay in one lump, till the choice made by
God. In choosing seven things considered.

1. Men weigh and consider before they choose; so God pitched on a people to be
his with deliberation and advice, not at random. 2. Men affect what they
choose, what ever the thing be in it self: so the Lord set his love upon a
people, delighted in his portion. 3. Men separate and take out of other things
what they choose: so God pulls the Brand out of burning, takes His out of all
the World. 4. In choosing, that which is chosen has no hand at all: so God
chose his people freely, nothing in them to move him. 5. Things chosen are set
apart for some special use: so the Lord had an End, an use intended for the
vessels of honor. 6. Men promise themselves something in the things they
choose: so God expects fruit from his Vine, [Love and entertainment from his
Chosen.] 7. Men have a special eye and care of things they choose: so Gods Eye
is after his Chosen in all Trials and Sorrows.
II. A ROYAL PRIESTHOOD, of the royal race, sprung from the Lord himself, of
that stock. Whence three things considered.

1. They have an Interest in God; can go to a Father, not a Judge. 2. Hence
great boldness to go to God; fear and shame are cast out. 3. Hence they prevail
in what ever they ask according to his Will.
All was brought home to Particulars: And lest all thrust in, seven Notes were
laid down to distinguish this Chosen Generation.

1. A certain close in their Souls to Truth only; no shadows can deceive them.
2. A certain weariness always upon them, giving no rest in all enjoyments; A
want still. 3. God is ever their utmost thing: All others are content with
Parts and Gifts, etc. 4. This Spirit presses on to the highest and most single
way, though never so sharp to it. 5. This Generation have secret hintings
spring at times, That they belong to God. 6. In greatest falls and sins no
hintings, as if utterly cut off because of sin. 7. A witness always in their
Souls, That when ever they have a heart to return, they shall be received: The
Father stands ready to receive the Prodigal; He waits to be gracious: this Hope
ever speaks; not thus with the Cains, or those that belong not to God.
1 PET. 2.9. But ye are a Chosen Generation, etc.
GO round about Zion; tell her Towers: Mark ye well her Bulwarks, that ye may
tell it to the generation following: For this God is our God for ever and ever;
He will be our Guide unto Death, Psalm. 48.12. And again, The Lord has chosen
Zion. And again, He will surely hear the afflictions of the afflicted, and
answer their cry. Though they may now seem forsaken and forgotten, though
abjects and outcasts in the eyes of the World, (disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God and precious.) So was it with our Lord and Master; and so will it
be with all them, on whom the Father has set his Love in like manner: However
the World may look on them, or they judge of themselves; yet in the Eye of God
it is thus, Ye are a chosen Generation, etc.

Now there is great need to distinguish between things and things, that the
Trumpet may give a certain sound who are this chosen People that are thus
beloved; for it belongs not to all men: I came not but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Many widows were in Israel, but only to one poor widow of
Sarepta was Elijah sent: And it is not meet (says Christ) to take the
childrens bread and give it to the dogs: Some are dogs as some are children;
and Peter tells Simon Magus plainly, Thou have neither lot nor part in this
matter. Lest every one should thrust in, there are bounds set; not All, but YE
are a chosen Generation: Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter: Not
every one that comes, and hears, and sits in the house among the children, is
of this chosen Generation, of that blessed seed; No, but in Isaac shall thy
seed be blessed. Ishmael, though he may live in the House, yet He must not be
Heir with Isaac: There are many flourishing Plants in the world that grow and
thrive apace: I, but every Plant that my Heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up. The King will overlook all his guests, and then, Friend,
how came thou hither? will light on all that have not the wedding garment on:
However we may strive to pull in Husbands and children, and other relations
(according to our selfish wills) yet alas, That will not stand! That will not
make any, who are not, to be this chosen Generation. It is not whom man
approves, but whom the Lord approves.

It was once so, That all lay in the confused Chaos together, in one lump, like
the Potters clay, and then there was no difference at all; none could say, This
is accepted, or this rejected; this is Jacob, or this Esau; this a vessel of
honor, That of dishonor; till the Potter has separated and distinguished his
clay to several purposes; and then was the Portion of the Nations divided, and
then the Lords People became his portion: Then this chosen Generation had their
first Being, and were both from the womb of the morning.

Now in choosing, these several things are considerable.

1. Before a man chooses any thing, he weighs well, and considers, and
overlooks it in his mind; He weighs all the flaws and all the perfections in
it, that he may know what he chooses, and not do it hoodwinked: So the Lord
was pleased to weigh all his creatures; When he divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, and separated the sons of Adam, then he said, Jacob is my portion:
He knew what he did, how he would prove; as God says, I knew thou would have
iron sinews, and a brazen brow: He thoroughly considered what he did, took in
all faults and provocations that should ever spring from them; and yet he
pitches on this chosen generation; and yet Jacob is the lot of his Inheritance.
Hence it is there are no repentings in God, because the thing was thoroughly
weighed: We often repent because of our heady rushing upon this, and the other;
but God is not as man, He made his choice with full advice and counsel: Hence
it is, The gifts and calling of God are without repentance; And, In him is no
variableness, nor shadow of change: because all his works were done in counsel,
therefore they stand fast for ever and ever: And therefore (says David) Walk
about Zion; Mark well her Towers, etc. Consider her strength, [the sure
unmovable Rock she stands upon;] For this God is our God for ever and ever; He
will be our Guide unto Death. This God is Zions God, that has done things at a
certainty (not at hazard,) that will be a Guide unto Death; that will never
leave nor forsake: The bottom and ground is certain, and it is expressed thus in
the Proverbs; That I may make thee understand the words of Certainty. This
choice of God is a certain, unfailable, unchangeable choice: This will seem
wonderful when you shall come to consider it, and the thing sink to your
hearts: Were thou once in the same lump with the reprobate silver? Was Esau
Jacobs Brother, and Jacob loved, and Esau hated? How comes this thing about?
What means this favor? What manner of Love is this? O Lord, if it did but sink
into your Souls, what a thing is it to be chosen of God! Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in
his riches: This is not the thing which puts the difference. And (so Christ to
his Disciples,) Rejoice not that Devils are subject to you; That is not your
Happiness: No; but that your names are written in Heaven; that you are of this
chosen generation; that God pitched upon you: what ever you are, rejoice in
that. Samuel he looks upon Eliah because of his stature and goodly personage,
as if sure he was the Lords anointed: No, but says God, not He; but it is the
stripling, the little youth in the field, the youngest and unthought of, David,
he is the man. He saves not the whole, the honorable and learned, the Scribes
and Pharisees; but Ought not this Daughter of Abraham to be loosed, whom Satan
has bound, lo these eighteen years? She must be loosed because a Daughter of
Abraham, [of that stock,] how ever mean and base in the eyes of man; for God
sees not as man sees: He picks where he pleases, one of a City, and two of a
Tribe: Though Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant shall be
saved. Though there be threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, yet My
Beloved is but one, etc. That he should let thousands and ten thousands go, and
yet pitch on me; this will be wonderful to us, when we shall see into it!

2. A man affects the thing he chooses; his heart goes after it more then that
which he lets alone: And therefore Moses said to Israel, The Lord chose you not
because you were better, or more in number, then other people; but because He
favored you, and set his Love upon you. And in Jeremy he says, I have loved
thee of old with an everlasting Love; and when thou wast in thy blood, (one
would think that a strange time to love in,) yet then was thy time the time of
Love: Though there was no cause, yet he loves: Even so, O Father (says
Christ,) for so it pleased thee. Two in a womb, two in a mill, two in the same
condition, and the one taken, and the other left: To be left is enough, there
is need of no more reprobation then that: If a man be but left, and not daily
maintained, kept up, and preserved, he will corrupt of himself, and run
naturally to destruction: There is no need of a cursing or destroying any
Creature, but he is pleased to leave some, and that is enough: They naturally
tend and fall into the curse, and bring it on their own heads, if a preventer
step not in: and therefore that is not first concluded in God concerning any,
This is a damned wretch, whom I hate and detest; No: his damnation is of
himself; he procures his own curse: and if he be but left, if not held up, and
hedged in, and kept alive, he cannot but dye. No man can keep alive his own
Soul. The Branch if it be left without Sap from the root must needs dye. If the
Lord has not chosen nor set his love upon any, that is destruction enough,
that creature will sure enough run thither; therefore see, how Esau first sells
his birthright, then loses his Blessing, and one misery follows another, till
he be quite ruined: and therefore the choosing, the setting his heart upon any,
that is the thing which saves. (If God say) as Sampson did concerning Delilah,
Give me her, for she pleases me; be she what she will, yet she pleases me: so
Christ says of the Spouse, Thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes:
that is the thing, to be beloved, to find favor in his eyes. Love will bear
all things, Love is as strong as death, Love will save to the utmost, and this
Lot fal's on some. Though Esther be an unlikely maiden, one of another Country,
of mean degree; yet she pleased the King, and obtained kindness of him, Chap.
2.9. and verse. 17. and the King loved Esther above all the women, and she
obtained grace and favor in his sight, and this is the thing that brings the
Crown to her, be she what she will, Thou art fair my Love, my undefiled. Though
she complains, I am black; yet he loves her, and Love sees no faults, she is
comely in his eye, this is the portion of the chosen Generation.

3. What a man chooses to himself, He takes it out from other things, he
gathers it near to himself: Thus is it with God, He pulls the Brand out of the
burning; He takes the Poor out of the Dunghill, leaves them not there; and this
is a sure token of choosing indeed, where he leaves not a man or woman in their
darkness, in their bonds, in their snares, but pulls them out, separates the
Wheat from the chaff; who has translated us out of darkness into the Kingdom
of his dear Son, and in the Revelation it is said, they were redeemed to God
from amongst men, and Christ says, because I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you: He takes his chosen ones, out of their chains,
out of their filth, out of a perishing condition, cuts them off from the old
stock. That which he intends for a vessel of honor, he takes it out of the
Lump, he leaves not his own in the same Lump with the rude world. Now this is
the great thing to be considered, whether you are yet thus pulled out? has he
made thee indeed to differ from the rude world? art thou pulled out of the old
Kingdom of Satan, where the whole world dwell in wickedness, though in
several ranks, forms and degrees, yet in the same Kingdom still, not a new
Creation made, but this will make it appear, he chooses thee, if thou can
say with David, He plucked my feet out of the Snare, he brought me up from the
nethermost Hell: and says Jonah yet have thou brought up my life from
corruption O Lord, my God, that is his Salvation; there it appears, God is God.
We would vainly promise our selves, (as the whole world do) to be saved by his
love only, and so quietly pass our Lives in our own wills here, and go to
Heaven when we die; but alas, if ever saved, we must be taken out of the
condition we stick in. Come out from amongst them my people that ye partake not
of her Plagues. Many have great words, and great knowledge and light, I, but
they are not yet translated out of the old Kingdom, they remain still on the
same stock, but things that are chosen, are taken out of the midst of other
things, and therefore Moses speaks to Israel, Was ever such a thing known, as
that God should go to take to himself a people out of the midst of another
people, by great signs and wonders? etc. to take out of Snares and Bonds and
Intanglements? for God to say, Come out of all, and be you clean, and be my
people, and I will be your God? I shall inquire of you, are you thus chosen?
are you pulled out of darkness, and out of death, and joined to all the living?
Though in never so mean a place, nenever so despised an outcast, though but a
living dog, yet if living, if taken out of death, and planted into a new Life,
that is the thing: If there be that seed of Life, it will ever be stirring and
moving, and bending (like the Needle touched with the Loadstone, set it where
you will, it can never rest until it come into its right place) till the Soul
be brought to God. Now there is a restless spirit in the Cains, and lost ones,
but that is only out of Torment, the worm that never dies, and this restless
spirit never moves toward God, but runs from him: but to this Center the
spirit of life ever tends, to come from, and out of, all things unto God, etc.

4. Things that are chosen have no hand in their own choice, All that befalls
this Chosen Generation is of mercy and free goodness: who made thee to differ?
nothing they could do, could ever make a difference; but the Case stands thus,
Two things lie together, and a man passing by, takes one and lets the other
lie: the things have no hand in it; so is it in this choice of God, all is done
according to the pleasure of his own will: see and read as you go, that you may
have nothing to glory and boast in, nor challenge the least to thy self, as if
he saw some readiness, or activity, or towardliness in thee more then in
others: no, he saw nothing but his own pleasure: if there be any thing good in
thee, he put it there: you have not chosen me (says Christ) but I have chosen
you: This will make it appear free indeed, when you shall be made to see there
is no hand of yours in it, but of his own good will begat he us. No man ever
begun first to seek after God, but, I was found of them that sought me not,
else no Soul would ever be saved: Can a stone move upward? no, nothing can move
to God, but what came from God; none can go to Heaven, but the Son of man,
which came down from Heaven: It is contrary to man, who is born from beneath,
from the Earth, to move upward, his Center is below; unless he be pulled, and
drawn, and born up, and carried upon Eagles wings, he falls to the Earth like a
stone; the natural man cannot please God, he neither will nor can be subject to
the Law of God, and this is, that God may have the glory alone in the work of
Salvation, as he says in Isa. It shall be to me for a name, and for a praise:
That he should save such unlikely ones, and out of stones raise up children to
Abraham, this will seem wonderful: I did not think to have seen the Lord here,
(says Hagar) when she had given up all for lost: this will make the Soul say
indeed, as David does, God alone does all.

5. Things that are chosen are set apart for some special use; a man has some
end in choosing them: so was it with God in this choice, he had a peculiar end
and design to bring about, and he chooses some for that purpose: but why are
not all the world for this use? True, they might have been, had he put in them
the same spirit, had he fitted the vessel to that purpose, but he spends a
great deal of cost and pains upon some, he prepares the Vessel for that very
purpose to put in new wine; Old Bottles would break presently, they were not
intended for that use: You see Saul had of this wine in him, he was among the
Prophets, the spirit of God was upon him, but the Vessel broke, and all ran
out, and was lost: so Judas he was a Preacher, and went in, and out, with
Christ, and had enjoyments and seasons of Truth, but the vessel had holes, and
all was lost, and came to nothing, and therefore it is said of some, that they
make shipwreck of faith, and a good Conscience: All is shattered and broken,
and gone as if it never had been, some are compared to the Corn that grows on
the house top; though it be green and flourishing, yet soon withers and comes
to nothing; It was sown there by some chance, or carried by some fowl, the
Husbandman never intended to have a Crop from thence: so may it be, and has
been, with many that are very green, they have Light and Knowledge, and parts,
and Forwardness, I, but they grow upon the house top, the place was not
intended for that purpose to bear a Crop; the stony ground flourished for a
time, but soon dies for want of root, ye did run well, (says Paul) but they
were left, and soon turned aside, but now whoever is pitched upon by God, and
made a chosen vessel, he is set apart for some end some service: say ye (says
Christ) the Master has need of him; and he speaks to Ananias concerning Paul,
He is a chosen vessel, to carry forth my name: whoever of you are thus chosen,
and picked and gathered by God out of the world, out of relations, and all your
straglings; Do you think God has no end in it? Is it think you, you should
still live to your wills as you did, and walk as other Gentiles? no sure, it
is, that you may do him service, be his, and no more your own.

6. Things that are chosen, men expect more from them, then from other refuse,
they leave behind; A man when he is hungry chooses bread and not a stone, and
he looks for more refreshment, and nourishment from that, then he would from a
stone, God expects not to gather grapes of thorns; he looks not to reap, where
he never sowed, the unjust Servant accused him falsely in that, but if he please
to take advantage he may, he may come in an hour unthought of, as Christ came
to the Fig tree, and cursed it, because no fruit was on it, though it is said,
it was not the time of fruit, it seems strange, but such a Lord is he, if he
will take the advantage, if he will be extreme to mark what is done amiss,
then who may stand? He can (if he please) cast a man into sickness, and
torments of body, or let loose horrors upon his Soul, there is cause and
advantage enough to be taken, if he will make a man an example, a witness of
his power and severity, (for the Gospel has that in it too, it is to be
preached for a witness to all, as well, as for Salvation to some) but now from
his own, his Chosen Generation, He expects somewhat out of Love: If I be a
Father, where is my Honor? he expects fruit from you, he looks for sweet
grapes from his Vine, he expects you should hear (Sure they are my people,
they will be ordered and persuaded, and prevailed with) he expects better
entertainment from them, then from the world, and though it falls out, that
they are the chief of Sinners, and found the most ill requiting of all People,
I, but it is their shame, and their sorrow, and their Sin; he looks for other
fruit; he looks for more, where he trusts with more, where he trusts with
Heavenly Treasure, I said, They are my People, Children that will not lie, and
in all things he expects their moderation that at all times they stand open and
ready to receive him; that always their Lamps be burning, and their Loins
girt, as those that expect their Lords coming, and he is grieved if they
disapoint him, therefore, he complains, The Ox knows his Owner and the Ass his
Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider: This
grieves him to be thus dealt with at their hands.

7. Things that are chosen, are more looked after, and more carefully minded
then other things; they are not laid scattering about, but charily reserved: So
does the Lord deal with his chosen; He takes them into his bosom, hides them
under the shadow of his wings, (Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of his Saints,) and if their Death be precious, if an eye after them then, in
their blood; if the minstration of condemnation be glorious; if there be Love
in that work of bringing to Death; Then how much more Love will be seen in
bringing them again to Life? He says of his Vineyard, that He watches it night
and day: And in the Canticles, My Vineyard, which is mine, is continually
before me: There is no time he watches it not; night and day take in all: In
the Light and in the Darkness, in their sorrows and in their enlargements,
still he watches: whether we sleep or wake, yet the Keeper of Israel neither
slumbers, nor sleeps: If they are sent into captivity, it is for their good,
(there his eye is after them:) If the three children are cast into the furnace,
there is a fourth like the Son of God, He will walk with them there: If Daniel
be cast into the Den of Lions, his God is there to shut the Lions mouths. If
Joseph be sold into Egypt, God goes with him; if he be cast into prison, he is
with him there, and finds favor for him: where ever these chosen go, a special
eye is after them: when they wander from one Nation to another, from one
Kingdom to another People; yet there, He suffers no man to do them harm, but
reproves even Kings for their sakes: Touch not mine anointed etc. His charge is
given out to secure them; a guard is set about them that nothing may harm them:
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, and they shall preserve thee in all
thy ways: This is his care of his chosen, and this is their safety and
happiness. Before I come to make Use of this, I would speak something of the
next words, A Royal Priesthood: This chosen Generation is intended for that, to
be a Royal Priesthood, to offer up Prayers and Praises to God: Hitherto, says
Christ, you have asked nothing in my Name, because as yet they were not brought
to believe the words of Christ: They knew not they were a Chosen Generation,
till at the last, when he was about to leave them, then he says to God, And
these have believed that thou have sent me: There is no coming to your
Priesthood, till you are first brought to know and believe you are a Chosen
Generation.

A ROYAL PRIESTHOOD; Royal,] of the royal Blood, born of God, sprung from that
stock and kindred.

And hence three great Privileges belong to them.

1. They can go to God as those that have an Interest in him; they go as to a
Father, and not as to a Judge: The Promise is to Christ (and so to all the
seed,) He shall say, My Father, My Father; and Christ says to his Disciples,
who were of this Royal Priesthood, when you pray, say, Our Father: All must go
to him as our Lord, and bow before their Judge; but they have an interest in
him, as being of that royal race, sprung out of his own heart and bowels; and
if you had but the knowledge of your interest in this Father, certainly you
could not hold your Peace, you could not be kept off from going and making your
requests known to him: If thou had known (says Christ to the woman) the gift
of God, thou would have asked of him waters of Life. You could not but pray,
and tell him your wants, and griefs, and sorrows: for you may go to him on this
ground, He is my Father. O that you did but know, and weigh, and consider,
whether indeed your lot be fallen in so good a ground! We would be taught to
pray any ways, rather then to pray thus, Our Father; as the Disciples ask of
Christ, Teach us to pray: but how? as John taught his Disciples: Why, how was
that? John could show his Disciples their wants, their misery, their
undoneness; and John could point to the Lamb of God, That this is He which
takes away the sins of the World: [That relief was only to be had and expected
there:] But John could not tell them, This is your portion, God is your Father,
All this is for you: No; This is the witness which Christ is to bear forth,
which is greater then the witness of John; He tells them, It is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: And again, The Father himself loves
you: and therefore he teaches them to pray thus, Our Father. But how long were
they before brought to ask any thing in this name! such a wretched
unwillingness is in the heart of man, indeed to know, or come to its own good.

2. This Royal Priesthood have this Privilege from their interest in God, They
may go freely, and with boldness, to the Throne of Grace; no need of
strangeness or straitness on Gods part: You are not straitened in us (says
Paul) but you are straitened in your own bowels; That is all the cause indeed:
But John was bold, He could say, And truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ; His company was no lower, nor meaner: And it is
said of our fathers, how they walked with God, and were the friends of God:
They had a boldness to go in to him at all times, in all cases of need: when
found Sinners, yet then they can pray, O cleanse my heart; O wash me, and I
shall be whiter then snow. When found ignorant, yet pray still, O grant me
understanding, and I shall live; Teach me in the way that I should walk: O
guide me, and teach me, etc. He is bold to go to God in the worst day, in the
lowest time; yet he has no whither else to betake him: and here the door
stands open always, Come unto me ye that are heavy laden, etc. When his sins go
over his head, as a burden too heavy to bear; yet whither carries he his
burden but to God? Where spreads Hezekiah the Letter, full of railings, and
threatenings, and reproaches, but before the Lord? As children, though they
have never so greatly offended, yet, when all comes to all, have no whither
else to go, but gather home to their Fathers house. Though Absalom had slain
his Brother, and highly offended the King his Father, yet nothing will content
him, unless he may see the Kings face: so nothing can stay the Soul, or keep it
back, though it have dealt never so unkindly with the Lord Christ, though it
has crucified, and killed this Brother: yet it must come in to its Father, and
own its sin, and see the Kings face, and cannot rest, till He smile again, and
take it into favor, that it may be free and bold with Him, as formerly.

3. Another Privilege of this Royal Priesthood, is, That as they have an
Interest in God, and boldness to him; so they are sure to prevail with him in
the things they ask: I know (says Martha to Christ) what ever thou ask of
God, he will give it thee: nothing else will stop the cry of this child; it
will ask and ask till it do prevail: Though called Dog, and put off once and
again, yet she follows on still, and will not leave, till at last she gets this
Answer, O woman, great is thy Faith! Be it unto thee as thou will. There is no
denying this Royal Priesthood the thing they are at a strait for: They will
never from his door till he arise and avenge his Elect. There is a wonderful
sympathy that runs in the worst of times, that cannot give over; but still the
cry is, My God, my God, why has thou forsaken me? All must stoop to the Lord,
the God; but my God still: Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him: And
therefore what need is there, and what great advantage might be to you, to know
you are of this Royal Priesthood, to whom these Privileges belong! That you
might step into the Priests Office, and begin to pray; for He will deny no good
thing to them that love him; or rather (says Paul) that are loved of him.
Though the Lions may want, and suffer hunger; though the great and high ones of
the World may come to straits, and cry and cry, and no Baal will answer them;
yet Elijah is heard: The Lord deals not so with this Royal Priesthood; He will
deny them no manner of good thing.

Now, if it were the Lords Will, I desire that I might interpret the riddle to
you, that you might read the Parable, and be your own witnesses, That God is in
you of a Truth. I have told you, you are a Chosen Generation, and are to be a
Royal Priesthood; and how ever there be in us a strange unnatural warring
against it, yet (as Christ says) It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom: He has pleased to tie himself in such a bond of neerness, as
nothing can separate. But I would yet come nearer and closer to you, that you
may know more clearly how to judge of the matter, and see the bounds of
distinction that are set between this chosen generation and all other
whatsoever: For as it is certain the Hypocrite will never be without Hope, say
and do what you can; yet he will scramble and steal something to lean on and
trust to: So the sons of God are as much on the other hand; it is as hard to
pull and draw them up to believe and hope, as to keep the others back: They
must be overpowered to it; They requite sign upon sign, and witness upon
witness, before they will be satisfied: And therefore ^ohn says concerning
some, I write unto you that have BELIEVED, that you may know you BELIEVE, etc.
But how shall we know this Chosen Generation?

I shall propose these seven Characters to you to consider.

1. In this Chosen Generation, there is a certain natural instinct of a close,
when ever God and the Truth sown in their Souls come to meet: when they come
but near one another, there is a natural turning, and cleaving together: The
Loadstone and the Iron never meet, but they close and feel one another, and
gather nearer and nearer. Now examine if it be not thus with you, where ever
you meet with a living breath from the Lord, does it not touch something in
you? Does it not turn and strike the heart? and cause a strange natural close
in your spirits? When Christ put but his finger in at the hole of the door, the
Spouses bowels were turned presently; It Is not so to other Lovers. The
Loadstone will not cleave to all metals, nor to wood and straws, though you
gild them never so fairly. Now all the rest of the World are taken here; They
all wonder after the Beast, when it has any likeness of the Lamb upon it; they
cannot know Wolves in sheeps clothing: They take down all good words, and
earnest desires, and hope, and love, and zeal, that speaks for God: They are
taken with shadows and pictures, and cannot distinguish between words and
words, voice and voice; Their gods have no breath pass through their throat;
they live not, to discern, and distinguish, and divide between things and
things; all that has the same shadow, to them passes for the same thing: but
my sheep know my voice (says Christ;) That touches them, and the voice of
strangers they will not hear: Where this chosen Generation is, there is a
certain distinguishing, relish, and taste; Does not my ear taste words (says
Job?) Nothing will please nor take this Truth (wherever it is sown in any) but
its own kind, and there it naturally cleaves and closes.

2. You shall know this Chosen Generation by this, They can find no rest for
the sole of their foot, no place where to lay their head: Though they run, and
hunt never so about and about for ease and rest, yet they can find none; They
are certainly disappointed and wearyed out of all things: All they come near
cries out to them (as the Lepers of old) unclean, unclean; Come not to me, I
cannot satisfy: The Earth says, It is not in me; and the Sea, It is not in me:
They can sit down no where, but the stool is pulled from under them, and they
hasted up to their journey, Up Elijah, why fittest thou here? Every thing their
hearts would pitch on, is made either too hot, or too heavy, for them to carry;
either we cannot carry our lusts, they have so much lumber and luggage belong
to them; or else they are too hot, and burn our hands; the thorns are too
sharp: it is too hard to kick against the pricks: Therefore I have often said,
of all people in the World, it is in vain for those that belong to God to go
about to please themselves in any lust; for they shall be sure to be hunted
out. Others may enjoy their wills, and sit down in sin, and take content in the
Creatures; their eyes may swell with fatness, they may have their hearts
desire: I, but the David's may not: I am chastened every morning, and plagued
every moment: They have no rest in this World, but are always like strangers
and Pilgrims; though weary and tired, yet alas! they must not take up till
they come home! All grows wearisom and tiresom to their Souls; nothing can
ease, nothing quiet, nothing satisfy nor fill up their want, no pleasure, nor
enjoyment: If I say, My Bed shall comfort me, yet there he is met with, and
affrighted: If I go up to Heaven, or down to Hell, or fly to the utmost parts
of the Earth; yet no where can he sit down for ease, but this spirit finds him
out; he can find rest and satisfaction no where. Job hunts through all places,
and searches the perfections of the choycest Creatures; he finds the place of
Gold, and a place for Silver, a place for Pearls and Treasures; but yet all
this is too short for the want: where is the place of Wisdom still? He had
tried all things, and yet finds them wanting: Now many through idleness sit
still, and will not take the pains to hunt thus; they will not try whether the
Creatures can content them or not: but (says David) I have seen an end of all
perfections; I see that all things come to an end: When all means, and ways,
and plots are proved out to the utmost, yet then the Soul is weary of all its
labors, and cries out, Ye are all Physicians of no value, you cannot help me.

3. By this you shall know the Chosen Generation; God is their utmost, their
utmost Hope, utmost Proposal, the utmost thing of all his People: but he is not
the utmost of others; they follow Christ but for loaves: some base selfish
thing or other is their highest: If they may have but what their hearts run
after, they could sit short of God well enough: Give them ease, give them peace
of Conscience, give them Knowledge, and great enlargements of spirit, and they
have enough; This contents them. I, but this Chosen Generation, give them what
you will, nor Gifts, nor Parts, nor Enjoyments of the World, nor enlargements
of Truth, no not Heaven it self; to be saved would not be enough to them: but
God is the utmost thing, the Center to which their Souls tend: To see the Kings
face is their desire; else what will their lives avail? And this I would
propose to you, Whether ever any thing thou mettest with in all thy life was
enough to thee? whether it was the utmost thing? That thy Soul could sit down
in? No, sure I am, nothing can stop the cry of this Elect; It cries night and
day: when straitened, and when enlarged, still it cries. When Jacob had
wrastled all the night with God, and now he says to him, Let me go, for the day
breaks; Is not that enough? Will not the day [the light] content thee? to know,
and see, and be enlarged? No, it will not: I will not let thee go unless thou
bless me: He wanted a farther blessing yet. I would have you weigh the thing in
your own Souls, whether it be thus or no with you? and do not always stagger;
be not faithless, but believe.

4. This is another sign of this Chosen Generation, it always gathers and
cleaves closest to them that are most excellent: All my delight (says David)
is with the Saints, and them that excel in virtue: It chooses to come up to
the foremost, to the worthies of Israel: Now others drozel away their time
without any such aspiring desires: If they might but come to Heaven, and be
saved at last, That were enough to them: They are not pressing on to the utmost
mark, where the bullets are thickest, and the battle hottest, as this chosen
generation do, according to that right mind that is planted in them: They long
with Moses, if possible, that they may go over this Jordan; they are ever
crying out of their shortness: Jacob (though Pharaoh reckon him an old man,)
yet he complains his days were few and evil, and that he had not reached the
age of his fathers in their generations: I, but he would have reached the
greatest attainment; That which is of this stock presses to the utmost mark,
prizeth that Truth, that friend, that deals most plainly, nakedly, and exactly
with it; it chooses the wounds of a friend, and goes where the sword cuts
sharpest: This cannot the Hypocrite ever endure.

5. This Chosen Generation have often still and secret hintings speaking within
them, That they indeed are of this stock, that they do belong to God, how ever
they are stopping the ear, and putting it off. Now the children of Hell they
hunt and seek for such a voice, that they may be cozened and deluded; and the
Devil he speaks peace to them, and they are given up to believe a lie: but the
Children of God are followed and followed with such a secret whispering in
their Souls, that rises up without their pumping; nay, when they run from it,
it speaks, Surely they are my people, they are my chosen; I will be their God:
Now either we are not sober, and so listen not to hear this voice, or else we
wilfully stop the ear, and run from it, (for such a base temper is in man
against his own good;) or else through ignorance the Soul runs wrong when it
does hear; it goes to Eli, as Samuel did; it runs to this, and the other thing,
to know the meaning of it, because, as yet, it is said, Samuel knew not the
Lord; but the time comes the Lord will go on, and call, Samuel, Samuel; so
long, till all the chosen of God, that are called according to purpose, shall
be made to hear, and own it distinctly, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears.

6. This chosen Generation, in their greatest transgressions, and iniquities
when most guilty, and left to themselves, yet never find such a witness
speaking in them, that they shall be cut off utterly for it* Now to all the
Cains, he will peak destruction for that very cause, a fugitive and a vagabond
shall thou be, because thou have killed thy brother, and his blood cries to me:
therefore, thou art cursed, etc. but to his own he speaks no such thing, he
shows them not their sin to destroy them, nor drive them from him, he has a
care of that in all his rebukes: So when Nathan was sent to show David his
great sin of Adultery, and murder, before he had well finished his charge,
lest such a thought should seize on him, as if God would utterly cut him off*
He adds, (2 Samuel 12.13.) The Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall not dye:
He never says that word to the Soul of any of his own, Iniquity shall be your
ruin; that sin shall utterly separate, (no says Paul) nothing shall be able
to separate, nothing, not Principalities nor Powers of Hell, not the heights or
depths of Sin, nothing shall separate from that love of God, to whom that
portion belongs: Now mind and consider, and attend, whither all along your
Journey you find not such Leadings in your spirits, as these I speak off.

7. You shall know this Generation by this, whenever there is a heart in them
to return, there is a heart in God to receive: He stands open and ready at all
times, there are such breathings in the souls of his people, that witness this
for him, and can set to their Seals, that God is true in this particular: that
he is always open hearted, and waits to be gracious; Mind whether it be not
thus with you, when ever your souls are in a sober frame, and you can speak
truly, and not (as Job says) the words of a man that is desperate, which are
as wind, when ever you are your selves (I say) and sober; see if there be not
ever such hints, speaking in you, that God is ready continually; he waits to
receive, whenever you will come. At what time soever a sinner repents, etc.
And if thou will return, O Israel, return to me: as if he should say, Go to no
other: if thou will return, here is a heart open; I am ready for thee: Return
to me, O Israel. Now let none get up the words and shadow of this, that have
not the substance; that idol will ^ot stand, though never so often raised and
held up by force, yet it will down: but you who are indeed the chosen of God,
and loved of him; if I shall ever live to see you brought out and delivered,
you will know what I have said, and be my witnesses, how these leadings, have
been all along your days with you; However at the present it be the weak time
with you, and hour and power of darkness, when fears, and jealousies,
confusions, and doubtings have their time to rule. I, but what says the Spirit
still? What speaks that seed of life? Are not these stirring within? Is there
not an invisible and strange close in thy soul, when God and the Truth in thee
meet? When Joseph and Benjamin meet, what a kiss is there, and turning of
Bowels! Then again, do thou not find that all creatures are too short, all
is weary to thee, no rest or content to be had there; but there is a pressing
on through all to the utmost point, to God himself, thy life and Portion? Is it
not thus? And so for all the other Characters, are not these things so?

Now if you have heard and believed this, You can surely witness to it. He that
believes, sets to his seal that God is true: and till you shall set to your
seals and believe this, That you are this chosen Generation, and your souls
stand settled in it; till then you can never enter into the Priests office, to
go to God with boldness, to go in all straights; no, we cannot go with that
weak Prayer, Lord I believe, help my unbelief, till somewhat of this Faith be
risen up, and stuck to by us. Why do we put it off any longer? Why are not we
now battered? Why not this night? What hinders? If ever we begin, we must begin
with this little grain, though there be but a dim seeing, but a half eye open.
Yet the star must be followed, if ever we will come to Christ; and the promise
is, The eyes of them that see shall not be dim. Now it is a dim seeing indeed,
now we see but darkly; but however, if we did but stick to this dark seeing,
then we might go and pray for a farther light, that it may grow cleerer and
cleerer to the perfect day. But why are we so loath to believe that this good is
intended us? It is a wonderful unnatural thing in us. But well; (as Peter
says) the long sufferance of God is salvation. Shall nothing hinder? No
gainsayings, nor longings; but the long-sufferance will stand and knock, and
wait out all, till it be our salvation? This will one day be prized. There is a
chosen Generation amongst you, that is certain: Now do you hear it? Do you
believe it? When will you open the Door, and lay down all weapons, and say,
Well; I will never speak against the Lord more. But (say with Job) what I know
not, teach thou me. It is sure you have been the bush in which the Lord has
appeared; the fire, has been trying and purging, and burning in you, and you
are not yet consumed: but when will you turn aside to see this great wonder?
When lay it to your heart? I must leave, and desire the Lord would give you
understanding into what has been said; and above all, that you may not war nor
fight against it in your minds; but soberly inquire, Is this my lot? Is this my
Portion, to be one of this chosen Generation? It will at last cause your souls
to admire.

The Poor WISE MAN, And LITTLE CITY, Against The GREAT KING, And His BULWARKS.
SERMON. X. May 18. 1651.
ECCLES. 9.14, 15. There was a little city, and few men within it; and there
came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great Bulwarks against
it.

Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the
city; yet no man remembered the same poor man.


The Analysis.
FRom the words was observed:

I. The Lord ever had a Little City under the Sun. A People built together in
Unity and Love.

In three respects compared to a City.

1 A City is for habitation: so God to dwell in his People. 2 It is a place of
Free-Trading: so God will be free to trade in sorrows* sufferings,
inlargements; What he pleases with his people. 3 It Is a place of safety: So
God looks to be safe in his People, in his Name* to be kept from reproach and
sufferings.
II. This is but a Little city* and that in three respects.

1 It makes but little noise in the world. Little notice of it. 2 Little in
compare of many thousands left: But a small remnant. 3 Little, not easily seen,
nor found, without a diligent search.
III. There are but few men in it.

Little or no help in it; but a few men left, and they tremblers, unable to
defend it.

Hence three things considered: 1 Few men in it, that no flesh might have to
glory in saving it. 2 All is emptied out of the room, that God may dwell in it,
and be seen -- that the poor man's wisdom may appear. 3 Few in it, as no
strength to withstand or keep off the lean enemy. Every Temptation and snare
too hard.


IV. A great King comes against this little City, and builds Bulwarks: Great
opposition from the devil. His Bulwarks are made of Earth: any thing that
springs thence: knowledge, parts, zeal. Hopes these Bulwarks he can employ to
keep off the Truth.

V. In it is found a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivers the City.

Whence two things considered: 1 Where he is to be found: In the City, not out:
the kingdom of God within you; Christ in you, else reprobates. 2 How shall this
poor man be known? How shall you know whether Christ be in you?


These seven signs were laid down of it.

1 If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; the man wholly
convinced that sin is too hard for him. He cannot help himself.

2 Where Christ is, the soul cannot utterly despair; it cannot be drowned. In
the bottom of hell Jonah looked toward the Temple.

3 There is ever a love to that which is of it is own kind: if God be your
Father, you would love me (says Christ.) Truth ever loves Truth.

4 Where Christ is, ever a light goes along to search and discover all the
secret carriages and wiles of the enemy. He is a true searcher.

5 Where Christ is, He will never yield up this City though it cost his life:
yet with the three children, we will not worship the golden image.

6 There is a secret looking after God, and expecting from him in the lowest
day: never a whole giving up all for lost.

7 Where Truth is, It can look through all heaps and swarms of enemies to God:
that he is still able to deliver, and who can tell but he may be gracious?

ECCLES. 9.14, 15. There was a little City, and few men within it, and there
came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great Bulwarks against
it. Now there was found it, a poor wise man, etc.
IN the verses before, Solomon speaks of a strange Case, which is very contrary
to Reason to believe, or see into; verse. 11. I returned, and saw that the race
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor
yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill: but time
and chance happens to them all. None of these will carry through: by strength
shall no man prevail, and the wisdom of this world is foolishness; and as for
Riches, they make themselves wings, and fly away. But well (says Solomon)
though all this takes not, this Wisdom, and strength, and riches, and skill
cannot deliver men; but they are taken in an evil net like the fishes, and
snared like the bird; Yet for all this there is a wisdom that will stand, there
is a condition of deliverance to be attained. I saw this wisdom under the sun,
and it seemed wonderful unto me. There was a little city, and few men in it;
and a great King came against it, and besieged it, and built Bulwarks against
it; and yet a poor wise man was found in it, and he by his wisdom delivered the
City. This wisdom is indeed wonderful, and too high for a fool.

The words in themselves are a metaphor taken up by the Holy Ghost, by which he
would express himself in things obvious to man's sense and reason, and humane
capacity, and thereby lead the soul into the invisible mind, meaning and
intent of Scriptures. For there is a hidden invisible meaning runs in all the
Scriptures, which none can read, but those that buy eye salve of Christ to
anoint their eyes; those who are taught of God, and led into the meaning of
them by the same Spirit which once breathed them forth. The Scriptures are a
deep Well, and none but men of understanding can draw it out: for all others
the Well is too deep, and they have nothing to draw with; they can by no means
reach the invisible mind of Christ.

From the words, these things are observable:

I. That always the Lord had a little City under the Sun.

In all times he had his people, a City built together, where his Name lived:
and this was the strait of all our Fathers in their day, to find this City of
the living God; They sought a City that had foundations, no other would content
them. They left all other dwellings all other contents delights enjoyments
(wherein the world live) choosing rather to wander in a wilderness, where there
was no way, till they might come to this City of habitation; they rested in no
place: no condition, nor honor, nor pleasure could hold them, till they might
come to this City, and sit down in their own house. -- O when shall I come and
appear before God! (says David) Though he had a strong Army now with him, of
the valiants of Israel, and they faithful and ready to venture their lives for
him, through a whole host, yet he is at a strait for the Temple of God, for the
place where the Lord dwelt, and his Name, and Power, and Truth lived.

There are many Cities in the world that are easily found. Cities of wisdom,
and fear, and rest; Cities of knowledge, and great enlargements; but none of
these will serve the true wanderers; they seek a City from Heaven, whose
builder and maker is God; Where God dwells. And where does he dwell? Why* where
two or three are met together in my Name, there am I in the midst: Where
Brethren live together in unity, where they be of one Heart, and one Soul;
Here, he has commanded the Blessing, and life for evermore. This is Sion,
(says God) here will I take up my rest, I will dwell in it for ever.

Now in a City three things may be considered,

1 A City is an habitable place* where many dwell: it is not like a waste
Forest, or barren Wilderness; but a place of concourse and meeting of people.
And thus are the people of God his City, where He dwells and inhabits, and all
his train with him; Peace, Love, Joy, Singleness, Hope, Meekness, etc. this
City is full of inhabitants. It is said in the Proverbs, He dwelt in the
habitable part of the Earth, and there daily was his delight; and he calls his
people out of Babylon, Come out from amongst them, and ye shall be my people,
and I will be your God. And again, I will dwell in them, and walk in them. They
are his habitation, where he takes up his abode. Time was, when he came and
went as a wayfaring man, that stays but for a night and is gone; (and thus he
is now in many of your souls, he comes and goes presently) but there is a time,
and there are a people, when, and in whom, he takes up his abode* in whom he
settles* never to remove more. Though he may lie in the bottom of the ship, lie
covered up* and buried under sorrows and trials; yet he is still there: I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee; that is the Promise.

2 A City is a place of free traffic, where men may buy and sell freely
without any molestation (if they are made Free of the City) trade where they
will, and when, and in what they will, -- Such a City has God in his people;
such a freedom he has to deal with them at his pleasure: Sometimes he will
trade in trials and sorrows, to bring forth the riches of the deeps beneath;
sometimes he will trade in chearings, inlargings, and revivings of Spirit.
Sometimes Gold, and Silver, and Pearls come out to sale; sometimes Camels Hair,
and blue Silk, (as he pleases) but some trade or other is ever going on in his
City. It is never left wholly desolate; but he will be free to buy, and sell,
and trade in what ever he pleases; such a place as this he has, where he is
not bound in or to any thing (as we would bind and limit him to our measure) we
will hear him so far, and come up to such a pitch, but not a jot further:
therefore, we are not this City yet; he dwells not so in us, (though visits and
passes too and fro often) for the Spirit of the Lord cannot be bound, it will
have liberty to stir and act at pleasure; he will be free to bind and
straighten, to loose and enlarge, to raise up or cast down, as he pleases (and
pleased he is, sometimes to run his dearest people through wonderful strange
conditions and cases to show his great power, and wisdom, and faithfulness in
standing to, and recovering them out of all) that he may bring forth all his
rich wares, and make his Name manifest; but he dwells not in any heart, where
he has not this freedom to trade in what he will, (sorrows and afflictions, as
well as inlargements and enjoyments) but in his own City he is free, there he
can trade in what he will, and when he will, and how he will; they always
submit and say, Not my will, but Thine; they ever justify him, Good is the
Word of the Lord (and with Eli) It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

3 A City is a place of safety and security; it is expected a man may be safe
from thieves and robberies there. Such a City are the people of God to his
Name, and Honor, and Truth; they are bound to secure them. It is expected by
God, as Lot says of the Angels that came to him (when the wicked Sodomites
pressed to the door to do them violence) see how earnest he is, how he labors?
What will he not give to save them out of their hands? Nay, take my two
daughters, rather take all I have, only let these strangers alone, disturb not
them: For, for that very cause came they under my roof, that they may be safe.
Where this City is indeed, what will not the soul venture to keep the truth
alive and safe, that it suffer not; and therefore the Church writes of Paul and
Silas, that they were men which had hazarded their lives for the Gospel; nay
let all go, to keep this Name up. I count not my life dear (says Paul) to
finish this course with joy. Now the enemies great plot is, to kill this Name
of truth, that the name of Israel may be no more in the earth; that the devil
and all his instruments aim at, to destroy it root and branch utterly; but I
have called you friends (says Christ) therefore I can entrust you with all my
mind and counsels; you will be faithful, and not betray me, not deal as the
men of Keilah, when David inquired of God, whether they would deliver him. I,
they will (says God) but these citizens will be more faithful; they will not
deliver up their David [their King the Lord Christ] they will die, rather then
be false to the Lord. Such a City as this will God have, such a people he
seeks, that will build him a sanctuary, where he may be safe out of all
dangers, that will (in deed, and not in word) venture their lives and all they
have for his Name. Oh that your souls were but taken! that the desires and
longings were but up in you, that you might be such a City to the Lord; and
sing as Israel did, when delivered through the Red Sea, And we will build him a
habitation. Oh that such a mind were risen up, though but in two or three of
you; that any of you were brought forth to be such a City where God might take
up his abode, and be free to do his own will (whatsoever pleases him) where he
might dwell securely; [always a watch and faithful oversight to preserve his
Name and Truth from suffering:] Joseph's watchfulness in all our ways; crying
out, when tempted to any thihg that is not right, How can I do this great evil,
and sin against God? How can I deal falsely with my Citizen, my King, that
dwells in me, and has committed himself unto me? If you have indeed a mind to
become a City for God to dwell in, you must first be a People compact
together, and at unity in your selves [a perfect union and close of heart] as
Christ prays, That they may be one, as thou Father and I are one: Such a
neerness, and freedom, and communion with God, as John speaks of; And truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And if we
come not to this point [to be such a City to him] truly all our profession,
and hearing, and gathering together, all will vanish into nothing: Nay, better
had it been the Name of the Lord had never been called upon by us then that we
should take his Name in vain; which will be if we come to nothing after all* if
we have begun in the Spirit and should end in the flesh; if make a show* and
profession, and resolution to stand to his Truth and Name with our lives; and
then (like the children of Ephraim who carried bows) shall turn backs in the
day of battle; this would be a taking of the Name of God in vain, if left, that
any thing be too hard for us, and make us depart, and say, We will follow him
no further.

2ly. Observe* THIS CITY IS BUT A LITTLE CITY; a little one] and that may hint
out these three Considerations.

1. Little, in that it makes no great noise, no bulk in the world; no great
notice is taken of it, (but a poor obscure worthless thing it is looked upon to
be;) and therefore it is said of Christ, He shall not cry, nor lift up his voice
in the streets. He makes no great bustle in the world, (by power, and strength,
and reason, and much talking to maintain his Cause) but gathers to a corner
amongst a few, a despised company of Publicans and Harlots, and blind and
lame, [the abjects of the world] and these he teaches, and opens the parable in
private.

2. A little city, in compare of the many great and vast cities of the world,
that make a mighty show, and take up a large compass. They have multitudes on
their side: (they plead) [all the wise, and learned, and rational men in the
world join with them.] I, but this will not prove you to be the little City.
The whole world (it is said) wondered after the Beast; and the whole world lies
in sin; and it is a broad way that leads to destruction, and many walk in it:
But it is but a LITTLE CITY where God dwells; and therefore there is need to
enquire into all your Preachings, and hearings, and huntings, and setlings down
to any people abroad: Have we found the RIGHT CITY yet in all? Men mistake, God
has not his kingdom in this world; he has not a multitude that will hold out
to follow him, but fall, and fall away, as the multitudes that followed Christ
did, till he came even to the twelve, and asks them, What, will you also
forsake me? Baals Prophets indeed they are many; they are three hundred and
fifty; I, but the Lords Prophet is only one despised Micaiah, and he never
prophesied good to Ahab. If you seek this City indeed, expect it not in a
multitude. What care, and designs, and plots are spoke of, to settle a whole
kingdom, whole Churches and Congregations in a way of truth! Alas! when all is
done that can be, you can get no gold but where it is, (though you dig and dig
never so in a wrong soil) there is but a remnant when all is done: Though
Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved, [but a few]
if we hang never so on husbands, and wives, and children, and would carry all
our friends a long with us, yet alas a parting must come, if they be not of
that little Remnant.

3 A Little City, in that it is hard to be found: you must look wishly, or
you will never find it out: you can hardly spy the houses of this City, (they
lie so low) unless your eyes be very good: you would never think this to be
Christ: What, this Jesus? The Carpenters son? whose Father and Mother we know?
Is this he? No, the world cannot find him, but two or three wise men that are
led by a star [here and there one] a Philip, a Nathanael, a Peter; they can
truly say, We have found the Messiah, he of whom Moses wrote; but it is
wonderful hard to spy him out, and therefore there is great need for you that
are seeking this City, to be very careful where you pitch, and greatly to be
jealous over your selves, and enquire again and again, that you may not be
cheated, but meet with the true one (for it is wonderful hard to find it) and
therefore see in what a posture the true seekers are, Jer. 50.4. The children
of Israel, and the children of Judah go together with weeping and supplication,
and ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward. See how they are bent
to the thing, and with what fear and earnestness they seek Zion! Alas, if we
find not the true City, we are undone! and the City is but Little. Many Cities
indeed there are in the world [ Cities of silk, and purple, and scarlet; of
gold, and silver, and all precious wares, great hopes and confidences, and
faith, and knowledge, and high words, etc. such Cities may easily be seen and
found] but if ever you find this little City, you must have a new eye given
you, such a one as Moses had, to see things that are invisible; things that
appear not at all here, but are a great way off, in another world, (as Christ
says) my kingdom is not of this world: and if you have not such an eye as this
given you, (seek, and enquire, and ask never so long) you will never meet with
the true Christ; for he is not easily found; It is not common Bread, to be had
every where: you may indeed eat Manna, bread from Heaven [ Powers, and
enlargements, and refreshings] and yet die for all that; your fathers eat
Manna, and are dead: but now the true bread, the bread of life, that is hard to
come by: to be saved indeed, to the utmost, that is another work. Here the
multitudes fall off at this hard saying. Here are no full harvests to be
expected; but three or four berries on an uppermost bow, [a few scattered
gleanings after harvest, when the vintage is over] and it is wonderful hard to
spy them out, unless it be given you to understand the parable, unless your
understandings be opened to see into the Scriptures, into them] many read the
letters (see them without) but cannot pierce into the Spirit and meaning of
them. None can do this, but they to whom the new eye is given, none else can
ever find this City. It is so little a one, so clouded and covered over with
reproaches, and scandals and meanness, it is such a despised unthought-of thing.
All the world never once dream that God is bound up in so little a compass,
that he lives in such a little City. They plead, Is not God everywhere? Is he
not with us as well as with you? No: He is indeed every where, but he is not
seen everywhere, he is known in Zion (that little City) but all others, the
great and learned of the world, see him not: they cannot see invisibly; that is
nonsense, they will say. He is hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed to a
few Babes. Therefore beware, and follow not a multitude to do evil: there is
great need your whole souls and minds should be intent and taken up in this
thing, (if indeed you have a mind to find it, and to live for ever) that you
may take no rest, nor give any sleep to your eyes, nor slumbering to your
eyelids, till you have found out this habitation for the God of Jacob. Need
there is to keep your eyes fixed, and to go weeping and mourning, and asking
the way to Zion, with your faces and hearts thitherward.

And thus two things in general have been opened to you. 1 That God for certain
has his City under the Sun, his people in the world: however the whole world
lie in wickedness, and are lost, and run the several runs to destruction, yet
he has a remnant; he has reserved to himself seven hundred that have not
bowed to Baal. In the days when Samuel was born, it is said, The Word of the
Lord was precious in those days, and there was no open Vision; and yet then God
will have his Samuel. Hannah brings forth this man-child, this son, in stead of
many sons: she that was barren has brought forth seven, [a complete number,] a
remnant he will ever reserve. 2. It was considered this City was but a little
one. 1. It makes no great noise nor stir in the world, (it raises no Armies,
nor makes Tumults to defend and enlarge it self.) 2. Little indeed, if you
consider the vast world, the great multitudes* and many thousands, that fall
short and perish: It is but a small cloud of a hands breadth, in compare to the
whole Heavens. 3. But little, as being hardly seen and found: Many shall seek
to enter, and shall not be able: And therefore there is great need (were but
your Souls sensible of it) to cry out with David, O lead me and guide me in the
way taht I should walk, [the way that leads to this City of Habitation.] Now to
proceed.

III. And but few men in it, etc.

The City is but little; but that is not all, it is weak also: there is no
might nor strength to defend it self, but few men in it: and therefore Paul
cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? etc. He felt how
weak he was, and un^ble ever to deliver himself: And therefore there is nothing
for any to glory in after the flesh; for, Who made thee to differ? There is no
cause for boasting; for none ever prevailed by strength, they obtained not the
field by weapons of war: It is said of David, when He had slain the Philistin;
But there was no sword found in the hand of David: And he says of himself, I
will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my sword save me: But he goes forth
against the great Goliath only in the Name of the Lord: and all the saved ones
ever have and will cry out, Grace, Grace, Grace; That must do all; for this
City has but few men in it, and they are poor fearful tremblers, such as are
ready to dye every moment, (only they are kept up by the chin, and not left
quite to be drowned:) but alas, for help to fight, and withstand an Enemy,
little or none can be expected from them! This poor wise man must do all, he
must save the City by his wisdom, if it be ever saved; it has no help of it
self.

1. Let none of you then, whom God has favored, glory according to the flesh;
for there is nothing at all you have to boast in, there are but few men in the
City, and they poor tremblers, not able for service: so that if this poor man
do not the whole work in every one of you, (use all your wits, and plots, and
power,) you will never be able to deliver this City.

2. But few men in it; there was more once, but they wasted and wasted away,
till but few left: Whence you may consider,

Who ever are favored of God to be his people, [this little City] He will
certainly rout and rout out all the old Inhabitants, They shall not live
quietly in it.

He will surely bring all the old Inhabitants down, all that is sprung from the
Man or Devil, He will rout it out and thus is the great company within, the
Wisdoms and hopes, and councels, the lustings and hunts of the heart, the
fears and joys, and love, all must be searched and fanned, and alas but a
little will be left of the great bulk. There are but few men in it. The Poor
man's wisdom could not appear nor be taken notice of; if a multitude were in
the City, they would take some of the work to themselves, but they must be
turned out that it may appear his own arm brings Salvation, and none puts a
hand to it.

3. But few men in it, not any considerable Partee to withstand an Enemy,
especially such a Great King as comes against it; no, alas they have no might
to stand in any temptation if but an Alarm sounds, (a rumor that an enemy is
indeed coming to set down and besiege) Oh what a strange uproar and trembling
does it cause within! All the Wisdom and hope and faith and experience, how do
all give back and are not able to stand to look the Enemy in the face without
the Lord appear, and be Captain himself: whoever of you are indeed this City of
God, you can witness how weak and unable you are to help your selves [unstable
as water not able to stand to it in the least Tryall] there are but few men in
it: and as Gehazi cried out to Elisha when he saw the enemies round about the
City, Alas, Master what shall we do? so may we cry out indeed if we did but see
the danger: For

IV. A GREAT KING comes against this little weak City, and besieges it, and
builds great Bulwarks against it, etc.

This Great King is the same spoken of, cap. 4. Better is a poor and wise
child, then an OLD AND FOOLISH KING that will no more be admonished, etc. In
all Ages this old King [the old serpent the Devil] has played these pranks
against this little City; he will never leave spitting his Venom and Poison
against the Truth to destroy it utterly, That the name of Israel may be no
more. This Haman can have no rest, so long as Mordecai lives; Poor Mordecai is
an eye-soar, and troubles and disquiets this Great King; and Gallows must be
provided to hang Mordecai, and D crees sent out to destroy the whole Nation of
the Jews for his sake; nothing less will serve then an utter ruin. He will
never be admonished; this Old King will never take warning, though his plots
have been again and again disappointed; and he has been taken in his own
snare: yet he will go on to besiege this little City; to disturb, and perplex,
and torment, and (if possible) destroy this little Remnant.

Now I have heard many say, that they never were thus troubled with the Devil,
they thank God: He harms not them; they never were under his temptations and
torture, and cruel batterings: were they never troubled with him? I, but this
is an Argument; they are a friend to him; they live in his Kingdom, and there
all is in peace, so long as he keeps the house; but if you are ever brought out
of the Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ; if you shall ever be
gathered out of the great City Babylon, to this little Sion, this small
remnant; if ever plucked out of the world, then you shall feel him stirring:
For this old Serpent has ever from the beginning of the World been casting out
his floods after the Truth (if possible) to drown and destroy that: and the
nearer any of you shall be brought to God, be sure he will be the more busy;
you shall have the harder encounters and assaults from the D^vil; you shall
then see he will raise his great Bulwarks.

But what makes he these Bulwarks of? out of what matter does he work them?

Why, whatsoever is of the Earth, be it what it will, yet if it be but an
earthly material, he can raise Bulwarks out of it well enough; not only out of
gross earth, out of dirt and mire; not only out of lusts, sensual delights and
pleasures; but out of the finest earth, out of a golden mine he can do it: out
of wisdom, and parts, and righteousness, and zeal, and hope, and faith, and
what not? that he cannot raise a Bulwark out of against the Truth. Paul had
these strong Bulwarks framed in him against the Truth in Stephen (when he was
stoned to death,) He was of the strictest way of the Pharisees, He walked
according to his Conscience, He was as concerning the Law blameless; and yet
all these were made Bulwarks for the D^vils service. And therefore all your
zeal, and forwardness, and love, which seems to be for God; see whether the
Devils bulwarks be not in all, to keep thee off from the Truth; for he works
himself strangely under ground, he has strange wiles to cheat and cozen by, by
knowledge of the Scriptures, by zeal, by forwardness to venture lives and
estates for the Truth (as we then think;) by these does he s^^ly wind in, and
raise his great Bulwarks: and if the Lord help you not, and deliver the City,
he will soonest of all destroy you, where you think you are safest; and so keep
off all Truth from coming near to touch ^ou: and therefore great need you
should well mind and consider the sleights; for he has bulwarks of all sorts,
shapes, and sizes; Bulwarks of dirt, and clay, and mire; they are strong enough
to destroy some: Bulwarks of Gold, and Silver, and Pearls, (if need be;) any
thing that is but this Worlds material (and that takes in a great compass) he
can make a Bulwark to save himself, and undo the Soul by. Good Lord! what
strange devices has h^! He Will put a man upon zeal and forwardness, put him to
give his goods to the poor, and body to be burned, and whatever you will, if so
be under all this he may but make a Bulwark, and lurk behind it to keep
himself alive, and do a mischief to the Truth. Therefore there is need to
consider what we lean on; for if we are trusting, and hoping, and lightly
promising our selves that God will sure help at last, and we shall be delivered
when he pleases, (and so rest in hearing and coming together, when nothing is
done:) I say, all these hopes and conclusions (which we get up, to keep off the
strait from our Souls, and get ease by.) All these are but the Enemies
Bulwarks, and certainly intended by him to destroy us: and if we be left to
shrink away so, and neglect the Truth in our day, we may never be met with
again, when the time is once gone: Sure the Lord is righteous, and will not let
the guilty go free; though (as I told you the last night) he is all Love and
sweetness in himself, if we could but get in, to him, to his heart: now if we
could go and meet him thus as a Father, and fall down and own our shame, how
well were it? Were it not better, then yet to stand out, and war, for the
Enemy, against our Brother? [then to join with the Devil in his Bulwarks
against the Truth?] for one of these hands we must needs fall into. But this is
a hard case (says the Soul,) Am I so liable to the Devils Bulwarks, and lie
open daily to all destruction and misery, and is there no remedy? Yes, there is
remedy; There is Balm in Gilead.

V. In this City was found a Poor Wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the
City.

A POOR WISE MAN, a Jacob, a plain man; no such cunning tricks and deceits as
the Esaus have: and yet by his plain wisdom he can overreach, and supplant,
and go beyond, all the deep plots and cunning of this great King: How soon was
Paul stopped in the midst of his run, when he drove furiously for the Devil!
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Not any great weapons are used, but a wise
word whispered into his Soul, and that turns all, and strikes the great
Champion down to the Earth: So Abigail comes to David, but with a wise word, a
soft answer; and how does it prevail, and prevent the great destruction
intended against Nabals house? It is but a word, and the stream is turned: I
come against thee (said David to the great Goliath) in the Name of the Lord: No
more but so; That Name is enough against the great Giant and all his armor: but
a word, Why persecutest thou me? and that is enough to strike down the stoutest
heart in the World, if it be but set home; What, do thou fight against God?
Art thou able to stand in his hands? Alas, what do thou do! Do thou war
against I AM? Thou and all Creatures [all thy strength, and hope, and plots,
all the forces in which thou trustest] ARE NOT, and will thou fight against I
AM? (He that Is strength and Power, and with a word can crush thee to nothing.)
Such a word from this poor wise man is able to overturn and shake down all the
great Bulwarks of this great King: But the rumor and noise of a barley loaf is
heard, and (this wise man can so order the matter) it shall skare and undo a
whole Army.

Now for you that are indeed besieged by this great King, against whom he has
raised his strong Bulwarks, and fills your ears always, with desperate rumors,
and hot alarums of ruin and destruction, and possesses your Souls with strange
fears and perplexities, and sinkings; Alas, what a sad case are you in, if you
now are to seek and know not whether this poor man be in you, or no, who alone
by his wisdom can deliver the City!

These things will surely bring you to a strait (when seized upon your hearts)
to consider, 1. That for certain, God has a City, a people in whom he dwells.
2. this is but a little one, and hard to find. 3. There are but few men in it,
[Little help to wage war and defend it] 4. A great King comes against it, and
besieges and builds great Bulwarks against it, all in appearance makes to
destroy it: he raises all his forces, ( Gebal and Ammon, the Philistines, with
them of Tire, the Ishmaelites, and Hargarens) all the Legions of Hell will be
sure to have a throw at this City: and now here will be the strait, whether
this poor wise man be in thee, or no; if he be not there, it is impossible thou
should ever deal with this great King, and his Powers, they will surely undo
thee; but if thou can find the wise poor man in the City, if thou lightest on
him, happily he may help thee by his wisdom; he may find out some wyle or other
to draw this great King out of his Bulwarks, and if he can but cast him out,
the unclean Spirit shall then enter no more, if he can but draw him forth out
of the City, out of his Bulwarks, then he will soon spoil the strong man of his
Armor and deliver the City.

Bu^ truly wonderful it is, that ever man or woman, should be saved, since the
fall of man! such is the ma^^gn^^y and strength of this enemy, and such the
man's weakness, and utter incapableness to help himself: All are against Truth,
be what they will, they all agree against the Lord and his Christ, a great
Council is held, and great resolutions neither to eat nor drink, till they have
slain Paul, [till this City be destroyed] but well, there is yet hope in
Israel, in it was found a poor wise man, etc.

Whence I would consider these two things.

1. Where this poor wise man is to be found? And that is in it in the city [in
the man, in thy soul] now shift it not off, and say, who shall go to heaven, to
fetch him thence? or go down to Hell, to bring him thence? but the word is nigh
thee, It is within, (if it be at all) The Kingdom of heaven is within you, the
poor wise man is in this City, else it can never be saved by him.

And this might show the great vanity of peoples thoughts, who look for the
Kingdom of God to come by observation, they think to pull it to them, by their
huntings, and seekings, and endeavorings, and strivings; no, (but if ever it be
to be had) it is within thee; truth is to spring out of the Earth, the seed is
there already, that seed of God, only the spirit goes forth to unlock and open
the ground, that it may get out, when it pleased the Father, (says Paul) To
reveal his Son in me, etc. He was there before, only now is revealed and made
manifest, but

2. How then shall you know whether this poor wise man be in you or not,
[whether Christ be there or no] It is not every one that says, Lord, Lord,
that shall enter, many have good words, and can learn the language of truth,
(as a Scholar learns Lattin) by road, but it is not their own, it is not their
mother Tongue in which they were born, they have not a root in themselves; and
so the seed soon withers.

How then shall we know it, whether Christ be in us, or not?

1. If Christ be in thee, the body is dead, because of Sin, [the Humanity is
certainly convinced, that he cannot help himself, nor ever deal with this
Enemy] the man is cut off from ever getting life at his own hands, but he cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! etc. that is the first
work of Christ, where ever he is in any Soul, to be ever stopping and curbing
and snibbing the man, in the vain runs, and promises of his heart; he sets a
flaming Sword, that man may not put forth a hand to reach to the Tree of Life,
and as Job says, He seals up the hand of every man: He shuts up, and there is
no opening: Now many are wearied, and wearied, by their own labors, because
they see nothing come out of all, and so their hearts dye, and are weak to go
on in their old way, but yet truth has not cut them off: Thou have wearied thy
self in the greatness of thy way (says God) yet have thou not said, there is
no hope, hope lived still in all this; I, but Christ, when he works, cuts off
all hope, from man ever to deliver himself, The Body is dead because of Sin,
etc.

2. Where Christ is, though the man would dye, and sink and give up all, and
again, and again, run to despairing, yet he cannot, it is impossible to drown
this truth; cast it where you will, it will swim, and get above, this seed of
Life cannot quite dye, Thou hold our souls in Life (says David:) and again,
thou hold me fast behind, and before; he can get out no ways, [he can
neither promise himself deliverance, nor yet conclude destruction] such a
strange bond holds the Soul: and I would now seriously enquire of some of you,
(in whose souls the truth is) whether ever you could say soberly in all your
lives, you were utterly cut off, and there was no hope in God for you, for as
it is impossible to bring up others to this close cleaving, and hanging upon
truth (though they seem never so high, and confident, and nail their God never
so sure, yet he will fall) so impossible is it to kill this Spark of Life,
wherever it is; but it will hope and cleave, and look toward God, though it
be in the bottom of Hell, etc.

3. (as Christ says to the Jews) If God were your Father you would love me,
for I came from God; so I say, if Christ be in thee, thou can not but love
Christ, (that of thine own kind, wherever thou find it] as Paul says, we
cannot do any thing against the truth, but for it, though the heart would be
spurning and shrinking away, saying, he is a hard Master, yet where this Spirit
of Christ is, it will join to his own; the heart will be taken with him, and
cannot get off quite to leave him.

4. Where Christ is, He is a searcher, he discovers all the inward, and secret
workings, all the plots, and stratagems of the Devil, that all are but to
destroy, the soul is made to take notice of the secret carriages of things
within, it sees all the Train of his wyles and tricks, and inventions how they
are laid, and how they work and whither they tend, the world is blinded in all,
they see no danger, they know not whither they go, but Christ he is a divider
in the souls of his People: he will not believe every good word and fair
promise that the enemy may make; Master save thy self, and cause these stones
to be bread, no, but he will weigh and try what runs in all, he will not take
all for gold that glisters, though you speak never so good words, and fair
promises, and all seems right, yet the Spirit of Christ, where it is, will try
and examine whence it comes, from what root all spings, whether from heaven or
hell? etc.

5. Where Christ is, he will never yield up his City, though it cost him his
life, he will stand to his charge what ever comes on it; as the three children
answer, though our God should not deliver us, yet (this their souls are
resolved in) we will not fall down and worship the golden Image: what ever it
cost, yet they cannot turn to a Lie to worship an Idol, Though thou have sore
broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, yet
cannot we lift up our hands to a strange God etc. though the Soul may be taken,
and carried Captive by force, yet where Christ is, it still breaths with Paul,
but with my mind I serve the Law of God [I choose not this Service, though
halled to it] it is the burden it cries under, that is certain, it cannot go
backward, though it cannot get forward neither, though made to yield and say
well: this is your hour, and the power, of darkness, yet the soul consents not,
it will not fall down and worship an Idol God Jacob will not go back again to
Labans service, what ever comes on it, though Laban pursues behind, and Esau
meets him bebefore, and God seems to leave and discouraged him, yet he will
wrestle it out with God, and never give over without the blessing.

6. Where ever Christ is, though the Soul be never so low in the bottom of
hell, yet there is a strange looking toward God, out of the belly of hell,
(says Jonah) I looked toward thy holy Temple, where truth is sown in the Soul,
it cannot but look thither ward [towards God] bind it, and fetter it, and keep
it down, and sh^ke it as you will, yet it will never leave turning, and
turning, and looking thither ward, as the Needle ever bends toward the
Northpole. I remember in my lowest day, (and it was low indeed) when all
appeared as if I were quite lost, and should sit down in Hell for ever among
the damned, yet I said in my Soul, sure I shall love God th re, I shall ^p ak
something well of him, amongst all that cursed and hateful crew, such a
strange turning God ward is there in the worst of times.

7. Where Christ is though all enemies beset it, though all the Legions o^ H ll
and darkness, of fears and doubttings come about it as a swarm, yet the Soul is
able to look beyond and through all to a Deliverance, that it is yet possi^le,
it says still well, yet if he will deliver, he is able; th^re is a strange,
long, Prospective Glass, by which the Soul looks beyond all Seas, and
Mountains, and impossibilities, and fears, and sees the Land that is very far
off, [the good Land of rest, and Peace] and says well, if the Lord delight in
us, he will bring us thither, he is able still, who can tell but he may be
gracious?

Sure, if the Lord Christ, that Poor Wise Man be in you, you cannot but savor,
and understand these words, you will know the Language, and though not able to
express them plainly, yet, you cannot but know and feel these Leadings in your
Souls.

It would now follow to speak of the Deliverance what way he takes, how he
delivers this City from the great King? and that is not by force nor might, nor
multitudes, but by his wisdom, by a slight, that great Goliahs head is
presently taken off by a wyle, an unexpected way: If thine Enemy hunger, give
him meat; who would think this was the way to destroy him: Yet this is the way
he takes, he gives the Enemy his Will, [lets him take his own course, and run
out his run, thus he feeds him till he be ensnared in his own net, and so
taken] This can the Poor man do by his Wisdom, but I would wish none of you to
take it in hand, it is too hard for you to put your hand in the fire, and not be
burnt.

Man's Backwardness TO THE Lords House, OR The Little Good Will to Truth. SERMON.
XI. May 25. 1651.
HAGG. 1.2, 3, 4, etc. Thus speaks the Lord, saying, This people say, The
Time is not come, the Time that the Lords House should be built.

Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your sieled, houses, and this house lie
waste? etc.


The Analysis.
THese general things were observed from the words.

I. What this house of God was? and what it typed out?

It was a house built and separated to the Worship of God, typing out the
uniting of a people into one heart and soul, where God may dwell.

II. Why will God have this House built?

For three Reasons.

1. To be a Pattern of the Life to come, where all live in Love and Peace. 2.
To be a standing place of Worship, whither the Tribes go up. 3. For a Witness,
to condemn the World in all their false ways.
III. What are the Materials of this House?

1. Not of all, but only living stones, such as will abide, in whom the spirit
of life is sown: A living Dog is better then a dead Lion. 2. In this House are
to be vessels of all sorts, and all for their proper use; none in vain, none
unfruitful.
IV. Why do they plead, It is not time to build this House?

For these three Reasons.

1. From their ignorance; They knew not that all their blastings, and mildews,
and curses came for want of this: This is our case. 2. From love to their ease;
easier to sit still at home, then go up to the mountain for wood to build: The
heart loves to be at ease. 3. Fear hinders, because yet they were under Tribute
to the King of Babylon, and the work once hindered; and so now sit down, and
will not venture.
V. Consider the Miseries that follow them for not building?

They sow much, and bring in little; clothe them, and were not warmed; earn
much, but all put into a bag of holes; a curse in all their ways, verse. 6, 9.
This applied to the present desolation upon us, it being impossible for us to
prosper without joining in to be a one People.

VI. The Privileges considered, which accrue to them that set hand to this
work: They are these four.

1. God promises, Verse. 8. to take pleasure in it: This is a great Privilege.
2. Verse. 13. he says, I am with you (says the Lord:) His presence goes along.
3. He promises, Chap. 2.19. From this day will I bless you: A sure blessing
follows. 4. He promises Zerubbabel, Verse. last, I will make thee as a signet,
etc.
In which three great Privileges considered.

1. A Signet has a near relation to the hand; so He to the Lord. 2. A Signet
carries a man's own Arms, or some memorable thing in it. 3. It is to ratify and
confirm things, to make sure; such an honor, and great privileges are promised
to such as shall set upon this work.
HAGG. 1.2, 3, 4, etc. Thus speaks the Lord, saying, This People say, The
Time is not come, the Time that the Lords House should be built, etc.
SEveral things I would mention to you out of this Scripture: 1. I would open
what this house is, that God complains lies waste. 2. What this house is to
be built up of? of what materials? 3. Why do they plead, It is not time to
build the Lords House yet? What Reasons have they for it? 4. What misery comes
upon them for neglecting this work; a blast and curse follows in all their
ways: They prosper in nothing they set a hand to, because of this. 5. I would
open the great benefits and privileges that follow upon the beginning to set
to this work of building God a house, how wonderfully they are prospered, and
blessed, and preserved; what strange ways God finds out, and turns all things
that were contrary, to help forward his work: The Heaven shall hear the Earth,
and the Earth hear the Corn and Wine, and the Corn and Wine shall hear Israel:
God will turn and order all things for a Blessing.

I. WHAT IS THIS HOUSE THAT LIES WASTE, AND WHAT TYPES IT OUT?

Time was when God had his Vine in Egypt, his people were in slavery and
bondage in a strange Land, till their tasks grew too heavy, and they cry out
under their cruel bondage, till at last the cry comes up to Heaven, and the
Lord can bear no longer, but breaks out, I have seen, I have seen the
afflictions of my People Israel: and so he sends to deliver them with a high
hand and stretched out arm, by strange signs and wonders, against all the
opposition and rage of their Enemies. Now when he had brought them through the
red Sea, and by a visible miracle drowned all their Enemies, and saved them
with a great Salvation; then their hearts were taken, and they sing his praise,
and in their song they make this promise, And we will build him an HABITATION:
and this was never accomplished till Solomon's time; Though it was in David's
heart (and God took it well that it was in his heart,) yet Solomon was pitched
on by God for this work; He shall build me an House: and here God placed his
Name, and his Worship, and his Presence; here he dwelt, here he would be sought
and enquired of; Hither the Tribes came up: here their prayers were made and
answered etc. But after they came once to make an evil use of this House, to
serve their lusts and own ends (contrary to what God had intended it,) when
they come to cry. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and vainly
rest on that outside, and make an Idol of it, as they did of the brazen Serpent
in the wilderness; then God departs from this House, and gives it into the hand
of the King of Babylon, who makes havoc of all, and lays it waste, and carries
away the vessels of the Lords House into Babylon, and breaks all their way and
worship in pieces: But yet still the Lords mind goes on, and is the same; he
is upon it still, to have a House built for his Name and Worship to live in;
and to this purpose he turns the heart of the King to make proclamation of
Liberty to the people to return, and gives them encouragement and supplies to
farther this work; but they no sooner set to it indeed, to begin and lay the
foundation, but there are Enemies appear, and great opposition is made, so that
the work ceased and was laid aside, till a new stirring arises, and God sends
Haggai and other of the Prophets to put them upon it, to build this House,
after it had lien waste many years, (for the people were now brought out of
Babylon, and dwelt in their own Land,) but they let the time slip and pass
over, and had no heart to the work, though they might have built it; and this
is parallel to our condition, that linger and trifle away time, and put it off,
though an opportunity be given us again and again, and we are often called, and
invited, and entreated to set on this work of building the Lords House, [to
become a one-hearted people, no more to serve our selves, but one another.]

II. But WHY WILL THE LORD HAVE A HOUSE BUILT? a set place of Worship? Why will
he not leave his Worship to be performed in any place where men please
themselves?

For these three Reasons.

1. That this house might be a pattern of the Life to come, a type of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, where they are all to live in love, and peace, and unity;
to be all of one heart and one soul, moving from one principle to one end,
without jars, and scatterings, and wranglings; for in the life to come it will
not be as it is now with us, every one living for, and to our selves, and at a
distance and loose end from all others: But there the morning stars all sing
together, without jars, and envyings, and an evil eye; there is a peaceable
life, a Kingdom of love and peace; and this God would have a pattern, a rude
draught of, in this World, a people brought into some order and conformity of
spirit, answerable to the Kingdom to come; He would have somewhat here of that
union and agreement of Soul, of that love to care for one another, and bear one
another burdens; to honor, and serve, and prize one anotehr, and all in love.
Paul had a taste of this life, He became a servant to all, that he might save
some: and Christ pleased not himself; and David cries out, O how I love thy
Law, and the place where thy honor dwells! This life to come was pointed out by
this outward Temple; and all its beauty, and garnishings, and curious works,
all was to express what a life is to be attained, a life of Glory, and Freedom,
and Peace; a life free from all snares and bonds of World or Devil.

2. God will have a House built, that there may be a certain set way of
worship, a place whither the Tribes may go up, the Tribes of the Lord; that
every man go not on rudely, in a conceited preposterous way, according to the
thoughts of his own heart: Thou shall not worship in every place which thine
eyes shall see, but in the place which the Lord shall choose to place his Name
therein: As there is but one God, and one Truth, and one Hope; so he has
appointed but one way; set down one order and rule for all, and not left men
rudely to the rangings and rovings of their own vain thoughts and conceivings,
(as all the world now take up ways of Religion according to their own
imaginations:) but he has a Zion, a House of prayer, a Temple, where Brethren
live in unity, join with one heart and soul in offering spiritual sacrifices,
and there will he be found; There he has commanded the blessing, and life for
evermore. Why could not David worship God as well in the wilderness? Was not
God there? (As many now plead, Why, is not God every where? and may not we
serve him where ever we will?) But David cries out, and is at a great strait,
to see the glory of God in the Temple, no other place would serve him: And why
was all Israel once every year to come to this temple to worship? What was the
meaning of it, think you? You Will say perhaps, the Law is gone and abrogated:
Well, but what was the end and substance of the Law? That stands still; Christ
came not to destroy the Law, but fulfill it: to bring about the End of God, the
thing typed out by the Law. Now (as it is said of Israel) That the vail was upon
their hearts, that they could not see to the end of the Law when Moses was
read: So this hidden end none can reach, but to whom God shall open the
Parable: but this was the end the Temple pointed to, to show that God then had,
and ever would have, an orderly, and quiet, and sober way of worship, in a
people joined together, and made up into one heart and one soul, and they to
worship in spirit and in truth, according to his ordering and appointment, as
that unction received shall teach, and not according to man's conceits, thoughts
and imaginations.

3. He will have a House built to be a spectacle and standing witness to
condemn the world by: For now, who will not say, that God is to be worshipped?
I, but they worship after their own heart and devices; according to the number
of their Cities, so are their gods, [as every one conceives, and makes a shape
of worship in his own thoughts:] But who knows the mind of God in all their
worship? Who joins in, to this Body of Christ, the true Temples where the Holy
Ghost dwells, and spiritual services are performed to God? It is said in the
Acts, Of the rest durst none join, but they magnified the people; the way was
too strict: I, it is the greatest Circumcision in the world to man's will, to
join in here, to be a member of this building; it calls for a whole giving up
of a man's own wisdom, his own will, his own interests; no stone in this House
must lie loose from another; [no Soul live apart to it self, and for it self,
but all in love to serve one another:] and this will condemn all the ways and
joynings of men in the worship of God; for they all live as Lords, love and
seek themselves in what ever they do; they cannot endure to come up to such a
joining, and such an order, where no Self may live: Though many enter into
Church-orders, and Church Fellowship, yet alas, there is no true life nor
spirit in it; they still live loose, as Lords, and Rulers, one over another;
there is no walking in love, and meekness, and patience to serve others, and
deny themselves. But in this building there is a mutual help and supply in
love, every member says to another, I have need of thee: The foundation lies
lowest; I, but it bears up the whole building: and what would the foundation be
but lost rubbage, if not built upon, and joined to, the rest of the House? All
minister and help, receive and give honor to other, and say, For they are
worthy. O the peaceable Life that is to be attained! But we are far short of
it, at a great distance from that uniting, from that supporting, that serving,
that prizing, and seeing the need each of other. We are brought together
indeed, but live like loose stones, scattered and alone, and prize not the
mercy given us, nor make use of it: and this is the reason we prosper not, but
a blast follows in all: we sow much, and reap little; we labor, and strive, and
tug again and again, but nothing comes of it: we cannot, nor shall ever be able
of our selves to withstand the Devil, and lusts, and entanglements, till we are
brought to be a one people, to receive help from one another; this is the way
and ordinance of God, and here he has commanded the blessing. If we were but
once made naked and open-hearted to one another, in our trials and temptations;
Oh how wonderfully might we be strengthened against the Enemy, and helped on in
our way! and this would clearly condemn the world, who in their own Consciences
know they are not built up into a one-hearted people, [singly, and truly, and
heartily to serve one another in love and peace, not seeking themselves in
all.] But how we linger? and the building of this House is neglected? I
remember the motioning and stirring to this work was up in some hearts at least
twenty years since; but the Bishops they got up, and crushed all the tender
buddings, that the work ceased; and since this Parliament, the Lord has
graciously procured Liberty to be proclaimed, a door open for this work, and
many have begun to build, but they prove Houses of their own invention and
contrivances; not the Lord House: but we that are surely called and invited to
it, and that of God, both from stirings within, and a call without, we make no
use of the opportunity offered, but plead, It is not time to build the Lords
House, because we have no heart to the work, etc.

Thus I have showed the Reasons why God will have a House built: 1. That there
may be a standing place of Worship, whither the Tribes may go up, where all may
meet and agree together in one heart and way. Daniel, though he be in Babylon,
yet opens his window, and looks toward Jerusalem in his prayers; and when they
sat by the rivers of Babylon, they wept, and remembered Zion: they called to
mind the worship, the services, the solemn assemblies, where God had walked,
and been seen, and found by them; and the remembrance of this enforces tears,
being now deprived, being now in a strange Land, out of this enjoyment. Alas!
if we belong not to this City, this Habitation of God, if not a stone in this
building, it had been good for us we had never been born, for without are Dogs.
Then again, this House is to condemn the world; let men be never so wise, and
strict, and religious, yet if they live alone, [keep all close, and live to
themselves,] the world will never be judged and convinced by this, but a spirit
of love and union to serve another, and deny my own will; as it is said of
Christ, He pleased not himself; and Moses chose afflictions with the people of
God: and Paul, though he was free from all, yet made himself a servant to all;
he made himself a servant, he chose the service, it was his joy to serve
others: And no man (says Christ) takes my life from me, but I lay down my life
for my sheep: And if we shall ever be brought to this, to forsake and willingly
give up all our enjoyments, and liberties, and enlargements, and choose
afflictions, choose to bear another burden, though I am free; when we shall
be glad to be counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Christ; when we might
have ease, liberty, and honor, and pleasures, yet to say, Farewell all: Friends,
life, and liberty, farewell all, you are nothing to me; neither count I my life
dear, in compare of my God, my Truth, my Brethren, that I may serve in this
work, and help to build this house This, I say, will condemn the world; their
consciences accuse them, that this mind is not in them, they live not this life
of love and union. There are many that cry for corn, and wine, and oil*
[enlargements and flourishings in the Truth,] but all is for themselves, to
feed their own bellies: but all this is too short; this is but fruit that may
be shaken: a man's Soul may be lost for all this, and the House of God lie
waste. But next,

III. Consider, WHAT WILL GOD HAVE THIS HOUSE BUILT OF? WHAT ARE THE MATERIALS
OF IT? All that come are not the Materials; No: though they make a fair show,
though wise, and honorable, and great in the eyes of men, yet this is not
enough; this House must be built.

2. Of living stones, stones that will abide and endure, not soon rot and
putrify: Better is a living Dog, then a dead Lion. Not every one that makes a
great show, and comes to hear, and seems forward, No, no, only such which have
this spirit of life in them, to keep them from stinking and corruption, to make
them lasting stones, they are the materials for this house; all others will
fall off in a day of trial. There were many followed Christ into Jerusalem,
when in his triumph, and Hosanna was sung before him; but very few that went
out of Jerusalem with him, that follow him to Golgotha, to his Cross; No, none
but a few picked and chosen stones that have a spirit of life to make them last
and endure: no others are for this building, but such as the Lord shall choose
to it, whom he takes out of many; David was chose out of all his Brethren, he
was a fit stone for the use, a man after Gods own heart, he loves Truth in the
inward parts; and this mind he sees in David, and him he pitcheth on; such a
company of choice stones will he have for this house, a chosen generation of
lasting stones that may make a Tabernacle never to be pulled down more, never
to be lost; The gifts and calling of God are without repentance: such ^s God
chooses for materials of this building, are such as are never to be lost and
thrown away; No man can pluck them out of my Fathers hand (says Christ:) not
such a dead stone as Saul proved, when the spirit of life was taken from him,
he mouldred away, and came to nothing; but living stones: a stable, enduring,
and fixed spirited people he looks for, that are not ever hanging, and waving,
and reeling to and fro in their minds; but such as are tried stones, and will
endure the storms; not like Ephraim, who being armed, and carrying Bows, yet
turned their back in the day of Battle. Then,

2. Consider, In this House are to be vessels of all sorts and sizes, some to
hold less and some more; some to receive much, and to give out, and supply, and
fill up others: He will have vessels for every service, and every use; none are
to be barren, but all useful and helpful to one another: and therefore the
thing is weighty, and need we should consider it, and lay it to heart; for he
will not build his House of any rubbage, but only of living and tried stones:
And then all are to be of use, all the vessels of his House are for his own
service; they are not to be looked on, and baubled with, and made to serve our
wills and lusts. Remember what befell the King Belshazzar for venturing to call
for the Lords vessels to make up his mirth and jollity, the handwriting
appears on the wall, and makes him tremble. It Is dangerous trifling in weighty
matters, God will not be mocked. But next consider,

IV. WHY DO THEY PLEAD, IT IS NOT TIME TO BUILD THE LORDS HOUSE?

What Reasons have they? These three.

1. Their Ignorance hinders: Thence their pleadings come, It is not time to
build, etc They knew not that the blastings and Mildews, and curse that
followed them in all their ways, was because this house lay waste; they were
ignorant whence all this evil befell them, they enquired not into it, Lord,
what is the meaning of the hand against me! Why go all things thus contrary?
Why prosper I not in any thing I take in hand? They knew not this was the cause
of all: Ye looked for much, and it came to little, and when ye brought it home,
I did blow upon it; why? says the Lord of Hosts? because of mine House that
lies wast, and ye run every man to his own house, Verse. 9. and so on. And this
is a great block in our way, our ignorance; we enquire not, why am I so barren
and desolate, and perplexed in all my ways! Why goes all so cross to me, and I
meet with nothing but troubles, and fears, and tormenting thoughts? Alas, it is
because we live Scattered alone, and follow our own Counsels, our own wills
are our own guides, and rulers, and come not to build the House of the Lord [to
be counseled and ordered, and appointed there:] Hence is all our misery.

2. Love of their ease hindered: it was a great deal an easier way to sit at
home in their own ceiled houses, then to go up to the Mountain, and cut wood
down, and bring, and hew, and square it to build the Lords House; and who would
indeed choose to venture to leave all, to give up all, ease and rest, and
peace, and enjoyments, and instead thereof to take up troubles, and sorrows,
and afflictions? Oh no, the heart shrinks from this: here comes in, Spare thy
self, Master; and therefore we plead it is not time yet, because it is a
trouble and perplexity to the man to set upon this work, it puts him beside his
cushion; he must be sure, if he begin to build the Lords House, to meet with
opposition and contradictions from within, and from without, from the world,
and from the Devil: The more we shall stir to get out of his Kingdom, the more
will he stir and rage, and cast out his floods to destroy: what have our
Fathers gone through in this work? what strange miseries, and sundry sorts of
death, as you may see Heb. 11. What did Paul suffer? hunger, and nakedness,
perils by sea, perils by Land, perils amongst false brethren, stripes, and
Imprisonments; and now who will endure this that can avoid it? who will choose
afflictions? Man's heart will ever plead, it is not yet time, because it loves
Ease, and would never see sorrow. But

3. Fear hinders them: They were yet under tribute to the King of Babylon; they
were not yet quite freed from their foes, they had once begun to build and were
hindered, and curbed in the work, and therefore now fear gets up, and they will
venture no more, having been once crushed, and still remaining under the same
enemies: this seems a just cause to plead, it is not time; and thus the heart
reasons, Have I not tried, again and again, and been stopped and prevented, and
beguiled by the Enemy, and am I not still in, his hands? and if I stir, I shall
soon be met with, and pulled back again: and here the heart slugs and lingers,
and thinks it has cause to fear, and keep off: but Jordan never parts, till
the Priest first ventures to set his foot in it: there must be a venturing
through all lets, and rubs in the way, if ever we think to come to any thing,
and see, when they do but begin, and set upon the work, how they are prospered,
and all makes for them, which before might seem impossible; and are not these
the true reasons we keep off from the work? are we not ignorant, that this is
the cause of all our misery? are we not loving our ease? are we not fearing our
enemies, and so give it over, and plead, it is not time, etc. But consider,

V. WHAT MISERIES FOLLOW FOR NOT BUILDING THIS HOUsE?

A curse and a blast follows in all their undertakings, do what they will, yet
nothing prospers; as it is with a man in a deep consumption, let him eat what
he will, though never so good and choice diet, yet his Stomach spoils all; It
turns it into ill humors to maintain the disease, till the root of his
sickness be taken away: and so is it with us, notwithstanding all our mercies
and opportunities afforded: meat is set before us daily, daily are we waited
upon, and called, and instructed, and counseled, yet how do we still waste and
consume? we thrive not in all, but wax leaner and leaner, we come and hear, and
listen sometimes, and swallow down a great deal, but alas all is spoiled by a
bad stomach! we spend all upon our Lusts, we love to live alone, by our selves,
at our own Wills, and Counsels, and Wisdom, we are not subjected, yet in our
souls to come to build this house of the Lord, to live in Love and Counsel and
order one with another, etc. and this is the moth that eats and destroys, and
will destroy all our good, if the Lord prevent not: thus I have spoke to you
what this House is, why God will h^ve it built, and of what materials: and
then the Reasons why the people plead, it is not time, and the misery that
follow this neglect: and now in a word I would speak to that, who they are that
are chiefly guilty in this thing?

I cannot so charge you all of being thus guilty, but there are chief Heads who
are called to this work, and they are to lay the first stone: the cloud must
first remove before the people can journey: and in that great sin of taking
strange wives, for which Ezra pulled off his hair, and sat astonished on the
ground, it is said, the Princes and rulers, they were the chief in this thing,
they lead on the rest by a bad example, they are the sinners, such as were
bidden to the feast, and yet refuse to come, and make excuses, they are the
sinners. Now are you all bidden and called out to build this house? no, I know,
it cannot yet touch nor lie upon all your Consciences, that this house is not
built, but the Princes and Leaders, such as have been called both from a word
without, and a stirring within their own spirits, to begin their work, and lead
the way and lay the first stone, that the rest might follow; these are the
guilty persons that make their excuses when they are Invited, I have married a
wife, I have bought a Farm, [This and the other stands in my way, that I cannot
come;] but if any enjoyment or employment, or relation, if any tie shall hinder
us from setting to this work, when the Lord calls to it, then are we miserable.
I know there are some of you that stand yet clear, and have not resisted a
call, but think you are ready to become any thing that shall be called for from
you; but some of you there are that punctually and certainly know you are
called forth to the work, and yet draw back and shrink away, and say, it is not
yet time to build, etc. The heart knowingly flies back and shrinks; this is the
guilt, here lies the sin: Therefore the first thing to be known by you, is,
whether you are called or not, and if called, then take heed of reasonings and
pleadings with Moses, I am a stammerer, a man of a slow speech, and they will
not believe that thou have sent me, till at lest the anger of the Lord was
kindled for his lingering in it: and this is the way of the heart; we do not
say point blank, we will never build the House; No, but shuffle it off, It is
not yet time, and we know not our way, and the enemies are round about to
hinder us; and so we conclude the case beforehand, and keep off the strait
that Paul was brought to, when he cries out, Lord what would thou have me to
do? What way should I take? What is thy mind in all? All things go cross;
there is no thriving nor prospering in out ways, but all symptoms appear to
signify a consumption is upon our way; we are scarcely kept alive, have scarce
a bit of bread to stay our hunger: Now what is the meaning of all this? Sure
there is a Cause.

Therefore need there is every Soul of you should consider your ways, and
enquire, Lord, is it I? or, Is it I? Do I hinder this work? where am I guilty?
For though it chiefly concern the Leaders and chief ones to consider, and take
it to heart, yet something belongs to all to look after: What is my place?
Where am I to stand? Am I faithful in the work entrusted me? To be faithful in
little things, is the way to be trusted in greater. Surely, surely, it is time
to bethink our selves we have no good nor peace in our way: though we live, and
are kept together by a mighty hand, yet we live loose, and scattered, and
consume in our spirits: Certainly if we could but meet with the very root of
all these ill humors, and get that cleared, then we might hope for cure; if we
were but once brought to leave the cumber about many things, and mind the one
thing necessary, then we might prosper. O Lord! that he would sink it on your
hearts! as God says here, Consider your ways, you that are called to; for all
are not materials for this House, not any dirt and rubbish; but you that the
Prophecy has taken in, That you are living stones, and that witness is born,
It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, will not you build him
a House? you that he has bestowed all this cost on? you are called upon to
begin and set upon the work, and lay the foundation of this House, that your
children may have a pattern to build after, and a foundation to build upon. We
pretend to love our children, and Oh how tender are we of them! but alas, we
do what we can to undo them utterly, if we come not up to this work, to begin a
House for the Lord, and leave a way behind us, for them to walk in. Hence come
all our blastings, we eat, and are not satisfied* put on clothes, and are not
warmed; we have no good runs in all we enjoy, the life and spirit* is stolen
from them, because there is not a true, and single, and clear coming off from
the world, but we stick, and linger, and put off the time, and look back to our
old Lovers, and hanker, and still love our selves, and come not forth
resolvedly to build this House: and thus in stead of leaving a good example, a
blessing to our children, we are like to leave them a curse and a blast, if the
Lord prevent not: The way is open at present, there is no outward persecution
that hinders but we might build this house in peace; but we trifle, and
dringle, and loyter, and say, It is not yet time. Good Lord, when shall we say,
It is time! but we plead, we have no heart: Have we no heart? and what is the
reason of that? We have a heart to our ease, a heart to our own wills; we have
a heart to build sieled houses for our selves to dwell in, and shall we dye
thus with this old heart? and never see a new heart given, a heart wholly to
follow the Lord!

But then lastly, If any thing will invite and move us to stir,

VI. Consider THE GREAT PRIVILEGES THAT ACCRUE TO THEM THAT SHALL SET THEIR
HAND TO THIS WORK: And they are these four.

The first is mentioned Verse. 8. Go up to the mountain (says God) and bring
wood, and build this house, and I will take pleasure in it. Now to have the
Lord accept our sacrifice, and take pleasure in our work, what a high favor is
it? Were it but truly laid to heart, That the God of the Heavens and Earth,
whose all creatures are, to command and turn at his Will; That I should do any
thing (may the Soul say) to please him, in which he will take delight, who can
express this favor? etc.

2. Another Privilege is mentioned Verse. 13. I am with you, says the Lord:
Will he be with them in it? that they shall not go, nor stir a step in this
work, but he will go along with them? Is not this enough to carry them on? If
thy presence go not with me (said Moses) send me not hence: I, but if that
presence go along, then send, do, and command me whither thou will: What would
not a man do that loves God indeed? what would not he suffer, and part with,
and undergo, to have God always with him? to have his Friend, his Counselor,
Life and Protector, to have him always stand by him in all that befalls? If God
be for us (says the Apostle) who can be against us? what can be too hard?
Therefore we see our Fathers have rejoiced in prisons, in fires, in bonds,
because the Lord was with them, and so long affliction is no affliction.

3. A third great Mercy is promised v. 19. From this day will I bless you: From
that day that the foundation of the Lords house was laid: Consider it now
(says the Lord) from this day and upward will I bless you: In all thou take
in hand shall a sure blessing follow, in thy going out and coming in, when thou
walk abroad and when thou sit at home, when thou sleep and when thou
wakest; from that very day you shall be helped to set a hand to the work
indeed: He will surely bless you. We have forsaken all, and followed thee
(says Peter,) what shall we have? Have! you shall have enough; you that have
endured with me in my Temptations, you shall sit on Thrones; you shall be blessed
in all your way: and what can you desire more?

4. The fourth Mercy is mentioned in the last verse, I will make thee as a
signet upon my hand (says God to Zerubbabel.)

And in that these three Privileges lie couched up.

1. A Signet has a near relation to the hand, it is worn always and carried
upon the finger.

2. A Signet carries the image and superscription, either of a man's self, or
some friend; or some weighty thing or other is carved in it.

3. A Signet, or Seal, is to witness, confirm, and ratify; to make things sure
and unalterable, that are once sealed with it. And now, 1. To be thus near to
God, as the signet upon his hand, to lie so close, so nigh him, in his heart
and bosom and love, as his delight, his jewel, his ornament; This is wonderful!
And then, 2. To bear forth his own image and stamp, to be like him, to own our
Father by our faces; as it is said of Moses, His face shone when he came from
talking with God in the Mount: It will appear to all whose we are, to whom we
belong, by the image and likeness we shall hear in us; all our words and
carriages savoring of God, bearing forth his image, his mind and heart. And
then, 3. To be as a seal, to witness and ratify the deeds of God, to confirm
and make all sure; This is a mighty honor, that man should ever be employed in
such a service: Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted in Heaven; and whose
sins ye bind in Earth, they are bound in Heaven: I will make thee as a God
(said the Lord to Moses,) to act, and order, and counsel, and confirm in my
place; Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord, he shall be as a
Signet upon his hand.

O then that your Souls were at a strait indeed, that you might cry out, O who
will give me of the waters of Bethlehem to drink! Who will help, and counsel,
and direct? who will show me how to begin to build this House of the Lord? that
I may share in all these blessings, and escape all the great curses, and stand
in that day; That the Lord may take pleasure in me, and be with me, and bless
me in all my ways, and bear me as a Signet on his hand, so nigh himself, and
make me so like himself, so serviceable and highly empowered to act for him. O
that it were in your hearts to cry this night, every Soul apart, O that he
would count me worthy to help on this building! That is the next thing, if God
will please to give us a heart to cry together and strive with him, and not let
him go until he bless us, till we shall be counted worthy to begin to build,
and made to say and feel, My heart is ready (O God,) my heart is ready: That
you may say to all Idols, Get you hence: Friends, and relations, and ease, and
honors, farewell all; let the dead bury their dead: you are but dead enjoyments,
and I am called, and must go, to build a living House to the Lord!

God Speaking BY A PROPHET, OR Truths way of instructing the Soul. SERMON. XII.
June 1. 1651.
DEUTERONOMY. 5.27. Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say; and
speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will
hear it, and do it.
The Analysis.
FRom the words in general was considered.

I. That the way of the Lord in speaking to his people is by a PROPHET. And
that for these Reasons.

1. It is his pleasure, his ordinance, as for bread to nourish. 2. It is a
gentle familiar way, suitable to their weakness. 3. His power and wisdom more
appears in such weak means. 4. By this he brings his people into an oneness,
order, and government. 5. Hence the distinct way of their being saved appears;
They know who was their own Guide and Leader.
II. This Prophet is to go NEAR TO GOD: Go thou near, etc. And that implies
three things.

1. To be free and familiar with God: Fear and guilt are removed. 2. To stand
in an awful and reverent frame of spirit. 3. To learn the carriage and mind of
God, his wisdom, meekness, etc.
III. HEAR ALL that the Lord our God shall say to thee.

Now the Lord speaks three things in general, which they should hear.

1. The Lord would have them know where they now are. 1. Saved out of Egypt,
[brought out of the rude world.] 2. That no returning back thither, what ever
come on us. 3. Know we are still in the wilderness. In which two things. 1. To
know, this is the day of proving our hearts. 2. That this is not our Rest, we
are far from home.

2. God would have them know what way they are to go; all along by Enemies,
Amalek, and Ammon, and Moabites, all will rise and stand in their way: This
they must lay down, the way of the Cross. 3. Know the end whither they are
going, what the latter end will be. Hence three things considered. 1. Know
there is surely an End, a Rest for the people of God. 2. This cannot be, till
Christ have put down all other Rule and Authority. 3. Then is the Kingdom to be
delivered up to the Father, and God to be all in all; this is the end.

IV. Consider the Promise, And we will hear it, and do it.

About this Hearing five things were considered.

1. To hear who it is that speaks, to be sure to know the voice of Christ. 2.
Hear what he speaks, thy particular lesson. 3. Hear to whom; not every one to
thrust in, but Is it to me? 4. Hear when the thing is to be done, now or
afterward. 5. Hear for his sake that calls so lovingly, O that my people would
harken. All brought home in five particular Uses.
DEUTERONOMY. 5.27. Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say; and
speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will
hear it, and do it.
TWo things I have already mentioned to you out of this Scripture: I. Why it is
that God will speak to his people by a Prophet; why not alone by himself,
without outward means and help of man? No; but Go thou near to the Lord our God
for us, and speak thou unto us, etc. and God approves of the thing as good:
They have well spoken in all that they have said. I showed you five Reasons,
why this was so. 1. Because it is his pleasure, his ordinance, the way he has
appointed for that purpose, where he has commanded the Blessing; and if we
neglect that way, we can prosper in no other. 2. It is a gentle and familiar
way, suited to man's capacity and weakness: God in himself is too dreadful and
dazzling; but a Prophet will the Lord raise unto you out of your Brethren, him
shall you hear. 3. The Wisdom and Power of God is more manifest by using such
weak means, a worm, a nothing; That this rich treasure should be put in earthen
vessels, it makes the glory wholly to appear Gods. 4. By this he brings his
people into an union, an order and government, else all would live loose,
alone, and scattered to themselves; but now all are brought under one Guide,
one Shepherd, one Interpreter between God and them. 5. By this the particular
work of Salvation is made more distinctly to appear; Of Zion it shall be said,
such and such a man was born there: The particular characters shall be set
down; In such a place, at such a time, by such a man, from such a word, the
Soul shall distinctly know all its leadings on. Then something has been spoke
of that,

II. Go thou near: This Prophet is to go near to God. They hit on the right
nick, God will have it so.

And that for these Reasons.

1. To testify his freeness and open-heartedness to them; To you it is given
(says Christ to the Disciples) to understand the mysteries of God, but to
others in Parables; They come not so nigh to read his heart and bosom. They
that traveled with Paul to Damascus, they saw the light that shone about him,
but none heard the voice, That was whispered unto Paul alone, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? None else was taken to be dealt with in that manner, in
whom the Word entered, and searched, and came nigh to the inwards: but they
that would indeed know the mind of God, the inward meaning, there is need they
should have a heart raised to search and enquire of God privately, What is the
very thing he intends in all? Many enquire no farther then the Scriptures, the
outward letters and the light of their Reason joined together; but alas, I
cannot find out the meaning of the heart of God concerning me by all this!
Therefore if there be not an Interpreter, one of a thousand, that can show to
man his righteousness; if there be not a days-man for us, that can come nigh to
God, and enquire his mind and thoughts toward us, then are we miserable: for
alas, we cannot go near our selves; who of us can stand before everlasting
burning! No, (says God to Moses) Thou can not see my face, and live: No
self, no flesh, no evil thing can live in the presence of God, the fire is too
hot; He will have no fellowship with the stool of iniquity. If you will come
near God, there is need of a heart without all guile and deceit, that intends
what it pretends; Will you be my people indeed (says God?) Indeed? Nothing
else will pass; He will divide between words and thoughts, between thoughts and
intentions; if there be but a tittle against thee, he will be sure to find it
out: I know thy Works, and Love, and Patience, (says Christ;) I, but yet I
have a few things against thee: He spies out the least flaw; and therefore it
is dreadful coming near him without that garment of Love, which can cover a
multitude of sins; for else alas, he may take advantage every moment, and
consume us.

2. This is another end of coming thus near God, That the Soul may stand
reverently, and with deep attendance of mind, as in the Kings presence: Were
you but aware that God was so near you, sure it would strike a great awe and
wariness upon your spirits: What, is the Lord in this place, and I knew it not?
Is this no less then the gate of Heaven? Am I in the presence of the great God,
and have to do with him in all my words, and thoughts, and hearings? O what
need is there of an awful spirit? Holiness becomes this House for ever. Many
go to Church, it may be twenty or thirty years, and never yet were their hearts
affected with the least true fear and awe; it is because they come not nigh God
in their service, but make it a mere custom and May Game: but he will have his
people come nigh him, he will have them stand in his presence with awe and
reverence, and godly fear; he will have their words and prayers weighed and
scanned to a tittle. How carelessly and inconsiderately do many venture on
praying? as men cast bones from them to a dog; never think of the thing, never
look to see what becomes of their prayers: but God will have his stand in
another kind of posture; As the eyes of a maid are unto the hands of her
mistress, so are our eyes up to thee, O Lord: He will have them wait, and look,
and attend; when ever a word shall drop from his mouth, and touch upon them.

3. They are to go near to God for this end, to learn his behavior and
carriage; Be ye holy, as I am holy (says God:) Learn of me (says Christ,) I
am meek and lowly: I will go down to Sodom (says God) and see whether it be
altogether so as the cry is come up unto me: Why, did not God know? Does he
need to go and see? No; but it is to teach us how to behave our selves in such
cases, to teach us to be sure and wary, and just in judgment; before we pass
sentence against any, to know what we do; to learn his tender-heartedness, and
compassion, and forbearance; to learn his manners and ways: and if ever you are
brought near him, it will be for these purposes.

III. The next thing to be considered in general, is, AND HEAR THOU ALL THAT
THE LORD OUR GOD SHALL SAY UNTO THEE.

Hear all,] Every tittle, let nothing be lost that he speaks. Now there are
three general things which the Lord speaks, and would have all his people know,
that stand in the same condition as Israel now did. 1. He would have them know
where they are, that they are yet in the Wilderness, yet not at home, but far
from Rest. 2. What is their way to attain it. 3. Their latter end, what they
are intended for, what they are to come up unto; for else the Soul cannot go on
with any strength and courage, but will faint and feeble. Abraham followed the
Lord at first going out, not knowing whither he went, but it was a mighty power
of God that carried him out to it; and afterward he saw the mind meaning of
God plainly, and that the Lord delights in; he would not have his people grope
in the dark always, but see and know their way, and have the mark in their eye,
and be wise to understand their latter end.

1. The Lord would have his people know where they are; They are now brought
out of Egypt, they have escaped that cruel bondage under Pharaoh. This the Lord
would have you take notice of, how far you are saved and delivered, not to pass
that over slightly without regarding it.

1. He would have you consider how he has brought us out of the rude world,
when we lay all together in one lump; and why should the Lord put a difference?
why has he brought us off of our false hopes and confidences, and false ways
of worship, worshipping Idols, the works of our own hands, the contrivances of
our own wisdom, and thoughts, and reason (as all the world do?) Why has he
saved us here? that what ever become of us, we can never again go back to those
fleshpots, the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt?

2. He would have us know what we are brought to, as well as brought from; to
consider how far he has led us, That we can surely stick to, though it should
cost our lives: whether we can say that word with the three children, what ever
becomes of us, though our God should not save us, though we should never attain
the thing set in our view, yet we will not fall down to this Image: we cannot
turn again from the worship of the living God, to worship Idols: This the Lord
would have us know and stick to.

3. He would have us know, that notwithstanding all we are brought off from,
and all we are brought on to, that yet we are but in the Wilderness, that is
the place, and no farther, And in this, two things are to be known by us.

1. That this is the day, in which he will prove our hearts. Now will he open
the fountains of the great Deep, the low channells of the earth are now made to
appear, as Psalm. 18. Now he discovers what man is, what a helpless wretched
thing: Now he opens the strange wickedness that lay hid in the heart; the fire
makes the scum rise, the fiery trialls, the great and sore temptations (as God
calls them) these stir, and fetch up all the poison that lay buried before: Now
the Lingrings, and drawings back, the murmurings, the ill will, the frettings,
and madness of the heart shows it self: when there must be no water given, but
what comes out of a rock, a flint, such a strange unthought of way, and
impossible to reason; and that they must have no bread but what is given them
new every morning, that they can turn them no ways from their miseries, nor to
their mercies: that they cannot reach out a hand to help themselves; but though
they dye and starve, and perish, yet there is no remedy, but they must lie at
the foot of God, and take what he gives, and no more: this is a day that will
prove the heart indeed, and what is in it.

2. As it is a day of Trial, so God would have us know, it is not our rest,
our home, there is a great journey to be gone, up Elijah why sit thou here?
Alas, you are far from home, you are not come to the good Land yet, which
brings forth of it self milk and honey! and this greatly displeased the Lord,
that they should here in this wilderness sit down to eat and drink, and rise up
to play: Is this a place, Is this a time to sit down in, and feast? Alas, (as
if God should say) you know not how long you shall enjoy any thing, what I give
you to day, I can take away, and deny to morrow, and then what becomes of you?
you know not yet my Heart, and Mind, and Good Will, and Eternal Thoughts, how
they stand toward you, and can you sit down here, to take content and pleasure
in any thing? This God would have them and us know in what a dangerous place we
are, still in the Wilderness.

2. Hear all] The second thing the Lord would have them hear, is, what way they
are to go.

And all along they are to pass through their enemies Lands: they must go by
Amaleck, and by the children of Ammon, and Moab, all along stand enemies in
their way to oppose and hinder. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution; they must take up their Cross, and follow him: He could
have led them another way, a nearer cut to Canaan, if he had pleased, but he
chooses this way, to go through the Lands of the^r enemies, and they must
follow him, if ever they will come to their journies end: they must through the
Cross, through hunger, and thirst, and Serpents, through sore temptations, and
sorrows, and sins. Now this you are to hear, if you will hear all, hear what
your way is, and submit to it: if he will lead through hunger and drought, if
he will deny and shut up, if he will destroy our next companions, if Korah,
Dathan and Abiram must be swallowed up, yet murmur not, be not affrighted, nor
skared, but go on still, and know the way is through strairs and sorrows:
Expect no bettter.

3. God would have them know their latter end whither they are going, he has
given an expected end.

And here three things are to be known.

1. That there is surely a Rest for the people of God: that they shall not
always be as a rolling stone, not always vagabonds, and wanderers, following
the Prince of the Air, with those restless tossing Spirits: this God would have
his people know, that there is a Rest, there is an expected end, a day of
freedom, when all bonds, and chains shall be broken, Sin shall not always,
reign, the enemy shall not afflict and torment for ever. I would not live
always (says Job) by any means, I am weary of it: This God would you should
hear, but now whilst we are in that horrible pit, the pit of noise, we can hear
nothing, but destruction upon destruction, one storm and wave comes upon the
neck of another, there is no respite given no time to swallow the spittle, (as
Job complains) so that the soul is, as it were distracted, to see no way of
escape, that it is like always to be thus with it: But is there not an
appointed time for man upon earth? Yes, God would have you hear, and be surely
set down in that, that there is an end.

2. He would have you know, when this end is to be.

It is said, when Christ shall have put down all rule and all authority, and
all power, then to comes the end: a time is to be when Christ shall reign in
the world in his glory, and his Saints reign with him, and all Scepters and
Kingdoms shall be made to bow and stoop under him: but there is a time of his
reigning in the particular souls of his People, when all that opposes and
offends shall be taken out of the way, no end will come till then: we shall
find no rest in our Souls, till the word of Life shall come and put down all
other rule and government, to bring every thought into subjection, every Lust
and Hunt of heart, all Pride and Envy, and self-love, all those lords that have
ruled over us, must down, before this end shall be; and till this be done,
there will be nothing but wars and rumors of wars, Nation against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom, and famine, and pestilence, and earthquakes; nothing
but troubles, and perplexities and trialls, till this end come: now to be kept
through all these, is the Salvation: He that endures to the end, the same shall
be saved.

3. What is this end? What is the Rest of the People of God: Hear and know
that, and that rest is the sole reigning, and rule of God in the soul, when
Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and God shall be all in all:
Now the Heir is under Tutours and Governors, now up, and now down, under fears
and faintings, and Terrors, because the Kingdom of God is not yet come, that
Kingdom of Peace and Truth; God is not yet all in all, we are yet straggling
after our wills and lustings, and covetings to our selves, and so can have no
peace in all our ways, till we shall be brought under that peaceable
Government, to submit to that one Lord in every thing; to give the Crown out of
our hand unto him whose due it is, that God may be all in all.

Now hear all that the Lord shall say, not by halves, and piecemeals, but hear
all, every word of God is good: how many of you content your selves, when you
have but a little Light to see where you are, how your condition stands! but
alas, that is misery, if you hear only your shortness, that you are in a
Wilderness, if you hear not of a rest too, of an end, if you perish and fall
short in the mid way, what shall then come of all? but oh how impossible is it
to make any thing seize upon a flint, to make a word enter upon an iron heart.
I wonder sometimes, the word should sink no more, being it is told you over,
and over again, and yet all passes away as an idle tale, but that I know, it is
impossible to be otherwise, till there be a new heart given, and an ear bored
by God to receive instruction.

IV. The next general Thing, is the Peoples Promise, AND WE WILL HEAR IT, AND
DO IT.

And if this be not the thing set down in your hearts and minds, if we intend
not this, to come to doing, to be the thing that is called for, alas, what do
we come together for? Why do we hear? What will come of all our way, if we are
not truly brought to this mind, we will hear and do all that the Lord shall
command? About this hearing, five things may be considered.

1. You are to hear who it is that speaks: My sheep hear my voice, (says
Christ) and the voice of a stranger they will not hear: there is need
distinctly to know him that speaks and calls, and not take every word by road
that seems good and true, as the world do, but to be able surely to discern and
distinguish between the voice of God, and the voice of man, and the voice of
the Devil, for the same outward words may be taken up by them all, the Devil
can speak Scripture to Christ; He shall give his Angels charge over thee, lest
thou dash thy foot against a stone: and the Jews, (the great enemies of Christ)
they can speak as good words as may be, they say to the blind man recovered to
his sights Give Glory to God: what better and righter word can be spoken? But
yet, how base and wicked was it from them? for in the next word they reject
Christ; as for this man, we know he is a sinner. Now if we be not made to look
into the inwards of words, and see what runs in them, what Spirit breaths,
whether God, or the enemy, or man's own heart, if we know not this, we know
nothing: and sure the word now preached to us is as an idle tale, and we do not
seriously enquire who it is that speaks? whether this Doctrine be from heaven,
or from men, whether the Lord speaks indeed unto us? I told you, the Lord would
have you know where you are at the present, that you are in a desolate
Wilderness, where a thousand dangers and miseries lie in the way, and it is ten
thousand to one, whether you get clear through all, but fall short in some pit
or other: Now do you believe this indeed? do you think it is the Lords voice,
that he speaks his very word to you? Alas! what a mist do the world live in?
How do they go to Church, and hear, and hear, year after year, and it scarce
ever comes into any of their minds once to think seriously: what is this I
hear? whose voice is it? Does God speak to me of a certain, or is it only the
voice of a man? If it be man only, then what do I hearing? it is a vain
service: but if God, then why seiseth it no more? why do they not tremble under
it? And this old Taint we retain from them, and thus I fear most of our
hearings slip away without a serious enquiry who it is that speaks to us, whose
voice calls: for if we were certainly persuaded, that when a word touches our
hearts, when it reproves, and finds us Sinners, when it pulls and stirs to
arise, and be going, did we surely know it is God that reproves, and touches
and stirs within us, certainly we durst not so stand out and slight it, as we
do. If it be indeed the word of God, it will not be dallied with: It is quick
and lively, and will work one way or other, it will either kill or save,
condemn or justify, draw to God, or drive from him; he will not speak in vain;
therefore in all hearings, hear this first, who is it that speaks?

2. The next thing is to hear what he speaks, I will hear what the Lord God
will say, (says David) hear the particular word and message that comes to me,
for he says to one, Go, and he is to go, and to anoth^r, Come and he is to
come; to a third, Do thou this, and that is to be his work. Now in Babel there
is a strange confusion, and lumber of all together; it is a Land without order,
because there is no King nor governmenr, nor settled laws to stand to, but God
is not the God of confusion, his Kingdom is a Kingdom of righteousness, peace,
and order, the Lord sets every one to his own work, and in his own place; Sit
thou down here, thou art a sinner, and guilty, buckle thou under the guilt,
that is thy place: To another he says, Friend sit up higher be thou encouraged,
and hope, and expect deliverance, that is his place, to another he says, Enter
thou into thy Masters joy, for thou art worthy, and that is his place: he
speaks not to you all, as in one condition, though you may be all sailing in
one ship, yet for different ends and purposes. I now some of you that are like
a post in a wall, it is as impossible to make you hear a word of truth, the ear
is so stopped, charm the charmer never so wisely. Now the word spoke to such,
is, to know where they are to own their shame, that is their place, and for
others that may not be this Highway ground, where the word is snatched away,
and takes no place at all, yet there is a stony ground, and a thorny ground,
where the seed grows and flourishes a while, but yet all is lost, it never
comes to perfection. Now for every one to know what ground is my present
condition in? What speaks the Lord to me? What is my way and work? hear that.

3. Hear to whom he speaks, that not every one may thrust himself in by
violence, and catch at a share in every word that is spoken: do you press in?
I* but you shall be turned out again as fast. The children of the Kingdom (that
thought they had good right and title to it, yet, they) shall be thrust out.
There is need therefore to know distinctly, whether the Lord speaks to me or
not. Thou art the man (said the Prophet to David) thou art the sinner, when the
word shall come home, and the Lot fall upon the particular Tribe, the
particular man, the particular sin: T^is distinct way God takes in his
de^lings, when Christ said to the D sciples, One of you shall betray me; they
are all put upon the search and enquiry, Lord is it I? and is it I? Now I have
told you all the four sorts of grounds are amongst us, there is the Highway
ground where the seed takes no place at all, and the stony ground where it
takes a while, but there was a depth of earth, a sure ^ooting, and that soon
withers, and there is a thorny ground which may continue long and hold to the
last, but the seed is all overspread, over-^opped, and choked with the thorns.
Now these three grounds take in a large compas^, and will you now go away, and
not enquire this night, which of these grounds does my soul stand in? how is
the state of my condition? where am I? how far gone, and taken off of my self?
and where stick I and am loath to give up? He that will be wise, let him be
wise for himself: It Is not your way to put it off to another, and say, this
concerns such a one, they are sinners and guilty here and there, and so the
discouraged drooping Soul puts off hope, and reviving, and says, I, it may
belong to another, but as for me, I am cut off, etc. Zion said my God has
forgotten me, etc. but our way is quietly and sob^rly to listen, to whom is the
message sent? does the Lord speak to me or not?

4. Hear this, when the Lord calls to stir, when his voice is to be obeyed; we
hear sometimes, and know and are convinced, that this is his will, that we must
come up to such a denial, and take up such a cross, and do such a service, but
we hear not the time when, we put it off till to morrow: Alas, to morrow is
not yours! you may be dead and in your graves by to morrow, therefore consider,
and whilst it is called to day, hear his voice. Ask now what is the meaning of
the Parable, what is his mind concerning thee, let not the Sun go down upon
your wrath. How many of your souls at present stand unreconciled to God? an
enmity is in your minds: now if advantage should be taken, if the Sun go down
upon you [if Truth should depart, and you be left to dye in your sins] oh how
miserable would it be! to morrow may never be ours, and then are we undone for
ever.

5. Consider, why, for whose sake, I should hear? for his sake that invites so
lovingly, and waits so patiently and calls so earnestly, Oh that my people had
hearkened to my voice, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou had known the day of
thy visitation! Hear for his sake that comes with intreatings, and bewailings,
and love and tenderness, that comes in the still voice, gently, not in thunder
and earthquakes to crush all a pieces, and shake us to nothing, (as he might
do) but the good will, the love of him that speaks might move us to hear: he
that after many rebellions, and many gainsayings, and many withdrawings, yet
stands at the door, and waits, and calls, and would not by any means the death
of a sinner, but uses all ways, that he may return and live: Hear for his
sake that is thus gracious.

Thus something has been spoke to the opening of that word, and we will hear
it and do it, it is a very good saying indeed, and God approves of it well;
they have well spoken, and if this come not in the last place, if we are not
brought to do what we hear, to be the thing, then is all our labor lost, as
good we had never heard at all; and if it come in the first place, it is to as
little purpose, if we set upon doing before we hear, then all is in a confusion
and lumber, we worship we know not what, God regards it not, and therefore he
says, I hate your new moons and solemn assemblies, my soul loathes your
sacrifices: and Samuel said to Saul for his blind and hasty venturing to
sacrifice, Has the Lord as much delight in burnt offerings, as to hear the
word of the Lord! no to obey is better then sacrifice: and these are the two
great Rocks that the whole world are split upon, one sort will do nothing,
another are doers indeed, but they do they know not what, they worship an
unknown God: Now it is said that he will come to render vengeance on all that
know not God [they live loosely and do nothing at all] and such as obey not the
Gospel, [The Gospel comes to them, and they hear and know it, I, but they obey
it not] they obey their own thoughts, and will worship, they seek, and ask; I,
but they ask amiss: Israel has not obtained what it sought after, but if ever
you would obtain and do any thing which may please the Lord, then you must hear
first, hear soberly what is his will and way? it is a blind preposterous way to
do first, and then go to hear whether we have done right or not; no, but hear
what he would have thee do, and therefore how long have I cried, and waited, to
hear but that word come from you, Lord; what would thou have me to do? O
Lord, have we been all this while, and have not heard yet! I, to this day, we
have not soberly and calmly sat down to hear the voice of the Lord, we have
been like wild creatures all our days, that though he has been calling and
going after some of us this twenty or thirty years, yet he could not come nigh
to speak with us, charm the charmer never so wisely; till he shall bind us in
fetters, and hold us in the cords of affliction, that we cannot get away, and
then will he open the ear to discipline: I know many of you have had calls
again, and again, and been made to say, sure, It is the voice of my Beloved,
but we would not rise, nor hear the call out, to this very day, not come to do
it, and if we are not brought to this* we are miserable, etc*

Thus have I opened to you the several circumstances b^longing to hearing, and
first you are to hear, who it is that speaks, to know the Lords, voice. Now to
bring it to use.

1 I^quire, do you believe that it is indeed the Lord that calls and invites,
and speaks now to you: else why hear you, if it be only man that speaks?
wherein is he to be accounted off? What are man's promises? what are man's
threats? bu^ if you are indeed convinced, (as I know some of you are) that it
is the Lords voice, then why obey we not? if we are fully set down in our
consci^nc^s that it is the Lord that speaks, then we must n^eds come to one of
these two points: 1. Either to do and an^wer the thing called for from us by
God; or else, 2. To lie under our guilt and shame, and accept of the
punishment, and bow under the hand. If the Lord sp^ak ^o this purp^se to any
soul, why thou know not yet the latter end, what shall become of thee for
ever, what ^^pes bear thee up? what live thou upon? why take thou any
c^n^ent in any thing till this thing be opened: If this be his voice, why then
hear it and obey it, own thy condition as it is: take thy place quietl^ when he
calls, Friend, sit down lower. Certainly, you will all be called to the
touchstone God will search and see the bottom of things how they stand, the
word will come to show our shortness, that we are not yet brought to that Reign
of Christ: all power, and au^horit^, and rule, is not put down in us, but yet
our wills, and huntings of heart, and self-loving Principles, live and rule:
Does the voice say thus? why, hear it, and obey it, bow under, own the
condition, mince not the matter, but let it seize upon thee; and if a word of
encouragement come from God, to raise the desolate, and ^^ll, Arise, arise out
of the dust O Jerusalem, etc. will Zion still say, The Lord has forsaken me,
and my God forgotten me? Does he call thee lovingly, to return and come into
his bosom, and he will be gracious, and will thou be kept back by wrath and
doubting? How does this wrath that is seated in the Soul against the truth
hinder and keep us off? This is the swelling of Jordan, The Heart swells and
rises, and will not be reconciled to God and its brother; alas, are we able to
contend with him, and stand before his wrath? and yet will we not hear and
answer the mild call, and invitation of love. Do thou well to be angry?
(says God to Jonah:) I, says he, I do well to be angry, such a strange
pensiveness is in the heart, and this made the jar between the Lord and Jonah,
he kept his wrath, it vexed him that God should be gracious, and spare Niniveh,
and that seems strange, but mind it, who ever of you are kept off from God, it
is through wrath or doubting: we would not in the mystery know our sins should
be forgiven in such a manner and way as God takes, we purpose some strange
torments and thunderings should do it, but that the thing should be done so
easily by a word from Christ, Thy sins are forgiven thee, and I say unto thee,
arise; this the proud heart would not submit to, to see a straw, a light thing,
has been such a ruler over it, which Christ can cure by a small word, and then
Doubtings hinder; when we see the waves, the least difficulty comes in view,
then the doubtings, and faintings press us and beat as hail: good Lord, do you
not feel these bonds about you! How you are holden of these cords? How your
destruction is of your selves? I speak to them of you, whose Consciences are
awake, and that have an Ear open to hear, and know that nothing in the world
hinders you, but this, wrath and doubting; an ill temper is settled in the
Soul, that will not come to God, but either fly out in wrath, or sink and
feeble in doubting.

2. Enquire, do you hear What the Lord speaks, in what particular he charges,
and smites at thee? There is nothing more contrary to me, then to hear you
complain in a confused general lumber, and cannot come distinctly to show
where your hurt is, and this is for want of observing and listening to the
voice, but we shuffle and jumble all together, and so keep off the particular
nick where our guilt lies. Now every one of us has some particular taint, or
other, which hinders our thriving and prospering in the Truth, and this must
first be known and owned, all other confessings, complainings, and doings w^ll
come to nothing.

3. Enquire in all speakings of God, to whom speaks he? does he call me or
not? He calls not to all the whole Army to move at once, but now calls for one
part to march, and then for another; and there is a strange mystery and
Witchcraft in the heart, when God finds it guilty in one particular, then it
will take all the charge upon it self, and be more guilty then it is, and all
that it might keep off the particular charge, and run from what God lays upon
us indeed as our sin, and place of sticking; therefore, Hear diligently to whom
the Lord speaks: and what the particular charge or call is.

4. Inquire in all hearings when the Lord calls to have the word performed and
obeyed by thee. It Is strange how cross and contrary to God the heart of man is
in all points! that which God calls for to be done to day, (to day harden not
your hearts) that it puts off till to morrow, and what is to be done to morrow,
when he calls to stay till the Cloud remove, then the heart is upon it to run
and post, presently to rush on (as we say) without fear or wit. Now examine, is
there this wariness wrought in your souls in all cases and points, to wait for
instruction, when to stir and when to sit still? when to speak and when to be
silent? sometimes the warning is, Stir not up my beloved until he please:
perhaps he calls and minds us by a clear instruction to see our way pla^nly in
all particulars. I, but the time to reach up to all this, may not yet be;
perhaps months and years must be gone through first before this be attained.
But something he calls for at our hands to day, to day harden not your heart,
and this the heart would put off and slip over. See the heat and forwardness
of Peter, he would dye with Christ when he is not called to it; I, but when
Christ in his great distress calls and entreats him to watch but one hour, that
he cannot do, then he sleeps. Do you observe this strange crosseness of your
hearts in all points!

5. I told you for whose sake you are to hear and do; for the Lords sake, not
for your own sakes or wills, not an end of self must lie in the bottom: and
this will be a sure measure and Touchstone of all your actions. When ever you
are upon any work or service, when ever doing or hearing, or speaking,
inquire, For whose sake do I all this? what end have I in it? Is it singly for
the Lords sake? is it in love to his name, his praise? that that may live and
spread abroad. In all your obedience and services, if you have not a single eye
to this, if there be a selfish taint in the bottom, it spoils all; God reckons
no more done to him, then is singly and unfainedly done for his name sake: not
for our ease or praise, or honor. And if I had not that witness in my soul,
that I now preach to you singly for that very end, not seeking yours but you,
alas, I should not be able to go on, it would be as a fire in my bones, and a
torment whilst I speak to you: but that is my peace in this particular, and
will be yours in all your ways, the clear witness of conscience, that what
you do, you do it singly for his name sake.

THE Strong Man outmatch'd by a stronger, OR Heaven out-powering Hell. SERMON.
XIII. June 8. 1651.
LUKE 11.21. When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace:
but when a stronger then he comes and overcomes him, he takes away from him all
the armor in which he trusted, and divides the spoil.
The Analysis.
I. A Fourfold Dispensation or time of reigning observed.

1. A time of man's reigning when he girds himself, and goes and comes whither
he will, without bands and straitening. 2. A time of the Devils reigning: Woe to
the Inhabitants of the World, for the Devil is come down to dwell amongst you.
3. A Dispensation of Christ, a time when he reigns, after he has bound the
strong man, and put down all rule and authority. 4. A time of Gods reigning,
when the Kingdom shall be delivered up to the Father, and God be all in all.
II. About the Devils time of reigning (which was chiefly aimed at from the
words) these several woes observed.

1. He is a strong man: David and our Fathers complain of their strong Enemy,
who was too strong for them. 2. He is throughout malignant, maliciously bent
against the root and branch of Truth, that the name of Israel may be no more.
3. Woe, in that he has a time and power given him to afflict; God allows it:
This is your hour, and power of darkness, etc. 4. He is in possession, he keeps
the house, he is got into the heart: out of the heart adulteries, murders,
etc. This is a great woe. 5. He has goods in us, finds of his own kind,
Pride, Envy, Deceit, Lustings, that he can challenge his own goods by right. 6.
Besides all this, he is armed, he has armor. His Armor expressed under these
three notions.
1. A coat of mail, to cover him over, that nothing can touch or find him
guilty; his scales so thick nothing can enter. 2. A helmet of brass; He can
dispute, and reason, and plead for himself, and will never yield nor give over.
3. A spear like a weavers beam; He Will seem to be for God and Truth, and by this
spear keeps off all from coming nigh.
7. The last woe, He is desperate, will venture on any desperate designs,
being thus armed, he is safe, made without fear.
III. A time when a stronger then he comes and overcomes him: And Christ does
it by these means.

1. He takes away all his armor; That is first done; else no entrance. 2. He
divides the spoil, sends all to their place, as Jer. 15. 1. That which for
death, to death, [something utterly destroyed:] That malignant disposition
which is ever bent against the Truth, that must dye. 2. That which for the
sword, to sword: The sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, must cut through
sloth and lingerings, etc. 3. Something to famine; the ill tempers are starved
by degrees. 4. Something to captivity; the Devil is bound, and in prison,
though not quite destroyed, but some Canaanites live, etc.

All brought home in these four Uses.

1. To examine how it is with us, whether we feel this reign of the Devil, this
strong malicious Enemy, what goods and possession he has? 2. If we feel it,
then to inform what a vain thing it is for us to stir to help our selves;
alas, man has no might! 3. To show, our way is to lie down, and let all go
over till Christ come. 4. To encourage that a stronger then he will come: Hope
against Hope.
LUKE 11.21. When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in peace,
but when a stronger then he comes and overcomes him, he takes away from him all
the Armor in which he trusted, and divides the spoil.
I Have s^oke to you this last week from those words in Deuteronomy 5. where God cries
out Oh that there were such a heart in then! etc. I told you what Heart it was
that God requires, and longs for, to have grown up in them, a Heart that will
hear and do all that the Lord shall speak, A heart always to fear before him;
and only such a heart I told you would be, first, suitable to God and the
heavenly life, secondly, profitable and useful to our brethren, and thirdly,
peaceable to our selves; and therefore ou^ great happiness lies in this, in
being brought up to such a heart. But now to day, if God will, I shall open to
you, what hinders that such a heart is not risen nor can rise in us; though
there be longings in God, and longings in the soul, yet that which does let,
will let till it be taken out of the way. For this I would have you note, that
wherever there is a longing and breathing in God after any of his People, to
cry Oh that there were such a heart in then! there is a certain echo lies in
the bottom of such a soul that answers this call, and longs and pants also,
Oh that my heart were so direct to keep thy Commandments! the longings and
cries are on both hands, and why do they not prevail? why is not such a heart
presently given? no, there is a block lies in the way which will ever hinder,
till it be removed, the strong man armed keeps the Palace, and till a stronger
then he come, till Christ shall rise in the soul and cast him out, this heart
cannot get up nor arise in us, the strong man rules.

I would in general observe to you a fourfold time of reigning, which succeed
and follow one the other. 2. A time of the man's reigning. 2. A time of the
Devils reign. 3. A time of Christ's reign. 4. A time of Gods reign, when Christ
shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and so God become all ^n all.

I. There is a time of Man's reign, when the man has a great liberty and swinge
to turn himself about hither and thither as he please, and meets with no let
nor cross, nor trouble in his way. When Peter is young he girds himself and
walks whither he lists, but when he grows old the case is altered, another
girds and leads him whither he would not: but the man has his day of liberty,
when the grass is in its prime, and the flower in its full beauty, the man can
turn him to his ease and parts, and inlargments, and enjoyments of truth, and
enjoyments of creatures, and suck sweet every where. Thus was Job in his day,
when his steps were washed in Butter, and the rock poured out rivers of oil,
his beauty was fresh in him, and he sat as a king in the army under the
flourishings and inlargments of truth, he could walk, and speak, and act, and
choose, and refuse, exhort and encourage others, and all takes, and prospers
and finds acceptance, and here he thinks he is sure, Then I said, I shall dye
in my nest, etc. And this time of greenness in the truth is yet upon some of
you and affords the man sweetness and liberty; and how long did many of us walk
in this posture? coming forth delicately with Agag, and saying, Surely the
bitterness of death is past. So have we secretly promised our selves, I have
forsaken the world, and am come off from all the false ways of worship, and
have left friends and preferments, and am set down to the truth, and sure now
the worst is over, now I am safe and in a good way: and here the man sits down
on a high seat above all creatures, and bonds and snares, takes ease and
content, and reigns with truth, as Paul writes to the Corinthians, Ye are free
and reign as Kings; they thought all was sure and the liberty of man would last
always. I, but (says Paul) I would to God you did reign, viz. that it were
such a reign as would last and hold. Now who spoke he to? not to the rude
world, nor to the ignorant, but such as he had in his heart to live and dye
with, such as he had espoused to Christ, the match was made, but not the thing
done; they were not wrought off from all things, nor wrought up to that one
husband, into the mind of Christ, though out of a light instruction and choice
the thing was owned and approved. And here the man gets peace, and ease and
liberty, is free from guilt and torments, and perplexities, the man can go on
either hand, if a mind to God and Truth, thither he can turn: if a mind to the
Creatures, he can turn thither, the door is open, and he can suck sweet from
every thing, his ways are all washed in butter, smooth, soft and easy. And
here (says David) my mountain was so strong, I said I shall never be moved,
here the man sits as a King, this is his day of reigning. But,

II. There is another dispensation follows, a time of the Devils reign, this is
a sad and woeful change. Another king arises which knows not Joseph, the man,
when he was King, he knew God and owned truth, and joined it with him in his
Kingdom, (though yet in the throne Pharaoh will sit above) [the man was
uppermost in all:] But now another king rises, that will not know Joseph; and
he deals cruelly with Israel: then the hard Taskmasters and cruel burdens
come: he will know nothing but his own will, and lust and cruelty: And Woe to
the inhabitants of the world, when the devil comes down to reign amongst them;
when Jeroboam reigns, that makes Israel sin. And how often have our fathers
been at sore pinches, and cried out in bitterness of soul, when this time of
the devils reign was upon them! It is a woeful kingdom indeed, a cruel reign.
And these seven Woes lie up in it.

1. One Woe is, that he is a strong man. How have our fathers owned his might,
and cried out under it! Thou have delivered me (says David) from my STRONG
enemy: for he was too strong for me. And again: My enemies live, and they are
MIGHTY. And Hezekiah cries out, Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me. And
again: We have no might against this GREAT HOST. Alas, when the man compares
but himself to him, what a Nothing is he to this great Goliath! but as a fly, a
worm, a gnat; a stripling, and he a man of war from his youth. And here the
heart sinks and dies at the very thoughts of dealing with him. Was he but an
ordinary enemy, that might be matched any ways, and the thing but feasible to
fight with him; then Man would have some hope: but alas, he carries all before
him. Shall not one be cast down at the very sight of him? (as it is said of the
Leviathan, who was a type of the devil.) Iron is counted as rotten wood to him:
he laughs at the shaking of a spear. Who is able to deal with this monstrous
Leviathan? If ever you but begin to reason and tamper the matter with him, you
are certainly foiled and worsted; he will surely get beyond you; it is in vain
to contend with him: But let him vaunt, and boast, and rail on; the Kings
commandment is, not to answer a word: that is the way Truth points us to, to be
still, and lie under, and say with Christ, This is your hour, and the power of
darkness. Until we can go out against him as David did, in the Name of the
Lord, let us never stir: though he come and vaunt himself, and reproach Israel
forty days, yet there is no other way, but, with Hezekiah, to spread the
Letter before the Lord, and cry under the misery.

2. He is not only strong, but a thorowout malignant enemy, maliciously set
and bent to destroy all truth; exalts himself above all that is called God;
root and branch; he strikes at all: he deals as Herod, who killed all the
children from two years old and upward, that he might be sure to meet with the
child Jesus, and not let him escape. So this malicious enemy kills every
budding and springing of God in the soul; he kills all the light, kills the
single love, kills all the good desires, that not so much as a right word, or
desire, or groan, may live: and in all this, his aim is, utterly to destroy the
Truth, the principle of God sown in the soul. Alas, he cares not else: if he
can but kill the little spark of the Spirit of life, he cares not what else
passes by and lives. Let us hear, and meet together, and eat, and trade, and
take ease and content; this is not the thing he is set against so, but to smite
the king of Israel only, that is his plot; that was the wicked counsel of
Ahithophel, to kill David only, and bring all the people back to Absalom:
Neither small nor great does he strike at, but the King only: he cares not
what lives, so the Lord Christ the Truth, the Seed of life, the Heart and Mind
of God] may die in us. Such a height of wickedness is in him, that nothing else
will content him, but the death of all that would be a Lord over him: a
controuler, a King, this, Herod cannot bear. That which sits in the kings gate,
and will not bow to him, [that resolved Truth that will not fall down and
worship the Idol] nothing will content Haman but the death of this: though he
get Decrees against all the Jews, though invited to the Queens banquet, and sit
next the King, yet nothing will content him, whilst this Mordecai lives, [that
Seed of God, that root of the matter, that, which will not stoop and buckle to
him, that he aims at] and his fingers itch to cut off this name of Israel for
ever. And Oh, what a Woe is this, to be under such a cruel malicious enemy! that
would not give a moments respite, not so much as a little breathing-time for
the Truth; not a little hope, not a little desire, not the least stirring of an
inclination, but he is upon it presently; if it were possible, to stop every
chink, that the smoking flax might not have the least vent, but be utterly
extinct and quenched.

3. A third great Woe lies in this, that he has a time and power given him of
God, to afflict and try: God allows it, and gives him leave to strike Job. This
is YOUR HOVR (says Christ:) an hour was given them. And God says, I will
cause them to pass under the rod. And it is said in the Psalms, He TVRNED the
hearts of their enemies to hate them. He gives him his time and commission to
rend and tear, waste, spoil, and imprison; and none can call him to account for
it; his Commission will bear him out. Alas, what a day is this! In the time
when the Man reigned, he promised himself fair, he should soon be delivered,
and get through the Battle, and see an end of sorrow: I, but he little thought
of this day, as Job cries out, He has given me over into the hand of the
ungodly; when the devil has power given to try and afflict, and torment; to let
in what beasts he will, to destroy the vineyard. O woe indeed, when a Leopard is
set to watch over the city! when the Devil is suffered to keep watch and guard,
that nothing can stir nor pass in or out without his leave. Power is given him;
he has a time to lead into captivity at his will. But the day will come, when
he that led into captivity, shall be led into captivity himself: He that
spoiled and wasted, and cried, Down with it down with it, to the very ground. A
turn will come; and then, Blessed shall he be that serves thee as thou have
served us. But Oh what havoc does this murderer make when it is his day! How
does he make the earth utterly waste and empty, and not a stirring of Truth may
live! If you mind it, we cannot sometimes speak a word, nor breathe a groan
toward God, but he flaps on the mouth presently; so cruel is he, when the
power is put into his hand. But now (says Job) now I am their song; they mock
at me; the rascal and vile rout, whose fathers I would have disdained to have
set with the dogs of my flock: [every base, low, unworthy, trifling lust, can
now lord it over the soul, and make their song on it.] Oh this is a woeful day
indeed! when the enemy has power to serve himself of the soul, without any
controuler; when he can carry captive at his will: this Christ cries out
against; If it be possible, let THIS CVP pass. And here David cries out, Oh let
not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

4. Another Woe lies in this: he keeps the houe; he is in possession: 'The
spirit that rules in the HEARTS of the children of disobedience. There is a
rotten and tainted sore within, that is seated in the soul, and sends forth
such an unsavory stink, if it were possible, to choke all that is good. The
Devil has got the dewlling place in the heart, is in possession; it is his
house: and therefore whence hear you of all your enemies? whence come your
troubles, and perplexities, and wars, and fightings? Come they not from your
lusts? (says Saint James.) Is not all the mischief from within? Out of the
heart come adulteries, and murders, and thefts, an evil eye, etc. all comes out
of the heart. Whence come all the pesters and torments? out of the air, or from
another? (as we often put it off) No, the taint is within: Look not without
thee for the enemy, nor for the devil; no, but within; IN THE HEART, there is
the seat, that is his palace. A time indeed is to be, of his casting out; but at
present he keeps the house, and therefore neither good can come in, nor good
come out, not a breathing of Truth stir, but he presently cries, Get you to
your tasks, to your tasks; that is the word that stops all. He would not let a
groan live: and this brings the soul into great bitterness, that neither good
can come into it, nor a groan go out from it, but presently the Devil flaps
Christ on the mouth; [some base taint or guilt comes in, and stops the rise and
liberty of Truth.] Alas, to have the Devil dwell so near a man, in his bosom!
this is a misery indeed: Here the soul cries out, Woe is me, that I am
constrained to dwell with them that hate peace. This is the present day and
time with some of you: your enemies sit chief, and Zion is in the dust. I
beseech you, let the Word sink into your hearts: (for it will have a time to
sink upon you all.) Consider where you are, under what rule and government. If
under the Man's reign still, then no marvel indeed you can live loose and free,
and gird your selves, and go whither you will: But a time will surely come,
when you shall know and feel this reign of the enemy: For till this Day be
over, you can never indeed come under the reign of Christ: the Day of Christ
will not be, till there be a falling away first, (from the Man's reigning) and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God: (this is the time of the devils reign.)
And until this wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord Christ shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming; till
this, you will never see that day of Christ, nor come under his time of
reigning.

5. A fifth great Woe is this: He has goods in us; his goods are in peace:] the
Prince of this world comes, and finds of his own in us, (though he did not in
Christ.) And that he has goods in us, appears by that unsavory smoke that
always is coming up out of the bottomless pit: their throat is an open
sepulcher, (says David) a continual ill savor and stink comes forth. As the
Church is described to be full of sweets, her garments smelling of myrrh,
aloes, and cassia, and all sweet perfumes: so in this condition, the soul is
clothed with nothing but stinking rags, and polluted garments. The soul that is
indeed awake and sensible, knows not how to endure its own stinking smell; it
is almost choked and overcome with an ill savor, which comes from that
abundance of rottenness, those goods of the Devil, and wares of Hell, that lie
up in the heart; so that the poor man knows not how to speak a word sometimes,
nor think a thought, but an evil taint gets in first or last, that spoileth
all; all the thoughts and inwards are so poisoned by the devil. Here David
cries out, My wounds stink, and are corrupt. In mars heart is that soul
sepulcher of dead men's bones, full of loathsome rottenness. (Do you know this?
have you felt and seen it in your selves?) There is that cage of unclean birds;
there is the Bittern, the Screech-owl, the Satyr: there all the beasts of the
Forest creep forth: there is the Lions den, and all the bones he has gnawn and
scattered: Our bones are scattered at the pits brink (says the Psalmist.) All
is corrupt, and become abominable; there are the goods of hell packt together:
there he lays up envy, and wrath, and stubbornness, and deceit, and lies. Now
who will believe this report! Who thinks his soul and heart to be the devils
shop, the warehouse of hell! But they that feel it, feel it; and they that
know, know; and the day will surely come to find out every man. How fair
soever we may speak, and mince the matter, and wipe our mouths; yet the fruit
will discover the root; Samuel, will ask, What mean the bleatings? Though we
would hide and cover the Devil never so close, and paint and garnish him over
with never so many fair pretenses, yet he cannot be so whited, do what we can,
but his black (...) appear to them that have eyes, and can discern. Paul was
brought to own and discover these goods of the devil: he cries out. In me
dwells no manner of good thing; all is corrupt. And God says of Jerusalem, As
a fountain casts out its water, so Jerusalem casts forth her sin. Now a
fountain casts out water naturally; it flows without pumping, and continually,
it never slacks night nor day: and 3ly, a fountain casts out abundantly, no
measure of it: and 4ly, irresistibly; who can stop it? So the heart casts out
sin; such a stock and endless store of the devils goods, are laid up in the
heart. Do you believe this?

6. Another great Woe is this: He is not only a strong enemy, and most
maliciously bent, and power put in his hand, and in possession, and has
stuffed the house with his goods; but 6ly, he is armed too; he has armor to
defend and maintain himself, and keep off all assaults that are made against
him.

Now his Armor may be expressed under these three Notions.

1. He has a coat of male upon him, which covers him quite over, that no word
of Truth can come to touch and enter into him, and find him guilty, though you
try again and again, and shoot and shoot bullet after bullet, yet nothing shall
enter; his scales are so close to one another, that not the least air can come
between, until the Lord shall direct an arrow through the joints of his armor,
and come to the heart: but it is out of the reach of any creature to do it: his
coat of male keeps off all: And though you may crush his coat a little
sometimes, and hurt him a little; yet he presently gets up again, and shakes
himself, and he is well; the wound is healed for it never came to his heart:
his coat of male has a thousand twistings and windings, to keep off all guilt
from coming so nigh him.

2. He is armed with a helmet of brass upon his head: his wisdom fences him,
that he is mighty able to plead the cause, and reason and dispute for himself:
you shall never out-speak nor out-reason him, he has so many subtle windings
and ways to put off the guilt: The fool is wiser in his own eyes, then a man
that can give a reason. He has a brazen brow, that be the case never so clear,
yet he will not blush, nor ever yield he is guilty; but some way, or trick, or
shift is ever at hand to put it off, and save himself from being a sinner: some
plaster or other he will find, to heal the wound, and keep the guilt from
sinking to his heart: though the case be never so plain against him, and though
seven [a complete number] witness and accuse him; yet his helmet of brass keeps
off all: he will not be guilty.

3. He is armed with a great spear in his left hand like a weavers beam; and
with this he dare challenge all: Come near him who can? By this spear he will
seem to be for Truth, and fight the Lords battles, with Saul, and slay the
Philistims: And who dare charge him now? He is on our side; he cries, A friend,
a friend: He has the Watchword and the Colors: he will come and build the wall
with you; and who shall set upon him here: He Will be zealous and forward in the
Truth: he will plead, and answer, and prove, and condemn others for being thus
and thus, (as the Pharisees did Christ.) And this spear reaches out so far,
that there is no way to come nigh to reach, or once question him. Will you
speak wickedly for God? (says Job to his friends.) There is a wicked speaking
for Truth, many times; a preaching of Christ out of envy, to snare another, or
find another guilty, and keep up our selves; some base selfish end or other
lies in it, that spoils all. Therefore God says, He will be Judge himself: he
will judge between ends and ends, between thoughts and intentions. The Word of
the Lord is quick and powerful, that pierces between marrow and joints; that
can get between, and meet with this enemy, when the time is come. But the work
is wonderful: He is so sorely armed all over, 1. with a coat of male; 2. with
an helmet of brass; 3. this long spear like a Weavers beam; that, alas, what
man shall come near to deal with him!

7. The last great Woe is, that this enemy is desperately ventrous, dares
venture upon any strange designs: He Will set on Christ, and hurry him about to
a high mountain, to a pinnacle of the Temple, into the wilderness. This
Leviathan is made without fear: being thus armed and fenced, he cares for
nothing. Whilst his armor is so close about him, he can venture on the mouth
of a Canon, and is safe enough. He can vent out all his malice, and poison, and
rage, and do all his mischiefs, and none shall touch nor control him, nor come
nigh to search his heart. He Will be a friend to God, and Truth, and his People,
come not nigh to judge him. And this is the armor of the whole world: they are
thus cheated by the devil, and think all is well and right with them; and under
this covert he can work all his pranks and bring about all his mischiefs and
murtherous plots against the Truth. And this is a great misery, the desperate
ventrous spirit of this enemy, that rushes on all mischief without fear and
dread.

Now mind: whilst this strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in
peace; all is at rest and quiet; there is no trouble nor perplexity, no fears;
the whole earth is at quiet: and, if it were possible, he would never be
disturbed, nor pitch battle with Christ, but keep his goods in peace. I, but a
time comes when a stronger then he comes upon him; and then the war begins, and
the battle stirs, and the clashings appear: but this is the great happiness,
that there is one that is stronger then this strong man, that can deal with
him; one that has all the keys of hell, and can open and unlock all the doors;
one that can take away all his armor in which he trusted, and utterly overcome
and rout him. Then (says Job) the poor has hope, and all iniquity stops her
mouth.

And the way by which Christ accomplisheth this, is twofold.

First, He does it, as I told you, by taking away all his armor in which he
trusted. He trusted in his armor, that that should save him, and keep off all
blows: He trusted no arrow should ever pierce that, and come into his heart,
and find him guilty. He trusted in his wisdom, that he could reason and plead
the case, and maintain his Way to be right and just. He trusted, his speaking
good words for God, and pretending for Truth, and his love, zeal, and
forwardness, should never have been questioned and ransacked. I, but Christ,
when he comes, he takes away his armor; all that in which he trusted and
hoped, and said, Now I am safe; I shall sit as a Queen for ever, I shall never
see sorrow. I, but all his armor and fence is taken from him; and this is a
downfall indeed, when he is thus found out, and nothing can hide nor cover him
any longer; his coat of Male is taken from him, and then Truth can easily
enter; then nothing appears, but the man's nakedness, and guilt, and shame: then
the man cries out, with Paul, I am the chief of sinners: then the Word takes
place, and enters; and every arrow sticks: Thine arrows stick fast in me (says
David.) Then the man falls under, as a poor, naked, helpless, hopeless thing:
then he is counseled by Christ to buy eye salve of him, and gold tried in the
fire, and fine linen; for he is found wholly naked, and blind, and miserable.
We had thought Christ had ruled in us, and we had been for God and the Truth:
we had thought our zeal, and forwardness, and speaking for God, should have
passed current; but take away this armor of the devil, and then we are found
out to be a wretched deceitful people; a lie and deceit appears to be running
in all, and that there is nothing single for God and Truth, without base
selfish ends of our own. And this is the first work Christ is to do in your
souls, to spoil this strong man of his armor; else no Word of truth can ever
come nigh and seize.

2. After Christ has taken away his armor, he then seizes on his goods, and
DIVIDES THE SPOIL: the spoil! Why, what use can Christ make of his spoil? what
can he do with all the devils goods? You may see the thing illustrated, Jer.
15. where God speaks thus: Let that which is for death, go to death; that which
is for the sword, to the sword; that which is for the famine, to the famine;
and that which is for captivity, to captivity.

1. That which is for death, to death: some of these goods are presently to go
to death, to be utterly destroyed: The enemies which you have seen to day,
(says Moses) you shall never see them more. The malignant disposition, that
was so wickedly bent against all prospering of Truth; that evil eye, that which
lay in the way, that one step Godward could not be taken; that must be utterly
destroyed, and cut off for ever; that abomination must live no more; that ill
favor, that gave a taint and poison to all our ways, and thoughts, and words,
that man to Death: Christ will say to that unclean spirit, Come out of the man,
and enter into him again no more. That enmity of spirit, and hatred, and ill
will to all good; the end of that is, to be destroyed for ever. That Cain-like
love, that hates its brother, and would not suffer the least breathing, nor
prospering, nor looking up of the Truth: for, according to that evil
disposition in you, if you mind it, the heart rises against all good,
wherever it appear; though in a child, in a brother, in a husband or wife,
yet the enmity works, and hates to see your offering accepted, and mine laid by
as nothing. But before Christ can ever come to reign, this must certainly die,
and a whole turn of soul be wrought, and we made naturally to love and choose
the prosperity of the Truth.

2. Something must go to the sword: That which is for the sword, to the sword.
The Word of God, that sword of the Spirit, that shall still go on (after that
great enmity is slain) to search, and judge, and quicken, and stir up the man,
and cut off what hinders that the soul may grow up into the mind of God; and
as it has born the image of the earthly, so to bear the image of the heavenly:
as we have given our members servants to sin, so to give them up to be servants
of righteousness; to be as free, and voluntary, and earnest in the service of
the Lord, as ever we have been to serve our selves: to spend and be spent for
the truth, this the sword must do; cut out a way through all rubbish, for this
mind to arise: It must cut away all that sloth and carelessness, that sluggish
and carnal mind, that sits still at home, and would not come out to help the
Lord against the mighty. When Christ shall come to deal with us indeed, and use
his sword; this must all be cut away, and the soul pruned.

3. Something must go to the famine. That ill taint, and settled indisposition,
that has been gathered and contracted by long custom in evil; that hankering
and lingering after the wickeds dainties; all this must to the famine, and be
worn out by degrees, and pined by little and little, till it come to die.
Wherever the heart is taken, and hangs on the creatures, on eating, or
wearing, or trading, (or whatever enjoyments) by degrees and degrees a secret
moth shall eat and consume all: a wasting and consuming famine must cure this
evil disease.

4. Something must go to Captivity, and that is the last enemy to be destroyed:
the Devil he will yet keep some hold and footing, and not be utterly routed, so
long as there is any dust to be the serpents food; so long as the man has any
life beside the life of God. I, but now Christ shall design him to captivity;
he shall be under; a hewer of wood, and drawer of water; a servant to Christ:
he shall lord it no more. He shall be bound for a thousand years; and that will
be the souls greatest happiness, to keep him but in his prison, that he may not
break forth, do his mischievous pranks, but lie in his dungeon, and be an
underling to Truth, though he still live; for some Canaanites will ever live in
the land, to be the souls trial, etc.

And thus I have opened to you this Day, the great block that lies in our way,
the bonds and shackles that hold us so fast. It is Satan's day, it is his hour,
and the power of darkness: the man's Day of reigning is declining and laid aside
in most, if not all of you: the man is not suffered so to bear sway, and go at
liberty, and soar aloft in his mind, but there are secret checkings, and
mindings of a shortness; and the black feet appearing, make the feathers fall.
And in some of you it is an empty and desolate Day; you are left without much
stirring, either from God, or from the enemy: The land is void of both her
kings. But the greatest and sorest Day which lies sore upon some of us, is, The
reign of the enemy; and then woe to the inhabitants of the world. Woe to that
Land indeed, where the Wicked are in Authority! I opened to you the several
Woes in it.

And now to make some Use.

1. Examine, How is it with you? Every soul look home: do you feel this strong
enemy? Do you feel how utterly malignant he is, and contrary to all good? Do
you find it is his hour to be let loose, to rend, and rear, and perplex, and
torment? Do you feel indeed the pains of hell, and do the sorrows of death take
fast hold, as David cries out they did upon him? If you find it not so now,
nor have ever found it; yet certainly a time will come when the enemy will show
himself, when the wicked one will get up into the throne, and exalt himself
above all that is called God: a time will come of being hurried, and torn, and
perplexed, under his wicked and tyrannous reign, when ye shall be made sensible
where you are once: for whilst you stand senseless, as images and posts, nothing
seizes on you, and you never think to see such a Day: but whether you feel, or
believe to see it, yea or not, yet the Day will surely come, and try all that
dwell upon the whole earth.

2. You that find and feel this Day, it may inform you what a vain thing it is
for man to stir or move hand or foot to rescue himself, or oppose this
adversary. Alas, what is man to lift up a hand against him! one that is so
strong, and so malignantly bent to destroy; one that has a commission and
power given; one that is in full possession of the house, and furnished with
all store of armor and goods in us. Alas, it is in vain to stir against him!
Man is too weak: it is all one as if a poor lonesome woman should have twenty or
an hundred plunderers in her house, ransacking and breaking up here and there;
alas, it is in vain for her to stand against them; they may do what they will,
unless some other help come and rescue her: so vain and impossible is it for
any of you to wind out of the hands of this enemy, and save your selves, if
another Savior, one mightier then he, deliver you not.

3. Therefore, in the next place, this might persuade you to lie down and
submit to your bonds, till deliverance come. Answer him not a word, (that is
the Kings command, the charge of Truth) but bear all his threats, and
vauntings, and upbraidings. Let all run over, as God says of Zion: And thou
layedst thy body to the earth, for them to pass over. Lie in the condition, how
miserable soever it be, till a stronger then thou or he shall come to deal with
him. This is the peaceablest and most suitable way for our present conditions.

4. Yet this must give some hint of hope and encouragement, and cause the soul
to put in and wait for a lot in this matter, since there is for certain such a
thing as deliverance to be for some: there is a rest for the people of God: Our
God will come (say they) and will not tarry. A stronger then he is spoke of,
that is able to deal with him, and twist him about at his pleasure: and this
might give a little encouragement to hope. But as for our parts, we can do
nothing in it; we cannot stand against the enemy, nor can we hasten the rising
of Christ to deal with him; Who shall say unto God, What do thou? Who shall
stir him up before his time? May he not do what he will? Is he not Lord of all?
Therefore no way is for us, but to lie under and endure, and let all the waves
go over our backs, till he shall command a calm: and he uses to come in an
unexpected time, when all hope of life is gone; when but meal and oil enough is
left to make one cake, and then the widow concludes to die; then comes the
word, The barrel of meal and the cruse of oil shall not fail, etc. Therefore Oh
that it was in your hearts to cry with one consent for this Savior to arise;
this Deliverer, that might turn ungodliness from Jacob: All difficulties and
impossibilities are nothing to him: that which is impossible with Man, with God
is easy and possible. And this might raise up a little springing of hope
against all rubs and bars that lie in our way. When he comes, he is able to
deal with this mighty enemy. He comes provided; His works before him, and his
rewards with him: He will divide the spoil, and take away his armor, and send
that which is for death, to death; that which is for the sword, to the sword;
that which is for famine, to famine; and that which is for captivity to
captivity: He keeps sure records of all, and will surely visit in his appointed
time. O therefore that we had a heart raised and stirred, to cry with one
consent for this Coming of his, and to give no rest night nor day, but cry, O
come Lord Jesus, come quickly, till we have an answer, and be delivered!

THE Woeful Case of the Lepers, OR The Soul at an exceeding Strait. SERMON. XIV.
June. 22. 1651.
2 KING. 7.3, 4. And there were four leprous men at the entering i^ of the
gate: and they said one to another, Why sit we here until we dye?

If we say, We will enter into the City, the famine is in the City, and we shall
dye there: and if we sit still here, we dye also. Now therefore come and let us
fall into the host of the Syrians: and if they save us alive, we shall live;
and if they kill us, we shall but dye, etc.


The Analysis.
THree things in general observed.

I. The present condition the Lepers are in: And that was opened in five
Particulars, suitable to the misery of our present state.

1. They were without the City, outcasts: no enjoyment of the Society,
Ordinances, Blessings, of the Commonweal of Israel. 2. They were all overspred
with leprosy, might not talk with any, lest infect them: and how do we taint
one another with our selves? 3. Farther, a miserable famine was upon them,
women eat their own children: so we forced to eat what is born of the flesh,
[our own Reason.] 4. They are beset with an host of Enemies too: and this is
our case at present, the world are up against us. 5. The light and sense of all
this misery was upon them; If we sit here, we dye: They knew and felt the heavy
case they are in.
All this was brought home to our particular conditions.

II. Consider their hopeless and helpless Case to use any means to escape: If
we go back into the City, we shall surely dye, etc.

This applied to our conditions: in three things we are brought to something;
and if we go back, Death will surely be in it.

1. We are brought to a clear information of the vanity of all the worlds
worship, and the shortness of our conversation in all points. 2. Made to see
that all hopes and conclusions, without a certain witness from God himself, are
short, and nothing to eternal Life. 3. We have professed to all, and chose in
our Souls, a self-denying way, to take up the Cross daily: and if now suffered
to reason with flesh and blood, and go back in any of these, we surely perish.
III. Consider the great Submission and Bowedness of Heart in these Lepers. Let
us fall into the host of the Syrians, we can but dye, etc.

About this three things considered.

1. They rise in this strange, leprous, outcast, famished, forlorn case, as
they are; Come and let us fall into the Host, etc. 2. They venture upon Death
it self, the mouth of Cannon; need makes them run: they fall upon the Sword of
their Enemies. 3. Yet they go at a peradventure, without any conclusions either
that they shall live, or shall dye, but leave it and venture: And thus the
Soul, truly buckled, comes in these three cases.
The Uses were, 1. To enquire whether the sense of our misery be upon us, as it
was with the Lepers? and that noise ever in our ears, If we sit here, we dye?
2. If sensible, then learn, What did the Lepers? they ventured upon the Sword:
You Will never have bread by ease, but venturing to endure. 3. Learn the way of
their going; without conclusions for, or against our selves, to say, Sure we
shall be saved, or sure we shall fall short: stand between both, and go at a
peradventure.


2 KING. 7.3.4. And there were four Leprous men at the entering in of the gate:
and they said one to another, Why sit we here until we die? etc.
THere are three main things in general, which this day I would open to you
from these words.

1. What an estate of misery the L^pers were in at the present.

2. How hopeless and helpless all ways and means seemed in their view for a
recovery. If sit here we dye, if we go into the City the famine is there, and
we dye also: Death hedges them in on both sides.

3. Take notice of their submitted minds, how they are bowed to the hand that
is against them.. They venture and fall under the Lords Sword, the Host of the
Syrians: come what will, if they kill us we can but dye; a great buckling of
heart was upon them, and they go, not knowing the end, but carry their lives in
their hands. But consider,

I. What their present condition is, and how suitable it is to ours in these
five particulars; For this that befell them came not upon them for their sakes
only, but was writ for ensample to us which are fallen in the same condition.

1. Then observe these Lepers sat without the City, they were outcasts, a
people forgotten, and cast off as it were, and not left to share in the mercies
of the Commonweal of Israel. Now the Commonwealth of Israel enjoyed many
privileges, they had the Ordinances, the Temple, the Worship, and there was a
common blessing that ran in these to them, not as though the Word had taken no
effect (says Paul) it did take some effect; but now to be separated and shut
out, and to have the heart hardened that the Word and all Ordinances slip over
and take no effect; this is to sit out of the City, and be separated from the
common good of Israel, not to partake of the power of the Word; but the heart
hardened, and left without all sense and feeling, and motion, that whilst it
is in the Ordinance, yet it is as not in it, In hearing it does not hear, and
in seeing it does not see; but is as a stone in a wall, that what ever weight
lies on it, it feels nothing: and in such a day as this to be left as an
outcast, to have no fellowship from heaven, and no fellowship from earth, no
society either with God or Man, this is the Lepers sad condition, destitute,
afflicted, tormented, Heb. 11.37. But now to come home to our selves, for that
is the life of all. For what is it to me to hear of the mercy or judgment, or
sin, or misery, or recovery of another? if I have not my share in the
condition, it will never seize, but pass over as a Tale that is told: now
therefore see if this be not our present condition, do we not stand some of us
as outcasts? are not we cast out of the favor and nearness of God, of the
Truth, and of our Brethren? I am a stranger to my brethren (says David,) and
so Job and Christ and our Fathers tasted of this Cup. How senseless and stupid
is the heart under this Word and Ordinances! They take no place at all; like a
dead man out of mind (says David,) as like a dead man as may be, only not
dead: Spare his life (says God concerning Job:) the life is maintained
strangely, by a secret, invisible, unaccountable power; the root of the matter
is in me (says Job,) I, but his bough is not green, nor does the dew lie all
night upon his branch, his ways are not washed in butter as in months past:
where are all our former operations, and powers and flourishings in the truth?
where is the Love? the tender heart? the single mind? the cries and groans to
be satisfied with substance indeed, and no shadows? have not all our riches
made themselves wings and are flown away? and are not we left miserably naked
and destitute of all? the power of the Word that reaches us not, the love and
help from one another, the bowels of compassion they are shut up, how miserable
forlorn are we both within and without? we look and gaze on one another, but
if we come but near to speak, and breath a word together, either heart-rising
or envy, or some evil taint or other gets in, do what we can; this is our
present condition, (if we were but sensible of it) all good is separated from
us, and we are like the clung and frozen earth, hardened, and hardened, that
nothing can enter: though the Light appears, and shines bright, to show us our
way, yet are we but like the earth in a winter night, the hardest Frost many
times is upon it when the Moon shines clearest and brightest; the Sun, the warm
and enlivening beams of that, are far off: we stand out of the City, and are
not partakers of the common mercies of Israel: the hired Servants had bread
enough and to spare, but the Prodigal wanted that; the ordinances were in
Israel, there were widows, in sad cases to mourn and make lamentation; there
were Prophets to bring a word from God, to enquire and tell how long the
sufferings were to endure, and what the meaning of the hand was, and what the
end would be (as Peter says) Ye have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which
do well to take heed, etc. though, in the dark, yet it was a great mercy, to
have that sure word of Prophecy, to have intercourse there: but alas the
Lepers, they must sit without the City, where they can hear no word from God,
nor have any notice of good; there is none to turn aside to ask how they do,
for it is all one in the mystery, to be out of the house, to be out of the
ordinance, out of the society, out of hearing, as not to have the blessing that
runs in these: In hearing ye shall hear, and not understand, and seeing ye
shall see, and not perceive: What a misery is this? and are not we thus an
outcast? outed from the favorable presence of the Almighty, outed from the
love and hearts of one another? the Court of heaven has excluded us, and our
own Land casts us out; we presently become a burden to our selves and each
other, and live only among harlots, and thieves, and murderers, the strange
lustings, and iniquities of our own hearts: who of you can say that word with
spirit and courage, Our feet shall stand in thy gates O Jerusalem? Who of us is
joined to ano her? Who lives in counsel, and love, and the true
one-heartedness? Who stands not alone? Whose Soul sits not down in its bonds,
and is turned out to the wide World of temptations, trialls, and
discouragements?

2. Another misery of these Lepers is, that they are all unclean, and
overspread with Leprosy; not only shut out of the City, but they must come
near none, to have any relief: They were to carry a cloth before their mouths,
lest their breath should touch upon any, and so infect them, so loathsome and
noisome was the disease upon them: and how truly is this our present condition?
How do we spoil and infect one another with our very words? we cannot speak the
least word, but a Selfish taint runs in it, and is ready to infect whoever it
lights upon, either to sink their spirits with faintings about the difficulty
of the way, or to stir them to frowardness, or move Jealousies: One mischief or
other comes from this loathsome Leprosy, that selfish base taint that runs in
all: so that they (as many as are sensible) know, and the Lord knows, that we
sometimes know not which way to turn us, to speak a word, or do an action, or
breathe a Breath without spreading a taint and infection in it; and therefore
Job cries out at the last, I will lay my hand upon my mouth, I will speak no
more: I will be among the Lepers, and cry, unclean, unclean. Do you not see
this thing I speak of? Do you not ^e^l, how you harm and grieve, and infect one
another? and that ever we should be cured and made to speak a word in season to
strengthen and help forward one another, this seems wonderful, but yet it is
possible, If he will, he can make us clean: and Lepers, such as we are, have
been cured; but Lepers we are at present, wholly polluted and unclean, that is
certain.

3. Yet farther, They were now under a miserable Famine: you may see at what a
strange price an Asses head was sold, and Doves dung, and how they eat their
own children, a woman cries to the King, Help O King, this woman and I made a
bargain to eat my Son to day, and her Son to morrow; and we boiled my Son, and
eat him, and now she has hid her Son, etc. 2 Kings 6.28, 29. a miserable
Famine surely! and when Elijah prophesied of plenty that should be to morrow,
one of the Nobles, on whom the King leaned, looks upon it as such an impossible
case, that he says, If God should make windows in heaven, can this thing be?
All shows the Famine was very sore in the Land, and this was l ke to undo them
were there no other miseries at all upon them. Famine is the most miserable,
languishing, uncomfortable death that can be: They that dye by the Sword (says
Jeremy) are better then they that dye by the Famine: O what a strange force is
there in hunger! How will it turn all upside down? This at last buckles the
Prodigal to the Dust, when nothing could touch him; and how truly is this
Famine seized upon us? Not a Famine of bread, but of the word of the Lord. How
does the countenance fall, and wax pale because of the Famine upon our spirits!
there is no bread to be found to strengthen man's heart, no oil to anoint his
face, to make a cheerful countenance: I could ask all of you, How long it is
since you met with a word of power and virtue that strengthened and gave life
to your souls, and set you upon your legs to walk on in your journey cheerfully
and resolvedly? Sure when you awake you will be sensible how lean and poor you
are; you have had so much hitherto provided and brought to you, as has just
kept life and Soul together, that you are not quite famished: and so had these
Lepers, they were alive yet through all, I, but what strange shifts were they
put to by the Famine? made to eat Doves Dung, and boil their own children,
strange unnatural ways to keep a Life by! and do not we use as hard shifts?
Are not you made often to eat your own children, to eat that which is born of
your own flesh, comes out of your own Bowels? your own wisdom and reason, and
counsel, as David cries out, How long shall I take counsel in my own heart?
etc. We have no other food to live on now, and that we turn to, rather then we
will starve: that which once we scorned, and condemned, and judged, (as Job
says) That which my Soul refused to touch, is made my sorrowful meat: We have
no other stay and refreshing, then these dry Husks, and it is a wonderful
thing, that we are not yet dead with such unsavory meat: It was a sore day of
Famine with Job, when all was taken from him, all his friends, and children,
and wife, and servants, and cattle, and he sits on the Dunghill to scrape
himself, and is cast off by all, that he cries out, My breath stinks and is
corrupt, my breath is strange to the wife of my bosom. This is a strange turn
for one who had seen so flourishing a day! and if you have never known plenty,
you cannot so sensibly know want; but if you have indeed tasted of the rivers,
the brooks of honey and Butter, (as Job speaks) if you have ever tasted that
the Lord is gracious, and then come to be denied, that will be the sore Famine
indeed: Oh how flourishing and green have we been in our young days! what
powers and breakings of heart upon us! How could we have run barefoot, and
broke through all blocks in our way to meet with the truth! but now how is all
dead and stupid, and clung within! the inwards are shut up, that nothing can go
down nor come to the heart to strengthen and nourish: but we dye, and pine, and
famish, and walk about like shadows, without any true life and motion: It was
misery enough to sit by the rivers of Babylon, and remember Zion, to them that
were sensible of the loss; they weep to think of Zion: but now to be an outcast
from Israel, and all overspread with the Leprosy too, to have a loathsome
disease sticking, that the breath must be stopped and kept from all society, this
is more miserable still: but then to be in a Famine too, that the Soul can turn
no whither for bread, the Nobles come to the pit, and there is no water, the
poor and needy seek water, and there is none, etc. This is a wonderful hard
case indeed.

4. Another misery of these Lepers was, They were encamped round about with the
host of the Syrians, their enemies were all about them on every side, and
though they were such sorry worthless things, so full of woes, and miseries,
that it might scarce seem worth the while to kill them, yet they stand in great
fear of their Lives too, lest their enemies should fall upon them, and slay
them; for an Host was now come forth, a sworn company of professed enemies
against all that belong to Israel, and have entered a League to cut off, and
destroy both root and branch: and though the Soul be but as a dry leaf, a
Partridge upon the mountains, a thing of no worth, as David pleads with Saul,
Alas, against whom is the King of Israel come forth? against a flea? such a
sorry thing as I am? So the Soul sometimes pleads, alas, what a wretched
creature am I! I am destitute of God and truth, shut out from his people, all
overspread with a loathsome Leprosy, ready to dye for hunger, dried up to
nothing with want and famine, and is not this misery enough? Is there need of
other force and violence, an Host to come against me? the Soul sometimes
seriously debates the Case, What is the meaning that all should thus conspire
against a poor desolate creature? a thing of nothing, a few sorry Lepers that
will soon dye of themselves, though all should let them alone? are you come out
against me with Swords and staves, (says Christ?) alas they might have spared
that labor, he was now in a most painful agony, in a bloody sweat, his Soul
was sorrowful unto death, under the sense and burden of sin, no need of a
Sword against him. The Soul that is indeed sensible, knows and feels it is
miserable enough, though no enemy from without should ever strike a blow
against it, to be void of God, a stranger to the Commonwealth of Israel, to be
a Leper full of sores, to be ready to starve for hunger; is not here load
enough? But to all these, to be in continual fears of death from an Host of
enemies, who can utter the misery of this condition? Surely if the Lord remove
us not hence, we cannot long live, and continue here. But,

5. Another thing considerable in their present condition, is, The lively sense
and feeling of their misery: they were not asleep, then the woe had been less,
but they feel where the shoe pinches, As for our iniquities we know them; the
misery and fears lie hard upon their Souls: If we sit here we dye, and if we go
into the City we dye, the famine is there: if we fall to the Army of our
enemies, in all appearance we dye, they will surely kill us: a great Strait it
is truly, if your Souls were sensible of it, to lie still in a barren
wilderness is to dye surely: and if you stir a foot, to get out, there are pits
to fall into, and wild beasts ready to devour, and it is a thousand to one, if
one mischief or other do not destroy. But all spoke in the general, I told you
had no force nor power in it, if it come not home to us in our own conditions:
therefore I showed you how the Case was ours, we were the men, we are the
Lepers. La. 3.1. I am the man that have seen affliction (says Jeremy) by the
rod of his wrath. I told you, 1. How we were outcasts, cut off, cast out from
the common blessings which belong to Israel: the word takes no effect, hearing
and speaking, and praying together, they take no place, touch not the heart,
but all we get, is put into a bag of holes; It comes in at one ear, and goes
out at another, nothing abides to be blessed unto us: we said in our prosperity,
in the day of our flourishing, we should never be moved, nor see sorrow; I, but
now how desolate are we? void and destitute of all good? how do we sit many a
day, and not one good and sober thought does pass through us? because we sit
as outcasts. 2. An evil disease has taken hold of us, we are all overspred
with the leprosy, so that we cannot speak nor have any dealings with one
another but we are in danger of being infected and tainted: whatever we do or
say, or design, a selfish taint get^ in, and spoils all: Let all your words be
seasoned (says the Apostle:) but how unsavory a breath runs in all ours?
unsavory to our selves, and unprofitable, if not infecting to all that hear
us. 3. The famine is sorely upon us also, and like to that which was in
Samaria, a Famine that puts us to it so hardly, that we are made to eat our own
children, the fruit of our own thoughts, and wisdom, and reason; we have no
Bread from Heaven now rained upon us, but Bread from the earth, that is from
beneath, our own fleshly thoughts and counsels, we have nothing else in a
Strait to refresh our weary Souls withal: all is spent, and the Prodigal
seeks to fill his belly with the Husks that the Swine eat, and they fail him
also. 4. There is an Host of enemies has beset us; Troops that continually
seek our lives, and wait for our halting both from within and from without, and
they threaten like Goliath, never to give over till they have given our flesh to
the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air, till they have undone us,
when the poor soul sits sadly bemoaning it self, alas! I am an outcast, shut
out from the favor of God, and of his people, and am made to sit alone in my
chains. Alas! I am a Leper and unclean, My wounds stink and are corrupt, a
loathsome disease has all overrun me, there is no sound part from head to
foot. Alas! I am ready to dye of the famine, the word takes no place: hearing
is not blessed to me, that which was once dearer then thousands of Gold and
Silver, sweeter then the Honey, and Honey comb; more sought for then necessary
food: yet now all is gone, the Soul is empty and dry, and heartless: the famine
has consumed all; and yet must an Host too come against the Soul in this case?
this adds to all our misery greatly. Here new fears perplex the Soul, lest the
enemy come unawares, and slay it: The Lepers know not what shall befall them,
and they are sensible of all these miseries now upon them. Alas! you that go
and come, and sit here as pictures, and are no more sensible then the stones in
the wall, all this is nothing to you; and I am wondering sometimes, how it is
possible you should thus sleep away your time, and never consider you are going
apace to Hell and destruction, but like the Smiths dog, sleep quietly, though
the sparks fly about your ears: the words of the Curse, and the words of the
Blessing, all are al^ke, nothing seiseth; and this is your great misery, that
you cannot come near your selves to enquire how is it, A deceived heart has
turned him aside, that he cannot (possibly come to that word to) say, is there
not a lie in my right hand? Isa. 44.20. But now you that are made sensible, and
know where you stand, and cry for bread to eat, somewhat that may cure and
heal, and satisfy you every where, you that are under the sense and pain of
this felt-want and misery, you clearly know these two things. 1. You see how an
evil taint has gone along with you all your days, from your childhood, which
you never yet were cured of, and if you be not cured, it will surely undo you.
And then, 2. We are under the sense of the great thing we are short of, of
knowing the very inward mind and heart of God toward us, how we stand in that
eternal favor of his, and acceptance: for till we shall have a clear and full
certainty, what these everlasting thoughts of God concerning us are; whatever
else we have had, or may have, of powers, inlargings, refreshings, and
operations of truth, yet all will be too short, to satisfy and set down our
Souls: we must still lie, as the Lepers here did, at a peradventure and hazard,
with our Lives in our hands: They can but kill us, etc. We know not what the
end will be, how God will deal, whether save or destroy, but all our Life long
we shall stand in fear of death, till we are freed from him that has the power
of Death, till we are satisfied by an everlasting witness of good will toward
us; and that nothing shall separate us from the love of Christ: and to have the
sense of this shortness upon us, sure it would make us stir and look about us.
I wonder truly, how you can pass over a day, a night, an hour, and let the
case lie at such uncertainties, and that you are not always crying out with
these Lepers, If we sit here, we dye! if we are not freed from this selfish
taint, from an evil heart that has ever been nursed up with us, that will
surely be our ruin: and if we are not in that eternal Good will of God
favored and accepted, that love which still cover a multitude of sins, and
never fail, but save to the utmost; if we are not found written in this book of
life, we surely perish. And can we lie in this miserable condition, to be
outcasts, Leprous, under a sore Famine, beset round with an Host of enemies,
from within, and without, (for do you not see and know how the world are up,
and stirred against us, if it be possible to break us in pieces, from being a
people?) and yet have we no sense, nor feeling of all this?

II. I told you a second thing in general to be considered, was, not only the
present misery these Lepers lie under, but the hopeless condition of any way or
means to help them: They are at their wits ends; If we sit here we dye; if go
into the City, we dye; if fall into the Host of our enemies, we can but dye,
etc. which implies they could promise and expect no other thing. And thus are
our souls hemmed in with straits on all hands. If we sit where we are, we
certainly know and feel we are short and perish, and if we turn back to the
world, and draw back from the place Truth has brough us up unto, there we are
sure to perish: and if we go on, an host of enemies is before us, what shall we
do in this Case!

There are three things which Truth has surely led us up to, and if we go back
again, and turn in any of those Cases, we are sure to fall short and dye.

1. As I told you, we are brought to a true light and information of our
present misery, in what a wretched, polluted, leprous case we stand, what a
base selfish ta^nt is with us in all our way, how short we are of the life of
God: and if we shall turn back from this, and the heart be left to reason, and
plead, and blind it self, saying, sure I am not so miserable, the case is not
so bad, as I may judge, etc. and so shuffle away, and get off the strait: This
is to be undone, that is certain.

2. We are informed in the great thing we want, that without a clear and
certain witness from heaven, sealed upon our spirits, of the everlasting
thoughts of Good will toward us, that nothing else can be enough to stay and
settle our Souls: this we are come to, to see nothing short of this will serve:
and this there is a true close to, and cry for, at times, in our minds, in our
inward man: However we are led captive, yet all along the eye is open to see
what we want: and if here we shall be left to turn back, and reason with flesh
and blood, and say, all reach not to the same pitch: why may not we be saved,
though we are not led up so far as some others? if we get off the strait thus,
and turn to carelessness, and security; this is the way also surely to perish.

3. We are brought to a Proclamation of, and have begun to enter into, a
killing and self-denying way: the Proclamation has sounded to leave all things
and take up the Cross, and follow Truth: not to please our selves, not to take
content or sit down in any of the creatures, not to have a Kingdom in this
world, but to walk always as strangers and pilgrims, seeking another country:
this we have chosen according to our Light, and this we have professed to the
world, and if we shall be left to fall back here, and say, This is a hard
saying, who can bear it? to be ever dying, to be killed all the day long, etc.
and so shall turn again to vanity, to the beggarly elements, to make a Captain,
and go back to Egypt, to turn with the dog to the vomit, etc. I say, to be left
to this, is a certain token of being undone. Many of you might have dyed in
peace, and been truly saved formerly short of this conversation, before the
Light came up, and the thing was called for to leave all: but now to resist,
and withstand the light that arises in your day, to rebel against the Lords
call, this is certainly to be undone: and therefore if the Lord help you not
out, and bring you not up to the next step and buckle your hearts to the dust,
and make you lie under and submit to the hand, and venture your lives, and say,
Let him do what seems him good; without you come to this, you are undone: if
you shall make a Captain to return into Egypt, then remember what befell, He
swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest: and so they that
were invited to the Feast, and draw back, and make excuses, see what comes of
it, he swears, they shall not taste of his Supper. I could desire you might
never come hither to hear, unless there be a heart indeed to go on; it is not
easy dallying with the truth, not like going to ordinary Chu^hes and
meeetings, there you may hear many years, and never be touched to the heart,
nor found so guilty for not going on in the Truth; but it will not be so here,
the Word will surely take place, and be either a savor of life to life, or of
death unto death.

And thus I have opened to you the present miserable condition the Lepers sit
in, and brought it home to our own case, and the case indeed is miserable to
sit down in it; and if ever we rise, it will be a wonderful recovery. You that
are sat down, O consider, and think of it; for if you are left here, it had
been good for you you had never been born. Then I have showed you how they were
hemmed in with Death; if they go back, they dye; if fall to their Enemies, in
all appearance they dye. I applied it to our particulars, and showed you three
Things we were brought to, from which if we turn back, it is no less then
Death. 1. We have seen the end of all the Doctrines of the world, an end of all
the ways of false worship. 2. We know how we are short, and what we want, and
that nothing but a certainty, and clear evidence of the love of God opened and
sealed to our Souls, and that we may be made like to him, nothing else can ever
content and satisfy us. 3. We are come to receive and entertain the
Proclamation of a self-denying way, to bid farewell to ease, and quiet, and
self-pleasing, and take up the Cross daily; and if in any of these Cases we
fall back, we are surely undone. And now to speak of the last Thing observed
from the words.

III. THE GREAT SUBMISSION AND BUCKLING OF THEIR SPIRITS. Come, and let us fall
into the Host of the Syrians, for we can but dye. Can but dye! Alas, and is
that little! How are their Souls ground to powder, and their hopes laid in the
dust, and they venture with their lives in their hands? In this Buckling of the
Lepers, I would observe to you three Things.

1. They rise: for they were set down; but are made to look about, and say, If
we sit here, we dye: And must they rise now? This is a strange time and case to
stir in; what when outcasts? when Lepers? when almost starved? when cast off
on all hands? I, now they rise; need makes the naked man run: They do not stand
to dispute the case as our hearts sometimes do; Alas, I am unclean, and an
outcast, and filthy, and should I now look toward God? But if the famine
pinched you to the heart, it would make you up, and be going, and not reason
the case, I am ragged, and torn, and uncomely; it is not a time to look for any
message from God, whilst the case is thus with me. Alas! Hunger stands not
upon manners and modesty; it says, Give me bread, or I dye: The sore famine
buckles the heart, and makes it stoop to any thing: It turns to the hand that
smites; it falls at the foot, and says, Let him say and do with me what seems
him good; Lo here I am.

2. In this submission of theirs, they fall into the Host of the Syrians; they
fall upon the sword. Now the Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God; with this
it cuts, and divides, and pierces to the heart; and when the Soul is brought to
this pinch, it bows indeed, it accepts of all; Let him read, and say, and do
what he will; let me hear all his mind, the judging part, the cutting part,
that which most strikes to the quick. The heart is not now coy and nice, and
stands upon those terms of picking and choosing; it says not, This is too
sharp, and the other too cruel; I cannot bear that hard saying, or the other
dealing: No, but now to the hungry Soul every bitter thing is sweet: Every word
of God is good (says Agur.) And Paul under this buckling of heart cries out,
The Law is holy, just and good, but I am carnal, etc. Thus the Leper crouches
down, and lays his neck to the block; if the sword will spare it, well, if not,
it lies to take the blow; I can but dye: and with Esther, If I perish, I perish.

3. Consider the carriage of the Lepers in this great strait: They rush not on
furiously and desperately, and say, Come, all shall be well; they take not the
Kingdom by force; nor do they go utterly fainting and despairing, shutting out
all hopes of their lives by hard conclusions: but with a sober submitted spirit
they venture, ready to take up what ever befalls; b^^ whether life, or whether
death, that they leave, and conclude not the matter: And in this posture does
the Soul truly buckled ever draw near to God. And therefore when ever you are
upon your hasty conclusions one way or other, saying, Sure I shall come to
nothing, or sure all will be well with me; you say you know not what, both are
alike false, and come not from a submitted heart that stands in the strait, and
gives not up all for lost in the worst time. How did Joseph's Brethren
expostulate the case, and plead with him when he seemed most harsh to them? and
though they buckle and own, We are all my Lords bondmen, we are guilty; yet
they plead, and hang on him, and cannot give over; but, O my Lord (says
Judah,) let thy servant I pray thee speak a word in my Lords ears, etc. This is
a token of a Soul that is at a want indeed. Many talk of a Heaven, of a God,
and of an eternal life, but it is but in way of complement, they are not at a
want indeed, their Souls are not fired with a thirst for the living God; but
want will carry through all. Though the Soul be an outcast, and the enemy
reproach it, and upbraids, how ill it has dealt with God, and how can it ever
hope for mercy? yet nothing can stop or hinder it; the needs press it on, and
the noise continually rings in its ears, If we sit here, we dye. Now for Use of
this, Consider:

1. Do you indeed hear this voice in your Souls, ever living, and speaking, and
giving no rest, If I sit here, I dye? O that it were the Lords will to thunder
it in your ears, that you might ever hear it sounding, If we sit here, we dye!
Who of you have attained to that certainty, that are sure you shall never fall
short? There is a twofold Death: A Death of your good, and light, and love,
and enlargements, and seize, that may be come to in the Truth; and here
you that are to be saved may dye in this Wilderness: And there is an
everlasting Death, to be utterly cut off and separated from God. And can you
have any rest till you are satisfied in both these, for your state, and for
your attainment? Can you get off from that voice within you, If I sit here, I
dye?

2. You that indeed hear this noise in your Souls, do you learn of these
Lepers; venture into the host, fall under the hand, let nothing keep you back;
not because you are forlorn, and miserable, and all overspread with sin; shall
this keep you back? But it shall not keep back all, some must enter and come as
they are, in their rags and unclean garments; they must venture upon the swords
point: and if ever you get bread, it must be this way; not by ease, and sitting
still, and shunning sufferings: No, but by venturing into the midst of the
Host, in taking up the Cross daily; not by picking and choosing here a bit, and
there a bit; but if hungry indeed, the whole Lamb must down, and the bitter
herbs; nothing must be too hard.

3. The manner of these Lepers going without conclusions one way or other, for
or against themselves; this may show you the right way of coming at a
peradventure, not propounding to our selves what will come on it, but to
venture, and leave the success to another, to lie before the sword, and say,
Let him do his pleasure, Lo here I am, let him do what seems him good: If it
please him, he is able, he can cure, and heal, and save us; but if not, lo here
we stand in his presence, and lie at his mercy.

Thy Will be done; OR Christ's Amen to the bitter Cup. SERMON. XV. July 6. 1651.
MATTHEW. 26.42. He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my
Father, if this Cup may not pass except I drink it, Thy Will be done.
The Analysis.
FOur General Things observed from the words.

I. This Cup must in no ways pass from Christ without drinking. II. Christ
certainly knew this, by proving and trying to the utmost to escape. III. The
ground why it cannot pass, was the Will of God. IV. Christ submits and bows to
this at last, Thy Will be done.
In this Submission of Christ, seven Particulars considered.

1. He submits to be betrayed by one of his Disciples, that eat at his Table,
they took sweet counsel together; this a great woe. 2. Submits to be betrayed
into the hands of sinners, not righteous persons: and here seven Aggravations
considered. 1. They are a multitude; that which is the Betrayer of the Soul,
lets in a multitude, an Host, swarms of ungodliness. 2. They come against him
with swords and staves; not only swords to kill, but staves to defend, and
prolong the misery. 3. They lay hold on him: sins get upon the Soul, and are
too strong, it cannot shake them off. 4. They bring him before the High Priest,
an Enemy, and unequal Judge; so the Soul brought befo e the Devil to be judged.
5. When He begins to speak, they flap him on the mouth: so is the Truth snib'd
within, if it speak a word to clear it self. 6. They crown him with thorns: so
the Truth pestred and cumbred with thorns, cares, fears, etc. 7. They seek
false witness against him to put him to death: so the great search in the Soul,
is, to prove all has been deceit, etc.
3. Christ submits to be put to death unjustly; no just thing is against him,
but only false accusations; yet he submits to dye. 4. He submits to a most
base, unworthy, and ignominious death. 1. Crucified between two Thieves; Truth
dies between the man and Devil. 2. Buried in the field of blood, the place of a
skull. 3. The Soldiers part his garments; Lusts share the garments of Truth.
5. Submits to be left of all his Disciples and Friends, they all fly away: so
all the labors and good that ever the Soul has done, now forsake it. 6. His
Father hides himself from him: He cries, My God, my God, but not now, my
Father; His bowels are hid. 1. He hides himself, because his Son is to dye, and
he will not see the death of his Child. 2. He does it, that the Son may learn
obedience from what he suffers: Nothing so crushes the Soul, as the absence of
God. 3. He does it, that the blow may seize; whilst he is present, it is
impossible the Soul should dye: Three children burn not.
7. That which adds to all, He submits to be dumb and silent, not to complain
under all this: and that for three Reasons. 1. That he may stand to his word:
He had consented, Thy Will be done, and if now complain, he contradicts all. 2.
Dumb, to give no evil example of murmuring to others. 3. That he might not lose
all his recompense and reward.

All was brought home practically, and Application made.

1. To enquire every one, What is my Judas, that lurks and lies hid? what will
be my Betrayer? need to know it. 2. To inform what we are to meet with; if we
will go to life, we must drink the same Cup; therefore let it not be strange.
MATTHEW. 26.42. He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my
Father, if this Cup may not pass except I drink it, Thy Will be done.
HAving spoke several times to you of the General Points observed from the
words, we came at last to the fourth Point, viz.

After all means used by Christ to avoid this Cup, after all strivings,
intreatings and prayings, O my Father, if possible let this Cup pass; yet at
last submits, Thy Will be done.

In the conclusion he bows and buckles, and is ground under, and made to cry
out, Thy Will be done. And in this saying there is so large, and vast, and deep
a thing contained, that truly it swallows up all things else: Heaven, and
Earth, and all creatures are as nothing before this Will of God; All things
must come to buckle, and be crushed, and lie in the dust before it! Alas, it
will make the sensible heart to shake and tremble, and the ears to tingle, to
hear and see what Christ here submits unto, what he gives consent to in saying
this word, Thy Will be done! an unfathomed depth of submission and bowedness of
Soul lies up in it, to take up all sufferings, and sorrows, and miseries that
can befall. For more plainness, I branched out the thing into seven
Particulars, which Christ here submits to, and to which all the saved ones must
consent, and follow in the same steps: In which seven particulars, ten thousand
miseries and sufferings are laid up, which no heart can conceive, nor tongue
express; what all they must pass through that go to life, and shall be made to
drink of the Brook in the way, before they must lift up their heads.

1. In this saying, Thy Will be done, He submits to be betrayed by one of his
Disciples; one of his own house lifts up himself against him, one that eat of
his bread, and was his familiar friend; as it is expressed in the Psalmist, We
took sweet counsel together, and walked in the House of God as friends: And
this is a wonderful misery to take up; Had it been an enemy, I could have born
it; but thou my friend, my familiar, etc. This cuts to the heart: This very
case befalls the Soul in which Truth is. There is something that sticks near to
it, a friend that lies in its bosom, and is nursed and favored by it;
something that walks in the House of God with it, and pretends to be for God,
and Truth, and pleads hard, as if all were intended for the Souls good; and
this will be a sad day, when this very thing shall be found to be the Betrayer;
and yet this Christ submits to, when he consents, Thy Will be done.

2. F^rther, He submits to be betrayed into the hand of Sinners: And here are
seven great Aggravations of misery.

1. They are a multitude into whose hands he is betrayed: This flattering and
smooth-mouth'd Betrayer, this Judas, that comes with a kiss, and salutes, Hail
Master, a great multitude is at his heels; he brings in a whole Troop after
him. Oh that you could read the thing in your selves, in the work upon your own
Souls! For there is all this to be fulfilled, if you go in the same way with
Christ, and tread in his steps, if you drink of the same Cup (as all the saved
ones must;) for there is no other way to life, but to be planted into the
likeness of his death; the likeness in all cases, though not the very same
particular Trials that he had. And now this you shall find true, that when ever
this Judas that betrays the Soul gets in, when by his counsel, or wisdom, or
flatterings, and fair promises, that cursed Betrayer gets in his foot, and
deceives the Soul with a kiss: then he lets in a multitude of enemies against
us, then come in the swarmings of wickedness; They compassed me about like Bees
(says David:) Then come in all the floods of ungodliness, and make the Soul
afraid; Then all the fountains of the great deep are broke up, and come with
violence, ready to sweep away all before them: Then the Sea brings forth
abundantly all manner of creeping things; Then a night presently overtakes the
Soul, and all the beasts of the Forest creep forth: Strange monsters and
things we never saw before; mire, and dirt, and strange wickednesses appear,
that we never thought had been in us. This Betrayer brings out all against us.
We had thought we had been knowing, and well seen into the ways of God; but now
ignorance, and mists, and confusion beset, that the Soul cannot see nor know
one distinct Truth. We had thought we had been good-natured, and
tenderhearted, and friendly however; but now rage, and madness, and
desperateness get up. We had thought sure we had a will and desire toward God,
and were willing to be ruled and ordered by him; but now the punctual
fightings, and opposings, and resistings show themselves, that the Soul is made
clearly to see, it chooses Death rather then Life: All monstrous wickedness
gets up, when this son of perdition is to be revealed in the Soul, and has
once betrayed it. I would you might read these things as we go, for all this a
written for our learning; and if this was done to the green tree, then what
shall be done to the dry? This is no other condition then what has befallen
our fathers in their day: When God has brought them to Judgment, and this work
of bringing them through death to life was in hand, they ever had a Betrayer,
that lay close, and did them all the mischief, and brought these Troops of
Enemies against them; and it cannot be prevented: This son of perdition will
thus act, he will betray and bring the Soul to death; and he lies close: he is
in all the saved ones; and there is no other way to life, but by having him
cast out: But he will first surely spit his poison, and play all his pranks, if
it were possible to undo the very Elect: Such an Host, such a multitude he
brings with him, that sometimes it agasters and amazes the man to see how he is
beset, what swarms of iniquities and strange unthought of lusts appear. And we
shall all surely find this true in our selves, when God shall have that work in
hand, of bringing us down to death, (the house appointed for all the living,)
which all the saved ones must pass.

2. This multitude come armed and provided against him, with swords and staves;
and herein lies a great mystery, if you were able to read it: Thy rod and thy
staff sustain me (says David.) The Enemy also he has swords and staves to
destroy; and mind, there are staves as well as swords: Now staves are dull
weapons, and though they may bruise and batter, yet they kill not: and this is
a great aggravation of the misery, that the sword may not come alone, suddenly
to cut off, and make an end; but there are staves too, that bruise and batter
the Soul, and yet touch not its life; but it must hang in death: And this Job
cries out against; O that I could find the grave, then should I be at rest, I,
but in those days (it is said,) men shall seek death, and it shall fly from
them: They cannot dye: and this wonderfully adds to the misery, that the Soul
is wounded, and cut, and pierced, and yet cannot reach to dye: the staves keep
off the sharpness of the Sword, that it does not quite kill. The Sword of the
spirit, is the Word of God; the true Light that the enemy makes use of, that
searches, and cuts, and judges, and finds guilty every where, and leaves no
thought unjudged: and this Sword would soon cut off, where it let loose. Thou
writest bitter things against me (says Job:) and this, though it be cruel,
yet it would seem easier to the Soul in that day, and under that anguish, if it
might but go on to make an end: then should I yet have comfort, etc. (says
Job) Job 69, 10. But there are staves too, that keep off the blow from coming
to the heart. There are secret hopes from the Devil steal in, and get up, do
the Soul what it can, that so it cannot dye, but lies thus miserably hattered
to and fro, and can get no ways, as David cries out, Thou have beset me behind
and before, that the Soul can neither get to God, nor from God, nor to death,
nor from death. O Lord, who can read the Riddle!

3. This multitude lay hold on Christ, and lead him away: they are too potent
and strong, and he has no might nor strength to withstand them: This is your
hour, and the Power of darkness: but it is the day of his weakness, his wings
are cut, that he cannot get away: He cries out, I am a worm and no man, a scorn
and reproach among the People: and this the Soul shall find true in it self:
there is a time when Christ is strong and can get away from them, a time when
the Soul could deal with its lusts, and curb and beat them in, when ever they
appeared: and like Sampson, when ever the Philistines came to bind it, It could
but arise, and shake it self, and get loose again. I, but there is a time when
Sampsons strength is departed, and the Philistines prevail, and carry him by
force, and put out his eyes, and make him grind in a mill, and he cannot
withstand: such hold do sins lay upon the Soul, They take such fast hold on me
(says David) that I cannot loook up: and again, speaking in the name of
Christ, My sins are gone over my head, as a burden too heavy for me to bear;
they stick close to the Soul, that it cannot get loose: they stick as the flesh
to the bones, that the Soul is no ways able to shake off these Lions, and
Tigers, and devouring beasts that lay hold upon it, it is impossible for the
soul to get them off, but it ^s led captive, and made to serve and follow
whither this wicked rabble will lead it: and here Job cries out, That which my
Soul refuses to touch, is made my sorrowful meat: and so Paul cries out, that
he was a slave and sold under sin, and that which I hate, and would not do,
that I do (says he;) such a strange haling is there, and leading captive by
sin: And this you will all have a time to find true, that your iniquities will
be too hard for you, you will not be able to stand before them, they will
pr^vail, and have the victory, else what need that challenge to Death and Hell,
where is your victory? if they had not the victory once? yes, they surely will
have the victory over all: but now not to be left in Hell, not to be holden of
the grave, but to be raised up by the same Almighty power which raised up
Christ, this will be the Salvation; but this will be the sad day to the Soul,
when it shall be thus left in the hands of Sinners: In those days they shall
mourn, etc. We promise fair, I can submit to be ruled and ordered, and part
with this and other, and be denied of my will and runs of heart: alas, you know
not your heart, nor the multitude and strength of your enemies! They will surely
come to be too hard for you, that you shall not be able to get out of their
hands, but a base rabble company of unworthy lusts (which sometime the Soul has
scorned should touch it) now lay hold and lead it away like an ox to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the stocks, and it cannot help
it, nor wring any ways out of their hands.

4. They bring him to the high Priest, and set him before a partial and unequal
judge that is set against him, and right or wrong will certainly do what he can
to put him to death; and thus is the Soul dealt with, in this day, when it is
betrayed into the hands of its lusts: They presently lead and hale it to be
judged by their own King, the Devil, he sits in the seat of Judgment to hear
and cast the matter: he who never favored Truth, was never a friend to it, but
a murderer from the beginning, seeking all ways and means to destroy, yet He
must now be Judge, and condemn, and accuse, and upbraid the Soul, in this day
of its calamity. Now Shimei comes out, and upbraids, and curses David, Come out
thou bloody man: Now all the blood of Saul's house is come upon thee: Alas!
there was another hand in it, he was clear and innocent concerning Saul's blood;
he had spared his life, when it was in his hands to slay him, and had done good
to Saul's house: but yet this false charge must be laid in his dish, and he must
bear the railing, and go away as guilty. O Lord, if your Souls be awake, and do
but mark the carriages within, you will see what a stir this wicked Judge makes
to find some false accusation or other, for which he may pass a sentence of
death against the Soul: how does he bestir him to prove, that all that ever the
soul had or did, was but a deceit, and in hypocrisy, and no truth was in the
bottom of it? and this is a token you were a deceiver, (says the Judge) and
this proves you will come to nothing, you ever had a base taint in all you did,
a base selfish end: and here the poor creature stands amazed, and silenced at
these cruel charges, when presently this wicked Judge is upon its back, and
will not give a breathing time, but asks an answer: Answerest thou nothing to
what these accuse thee of? he calls for an answer in a moment: when the Soul
stands amazed, and nonplust, and knows not how to get up a sober thought, or
word, at such an instant, to plead for it self, yet then they press to have the
Sentence pass against the Soul, as if there were nothing of truth and
singleness, but a dissembling hypocritical heart in all.

5. When Christ begins to speak for himself, presently one smites him upon the
mouth, answerest thou the high Priest so? why (says Christ) If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of it; but if good, why smitest thou me? So if you can read
the Parable, when ever the Soul in this day goes about to speak a word for it
self, though never so fairly, and soberly, and according to truth, opening the
thing as it is; presently one or other of this Rabble multitude flap it on the
mouth; some base fear or discouragement comes in: What, dare you look toward
God? Dare you speak or plead a word for your self? Are not you found guilty and
deceitful here and there? And do you look for mercy? so that when this work
must pass, of bringing the Soul to death, all things must work to that purpose:
it may not have liberty to speak a word to clear it self, how innocent and
clear soever it be.

6. They crown him with Thorns: A Crown of Thorns indeed! It Is said of the
Thorns, that they choked the seed, and made it unfruitful: A Crown of cares and
pesters come in, which way to take, and what to do, to escape this hand, and
get from the blow. Oh that the King of Glory should wear such a Crown as this!
He that was born to a Crown of Glory, a Crown of Gold; yet he too must be rent
with these Thorns: He was under cares and fears; and therefore it is said, He
was heard in the things he feared: He looked about to his right hand, and to
his left, to see if there were any to help, but he found none: This Crown of
Thorns rends his head, the cares and fears which in the day of his flesh did
beset him. Then they put on a Purple robe; in derision and scorn they mock at
him, Hail King of the Jews, and make a sport at his misery. And thus many times
the cursed Lusts within, insult, and triumph, and mock the poor Soul, when it
is in this miserable strait, and upon the nick of Life and Death: Can you read
it?

7. They sought false witness against Christ: They were busy to search and
enquire out all that could come against him, right or wrong they matter not.
And if you mind in this day, there will be a most strict search and enquiry
made, if any can come in against the Soul, to prove it a Deceiver and Hypocrite
in all it has done or said for Truth. Can you not read the Parable? What
inquisition is made by the high Priests to prove against the soul, that all its
best good was tainted, all it has ever done or spoke for God, that all this
was in deceit, and a base selfish taint ran in all, and that there is no
singleness in the bottom to carry it through? This is the thing the Enemy
main^y aims at, and this cuts to the heart, as a sword, to be thus upbraided
and dogged with accusations and outcries within, that all was but deceit, and
the Soul shall come to nothing, etc. And this I would have you mark, what will
surely befall us in the day of our calamity; what dealing we may look for, and
expect, if we will follow our Master, and tread in his steps. Many speak much
of the Death of Christ, but they come not to it, to know and feel it in
themselves: But if we never be planted together with him into his death, never
shall we partake of his resurrection, if we come not to the same submission of
heart, to say, Thy Will be done. And in this word I told you seven Things were
considerable, which Christ accepts of, and consents unto, though the Execution
was yet to come and pass upon him. 1. He submits to be betrayed by one of his
own House, by a Disciple, one of the Twelve, one that goes for a Friend, and
had another heart given him, though never a new heart. 2. He submits to be
betrayed into the hands of sinners, a multitude come against him; and there I
opened to you seven particular Aggravations. Now to come to the next Thing.

3. He submits and yields to be put to death wrongfully: He is falsely accused,
falsely judged, falsely condemned: They bring nothing truly, but only lies
against him; and yet he submits to take up death, though never so unjustly
condemned: They lay that to my charge which I never did; and therefore their
Witnesses could not agree; there is ever a jar will be between lies: One comes
and witnesses, This man blasphemed, and said, I am the Son of God; another
says, This man said, I will destroy the Temple of God made with hands, and in
three days raise one made without hands: And this was a lie, He had said no
such thing, but spoke of the Temple of his Body. And thus is the Soul dealt
within this day, false Witnesses come against it, and upbraid it; Well, you
said once you should never be moved, you should never be left nor forsaken of
God, but that he was your Father for certain, and you should be saved: When
alas the Soul that is to be saved never durst conclude any such thing, till it
be sure indeed; but in its best day, ever it stands in fear and jealousy what
the end shall be. Other Witnesses come, and bring in a false charge on the
other hand; 'Well, you said once there was no God, no 'Heaven, no Hell, nor
Life to come: And this is a flat lie also. The Soul to be saved, could never,
nor durst ever say, there was no God, though it has truly complained and
bewailed that it knew not God, nor Heaven, nor the life to come; it was dark
and ignorant in these cases as a blind creature; and this was its heavy woe and
bitterness. And all this while the Witnesses agree not, they differ in their
Tale, and their Accusations are all false, and unjust, and groundless; no one
true thing is brought against him, and yet he must dye; still they cry,
Crucify him, crucify him, and he submits to take it up. But what is the
reason, why must he dye, when no just Cause is found against him?

1. Because it is determined so, it is the determinate Counsel of God it should
be thus, though brought about by wicked hands.

2. He dies for the glory of God, that his Power, and Might, and Truth, and
Faithfulness might appear the clearer, in raising up from the dead: As Christ
said of the blind man, Not for this man's sin, nor his parents, was he born
blind, but for the glory of God. Alas! were man to dye for sin, (for that very
cause, and no other,) he might dye again and again, ten thousand times over,
and never have done the work: No, but precious in the eyes of the Lord is the
death of his Saints: They dye not to satisfy for their sin, but for the glory
of God. Did the Father lay any thing to the Prodigals charge when he came home?
No, his sin was that he came no sooner, the father was ready to receive him
notwithstanding all his rags and riotous behavior; this hindered not his
acceptance, but his keeping away from his father, that was his great sin. When
they accuse Christ as a glutton, a wine bibber, a Companion of Publicans and
Harlots, a Breaker of the Sabbath, a Blasphemer, and would put him to death for
these; alas, they charge him unjustly, he is not guilty of these. So all that
is laid to the charge of the Soul in that day by the Enemy, all the hypocrisy,
and deceit, and envyings, and coverings, and lustings; alas! all this belongs
not to the Son of God, the Truth is clear. But these are the Devils goods, his
ware, and he and his goods must perish together: The Truth is free, and disowns
and hates all; and the man (take him as separate from that evil Spirit, as
standing alone) and he is harmless and innocent, only his woe add misery is to
be cumbered, and pestered, and plagued with these goods of the Devil, lodged
within him. But now the Accusation and Charge is never laid rightly and truly,
for then the Enemy must accuse himself, which he will never do: He never hits
rightly on the sore, where the Souls great woe, and misery, and weakness lies,
that is hid from these false Witnesses; but they venture to speak desperate and
punctual lies, if it were possible to destroy the Soul by them: if you do but
mind how the wheels move within, when ever the man is indeed put to a strait,
and stands in anguish, then the Liar steps up, and witnesses falsely; then they
say (acted by this Spirit,) It Is you, Moses and Aaron, that have made our savor
stink in the nostrils of Pharaoh and his servants, and you have brought us into
this Wilderness to slay us with thirst: It was all false; they were sent to be
their Guides and Deliverers, to bring them to the good Land: But the Liars
mouth was open; and this Christ is made to submit to, to have his Life taken
from him unjustly, and without cause.

4. Another Thing Christ submits to, when he says, Thy Will be done, is, to be
put to the worst and shamefullest death of all: The Circumstances aggravate the
Death. 1. He is crucified among two Thieves, as one of that company, guilty as
they; He is numbered with transgressors: The Truth suffers as guilty, though it
be clear; as Deceivers, and yet true (says Paul.) Truth suffers between the
Man and the Devil; they are the two Thieves. The Devil he is the great Thief;
he steals to himself Lordship, and Power, and to sit in the seat of God, and to
be Disposer of things; He brags and vaunts, All this will I give, if thou will
fall down and worship, etc. Alas, they are none of his goods. Then the Man, he
is a Thief too; he steals a little hope, and ease, and rest, a little release
of his burden when it presses very sore: and this Thief steals for his want to
satisfy his hunger; and therefore he may be saved with Christ: But between
these two the Truth must dye, as one of that number, as a sinner and
transgressor. We have looked amiss, as if the man only and the Devil were to
suffer; but the Truth in us, because clear, therefore that might escape: No, no;
that must suffer, and lead the way to the man, or else he alas can never
suffer, nor go through death! But the good shepherd, when he puts forth his own
sheep, he goes before them; He suffers first, and drinks the first cup. But, 2.
Where do they crucify him? Out of the City, out of the place of blessing, and
carry him to the place of a skull (as one of the Evangelists has it,) a field
of blood (as another calls it,) but by both it appears to be a loathsome,
unworthy, disgraceful place, a place of filth and rottenness: Out of the belly
of Hell have I cried unto thee, etc. No better a lodging for the Soul in this
day, then the belly of Hell it self; and this Christ submits to. 3. Yet
further, The Soldiers part his garments among them: And truly this is a very
sad case to consider; How the Lusts, that crucified the Truth, yet they will
divide its garments, and put them on, and they will be covered with a garb and
covering of Truth: The wisdom of the flesh that puts in for a share; the hasty
and eager zeal and affections they plead for a share, the strange imaginations
they plead a share; and all will seem to be Friends to Truth, notwithstanding
they have but now put it to death; yet they part his garments among them. And
this is a sad case to the sensible Soul that is bereaved of the Life of its
Truth, and of the garments also, that has lost all; such a Soul can cry out
bitterly with Mary, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid him.

5. Yet further, He submits to be left and forsaken of all his Friends; His
Disciples left him and fled: Might he but have had them to stick to him in this
day of his calamity, it had been a great support and stay; but they all leave
him, and are scattered every one to his own: And herein lies a sore aggravation
of misery, (if your Souls can read it,) that now in this woeful day, when all
these woes are upon the back, and press the Soul to death almost, yet this must
come in, to add to all the rest, That all the good that ever the Soul has
done, and thought, and labored in the Truth, all is now scattered, and leaves
it: What ever it has done, singly and honestly, and out of the good will sown
in its heart toward the Truth, all the labors under the Sun now take their
leave, and seem vanity and vexation of spirit: And here Christ cries out, I
have spent my labor in vain: time will come, you will forget that ever you had
a good thought, or a good word or did any thing for the Truth; all will leave
you and be gone: when now your Souls can sometimes hold on the innocence and
single mindedness within, and truly pray to be remembered according to that
inward cleanness, yet a day will come when all this will be laid aside, and
forgotten; I forgot prosperity (says David:) and in another place, he compares
himself to the Dead that are forgotten for ever: How had Christ once his
Disciples about him, and ready to his command, when he sent out the Seventy two
by two! and now to be left of all, and not one to stand by him, this is a hard
Trial: and if it were not hid from the Soul, if it could foresee what a day of
Scattering of all its good and labors would come upon it, as though they had
not been, it would discourage and make it flag in all its actings for God, if
it thought such a day of stripping all were to come. They pierced my hands, and
my Feet, (says Christ;) His Hands that had labored in the Truth, and his Feet
that had ran the way of his Commandments: These are now nailed fast to the
Cross, and he is not able to stir them. The day will come when your Souls will
hate all the Labors you have taken under the Sun; when that Strait shall be
upon you, to cry out, My God, My God, Why have thou forsaken me! (Mark what I
say, for the day will surely come upon you) and then all your Works and Labors
will leave you: All the good that ever has passed upon you will not stand you
instead in that day, nor answer that Strait. O Lord! how is my Soul troubled,
when I feel how senseless you are, and far off from having the thing seize
upon you indeed? But it will surely come, and then you will remember what has
been told you; this Condition will befall you, to be left alone, as Christ
complains, Lover, and Friend have thou put far from me, and my acquaintance
into darkness.

6. Another misery greater then all, is this, His father hides his face from
him, he seems to forsake him, and become an enemy, that he cries out, my God,
my God, etc. My God, he can yet say, but not my father, he has hid himself
from the house of Jacob, all the bowels are hid. But why must this befall
Christ, that his father leaves him?

1. He hides himself, that he may not see the death of his child, the father
cannot endure that; and therefore he turns aside, and hides his face, his
bowels and tenderness, and puts on another habi^: Clothes himself with
vengeance, as with a garment: when this work of death must pass, then he seems
all anger, and hardens himself against the cries, and tears of his Son; then he
comes with Refiners fire: now the fire, that has no mercy, it burns all alike
that comes nigh it: and here David cries out, Have thou forgotten to be
gracious? Have thou shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure? The Soul
wonders at this day, and is amazed what work is in hand: It is hemmed in wi^h
darkness and gloominess, and all things work against it, and God he withdraws,
and leaves it: the Father lays aside all his bowels, and falls upon his Isaac
to bind him, and lay him upon the Altar for a Sacrifice.

2. He hides himself, that the Son may learn obedience by the things he
suffers: for nothing in the world seizes so deep upon the sensible Soul, as
this absence of God: when God is indeed made precious, and the Soul has left
all, and made choice of him only; then to be left and forsaken, O how it
grindes the heart, and lays it in the dust! The Soul is like a foolish child,
that so long as the mother is present joys and fliggers greatly; but let his
mother depart and leave it, and then how does it pensie and sink, and nothing
will please it! So when all sight of God is gone, that the Soul can see no more
of him, O how does it seize and buckle to the dust! Then the Soul cries to all
things, Labor not to comfort me; let me dye in my sorrow: It learns by this
want to want all things.

3. He hides himself, that Death may seize and take place: for God, should he
always be present, and uphold with his love and favor, it were impossible to
dye. How have the Saints sung and rejoiced in stocks, and prisons, and fires?
nothing could terrify nor affright: why, God was present, and that kept them
up. He walked in the fire with the three children, and so long the fire cannot
burn, nor seize at all. Martha says to Christ, Lord, had thou been here, my
Brother had not dyed. And certain it is, were but God with us, we could not be
in that darkness and confusion, in those sorrows, and wants, and perplexities,
that now are upon us; but he withdraws on purpose that the blow may seize. Do
you know what this means? and what a bitter cup this will be to drink of? when
the Philistines are upon you, and the Lord he is departed! To be betrayed by a
near and bosom friend, to be given into the hands of sinners, to be unjustly
put to death, to be numbered among Transgressors, and left of all friends that
ever stood by us; and then to add to all the rest, to have God withdraw too,
and hide all love and favor, and stop his ears, and seem an enemy; O who can
express the misery! My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! The Soul cannot
get from my God: How ever it is dealt with, though a Father be gone and hid, yet
it cannot go to another God, though it perish.

7. The seventh aggravation of this misery, to which Christ submits, is this,
He must be dumb, and not open his mouth in all these sufferings; as a sheep
dumb before the shearer: He must not complain, nor repine, nor struggle, nor
reason the case: He must not ask and cry for any ease and favor, but be still,
and let all the waves go over him: He may not have so much liberty as the rich
man had in Hell; he could call out to Abraham for water to cool his tongue; but
he must be in the fire, and yet not cry out, but bear it in silence: and how
hard a lesson is this, to have no vent in misery? not to complain, nor so much
as ask pity! but this Christ submits to, and all your Souls must come to it,
that shall enter into Life. And there are three Reasons for it.

1. He must be dumb, that he may stand to his word, and make that good: He had
consented and spoke the word, Thy Will be done; and he should now contradict
himself, and his heart would reproach his mouth (as Job says) if he should
shrink away, and complain; for this was, to have His Will done, and not Gods.

2. He must be dumb, that he may give no ill example to others: He is called
the Lamb without spot; no flaw must be in the Truth: If the Captain turn his
back, alas, this would soon dishearten all his Soldiers! If he should
complain and murmur, who would not learn murmuring, and stand to plead for it?
It Is certain we learn evil one of another; if we see another break out
frowardly under a cross, we presently learn to be unruly and froward: With the
froward thou will show thy self froward. But now he must bear the hand quietly,
and meckly, and patiently, to leave a good example for his people to walk in
the same steps.

3. He is dumb, that he may not forfeit all his work, and lose all his reward:
One dead fly spoils the whole box of ointment; And he that keeps the whole Law,
and fails in one point, is guilty of all: Not to go quite through with the
work, is to lose all; and to complain and murmur, that is to fly from the hand,
and shrink from the work; and that would hinder the reward, and be recorded for
an evil: Amongst all the other good, yet this comes in as a flaw; In this thou
have done foolishly. And thus you may see a picture of Christ upon the Cross:
but you cannot feelingly know the thing, till you shall come to the execution
of it upon your selves, and feel the same in all these particulars.

1. Then for Use, consider, Do you believe ever to see this day? or do you
think to come in at some other door? I wonder where your thoughts are! sure you
do not believe that ever this condition should be yours: If you believe it, you
will be searching and enquiring, But what is my Judas? what is that false bosom
companion that will prove my Betrayer? where lies that darling-viper? Is it in
my Understanding, my Light? Am I holding and boasting of my knowledge secretly?
Or is it in my affections? in the love, and choice, and cleavings of my heart
to any seen thing? and will that be a Traitor to me? Where lurks the Thief?
under what habit goes he? Is he betraying with kisses, with tenderness, and
love, and inward pleasings of spirit, where I least suspect him? Is he in my
ease, and rest, and content? Is it he that keeps the bag, and is the overseer
and provider of all things needful for me, which seems the nearest friend, and
most careful for my good? Is the Traitor so nigh me? It Is time to entire; for
certainly if ever you enter into Life, you must pass the same way; and you will
meet with a Judas that will be your death, one that lies close and hid; and the
man little suspects him to be who he is: but it is said of Christ, He knew from
the beginning who should betray him. Truth in us, from the first day, we can
remember, has ever dis-relished him, and found an evil savor in all that he
has done or said: therefore enquire out the thing; for what ever it be,
whether wisdom, or knowledge, or honor, or ease, or outward enjoyments, or
husband, or wife, or child, or what ever else; yet certain a Thief is got in,
and lodges nigh all of you, in your very bosoms, that will betray you.

2. If you are informed you must pass this way and no other, then let it not
seem strange when it comes to pass: when a multitude shall be about your ears,
floods and swarms of ungodliness, that agaster and amaze the Soul, will appear,
hidden and unthought of depths of wickedness: and all, that man may appear to
be a mere nothing, and Sin may appear exceeding sinful, and Grace may appear to
be Grace indeed. All your fair carriages, and wisdom, and moderation will be
found to be a stinking puddle, and defiled. If you have found another way to
life, I would you could declare it; but if there be no other, sure it will put
your Souls to a strait, to look about where you are: How do you think to stand
in that Day, when he shall rise to shake terribly the Earth? If you are not
then found in those everlasting records, if not a Name written in the Book of
Life; if there be not another spirit in you, that can go through the fire, that
cannot dye, that it is impossible it should be holden of the grave; Then what
will become of you in that Day!

FINIS.

