CLEAVELAND'S PETITION To His HIGHNESS the Lord POTECTOR.
May it please your Highness,
RUlers within the Circle of their Government have a claim to that which is
said of the Deity, They have their Center every where, and their Circumference
no where. It is in this confidence that I address to your Highness, as knowing
no place in the Nation is so remote, as not to share in the ubiquity of your
care; no Prison so close, as to shut me up from partaking of your influence. My
Lord, it is my misfortune, that after ten years of retirement from being
engaged in the difference of the State, having wound my self up in a private
recess, and my comportment to the public, being so inoffensive, that in all
this time, neither fears nor jealousies have scrupled at our Actions: Being
about three Months since at Norwich, I was fetched with a Guard before the
Commissioners, and sent Prisoner to Yarmouth, and if it be not a new offense to
make inquiry wherein I offended (for hitherto my faults are kept as close as my
person,) I am induced to believe, that next to the adherence to the Royal
party, the cause of my confinement is the narrowness of my estate; for none
stand committed whose estate can bail them; I only am the Prisoner, who have no
Acres to be my hostage. Now if my poverty be Criminal (with Reverence be it
spoken,) I must implead your Highness, whose victorious Arms have reduced me to
it, as accessory to my guilt. Let it suffice my Lord, that the calamity of the
War has made us poor; do not punish us for it! Who ever did Penance for being
ravished? Is it not enough that we are stripped so bare, but it must be made in
order to a severer Lash? must our skars be engraven with new wounds? must we
first be made Cripples, then beaten with our own Crutches? Poverty! if it be a
fault, it is its own punishment; Who suffers for it more, pays Use upon use. I
beseech your Highness put some bounds to our overthrow, and do not pursue the
chase to the other World; Can your thunder be levelled so low as our grovelling
Conditions? Can that towering Spirit that has quarried upon Kingdoms make a
stoop at us, who are the rubbish of those ruins? Methinks! I hear your former
Atchievments interceding with you not to sully your glories, with trampling on
the prostrate, nor Clog the wheels of your Chariot with so degenerous a
Triumph. The most renowned Heroes have ever with such tenderness cherished
their Captives, That their Swords did but cut out work for their courtesy;
Those that fell by their prowess, sprung up by their favors, as if they had
struck them down, only to make them rebound the Higher. I hope your Highness
as you are the Rival of their fame, will be no less of their virtues; the
noblest Trophy that you can erect to your Honor is to raise the afflicted. And
since you have subdued all opposition, it now remains that you attach your
self, and with acts of Mildness vaniqush your victory. It is not long since, my
Lord, that you knocked off the Shackles from most of our party, and by a grand
release did spread your clemency as large as your territories. Let not now
proscriptions interrupt our Jubilee. Let not that your lenity be slandered as
the Ambush of your further rigor. For the service of his Majesty (if it be
objected) I am so far from excusing it, that I am ready to allege it in my
vindication: I cannot conceive that my fidelity to my Prince should taint me in
your opinion; I should rather expect it should recommend me to your favor; Had
not we been faithful to our King, we could not have given our selves to be so
to your Highness; you had then trusted us gratis, whereas now we have our
former Loyalty to vouch us. You see my Lord, how much I presume upon the
greatness of your Spirit, that dare prevent my Indictment with so frank a
Confession, especially in this, which I may so justly deny, that it is almost
arrogance in me to own it; for the truth is, I was not qualified enough to
serve him; all that I could do, was to bear a part in his sufferings, and give
my self up to be crushed with his fall; thus my charge is doubled (my obedience
to my Sovereign, and what is the result of that, my want of-fortune;) Now what
ever reflections I have on the former, I am a true penitent for the latter; My
Lord you see my crimes! As to my defense you bear it about you! I shall plead
nothing in my justification, by your Highness, (which as it is the constant
inmate of a valiant breast, If you graciously please to extend it to your
Suppliant in taking me out of this withering durance,) your Highness will find
that mercy will establish you more than power; though all the days of your life
were as pregnant with victories, as your twice auspicious third of September.

Your Highness humble, and submissive Petitioner. J. C.

Printed for William Sheares.


