A Short Account of Blurton-Spaw-Water, with some plain Directions, and
necessary Rules for the more efficacious Drinking of it.
THIS Paper being chiefly designed for the meanest Readers, I shall deliver my
self in as few, and plain words, as the subject Matter will allow, hoping by
several more Experiments made, and observed of this Mineral Water, hereafter by
others, as well as my self, that Learned and Inquisitive Persons, (or any
others that dislike this Propter Authorem) may receive a more large and
suitable Satisfaction in deeper Notions, from some other more Learned and
Philosophical Pen: And in the mean time, these plain Directions have been
desired by some, and perhaps may be acceptable, and useful to most sorts of
Persons, that flock to this Spaw; therefore not regarding the Cenfures of the
Momy's, observing Method, the better to be understood, I shall,

First tell you from what Minerals, (as learned Physicians, and other
Philophical Men do affirm) this Water does receive its Medicinal Virtues.
Secondly, I shall endeavor to answer an Objection thrown abroad against it.
Thirdly, I shall tell you its Virtues, and in what Distempers it has done, and
in all probability it may do good. Fourthly, You shall have the best Method and
Manner how to drink it, without any Prejudice to your Bodies.

First, The Minerals (upon Trials and Experiments) which are very strong in
this Water, are Sulphur Flowers, and Iron Other, which unite into an imperfect
Vitriol in the Water, that is (more plainly) chiefly Steel, some Sulphur, and a
little Copper intermixed; which two last gives the Vomiting and Purging quality,
this Water is so excellently endued with, and from the Iron and Steel it works
so strongly by Urine. Now, to illustrate this (for the satisfaction of the
Inquisitive and Learned) not only have I tried, and often found it (and many
others) to turn with a few Grains of Gills into a deep Purple color at the
Well, and at my own House; but also it turned so at Litchfield after their
Carriage, and Keeping many days; some Bottles being sent to the Learned Sir
John Floyer, Knt. and Doctor of Physic, who caused others, besides himself, to
drink of it there; and by standing sometime in a Glass, a bleuish Skin appears
on the top of the Water, and hence says Sir John (in his Letters to me) we may
conclude, that this Water has the same Minerals, as the common Chalybeate
Waters have.

But m^reover there is this singular in this Water, from all others that are
Chalybeate, that by Spirit of Hartshorn dropped into it (at Litchfield, and many
other places) it precipitated green Clouds and Sediment, (very pleasant to the
Beholders) and not of an yellow Other color, as other Chalybeate Waters do,
neither will it turn green with Syrup of Violets, as other Chalybeate Waters
use to do, but gives a green Tincture to old rusty Iron put into it; by which
Experiments, and also by its Purging Faculty, it is believed that something of
Copper is contained in the Pyrites, or Fire-stone, which furnish the Water,
with its strong Chalybeate taste, from the Sulphur and Iron Ocher all Pyrites
contain. Upon these Experiments it is adjudged to be stronger than the Waters of
Quarne, Bromish, Poles worth, or Astrop; nay, some Learned Men at the Well have
affirmed it stronger than Tunbridge, and may be compared with Scarborough Spaw,
which purges as this does, and therefore must needs have greater Success, than
most other Steel Waters in England.

Secondly, The Objection is, it is a Coal pit-water, dreining dry through a Slough
or Gutter, some Coal-pits, as well as the Iron Stone pits, on Mere Heath,
therefore unwholesome.

Answ. The same Objection is made against the Waters of Polsworth and Bromich,
which are near Coal-pits also, and yet experience has proved them, (as says
Sir John in a late Letter to me) both to be useful and innocent: It is the
Pyrites, or Fire-Stone, (found in Beds, in getting of Coal or Iron-stone, through
which the Water runs) gives the Chalybeate Tincture to the Water; for if a
little Pyrites be put into a Glass of fair Water, in a few Minutes (as often as
it has been tried) it gives a Steel taste to the Water, and by adding Galls to
the same Glass, it turns of a deep Purple in a small time. Moreover, Chalybeat
Springs lie shallow, and are often spoiled by digging into, and therefore come
not from the Coal which lie deep, and the Fire-stone which gives the Chalybeat
Virtue) lies very much above the Coal, as Miners inform us; furthermore,
neither Iron-stone nor Coal can be dissolved in Water; the last being a
Sulphurous Oily Bitumen, cannot mix with Water no more than Oil can; and being
no Sulphurous stinking smell is found in Water, it is plainly evident it has
no ill quality from the Coals: Beside there is no such noxious quality in Coal
(as the Objectors imagine) as appears by warming Drink with a red hot Coal, as
many Countrymen use to do, and others light their Tobacco with it, without
prejudice, and easily taste the Sulphurous Acid in it, and believe its good for
the Lungs; and this sure is sufficient to satifie any Timorous (if Rational)
Person.

Thirdly, I design not to erect a Creature of my own, by extolling the Virtues
of this Water, so as to be accounted the Author of their Fame; but seeing it is
a stronger Steel-water, I shall, for the Benefit of our Country, set down a
Catalogue of some Distempers, for which you may expect Remedy by the use of it.

It is a very clear Water, and that is a peculiar Advantage to it; It has to
my knowledge cured the Green Sickness in several Virgins, brought away Worms
from Children, Gravel and Stones from many Men, and helped Pissing of Blood,
bravely helped a Gentlewoman of great Quality of an ill Habit of Body, with
Hysterical Maladies: Another good Gentlewoman (under my care) of a hot
splenetical Habit of Body, and Hectical in the first degree; greatly
efficatious in the Scurvy, as Mr. Atherly, Mr. Barber, and others can testify;
it procured to all that drank it regularly, a good Appetite, and amended the
Color in Women's Faces, etc.

By this it appears to be a great Opener of Obstructions, the causes of most
Diseases. It purges the Bowels by siege, the Mesentery, Liver, Reins, etc. by
Urine, carrying off, destroying and sweetening any Corrosive, Sour, and
Scorbutic Salts in the Blood, thereby cleansing and purifying the same: With
some it purged so much, as if it would leave nothing to pass by Urine; and yet
passed so plentifully by Urine, as if it found no vent by Stool, scarce ever
failing of purging (except in exceeding constipated Bodies, and in such as
drank but two or three Pints for Pleasure or Company) turning the Excrements of
all into a sad Green, or Blackish color, as all Steel-waters and Medicines do:
It Vomits also, as I observed in many, besides my self, who often drank it for
trials sake.

To be positive in its Virtues till more Experimental Histories have given the
Country satisfaction, were to extenuate the reality of the Premises; but from
its Mineral Principles, it justly may be recommended to be used in the hot
Scurvies, Jaundice, Incipient Dropsies. Hectical and Hysterical cases, the
White Flux, and Bleedings at the Nose; in Diseases of the Breast or Lungs,
that need or can admit Purgation; in Vomitings, decayed Appetites, and
Indigestion; in Diseases of the Head, as Convulsive cases, Falling Sickness,
etc. and in Nervous Cases, as Tremblings, Palsies, old Rheumatisms, Palpitation
of the Heart, Flatus, Hypochondriack Melancholy, and Cholicks arising from a
hot cause: In old Gonorrhea's and Claps ill cured, Ulcers of the Kidneys or
Bladder, Diabetes, Strangury, Sharpness of Water: Outwardly it must needs be
good in all Ulcers, Sore Eyes, Scorbutic running Sores, VVild-fires, Ring
worms, King's Evil, Scabs, Itch, Cankers, and in Scorbutic Sores of the Mouth
and Gumms.

Fourthly, Though those that are in perfect Health, (that come for pleasure) may
drink it without any hurt to their Bodies, yet it may harm such as are sickly,
if not used aright; and it is impossible to direct so, as to answer every Man's
particular case: But a preparation of the Body, by purging, may be necessary,
and safe in most Maladies, to make way for the Water: And bleeding some few
days before (or after) drinking, especially in Plethorical Bodies, or hot
Maladies, may be very profitable; for by it, Obstructions will sooner yield to
the Water: And purging once in ten or fourteen days (as I did some Patients the
last Summer) may be proper in some cases, as may the taking some Alteratives,
and appropriated Medicines, relating to the part Affected, or to the Nature or
Complication of the Sickness. Therefore, understanding Persons that have
distempered Bodies, do usually at Spaws, consult some Physician, whether the
Water be proper or not for their Condition, etc. whereas in others, less
discreet, and unadvisedly drinking of it, it may not do that good (but perhaps
harm) as by a regular Method.

Begin at six or seven a Clock in the Morning with two half pint Glasses
(walking two or three Minutes betwixt them) then walk gently a quarter of an
Hour, or something more, then take two more Glasses, and your Walk as before,
so repeat your Glasses the first Morning with your Walks, till you have taken
eight or nine Glasses at most, and so walk or ride gently, till the Water is
passed off, which may be in two or three hours time, after the last Glass, that
is by twelve or one of the Clock.

The days following increase your quantity, by one or two Glasses each Morning,
till you come to 12, 14, or 16 Glasses (which will be six, seven, or eight
pints) as you are advised too, or as it passes off, and you can bear it: And
after you are come up to the just number of Glasses you intend, you may hold to
that number every Morning a week, or more days, if your case require it, or you
may decrease, daily abating one Glass, till you come to the number you begun
with, or rather under, and so leave off; taking a Purge after it, as may be
proper in some, though not in all Cases and Bodies.

Remember not to walk too fast thither, nor drink too fast, nor walk too fast
home again after it, so as to heat or sweat; for thereby the Water is forced
into the Habit of the Body, and hinders its working off through the Bowels; and
this is one great cause of such Itchings, Pimples, and Breakings-forth, as many
the last Summers complained off.

If the Stomach chill at them, and grow nauseous, a bit of a Stomachical
Lozenge, Candid-Orange, Lemmon-Peel, Mint-Cake, or a few Carraway Comfits may
be chewed now and then, but the less the better: And if any have such weak
Stomachs they cannot fast till Dinner, at twelve or one of the Clock, a Mess of
warm Broth or Gruel will be exceeding proper for them at ten or eleven. Shun
Salt and Fried Meat, Sallets, Cheese, exercise gently after Dinner; sleep not,
nor drink hard, but remember Temperance in all things.

As to the time of the year to drink, it is usually from mid-May, till the end
of August; the hotter, and drier the Season is the better. A fortnights time to
drink them regularly may be the shortest, some Bodies and Distempers may
require three Weeks, others a Month or more; Mr. Barber drank it six Weeks
complete in the two last Summers.

This Water, as many can testify, has been carried six, ten, and many more
Miles in Bottles, kept three or four days, drank, and worked off very well, and
so fetched fresh every third or fourth day for three weeks together; enquire of
John Licet, of Hopton, who drank it older than ever I yet heard of with great
Success; but purius ex ipso font bibuntur Aquae: It Is most efficatious no
doubt when drank at the Well.

To conclude (Brevity having been my aim) I hope if any meet with help by the
use of this Water, they will be so gratefully Ingenious to it, as to confess it
to me, or some other Physician or Friend, so that the Virtues of it may be
grounded on Matter of Fact and Observations: And if the poorer sort of People
that come to this Spaw, where (Deo volente) I often shall be, require my
Advice, I shall be ready to give it them Gratis, as I am bound in Conscience to
do, and that as carefully, as to any other of our Country, to whom I am

New-Castle-under-line, Mar. 30. 1694. A Friend and Servant, Will. Westmacott.

SIR,
I Freely give my Recommendation of Blurton-Water to all my Countrymen for the
Curing those Distempers mentioned in your Paper, so that they fitly prepare
themselves before Drinking by proper Physic, and follow your Directions in
your Paper, while they pursue the course of drinking the Water; and I question
not, but your publishing your Account of these Waters, will be very useful, for
the making them more known to all our Patients in our Country, and those of our
Profession will give you their thanks, for the communicating the Trials and
Experiments you have made about them, for which I shall upon all occasions
return you mine, who am,

Litchfield, Feb. 16. 93. SIR, Your Faithful, and Humble Servant, John Floyer.

London: Printed for William Bateman, Apothecary in Stone, in Staffordshire,
who is entrusted to take any Observations from any Ingenious or Distempered
Persons, that make Trials of this Spaw.


