royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROITBy the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas His Majesty has Received Information, that the Persons herein after
Named, have, with diverse other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, Committed High
Treason, in Compassing and Conspiring the Death and Destruction of His
Majesty's Royal Person, and in Adhereing to His Enemies; for which Cause
several Warrants for High Treason have been Issued out against them, but they
have withdrawn themselves from their usual Places of Abode and are fled from
Justice: His Majesty has therefore thought fit (by the Advice of His Privy
Council) to Issue His Royal Proclamation, and His Majesty does hereby Command
and Require all His Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the Lord
Montgomery and Sir John Fenwick, wherever they may be found, and to carry them
before the next Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required
to Commit them to the next Goal, there to Remain until they be thence Delivered
by due Course of Law. And His Majesty does hereby Require the said Justice or
other Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof to Him or His Privy
Council. And for the Prevention of the going of the said Persons into Ireland,
or other Parts beyond the Seas, His Majesty dors Require and Command all His
Officers of the Customs, and other His Officers and Subjects of, and in the
respective Ports and Maritime Towns, and Places within His Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they, and every of
them, in their respective Stations and Places, be Careful and Diligent in the
Examination of all Persons who shall Pass, or endeavor to Pass, beyond the
Seas; and if they shall discover the said Persons abovenamed, or either of
them, then to cause them to be Apprehended and Secured, and to give Notice, as
aforesaid. And His Majesty does hereby Publish and Declare to all Persons who
shall Conceal the Persons abovenamed, or either of them, or be Aiding and
Assisting in the Concealing of them, or Furthering their Escape, that they
shall be Proceeded against for such their Offense, with the utmost Severity
according to Law. And for the Encouragement of all Persons to be Diligent and
Careful in endeavoring to Discover and Apprehend the said Persons, His Majesty
does hereby further Declare, That whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the
Persons abovenamed, or either of them, and shall bring them before some
Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall Have and
Receive, as a Reward, the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds; Which said Sum of Five
Hundred Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury are hereby
Required and Directed to Pay accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty second Day of March, 1695. In the
Eighth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.


