royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROIT By the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas His Majesty has Received Information upon Oath, of a Horrid and
Detestable Conspiracy to Assassinate and Murder His Royal Person, carried on
by Papists, and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons; And has also Received
certain Intelligence of an Invasion intended by the French upon this Kingdom;
And His Majesty taking Notice, That great Numbers of Papists and other Ill
Disposed Persons have lately Resorted to, and Assembled in the Cities of London
and Westminster, contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom, and in Order, as
may reasonably be thought, to put their said Wicked and Traitorous Designs in
Execution: His Majesty therefore, upon the humble Address of the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, has thought fit, by the Advice
of His Privy Council, to Issue this His Royal Proclamation, and does hereby
strictly Charge and Command all Popish Recusants, Natives or Denizons, being
above the Age of Sixteen Years, That they do, according to the Statutes in that
behalf made, repair to their respective Places of Abode, and if they have none,
then to the Places where their respective Father or Mother is or shall be
Dwelling, and do not thereafter Remove or Pass above Five Miles from thence.
And His Majesty does likewise Charge and Command all Papists and Persons
reputed so to be (Except Merchant Strangers, Settled Householders, and other
Persons Excepted in the Statutes made in this behalf) on or before the Tenth
Day of March next, to Depart out of the said Cities of London and Westminster,
and from all Places within the Distance of Ten Miles of the same. And His
Majesty does hereby Command the Lord Mayor of London, and all other Justices of
the Peace, and other Officers within the said Cities, and Ten Miles of the
same, That they make Strict Search for, and Proceed against all such of them as
shall presume to Remain, Repair or Return within the Limits aforesaid,
according to the Statutes in that Case provided, and particularly the Statute
made in the First Year of the Reign of His present Majesty and of the late
Queen Mary of Blessed Memory, Entitled, (An Act for the Amoving Papists and
Reputed Papists from the Cities of London and Westminster, and Ten Miles
Distance from the same) by Tendering to them the Declaration therein mentioned,
and otherwise according to the said Act. And His Majesty does likewise Charge
and Command the aforesaid, and all other Justices of the Peace whatsoever, who
shall Know or be Informed, that any Person is, or is Suspected to be a Papist,
to Tender unto such Person the Declaration aforesaid, and Proceed thereupon,
according to one other Act made in the said First Year of the Reign of His
present Majesty and the said late Queen, Entitled (An Act for the better
Securing the Government, by Disarming Papists and Reputed Papists.) And for the
better Discovery of Persons Disaffected to the Government, and that being
Discovered, their Disloyal and Wicked Purposes and Attempts may be
Disappointed, His Majesty does strictly Charge and Command all Justices of the
Peace, and other Officers in that behalf Authorized, That where they shall Find
or be Informed of any Person, who by reason of his Conversation, Discourse or
other Demeanor, shall be Suspected not to be well Affected to His Majesty's
Government, they do Tender unto such Person the Oaths Appointed by an Act made
in the First Year of the Reign of His present Majesty and the said late Queen,
Entitled (An Act for the Abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
and Appointing other Oaths) and that in Case of Refusal to take the same due
Prosecution be made thereupon. And for the more effectual Performance thereof,
the said Justices of Peace are to make and keep Entries or Records of such
their Proceedings, in order to the Tendering the said Oaths again to the Person
so Refusing; it being His Majesty's Pleasure, that the said Law be Executed to
the utmost against such Offenders. And His Majesty does hereby Charge and
particularly Require all Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace, that
they do meet Monthly, to Inquire into and Inform themselves of the Affairs of
their respective Counties and Divisions in Relation to the Premises, and take
special Care to Preserve the Peace, and Prevent all Unlawful Meetings and
Assemblies against His Majesty and His Government, and that from time to time
they give Information of their Proceedings and Discoveries to the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty fifth Day of February 1695/6. In
the Eighth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695/6.


