By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Apprehending and Securing the Person of
Monsieur John Robart.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas We have been Informed, That by the Examinations and Informations upon
Oath of Several Persons, lately taken before a Committee of both Our Houses of
Parliament, touching the Unlawful and Indirect Giving, Receiving and Disposing
of Great Sums of Money, for Procuring Charters for the East India Company, and
otherwise relating to that Company, it appeared that Monsieur John Robart was
not only Concerned in the Receipt, but was also able to give Evidence, and make
Proof of the Disposal and Application of Part of the said Money; yet to avoid
Justice, and the Manifestation of the Truth, and (as much as in him lies) to
Render all Just and Proper Methods of Prosecution in the Premises ineffectual,
he, the said John Robart has withdrawn himself from his usual Place of
Habitation, and Absconds, intending, as may reasonably be supposed, to make his
Escape into Parts beyond the Seas. And whereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
in Parliament Assembled, did lately make an Humble Address unto Us, That We
would Issue Our Royal Proclamation for Securing the Person of the said John
Robart, and in Order thereunto, that the Ports might be stopped: We have
thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Issue this Our Royal
Proclamation, hereby Requiring and Commanding all Our Loving Subjects
whatsoever to Discover and Apprehend, and Cause the said Monsieur John Robart
to be Discovered and Apprehended, and to Carry him before some of Our Justices
of the Peace, or Chief Magistrates of the County, Town or Place where he shall
be Apprehended; who are respectively Required to Secure him, and thereof to
give speedy Notice unto Our Privy Council, or One of Our Principal Secretaries
of State, to the end he may be forth coming to be dealt withal, and proceeded
against according to Law. And for the Prevention of the said Robarts Escape
into Parts beyond the Seas, We do Require and Command all Our Officers of the
Customs, and other Our Officers and Subjects of and in Our Respective Ports and
Maritine Towns and Places within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they, and every of them, in their respective
Places and Stations, be careful and diligent in the Examination of all Persons
that shall Pass, or endeavor to Pass beyond the Seas; And if they shall
Discover the said Robart, then to Cause him to be Apprehended and Secured, and
to give Notice thereof, as aforesad. And We do hereby strictly Charge and
Command all Our Loving Subjects (as they will Answer the contrary at their
Perils) that they do not any ways Conceal, but do Discover the said John
Robart, to the end he may be Secured and Proceeded against according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Ninth Day of May, 1695. In the Seventh
Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. MDCXCV.


