By the Mayor.
The Order of the House of Commons to the Lord Mayor, for the due observing the
Sabbath day.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, that the Aldermen and Citizens
that serve for the City of London, shall intimate to the Lord Major, from this
House, that the Statutes, for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in
execution. And it is further ordered that the like intimation from this House
be made to the Justices of Peace in all the Counties of England and Wales. And
the Knights of the Shire of the several Counties are to take care that Copies
of this Order be accordingly sent to the Justices of Peace in the several
Counties.

FOrasmuch as the Lords Day commonly called Sunday is of late much broken and
profaned by a disorderly sort of people in frequenting Taverns, Alehouses, and
the like, and putting to sale victual and other things, and exercising
unlawful games and pastimes, to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of
Religion, whereof the House of Commons now assembled has been pleased to take
notice, and by their order, intimation has been given unto me, that the
Statutes for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in execution. These are
therefore in his Majesty's name to will and require you forthwith, upon the
sight hereof, that you give strict charge and command unto all and every the
Churchwardens and Constables within your Ward, that from henceforth they do
not permit or suffer any person or persons, in the time of divine service or at
any other time upon the Sunday, to be drinking or playing in any Tavern, Inn,
Tobacco shop, Alehouse or other victualling house whatsoever, nor suffer any
Fruiterer, Milkewomen, or Hearbwomen to stand with fruit, milk, herbs, or any
other victual or wares, in any the streets, lanes, or allies within your ward,
or any other ways to put those things or any other to sale upon the Sunday at
any time of the day or in the evening, nor to permit or suffer any person or
persons to use or exercise upon that day any unlawful exercises and pasttimes
within your ward, and that express charge be given to every keeper of any
Tavern, Inn, Cookshouse, Tobaccohouse, Alehouse, or any other Tipler or
victualler whatsoever within your ward, that hereafter they receive not or
suffer to remain any person or persons whatsoever as their guests or customers
to tipple eat drink or take Tobacco in their houses upon any Sunday, other
then that Inholders may receive their ordinary guests, or travelers and such
like, who come to remain for a time in their Inn for dispatch of their
necessary business. And if any person or persons shall be found offending in
the premises that then they be brought before me the Lord Major, or some other
of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, to the end they may receive such punishment
as to Justice shall appertain. And hereof not to fail as you will answer the
contrary at your peril. This thirteenth of April, 1641.

Mitchel.


