A PROPOSAL, Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable the Commons
of England in Parliament assembled, for raising a farther Supply toward the
Erecting and Maintenance of the intended College or Hospital at Greenwich, for
Ancient and Maimed Mariners and Seamen; Or such other Good and Public Use as
the Honorable House shall think fit.
THAT whereas by the Constitution and Establishment of, or some Grant to
Christ's Hospital in London, the Governors thereof have Power to let Leases,
or dispose of Carooms, or Licenses and Dispensations for keeping and working
for Hire, Cars and Carts, etc. within the said City and the Liberties thereof,
As an Inheritance or Perpetuity belonging to the said Hospital; and no Person,
who is not so qualified, can keep, or work for hire, any Car or Cart within the
said City or Liberties: By virtue whereof, the Number of such Cars and Carts is
settled at about 430, which is found a sufficient and convenient Number; Whereby
many great Inconveniences are avoided: There being sufficient for all necessary
Occasions, and yet not such an exorbitant Number as to clog up the Streets and
obstruct the Passages, or cause the Owners to depend upon a Livelihood thereby,
to the ruin of themselves and Families for want of a full Employ: (As was the
Case of many Hackny Coach-men, before their Number was limited by Act of
Parliament:) But on the contrary these Carooms, tho they cost the Owners 100 l.
a piece at the least, upon taking the Lease, besides Office-Fees, and some
yearly Rent or Acknowledgment to the Hospital, yet are they esteemed as
valuable Chattels to be transferred, and as ready Money if offered to sale,
(according to such Term and Interest as the Proprietor has therein) as any
other Leases whatsoever; and many Hundreds of Families are well supported
thereby: And the Caroom (which is a Badg of Brass given by the Hospital, and
born by the Car-man upon the String of his Car) denoting the Number of such
Car, etc. gives them such a Reputation that they are readily entrusted with the
Carriage of any Goods; there being a present Remedy against them in Case of any
Misdemeanor, in such their Employment.

AND the City of Westminster and Liberties thereof, and Borough of Southwark,
(without the Liberty of the City of London) and the several Out-Parishes in
Middlesex and Surry, bordering upon the Liberties of the said Cities, and lying
within the Extent of the weekly Bills of Mortality, being of late become very
Populous, and likely still to Augment; And the greatest part of the Nobility
and Gentry of the Kingdom living or residing therein, (especially during the
Sessions of Parliament;) whose Coaches are many times not only obstructed, but
even endamaged and broken, by over-numerous and disorderly Car-men and Carters,
with their Cars and Carts, and that without any means of Reparation or
Satisfaction from them; and the rather for that such Car-men and Carters, as
live out of the Liberty of the said City of London, carry no Badg to denote
their Place of abode, or where they may be found, and are without all
Government and Restraint, as to their Number or otherwise; Whereby likewise
Cheats and Frauds may the more easily be committed by them of the Goods with
the Carriage whereof they are entrusted, And especially in the Case of Fires:
And the ill-practice of some brings a Diseredit to the rest, to the great
Hinderance of such there Employment and Livelihood.

AND therefore for preventing the several Inconveniences before mentioned, and
raising somewhat of a Supply for so excellent a Use as aforesaid, It is humbly
proposed, That the Number of such Cars and Carts to reside and work for Hire,
out of the Liberty of the said City of London, and within the Extent of the
weekly Bills of Mortality, be restrained to 200, (or such other Number as shall
be thought requisite) and Licenses granted of them from time to time for 21
Years, each to pay a Fine of 50 l. upon taking their first License, and such
yearly Rent to the Hospital, during the Term, as shall be thought reasonable;
And after the Expiration of the Term, to pay such farther Fine, upon taking any
new License, as shall be agreed upon with the Commissioners or Trustees to be
appointed for the Management thereof, without any Abatement of the old Rent;
And such Commissioners or Trustees to be empowered by Act of Parliament to
grant such Licenses, and make Bylaws for the well ordering and governing the
Persons so to be Licensed, and to cause the same to be observed.

AND forasmuch as diverse Brewers, Innkeepers, Wood-mongers, Cole-mongers, and
Masters and Owners of Wharss, living within the said City and Liberties of
Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and Out-Parishes aforesaid, keep and daily
use diverse Drays, Carts, and Carriages for carrying away their Dung, and for
carrying out their Beer, Ale, Coals, Wood, Timber, Stones, Lime, and other
their Goods and Merchandises (according to their respective Trades and
Employments) by whom, or their Servants, (for want of some good Orders and
Rules of direction concerning them, and a ready way to detect and punish the
Offenders) many Abuses and Disorders are frequently done and committed with
such their Drays, Carts and Carriages, in the Streets and Passages where they
pass, To the great Annoyance of diverse of the Peers of England, and honorable
Members of Parliament, when going upon the weighty Affairs of the Nation, And
to the frequent Abuse, and even hazard of the Lives of many other of his
Majesty's good Subjects, in passing about their Lawful Occasions: THAT
therefore, tho it may not seem reasonable to lay any Mulct upon the Persons
aforesaid, for using such their Drays, etc. about their own Lawful Concerns and
Employments, Yet it may be requisite (for preventing Disorders and Abuses) to
subject them likewise to the Orders and Government of the said Commissioners or
Trustees so to be Constituted or Appointed as aforesaid; And to oblige the
Owners or Occupiers of such Drays, Carts and Carriages, to carry a Badg or
Ticket upon some apparent Place of every such Dray, Cart or Carriage,
expressing the Name and Place of Abode of the Owner or Oecupier thereof; And to
procure the same to be entered in the Office to be kept by the said
Commissioners or Trustees for the Purposes aforesaid, And to be renewed so
often as such Dray, Cart or Carriage, shall come to any new Owner or Occupier,
or that such Owner or Occupier shall have any new Habitation or Place of abode;
They paying only a small Fee for the same. And the Fines and Forefeitures
arising by Offenses and Misdemeanors will be an Augmentation of the proposed
Revenue, or help to defray the necessary Charge of the Management thereof.

By P. C. and D. C.
A PROPOSAL For Regulating Cars and Carts, etc.


