PREPARATION FOR SUFFERINGS, OR The best Work in the worst Times.

WHEREIN The Necessity, Excellency, and Means of our readiness for Sufferings
are evinced and prescribed; our call to Suffering cleared, and the great
unreadiness of many Professors bewailed.

By John Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon.

Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do
this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

Sapienti meliora sunt in votis, deteriora vero in expectatione, Plut. de
Tranquil.

Gravius est vulnus quod non expectatur, and illa aegrius tollerantur quibus
homo se non prius assuefecit, Augustine.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Boulter at the Turkshead in Cornhil, 1681.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT was the observation of the Learned Gerson (when the world was not so old by
many years as now it is) that Mundus senescens patitur Phantasias: The aged
world, like aged persons, dotes and grows whimsical in its old age; the truth
of which observation is confirmed by no one thing more, than the fond and
groundless dreams and phantasmes of tranquillity and continuing prosperity
wherewith the multitude please themselves, even whilst the sins of the times
are so great, and the signs of the times so sad and lowering as they are.

It is not the design of this Manual to scare and affright any man with
imaginary dangers, much less to sow jealousies, and foment the discontents of
the times: It being a just matter of lamentation, that all the tokens of Gods
anger produce with many of us no better fruit, but bold Censures and loud
Clamours, instead of humiliation for our own sins, and due preparation to take
up our own Cross, and follovv Christ in a suffering path, which is the only
mark and aim of this Tract.

We read the Histories of the Primitive Sufferers, but not with a Spirit
prepared to follovv them. Some Censure them as too prodigal of their blood, and
others commend their Courage and Constancy; but where are they that sincerely
resolve and prepare to be followers of them, who through faith and ptaience
inherit the promises? Heb. 6.12. or take them for an Example of suffering
affliction and of patience, Jam. 5.10.

It is as much our interest, as it is our duty to be seasonably avvakned out of
our pleasant, but most pernicious drovvziness. Troubles will be so much the
more sinking and intolerable, by how much they steal upon us by way of
surprizal. For look as expectation deflowreth any temporal comfort, by sucking
out much of the sweetness thereof before hand, and so we find the less in it
when we come to the actual enjoyment: So the expectation of evils abates much
of the dread and terror, by accustoming our thoughts before hand to them; and
making preparation for them: so that we find them not so grievous, amazing and
intolerable when they are come indeed.

This was exemplified to us very lively by holy Mr. Bradford the Martyr, when
the Keepers Wife came running into his Chamber saying, O Mr. Bradford, I bring
you heavy Tidings, for to morrow you must be burned, your Chain is now buying,
and presently you must go to Newgate. He put off his Hat, and looking up to
Heaven said, O Lord I thank thee for it. I have looked for this a long time: it
comes not suddenly to me, the Lord make me worthy of it: See in this Example
the singular advantage of a prepared and ready soul.

Reader, The Cup of Sufferings is a very bitter Cup, and it is but needful that
we provide somewhat to sweeten it, that we may be able to receive it with
Thanksgiving: And what those sweetning ingredients are, and how to prepare
them, you will have some direction and help in the following discourse, which
has once already been presented to the public view; and that it may at this
time also (wherein nothing can be more seasonable) become come farther useful
and assisting to the people of God in their present duties, is the hearty
desire of

Thine and the Churches Servant in Christ. J. F.

THE CONTENTS
CHAPTER I. WHerein the Text is opened, and the Doctrine propounded. CHAP. II.
Shows that although God takes no delight in afflicting his people, yet
sometimes he exposes them to great and grievous sufferings; with a brief
account why or how, he calls them thereunto, CHAP. III. Shows that it is usual
with God to premonish his people of approaching Trials and Sufferings, with
some account of the manner how, and reasons why he so forewarns them. CHAP. IV.
Demonstrating the excellency of a prepared heart for the worst of sufferings,
and what a blessed thing it is to be ready to be bound, or die for Christ, as
Paul here was. CHAP. V. Evincing the necessity of a sound and real work of
grace upon the heart, to fit a man for the sufferings of Christ, CHAP. VI.
Wherein the nature of this work of grace in which our habitual fitness for
sufferings lies, is briefly opened; and an account given of the great advantage
the gracious person has by it, for suffering work. CHAP. VII. In which the
necessity of getting clear evidences of the work of grace in us, in order to
our readiness for sufferings, is held forth; the nature of that evidence
opened; and diverse things that cloud and obscure it, removed out of the way.
CHAP. VIII. Discovering the necessity of an improved faith for the right
management of sufferings, and directing to some special means for the
improvement thereof. CHAP. IX. Showing the need and usefulness of Christian
fortitude in times of suffering and danger, with a brief account of the nature
thereof, and the right means of attaining it. CHAP. X. Discovering the
necessity of an heart mortified to all earthly enjoyments, in order to our
readiness for a time of suffering, with several directions for the attaining
thereof. CHAP. XI. Wherein is opened the singular advantage that suffering
Saints have by their skill and insight in the methods and mysteries of Satan's
temptations; some of those methods opened, and rules for avoiding the danger
briefly prescribed. CHAP. XII. Shows that a choice part of our preparation
for sufferings consists in the improvement of our praying abilities, and
keeping close with God in that heavenly exercise in days of temptation and
distress; wherein also of the nature, and means of its improvemente CHAP. XIII.
Discovering the necessity of going out of our selves to Jesus Christ, even when
our habitual and actual preparations are at the greatest height, and depending
as constantly and entirely upon the influences of his Spirit as if we had done
nothing: together with the means of working our hearts into such a frame. CHAP.
XIV. Containing the first use of the point by way of Conviction; discovering
the unreadiness of multitudes of professors for suffering work,
notwithstanding the gracious respites of judgments, and the loud and long
continued calls both of the word and the rod. CHAP. XV. Making a farther
improvement of the point by way of Exhortation to all professors to prepare
themselves for greater trials; where several motives are propounded to excite
them to their duty. CHAP. XVI, Containing the last use of the point by way of
support and comfort to poor trembling souls, who though they do take pains to
make themselves ready for sufferings, yet finding such strength in Satan's
temptatitions, and their own Corruptions, fear that all their labor is in
vain, and that they shall faint and apostatize when their trials and troubles
shall come to an height.
PREPARATION FOR SUFFERINGS.
ACTS XXI. XIII. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep, and break my heart?
for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name
of the Lord Jesus.


CHAP. I.
Wherein the Text is opened, and the Doctrine propounded.

THe Divine Providence is not more signally discovered in governing the Motions
of the Clouds, than it is in disposing and ordering the Spirits and Motions of
the Ministers of the Gospel, who in a mystical sense are fruitful Clouds to
dispense the showers of Gospel-Blessings to the World. The Motion of the Clouds
is not spontaneous, but they move as they are moved by the winds; neither can
Gospel Ministers choose their own Stations, and govern their own Motions, but
must go when and where the Spirit and Providence of God directs and guides
them; as will evidently appear in that dangerous Voyage to Jerusalem in which
the Apostle was at this time engaged; Acts 20.22. And now behold I go bound in
the Spirit to Jerusalem: [bound in the Spirit] alluding to the watery vapors
which are bound up in Clouds, and conveyed according to the motion of the
Winds: This Journey was full of danger; Paul foresaw his business was not only
to plant the Gospel at Jerusalem with his Doctrine, but to water it also with
his blood; but so effectually was his Will determined by the Will of God, that
he cheerfully complies with his duty therein, whatsoever difficulties and
dangers did attend it.

And indeed it was his great advantage, that the Will of God was so plainly and
convincingly revealed to him touching this matter; for no sooner did he employ
himself to obey this Call of God, but he is presently assaulted by many strong
temptations to decline it.

The first Rub he met in his way, was from the Disciples of Tire, who
pretending to speak by the Spirit, said unto Paul, that he should not go up to
Jerusalem, Acts 21.4. the Lord by this trying the Spirit of his Apostle much,
as he did the young Prophet coming from Judea to Bethel, 1 Kings 13.18. but not
with like success.

His next discouragement was at Caesarea, where Agabus (whom Dorotheus affirms
to be of the seventy two Disciples, and had before prophesied of the Famine in
the Reign of Claudius, which accordingly came to pass) takes Paul's Girdle, and
binding his own hands and feet with it, said, Thus says the Holy Ghost, so
shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owes this Girdle, and shall
deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles, ver. 11. And surely he was not
ignorant what he must expect when ever he should fall into their hands; yet
neither could this affright him from his duty.

But then, last of all, he meets with the sorest trial from his dearest
friends, who fell upon him with passionate entreaties, and many tears,
beseeching him to decline that Journey: O they could not give up such a
Minister as Paul was! This even melted him down, and almost brake his heart;
which yet was easier to do, than to turn him out of the path of Obedience:
Where by the way we may note two things;

First, That Divine Precept, not Providence, is to rule out our way of duty.

Secondly, That no hindrances or discouragements whatsoever will justify our
neglect of a known duty.

All these Rubs he passes over, all these discouragements he overcame with this
Heroic and truly Christian resolution in the Text; What mean ye to weep, and
to break my heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at
Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

In which words we have: 1. A loving and gentle rebuke. 2. A quieting and
calming Argument.


First, What mean ye to weep, and break my heart? as if he should say, What
mean these passionate Entreaties, and tempting Tears? to what purpose is all
this a-do? they are but so many Snares of Satan to turn my heart out of the way
of Obedience: You do as much as in you lies to break my heart; let there be no
more of this, I beseech you.

Secondly, For I am ready, etc. (...) parate habee. I am prepared and fitted
for the greatest sufferings which shall befall me in the pursuit of my duty, be
it a Prison, or be it Death, I am provided for either; Liberty is dear, and
Life much dearer, but Christ is dearer than either.

But what was there in all this to satisfy them whose trouble it was to see
him so forward? let the words be considered, and we shall find diverse things in
them to satisfy and quiet their hearts, and make them willing to give him up.

First, I am ready, that is, God has fitted and prepared my heart for the
greatest Sufferings; this is the work of God; flesh and blood would never be
brought to this, were not all its interests and inclinations subdued and
overruled by the Spirit of God: What do ye therefore in all this but work
against the Design of God, who has fitted and prepared my heart for this
service?

Secondly, I am ready, that is, my will and resolution stands in a full bent,
my heart is fixed, you cannot therefore study to do me a greater injury, than
to discompose and disorder my heart again, by casting such temptations as these
in my way, to cause the flesh to rebel, and the Enemy that is within to renew
his opposition.

Thirdly, I am ready, that is, my heart is so fixed to follow the Call of God
whatever shall befall me, that all your tears and entreaties to the contrary
are but cast away, they cannot alter my fixed purpose, you had as good be
quiet, and cheerfully resign me to the Will of God.

Thus you see the Equipage and preparation of Paul's Spirit to receive both
Bonds and Death for Christ at Jerusalem; this made him victorious over the
temptations of Friends, and the malice and cruelty of his Enemies; by this
readiness and preparation of his mind he was carried through all, and enabled
to finish his course with joy. From hence the Observation is;

That it is a blessed and excellent thing for the people of God to be prepared,
and ready for the hardest services, and worst Sufferings to which the Lord may
call them.

This is that which every gracious heart is reaching after, praying and
striving to obtain, but ah how few attain it? Certainly there are not many
among the multitude of Professors of this Generation, that can say as Paul here
did, I am ready to be bound, or to die for Christ.

CHAP. II.
Shows that although God takes no delight in afflicting his people; yet he
sometimes exposes them to great and grievous Sufferings, with a brief account
why, and how he calls them thereunto.

THe Mercies and Compassions of God over his people are exceeding great and
tender, Psalm. 103.14. Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him; he delights not in afflicting and grieving them,
Lam. 3.33. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. The
Scripture intimates to us a seeming Conflict betwixt the Justice and Mercy of
God, when he is about to deliver up his people into their Enemies hands, Hosea
11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How
shall I make thee as Adma? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together: Which shows us with what
reluctance and great unwillingness the Lord goes about such work as this: the
work of Judgment is his strange work; it pleases him better to exercise the
milder Attribute of Mercy toward his Children. Hence we find when he is
preparing to execute his Judgments, that he delays the execution as long as the
honor of his Name and safety of his people will permit, Jer. 44.22. He bears
till he can bear no longer; he often turns away his wrath from them, Psalm.
78.38, 39. He tryes them by lesser Judgments, and gentler Corrections, to
prevent greater, Amos 4.6. When his people are humbled under the threatenings of
his wrath, his heart is melted into compassion to them, Jer. 31.17, 20. And
when ever his Mercy prevails against Judgment, it is with joy and triumph, Jam.
2.13. Mercy rejoices against Judgment.

For he feels his own tender compassions yerning over them; he foreseeth, and
is no way willing to gratify the insulting pride of his and their Enemies,
Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. I said I would scatter them into corners, I would make the
remembrance of them to cease from among men, were it not that I feared the
wrath of the Enemy, lest their Adversaries should behave themselves strangely,
etc.

Yet all this notwithstanding, it often falls out by the provocations of his
Sons and Daughters, that the Lord gives them up into the hands of their
Enemies, for the correction of their evils, and the manifestation of his own
glory. Seneca (though a Heathen) could say, that God loves his people with a
Masculine love, not with a Womanish Indulgence and Tenderness: If need require,
they shall be in heaviness through manifold temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. He had
rather their hearts should be heavy under adversity, than vain and careless
under prosperity; the choicest Spirits have been exercised with the sharpest
sufferings, and those that now shine as Stars in Heaven, have been trod under
foot as Dung on the Earth, 1 Cor. 4.11. Unto this present hour we both hunger
and thirst, and are naked and buffeted, and have no certain dwelling places,
and labor, working with our hands; being reviled we bless, being persecuted we
suffer it, being defamed we entreat; we are made as the filth of the world, and
the offscouring of all things unto this day. The eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews is a Compendium of the various and grievous sufferings of the Primitive
Saints: They were tortured, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain
with the Sword, they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
afflicted, destitute, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy; they wandered
in Deserts, and in Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the Earth. And since the
Earth had dried up those Rivers of precious blood, whereof the Sacred Records
make mention, what Seas of Christian blood have since those days been shed by
bloody Persecutors? Histories inform us, that in the ten Primitive
Persecutions, so many of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus have been slain, as
that you may allow five thousand a day to every day in the whole Year. Those
bloody Emperors sported themselves with the deaths of Gods dearest Saints;
many precious Christians were burnt by night at Rome, to serve as Torches to
light their Enemies in their passage through the Streets; eight hundred
thousand Martyrs are mentioned within the space of thirty Years, since the
Jesuits arose out of the Bottomless Pit.

To what grievous Sufferings did the Lord give up those precious Servants of
Christ, the Waldenses and Albigenses, who received the Light of Reformation
about the Year 1260. when the Fogs of Antichristian Darkness had overspread the
Earth; a People sound in Judgment, as appears by their Letters, Catechismes,
and Confessions which are extant; a People of a simple, plain, and inoffensive
behavior; yet with what fury and rage did that impious Pope Pius prosecute
them to destruction? driving them into the Woods and Mountains, except the Aged
and Children that could not flee, who were murdered in the way: Some famished
in the Caves and Clefts of the Rocks, others endured the Rack for eight hours
together; some beaten with Iron Rods, others thrown from the tops of high
Towers, and broken to pieces.

What bloody Shambles and Slaughter-houses have France, Ireland, and England
been made by Popish cruelty? More might be related out of each Story, than a
tenderhearted Reader is able to bear the rehearsal of: But what God has done,
he may do again; we are not better than our Fathers, dismal Clouds of
indignation are gathering over our heads, charged with double destruction,
should the Lord please to make them break upon us; we cannot imagine the rage
of Satan to be abated, now that his Kingdom hastens to its period, Rev. 12.12.
nor are his Instruments grown less cruel and skilful to destroy. The Land
indeed has enjoyed a long rest, and this Generation is acquainted with little
more of Martyrdom, than what the Histories of former times inform us of: but
yet let no man befool himself with a groundless expectation of a continuing
tranquillity. Augustine thinks that the Bloody Sweat which overran the Body of
Christ in the Garden, signified the sharp and grievous Sufferings which in his
Mystical Body he should afterward endure; and indeed it is a truth, that these
are also called the Remains of Christ's Sufferings, Col. 1.24. His Personal
Sufferings were indeed completed at his Resurrection, that Cup was full to the
brim, to which no drop of Suffering can be added; but his Sufferings in his
Mystical Body are not yet full; by his Personal Sufferings he fully satisfied
the wrath of God, but the Sufferings of his People have not yet satisfied the
wrath of men; though Millions of precious Saints have shed their blood for
Christ, whose Souls are now crying under the Altar, How long Lord! how long!
Yet there are many more coming on behind in the same Path of Persecution, and
much Christian Blood must yet be shed before the Mystery of God be finished;
and notwithstanding this Lucid Interval, the Clouds seem to be returning again
after the Rain. Thus you see to what grievous Sufferings the merciful God has
sometimes called his dearest People.

Now God may be said to call forth his People to suffer, when he so hedgeth
them in by Providence, that there is no way to escape suffering, but by
sinning; whatsoever Providence labors with such a Dilemma as this, is a plain
signification of Gods Will to us in that case. We may not now expect
Extraordinary Calls to Suffering-work, as some of the Saints had of old, Genesis
22.2. Acts 9.16. but when our way is so shut up by Providence, that we cannot
avoid Suffering, but by stepping over the Hedge of the Command, God will have
us look upon that Exigence as his Call to suffer: And if the Reasons be
demanded, why the Lord who is so inclined to Mercy, does so often hedge in his
own People by his Providence in a suffering Path; let us know, that in so doing
he does both 1. Illustrate his own Glory. And 2. Promote his Peoples happiness.


First, Hereby the most Wise God does illustrate the glory of his own Name,
clearing up the righteousness of his ways by the sufferings of his own people:
By this the world shall see that how well soever he loves them, he will not
indulge or patronize their sins; if they will be so disingenuous to abuse his
favors, he will be so just to make them suffer for their sins, and by those
very Sufferings will provide for his own glory, which was by them Clouded in
the eyes of the world. He hates not sin a jot the less because it is found in
his own people, Amos 3.2. and though for the magnifying of his Mercy he will
pardon their sins, yet for the clearing of his Righteousness he will take
vengeance upon their inventions, Psalm. 99.8.

Moreover, by exposing his people to such grievous sufferings, he gives a fit
opportunity to manifest the glory of his Power in their support, and of his
wisdom in the mavelous ways of their escape and deliverance. It is one of the
greatest wonders in the world how the Church subsists under such fierce and
frequent assaults as are made upon it by its Enemies: I will turn aside (said
Moses) and see this great sight, why the Bush is not consumed, Exodus 3.3. That
Flaming Bush was the lively Emblem of the oppressed Church in Egypt, the
crackling Flames noted the heat of their Persecution, the remaining of the Bush
unconsumed in the Flames, signified the wonderful Power of God in their
preservation; no People are so privileged, so protected, so delivered, as the
people of God; much less opposition than has been made against the Church,
has overturned and utterly destroyed the mighty Monarchies of the world.

-- Sic Medus ademit
Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses, Claudian lib. 3. in lauds
Stiliconis.

Subjecit Persen Macedo, cessurus and ipse
Romany --
And no less admirable is the Wisdom of God in frustrating and defeating the
most deep and desperate Designs of Hell against his poor people. Now you may
see the most wise God going beyond a malicious and subtle Devil, overturning in
a moment the deep-laid Designs and Contrivances of many years, and that at the
very birth and point of Execution, Hest. 6.1. snaring the wicked in the works
of their own hands, making their own tongues to fall upon them, working out
such mavelous Salvations with his own hand, as fills them with astonishment
and wonder: Psalm. 126.7. When the Lord turned back the Captivity of Sion, we
were like them that dreamed.

Secondly, As God provides for his own glory by the sufferings and troubles of
his people: so he advances their happiness, and greatly promotes their
Interest thereby.

For first,

Secondly,

Thirdly, of Hypocrites, which were its reproaches as well as burden, Amos
9.9, 10. Affliction is a Furnace to separate the Dross from the more pure and
noble Gold. Multitudes of Hypocrites, like Flies in a hot Summer, are generated
by the Churches prosperity; but this Winter weather kills them; many Gaudy
Professors grow within the enclosure of the Church, like beautiful Flowers in
the Field, where they stand, during its peace and prosperity, in the pride and
bravery of their gifts and professions; but the wind passes over them, and
they are gone, and their places shall know them no more; to allude to that in
Psalm. 103.16. Thunder and Lightning is very terrible weather, but exceeding
useful to purify and cleanse the Air.

Fourthly, Mal. 3.17. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another. Certainly there is something in our Fellowship in the same sufferings
that is endearing and engaging; but there is much more in the discoveries that
Persecution makes of the sincerity of our hearts, which, it may be, was before
entertained with jealousy, and there is yet more than all this in the reproofs
of the Rod, whereby they are humbled for their pride, wantonness; and
bitterness of their spirits each to other, and made to cry in the sense of
these transgressions, as Psalm. 70.8. Remember not against us former iniquities.

Lastly, Lord save us, we perish. They say Music is sweetest upon the waters;
I am sure the sweetest melody of prayer is upon the deep waters of affliction:
For these, among many other righteous, wise, and holy ends, the Lord permits
and orders the persecutions and distresses of his people.

CHAP. III.
Shows that it is usual with God to premonish his people of approaching trials
and sufferings; with some account of the manner how, and the reasons why he so
forewarns them.

AS Paul had many clear Premonitions and fore-notices of the sufferings that
should befall him at Jerusalem, that he might not be surprised by them when
they came; so it is usual with God (though not in such an immediate and
extraordinary manner) to admonish the world, and especially his own people, of
great trials and sufferings before hand, Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord will do
nothing, but he reveals his secrets unto his servants the Prophets.

Thus when he was about to bring the Flood upon the World, he gave one hundred
and twenty years warning of it before it came, Genesis 6.3. And when he was to
destroy Sodom, he says, Genesis 18.17. Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I
do? And the like discovery he made about the same Judgment to Lot, Genesis 19.12,
13, 14. So when the Captivity of the Jews was nigh at hand, the people had many
forewarnings of it; God forewarned them both Ministerially and Providentially;
he warned them by the Prophets, Ezekiel. 3.17. Hear the word of my mouth, and give
them warning from me. And when the time drew nigh to execute the Judgment
determined upon Jerusalem, and the Temple, how plainly did Christ foretell them
of it? Luke 19.43, 44. Thine Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee, and
compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even
with the ground, and thy Children within thee.

And when the Storm was just ready to fall, Josephus de bello Jud. lib. 7. cap.
2. Audita major humanae vox, excedere Deos, simul ingens motus excedentium.
Tacitus lib. 21.
their own Historian tells us a Voice was heard in the Temple, saying, Migremus
hinc, Let us go hence: Which Voice Tacitus also mentions in his Annals,
affirming it to be more than a Humane Voice, telling them God was departing,
and that it was accompanied with a rushing noise, as of persons going out;
these were extraordinary warnings. The like Signs have been given to diverse
other Nations, by dreadful Eclipses of the Heavenly Bodies, Portentous Comets,
Earthquakes, and other Signs of Judgment.

Now though we have no ground to expect such extraordinary warnings; yet we
have the most apparent and certain signs of approaching calamities, after which
if they surprise us, the fault must lie in our own inexcusable negligence; for
we have a standing Rule to govern our selves in this matter, and that is this:
When the same sins are found in one Nation, which have brought down the wrath
of God upon another Nation, it is an evident sign of Judgment at the door; for
God is unchangeable, just and holy, and will not favor that in one people
which he has punished in another, nor bless that in one Age which he has
cursed in another. Upon this very ground it was that the Apostle warned the
Corinthians by the example of the Israelites, whose sins had ruined them in the
Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.6. Now these things were our examples, to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted: as if he should say,
look upon those dead bodies which are as it were cast up upon the Scripture
shore for a warning to you; follow not the same course, lest you meet in the
same curse; if you tread the same paths, expect the same punishment; God is as
righteous now as he was then, he hates, and will punish sin in you, as much as
he did in them.

Let us therefore consider what these provocations were, that hastened the
wrath of God upon his own Israel, a people that were nigh and dear unto him, a
people upon whom he spent as much of the riches of his patience, as upon any
people in the world; that so we may reckon whereabout we are at this day, and
what is like to be the lot of this sinful and provoking Generation, and we
shall find by the consent of all the Prophets, that these sins were the
immediate forerunners and proper causes of their overthrow.

First, The great corruption of Gods worship among them kindled his wrath, and
hastened their ruin, Psalm. 106.39, 40, 41, 42. They were defiled with their
own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions; therefore was the
wrath of God kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own
inheritance, and he gave them into the hand of the Heathen, and they that hated
them ruled over them, their Enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought
into subjection under their hand. They that will not bear the Golden Yoke of
Christ, shall be galled with the Iron Yoke of men: nothing more provokes the
anger of God, than the adulterating of his worship; a man will bear with a
thousand infirmities in the Wife of his Bosom, but unfaithfulness in the
Marriage Covenant breaks his heart: after the manner of men so abused and
grieved the Lord expresses himself, Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish
heart which has departed from me, and with their eyes that go a whoring after
their Idols. Men cannot invent a surer and speedier way to their own ruin,
than to bring their own inventions into Gods worship.

Secondly, Incorrigible obstinacy and impenitency under gentler strokes and
lesser Judgments, makes way for utter ruin and desolation, Amos 4 from the 6.
to the 12th ver. Scarcity, Mildews, Pestilence and Sword had been tried upon
them, but without effect; for the remnant that escaped those Judgments
(although plucked as so many Brands out of the Fire, in which their
fellow-sinners perished) were not reformed by those gentler and moderated
Judgments.

Thirdly, Stupidity, and senslesness of Gods hand, and the tokens of his anger,
was a provoking cause, and forerunning of their National desolation; they
neither saw the hand of God when it was lifted up, nor humbled themselves under
it when it was laid on; the hand of God is then said to be lifted up, when the
Providence of God prepare and posture themselves for our affliction; when the
Clouds of Judgment gather over our heads, and grow blacker and blacker, as
theirs did upon them, and do upon us at this day, but they took no notice of
it, Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; and (which
is the height of stupidity) they all remain senseless and regardless when the
Hand of God was laid upon them, Isa. 24.25. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and
Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord? he against whom we have sinned, for
they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient to his Law;
therefore he has poured upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of
Battle, and it has set him on fire round about, and he knew not; and it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart. O prodigious sottishness! it was not some
small drops of Gods anger, but the fury of his anger, not some lighter skirmish
of his Judgments with them, but the strength of Battle; it was not some
particular strokes upon single persons, or families, but it set him on fire
round about, a general Conflagration; yet all this would not awaken them.

Fourthly, The persecution of Gods faithful Ministers and People was another
sin that procured, and a sign that foretold the destruction of their Nation, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. And the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his
Messengers, rising up betimes and sending, because he had compassion on his
people, and on his dwelling place; but they mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, till there was no remedy. There were also a number of
upright Souls among them, who desired to to worship God according to his own
prescription; but a Snare was laid for them in Mispah, and a Net spread for
them upon Tabor, Hos. 5.1. and this hastened Judgment toward them: Mispah and
Tabor, were places lying in the way betwixt Samaria and Jerusalem, where the
true worship of God was; and in those places Spies were set by the Priests to
observe and inform against them, so that it became very hazardous to attend the
pure and incorrupt worship of God, which quickly hastened on their ruin.

Fifthly, The removal of godly and useful men by death in more than ordinary
have, was to them a sign of desolation at hand, Isa. 57.1. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. In this
case God acts toward his people, as the Husbandman in a catching Harvest does
by his Corn, he hurries it with a shuffling have into the Barn, when he sees a
Storm coming; or as a careful Father with his Sons that are abroad at School,
who sends his horses to setch them home speedily when he hears the Plague is
begun in the place: upon this ground the Prophet Amos bewails himself, Amos
7.1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the Summer fruits, as the
Grape gleanings of the Vintage, there is no Cluster to eat: my Soul desired the
first ripe fruit; q. d. Alas, alas, what miserable days are at hand! what
miseries must I expect to see! the pleasant Clusters (i. e.) the Societies of
the Saints are gathered away by the hand of death; there are but few that
remain, here and there a single Saint, like Grapes after the Vintage is done,
two or three upon the outmost branches.

Sixthly, The general decay of the Life and Power of Godliness amongst them
that were left, foreboded destruction at the door; this is both a provoking
sin, and a fore-running sign of National calamity, Hosea 4.18. Their drink is
sour: A Metaphor lively expressing the deadness and formality of the peoples
in the worship of God; it was like sour or dead drink, which has lost its
spirit and relish, and is become flat; such were their duties, no spiritual
life, affection, or savor in them; they heard as if they heard not, and prayed
as if they prayed not; the Ordinances of God were to them as the Ordinances of
Men, of which the Apostle says that they perish in the using.

Seventhly, To conclude, Mutual Animosities, Jars and Divisions, were to them
manifest symptoms of National calamities and desolations; for then Ephraim
envied Judah, and Judah vexed Ephraim, Isa. 11.13. Hosea 9.7. The days of
visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel shall know it: The
Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine
iniquities, and the great hatred.

When such symptoms of Gods indignation do appear upon any people, the Lord by
them, as by so many glazing Meteors and blazing Comets, forewarns the World
that his Judgments are near, even at the door. These Signs all men ought to
observe and behold with trembling. If you ask why does God usually give such
warnings of his indignation before it comes, the reasons are: 1. To prevent the
execution. 2. To make them more tolerable. 3. To leave the incorrigible
inexcusable.


First, Warning is given with design to prevent the execution of Judgments,
Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; and because I will do
this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel; (i. e.) prepare thy self to
meet me in the way of my Judgments, by Humiliation and Intercession, to prevent
the execution: And what else was the design of God in sending Jonah to that
great City Nineveh, but to excite them to repentance for the prevention of
their ruin. This Jonah knew to be the Lords meaning, how positive soever the
words of his Commission were, and therefore he declined the Message, to secure
his Credit; knowing that if upon warning given they repented, the gracious
Nature of God would soon melt into compassion over them, and Free Grace would
make him appear as a Liar; for so we must expound his words, Jonah 4.2. Was not
this my saying when I was yet in my Country? therefore I fled before unto
Tarshis: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil; q. d. yea Lord, I knew
beforehand it would come to this; thou sendest me positively to denounce thy
Judgments to Nineveh, mean time desiring nothing more than that the execution
of them might be prevented by their repentance: And thus thy Mercy has exposed
my Reputation in saving them from destruction.

Secondly, God forewarns his people of Judgments, to make them more tolerable
when they come; expected evils are nothing so heavy, as those that come by
surprizal; for look as the long expectation of a Mercy makes it less sweet, our
thoughts having anticipated and sucked out much of the sweetness beforehand; so
the expectation of Judgments before they befall us, makes them less bitter and
burdensome than else they would be, the Soul having inured and accustomed it
self to them by frequent thoughts, and prepared and made ready it self to
entertain them, as Paul did in my Text. To prevent the Disciples surprizal and
offense at those days of Persecution that were coming upon them, Christ
foretold them, and gave them fair warning beforehand, Joh. 16.4.

Thirdly, He forewarns his people of approaching dangers, to leave the
incorrigible wholly inexcusable, that those who have no sense of sin, nor care
to prevent ruin, might have no Cloak for their folly when Judgments overtake
them; What will thou say when he shall punish thee? Jer. 13.21, 22. as if he
should say, What Plea or Apology is left thee after so many fair warnings, and
timely Premonitions? Thou can not say I have surprised thee, or that thou was
ruined before thou wast warned; thy destruction therefore is of thy self.

CHAP. IV.
Demonstrating the Excellency of a prepared heart for the worst of sufferings;
and what a blessed thing it is to be ready to be bound, or to die for Christ,
as Paul here was.

I Am ready] O blessed frame of Spirit! how hard, but how happy is it to get a
heart so tempered! Every Christian can say I would be ready, and the Lord make
me ready for sufferings; but few can say I am ready, my heart is prepared and
fitted for such a work: yet this Example shows us it is attainable; and what a
blessed thing it is to attain it, the following particulars will abundantly
convince us.

First, Readiness for sufferings will bring the heart of a Christian to an holy
rest and tranquillity in a suffering hour, and prevent that anxiety,
perturbation, and distraction of mind, which puts the sinking weight into
afflictions; the more cares, fears and troubles we have before our sufferings
come, the more calm, quiet and composed we are like to be when our sufferings
are come indeed. It is admirable to consider with what peace and patience Job
entertained his troubles; which considering the kinds, degrees and manner in
which they befell him, one would think they should at least have startled and
amazed him, and put his Soul (as gracious and mortified as it was) into great
disorder and confusion; but you find the contrary, never did the patience of a
man triumph at that rate over adversity, he worships God, owns his hand, and
resigns himself up to his pleasure, Job 1.20, 21. and whence was this? Surely
had his troubles come by way of surprise, he could never have carried it at
that rate; but in the days of his peace and prosperity he had prepared for such
a day as this, Job 3.25, 26. I was not in safety, neither had I rest, yet
trouble came; The thing that I feared (says he) is come upon me. He laid it to
heart before it came, and therefore it neither distracted nor brake the heart
when it came. In like manner the Prophet Habakkuk stood upon his Watch Tower,
(i. e.) he made his Observations by the Word upon the probable events of
Providence, whereby he got a clear foresight of those troublous days that were
at hand; which though it made him tremble in himself, yet it gave him rest in
the day of evil, Hab. 3.16, 17, 18. There is a twofold rest in the day of evil.
Viz.

1. A Rest of Deliverance. 2. A Rest of Contentation.
It is a singular mercy to find rest in a man's own spirit, to enjoy inward
peace and tranquillity of mind, when there is no rest without; and the way to
obtain this, is to foresee, count upon, and make due preparation for troublous
times beforehand: evils that come by way of surprizal are not only amazing,
but very frequently destructive evils; it is a sad aggravation to feel a misery
before we fear it; those calamities that find men secure, do usually leave them
desperate; the Enemy that comes upon our backs has a great advantage to ruin
us, yet this is the common case of the world, For man knows not his time, but
as the Fishes are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds that are caught in the
snare; so are the Sons of men snared in an evil time when it falls on them
suddenly, Eccles. 8.12. Thus perished the old World: There was but one Noah
provided for the Flood, and he only with his Family were preserved in it; all
the rest were eating and drinking, marrying and given in marriage, until the
Flood came and swept them all away, Mat. 24.38. Men will not use their
foreseeing faculties, but because it is all quiet to day, they conclude it
shall be so to morrow. Those that are at rest in their habitations, and have
got a soft Pillow under their heads, are apt to fall asleep in security, and
dream pleasantly of continued rest and peace, and loath they are to interrupt
their sensual pleasure with melancholy thoughts of changes and sufferings.

Philosophers tell us, that immediately before an Earthquake, the Air is very
quiet and serene, and before the great Rain falls, the Wind usually lies: Were
the aspect of second causes much more favorable and encouraging than it is;
yet there were cause enough for all that are wise in heart to fear and tremble,
under the consideration of that National guilt which is treasured up, and will
certainly produce distress and trouble.

O Christians look out for days of Visitation, prepare for a Storm, and provide
you an Ark, an hiding place in Christ and the Promises, as ever you expect rest
and peace in your own spirits, when the Earth shall be full of Tumults, Uproars
and Desolations.

Secondly, Our preparations for sufferings is an excellent argument of the
honesty and sincerity of our hearts in the matters of Religion: He that makes
account of sufferings, and is daily at work with his own heart, mortifying its
corruptions, weaning its worldly affections, exciting and making ready its
suffering Graces, resolving in the strength of God to take his Lot with Christ,
wherever and howsoever it shall fall; this is the man that has deliberately
closed with Christ upon his own terms, and is like to be the durable and
victorious Christian.

As for hypocrites, (Christ's Summer friends) they have either their Exceptions
against the severities of Religion, and study to secure to themselves a retreat
from danger, or else they rush inconsiderately into the Profession of Christ,
never debating the terms which he proposes to all that will follow him, Mark
8.34. The necessity of a rational and well-advised closure with Christ upon
suffering and self-denying terms, is by himself fully set forth in that
excellent Parable, Luke 14.25, 26, 27, 28. there was a great multitude that
followed him at that time; Christ began to grow in request among them, they
flocked from all parts to see and hear him; but he foresaw that if once a sharp
trial should befall them, it would quickly thin and diminish that great
multitude, and reduce them, like Gideons Host, into a little handful; and
therefore he resolves to deal heartily and plainly with them, he propounds his
terms, and sets down his conditions, which every one of them must subscribe
that will follow him, the sum of which is this; Let him deny himself; take up
his Cross, and follow me: And to evince the rationality of these terms, he
argues from the most common and obvious practices of men in their Civil
Affairs: No man that exercises reason will begin to build an house, and lay a
large foundation, when he is not provided with a Stock to carry up the Walls,
and complete the work; no man in his wits would engage with an handful of men
against a great armed multitude; possibly they may intend to face, but no man
would think they intended to fight the Enemy on such a disadvantage: Just so
stands the case in our profession of Christ; if we really intend to go through
with the business of Religion, we must sit down and compute the cost and
charges of Christianity, think upon the worst, as well as the best, cast upon
reproaches, prisons and death for his sake, as well as the easier and more
pleasant parts of active obedience; and having so done, if then we can be
content to run all hazards with Christ, and expect to save no more by following
him, but our Souls; if we can be content to hazard and forego all the rest upon
his account, and accordingly manage our selves in a day of suffering, then we
deal sincerely with Christ, and clear our selves from the danger of hypocrisy.
It is for want of this that so many Professors faint and fall away in times of
temptation, furnishing the Devil with so many Triumphs over Religion, and the
more upright Professors of it; it was for want of depth of Earth (i.e.) a deep
consideration, and well-rooted resolution at first, that the stony-ground
hypocrite so quickly withered away, when the Sun of Persecution began to shine
fervently upon him, Mat. 13.5, 6. And doubtless it is to prevent this fatal
Issue of our Profession, that God makes such deep wounds by Conviction upon his
peoples hearts at first; it is for our establishment in future trials and
sufferings that he so distresses and humbles them, that he makes sin so bitter
and burdensome to them, as well knowing that all this is no more, than needs
to prevent their returning again to sin in the times of their temptation.

O Professor, if thou be one that art come to Christ in this way, and have thus
deliberately closed with him; if thou have as well bethought thy self of
bearing his Cross, as of wearing his Crown, thou have then a fair Evidence of
the uprightness of thy heart, than which the World affords not a sweeter
comfort.

Thirdly, The advantage of Preparations for Sufferings lies in this, that it
prevents and cuts off the scandal and offense of the Cross, with respect both
to our selves and to others.

First, It prevents our own offense at sufferings; and by Christ's own
testimony, that Soul is blessed that is not offended in him, Mat. 11.6. Among
the multitudes of Professors, few are found that are no way offended at the
suffering of Christ; they expected much peace, honor and prosperity in the
ways of Religion, but finding their expectations frustrated, and their Carnal
Interest rather exposed than secured by their Profession of Christ, they go
back like those, Joh. 6.66. and walk no more with him. And it is very
remarkable, that Christ dates the offense that men shall take at him, from the
first appearance of sufferings, Mat. 24.8, 9. All these are the beginnings of
sorrows, and then shall many be offended. Sorrows and Apostacies commence
together.

But Reader, if thou be one that make it thy business to foresee and prepare
for an evil day, thou will have as good thoughts of Christ and his ways at the
lowest Ebb, as ever thou had in the greatest flourish and time of prosperity:
Great peace (says the Psalmist) have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them. Oh happy Soul, whom no troubles, reproaches, or sufferings are
able to offend! thou may meet with Prisons, Death, Banishments; yea, but none
of these things shall offend or stumble thee, but thou shall peaceably and
safely pass over them, because they are no more than thou expectedst and
providest for.

Secondly, And by this means thou will also prevent the offense and scandals of
others at the ways of Religion: It is a sad and dangerous thing to be an
occasion of stumbling, either to the weak, or to the wicked. Woe to the world
because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that
man by whom the offense comes, Mat. 18.7. The Apostacies and sinful
compliances of ungrounded Professors and weak Christians in times of
temptation, are the woeful occasions of prejudicing others against Religion, and
shedding the blood of Souls. Ah it were much better never to be in the ways of
Profession, than to be there only as a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense to others: but all this mischief will be prevented, by thy serious
expectation of, and provision for the evil day.

Fourthly, A fourth Excellency of Preparation for Sufferings lies in this, that
it has a tendency to convince and awaken the drowsy World. O! if the Lords
people would but fall about this work in earnest, and live as people that are
providing for a Storm, and resolve in the strength of God to run all hazards
and hardships for Christ, I am persuaded it would be of more use, to startle
and convince the World, than all the Sermons that ever they heard: for here is
that which dashes and cuts the throat of all our labors, we preach up
Self-denial, and contempt of life and liberty for Christ. Now though they hear
us preach the necessity and excellency of these things, and hear you profess
them as your Principles; yet when they look upon the lives of Professors in
times of danger, and find no proportion betwixt Profession and Practice; when
they see us cling to the World, and are as loath to give it up as others; when
they observe Prisons and Sufferings, affright and terrify us as much as those
that make no Profession; when they see us start like Hares at every sound, and
that we live not loose from the World, as men prepared to let it go, and give
it up for Christ: Why then they conclude that we dare not trust our own
Principles, when it comes to the push: And how can they be persuaded to believe
that which they think we our selves do not really believe, although we persuade
them to believe it?

My friends, the World has Eyes to see what you can do, as well as Ears to
hear what you can say; and as long as they see you do no more than others, you
may talk your hearts out, e're they will believe your way is better than others.

But now when Persecution arises, did they see you providing your selves for
it, and putting on your Harness to enter the Lists, carry your dearest
Enjoyments in your hands, and put on the Shoe of Preparation, to follow the
Lord through the roughest ways of Sufferings: this would convince to purpose,
and preach the Excellency of Christ, the vanity of the Creature, the
rationality and certainty of Christian Principles, in a more intelligible and
rouzing Dialect to them, than all our cheap and easy Commendations of them
did. And hence it is, that Noah was said to condemn the World, Heb. 11.7. By
Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, (i. e.) of the
Deluge that was coming, though no appearance of it yet, the Heavens being as
clear as ever; yet believing the Threatening, he was moved with fear: the fear
of God, an effect of his Faith in the Word of God, moved, (i. e.) impelled him
to his Duty: Set him about his Preparation-work, to provide an Ark; and this
was it by which he condemned the World, left them excuseless: For they not only
heard of an approaching Flood by his Ministry, but now saw he himself believed
what he preached, by his daily preparations against it came. O consider this,
how much it would tend to the Worlds Conviction. Now they will see that you are
in good earnest, and that there is a reality in godliness. This will induce
them to search into the matter more than ever, and remove those prejudices they
have taken up against the good ways of God, as if they were but Phantasms and
Conceits.

5. In the next place, this foresight and preparation, must needs be an
excellent thing, because the Spirit of God every where sets an honorable
Character upon it, and always mentions such persons with some singular and
commendation and respect. These only are wise men in the Judgment of God; and
all the rest (what great Politicians soever they are famed to be among men) are
accounted Fools, Prove. 22.3. Eccles. 2.14. The Wise man's Eyes are in his head;
that is, he is a foreseeing man; but the Fool goes on, and is punished: Rushes
on without consideration, suspecting no danger that he at present sees not, and
so smarts for his folly. Beloved, there are Signs of the Times, as well as of
the Weather, Mat. 16.3. You may see the Clouds of Judgment gathering before the
Storm falls upon you: And this is the meaning of Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather your
selves together, before the Decree bring forth, and the Day pass as the Chaff.
Where there is a Conception of Judgment, there will be a Birth, unless the
Reformations and Prayers of the Saints give it a miscarrying Womb. But it
requires Wisdom to discern this; they must be men of much Observation, that can
descry it at a great distance: yet this may be done, by considering what GOD
has done in like Cafes in former Ages, when Nations have been guilty of the
same sins as now they are: For God is as just now as then, and hates sin as
much as ever he did; and partly, by attending to things present, to what
fullness and maturity the sins of a Nation are grown, Joel 3.16. or what
beginnings of Judgment are already upon a people, as Harbingers and
Forerunners of more at hand, Luke 3.30, 31. 1 Samuel 2.12. Or what is the
universal Vote and Cry of Gods Ministers, who are his Watchmen to foresee
danger, Ezekiel. 3.17. and his Trumpeters to discover it, Numb. 10.8. and when
these have one mouth given them, certainly there is much in it, Luke 1.70. Or
lastly, by pondering those Scripture-Prophecies that yet remain to be
fulfilled: They must all go out their times, and accomplish their full number
of Years and Months; but certainly they shall be fulfilled in their Seasons.

By attending to these things, a Christian may give a near guess at the
Judgments that are approaching a Nation, and so order himself accordingly,
Eccles. 8.5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. And this is
(even in the Judgment of God) a choice point of Wisdom. Whereas on the
contrary, heedless and careless ones, that regard not these things, are branded
for Fools, and upbraided with more bruitishness than the Beasts of the Field,
or Fowls of the Air, Mat. 16.3. Jer. 8.7. The Stork in the Heavens, the
Swallow, Turtle, and Crane, observe their Seasons of departing, and returning,
upon the approach of the Winter and Spring, and that by a natural instinct,
whereby they prolong their lives, which else must perish. But though God has
made Man wiser than the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Earth, which by
instinct will quit colder Climates, or run to the Hedge when Winter or Storms
approach; yet the Heavens may be astonished at this, to see Nature cast by sin
so far below it self, and that in reasonable Creatures.

But now, if this be foreseen, then there is a singular advantage in a man's
hand, either to ^se the means of preventing those approaching Calamities, Zeph.
2.3. or if it cannot be prevented, yet to take Sanctuary in Christ, Mic. 5.5.
to run to the Promises and Attributes, Esa. 26. ult: and so have a good Roof
over his Head while the Storm falls, and the Weather is tempestuous abroad. And
therefore certainly, this Preparation is an excellent thing. Whatever the
Spirit of God speaks in the commendation of foreseeing Evils, is with respect
to this Duty of preparing for them; for foresight of Evils, without
preparation, rather increases, than diminishes the misery.

6. A sixth Excellency of Preparation, lies in the influence that it has into
a Christians stability in the evil day. You cannot but know, that your
stability in that critical hour of Temptation, is a choice and singular Mercy,
in as much as all you are worth in the other World depends upon your standing
then, Rev. 21.7, 8. Romans 2.6, 7. Luke 22.28. Neither can you be ignorant how
much you are like to be tried and put to it then, whether you respect the Enemy
that ingages you, Ephesians. 6.12. or your own weakness, who have been so often
foiled in lesser trials, Jer. 12.5. All the Grace you have, will be little
enough to keep the Field, and bear you up from sinking; and therefore it cannot
but be a blessed thing, to be able to stand and cope with the greatest
difficulties, in such a nick of trial as that will be. Now he that expects to
do this, must put on the whole Armor of God. See Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 14. There Is
no expectation of standing in the evil day, except your foot be shod, that is,
your wills prepared, with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

It is true, that our ability to stand, is not from our own inherent grace; for
by his strength shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2.9. and yet it is as true, that
without grace, both inherent in us, and excited and prepared for action, we
cannot expect to stand: For these two, Grace inherent in us, and Grace exciting
and assisting without, are not opposed, but co-ordinated. Grace in us, is the
Weapon by which our Enemy falls; but then that Weapon must be managed by the
Hand of the Spirit. -- Well then, look upon this as a choice mercy, which tends
so much to your stability.

7. A seventh Excellency of a prepared Heart, is, that it is a very high
testification of our love to Jesus Christ, when we thus show our willingness to
take our Lot with him, and follow him where ever he goes. What an high
expression of love was that of Ruth to her Mother Naomy? I will not go back,
but where thou lodgest I will lodge, and where thou go I will go. It Is
excellent, when a Soul can say to Christ, as Ittai to David, 2 Samuel 15.21.
Surely, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in Death, or in Life,
even there also will thy Servant be. This is love indeed, to cleave to him in a
time of such distresses and dangers. This is love which the Waters cannot
quench, nor the Flood drown, Cant. 8.6. Probatio amoris, est exhibitio operis:
If you love Christ indeed, show your love by some fruits of it; and surely,
this is a very choice fruit and proof of it. There be many that profess a great
deal of love to Christ; but when it comes to this Touchstone, it appears false
and counterfeit, but a mere flourish, when no danger is near: But that Soul
which buckles on the Shoe of Preparation, to follow him through Thorns and
Briars, and over the Rocks and Mountains of Difficulties and Troubles, loves
him indeed, Jer. 2.2, 3. Beloved, it is one of the choicest Discoveries of your
love to your Master Christ; yea, it is such a testification of love to him, as
Angels are not capable of. They show their love by their readiness to do his
Will, in the execution of which they fly as with Wings, Ezekiel. 1.24. But you
only have the happiness of testifying your love, by your readiness to suffer
for him, and is not this excellent?

8. When the Heart is prepared for the worst Sufferings, it is an Argument that
your Will is subdued to the Will of God; for till this be done in a good
measure, you cannot stand ready to suffer for him: But now, to have the Will
subdued by Grace to the Will of God, is a very choice and excellent frame
indeed; for in this the main power of Grace lies: Look in what Faculty the
chief Residence and strength of sin was, in the same, the chief Residence and
power of Grace, after Conversion, is also: Now it is in the Will, that the
strength and power of sin (before Conversion) lay. See Joh. 5.40. Psalm. 81.11.
Jer. 44.16, 17. And indeed it was the Devils strong Hold, which in the Day of
Christ's Power, he storms and reduces to his Obedience, Psalm. 110.3. Oh what a
blessed thing is this! the Will rules the Man, it has the Empire of the whole
man, it commands the Faculties of the Soul, imperio politico; and it commands
the Members of the Body, imperio despotico. Now to have Christ and Grace rule
that, which rules and commands your inner and outer Man too, is no small Mercy:
And a better Evidence that it is so cannot be given than this, that you stand
ready, or do seriously prepare your selves to suffer the hardest things for
Christ: If your Will can like that Work, it is an Argument Grace has conquered
and subdued your wills indeed.

9. This Preparation of Heart to Sufferings, is an excellent thing, because God
is so abundantly pleased with it, that he often excuses them from sufferings in
whom he finds it, and accepts it, as if the service had been actually done. So
Abraham, Genesis 22.12. he was ready to offer up his Isaac's life to God; but God
seeing his Servants heart really prepared, and ready for that difficult
service, and high point of Self-denial, provided himself another Sacrifice
instead of Isaac. Abraham shall have his Isaac back again, and that with
advantage; for he has with him not only a choice Experiment of his love to
God, but Gods high approbation of him, and acceptance of his Offering. It was
all one, in respect of Divine acceptance, as if he had been slain; and so the
Scripture represents it, Jam. 2.21. And in this sense, that Promise is often
made good to Gods People, who stand ready to give up their Isaacs, their lives,
liberties, and dearest enjoyments, to the Lord; He that will lose his life for
my Names sake, shall save it, Luke 9.24.

Now what a blessed thing is this! you may this way have the Crown of
Martyrdom, and yet not shed one drop of blood for Christ actually. Ah how
kindly does God accept it at his poor Creatures hands, when he sees how willing
they are to serve him with their best enjoyments! It is well (says he to
David) that it was in thy heart, 1 King. 8.18.

10. And then lastly, to add no more, it is beyond Controversy an excellent
and blessed thing; because should such a Christian, after all his pains and
preparations, be overborn, and fall by Temptation; yet this preparation of his
heart excuses his fall, from those aggravations that are upon the falls of
others, and will give him both support under such a Condition, and
encouragement to hope for a speedy recovery out of it. Ah! it is no small
comfort, when a poor Soul that has been overborn by temptation, can come to
God and say, Lord, thou know that this was not a wilful departure from my
duty, but contrary to the bent and resolution of my heart, thou saw my
diligence beforehand to prepare for it; thou saw my fears and tremblings of
heart about it; O Lord forgive, O Lord recover thy Servants, wash away this
spot, it is one of the spots of thy children, an infirmity, not a Rebellion:
This may much stay the Soul.

Surely in this case, thou have many grounds of comfort that another wants: For
thy sin being but an infirmity, (1.) It Is that which is common to all Saints,
Psalm. 103.11, 12, 13, 14. (2.) God has mercy and pardons for such sins as
these, else woe to the holiest Soul, Psalm. 130.3, 4. Solomon, upon this ground,
pleads for mercy for them that prepared their hearts, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. and
God has laid in sweet grounds of encouragement for such Souls, Numb. 15.27,
28. Heb. 5.2. How tenderly does Christ deal with the Disciples under this kind
of sin, Mat. 26.41. and though they forsook him for a time, yet he received
them again; though they fled from him, yet they all returned again, and
appeared boldly for Christ afterward, and sealed their Confession of him with
their blood: and that which recovered them again was this, that their fall and
departure was contrary to the resolution and standing frame and bent of their
hearts; for they resolved all to cleave to him to the death, Mat. 26.35.
whereas those that engaged in a profession of him inconsiderately, and never
resolved nor prepared for the worst, fell off from him, and never returned any
more, Joh. 6.66. So then, upon the whole, you cannot but grant, that it is a
very blessed and excellent thing, to prepare thus for the greatest Sufferings
that can befall us for Christ. We come next to show wherein it lies.

CHAP. V.
Evincing the necessity of a sound and real work of Grace upon the heart, to
fit a man for the Sufferings of Christ.

HAving showed you that God does sometimes put his dearest people upon very
hard services for him, and what an excellent thing it is to prepare our selves
to obey the Call of God to them: In the next place I come to show you, wherein
this Preparation or readiness for Sufferings consists, and how many things
concur and contribute their assistance to this Work.

Now there is a twofold Preparation or readiness for Suffering; the one is
habitual, the other actual: That habitual readiness is nothing else but the
inclination of a Soul to suffer any thing for Christ; which inclination arises
from the Principles of Grace infused into the Soul: But then as fire, though it
have a natural inclination to ascend, yet may be violently deprest and
hindered, that it cannot ascend actually, so may it be in this case; and
therefore, before a man can be fitted for Sufferings, as Paul was, there must
to this habitual be superadded an actual readiness, which is nothing else but
the rouzing of Grace out of the sleepy and dull habits, and awakening it to its
work in a time of need: as the Lion is said to lash himself with his Tail, to
rouse up his Courage before he fight. The former is a remote power; the latter
a proxim and immediate power. I must handle the former in this Chapter, and you
are to know, that it consists in a sound and real work of Grace, or
Conversion wrought upon the Soul; without which I shall make it evidently
appear to you, that no man can be fit or ready to suffer as a Christian.

What ever stock of Natural Courage, Moral Principles, or common gifts of the
Spirit be lodged in any man's Breast, yet all this (without special grace) can
never fit him to suffer for Christ. And had not this Work been really and
soundly wrought upon the heart of this blessed Man, as indeed it was, Acts 9.3,
4, 5. he had quickly fainted under his Sufferings; and so will every Soul
sooner or later do, that suffers not upon the same Principles he did.

1. For first, No man can suffer for Christ, until he be able to deny himself.
See Mat. 16.24. Self-denial goes in order of Nature before Sufferings. Beloved,
in a Suffering hour the Interests of Christ and Self meet like two men upon a
narrow Bridge, one must of necessity go back, or the other cannot pass on: If
you cannot now deny Self, you must deny Christ. The Yoke and Dominion of Self
must cast off, or else Christ's Yoke and Burden cannot be taken on.

It is confessed that Self may not only consist with, but be a Motive to some
kind of Sufferings: Ambition and Applause may carry a man far this way; Pride
is a Salamander that it seems can live in the flames of Martyrdom, 1 Cor. 13.3.
but to be a Servant to Self, and a true Sufferer for Christ, are incompatible.
Self may make you the Devils Martyrs, but Grace only can make you Christ's
Martyrs. So that let a man be seemingly carried for a while with never so high
a Tide of Zeal for Christ, yet if Self be the Spring that feeds it, those
self ends like so many little Ditches joined to the Banks of a River, shall
suck and draw away the Water into themselves, that the lofty Stream will sink
and come to nothing e're it have ran far: So then of necessity Self must be
dethroned in the hearts of Christ's suffering Servants.

But now it is real Grace only that deposes Self, and subjects its Interests to
Christ's; for Sanctification is nothing else but the dethroning of exalted Self,
and the setting up of Christ's Interest above it in the Soul. This is it that
alters the property of all a man has, and superscribes them with a new Title,
Holiness to the Lord, Isa. 23.18. Zech. 14.20, 21. Thenceforth a man looks at
himself as none of his own, but past into another right, 1 Cor. 6.19. and that
he must neither live, nor act ultimately for himself, but for Christ, Romans
14.7. Heb. 13.7, 8. Phil. 1.20. He is no more as a Proprietor, but a Steward of
all he has; and so holds upon these terms to lay it out, or lay it down, as
may best serve his Masters ends and glory.

All that he is or has, is by Grace subordinated to Christ; and if once
subordinated, then no more opposed to him subordinata non pugnant. This is it
that makes him say, I care not what becomes of me or mine, so Christ may be
glorified. Let Christ be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by
death, Phil. 1.20.

By Conversion Christ enters the Soul, 2 Cor. 10.5
as an Army does an Enemies Garrison by Storm; and when he is possessed of it by
Grace, he presently divides the whole spoil of Self betwixt himself and his
Church. This is the first that evinces the necessity of a Work of Grace to
prepare the heart for Sufferings.

2. And then in the next place, It is as evident that a man can never be fit to
suffer hard things for Christ, until his Spirit be enlarged, raised, and
enobled, so that he be able to despise Dongers, and look all Difficulties in
the face. That low and private Spirit must be removed, and a public Spirit
must possess him. If a man be of a feeble and effeminate Spirit, every petty
Danger will daunt and sink him; Delicacy and Tenderness is as unsuitable to a
Christian as to a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.3. They that mean to enter into the
Kingdom of God, must resolve to make their way through that Brake of Troubles
betwixt them and it, 2 Timothy 3.12. They that will be crowned with Victory, must
stand to it, and play the men, as that word imports, 1 Cor. 16.13. Look over
all the Sacred and Humane Histories, and see if you can find a man that ever
honored Christ by Suffering, that was not of a raised and noble Spirit, and in
some measure able to contemn both the allurements and threats of men. So those
three noble Jews, Dan. 3.16, 17. so Moses, Heb. 11.27. and so our Apostle, Acts
20.24. and the same Heroic and brave Spirit was found in the succeeding Ages
amongst the Witnesses of Christ. When Valence the Emperor endeavored to draw
Basil from the Faith by Offers of Preferment, Offer these things (said he) to
Children; when he threatened him with torments, Threaten these things (said he)
to your Purple Gallants that live delicately. And the same Basil relating the
Story of the forty Martyrs, says, That when great Honors and Preferments were
offered them to draw them from Christ, their answer was, Why offer you these
small things of the world to us (O Emperor) when you know the whole world is
contemned by us! So Luther, Money could not tempt him, nor the fear of man
daunt him. Let me (said he in his Letter to Staupicius) be accounted proud,
covetous, a murderer, guilty of all vices, rather than of wicked silence and
cowardice in the Cause of Christ. Thus you see to what an height and holy
greatness the Spirits of suffering Saints in all Ages have been raised.

But now it is Grace that thus raises the Spirits of men above all the smiles
and honors, frowns and fears of men: and no other Principle but Grace can do
it. There is indeed a natural stoutness and generosity in some, which may carry
them far, as it is said of Alexander, that when any great danger approached him,
his courage would rise, and he would say, Jam periculum par animo Alexandri;
here is a danger fit for Alexander to encounter: so Pompey when dissuaded from
a dangerous Voyage, answered, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam; It Is necessary
that I go, not that I live. But this being fed only by a natural Spring, can
carry a man no higher than Nature, and will flag at last. If applause and the
observation of the world supply it not, it quickly ebbs and fails.

But as Grace raises men much higher; so it maintains it even when there is
nothing to encourage without; when forsaken of all Creatures, and visible
supports, 2 Timothy 4.10. and this it does three ways: (1) By giving him that has
it a view of far greater things, which shrinks up all temporary things, and
makes them appear but trifles and small matters, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.18. By
Grace a man rises with Christ, Col. 3.1. It sets him upon his high places, and
thence he looks down upon things below, as very poor and inconsiderable. The
great Cities of Campania seem but little spots to them that stand on the top of
the Alps. (2) By teaching him to value and measure all things by another Rule
than he was wont to do. He did once measure life, liberty, riches, honors, by
sense and time; and then they seemed great things, and it was hard to deny
them; or thus to slight them; but now he values and measures all by Faith and
Eternity; and esteems nothing great and excellent, but what has a reference to
the Glory of God, and an influence into Eternity. (3) Grace raises and enobles
the Spirit thus, because it is the Divine Nature; it is the Spirit of Christ
infused into a poor Worm, which makes a strange alteration on him, transforms
him into another manner of person; as much difference betwixt his Spirit now,
and what it was, as betwixt the Spirit of a Child that is filled with small
matters, and taken up with Toys; and of a grave Statesman, that is daily
employed about the Grand Affairs of a Kingdom.

3. A man can never suffer as a Christian, till his will be subjected to the
Will of God. He that suffers involuntarily, and out of necessity, not out of
choice, shall neither have acceptance nor reward from God. Of necessity the
will must be subjected; a man can never say, Thy will be done, till he can
first say, Not my will.

But it is Grace only that thus conquers and subjects the will of man to Gods,
Psalm. 110.3. This is it that which exalts Gods Authority in the Soul, and makes
the heart to stoop and tremble at his Commands. It Is this which makes our will
to write its fiat at the foot of every Command, and its placet under every
Order it receives from God. No sooner was Grace entered into the Soul of Paul,
but presently he cries out, Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6. The
Will is to the Soul what the Wheels are to the Chariot; and Grace is to the
Will what Oil is to those Wheels. When we receive the Spirit of Grace, we are
said to receive an Unction from the Holy One, 1 John 2.20. and then the Soul is
made as the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6.12. Non tardat uncta rota, it runs
freely after the Lord, and cheerfully addresseth it self to every Service.

4. A man can never suffer as a Christian, until his heart be composed, fixed,
and determined to follow the Lord through all hazards and difficulties. As long
as a man is hesitating and unresolved what to do, whether to go forward, or
turn back again to the prosperous World, when a man is at such a pause, and
stand in his way, he is very unfit for sufferings. All such Divisions do both
weaken the Soul, and strengthen the Temptation: The Devils work is more than
half done to his hands in such a Soul; and he is now as unfit to endure
hardship for Christ, as a Ship is to ride out a Storm, that has neither Cable,
Anchor, nor Ballast to hold and settle it, but lies at the mercy of every Wave,
James 1.8. The double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. But it is Grace,
and nothing besides it, that brings the heart to a fixed resolution and
settlement to follow the Lord. It Is Grace that establishes the heart, Heb.
13.9. and unites it to fear the Name of God, Psalm. 86.11. This gathers all the
Streams into one Channel, and then it runs with much strength, and sweeps away
all obstacles before it. So that look as it is with a wicked man that has sold
himself to do wickedly, if he be set upon any one design of sin, he pours out
his whole heart and strength in the prosecution of that Design; which is the
ground of that saying, Liberet me Deus ab homine unius tantum negotii, Let God
deliver me from a man of one only Design. He will do it to purpose: So is it
also in Grace; if the heart be composed, fixed, and fully resolved for God,
nothing shall then stand before him. And herein lies much of a Christians
habitual fitness and ability to suffer.

5. The necessity of Saving-grace in all Sufferers for Christ will farther
appear from this consideration, that he who will run all hazards for Christ,
had need of a continual supply of strength and refreshment from time to time.
He must not depend on any thing that is failable: For what shall he do then,
when that Stock is spent, and he has no Provision left to live upon? Now all
natural qualifications, yea all the common gifts of the Spirit are failable and
short-lived things; they are like a sweet Flower in the Bosom, that is an
Ornament for a little while, but withers presently: Or like a Pond or Brook
occasioned by a great fall of Rain, which quickly sinks and dries up, because
it is not fed by Springs in the bottom, as other Fountain-waters are: And hence
it is they cannot continue and hold out when Sufferings come, Mat. 13.21.
because there is no Root to nourish and support. The Hypocrite will not always
call upon God, Job 27.10. Though they may keep company with Christ a few miles
in this dirty way, yet they must turn back at last, and shake hands eternally
with him, John 6.66. These Comets may seem to shine for a time among the Stars,
but when that Earthly matter is spent, they must fall and lose their glory.

But now, Grace is an Everlasting Principle, it has Springs in the bottom that
never fail. It shall be in him (says Christ) a Well of water springing up into
eternal life, Joh. 4.14. The Spirit of God supplies it from time to time as
need requires. It has daily Incomes from Heaven, munimur quatenus unimur.
2 Cor. 1.5. Phil. 4.13. Col. 1.11. So that it is our Union with Christ the
Fountain by Grace, that is the true ground of our constancy and long-suffering.

6. And then lastly. It will appear by this also, that there is an absolute
necessity of a real change by Grace on all that will suffer for Christ; because
although we may engage our selves in sufferings without it, yet we can never
manage our sufferings like Christians without it. They will neither be
honorable, or acceptable to God, nor yet beneficial and comfortable to our
selves or others, except they be performed from this Principle of Grace: For
upon what Principle soever beside this, any man is acted in Religion, it will
either cause him to decline sufferings for Christ; or if he be engaged in them,
yet he will little credit Religion by his Sufferings. They will either be
spoiled by an ill management, or his own pride will devour the praise and glory
of them. I do not deny, but a man that is graceless, may suffer many hard things
upon the account of his Profession, and suffer them all in vain, as these
Scriptures manifest. See 1 Cor. 13.3. Gal. 3.4. And although you find many
sweet Promises made to those that suffer for Christ, yet you must consider,
that those pure and spiritual Ends and Motives, by which men ought to be acted
in their sufferings, are always supposed and employed in all those Promises that
are made to the external action. And sometimes it is expressed, 1 Pet 4.16. to
suffer [as a Christian] is to suffer from pure Christian Principles, and in a
Christian manner, with Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, etc. and this only
Grace can enable you to do: So that by all this, I suppose what I have
undertaken in this Character, viz. to evince the necessity of a Work of Grace
to pass upon you, before Sufferings for Religion come, is by all this performed
to satisfaction.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein the Nature of this Work of Grace, in which our habitual fitness for
suffering lies, is briefly opened; and an account given of the great advantage
the gracious person has for any, even the hardest work thereby.

HAving in the former Chapter plainly evinced the necessity of saving Grace, to
fit a man for sufferings; it will be expected now, that some account be given
you of the nature of this Work, and now it advantages a man for the discharge
of the hardest services in Religion: Both which I shall open in this Chapter,
by a distinct Explication of the parts of this description of it.

This work of Grace, What Saving Grace is.
of which I am here to speak, consists in the real change of the whole Man, by
the Spirit of God, whereby he is prepared for every good work: In which brief
Description, I shall open these four things to you.

1. That it is a Change; this is palpably evident, both from Scripture and
Experience. 2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are past away; behold, all things are
become new; and it is so sensible a Change, that it is called a turning from
darkness to light, Act. 26.18. and a new Creature formed and brought forth. But
to be a little more distinct and particular, there are several other Changes
that pass upon men, which must not be mistaken for this: and therefore, (1.) It
is not a mere change of the Judgment from Error to Truth, from Paganism to
Christianity. Such a Change Simon Magus had, yet still remained in the gall of
bitterness, and fast bound in the bonds of iniquity, Act. 8.23. (2.) Nor only
of a man's practice, from Profaneness to Civility; this is common among such as
live under the Light of the Gospel, which breaking into men's Consciences,
thwarts their Lusts, and over-awes them with the fears of Hell: Which is no
more than what the Gentiles had, Romans 2.15. (3.) Nor is it a change from mere
Morality, to mere Formality in Religion. Thus Hypocrites are changed, by the
common gifts of the Spirit, illuminating their Minds, and slightly touching
their Affections, Heb. 6.4, 5. (4.) Nor is it such a Change as Justification
makes, which is relative, and only alters the state and condition, Romans 5.1, 2.
(5.) Lastly, it is not a Change of the Essence of a Man; he remains essentially
the same person still.

But this Change consists in the infusion of New Habits of Grace into the Old
Faculties; which immediately depose Sin from its dominion over the Soul, and
deliver up the Soul into the Hands and Government of Christ; so that it lives
no more to it self, but to Christ. This is that Change whereof we speak: And
this Change (2) I assert to be real, no fancy, nor delusion; not a groundless
conceit, but it is really existent, extra mentem, whether you conceit it or
not. Indeed, the blind World would persuade us it is suppositious; and
fantastic; and that there is no such real difference betwixt one man and
another, as we affirm Grace makes. And hence it is, that whoever professes it,
is presently branded for a Phanatique; and that Scripture, Esa. 56.5. Stand by
thy self, I am holier than thou, etc. clapped in their Teeth, in their absurd and
perverse sense of it.

But I shall briefly offer these seven things to your consideration, which will
abundantly evince the reality of it, and at once both stop the slanderous
mouths of ignorant men, and silence those Atheistical Surmises, which at any
time Satan may inject into the hearts of Gods own people touching this matter.
And first, let it be considered, that the Spirit of God has represented to us
this Work of Grace, under such Names and Notions in Scripture, as if they had
been chosen purposely to obviate this Calumny. It Is called a Creature, Gal.
6.15. a Man, 1 Pet. 3.4. a New Birth, Joh. 3.3. Christ formed in us, Gal. 4.19.
all which express its reality, and that it is not a conceited thing. (2.) It
appears to be real by the mavelous effects it has upon a man, turning him
both in Judgment, Will, Affections and Practice, quite counter to what he was
before. This is evident in that famous instance of Paul, Gal. 1.23. which is
abundantly attested and sealed by the constant experience of all gracious
Souls, that are Witnesses of the truth hereof. (3.) A Divine and Almighty Power
goes forth to produce and work it; and hence Faith is said to be of the
Operation of God, Col. 2.12. Yea, that the same Power which raised Jesus Christ
from the Dead, goes to the production of it, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And if so, how
much less than Blasphemy is it, to call it a Conceit or Fancy? Does God set
on work his infinite Power to beget a Fancy, or raise an imagination? (4.)
Conceits and Whimsies abound most in men of weak Reason: Children, and such as
are cracked in their Understandings have most of them: Strength of Reason
banishes them, as the Sun does Mists and Vapors: But now the more rational any
gracious person is, by so much the more he is fixed, settled, and satisfied in
the Grounds of Religion: Yea, there is the highest and purest Reason in
Religion; and when this Change is wrought upon men, it is carried on in a
rational way, Esa. 1.18. Joh. 16.9. The Spirit overpowrs the Urderstanding with
clear Demonstrations, and silences all Objections, Pleas and Pretenses to the
contrary. (5.) It Is a real thing, and gracious Souls know it to be so; else so
many Thousands of the Saints would never have suffered so many cruel Torments
and Miseries, rather than forsake a Fancy, and so save all. They have been so
well satisfied of the reality of that which the World calls a Fancy, that
they have chosen rather to embrace the Stake, than deny it. The constancy of
Christians, in cleaving to Religion, was common to a Proverb among the Heathen;
who when they would express the greatest difficulty, would say, You may as soon
turn a Christian from Christ, as do it. Surely no wise man would sacrifice his
Liberty, Estate, Life, and all that is dear, for a Conceit. (6.) It Is reality
appears in its uniformity in all those on whom it is wrought: They have all
obtained like precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. They are all changed into the same
Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. Three thousand persons affected in one and the same manner
at one Sermon, Act. 2.37. Could one and the same Conceit possess them all
together? Take two Christians that live a thousand miles distant from each
other, that never heard of one another, let these be persons examined, and
their Reports compared, and see if they do not substantially agree; and whether
as Face answers Face in Water, so their Experiences do not answer one to the
other? which could never be, if it were a groundless Conceit. (7.) And lastly,
it is manifest, it is a reality, and puts a real difference betwixt one and
another, because God carries himself so differently toward them, after their
Conversion; now he smiles, before he frowned; now they are under the Promises,
before they were under the Threats and Curses: and what a vast difference will
he put betwixt the one and other in that great day? See Mat. 25. Surely, if
these nominal Christians did but differ in Conceit, not really from others, the
Righteous Judge of all the Earth would not pass such a different Judgment and
Doom upon them.

By all this you evidently see, that Grace is a real Change, and not a
conceited one.

3. We say that this real Change passes upon the whole Man: he is changed in
Soul, Body and Practice; all things are become new. (1.) This Change appears in
his Soul: For by it, (1) His Understanding is strangely altered, and receives
things in another way than formerly. It did look at Christ and things Eternal,
as uncertain and light matters: The things that are seen and present, did
mostly affect, and appeared great and excellent: It admired Riches and Honors,
while Christ and Glory were over-looked and despised. But now, all these
Temporals are esteemed Dung, Dross, Vanity, Phil. 3.8. Romans 8.18. and Jesus
Christ is now esteemed the Wisdom and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. It did
look on the Saints as despicable persons, but now as the Excellent of the
Earth, Psa. 16.3. Strictness and Duty was once esteemed a needless thing, but
now the only thing desirable, Psalm. 119.14. Oh, says the renewed Soul, where
were mine Eyes, that I could see no more Excellency in Christ, his ways, and
people! (2) It stops not there (as it does in Hypocrites) but passes on
further, and reduces the Will; that strong Hold is taken, and delivered up to
Christ. It did rebel against God, and could not be subject, but now it submits,
Act. 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? In the day of Christ's Power, he
presents himself in all his drawing glory and loveliness before the Will, and
cries to that stubborn Faculty, Open to me, open to me; with which Word there
goes forth an opening and subduing Power, which the Will no sooner feels, but
it spontaneously moves toward him, and says, Stand open ye everlasting Gates,
that the King of Glory may come in. Henceforth it votes for God, subscribes and
submits to his Will, as its only Rule and Law; and indeed, it becomes the
principal Seat where Grace makes its Residence; and where, for the most part,
it is more visible than in any other Faculty. For after a man has searched for
it in all other Faculties, and cannot discern it, yet here he ordinarily finds
it; to will is present, Romans 7.18. (3) The Will being thus gained to Christ,
Love comes in of course; it feeling the power of Grace also, presently changes
its Object: It seizes not so greedily on Earthly Objects as before, but is
strangely cooled and deadned to them, by the appearance of a far greater Glory
in Jesus Christ; which has so captivated the Soul, and strongly attracted this
Affection, that its now become very remiss in all its actings toward them; and
often (especially at first) it is so weaned from all things on Earth, that the
Temptation seems to lie on the other Extreme, even in too great neglect of our
lawful Employments and Comforts. Now Jesus Christ, Cant. 1.3. his Ordinances
Psalm. 119.97. and his Saints, 1 John 3.14. are the only Delights, and sweetest
Companions; he could sit from Morning to Night, to hear Discourses of Christ
his Beloved, and could live and die in the company of his people, whose company
is now most delightful and sweet, Psalm. 119.63. (4) The Desires are altered,
they pant no more after the Dust of the Earth, Psalm. 4.6. but pant for God, as
the Heart for the Brooks of water, Psalm. 42.1. Yea, so big is the Soul with
them, that it is sometimes ready to faint, yea to break with the longing it has
after him, Psalm. 119.20. (5) The Thoughts are changed, Psalm. 119.113. and the
Thoughts of God are now most precious, Psalm. 139.47. musing, when alone, of
him; and in its Solitudes, the Soul entertains it self with a delightful Feast,
which its Thoughts of God bring in to refresh it, Psalm. 63.5, 6. (6) The
Designs and Projects of the Soul are changed; all are now swallowed up in one
grand Design, even to approve himself to God, and be accepted of him, 2 Cor.
5.9. and if he fail not there, it will not much trouble him, if all his other
Designs should be dashed.

It were easy to instance in the rest of the Affections, and show how Grace
spreads and diffuses it self into them all, as Light in the Air, or Leaven in
the Lump; but this may suffice, to show how it passes upon the whole Soul, and
enters the several Faculties and Affections thereof.

And the Soul being thus possessed for God, the Body, with all its Members, is
consequently resigned up to him also: For the Will has the Empire of the
Members of the Body, as well as of the Passions and Affections of the Soul.
These are not any more delivered up to execute the Lusts of Satan, but are
yielded up to God for his ends and uses, Romans 6.19. And thus you have the third
thing in the Description made out also, that it is an universal, as well as a
real Change. But then,

4. Lastly, You must know that by this change God prepares a man for choice and
excellent services; and this indeed is the main thing designed in this Chapter,
and is the result and issue of all that has hitherto been said about this work
of Grace.

Beloved, can you imagine that God would employ his infinite and glorious
Power, to produce this new Creature in such an excellent nature, it being the
Masterpiece of all his Works of Wonder wrought upon man, and not aim at some
singular use and excellent end? Every wise Agent designs some end; and what God
aims at he has told us, Isa. 43.21. Ephesians. 2.20. And accordingly he expects
singular things from such persons, Mat. 5.47. If God had not aimed at some new
service, he need not have made a new Creature: the old Creature was fit enough
for the old use and service it was employed in. But God has some choice
service to be done, wherein he will be glorified. He will have his Name
glorified, even in this world, by the active and passive obedience of his
people. But this being far above all the power of Nature, God therefore brings
them forth in a new and heavenly nature, endowed with rare supernatural and
divine qualities, by which it is fitted and excellently prepared for any
service of God by doing or by suffering, which before he had no fitness or
ability for.

The very Make and Constitution of this new Creature speaks its use and end: As
now, if a man look upon a Sword or Knife (supposing he had never seen either
before) yet I say by viewing the shape and properties of it, he will say, this
was made to cut. Even so here, this new Creature was formed for some glorious
and singular service for God, to which it is exceedingly advantaged, whether
God put you upon doing or suffering. If you ask wherein this advantage of the
new Creature to honor God either way lies; I answer, It principally consists
in its heavenly inclination, or natural tendency to God. This is its great
advantage: For by virtue of this:

1. If God call a man to any Duty, there is a Principle within closing with the
Command without, and moving the Soul freely and spontaneously to duty, Psalm.
27.8. If God say, Seek my face, such an heart echoes to the call, Thy face
Lord will I seek. And this is it which is called, The writing of Gods Law in
the heart, Jer. 31.33. and must needs be a mighty advantage; for now its work
is its delight and wages, Psalm. 19.11. The Command to such a Soul is not
grievous, 1 John 5.3. And by this it is kept from tiring in duty, and being
weary of its work; as you see what pains Children can take at play, how they
will run and sweat, and endure knocks and falls, and take no notice of it; put
them upon any manual labor, and they cannot endure half so much. When our work
is our delight, we never faint nor tire at it. This inclination to God is to
the Soul as wings to a Bird, or sails to a Ship. This carries the Soul easily
through every duty. O there is a vast difference betwixt a man that works for
wages, and one whose work is wages to him. And here you may at once see wherein
the principal difference betwixt the Hypocrite and the real Christian lies in
the performance of duty; and also have a true account of the reason why one
perseveres in his work to the end, when the other flags. Why, here is the true
account of both; the one is moved to duty from a natural inclination to it, the
other is forced upon it by some external motives: For the Hypocrite takes not
delight in the spiritual and inward part of duty, but is secretly weary of it,
Mal. 1.13. only his ambition and self ends put him upon it as a task. But now
the upright heart goes to God as his joy, Psalm. 43.4. and says, It is good for
me to draw nigh to God, Psalm. 73. ult. When the Sabbath comes, (that Golden
Spot of the Week) oh how he longs to see the beauty of the Lord in his
Ordinances! Psalm. 27.4. and when engaged in the Worship of God, he cannot
satisfy himself in bodily service, or to serve God in the oldness of the
letter. He knows that this persuasion comes not of him that called him, Gal.
5.7, 8. He labors to engage his heart to approach to God, Jer. 30.21. And
hence those mountings of heart, and violent sallies of the desires heavenward.
And thus you see one rare advantage to glorify God actively, flowing from the
inclination of this new Creature.

2. But then secondly; Hence in like manner has the Soul as great an advantage
for sufferings: For this new Creature having such a natural tendency to God,
will enable the Soul in which it is, to break its way to God through all the
interposing obstacles and discouragements. What are persecutions, what are
reproaches, what are the fears and frowns of enemies, but so many blocks thrown
in the Souls way to keep it from God and Duty? And indeed where this Principle
of Grace is wanting, they prove inaccessible Mountains. Graceless hearts are
stalled and quite discouraged by them; but now this tendency of the Soul to God
enables the Christian to break his way through all. You may say of him in such
a case, as the Historian does of Hannibal (who forced a way over the Alps with
Fire and Vinegar) either he will find a way, or make a way. Shall Sword or
Famine, or any other Creature separate me from Christ? says an upright Soul.
No, no, it will through all to him, and that from this tendency of his new
Nature. You see in Nature, every thing has a tendency to its center; Fire will
up, do what you can to suppress it; Water will to the Sea, if it meet with
Dams, yea Mountains in its way; if it cannot bear them down, it will creep
about some other way, and wind and turn to find a passage to the Sea. God is
the center of all gracious Spirits, and Grace will carry the Soul through all
to him. This is Grace, and this is your advantage by it in the most difficult
part of your work. It will carry you through all; make the hardest work easy
and pleasant, 2 Cor. 12.10. And if great sufferings or temptations interpose
betwixt you and your God, it will break through all, and enable you to
withstand all, as it did Paul in the Text, who forced his way not only through
the fury of Enemies, but also through the entreaties and tears of Friends.

CHAP. VII.
In which the necessity of getting clear Evidences of this work of Grace in us,
in order to our readiness for sufferings is held forth; the nature of that
Evidence opened, and diverse things that cloud and obscure it removed out of the
way.

I Have done with habitual readiness, consisting in an inwrought work of Grace.
The following particulars are the things in which our actual readiness lies.
And of them that which comes next to be handled, is the getting of clear
Evidences in our own Souls that this work has been wrought on us, this will
exceedingly tend to your strengthening and comfort in a suffering hour. Blessed
Paul, who here professes himself ready both for Bonds and Death, was clear in
this point, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. 2 Timothy 1.12. And indeed had he been cloudy and dark
in this, he could not have said, I am ready. No, no, he had been in an ill case
to undertake that Journey to Jerusalem: And thou will find it a singular
advantage in dark and difficult days to have all clear and right within. Now
for the opening of this, I will show:

1. What the Evidence or Manifestation of the work of Grace is.

2. How it appears to be of such great advantage to a suffering Saint.

3. Prescribe some Rules for the obtaining of it.

1. What it is. And in short it is nothing else but the Spirits shining upon his
own work in the hearts of Believers, thereby enabling them sensibly to see and
feel it to their own satisfaction. And this is expressed in Scripture under a
pleasant variety of Metaphors. Sometimes it is called the shedding abroad of
the love of God in the heart, Romans 5.5. sometimes the lifting up of the light
of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4.6. and sometimes it is expressed without a Trope; by
Christ's manifesting himself to the Soul, John 14.21.

For the opening of it, I desire you would consider these six things.

1. That it is attainable by Believers in this life, and that in a very high
degree and measure. Many of the Saints have had it in a full measure, 1 Cor.
2.12. 1 John 3.24. John 21.15.

2. Though it be attainable by Believers, yet it is a thing separable from true
Grace, and many precious Souls have gone mourning for the want of it, Isa.
50.10. This was sometimes the case of Heman, David, Job, and multitudes more.

3. During its continuance, it is the sweetest thing in the world. It swallows
up all Troubles, and doubles all other Comforts: It puts more gladness into the
heart, than the increase of Corn and Wine, Psalm. 4.6. Suavis hora, sed brevis
mora; sapit quidem suavissime, sed gustatur rarissime, Bern.

4. Both in the continuation and removal of it the Spirit acts arbitrarily. No
man can say how long he shall walk in this pleasant Light, Psalm. 30.7. By thy
favor thou have made my Mountain stand strong: thou hiddest thy face, and I
was troubled. And when in darkness, none can say how long it will be e're that
sweet Light break forth again. God can scatter the Cloud unexpectedly in a
moment, Cant. 3.4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him
whom my Soul loves. There is such an observable difference in David's Spirit
in some Psalms, as if one man had written the beginning, and another the end of
them.

5. Though God can quickly remove the darkness and doubts of a Soul, yet
ordinarily the Saints find it a very hard and difficult thing to obtain and
preserve the Evidences of their Graces. Such is the darkness, deadness, and
deceitfulness of the heart; so much unevenness and inconstancy in their
practice, so many counterfeits of Grace, and so many wiles and devices of Satan
to rob them of their peace, that few (in comparison) live in a constant and
quiet fruition of it.

6. Notwithstanding all these things which increase the difficulty, yet God
has afforded his people a sure Light, and sufficient means, in the diligent
use and improvement whereof they may attain a certainty of the work of Grace in
them. And there is a threefold Light by which it may most clearly and
infallibly be discovered.

1. Scripture Light, which is able to discover the secrets of a man's heart to
him; and is therefore compared to the Anatomizers Knife, Heb. 4.12.

2. The Innate Light of Grace it self; or if you will the Light of Experience,
1 John 5.10. It has some properties and operations which are as essential,
necessary, and inseparable, as heat is to the fire, and may be as sensibly felt
and perceived by the Soul, Psalm. 119.20.

3. The Light of the Spirit, superadded to both the former, which is sometimes
called its Earnest, sometimes its Seal. The Spirit does both plant the habits,
excite and draw forth the acts, and also shine upon his own work that the Soul
may see it; and that sometimes with such a degree of Light, as only begets
peace, and quiets the heart, though it do not fully conquer all the doubts of
it. And at other times the heart is irradiated with so clear a Beam of Light,
that it is able to draw forth the Triumphant Conclusion, and say, Now I know the
things that are freely given me of God: I believe, and am sure.

And so much briefly for the opening of the nature of this Evidence.

2. I shall show you the necessity of it to a suffering Saint, in order to the
right management of a suffering condition.

And this will appear by the consideration of five things.

1. You will readily grant that the Christians love to God has a mighty
influence into all his sufferings for God. This Grace of love enables him
victoriously to break through all difficulties and discouragements. The Floods
cannot drown it, nor the Waters quench it, Cant. 8.6, 7. It facilitates the
greatest hardships, 1 John 5.3. And whatever a man suffer, if it be not from
this Principle, it is neither acceptable to God, nor available to himself, 1
Cor. 13.3.

But now nothing more inflames and quickens the Christians love to God, than
the knowledge of his interest in him, and the sensible perception and taste of
his love to the Soul. Our love to God is but a reflection of his own love; and
the more powerful the stroke of the direct Beam is, the more is that of the
reflex Beam also. Never does that Flame of Jah burn with a more vehement heat,
than when the Soul has the most clear manifestations of its interest in Christ
and his benefits, Luke 7.47.

It must needs be of singular use to a suffering Saint, Paul sailed was, when
it fell into a place where two Seas met, Act. 27.41. Oh how tempestuous a Sea
does that Soul sail in, that has fightings without, and fears within! How must
that poor Christians heart tremble and meditate terror, that when he retires
from troubles without, for some comfort and support within, shall find a sad
addition to his troubles from whence he expected relief against them! Hence it
was that Jeremy so earnestly deprecates such a misery, Be not thou a terror to
me, thou art my hope in the day of evil, Jer. 17.17. This is prevented by this
means: If a man have a clear breast, and all be quiet within, he is like one
that has a good Roof over his head when the Storm falls. We glory in
tribulation, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5.3, 5.

It is a Fountain of joy and comfort in the darkest and saddest hour. Romans 5.5.
and in the Christians joy in the Lord, lies much of his strength for
sufferings, Noh. 8.10. If once the Spirit droop and sink, the man is in a bad
case to suffer: holy joy, it is the Oil that makes the Chariot-wheels of the
Soul free to follow the Lord; Non tardat uncta rota. To suffer with joyfulness
for Christ is a qualification that Gods Eye is much upon in his suffering
Servants, Col. 1.11. How did the famous Worthies that went before us magnify
Christ, and glorify Religion by the holy triumphs of their faith and joy under
tribulation! One kissed the Apparator that brought him news of his
Condemnation, and was like a man transported with an excess of joy. Another
upon the pronouncing of the Sentence, kneels down, and with hands and eyes
lifted up, solemnly blesses God for such a day as that. Oh how is Christ
magnified by this! And this cannot be until interest be cleared. It Is true, the
faith of recumbency gives the Soul a secret support, and enables the Christian
to live; but the faith of Evidence keeps him lively, and prevents all those
uncomfortable and uncomely sinkings and despondencies of spirit, 2 Cor. 4.16,
17. and therefore cannot but be of singular use to a Soul at such a time.

Lastly, Heb. 11.35. Heb. 10.34. He that sees the gain and reward of suffering,
will think he is offered to his loss, when life and deliverance are set before
him upon such hard terms as sin is.

And thus you see what influence it has into a suffering condition.

3. In the next place I promised to prescribe some Rules for the attaining of
this Evidence, and the dispelling of those doubts by which it is usually
clouded in the Souls of Believers. And oh that by the faithful use of them you
may attain it against a suffering day come upon you.

And the first Rule I shall give you is this. vigorous it is, the more
evidential it must needs be, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Oh how much time
have many Christians spent in enquiring after the lowest signs of sincerity,
and what may consist with Grace; which had they spent in the diligent
improvement of the means of Grace for the increasing of it, they would have
found it a shorter cut to peace and comfort by much.

Mistake not the Rule, by which you are to try your selves, lest you give a
false judgment upon your selves. Some are apt to make those things signs of
Grace, which are not; and when the falseness of them is detected, how is that
poor Soul plunged into doubts and fears, that leaned upon them? As now, If a
man should conclude his sincerity from his diligence in attending on the Word
preached; this is but a Paralogism (as the Apostle calls it) Jam. 1.22. by
which a man deceives his own Soul: For that which is a note or mark, must be
proper to the thing notified, and not common to any thing else. There are
diverse sorts of marks; some are exclusive, the principal use of which is to
convince bold Pretenders, and discover Hypocrites: Such is that, 1 Cor. 9.9. It
is a most certain sign where these are, there is no Grace; but yet it will not
follow on the contrary, that where these are not, there is Grace. See Luke
18.11. Others are inclusive, the use of which is not so much for trying of the
truth, as the strength and degrees of Grace. As now when Faith is described by
the radiancy of it, or by some of its heroic acts, and promises made to some
raised degrees and operations of it; as that, Ephesians. 3.12. etc. Here a mistake
is easily made. Besides these, or rather betwixt these, are another sort of
marks, which are called positive marks; and these agreeing to the lowest degree
of Grace, are for the trial of the truth and sincerity of it. Such are these, 1
John 4.13. 1 John 2.3. Matthew. 5.3. Be sure to try by a proper mark.

Take heed of such sins as violate and waste^ the Conscience; Psalm. 51.8. etc.
Such are sins against Light, and the reclamations of Conscience.

Labor to shun those common mistakes that Christians make in judging of their
state;

1. Call not your condition into question upon every failing, and involuntary
lapse into sin. Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou
shall purge them away, Psalm. 65.3. In short, thou need not call thy
condition into question, provided thou find thy Spirit working as Paul's did
under the surprizals of temptation: viz. If (1) thou do approve of, and delight
in the Law, though thou fall short of it in thy practice, Romans 7.12, 14. (2) If
thy failings be involuntary, and against the resolution and bent of thy Soul,
verse. 25, 18, 19. (3) If it be the load and burden of thy Soul, verse. 24. (4)
If the thoughts of deliverance comfort thee, verse. 25.

2. Question not the truth of thy Grace, because it was not wrought in the same
way and manner in thee, as in others: For there is great variety, as to the
circumstances of time and manner, betwixt the Spirits operations upon one and
another. Compare the History of Paul's Conversion with that of the Jailer,
Zacheus, or Lydia, and see the variety of circumstances.

3. Conclude not that you have no Grace, because you feel not those
transportations and ravishing joys that other Christians speak of. If thou
can not say as Paul does, Romans 8.38. yet bless God, if thou can but breath
forth such language as that, Mark 9.24. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

4. Say not thou have no Grace, because of the high seize of some
Hypocrites, who in some things may excel thee. When some persons read the sixth
Chapter to the Hebrews, they are startled to see to what a glorious height the
Hypocrite may soar; not considering that there are these three things wherein
they excel the most glorious Hypocrite in the world. (1) That Self was never
dethroned in Hypocrites, as it is in them. All that an Hypocrite does is for
himself. (2) The Hypocrite never hated every sin, as he does; but has still
some Agag, Rimmon, or Delilah. (3) That the Hypocrite never acted in duty from
the bent and inclination of a new nature, taking delight in heavenly
employment, but is moved rather as a Clock by the weights and poises of some
external motives and advantages.

5. Conclude not you have no Grace, because you grow not so sensibly as some
other Christians do. You may be diverse ways mistaken about this: (1) You may
measure your growth by your desires, and then it appears nothing; for the
Christian aims high, and grasps at all. (2) Or by comparing your selves with
such as have larger capacities, time and advantages than you. (3) Or by
comparing your Graces with other men's Gifts, which you mistake for their
Graces. (4) Or by thinking that all growth is upward in joy, peace, and
comfort; whereas you may grow in mortification and humility, which is as true a
growth as the former. Oh! take heed of these mistakes; they have been very
prejudicial to the peace of many Christians.

Lastly, Then the Spirit of God and glory re^teth on them, 1 Pet. 4.14. That
which has been in suspense for some years, is decided and cleared in a
suffering hour. And thus I have showed you how to attain this necessary
qualification also.

CHAP. VIII.
Discovering the necessity of an improved faith for the right management of
sufferings, and directing to some special means for the improvement thereof.

THE next thing conducing to our actual readiness for Sufferings, is the
improvement of Faith to some considerable degree of strength. This is the Grace
that must do the main service in such an hour, and has the principal hand in
supporting the Christian under every burden. This is the Grace that crowns our
heads with Victory in the day of battle, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all taking the
Shield of Faith. Its true every Grace is of use, and contributes assistance:
suffering Saints have heen beholding to them all. But of this we may say, as
Solomon of the Virtuous Woman; Though many Graces have done excellently, yet
this excels them all. In this Grace ready Paul was eminent. It was the life he
daily lived, Gal. 2.20. Oh it is a precious grace, 2 Pet. 1.1. so precious that
Christ, who seldom admired at any thing, yet wondered at this, Mat. 8.10. A
victorious Grace it is that overcomes all difficulties, Mark 9.23. By this
Sword it was that all those famous Heroes, Heb. 11. achieved all those
glorious Conquests: and in every distress it may say to the Soul, as Christ to
the Disciples, John. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. This is that Sword
that has obtained so many Victories over the World, 1 John 5.4. and that
trusty Shield that has quenched so many deadly Darts of temptation, as have
been levelled at the very heart of the Christian in the day of battle. By it a
Christian lives, when all outward sensible comforts die, Hab. 2.4. Its the
ground upon which the Christian fixes his foot, and never fails under him, 2
Cor. 1.24. The necessity of it will more clearly appear, by considering how
many ways it relieves the soul in trouble, and disburthens the heart of all its
sinking loads and pressures: there are two things that sink a man's Spirit when
under sufferings; viz. The greatness of the troubles, and the weakness of the
soul to bear them; against both which Faith relieves the soul; viz. by making a
weak soul strong, and heavy troubles light.

First, It makes a weak Soul strong and able to bear; and this it does diverse
ways.

1. By purging out of the Soul those enfeebling and weakening Distempers; not
only guilt in general, which is to the Soul, as a wound upon the bearing
Shoulder, Romans 5.1. The removal whereof enables the Soul to bear any other
burden, Isa. 33.24. But it also removes Fear, that Tyrant Passion, that cuts
the Nerves of the Soul. For, as Faith comes in, so Fear goes out: Look in what
degree the Fear of God is ascendant in the Soul, proportionably the sinful fear
of the Creature declines and vanishes, Esa. 8.12, 13. This fear extinguishes
that, as the Sunshine puts out fire: The Righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove.
28.1. The word (...)signifies a young Lion in his hot blood, that knows no such
thing as fear: And look how much of the Soul is empty of Faith, so much its
filled with fear: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? Mat. 8.26.
Certainly, it is a rare advantage, to be freed from the common distraction, in
times of common destruction: and this advantage the Soul has by Faith.

2. It strengthens the Soul to bear afflictions and hardships, not only by
purging out its weakening Distempers, but by turning it self to Christ, in whom
all its strength lies, and that suitably to the several Exigencies of the Soul,
in all its Distresses. Does Darkness, like the shadow of Death, overspread the
Earth, and all the Lights of Earthly Comforts disappear, then Faith supports
the Heart, by looking to the Lord, Mic. 7.7. and this look of Faith exceedingly
revives the Heart, Psalm. 34.5. and enlightens the Soul. Does God pluck away all
Earthly Props from under your feet, and leave you nothing visible to rest upon,
in that Exigence Faith puts forth a suitable act, viz. Resting or staying upon
God, Esa. 26.3. and by this the Soul comes to be quieted and established, Psalm.
125.1. Do Temptations strive to put off the Soul from Christ, and discourage it
from leaning upon the Promise? then it puts forth an act of Resolution, Job
13.15. and so breaks its way through that discouragement. Or has the Soul been
long seeking God for deliverance out of trouble, and still there is silence in
Heaven, no Answer comes; but instead of an Answer, comes a Temptation, to throw
up the Duty, and seek to deliver it self? Then Faith puts forth another act
upon Christ, suitable to this distress, viz. An act of waiting, Isa. 49.23.
which waiting is opposed to that sinful haste which the Soul is tempted to,
Isa. 28.16. Or does God at any time call the Soul forth to some difficult
service, against which the Flesh and Carnal Reason dispute and plead? Now Faith
helps the Soul, by putting forth an act of obedience; and that whilst Carnal
Reason stands by dissatisfied, Gal. 1.16. And hence it is, that Obedience
carries the name of Faith upon it, to show its descent, Romans 16.26. Faith
encourages the Soul to obey, not only by urging Gods Command, but by giving it
Gods Warrant for its Indemnity, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Or does a poor Believer
find himself over-match'd by Troubles and Temptations, and his own inherent
strength begin to fail under the burden? then Faith leads him to an Omnipotent
God, and so secures him from fainting under his trouble, Psalm. 61.2. in the
Lord is everlasting strength. El Shaddai, is a name of encouragement to a
feeble Soul, Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. And thus you see the first particular made
good, viz. What a strengthening influence it has into a weak Soul.

Secondly, In the next place, let us see how it lightens the Christians Burden,
as well as strengthens, his back to bear.

And certainly, this Grace of Faith does strangely alter the very Nature of
Sufferings, taking away both the heaviness and horror of them; and this it
does diverse ways.

1. By committing the business to Christ, and leaving the matter with him; and
so quitting the Soul of all those anxieties and perturbations, which are the
very burden and weight of affliction, Psalm. 37.5. For certainly, that which
sinks us in days of trouble, is rather from within, from our unruly, seditious
and clamorous thoughts, than from the troubles themselves with which we
conflict: But by committing the matter to God, the Soul is quickly brought to
rest.

2. By discovering much present good in our troubles; the more good Faith
discovers in a trouble, the more supportable and easy it makes it to the Soul.
Now Faith brings in a comfortable Report, that they are not only evils, as the
troubles of the wicked are, Ezekiel. 7.5. but have an allay and mixture of much
good, Heb. 12.10. Isa. 27.9.

3. By foreseeing the end and final removal of them, and that near at hand, 2
Cor. 4.17. That which daunts and amazes men in times of trouble, is, that they
can see no end of them. Hence the heart faints, and hands hang down through
discouragement: But now Faith brings the joyful tidings of the end of troubles,
and says to the Soul, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why so disquieted
and discouraged within me? as if thy sufferings were like the sufferings of the
Damned, endless and everlasting, whereas they are but for a moment. Yet a
little, a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry, Heb. 10.37. Yet a little while, and then the days of thy mourning shall
be over.

4. By comparing our sufferings with the sufferings of others, which
exceedingly diminishes and shrinks them up: Sometimes the Believer compares
his sufferings with Christ's, and then he is ashamed that ever he should
complain and droop under them. Oh! says he, What is this to that which the
Lord Jesus suffered for me? he suffered in all his Members, Head, Hands, Side,
Feet, from all hands, Friends and Enemies, in all his Offices: Yea, in his
Soul, as well as in his Body: And indeed the sufferings of his Soul, were the
very Soul of his sufferings: sometimes he compares them with the sufferings of
others, of the Saints in former Ages: When he reads in Faith the History of
their Persecutions, he is shamed out of his Complaints, and says, Am I better
than my Fathers? Sometimes he compares them with the sufferings of the Damned:
Oh what is this to the everlasting burnings! What is a Prison to Hell? How
light and easy is it to suffer for Christ, in comparison of those sufferings
which are from Christ? And thus the Soul is quieted, and the terror of
sufferings abated.

5. Faith entitles Christ to the Believers sufferings, and puts them upon his
score; and so it exceedingly transforms and alters them: Ah! it is no small
relief, when a man can hold up the Bible, as that Martyr did at the stake, and
say, This is that which has brought me hither: Or, as the Psalmist, For thy
sake we are killed all the day long: Or, as the Apostle, Col. 1.24. I fill up
that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh.

6. Lastly, Faith ingages the presence of God, to be and abide with the Soul in
all its solitudes and sufferings: It lays hold upon the Promises made to that
purpose, Psalm. 23.2. Isa. 43.2. Heb. 13.5. John 14.18. and whilst a poor Soul
enjoys this, the very sense of troubles is swallowed up.

And thus I have given some brief hints, how Faith relieves and strengthens the
Soul in a suffering hour: The next thing is to direct you, how to improve this
excellent Grace, that it may do you such service as this in a time of need:
And, in order thereunto, I shall give you these seven Directions.

1. Attend diligently upon the Ministration of the Gospel, which is not only
the procreant, but also the conserving cause of Faith, 1 Pet. 2.2. the Doctrine
of Faith, is the Food and Nutriment of the Grace of Faith: There are its Rules,
its Encouragements, its Cordials. Thence Faith takes and treasures up its
Michtams, to which it has recourse in times of need: Every Attribute, Command,
or Promise, that shines forth there, is a Dish for Faith to feed on, but all
together are a Royal Feast; Psalm. 63.5. Some say the Land of Judea is called
the Land of the Living, in Psalm. 27.13. in respect of the Ordinances of God
which that people enjoyed: Certain it is, they are the great Instruments of
quickening Souls at first, and preserving that life it so begat in them: But
then, be sure they have Christ's stamp upon them, and that they be ministered by
his own Officers, and in his own way: And so you may reasonably expect more
fruits and influences from them, than from all private gifts and helps in the
World: For the Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of
Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. and all private helps may say, in comparison of Christ's
public Ordinances, as Gideon said to the men of Ephraim, Judge. 8.2. What have
we done in comparison of you?

2. Improve well your Sacrament seasons, those Harvest-days of Faith: This
Ordinance has a direct and peculiar tendency to the improvement and
strengthening of Faith: It is a Pledge superadded to the Promise for Faiths
sake: Heavenly and Sublime Mysteries do therein stoop down to your Senses, that
you may have the clearer apprehensions of them; and the clearer the
apprehensions are, the stronger the assent of Faith must needs be: By this Seal
also the Promise comes to be more ratified to us; and the firmer the Promise
appears to the Soul, the more bold and adventurous Faith is in casting it self
upon it: Oh! how many poor doubting trembling Souls have in such a Season,
gathered the full ripe Fruits of Assurance, from the Top-boughs of that
Ordinance!

3. Frequent actings of Faith, are rare and special means of improving it: To
him that has (i. e.) that improves and uses what he has, shall be given, Mat.
25.29. This was the way by which Paul thrived in Faith, and every other Grace
so exceedingly, that he out-grew them that were in Christ before him, 1 Cor.
15.10. It Is true, that its beginning in the Soul, is not after the manner of
other Habits, either Moral or Natural: This is not of Natural acquisition, but
by Divine Infusion; but yet its improvement is in the same manner. Oh then! if
ever you would have a flourishing Faith, rouse it up out of the dull Habit, and
live in the daily exercise of it.

4. Go to Jesus Christ, who is the Author and Finisher of Faith, and cry to
him, as Mark 9.24. Lord increase my Faith: Yea, beg the assistance of others
Prayers in this behalf, as the Apostle did, 1 These. 3.10. 2 These. 1.11. Faith
animates Prayer, and Prayer increases Faith.

5. Improve times of affliction for the increase of Faith: For certainly,
sanctified afflictions do notably exercise and increase this Grace, 1 Pet. 1.7.
In times of Prosperity, we see not what stock of Faith we have: We live so much
upon things seen, that we cannot many times tell whether we have Faith or no:
But when difficult days come, then we must get out our whole subsistence and
livelihood by Faith, Hab. 2.4. Yea, then we have many Proofs and Experiments of
Gods fidelity in the Promises, which is a choice help to Faith, 2 Cor. 1.10.

6. Keep Catalogues of all your remarkable Experiences; treasure them up as
food for your Faith in time to come: Oh! it is a singular encouragement and
heartning to Faith, when it can turn over the Records of Gods dealing with you
in years past, and say as Joshua, Not one thing has failed, Jos. 23.14. When
it can say so of Promises, that have already had their accomplishments, then
they will be apt to say concerning those yet to be accomplished, as Elizabeth
said to Mary, Luke 1.45. Blessed is the Soul that believes, for there shall be
a performance of those things which are told it by the Lord.

These Experiments are the Food of Faith: Psalm. 74.14. Thou brakest the Heads
of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to thy people inhabiting the
Wilderness, (i. e.) That famous Experience of the Power and Love of God in
their Red Sea Deliverance, where he destroyed that Sea Monster Pharaoh, and his
Host, was Meat to the Faith of Gods Israel in the Wilderness afterward. We
often find Christ charging the peoples unbelief on a bad memory, Mat. 16.8, 9.
And hence it was, that the Lord commanded the Israelites to keep Journals of
every days Occurrences, Numb. 13.1, 2. It Is a thousand pities such choice helps
should be lost. Oh! if you could but remember, how the Lord has appeared for
you in former Exigencies, and how often he has shamed you for your unbelief,
it would exceedingly animate your Faith, both in present and future distresses,
Mic. 6.5.

7. Lastly, Beware of Sense, which is the supplanter of Faith. O if you live
upon things earthly, you put Faith out of its Office: things earthly have an
enmity to Faith. This is the victory by which we overcome the world, even our
Faith, 1 John 5.4. Overcoming notes a conflict, and conflicts infer
oppositions. Oh you that live so much by sight and sense on things visible,
what will you do when in David's or Paul's case, Psalm. 142.4. 2 Timothy 4.16. when
all outward encouragements and stays shall utterly fail. What had Abraham done,
if he had not been able to believe against hope, (i. e.) such an hope as is
founded in sense and reason.

Reader, I advise and charge thee in the Name of the Lord, and as thou hopest
to live when visible comforts die, that thou be diligent in the improvement and
preparation of this excellent Grace of Faith: if it fail, thou failest with it;
and as thy Faith is, so art thou. Consult all the Cloud of Witnesses, and see
if thou can find a man among them, that did not atchieve the Victory by his
Faith. Had they not all been run down by the furious assaults of temptation,
and instead of a Cloud of Witnesses, been so many Pillars of Salt, and
Monuments of reproach and shame to Religion, if their Faith had failed in its
trial.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the necessity and usefulness of Christian fortitude, in order to
sufferings, is evinced; with a brief account of its nature, and the means of
attaining it.

THe next Grace which concurs to the completing of our actual readiness for
sufferings, is Christian Fortitude, or holy courage; which must say in thy
heart in a time of danger, as Elijah once did, As the Lord lives, I will show
my self. This also is a choice part of your preparation work. In this Grace our
Apostle was Eminent: When he was told, Bonds and Afflictions waited for him; he
could say, That none of those things moved him, Acts 20.24. yea, when he was to
appear before the Lion Nero, and not a man would own or stand by him, yet he
stands his ground, resolving rather to die on the place, then dishonourably to
recede from his Principles and Profession, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. He set the World,
with all its threats and terrors, lower than it set him. Oh how conspicuous
was this Grace in all those Heroes that have past on before us! And if ever you
hope to stand in the evil day, and be fetched off the Field with honor, you
must rouse up and awaken your courage for God: And the necessity thereof will
appear upon these four considerations.

1. Because the success and prevalence of Satan's temptations in the hour of
persecution depends upon the fainting and overthrow of this Grace. Wherefore
does he raise persecutions in the world, but because such terrible things are
fitted to work upon the passion of carnal fear, which rises with those dangers,
and makes the Soul as a tumultuous Sea. This is it he aims at, Neh. 6.13. This
is a multiplying passion, that represents dangers more and greater than they
are, and so drives the Soul into the very Net and Snare laid by the Devil to
take it. Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare; which was sadly
exemplified in Abraham, Genesis 12.12. and diverse others of the Saints. If he can
but subdue this Grace, he will quickly bring you to capitulate for life and
liberty upon the basest and most dishonorable terms; therefore the preparation
of this Grace is so exceedingly necessary.

2. Because this is the Grace that honors Jesus Christ abundantly, when you
are brought upon the Stage for him.

There is a great Solemnity at the suffering and trial of a Saint: Heaven,
Earth, and Hell are Spectators, observing the issue, and how the Saints will
acquit themselves in that hour. We are made a spectacle, says the Apostle. The
word is (...), we are set as upon a Theater in public view, 1 Cor. 4.9. God,
Angels, and Saints, wait to see the glorious triumphs of their Faith and
Courage, reflecting honor upon the Name and Cause of Christ. Devils and wicked
men gape for an advantage by their cowardice. Certainly very much lies now upon
the Christians hands. Should he faint and give ground, how will it furnish the
triumphs of Hell, and make Christ's Enemies vaunt over him, as if his love ran
so low in the hearts of his people, that they durst not adventure any thing for
him: or if notwithstanding their brave words and glorious profession, they
durst not trust their own principles when it comes to the trial! But if now
they play the men, and discover an holy gallantry of Spirit and resolution for
Christ, how will it daunt the enemies, and make them say as Marcus Bishop of
Aretheusa made one of Julian's Nobles, present at his torments, to say
concerning him, We are ashamed, O Emperor; the Christians laugh at your
cruelty! And how will God himself rejoice and glory over them, as he once did
over Job when he fetched him with honor off that first Field! Job 2.3. Still
he holds fast his integrity.

3. Your own peace is wrapped up in it, as well as Gods glory. Is it nothing
think you, to be freed from those Vultures and Harpyes, that feed upon the
hearts of men at such times? Surely God reckons, that he promises a very great
mercy to his people, when he promises it, Prove. 1. ult. Psalm. 112.7. When
Borromaeus was told of some that lay in wait to take away his life, it troubled
him not; but he said, An Deus est in mundo pro nihilo? What, is God in the
world for naught? and like to this was the answer of Silentiarus in the like
case; Si Deus mei curam non habet, quid vivo? If God take not care for me, how
do I live? O this is it that brings you to an holy quietude of Spirit in times
of confusion and distraction, which is a choice mercy.

4. Your magnanimity is of special use to other Saints, who are following you
in the same path of sufferings. If you faint, it is like the fainting of a
Standard Bearer in an Army: You bring thereby an evil report upon the Cross of
Christ, as the first Spies did upon the Land of Ca^aan. And a like influence
with that it is like to have on your Brethren; so that there is a necessity of
improving this Grace also, before you can say with Paul you are ready.

2. But what is this Christian fortitude, and wherein does it consist?

I answer briefly, It is an holy boldness in the performance of difficult
duties, flowing from Faith in the call of God, and his promise to us in the
discharge of them.

And so you have the nature of it in these four particulars:

1. It is an holy boldness, not a natural or sinful boldness, arising either
from the natural constitution, or evil disposition of the mind.

2. It is expressed about duties for truth, not error, Jerem. 9.3. for the
Interest of Christ, not o^ the flesh.

3. The season in which it appears is, When duties are surrounded and beset
with difficulties and dangers, Dan. 3.16. Dan. 6.10.

4. The Fountain whence it flows is Faith, and that as it respects the command
and call of God to duty, Acts 16.10. and his promise to us in the discharge
thereof, Josh, 1.5, 6.

And this Grace stands opposed both to the fear of man in the Cause of God,
Heb. 11.27. and to Apostasy from the Truth for fear of suffering. Thus briefly
of the nature of it.

3. In the last place I shall lay down some Rules for the promoting and
improvement of it, and so finish this Chapter.

Now there are ten Rules heedfully to be observed for the breeding of holy
courage in the breast of a Saint in evil times.

And the first Rule is this, Tim. 2.4. You meet not with a man of courage for
God, but had his heart dead to earthly things; so it was with Paul, Phil. 3.8.
Since the Apostles days we scarce meet with a greater example of holy
magnanimity than Luther; and if you read his story, you will find few men ever
set a lower rate on the world then he. All the Turkish Empire in his eye was
but a Crumb cast to the Dogs. Germana est haec bestia, pecuniam non curat,
Money could not tempt him.

Suffer not guilt to lie upon your Consciences: Romans 5.1, 2, 3. The Spirit of a
sound mind is opposed to the Spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1.7. Now that found mind is
a mind or spirit that is not wounded, and made sick and infirm by guilt. Oh
what black Fogs and Mists arise out of Guilt, which becloud our Evidences, and
fill us with fears and discouragements! Genesis 42.21, 22.

Clear your Call to difficult services; Josh. 1.9. Then a man may promise
himself Gods presence and protection, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. But whilst a man is
dubious here, and cannot tell whether it be his duty or not, that he is
engaging in; how can he have courage to hazard any thing for it? For thinks he,
I may suffer much from men, and yet have no thanks of God for it, 1 Pet. 2.9.
And further till a man be clear in thi^ he cannot commit his Cause to God. And
it is a sad thing to be cut off from so choice a relief as that is, 1 Pet 4.19.

Get right notions and apprehensions of your enemies. magnify the Creature, as
if he could do more than he can, and thereby disable our selves from doing what
we should. Possess your fouls with the belief of these five things concerning
them. (1) That they are poor weak enemies, Isa. 40.15, 17, 22. but as a swarm
of Gnats in the air. See how God describes them, Isa. 51.13, 14, (2) That
little power they have is limited by your God, who has the bounding and
ordering of it, John 19.11. Psalm. 76.10. (3) They carry guilt upon them, which
makes them more timorous then you. Isa. 8.12. Their fear is a strange fear. (4)
They only use carnal weapons against you which cannot touch your souls. If they
were praying enemies that could engage God against you, they would be
formidable Enemies indeed; but this they cannot do. The largest Commission that
any of them ever had from God, extended but to the bodies and bodily
concernments of the Saints, Luke 12.4, 5. They cannot thunder with an arm like
God, nor blot your name out of the book of Life, nor take away your part out of
the New Jerusalem; therefore fear not man. (5) Your Enemies are Gods Enemies;
and God has espoused your Cause and Quarrel. The more cruel they are, the
kinder he will be to you, John 9.34, 35.

Labor to engage the presence of God with you in all places and conditions.
Josh. 1.9. Psalm. 118.6. A weak Creature assisted and encouraged by the presence
of a great God, will be able to do and suffer great things. Poor Flesh in the
hand of an Almighty Spirit acts above it self. A little Dog, if his Master be
by and animates him, will seize upon a greater Beast than himself, though he
would run from him were his Master absent. Our courage ebbs and flows, as the
manifestations of the Divine Presence do. Oh get thy self once within the Line
of that Promise, Isa. 43.1, 2. and thou art invincible.

Get an high estimation of Jesus Christ, value him highest, will adventure for
him farthest. Magnanimous Luther how inestimable a value did he set upon the
Truths of Christ! Ruat Coelum, etc. Let Heaven rush, rather than a crumb of
Truth should perish. Thou will never be a man of zeal and courage for Christ's
interest, until that interest of Christ have swallowed up all thine own
Interests. No sooner is the Soul acquainted with, and interested in Christ, but
he heartily wishes well to all his affairs and concernments, Psalm. 45.3, 4.
This is that which puts mettle and resolution for Christ into the soul.

Beware you be not cheated with Maxims of carnal policy, mistaken for
Christian prudence. a thing as Christian prudence; but this does not teach men
to shun all costly and difficult duties, and prostitute Conscience to save the
Skin. But a man of understanding walks uprightly, Prove. 15.21.

Look upon the inside of Troubles for Christ,

View the issue and reward of sufferings by an eye of Faith: Heb. 10.34. Upon
this account it is the Saints have so slighted and contemned them, Romans 8.18. 2
Cor. 4.16 17. But then see that you act your Faith, (1) Upon the certainty of
it: Look at it as a most real and substantial thing, Heb. 11.1. (2) View it as
a great and glorious reward. And (3) as near at hand: And then say to thy soul,
Come on my soul, come on; See thou the joy set before thee! the Crown of
glory ready to be set on thy head by the hand of a righteous God. Oh what
compare is there betwixt those Sufferings, and that Glory!

Propound to your selves the best patterns and examples. Heb. 12.1. Jam. 5.10.
Who would be afraid to enter the Lists, and grapple with that enemy that he
has seen so often foiled, and that by poor weak Christians? See how the enemy
with whom you are to grapple, has been beaten hand to hand, and triumphed over
by poor women and and children; they had as great infirmities, and you have as
gracious assistances as those that are gone before you.

CHAP. X.
Discovering the necessity of an Heart mortified to all Earthly and Temporal
Enjoyments, in order to the right managing of a suffering condition: with
several Directions for the attaining thereof.

THE next thing wherein your actual readiness for Bonds or Death consists,
is, in the mortification of your Affections to all Earthly Interests and
Enjoyments, even the best and sweetest of them: Till this be done, in so me
measure, you are not fit to be used in any such service for the Lord, 2 Timothy
1.21. The living World, is the very Life of Temptations: The travailing pains
of Death, are strenger and sharper upon none, than those that are full of Sense
and Self. As you see in Nature, what Conflicts and Agonies strong and lively
persons suffer when they die! When others, in whom Nature is decayed and spent
before hand, die away without half that pain, even as a Bird in a shell.
Corruption in the Saints, is like the Sap in green Wood, which resists the
fire, and will not burn well, till it be dried up. Prepared Paul had an Heart
mortified, in a very high degree, to all the Honor and Riches of the World,
accounting them all but Trifles, Gal. 6.14. 1 Cor. 4.3, 4.

The need of this will be evinced by these five Considerations.

1. Unless the Heart be mortified to all Earthly enjoyments, they will appear
great and glorious things in your eye and estimation: and if so, judge what a
Task you will have, to deny and leave them all in a suffering hour. It is
Corruption within, that puts the Luster and Glory upon things without: It Is the
Carnal Eye only that gazes admiringly after them, 2 Cor. 5.16. And hence the
Lust is put, to express the Affection, 1 John 2.16. because all that inordinate
affection we have to them, arises from our high estimation of them, and that
estimation from our Lusts, that represent them as great and glorious: Therefore
certainly, it will be difficult (if not impossible) to deny them, till they
have lost their glory in your Eye; and that they will never do, till those
Lusts within you, that put that Beauty and Necessity upon them, be first
crucified. As for instance, What a Glory and Necessity does the Pride of Men
put upon the Honor and Credit of the World, so that they will rather choose to
die, than survive it! but to a mortified Soul it is a small matter, 1 Cor. 4.3.
So for Riches, how much are they adored, till our Lusts be mortified, and then
they are esteemed but Dung and Dross, Phil. 3.8. It Is our Corruption that
paints and gilds over these things: When these are crucified, those will be
lightly esteemed.

2. Mortification of Corruptions is that which recovers an healthful state of
Soul: Sin is to the Soul, what a Disease is to the Body; and Mortification is
to sin, what Physic is to a Disease. Hence those that are but a little
mortified, are in a comparative sense called Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. and Babes,
verse. 2. in respect of weakness. Now, suffering Work, being some of the
Christians hardest Labor and Exercise, he cannot be fitted for it, until his
Soul be in an healthful state: A sickly man cannot carry heavy Burdens, or
endure hard Labors and Exercises: The sick Soldier is left behind in his
Quarters, or put into the Hospital, whilst his Fellows are dividing the
spoils, and obtaining glorious Victories in the Field. To this sense some
expound Romans 8.13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through
the Spirit, mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Where, as Death is
put to note a languishing state of Soul, whilst Mortification is neglected: So
Life is put to express an healthful and comfortable state; vivere pro valere;
so that upon this account also the necessity of it appears.

3. Your Corruptions must be mortified, else they will be raging and violent in
the time of Temptation, and like a Torrent, sweep away all your Convictions and
Resolutions. It Is sin unmortified within, that makes the Heart like Gunpowder;
so that when the Sparkles of Temptation fly about it, (and they fall thick in a
suffering hour) they do but touch and take. Hence, the Corruptions of the World
are said to be through Lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. With these internal unmortified Lusts,
the Tempter holds correspondence: and these be the Traitors that deliver up our
Souls into his hands.

4. Unless you be diligent and successful in this Work, though you should
suffer, yet not like Christians, you will but disgrace Religion, and the Cause
for which you suffer: For it is not simple suffering, but suffering as a
Christian, that reflects Credit on Religion, and finds acceptance with God. If
you be envious, fretful, discontented and revengeful, under your sufferings,
what Honor will this bring to Christ? Is not this altogether unlike the
Example of your Lord? Isa. 53.7. and the behavior of suffering Saints? 1 Cor.
4.13. Yet thus it will be, if your Pride, Passion, and Revenge, be not first
subdued: For what are the breakings forth of such distempers of Spirit, but as
the flushes of Heat in the Face from an ill-affected Liver? Most certain it is,
that all these Evils are in your Natures; and as certain it is, they will rise
like Mud and filth from the bottom of a Lake, when some eminent Trial shall
rake you to the bottom; Natura vexata prodit seipsam.

5. Lastly, Mortification must be studied and plied with diligence; else you
will find many Longings and Hankerings after Earthly Enjoyments and Comforts,
which will prove a snare to you: What is sin, but the corrupt and vitiated
appetite of the Creature, to things that are Earthly and sensual, relishing
more sweetness and delight in them, than in the blessed God? And what is
Sanctification, but the rectifying of these inordinate affections, and placing
them on their proper Object? A regenerate and mortified Christian tastes not
half that sweetness in forbidden fruits that another does: Set but Money before
Judas, and see how eagerly he catches at it. -- What will you give me, and I
will betray him. Set but Life, Liberty, or any such Bait before an unmortified
Heart, and how impotent is he to withstand them, as offered in a Temptation. Oh
those unmortified Lusts! how do they make men hanker, long, and their Lips
water (as we use to say) after these things? This makes them break Prison,
decline sufferings, though upon the basest terms: Whereas a mortified
Christian can see all these things set before him, yea offered to him, and
refuse them, Heb. 10.35. It is with them much as it was with old Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.35. when Nature is decayed, they find but little pleasure in natural
actions. Eccles. 12.1. And look as the Body of sin decays and languishes, so do
these Longings also: It weans the Soul from them all, and enables it to live
very comfortably without them, Psalm. 131.1. Phil 4.12. There needs no more to
be said, to evince the necessity of Mortification, and discover what influence
it has into a Christians readiness for sufferings.

It remains therefore, that I open to you some of the principal Corruptions,
about which it mostly concerns you, to bestow pains e're sufferings come. Now
look as there are four principal Enjoyments, in which you are like to be tried,
viz. Estate, Name, Liberty, Life; so the Christians Work in suffering times,
lies in mortifying these four special Corruptions, viz. First, The Love of the
World. Secondly, Ambition. Thirdly, Inordinate affectation of freedom and
pleasure. Fourthly, Excessive love of life.

1. For the love of this World, away with it, crucify it, crucify it: Down
with this Idol, and let it be dethroned in all that intend to abide with Christ
in the hour of Temptation: How else will you take the spoiling of your goods?
How will you be able to part with all for Christ, as these blessed Souls did?
It grieves my heart to see how many Professors of Religion are carried captive
at the Chariot Wheels of a bewitching world. Oh! good had it been for many
Professors, if they had never tasted so much of the sweetness of it. Sirs, I
beg you, for the Lords sake, down with it in your Estimations, down with it in
your Affections, else Temptations will down with you e're long. I shall offer
five or six Helps for the crucifying of it.

First, Consider your Espousals to Christ, and how you have chosen and
professed him for your Lord and Husband: Therefore, your doting upon the World,
is no less than Adultery against Christ, James 4.4. If Christ be your Husband,
he must be a Covering to your Eyes; an unchaste Glance upon the World wounds
him.

Secondly, The more you prize it, the more you will be tormented by it: Did you
prize and love it less, it would disquiet and vex you less: It'ts our doting
on it, that makes it draw blood at parting.

Thirdly, Get true Scripture-notions of the world, and rectify your Judgments
and Affections by them. If you will have the true Picture and Representation of
it drawn by the Hand of God himself, see 1 John 2.16. It Is nothing else but
Lust that puts that Luster upon it: It has but a Fantastic Glory, and that
also passes away: What is become of them that ruffled it out in the World but
one hundred years ago? What could the World do for them? Are they not all gone
down to the sides of the Pit? But ke that does the will of God abides for ever.

Fourthly, Study and contemplate Christ, and the things above more: This would
vail all its Glory, and kill it at the Root, Phil. 3.18, 19. Just as a man that
has been gazing upon the Sun, when he takes off his Eye from that bright and
glorious Creature, and looks to the Earth, there is a Vail of Darkness
overspreading the Face of it, that he can see nothing. I wonder how such as
pretend to live above, and enjoy communion with God, can ever relish such
sweetness in the World, or have their hearts enticed and captivated by it?

Fifthly, Remember always, that by your love and delight in worldly things, you
furnish the Devil with the chiefest Bait he has to catch, and destroy your
Souls. Alas! 'were your Hearts but dead to these things, he would want an
Handle to catch hold on. What has he more to offer you, and tempt you off from
Christ with, but a little Money? or some such poor Temporal Rewards: And how
little would that Soul be moved by such a Temptation, thot looks on it all but
as Dirt.

Sixthly, Lastly take notice of the approaches of Eternity; Remember you are
almost at the end of Time: and when you come to lanch out into that endless
Ocean, how will these things look then? It seems glorious, whilst you are in
the chase and pursuit of it; but, upon a Deathbed, you will overtake and come
up with it, and then you will see what a deceitful and vain thing it is: Stand by
the Beds of dying men, and hear how they speak of it. Oh the difference betwixt
our apprehensions then, and now! Thus labor to wean off your Affections, and
crucify them to the World.

2. Mortify your Ambition, and vain Affectation of the Repute and Credit of
the World: Oh stand not on so vain a thing as this! judge it but a small thing
to be judged of man, to have your Names cast out as evil: Let not Scoffs and
Reproaches be such terrible things to you. It is, without doubt, a great trial;
else the Holy Ghost had not added a peculiar Epithete to it, which is not given
to any other of the sufferings of the Saints: not cruel Tortures, nor cruel
Stonings, Burnings, slayings with the Sword; but cruel mockings, Heb. 11.36.

Yet learn to be dead to and unaffected with these things; set the reproaching
World as light, and as low as it sets you: Despise the shame, as your Master
Christ did, Heb. 12.2. and to promote Mortification in this, take these Helps:

1. Consider this is no new or strange thing that has happened to you: The
holiest of men have past through the like, if not worse Trials, Heb. 10.33.
Psalm. 44.14. Reproaches have been the Lot of the best men. They called
Athanasius Sathanasius; Cyprianus Coprianus, a gatherer of Dung; Blessed Paul a
pestilent fellow: Doctor Story threw a Faggot at sweet Mr. Denlies Face, as he
was singing a Psalm in the midst of the flames, saying, I have spoiled a good
old Song.

2. It may be Religion has been reproached and scoffed at for your sakes; and
if so, think it not much to be reproached for Religions sake.

3. It Is much better to be reproached-by men for discharging Duty, than by your
own Consciences for the neglect of it: If all be quiet within, never be moved
at the noise and clamor without: if you have a good Roof over your Head, be
not troubled though the Winds and Storms bluster abroad, 1 Pet. 4.14. Take heed
what you do, and be heedless what the World says.

4. Always remember, that you neither stand or fall at the Worlds Judgment, and
therefore have the less reason to be troubled at it, 1 Cor. 4.3. If your
condition were to be cast to Eternity by it, it were somewhat.

5. There is a worth and excellency in the Reproaches of Christ, as bad as they
seem; and such an excellency, as is not to be matched by any Earthly Enjoyment,
Heb. 11.26. The Reproaches of Christ are of more worth, than the Treasures of
Egypt, though Egypt then was the Magazeen of the World for Treasures. The
Apostles counted them their honors, Acts 5.41. When Ludovicus Marsacus, a
Knight of France, saw those that were to suffer with him in the Chains, and
that they put none upon him, because of the Nobility of his Birth, he said to
the Executioner, Cur me non quoque Torque donas, and illustris illius ordinis
militem non creas? Why do you not honor me with a Chain too, and create me a
Knight of that Noble Order?

6. Lastly, should Scoffs and Reproaches scare you from Christ and Duty; then,
though you should escape the Reproaches of men, yet shall you fall under the
everlasting Contempt of God, Angels, and good Men, Therefore, Fear ye not the
Reproaches of men that shall die, nor be afraid of their revilings, for the
Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat them like Woo^;
but my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my Salvation from Generation to
Generation, Isa. 51.7, 8.

3. Mortify your inordinate offectation of liberty, pleasure, and delicate
living O let not a Prison seem so formidable to you. It Is true, as Christ told
Peter, Joh. 21.18. When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst
whither thou would; but when thou shall be old, thou shall strotch forth thy
hands, another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not. You
have now your liberty to go whither you will, and it is a precious mercy if well
improved: The Birds of the Air (as one says) had rather be in the Woods at
liberty, though lean and hungry, than in a Golden Cage with the richest Fare.
But yet, if God will call you to deny this also for Christ, see that you be
ready to be bound as Paul was, and receive the Chain and Bonds of Christ with
thanksgiving: To which end, consider,

1. That the affliction, in such cases of Restraint, is more from within, than
from without you. There Is no place but may be delectable to you, if your heart
be heavenly, and the presence of God be engaged with you. What a sweet Night
had Jacob at Bethel? Paul and Silaes in the Stocks? See that precious Letter of
Pomponius Algerius.

Transtulit in caelum Christi praesentia claustrum;
Quid faciet caelo? quae Caelum jam creat antro.
It Is your own Unbelief and Impatiency, that gives you more trouble than the
Condition.

2. No Keeper can keep the Comforter from you, if you be the Lords Prisoners,
Act. 16. if they could bar out the Spirit from you, it would be a dismal place
indeed: But ordinarily, there the Saints have their clearest Visions of God,
and sweetest presence of the Spirit: You are the Lords Freemen, whilst Men's
Prisoners: All the World cannot divest you of the state of liberty Christ has
purchased for you, John. 8.36.

3. Though a Prison look sad and dismal, yet it is not Hell: Oh bless God for
that, that is a sad Prison indeed! Beloved, Men have their Prisons, and God has
his: Gods Prison is a terrible Prison, indeed; Thousands are now there in
Chains, 1 Pet. 3.19. and there you deserved to have been sent long ago: If God
exchange an Hell for a Prison, have you any cause to complain?

4. How obdure and cruel soever men are to you, yet the Lord Jesus is kind and
tenderhearted to his Prisoners; he puts the kindnesses that any show them upon
his own account, Mat. 25.36. He looks down from Heaven to hear the sighings and
groanings of his Prisoners, Psalm. 102.20. He will tenderly sympathize with you
in all your Prison-Straights, and Troubles.

5. A Prison has been hanfel'd and perfumed by the best and holiest of men in
all Ages, 1 Kings 22.27. Jer. 32, 2. Mat. 4.12. Acts 5.18. Acts 26.10. God has
made it a settled School of Discipline to them.

6. Should you, to avoid a Prison, commit a sin, instead of being Man's
Prisoner, you shall be clapped up by God: for he has a Prison for your Souls
even in this World, Psalm. 142.7. and this is ten thousand times more dreadful,
than any Dungeon in the World. Oh it is a dark Prison! not a Cranny to let in
one Beam of Gods Countenance upon your poor Souls. What a sad exchange have you
made then?

7. Consider what a ground of Comfort GOD has laid in that Word, Rev. 2.10. to
obviate the Fears and Terrors incident to us in such a condition: God has
limited Satan and his Instruments, both for time, number, and all circumstances
of the trial.

8. Lastly, You do not know what a Mercy may be in it: It may be a time of
retirement from the World, and the Clamours and Distractions that are abroad.
These days of Imprisonment may be your Holy Days; as a Prisoner of Christ once
called them.

4. Get an Heart mortified to the excessive and inordinate love of life: This,
I confess, is the highest and hardest point of Self-denial, because it wraps up
all other Self Interests in it. But yet consider,

First, Though life be very dear, yet Jesus Christ is ten thousand times dearer
than thy Life: If thou be a Saint, he is the Life of thy Life, and the length
of thy days; and in comparison of him, and his glory, Saints should, and have
despised and slighted their Lives, Luke. 14.26. Rev. 12.11.

Secondly, Die you must; and if by shrinking from Christ, you should protract a
miserable Life for a few days longer, in the mean time losing that which is
better that life, Psalm. 63.3. Mat. 10.39. Oh when you lie upon your Deathbed,
you will wish, that you had obeyed Gods Call, and so have departed in peace.

Thirdly, If you have cordially covenanted with Christ (as all sincere
Believers have done) then have you yielded up your lives to him, to be disposed
for his glory, Rom 14.7. So that look, as Christ both lived and died for you;
so, ought you to live as Christ: And all the excellency you see in life,
consists in that reference and subserviency it has to his glory. I say then,
if you have understandingly and cordially transacted in a Covenant-way with
him, your care will not be, so much how to shun Death, as by what Death you may
most glorify God, John 21.19. And certainly, you can never lay them down upon
a more honorable or comfortable account than in his cause, and for his sake.
It was a great trouble to Luther, that he carried his blood to his Grave.

Fourthly, To die for Christ, is one of the highest Testifications of your Love
to Christ, that you are capable of, Joh. 13.37. Yea, it is such a Testification
of your Love to the Lord Jesus, as Angels are not capable of making.

Fifthly, Why should you decline even a violent death for Christ, when as the
bitterness of death is past, and there is no Hell following the pale Horse? It
cannot separate you from Christ, Romans 8.38.

Sixthly, Think what a death Christ suffered for you: in which the fullness of
the Wrath both of God and Man met together, so that he was fore amazed; yet
with desire, did he desire it for your sakes.

7. Lastly, Think what a life you shall have with Christ, as soon as this is
delivered up to, and for him, 2 Timothy 2.12. It is but wink, and you shall see
God.

Oh that these things might provoke you to follow on, and ply the Work of
Mortification.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein is opened the singular advantage that suffering Saints have, by their
skill, and in-sight into the Methods and Mysteries of Satan's Temptations; some
of those Wiles of Satan opened; and Rules for the avoiding of the danger
briefly prescribed.

THE hazards and dangers of Christians, in times of Perfecution, arise not so
much from their Sufferings, as from the Temptations that always attend and are
by Satan planted upon their Sufferings: for the most part, Sufferings and
Temptations go together, Heb. 11.37. And therefore, it behooves such as are, or
expect to be called to Sufferings, to dive into the Mysteries of Temptations,
and be well acquainted with the Enemies Designs upon them. So was Paul, and so
he supposes all others to be, that engage in the same Cause; We are not
ignorant of his Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. There is a manifold advantage redounding
to suffering Saints thereby.

1. He that is well acquainted with the Methods of Temptation, will be the
better able to descry the first approaches and beginnings of it; and a
Temptation discovered, is more then half conquered. It is a special Artifice of
Satan, to shuffle in his Temptations as undiscernibly as may be into the Soul;
for he knows, that in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird, Prove.
1.17. And therefore, he ordinarily makes a suffering season, to be a tempting
season; because sufferings, like Fire to Iron, make it impressive and operable,
they do ordinarily put the Soul into an hurry and distraction, and so gives him
an advantage, to tempt the Soul with less suspicion, and greater success. But
now, a skilful Christian, that is acquainted with his Wiles, will discern when
he begins to enter into temptation; as Christ's expression is, Luke 22.46. and
so check the Temptation in its first Rife, when it is weakest; and most easily
broken. Doubtless, one Reason why so many fall by Temptation, is, because it is
got within them, and has prevailed far, before it be discovered to be a
Temptation.

2. He that is well acquainted with Satan's Methods of tempting, will not only
discern it sooner than another; but also knows his Work and Duty, and how to
manage the Conflict with it, which is a great matter. There are many poor Souls
that labor under strong Temptations, and know not what to do: They go up and
down complaining, from Christian to Christian, whilst the Judicious Christian
plies the Throne of Grace with strong Gries. See 2 Cor. 12.8. keeps up his
Watch, Luke 22.46. countermines the Temptation, by assaulting that Corruption
by endeavors of Mortification, which Satan assaults by Temptation, 1 Cor. 9.27.

3. Lastly, To name no more; he that is best acquainted with the Mystery of
Temptation, and can maintain his ground against it, he shall be the persevering
Christian under Persecutions, and the victorious Christian over them. Here lies
the main Design of Satan, in raising Persecution against the Saints. It is not
so much their Blood that he thirsts after, as their Fall by Temptation: and
all Persecutions are designed by him, to introduce his Temptations. These work
upon our Fear, and Fear drives us into his Trains and Snares, Prove. 29.25. The
Devils Work in raising Persecution, is but as the Fowlers work, in beating the
Bush in the Night, when the Net is spread to take the Birds, which he can
affright out of their Coverts. He that understands this, is not easily moved by
the strongest Opposition from his Place and Duty; and so is like to prove the
most constant and invincible Christian in Times of Persecution.

Oh then how necessary is it, that since all Persecutions are intended as means
to promote Temptation: and that skill and insight into these Designs of Satan,
so advantages us to frustrate his Designs in both? I say, how necessary is it,
that you should be all instructed wherein the strength of Temptation lies; as
also how to resist those strong and dangerous Temptations, which your
Sufferings only are intended to usher in, and make way for?

It will not be unseasonable or impertinent then in this Chapter to show you;
First, wherein the force and efficacy of Temptations lies: Secondly, what you
are to do, when in a suffering hour such Temptations shall assault you. And
first,

1 Qu. Wherein does the efficacy and power of Temptation lie?

Sol. I answer, It lies principally in three things:

1. In the kind and nature of the Temptation.

2. In the Crast and Policy of Satan in managing them.

3. In that secret Correspondency, that Satan has with our own Corruptions.

1. It lies in the kind and nature of the Temptation it self: For it is most
certain, that all Temptations are not alike forcible and dangerous. Some are
ordinarily more successful then others; and such are these that follow.

1. Strange and unusual Temptations, I mean not such as none have been troubled
with before us; for there is not a Dart in Satan's Quiver, but has been let fly
at the Breasts of other Saints, before it was levelled at ours, 1 Cor. 10.13.
But by strange and unusual, I mean such, as the People of GOD are but rarely
troubled with, and possibly we were never exercised with before. These are the
more dangerous, because they daunt and amaze the Soul, and ordinarily beget
despondency, even as some strange Disease would do, that we know not what to
make of, nor can learn that others have been sick of.

2. Mark them for most dangerous Temptations, that are ad^pted and suited to
your proper sin, or constitution evil: For certainly, that is the most
dangerous Nick and Crisis of Temptation when it tries a man there. Now if he be
not truly gracious, he falls by the Root irrecoverably, Luke 22.5, 6. Or if
sincere, yet without special assistance, and extraordinary vigilance, he falls
scandalously, 2 Samuel 11.2. compared with 1 Samuel 16.12.

3. When it is a Spiritual Temptation, which rises undiscernably out of a
Christians Duties. This is the less suspected, because Temptations usually come
from the strength and liveliness of Corruptions; but this, from the Slaughter
and Conquests we make of them. Duties, and enlargements in them, which are the
Poison of other Lusts, proves the Food and Fuel of this, 1 Cor. 4.7, 8. And
how much the more covert and close any Temptation is, by so much the more
dangerous it is.

2. The strength and efficacy of temptation lies much in the skill and policy
of Satan in the management of it: And hence they are called wiles, methods, and
devises, 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.11. and himself an old Serpent, Rev. 12.9. And
amongst the rest of his deep and desperate stratagems these following are
remarkable.

1. In employing such instruments to man^ge his temptations as are least
suspected, and have the greatest influence. A Teacher, Gal. 2.1^. a Wife, Genesis
3.6. Job 2.9. Friends, Acts 21, 13. The Devil knows it is a bad business, and
therefore must make the best of it; Paul's forest trial was by his dearest
Friends.

2. In the orderly disposition and ranging of his temptations; beginning with
little things first, and then by degrees working over to greater. His first
motions are commonly most modest, Genesis 3.1. Should he discover the depth of his
design at first, it would startle the Soul, and make it reply as Hasael, Am I a
Dog that I should do thus? It Is far easier to gain his end by parts, then
putting for all at once.

3. In endeavoring to engage the Soul upon his own ground. I mean to tempt him
from his Station and Duty where God set, and expects to find him. He knows
while you are with God, God is with you, 2 Chro. 15.2. Whilst a man abides
there, he abides with God, 1 Cor 7.24. Whilst he is there, the Promise is a
good breast-work to keep off all his darts: And therefore as Fishers, when they
have spread their Net in the River, beat the Fishes out of their coverts and
caverns, so does Satan.

4. In not p^esenting the temptation, till the Soul be prepared to receive it.
He loves to strike when the iron is hot. He first lets their troubles come to
an height, brings them to the Prison, Gibbet, or Fire, and then offers them
deliverance, Heb 11.35, 37.

5. In tiring out Souls with the long continuance of temptations. What he
cannot win by a sudden storm, he hopes to gain by a tedious siege. Forty days
together he assaulted the Captain of our salvation, Mark 1.13. And truly it is a
wonder the Soul yields not at last, that has been tried long, Psalm. 125.3.
When the rod of the wicked lies long upon the back of the righteous, it is much
if he put not forth his hand to iniquity.

6. In falling most violently upon them, when they are lowest and most
prostrate in their spirits and comforts: So he assaulted Job with a temptation
to curse God and die, when he sat in that deplorable state upon the dunghill,
Job 2.8, 9. He loves to fall upon us as Simeon and Levi did upon the
Shechemi^es, when we are sore and wounded: And therefore ordinarily you find
times of divine desertions, to be times of diabolical temptations. So that look
as the wild Beasts of the Desert come out of their Dens in the night, and then
roar after their prey, Psalm. 104.20. so does Satan when the Soul seems to be
benighted and lost in the darkness of Spiritual troubles.

And this is the second thing wherein the efficacy and strength of temptation
lies.

3. Lastly, it lies in that secret correspondency Satan holds with our bosom
enemies. Were it not for this domestic Traitor, he could not surprise us so
easily: As you see in Christ, he could do nothing, because he found nothing to
fasten a temptation on. He was like a Ch^ystal glass filled with pure Fountain
water: So that though he should have been agitated and shaken never so much by
temptation, yet no filthy sediment could appear; but now we have an enemy
within that holds intelligence with Satan without; and this would prove a Devil
to us, if there were no other Devil to tempt us, Jam. 1.14, 15. It Is a Fountain
of temptation in it self, Matthew. 15.19. and the chief instrument by which Satan
does all his tempting work, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Our several passions and affections are the handles of his temptations. Every
thing says Epictetus has (...), two handles to take it by. Our affections are
the handles of our Souls. The temptation of Self-confidence, and Pride, takes
hold of a during and forward disposition; the temptation of Apostasy upon a
timorous disposition, etc. These inbred lusts go over to the Enemy in the day
of battle, and fight against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. This is a more dangerous
enemy, than the Devil. It Is true, they both work against us, but with a double
difference. Satan works externally, and objectively; but Lust internally, and
physic^lly (i e.) quoad ma^eri^le, as it is capable of physical efficiency. Sin
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, Rom 7.8. Yea, it is a subtle Enemy
that does his business politickly. Romans 7.11. Sin deceived me; it betrays with
a kiss, strangles with a silken halter, Heb. 3.13. Ephesians. 4.22. These be his
Agents sitting at the Council Table in our own breasts, and there carrying on
his designs effectually: Yea; it is the restless and perpetual Enemy, no ridding
of your hands of him. Satan is sometimes put to flight by resistance, Jam. 4.7.
and sometimes ceases his temptations, Luke 4.13. but when he cease to tempt
and inj^ct, this cease not to irritate and solicit: Where we are, it will
be; it is our sad lot to be tied to it, and perpetually assaulted by it, Romans
7.24. We may say of it, as Hannibal said of Marcellus, That it is never quiet,
whether a Conqueror, or conquered. Yea, it is a potent enemy too, it hauls men
away to the commission of sin, Jam. 1.14. It seizes the Magazeen of the soul,
and delivers up the Arms; I mean the Members to be (...), weapons of
unrighteousness.

Thus you see wherein the efficacy and power of temptation consists. And it
mightily concerns you that are, or expect to be Sufferers for Christ, to be
acquainted with these things, and know where the strength of your enemy lies.

But how shall the suffering Saint so manage himself in a Suffering hour, as
not to be captivated by temptations? This brings me upon the second thing I
promised; viz. to prescribe some Rules for the escaping or conquering of those
temptations that are incidental to a suffering state. And first:

Labor to cut off the advantag^s of temptations before they come. It Is our
inordinate love to life, R^v. 12.11. O mortify self-love, and creature love;
let your beart be loosened and weaned from them, and then the temptation has
lost its strength.

Secure to your selves an interest in the heavenly glory. Heb. 10.34. It Is our
darkness and uncertainties about those, that make us cling so fast to these.

Settle this principle in your heart, Heb. 11.24, 25. This all will
acknowledge, but how sew practice it! Oh that you would practically understand
and receive it! Sufferings is but a respective, external, and temporal evil;
but sin is an universal, internal, and everlasting evil.

Believe that God has cursed and blasted all the ways of sin, Mark 8.35. Prove.
13.15. The way of Transgressors is an hard and difficult way. There is no
security in the way of iniquity. He that runs from suffering to sin, runs from
the seeming to the real danger; from the painted, to the living Lion.

Live up to this principle, Psalm. 25.2. Job 2.3. Sinful policy never thrives
with Saints.

Consider sadly what the consequence of yielding up your selves to temptation
will be: Sam. 12.14. A fatal stumbling block is laid before the blind world, 1 Samuel 2.36. the hearts of many upright ones made sad, Psalm. 25.3. The fall of a
Professor is as when a Standard Bearer faints; and a dreadful wound it will
be to thine own Conscience, 2 Cor. 2.7. Matthew. 25.76. One hours sleep of
security, may keep you many days and nights waking upon the Wrack of horror.

Never engage a temptation in your own strength, Ephesians. 6.10. What are you to
grapple with Spirits, to enter the Lists with Principalities and Powers? or
what is your strength that you should hope?

Let the days of your temptation, Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8. Psalm. 109.4. Your best
posture to wrestle with Temptation, is upon your knees.

Dwell upon the consideration of those choice encouragements God has laid up
in the Word for such a time. Deuteronomy. 33.3. Joh. 10.28. (2) That whilst Satan is
sifting and trying you on Earth, Christ is interceeding for you in Heaven, Luke
22.31, 32. (3) That an eternal reward is laid up for those that overcome, Luke
22.28, 29. Rev. 21.7, 8. And now is this reward to be won or lost.

Lastly, Be content till God open a door out of your temptations, 1 Cor. 10.13.
The time of the Promise will come, Acts 7.17. Wait for it, though it tarry, and
seem to be deferred; in the end it will speak, and not lie, Hab. ^4.3. There
was a secret door in the Ark, though it could not be seen whilst the waters
prevailed: And so there is in all your temptations, though at present it be not
discernible by you.

And thus I have brought you one step nearer to Paul's blessed frame. O give
diligence to make your selves ready for sufferings.

CHAP. XII.
Shows that a choice part of our preparation and readiness for sufferings,
consists in the improvement of our praying abilities, and keeping close with
God in that heavenly and excellent duty in days of suffering; wherein also of
the nature and means of its improvement.

PRayer is said to be amongst Duties, as Faith is amongst the Graces. Doubtless
it is of special use and service at all times to a Christian; but yet in
suffering days it is of more than ordinary use and necessity, Heb. 4.16. Jam.
5.13. and therefore it is reckoned among those choice pieces of Armor which
suffering Saints are to put on, Ephesians. 6.18. I will here briefly discover the
necessity of it, and then show you that a Christian may improve himself to an
excellent degree in it; and lastly prescribe some means for an improvement.

The necessity of it to a suffering Saint will demonstratively appear, if you
consider;

1. That this duty is the outlet of troubles, and the best way the poor
Christian has to ease his heart when surcharged with sorrow. Griefs are cased
by Groans. Such evaporations disburthen and cool the heart, as the opening of a
vein in some cases does. Oh the sensible ease that comes in this way! When
grief in the mind, like vapors in the Air, are condensed into black Clouds,
that overspread the Soul, and darken that beautiful Light that once shone
there, then Prayer like the Sun dispels and scatters them. 1 Samuel 1.18. Many a
Saint by Prayer has sucked the breast of a Promise, and then sell asleep by
Divine contentment, in the bosom of God. A time may come, when thy heart is
ready to break with trouble, and not a friend to whom thou can open and ease
it: and then blessed be God for Prayer, Micah 7.5, 6, 7. That which sinks
others is, That when troubles fill and everwhelm their hearts, they try what
Reason, merry Company, or outward Comforts can do: but alas! this is to
palliate a Cure, it returns again with the more violence: but prayer gives
sensible relief, Psalm. 102. title Psalm. 62.8. For first, this opens and gives a
vent to troubles, Jer. 20.12. (2) It gives our troubles a diversion, and so a
cure, Psalm. 5.1. and last verse compared. Yea (3) by praying over them, they
are not only diverted but sanctified, and so cease to be distracting, or
destroying troubles.

2. As it gives a vent to our troubles, so an in let to unspeakable comforts
and consolations. See a pregnant instance of this, Act. 16.25. For (1) hereby
they obtain gracious answers from the Lord concerning their troubles, 2 Cor.
12.9. In this also they meet the gracious smiles of God which swallow up their
troubles, Psalm. 85.8. And lastly, hereby they prevail with God to open a
seasonable and effectual door out of all their troubles, Psalm. 34.4, 6.

3. Prayer begets and maintains holy courage and magnanimi^y in evil times,
when all things about you tend to discouragement. It is your being with Jesus
that makes you bold, Acts 4.13. He that uses to be before a great God, will not
be afraid to look su^^ little things as men are in the face. The clothed with
the ^un, had the Moon under her seet. And what need you have of courage in evil
times, has been already showed.

4. This is a duty you may perform at any time, or in any condition: No
Adversary can cut you off from it. It cannot be said so of many other duties.
None can hinder the intercourse betwixt Heaven and your Souls. You may perform
it in a Prison, Acts 16.25. in a banished condition, Psalm. 61.2. and so is
fitted for a suffering condition.

Lastly, you m^st strive to excel in this, forasmuch as no Grace within; or
Service without can thrive without it. God has ordained the whole work of
Grace to grow up to perfection this way, Jud. 19.20. He will have all mercies
fetched out this way, Ezekiel. 36.37. Jer. 29.11, 12, 13. All that comes from God
to you, or to you from God, must come in this Channel. Be convinced then, of
the need you have to improve your selves herein, as ever you hope to stand in
the evil day.

But how are these praying abilities capable of improvement in the people of
God?

Praying abilities are either external and common, or else internal and
special: The external and common ability, is nothing else but that dexterity
and skill men get, to express themselves to God in Prayer. Thus many can put
their meaning into apt and decent expressions, to which the Spirit sometimes
adds his common touches upon the affections. And this Hypocrites rest on and
glory in: Or else they are special and internal, whereby men are enabled to
pour out their souls to God in a gracious manner. And this may be considered
either in the Habit or Act. The Habit is given by the Spirit, when the
principles of Grace are first infused into the soul, Zech. 12.10. Acts 9.11. By
being sanctified we are made near, and by acting those principles in Prayer we
are said to draw near, Psalm, 10.17. Now in our actual drawing near to God, the
Spirit has the chief and principal hand: and his assistance therein is
threefold.

1. He excites the heart to the duty; it is he that whispers to the Soul to draw
nigh to God, Psalm. 27.8.

2. He suggests the matter of our Prayers, and furnishes us with the
Materials, Romans 8.26. guiding us as to the matter, not only to what is lawful,
but also to what is expedient for us.

3. He stirs up suitable Affections in Prayer, Romans 8.26. and hence those
groans and tears, those gaspings and vehement anhelations. But notwithstanding
all our Abilities, both habitual and actual, be from the Spirit, and not from
our selves, yet are they capable of improvement by us: For though in respect of
acquirement, there be a great difference betwixt natural and supernatural
Habits, yet their improvement is in the same way and manner; and this
improvement may be made diverse ways. For,

First, Though you have the Spirit, and can pray, yet you may learn to pray
more humbly then before: Though you rise no higher as to words, yet you may
learn to lay your selves lower before the Lord, as Abraham and Ezra did, Genesis
18.27. Ezra 9.6.

Secondly, You may learn to pray with more sincerity then formerly: Ah! there
is much Hypocrisy and Formality in our Prayers, much of Custom, etc. Now, you
may learn to pour out more Cordial Prayers. See Psalm. 17.1. Psalm. 119.10.

Thirdly, You may learn to pray with more zeal and earnestness then before:
Some Saints have excelled, and been remarkable for this, Daen. 9.19. Hos. 12.4.
James 5.16.

Fourthly, with more assiduity and readiness at all times for it, Ephesians. 6.18.
Praying always, with all Prayer. Hence Christ gives that commendation to the
Church, Cant. 4.11. Thy Lips, O my Spouse, drop as the Honey Comb: The Honey
Comb often drops, but always hangs full of Drops ready to fall.

Fifthly, You may learn to pray with more Faith: Oh the qualms of Unbelief,
that go over our Hearts in a Duty! Faith is the Soul of Prayer, and according
to the Faith God finds in them, he accepts and values them. Now in all these
things, you may improve your selves abundantly.

1. By being more frequent in the Duty, Job 22.21. acquaint thy self with the
Almighty; in the Hebrew it is, accustom thy self: Those that have been
excellent, have also been abundant in it, Psalm 15.17.

2. By taking heed that you grieve not the Spirit, on whose influences and
assistances, you so entirely depend: Even as much as a Ship does upon the Gales
of Wind for its motion.

3. By honoring the Spirit which enables you to pray, and that especially two
ways; (1) By dependances on him; go not forth in your own strength to the Duty,
trust not upon your own promptness, or preparations. (2) By returning, and with
thankfulness ascribing the praise of all to him: Be humble under all
Enlargements: Say, Not I, but Grace.

4. By searching your own Hearts, and examining your Necessities and Wants,
when you draw nigh to God; this will be a Fountain of Matter, and give you a
deep Resentment of the worth of Mercies prayed for.

5. Lastly, By looking more at the exercise of Graces, and less at the
discovery of Parts; by laboring for Impressions more, and pumping for
Expressions less. And thus I have briefly showed you, how to furnish your
selves with this needful Qualification also.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is showed the necessity of going out of our selves even when our
habitual and actual Preparations are at the greatest height; and depending as
constantly and entirely upon the Spirit, who is Lord of all gracious
Influences, as if we had done nothing: Together with the means of working the
Heart to such a frame.

THus you have seen your habitual and actual readiness for Sufferings, and
blessed is the Soul that gives diligence to this work: But now, lest all that I
have said, and you have wrought, should be in vain, I must let you know, that
all this will not secure you, unless you can by Humility, Faith, and
Self-denial, go out of your selves to Christ, and live upon him daily for
supply of Grace, as much as if you had none of all this Furniture and
Provision for Sufferings. I confess, Grace is a very beautiful and lovely
Creature, and it is hard for a man to look upon his own Graces, and not dote
upon them. But yet know, that if you had all these excellent preparations that
have been mentioned, yea, and all Angelical Perfections superadded, yet are you
not complete without this dependence upon Christ, Col. 2.10. When ever you go
forth to suffer for Christ, you should say in the Head of all your excellent
Graces, Duties, and Preparations, as Jehosaphat did, when in the head of a
puissant and mighty Army, 2 Coron. 20.12. O Lord, I have no might nor strength,
but my Eyes are unto thee. This was one thing in which Paul excelled, and was a
special part of his readiness. See 1 Cor. 15.10. What a poor Creature is the
eminentedst Saint, left to himself in an hour of trial; the Hop, the Ivy, and
the Woodbind, are taught by Nature to cling about stronger Props and
Supporters: What they do by Nature we should do by Grace.

The necessity and great advantage of this, will appear upon diverse
Considerations.

1. Adam hand to hand in his state of integrity. It is not your inherent
strength that enables you to stand, but what you receive, and daily derive from
Jesus Christ, Joh. 15.5. Without me, or never so little separated from me, ye
can do nothing, all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Upon this very
consideration it was, that the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, to be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might, (i.e.) not to depend upon their own
stock and furniture, but Divine Assistances, and daily Communications; for we
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.10,
12. in his own strength shall no man prevail.

2. That in all things he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1.13. That Christ
might be all in all, Col. 3.11. Hence, no Saint must have a self-sufficiency,
or be trusted with a stock as Adam was, but Christ being filled with all the
fullness of God, and made the (...), or first Receptacle of all Grace: For it
pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell; all the Saints are
therefore to go to him for supplies, and of his fullness to receive, John 1.16.
This fullness being a Ministerial fullness, like that of the Sun, or of a
Fountain, intended to supply all our wants. And hence is it that Faith, a
self-emptying and denying Grace, is appointed to be the Instrument of fetching
our supplies from Christ. All must be derived from him, that all the praise and
glory may be ascribed to him, Phil. 4.14. And this is a most wise and congruous
Ordination of God; for hereby not only are his People the better secured, but
by this also the reproach that lay upon Christ is rolled away: He was
reproached on earth, as barren, empty, weak Can any good come out of Nazareth?
He was looked upon as a Root springing out of a dry ground; but by this shall
his Reproach be wiped away: So that unless you will go about to cross the great
design of God, in the exaltation of his Christ, you must go out of your selves,
and humbly, and constantly rely upon supplies from Christ, and his grace to
help in the times of need.

3. 1 Cor 15.10. 2 Cor. 3.5.
John 15.5. It may be said of Grace in us, as it was of the Land of Canaan,
Deuteronomy. 11.10. 11, 12. It is not as the Land of Egypt whence ye come out, where
thou sowedst thy seed, and waterdst it with thy foot, as a Garden of Herbs: But
a Land of Hills and Valleys, drinking water of the Rain of Heaven, a Land which
the Lord thy God cares for: his Eyes are always upon it, from the beginning of
the year, even to the end of the year. As the life and fragrancy of Vegetables,
depends on the Influences of Heaven so do our Graces upon Christ. And hence, he
is called, (1) a Root, Isa. 11.10. (2) An Head, Col. 1.18. (3) A Sun, Mal. 4 2.
(4) A Fountain, Zech. 13.1. all which Comparisons do fully carry this Truth in
them.

4. Covenants: In the first, Adam's stock was in his own hands, and so his
security or misery depended upon the unconstrained choice of his own mutable
and self determining Will: But now in the New Covenant, all are to go to
Christ, to depend upon him for supplies, and are so secured against all
destructive dangers, Jude 1. 1 Pet. 1.5. Should you go forth in your own
strength against a Temptation, either your Grace would fail, and you fall in
the Conflict: Or if you obtain any Victory over it by your owa strength, yet
it is a thousand to one but your Pride would conquer you, when you had conquered
it: Like him that slew an Elephant, but was himself slam by the fall of that
Elephant which he slew. But now, by this way, as God has secured you against
the Dangers without; so also the frame and constitution of this New Covenant is
such, as prevents the danger arising from our own Pride too. Not. Ego, and Deus
meus; I and my God did this: as was once said by a profane Mouth; But self is
abased, and the Lord lifted up in his own strength, 1 Cor 4 7. And thus I have
briefly evinced the necessity of this daily dependence.

But next it concerns you to know, what this dependence we speak of is: This
also I shll abriefly open to you, laying down somewhat negatively, and omewhat
positively about it.

It is not to deny the Grace wrought in us by the Spirit; this were both
injustice and ingratitude: Cor. 15.10.

It is not a lazy excuse from our duty: depend, but rather dishonor Christ by
so doing. You must not say, Because Christ must do all, therefore I must do
nothing: but rather work out your salvation, because it is he that works both
to will and do, Phil. 2.12, 13. These are not opposed, but subordinated.

But then positively, it lies in three things.

(1.) In seeing and acknowledging the infinite sufficiency and fullness that is
in Christ: Impetration procuring all, Heb. 9.12. but also by way of
Application, bringing home to the Soul all the blessings purchased by his
blood, and settling us in the possession of it, Joh. 14.3. and so from first to
last to eye him as the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

(2.) Our life is hid with Ghrist in God, Col. 3.3. When you see this, and also
see that all your activity and striving is but as the hoysting up of the Sails,
in order to the motion of the Ship, which can do nothing sill there come a
Gale: When you look upon your Grace as a Creature that must be upheld, fed,
acted and preserved by Christ, Col. 2.19. then you are prepared for this act of
dependence: As for instance, You can never depend upon Christ for the acting of
that Grace of Hope, until you see Christ to be the prop and foundation of it,
and that it depends upon him, as upon its cause, 1 Pet. 1.3. as upon its
object, Hebr. 6.19. and as upon its foundation and ground work, Col. 1.27.

You can never depend upon Christ for your joy and comfort, until you see what
a necessary dependence this also has upon him, Phil. 3 3. and that both as to
its being and acting, John 16.22.

You can never depend upon him for strength in any duty, until you see how your
duties depend upon Christ, not only for the strength by which they are
performed, John 15.4, 5. but also for acceptance when they are performed, 1
Pet. 2.5. It were easy to instance in any other Grace.

(3) It lies in (...) ^ooking off ^o the Au^^our of our ^aith.
looking off from your own Grace, when ever you are put upon the acting of it,
(I mean in regard of any dependence upon it) and looking by an eye of Faith for
acceptance to Christ, Heb. 12.2. To the putting forth of which acts of
dependence upon Christ, holy ejaculations in our on-sets upon duty, or those
quick and vigorous lifting up of our souls to God that way are of special use,
it being a duty fitted for the purpose, when there is no room for set and
solemn Prayer. And thus briefly of its nature.

And to urge you to this duty, I shall offer these seven Considerations; which
oh that they might prevail upon your hearts, and make you for ever to cl^sp and
cling about Christ more than ever you have done.

You have little reason to rely upon the strength of your own Graces; for you
may be easily deceived in that matter, and think you have much more Grace then
you have. How often are the common Gifts of the Spirit mistaken for his special
Graces! The sixth Chapter to the Hebrews is able to make a man tremble in this
thing.

Suppose you have much Grace, etc.

Whatever measures of Grace you have arrived at, yet all is not able to secure
you from falling, Abraham had more Faith then you, and yet he fell into a sin
contrary to that very Grace wherein he so excelled others, Genesis 20.2. Job had
more patience then you: which of you could behave your selves as he did, had
you been in the like circumstances as he was, Chap. 1.2. He is renowned for it
in Scripture, Jam, 5.11. yet he fell into that sin which was contrary to this
Grace also, Chap. 3. Moses had more m^ckness then you: Now the man Moses was
the meckest man upon the Earth. If you be but reproved, and that justly for
your faults, how Waspish are you? Yet see how this Grace failed even in him, in
an eminent trial of it, Numb. 11.13, 14, 15. Adam was much more advantaged in
this respect, then you, being made upright, and no corruption inherent in him,
yet he fell: The Angels more again, yet they fell. Oh when will you learn the
vanity of self-dependance!

Nothing more provokes the Lord to withdraw his Spirit, and let you fall,
does, Luke 14.29, 30, 31. God will teach you by sad experience your own
weakness and what frail and vain things you be, if you will learn it by no
other means.

If God permit you to fall (as doubtless he will if you be self-conceited) then
the more eminent you have been, How are the mighty fallen! What dismal
consequents will attend your fall!

Have you not sad experience of your own weakness from day to day in your
lesser trials? David once did? My feet were well nigh slipped. O methinks this
should teach you to look more to God, and less to self. If you have run with
footmen, and they have wearied you in the Land of piece; think sadly, how you
shall contend with Horses in the swellings of Jordan. Do not you see that you
are but Feathers in the wind of Temptation? Consult your former experiences,
and they will tell you what weaklings you are.

Lastly,

Well then, by all this be persuaded to cease from your selves, yea from your
Religious selves; and to all other your preparations, add this as a choice one:
If you do these things, you shall never fall. And thus you see the complete
Christian in his equipage for sufferings.

CHAP. XIV.
Containing the first use of the point by way of conviction, discovering the
unreadiness of multitudes of Professors for suffering-work.

YOu have seen by all that has been spoken, what the necessary prerequisites
unto a suffering condition are, and what manner of persons you must be (both
for habitual and actual readiness) if ever you honor Christ by bonds or death
for him. And I doubt not but your judgments and consciences yield to the
evident necessity of these things, wherein I have placed the Christians
readiness. But alas! where shall we find among the throngs and crowds of
Professors, any considerable numbers thus qualified and prepared? To suffer
for Christ, is a gift that few have received, We are fallen into the dregs of
time. Oh how little of the Primitive zeal and simplicity remains among the
Professors of this Age! Later times have produced a four of Professors of
another stamp and Spirit. These have the light, but they had the love: these
see more, but they did and suffered more. How many that are no ornament to
Religion, do adorn themselves with the name of it!

Now according to this account given of a ready Christian, diverse professing
persons will be convicted of their unreadiness and inability to manage
suffering work; As first,

1. The politic and hypocritical Professors, whole hearts were never set
right at first, and therefore cannot be steadfast when trials come, Psalm. 78.8.
Their hearts were never sound in Gods statutes, and therefore no wonder if they
be not only a shame to, but ashamed of their profession, Psalm. 119.80. Never
wonder if you see that profession which began in hypocrisy, to end in
apostasy. These want their habitual readiness for sufferings, and so cannot
drink of that Cup: needs must they fall when tried; and when they fall, they
fall dreadfully, and often irrecoverably, for they neither have the seed of God
in them, nor any promise of God made to them.

And are there not many such to be found in every place? For (1) how difficult
is it to persuade many of you to any duty that has loss or hazard attending on
it. Does not the sincere heart stand inclinable and dispofed to all the known
will of God? Psalm. 119.6. Do Christians use to enquire more what is cheap,
easy, and safe for them, or what is their duty? Gal. 1.16. Speak Conscience,
for to thee I do appeal; Art thou not conscious of some reserves, limitations,
and exceptions? Does not the man like Naaman desire the Lord to excuse and
pardon him in this or that thing? 2 Kings 5.17. And think thou that this is
consistent with sincere obedience which excepts no duty, nor quarrels with any
command, because they all flow equally from the sovereignty of God? Jam. 2.11.
and so does what it does intuitu voluntatis, upon the sight of Gods will. Say
Conscience, Are they not great struglings, disputes, and contests betwixt thee,
and fleshly interests in such cases? and art thou not frequently overborn? Oh
search your hearts in this particular.

Yea secondly, I appeal to you, whether there be not many among you that choose
sin rather then affliction? This is always the Hypocrites option and choice.
He judges sufferings the greatest evils, and so orders himself in his election.
It was merely to avoid persecution that those Hypocrites, Gal. 6.12.
constrained others to be circumcised, only to gratify the Jews; that so by a
sinful compliance with them, the offense of the Cross might cease. If Paul
would have done so, he might have avoided it too, but he durst not whatever he
suffered, Gal. 5.11. Oh this is a shred sign of a salse heart, Job 36.21. and
the contrary disposition is always found in the upright heart, Heb. 11.25.

Nay, are there not some that have, and others that are ready to throw up their
Profession, when they see into what difficulties it involves them? Whilst they
could live upon the profession of Truth, they entertained it; but when Truth
comes to live upon them, they thrust it out, and cry, Away with this
Profession, it will beggar and undo us: They then repent of their forwardness,
and secretly wish they had never engaged in it. O examine whether your hearts
be not thus turned back, and your steps declined. If so, it is manifest you are
hypocritical Professors, and that it was some outward self-respect that first
engaged you in your Profession, but can never enable you to hold out when
difficult days come. I say it is manifest by this departure from your
Profession, that some outward self-respect at first allured you to it. As now
when I behold the artificial motions of the Wheels in a Watch, and see how
regularly the Needle marks the journal hours of the Sun upon the flat of the
Quadrant, and see nothing that moves or guides it, it would cause admiration if
I had never seen it before, or did not understand the cause of that motion: but
when I look upon the other side, and there find Wheels, Ressorts, and
Counterpoises, and a Spring that causes all those motions, I cease to wonder;
certainly some Lust or other was the spring of all thy religious motions; stop
or take off that, and motion ceases: And if it be so, this Scab of Hypocrisy
will at last break out into the Botch of Apostasy. Thou can never hold out
long under Trials, Matthew. 13.21. Oh how many such sad sights may we live to see
as Trials come! Difficult times are coming on, 2 Timothy 3.1. and woe to such then
as want sincerity at the bottom of their Profession.

2. And as these have no habitual readiness for sufferings, and consequently
must be ruined by them, so there are others that may be truly godly, and have
the root of the matter in them, who are yet far from an actual readiness, and
so continuing, are like to be a reproach to Religion when their Trial comes.
For it is not a little Grace in the sleepy habit that will secure you from
falling scandalously by the hand of temptation: And although that Seed of God
which is in you, will recover you again, and prevent total and fiual Apostasy,
yet oh consider what a sad thing it is to enter into, and be conquered by
temptation, to be led away in triumph by the Tempter, and made a reproach to
Christ. O it is a sad consideration to think how many there be amongst the
people of God, that discover little or no actual preparation for sufferings, As
first;

1. Upon how many of the Saints is the Spirit of slumber poured out: Even the
wise as well as foolish seem now to be sleep. There is a twofold spiritual
sleep; the first is total, upon wicked men: and it is one of Gods sorest and
dreadfullest strokes upon their soul, (...)
Isa. 29.10. The Hebrew word there is the same with that which is used of Adam,
when God cast him into a deep sleep, whilst he took out his rib. (...).
And in 2 Timothy 2.26. it signifies such a sleep as that which is occasioned by
drunkenness; out of such a sleep does the Lord awaken all that are saved, and
they never fall into it any more. The other is partial, Cant. 5.2. and is
incident to the people of God, Matthew. 25.5. This is nothing else but that
torpor or sluggishness of spirit which seizes upon the Saints, and never did
it prevail, I fear among them, more then now. For where is their activity for
God? Where is he that stirs up himself to take hold of God? Isa. 64.7. Where
is there such a generation as that, Psalm. 24.6. we pray, confer, and hear for
the most part, but as men speak betwixt sleeping and waking. Where can you
find, except here and there one, that has a quick and lively sense of Gods
indignation upon him, or that trembles at his judgments? Is not that the very
case of the most which God describes? Isa. 42. ult.

2. How many are seized by a private and worldly spirit, every man turning to
his own house, and eagerly pursuing the world? Hag. 1.9. Jer. 45.4, 5. Oh! how
are we entangled in the Wilderness? how does the World eat up our time, and eat
out our Zeal, cowardice and soften our spirits, and render us utterly unfit for
the Yoke and Burden of Christ? You that see so much Beauty, and taste so much
sweetness in the Creature, will you have an hard Tugg when called to deny it:
you are not yet prepared to drink of the Cup, or take up the Cross of Christ.

3. How many poor Christians are of a low and timorous spirit, ready to tremble
at the shaking of a Leaf: Ah poor hearts! how unfit are you for Bonds or Death?
This passion of fear that so predominates in you, is the very passion which
Satan assaults, and lays siege to in the hour of Temptation, as was before
noted: and commonly it is occasioned (where it flows not from the Natural
Constitution from an excessive love to the world, or from some guilt upon the
spirit. It Is true, the Lord can so assist weak Faith, and so subdue strong
Fear^, as that you may be enabled to stand the shock when it comes: (for, as I
noted formerly, our strength lies not in any thing inherent in us, but we are
strong or weak, according to the divine presence and assistances that we enjoy)
but yet if you labor not to mortify this Evil, and stir not up your felves in
the use of all appointed means, to rouse your Zeal and Courage for God, I know
no Warrant you have to expect such assistances.

Lastly, how many poor Christians among us, are to this day dark and cloudy in
their Evidences for Heaven? Had they walked closely with God, been laborious in
the disquisition and search of their own hearts, they had long since obtained a
clearness and satisfaction about the state of their own hearts: But as the case
stands with them, how unfit are they for Bonds or Death. Oh! it is a sad case,
when inward and outward Troubles meet together, as you may see, Genesis 42.21, 22.
when there shall be fightings without, and fears within: When such a pang as
that, Lam. 3.17, 18. shall come over thy heart, what will thou do?

By all that has been said, it appears, that the most of Professors are in a
very unready posture for sufferings: So that as Troubles come to an height, we
are like to see many sad Spectacles: Many offenses will come; Religion is like
to be wounded in the house of it is friends. Oh! What a day of Mercy have we
enjoyed? What helps and choice advantages, above any precedent Age, and yet
unready? How sad and inexcusable is this?

CHAP. XV.
Containing another use of the Point, by way of Exhortation, persuading all the
People of God, whilst the Lord respites, and graciously delays their trials,
to answer the end of God therein, and prepare themselves for greater trials;
where several Motives are propounded, to excite to the Duty.

UP then from your Beds of sloth, awake from your security, O ye Saints; get
upon your Watch-Towers, tremble in your selves, that ye may rest in the Day of
Evil, Hab. 2.1, 3, 16. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand in the evil day, and when you have done all to stand, Ephesians. 6. O let it
never be said of your Dwellings. as it is of the Tabernacles of the wicked. Job
21.9. Their Houses are safe from fear.

Augustus hearing of one that was deeply in debt, who yet slept heartily, sent
for his Pillow, supposing there was some strange virtue, in that Pillow. I
wonder what Pillow you have gotten, O ye drowsy Saints, that you can sleep so
quietly upon it, now that all things about you are compiring trouble, and
threatening danger. Can you sleep like Jonah, when Seas of wrath are tumbling
and roaring round about you, and threatening to entomb you, and all your
enjoyments? Behold, The Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed time, Jer.
8.7. and has not God made you wiser then the Fowls of the Air, Job 35.11. It
may be the sound of some present Judgment may a little startle you, like a
sudden clap of Thunder in the Air; but how soon does Sloth and Security prevail
and over come you again They say Poison by being habituated, may be made
Innocent: We are so used to, or rather hardened under calamities, that nothing
moves or effectually awakens us. Lord! What will the end of these things be?
Will thou surprise thy people at unawares? Shall thy judgments find them
secure, and leave them desperate? O that God would persuade you to gather your
selves together, yea to gather together, (not in an unlawful and seditious way)
but in the way of duty, before the Decree bring forth, and the day pass as the
chaff, Zeph. 2.1, 2. O prepare to meet your God, Amos 4.12. Prepare your faith,
love, courage, etc. before God call you to the exercise of them.

And to excite you to this duty, besides all the forementioned benefits of a
prepared Spirit, consider these following particulars hy way of motive.

The many Calls which God has given you to this work. one mouth, Luke 1.70.
and they have warned you faithfully. (2.) By the Rod: This also has a loud
voice, Micah 6.9. Psalm. 2.5. Men of understanding will hear this voice; and
those that will not hear it, shall be lashed by it even till they are sick with
smiting, verse. 13. (3) By prodigious and portentous signs in the Heavens and
Earth, such as no Age can parallel, these have a loud voice to all that regard
the works of the Lord, or the operations of his hands. Eusebius calls them Gods
Sermons to the World. (...), Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Oh that we were wise to consider what Gods Ends are in these things! One
observes, That as they are the plainest and most obvious to sense, so they are
commonly the last Sermons which God intends to preach to Nations, before he
inflicts his punishments on them, if they repent not. O let not God, speaking
in ordinary and extraordinary ways to you, still speak in vain.

Your preparation for sufferings, Luke 14.28. Put on the whole Armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand, Ephesians. 6. He that has first severed Christ in
his thoughts from all worldly advantages, and put the case thus to his own
Soul, O my Soul, can thou embrace or love a naked Christ? Can be content to
be impoverished, imprisoned, and suffer the loss of all for him? He is most
likely to cleave faithfully to him, when the case is really presented to him
indeed. And can it seem light thing in your eyes, to be enabled to stand ^n
such an evil day? If you fall away from Christ, then all that you have wrought
is lost, ^zek. 33.13. Gideons one Bastard destroyed all is seventy Sons. This
act renders all former ^ctions and professions vain. If you fall, you ^^all
thereby be brought into a more perfect ^ondage to the Devil than ever, Matthew.
12.23. ^ea, ordinarily Apostates are judicially given up to be Persecutors,
Hos. 5.12. 1 Timothy 1.20. and are seldom or never recovered again by Grace, Heb.
6.4, 6. They that lick up their vomit, seldom cast it up any more. It is a
fall, within a little as low as the unpardonable sin, whence never any rise
again. In some cases the Judge will not allow the Offender his Book. And is it
not then a choice and desirable mercy to escape and prevent such a fall as
this? O good Souls, ply your Preparation-work close then; prepare, or you
perish.

3. This will best answer the Grace of God, in affording you such choice helps
and advantages as you have enjoyed. How long have you enjoyed the free liberty
of the Gospel, shining in its luster among you? This Sun which to some other
Nations has not risen, and to diverse on whom it has shined, yet it is but as
a Winters Sun, remote, and its Beams but feeble: But you have lived as it were
under the Line, It has been over your heads, and shed its richest influences
upon you. Yea, Gods Ministers, who are not only appointed to be Watchmen, Ezekiel.
3.17. but Trumpeters to discover danger, Numb. 10.8. these have faithfully
warned you of a day of trouble, and given you their best assistance to make you
ready for it. And is not their joy, yea life bound up in your stability in such
a day of Trial? Does not every one of them call upon you in the words of the
Apostle, Phil. 4.1. Therefore my Brethren, dearly Beloved and longed for, my
joy and Crown, so stand fast in the Lord my dearly beloved. Will it not cut
them to the very heart, if after all their spending labors among you, they
still leave you unready? Enemies still to the Cross of Christ, impossible to be
reconciled and persuaded to suffering-work for Christ.

I remember I have read of the Athenian Codrus, who being informed by the
Oracle, that the people whose King should be slain in Battle, should be
Conquerours: He thereupon disrobed himself, and in a disguize went into the
Enemies Quarters, that he might steal a death to make his people victorious.

Oh! how glad would your Ministers be, if you might conquer, and overcome in
the day of temptation, whatever become of their lives and liberties! Yea, and
if they be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, they can
rejoice, and joy with you all. Such is their zeal and longing after your
security and welfare. But if still you remain an unready people, and do become
a prey to temptation, Oh how inexcusable will you be!

4. Remember how ready the Lord Jesus was to suffer the hardest and vilest
things for you. He had a bitter Cup put into his hands to drink for you, into
which the wrath both of God and man was squeezed out. Dolor Christi fuit major
omnibus doloribus. Aquin.
Never had man such sufferings to undergo as Christ's. Whether you consider (1)
the dignity of his person, who was in the form of God, and might have stood
upon his Peerage and Equality with him, he is the sparkling Diamond of Heaven,
Acts 7.56. The Darling of the Fathers Soul, Isa. 42.1. glorious as the only
begotten of the Father, John 1.14. yea glory it self, James 2.1. yea, the very
brightness of glory, Heb. 1.3. He is the delicia Christiani orbis, fairer than
the Sons of men: And for him to be so debased, below so many thousands of his
own Creatures, become a Worm, and no man; this was a wonderful humiliation. It
was Jeremiah's lamentation, that such as were brought up in Scarlet, embraced
Dunghills; that Princes were hanged up by the hands, and the faces of Elders
were not reverenced. But what was that to the humiliation of the Lord of Glory?
Or (2) that he suffered in the prime and flower of his years; when full of life
and sense, and more capable of exquisite sense of pain than others: For he was
optime complexionatus, Aquinas.
of a singular Constitution; and all the while he hanged on the Tree, his sense
of pain not at all blunted or decayed, Mark 15.37, 39. Or (3) the manner of his
death. It was the death of the Cross, which was as a Rack to Christ: for in
reference to the distention of his Members upon the Cross, is that spoken,
Psalm. 22.17. I may tell all my bones Or (4) That all this while God hid his
face from him. When Stephen suffered, he saw the Heavens opened. The Martyrs
were many of them ravished and transported with ecstasies of joy in their
sufferings; but Christ in the dark. He suffered in his Soul as well as in his
Body; and the sufferings of his Soul, were the very Soul of his sufferings. It
was the Fathers wrath that lay so heavy on him, as to put him into such an
agony, that an instance was never given of the like in nature: For he sweat
(...) great drops, or clodders of blood, which fell from his Body to the
ground, Luke 22.24. It amazed him, and made him very heavy. See Mark 14.33.
yea, sorrowful even to death, Matthew. 26.38.

And yet as bitter as the Cup was, he freely and willingly drank it up, John
18.11. prepared himself to be offered up a sacrifice, Psalm. 40.6, 7. Gave his
back to the Smiters, Isa. 50.6. yea longed exceedingly for the time till it
came, Luke 12.50.

Now, if Christ so cheerfully prepared and addressed himself to such sufferings
as these for you, should you not prepare your selves to encounter any
difficulty or hardship for him? O my Brethren, Does not this seem a just and
fair inference to you, from the sufferings of Christ for you? 1 Pet. 4.1.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind.

Oh trifle no longer; feed not your selves with fancies and groundless
presumptions of immunity and peace, but foresee difficulties, and fit your
selves to bear them.

CHAP. XVI.
Containing the last use of the point, by way of support and comfort to poor
trembling Souls, who do take pains to make themselves ready for sufferings; but
yet finding such Strength in Satan's temptations, and their own corruptions,
fear that all their labor is in vain, and that they shall faint, and utterly
Apostatize, when their Troubles and Trials come to an height.

IN the last place, If it be such a blessed thing to be ready for Bonds, or
Death for Christ, this may minister much comfort to such Souls, who though they
cannot say as Paul here did, that they are ready; yet are at work da^ly upon
their own hearts to make them ready, and strive in the use of all means to
conquer those corruptions that hinder it, and improve those Graces in which it
mainly consists. O poor Soul, what ever present unreadiness or indisposition
thou find, and complainest of in thine heart, yet thy condition is safe.

Oh but I cannot be satisfied in that:

It Is well thou suspectest thine own heart, He that fears to flinch, Mr. A. H
shall never flinch for fear. It Is true, seeming Grace may be totally lost,
Luke 8.18. Heb. 6.4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.20. It Is granted also, that the sins of
Believers deserve that God should forsake them, and that he may suffer Grace in
them to be sadly re-bated, and they may fall before a Temptation, as Peter, and
all the Disciples did. But that thou shall never be separated from Christ, or
fall Totus, a toto, in totum, utterly away from God, thou may be abundantly
satisfied upon these five or six grounds.

1. From Gods Eternal Electing Love, wherewithal gracious Souls are beloved
and embraced, be their Graces never so weak, or their corruptions never so
strong. This is immutable, Heb. 6.18. and hence it is said, Mark 13.22. They
shall deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect. Now this immutable purpose
of God, is not founded upon any mutable ground or reason in thee, Romans 9.11.
Yea, when he Romans 8.29.
Elected thee, he saw what thou would be, and yet that hindered him not.

2. From the Covenant of Grace, in the Bosom of which thou art wrapped up: This
is all thy salvation, and all thy hope; it will afford thee abundant
satisfaction, if thou do but weigh particularly these three things about it: 1.
That the Author of this Covenant is not a fickle Creature, but a faithful God,
with whom there is not yea and nay: With whom there is no variableness, nor
shadow of turning; whose Gifts and Callings are without repentance; so that
once within the clasp of this blessed Covenant, and in it for ever. 2. That God
has established the Covenant with you in the Blood of Christ; therefore the
Sacramental Cup, is called the Cup of the New Testament in his Blood, Luke
22.20. the everlasting Merit and Efficacy whereof, gives the Soul of a Believer
the highest satisfaction imaginable. Lastly, add to this, that in this Covenant
God has undertaken for us, as well as for himself: So that what is a Condition
in one Scripture, is the matter of a Promise in another Scripture, Jer. 32.40.

3. From that strict and intimate union that is betwixt Christ and thee. And
hence it is impossible thou should be lost: For 1. Thy union with his Person,
draws interest in his Properties with it: What ever he is, or has, it is for
thee; his eye of Knowledge, arm of Power, bowels of Pity, it is all for thee.

2. This union with his Person, secures thy feeble Graces from perishing, John
4.14. Thy Graces have an everlasting Spring. Whilst there is Sap in this Root,
it will ascend into the Branches.

3. It implies thy Perseverance, because by this union thou becomest an
integral part of Christ's Body, which would be mutilate and defective, should
thou be cut off and lost.

4. From the prevalent intercession of Jesus Christ in the Heavens, for all his
Saints, in all their trials here on Earth. From hence the Apostle infers the
certainty of our Perseverance, Romans 8.34. and a pregnant instance of it you
have in Peter's case, Luke 22.32. So Heb. 7.25. speaks fully to the case. To
strengthen this, consider 1. Who it is that intercedes: It Is Christ, whose
Person is most dear and ingratiated with the Father, John 11.42. 2. What he
intercedes for: Surely for nothing but what is most suitable to his Fathers
will. The Will of Christ, and his Fathers, do not clash, John 16.26, 27. yea,
what he prays for, he prays not for gratis, or asks upon any dishonorable
terms to the justice of his Father; but they are all mercies purchased and paid
for; and therefore fear not the failing of your Graces.

5. From the Spirit of Christ which dwells and abides in thee, and has
begun his saving work upon thee. I say saving, for else it would afford no
argument: His common works on Hypocrites come to nothing, but in thee they
cannot fail: For 1. His Honor is pawned and engaged to perfect it. That
reproach of the foolish Builder shall never lie upon him, that he began to
build, but could not finish. Besides, this would irritate, and void all that
the Father and the Son have done for thee; both their works are complete and
perfect in their kinds, and the Spirit is the last efficient in order of
working. 2. Besides, the Grace he has already wrought in thee, may give thee
yet further and fuller assurance of its preservation, inasmuch as it has the
nature of a Seal, Pledge, and Earnest of the whole, Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 1.22. So
that it cannot fail.

6. From those multitudes of Assertory, Promissory, and Comparative Scriptures,
the rich veins whereof run through the Book of God, as so many streams to
refresh thy Soul. Of Assertory Scriptures, see John 6.39. John 10.28. 1 John
2.19. Of Promissory Scriptures, see Issa. 54.10. Jer. 34.40. 1 Cor. 1.8. etc.
Of Comparative Scriptures, see Psalm. 1.3. Psalm. 125. 1. John 4.14. etc. The
principal scope of all which, is to show the indefectible nature of true Grace
in the Saints.

And now, how should this refresh thy drooping Soul, make thee gird up the
loins of thy mind! since thou do not run as one uncertain, neither fightest
as one that beats the Air, 1 Cor. 9.26. but art so secured from total Apostasy,
as thou see thou art by all these things. O bless ye the Lord.

But the Lord seems to be departed from my Soul; Saul was, when the Philistines
made war upon him, and God was departed from him; and therefore I shall fall.

Not so; absolute, when the Lord utterly forsakes his Creatures, so that they
shall never behold his face more: The other is limited and respective, and so
he forsook his own Son, and often does his own Elect: And of this kind, some
are only Cautional, to prevent sin; some are merely Probational, to try Grace;
and others Castigatory, to chastise our negligence and carelessness. Now though
I have not a word of comfort to speak in the case of total and absolute
Desertions; yet of the latter, (which doubtless is thy case) much may be said
by way of support, be it of which of the three sorts it will, or in what degree
it will. For 1. This has been the case of many precious Souls, Psalm. 22.1, 2.
Psalm. 77.2. Psalm. 88.9. Job 13.24, 25, 26. This was poor Mr. Glovers case, as
you will find in his Story, and it continued till he came within sight of the
Stake: therefore no new or strange thing has happened to you.

2. The Lord by this will advantage thee for perseverance, not only as they are
cautional against sin, but as they make thee hold Christ the faster, and prize
his Came. 3.4.
Presence at an higher rate, when he shall please graciously to manifest
himself to thee again.

3. This shall not abide for ever; it is but a little Cloud, and will blow over.
It is but for a moment, and that moments Darkness ushers in everlasting Light,
Isa. 54.7.

Yea lastly, The light of Gods Countenance shall not only be restored
Certainly, but it shall be restored Seasonably; when thy Darkness is greatest,
thy trouble's at the highest, and thy hopes lowest. He is a God of Judgment,
and knows how to time his own mercies, Psa. 138.3.

But I am a weak Woman, Rulers, and look great ones in the face?

Christ delights to make his Power known in such, Cor. 12.9. for he affects not
Social glory.

2. Thou shall be holden up, for God is able to make thee stand, Romans 14.4.
Thou that art sensible of thine own infirmity, may run to that Promise.

3. Such poor weak Creatures shall endure, when stronger (if Self-confident)
fall, Isa. 40.30, 31. Even the youths shall faint, and be weary, and the young
men utterly fall; but they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength:
They shall mount up with wings as Eagles, run and not be weary, walk, and not
faint.

Youths and young men are bold, daring and confident persons, that trust to
their own strength; to whom such as wait upon the Lord, stand here opposed:
They shall faint, but these shall renew their strength.

Art thou one that waitest and dependest upon an All-sufficient God, in the
sense of thine own weakness? This Promise then is for thee.

4. You may furnish your selves at pleasure, with Examples of the mighty Power
of God resting upon such as you are, out of our own Martyrology.

Thomas Drowry the poor blind Boy, Fox Vol. 3. p. 703. What a presence of
Spirit was with him, when examined by the Chancellor!

Eulalia a Virgin, of about twelve years of age, see how she was acted above
those years, yea, above the power of Nature: Fox. Vol. 1. p. 120. Tender Women,
yea Children act above themselves, when assisted by a strong God.

And thus you have some help offered you by a weak hand, in your present and
most important work.

The Lord carry home all with Power upon your hearts, that (if God call you to
suffer for him) you may say as Paul did, I am now ready to be offered up, and
the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge shall give me at that
day; and not to me only, but to them also which love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.6.
And as you expect so to finish your course with joy, be diligent in the use of
all means, to prepare and make your selves ready to follow the Call of God,
whether it be to Bonds, or to Death, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

