HONI ^ SOLT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE ^

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT

By the King. A PROCLAMATION Prohibiting the Importation of all Wines of the
Growth of the Canary Islands, and all further Trade and Commerce with the said
Islands, and the Inhabitants thereof, until His Majesty's Pleasure shall be
further known.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Trade of the Canary-Wines was heretofore carried on with much
benefit and advantage to Our Subjects, by a great Vent and Exportation of the
Native Commodities and Manufactures of Our Kingdoms, and the Wines received in
Exchange for those Commodities, were usually, when Imported, sold at moderate
and easy Rates, until of late, by reason of the irregular and disorderly
Trading of Retailers, and other persons no ways experienced in that Trade, and
of their extraordinary and unseasonable resort unto the said Islands; with an
unusual number of Ships, the Prices of those Wines have been exceedingly
enhaunced, and the Commodities and Manufactures of Our Kingdoms debased in
their Value by the Inhabitants of the said Islands, and Our Subjects enforced
to pay for a great part of those Wines with Pieces of Eight, and Bills of
Exchange, to the decay of Trade, and the decrease of the Treasure of Our
Kingdoms: And whereas the Inhabitants of those Islands not contenting
themselves with the Banishment of Our Consul, and the principal Factors out of
the Island of Theneriff last year, have lately proceeded further, and do openly
Declare, That no English Ship whatsoever shall be permitted to Load or Unload,
or any English Merchant to live amongst them; And the Governors of the said
Islands have published several Proclamations to that effect, and executed them
with such severity, That all Our English Merchants lately residing in those
Islands, are quite turned off the said Islands, and forced to leave their
Estates behind them, to their utter ruin. We therefore deeply resenting these
injuries done to all Our loving Subjects, and resolving not to suffer the
Indignities offered to Our Self, have thought fit by the advice of Our Council,
to Declare, and do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That
no Wines, nor any other Commodities of the Growth, Production, or Manufacture
of the Canary Islands, nor any other Merchandise whatsoever from thence, shall
at any time hereafter be Imported into this Our Kingdom, or into any other of
Our Kingdoms and Dominions, until Our Pleasure shall be further known, upon
pain of forfeiting all the Wines, Commodities, and Merchandises so Imported,
and of incurring the utmost Penalty which can be inflicted upon the wilful
Contemners of this Our Royal Command. And We do hereby Charge and Command all
and every of Our loving Subjects, of what degree and condition soever, as well
in this Our Kingdom of England, as in any other of Our Kingdoms or Dominions,
That they presume not to continue any Trade or Traffic with any of the
Inhabitants of the said Islands, nor to have any further Commerce with them, or
send any Ship or Ships thither, as they will answer the contrary at their
perils. And all Merchants and Commanders of Ships now in Port, and Outward
bound for the said Islands, or any of them, are hereby Commanded not to proceed
in such their Voyage, upon pain of Our utmost Displeasure. And We do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all Farmers, Collectors, Waiters, and Officers of
Our Customs, and all other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, That they
presume not to suffer any Wines of the Growth of the said Canary Islands, or
any other Commodities or Merchandise belonging to any of the Inhabitants of the
said Islands, or coming from thence, for the account of any other person or
persons whomsoever, to be Landed at any the Ports of this Our Kingdom, or any
other of Our Kingdoms or Dominions, until Our Pleasure herein shall be further
known, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twelfth day of November, 1666. In the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, His
Majesty's Printers, 1666.


