A DECLARATION OF THE Prince Paltsgrave, TO THE High Court of PARLIAMENT,
concerning the Cause of his departure out of England in these times of
distractions, and the manner of his carriage and behavior during the time of
his continuance with His Majesty in the North.

Likewise his earnest request to the Parliament, and the Parliaments answer
thereunto: Declared in his Letter to the House of Peers on Tuesday last.

ALSO THE QUEEN OF BOHEMIA her Resolution concerning Prince ROBERTS coming into
England against the Parliament.

Likewise a true Relation, showing how the Marquess of Hartford and his
Company are beset by the Earl of Bedford and his Forces.

Printed for J. Green. October 1. 1642.

THE QUEEN OF BOHEMIA Her Resolution concerning Prince Roberts coming into
England against the Parliament.
ALSO THE PRINCE PALTSGRAVES Declaration to the Parliament of his departure out
of England in these times of distraction: with his earnest request to the
Parliament, and the Parliaments answer thereunto.
THe Prince Paltsgrave hearing of the jealousies and differences that began to
arise between the King and Parliament, came into England, no doubt with an
intent to use his best skill to settle those distractions: but it seemed his
coming was not very well pleasing to his Majesty; for after his coming to
London, for some space of time, he was not admitted into his Majesty's
presence, but lay privately at Essex house, and therefore was there the less
hopes that his coming should do any good: which when he perceived, he took
his leave of his Majesty, and went again over into Holland, his second brother
Prince Robert going away also with him. But it seems those two brothers had
contrary affections and intents toward England: for the one went with an
intent and purpose to stay in Holland and not to meddle further with the
distractions that were in England, and the other (as it appears by the event)
with a resolution to bring in what Forces he could to assist the King in a war
against the Parliament. But some are of ^pinion, that it was infused into his
brain by the Queen after he went over from hence, which was much against his
Mothers (the good Lady ELIZABETH) mind. And although she could not persuade him
from coming again into England, with a purpose to increase the division
between the King and Parliament, yet she did refuse to give him her blessing,
who went about so wicked a design.

Not long since the Queen of Bohemia sent to the Parliament, to acquaint them
that the twelve rhousand pounds a year which she had wont to receive as a
stipend from England, since these distractions between his Majesty and the
Parliament have happened, has not been paid; which the Parliament have taken
into consideration, and notwithstanding all those ill offices which are done
here by her son Prince Robert, yet so soon as his Majesty will be pleased to
pass the, Bill for Tonnage and Poundage, which has been a long time with his
Majesty, out of which it is to be paid, or the present distempers a little
over, she should have the same.

On Tuesday the 27. of September, a letter was read in the Parliament House
which came from the Prince Paltsgrave, sent to the House of Peers, wherein he
makes a Declaration of his carriage in England while he was with his Majesty,
showing to their Lordships, that he had oftentimes persuaded and counseled his
Majesty to hearken to the advice of his great Counsel, the high and
honorable Court of Parliament, and to return unto them, and that during all
the time that he continued in England, he did never use any means either by
words or actions to increase the difference between his Majesty and the
Parliament, but as much as in him lay, had used all possible endeavors to the
contrary: neither since his going into Holland had he been an occasion of
sending over any ammunition, or other provision for war, to be employed
against the Parliament. He further declared unto their Lordships, that he was
in great want of moneys, desiring their Lordships to consider, that there has
been but little supply had out of England lately, and therefore entreated
their Lordships to let him have a thousand pound for the supply of his present
necessities. Which Letter the Lords communicated to the House of Commons,
desiring that they would join with them in an Order, that the foresaid Prince
Paltsgrave might have a thousand pound, in regard the sum he desired was not
great, but only to furnish his present occasions: which after some debate in
the House of Commons, they joined with the Lords in the said Order, and it was
done accordingly.

The Marquess of Hartford when he fled from Sherburne, marched toward Bruton
in Somersetshire, but the next day turned his course toward Minyard, and the
Earl of Bedford pursued after him with his thoupes, following after him with a
continual alarm, with the assistance of the country, and sent a post before
to Minyard to stop his passage into Wales by sea, and so pursued him to the
town: but finding no passage to get over into Wales, as he intended, he
possessed himself of a strong Inn in the said town, and there for the present
stands upon his guard: the Earl of Bedford with his Forces came to the said
town, and continues there: and a great number also of the Trained Bands of
several countries here adjacent are come thither, so that the Marquess will
find it very hard to give them the slip the third time; for he dares not look
out of the doors, he is so closely beset: and were it not for fear of burning
down the town, they would quickly force him and his company out of the house:
but within two or three days it is supposed that hunger will bring them forth
to fight, rather then they will starve: and therefore we may assure our selves,
that by the next Post we shall hear that the Earl of Bedford has taken them.

FINIS.

