JUSTICE VINDICATED From the False FUCUS put upon it, BY THOMAS WHITE Gent. Mr
THOMAS HOBBS, AND HVGO GROTIVS.


AS ALSO ELEMENTS OF Power and Subjection; Wherein is demonstrated the Cause of
all Humane, Christian, and Legal SOCIETY.

And as a previous Introduction to these, is showed, The Method by which Men
must necessarily attain ARTS and SCIENCES.

By ROGER COKE.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for G. Bedell and T. Collins, at the
Middle-Temple-Gate, Fleetstreet. 1660.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES II.
By the Grace of GOD, KING of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of
the Faith.
IF it were not unbecoming confidence, (Most Eminent of Kings!) in Hugo
Grotius, who at most did owe Your Illustrious Uncle Lewis the Thirteenth, but a
topical and temporary obedience, to dedicate his Book De Jure Belli and Pacis,
to him, founded upon such feigned and inconsistible principles, because written
for Justice: Then will it not ill become a natural Subject of Your Majesty's,
who by all divine and humane laws owes an indelible character of obedience to
Your Majesty, to implore Your patronage of Justice, founded upon the true and
genuine causes. Nor is there any attribute of Justice which Grotius there
ascribes to Your Uncle, but is as properly or more due to Your Majesty. For, if
Lewis were just, because above any thing which might be spoken, he did honor
the memory of the great King his Father, by imitating him; how just then is
Your Majesty, when as not all the storms of adverse fortune in Your Father or
Self, could ever any ways shake the constant veneration You have always paid
his Saintlike memory, by imitating him; whereas prosperity did almost ever fill
the sails of Your Uncle and his great Father! If he were just, because he did
instruct his Brother by all means, but most by his own example; then is not
Your Majesty less just, who by all means, but most by Your own Example, has so
well instructed Your Brethren, that they in all respects answer the dignity of
their high extraction, and whose eminent Virtues have attained such a height of
perfection, that they are justly celebrated all over Christendom with
admiration! If he were just, because he did adorn his Sisters with highest
matrimonies; (yet certainly it was rather the felicity of his fortune, then
acts of his justice, that he was by the marriage of his Sisters allied to all
the greatest Hereditary Princes of Christendom:) how just then is your Majesty,
who has so adorned Justice and Piety, that as being by nature wedded to these
(though born one of the greatest Princes of the Western world) You have
preferred them before the enjoyment of Three Kingdoms! If he were just, because
he did call back the almost buried Laws, and opposed himself to a Generation
making haste into worse: Who then can express Your justice, who has recalled
our buried and almost forgotten Laws, and who with most manifest danger, yet by
Providence miraculously preserved for your Subjects deliverance, did oppose
your self against the Tyranny of the most perverse generation of men that ever
pretended to be Christians! If he were not only just, but also clement, whenas
he took from his Subjects, who by ignorance of his goodness had transgressed the
bounds of their duty, nothing but the liberty of sinning, nor did force their
consciences differing from him in Religion: Let the world then judge and admire
your justice and clemency, who of your own accord does refer the most
perpetrated villainy committed in the sight of the sun, upon the person of your
Royal Father, not by your Subjects ignorant of his and your goodness, but by
those who had known his clemency and goodness, and in the worst of their
wickedness needed not have despaired of his favor, to those of your Subjects
neither convened nor elected by your authority! And are so far from taking any
thing from your peccant Subjects, more then liberty of sinnng, that you admit
of a restitution to those of your Subjects, who by such undue means had invaded
the sacred patrimony of Gods Church, and your Crown. And though these things
were committed upon pretense of Religion; yet so tender is your Majesty, that
you will force no man's conscience, not of these men! And if it were justice and
mercy in your glorious Uncle, in the prosperity of his fortune to relieve
oppressed people and Princes by his authority; then was it no ways less justice
and mercy in your Majesty, that in the adversity of your fortune, you did by
all means endeavor by your authority to relieve the oppressed and distressed
Princes and people of Christendom.

To You therefore, Great Sir! being the Fountain and Center of Justice in these
your rightful Dominions, in the lowest posture of humility, do these
Observations and Elements presume to offer themselves, though not upon any
confidence of themselves, or Author, but because w^^ten for and in defense of
Justice. To You, Sir, who by an indifferent administration of just, received
and known Laws, and moderating the severity of them, (Your Majesty being their
Moderator, as well as Arbitrator) where it becomes impossible for your Subjects
to fulfill them, or inconvenient to Your self, or Subjects, in rigor to execute
them, (if it be not your Subjects fault) shall not less, under God, confer
peace and happiness to all sorts of them, then the Sun by its effluence does
diffuse life and light to all the various creatures of the Universe. This is
it, which in time will reduce your wandering Subjects to the secure and known
paths of their Allegiance, out of which they have gone astray: This is it,
which will secure you from the imputation of Tyranny, and convince your
adversaries that it is not your fault in governing, but theirs in disobeying,
if hereafter they bring upon themselves the miseries and calamities of another
Civil war: And this is that, which will evidence to the world, that then your
adversaries became enemies to your Royal Father and Self, when they first trod
under foot the established and received Laws of their Country; and that it is,
and always was the desire of Usurpers, who having no just title but new
Oppression, to introduce more new Inventions of their own, in place of the old
Laws. This is it, which after your Majesty's gracious Act of Oblivion for
crimes past, will so settle the minds of your Subjects, that in the known ways
of their ancestors, they may expect favor and protection from your Majesty.
This is it, which will so genuinely and equally support your Majesty's Title,
that as it is so derived from the loins of innumerable Royal Ancestors, as no
man can show where it began, and so clear, that in the world no man presumes to
stand in competition with You; so is it supported by received Laws of that
continuance, that they have lost their first original.

I presume not, Sir, to say this of mine own head, to advise your Majesty, much
less have any diffidence of your Majesty's governing your Subjects any other
way then by the established and received Laws of the Nation, where men's vices
and depraved manners do not require new ones: I design no more then to
demonstrate, that it was not your Majesty's Father's, and your own adherence to
the established Laws, but the iniquity of the times, which made him a Victim,
and your Sacred self an Exile. Nay, in reason, as well as justice, it had been
a most imprudent thing in either of your Majesty's to have given up the Laws to
the arbitrary lusts of your Adversaries, or any one Faction: For, should either
of your Majesty's have indifferently renounced the Laws to your Adversaries,
being compounded of such different and contrary humors and affections, then
there was no visible means under Heaven to have cemented them, and by
consequence your Adversaries hostility and confusion continued, and your own
conditions no ways bettered or secured: Or should either of your Majesty's have
renounced the Laws, to have advanced any one Faction so above the rest, and all
your loyal Subjects, that their arbitrary wills and lusts should have been the
laws of all the rest, and your other Subjects also; yet should you not only
have failed to have contented that Faction, (it being the nature of Faction,
never to bear any grateful acknowledgment for benefits received, but on the
contrary always abuse them to their prejudice from whom they received them, and
never rest until they have made themselves all, and their Benefactors nothing
at all, or vile and miserable) but have animated all the other Factions against
your Majesty's and it.

To the fulfilling of all singular and glorious Virtues in Your Sacred person,
is added Your being a Christian King, and a Nursing Father of the Church of
Christ; and as if immediately sent from Heaven to cure and repair the wounds of
this most miserably distracted Church, although Your Majesty is descended from
innumerable Royal Ancestors, who have been Nursing Fathers of Christ's Church;
yet are you not derived from any who have had the least hand in the late
Sacrilege thereof. And though, Sir, You are and ought to be a Nursing Father of
Gods Church, and a Patron and Defense against her ravenous and devouring
Adversaries, yet none of mortal men have been more Religious Sons of the
Church, then Your Majesty, and Your Saintlike Father.

How unequal, and how unjust then have been the sufferings of Princes so just,
so religious, caused by Christians, Your natural Subjects, and these pretending
Conscience? whereas no School teaches men a better lesson of obedience to
Princes, then the Christian faith; whenas the first principle or foundation of
Subjects obedience to rightful Princes, is founded in the Law of Nature;
however popular Orators and Atheists have, against all sense, reason, nature,
and all authorities of sacred and profane History, resolved it into the pacts
and wills of men. And conscience always supposes some superior law informing
men to do, or not do a thing, or suffer, when any subordinate power commands
contrary to it; whereas Your persecutors pretending concience, trod underfoot
whatsoever might be called sacred, to the attaining their seditious and
sacrilegious ends.

That God in his providence does often permit the good and just to suffer
persecution, is evidently seen in all ages and places: But in reason and
prudence, neither Your Majesty's Father's, nor Your own adherence to the
established Government of the Church, and the Rites, Liturgy, and Means
thereof, in Your adversities, when they were so zealously persecuted by its and
Your adversaries, could be any cause thereof: Neither would the desertion of
it, have any ways conduced to either of Your Majesty's advantage; for, should
either of Your Majesty's have renounced the Church and rites thereof, so as to
have been a Christian King of such Miscreants, who (besides that they would not
be of any Christian Church or society) had by undue ways devoured the patrimony
of the Church; yet no man in his right wits could have imagined such men would
long have been governed in peace, or that all other men of their factions would
have been content, who had not made a prey thereof; and there was not
sufficient to content all, nor indeed any at all; or that the canine appetites
of those men who had devoured the lands of the Church, would not also have
hungered after those of the Crown. Or should Your Majesty have advanced any one
Faction so above the rest, that it should not only have tyrannized over the
rest of the Factions, but also Your Majesty and the rest of Your subjects; yet
could it not in reason have been expected, that this Faction (who by all Divine
and Humane laws were subject to a Government, founded upon our Savior and his
Apostles, and by a continued series dispersed over the face of Christianity,
until of late it became violated in some places of Europe by seditious and
sacrilegious men) should so unjustly cast off their obedience so rightfully
due, and yet expect that their wills and lusts should long be received for Laws
by the rest of the Factions, and all other of their fellow subjects. But
certainly, Your constant adherence to the Church, did proceed from the power
and grace of God in You, before any prudential or moral cause.

Notwithstanding that your Majesty is so constant a Preserver of Christ's
Church, and Propagator of Christian religion, and that your own conscience has
been so often attempted to be violated (by men of none at all indeed;) yet so
tender is your Majesty of other men's, that you will not force the conscience of
any of your subjects, pretending it. A strange condescension, any one will
judge, who considers the parties granting, and expecting: For, should your
Majesty command your Subjects any thing in derogation to the Majesty of God, or
forbid them the worship and service of God, your Subjects might then justly
plead conscience, because the duty and allegiance which they owe to God, is in
the first place to be paid by all his creatures: Or should your Majesty command
any thing which were immoral or unjust, as that your Subjects should dishonor
your Majesty or their Parents, etc. they might justly plead conscience, because
that for Subjects to honor their King, and children their Parents, is founded
in Nature, and is a Law of God engraven in the minds of all mortal men; or
should your Majesty have lived in the Primeve times of Christianity, when men
by the light of Humane Nature apprehending a Deity to be publicly Worshipped
and Served, yet being ignorant of the manner, misplaced it in Osyris, Isis,
Jupiter, Apollo, an Oak, etc. then to have compelled them to have Worshipped
God after the manner of Christians, had been unconscionable and unchristian,
because they paid an acknowledgement of that Worship due to God by Nature, and
could not by Nature apprehend this, but must wait upon God, until (that by the
ordinary means of the Church, or supernaturally inspired by God,) they should
be converted thereunto: Or should your Majesty command any thing in derogation
to Christian Faith or Religion, they might plead Conscience, because the
Obedience they owe thereunto is superior to all Humane Laws: But when as God is
to be publicly Worshipped, and your Majesty obeyed by the light of Humane
Nature; whenas he that hears, and obeys not the Church, is to be accounted
an Infidel and Heathen man; and neither your Majesty nor Church enjoining any
thing contrary to the Law of Nature, or Gods Will revealed in Scriptures, but
conformable to these; for men, your natural Subjects, and Born and Baptized in
a Christian Church, in contradiction to all these, to plead Liberty of
Conscience, to be Atheists, Hypocrites, and Schismatics, is such a monstrous
Paradox, as is not imaginable should proceed from reasonable creatures, not
aiming at some further mischief: And when your Majesty shall with bleeding
tears reflect upon the manners of these men thus pretending Liberty of
Conscience, you will find them never to have made any conscience of Liberty,
their Manners no whit better then their Religion? but as great enemies to
Humane Society, as Christian Religion: For they no sooner, upon pretense of
Liberty of Conscience, got license of action, but what followed; Rapine,
Plunder, Sequestration, Sacrilege, Regicidism and Murder, upon the Estates of
the Church, Crown, and the Sacred Person of your Royal Father, and the
principal members of Church and State, who were your best and most Loyal, and
their Fellow Subjects: when as by the Law, or Light of Nature, no man ought to
do that willingly to another, which he would not have done to himself. Nor is
this humor only Topical, or confined within the limits of your Dominion; but
wheresoever men would not pay the Duty they ought to God in the first Table,
they have never better performed that to their neighbor in the second, although
it has not pleased God to permit them to attain such a degree of Impiety, as
here in your Majesty's Dominions; and your Majesty may believe it, that the
times are changed, not these men's manners and dispositions, to attempt the like
again whenever they get an opportunity; however, these things at present will
be better cured by your Majesty's Christian Patience and example, then by your
severe Execution of the established Laws against them; yet if the Laborer be
worthy of his Hire, then is he who is Hired worthy to Labor; and these men who
pretending Conscience, neglect or refuse to perform the Duties of the Church,
are utterly unworthy the Means of the Church.

Man's necessity is Gods opportunity: It is Gods usual way in his Providence
(doubtless to manifest the greatness of his Power to us Mortals here below)
when men's extremities are at the highest, then to relieve them, having, it may
be, the least reasons or hope to expect it; and indeed what less then the power
and grace of God in a Christian Prince, so Religious, so Just, so Merciful, and
so descended, at such a time, could have cured the wide wounds of our miserable
Church, and distracted State? D'avila reports of Coligny the Admiral of France,
that he would usually prefer himself before Caesar or Alexander, because they
acquired greatness by prosperous Fortune; whereas notwithstanding that Fortune
was always adverse to him, he still rose more formidable and terrible to his
adversaries: Sure it is an admirable thing, that after all the adversity of
your Affairs, God should without force or blood, exalt your Sacred Head above
the Storms and Waves of such Enemies, who had neither Religion, Law, Justice or
Reason, but only force and blood in stead of, and against these, to maintain
their Cause.

It cannot but be a consolation to any man in adversity, rightly considering,
how God (in the ordinary nature of things,) does afflict men who place
happiness in things of this world, and reward the afflictions of men
(especially who suffer for a good Conscience) even in this world; for no man
placeing happiness in things here below, can so enjoy them, but necessarily a
time will come when he shall say, I take no pleasure in them; and then it will
be miserum fuisse beatum; whereas other men who are afflicted, and suffer
persecution, are no ways affrighted at the terrors of death, but rather with
joy expect happiness in another world, after they shall be freed from the cares
and troubles of this; or if it pleases God to free them from their afflictions
here, then they truly convert miserum fuisse beatum, into beatum fuisse
miserum. Besides your Majesty's individual happiness in making so right
construction of your precedent affections, and the advantages you have acquired
by your severe education therein; your Subjects (like men who have been long
sick, will better learn to esteem health) from their many sufferings in your
absence, will for the future learn to set a truer estimation upon your
Prosperity and Presence. And may the God of Peace, the God of Mercy, and the
God of Justice, so Crown the antecedent adverse fortune of You, Sir, the most
Peaceable, the most Merciful, Just, and best of Princes, that being as Good and
Just as Trajan, and as Devout and Religious as Constantine the Great, or
Theodosius the first, you may be of your Subjects as beloved as was Augustus,
and the Arbitrator of Christendom, as well as Defender of the Christian Faith:
And when this your Diadem shall descend to your next Heir, you may then assume
a Celestial one, which shall never be subject to time, variation, or chance:
Which is, and always shall be the daily Payer of,

SIR, Your most Devoted, and most Obedient Subject, ROGER COKE.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Mr THO: WHITE's GROUNDS OF Obedience and Government.

Mr HOBBS his BOOK De Cive: AND UPON HVGO GROTIVS De Jure Belli and Pacis.

Prematur, nunquam Opprimitur veritas.

Nulla res magis operae pretium est, sive ad utilitatem fructuosior, sive ad
animi voluptatem jucundior esse potest quam Justitia, qua quidem post Deum
Immortalem, rerum omnium Publicarum Fundamenta, nituntur.

Corruption vero optimi, est pessima.

By ROGER COKE.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for G. Bedel and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple
Gate. 1660.

TO THE READER.
I Have often with great admiration considered in my self, how that all men,
good and bad, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, have with one voice commended
Virtue, and decried Vice; and yet scarce any man in a thousand has made Virtue
the rule or reason of his actions. Nor is it a thing less worth admiration to
consider, how that all men generally have not only a natural spite against
their Superiors, and are unwilling to obey them, but also a propense desire to
attain to Liberty, and do tread under foot all things which may be called
sacred, to the attaining thereof; and yet at no time or place in the world, did
ever men accomplish it. I did therefore conclude with my self, that not only
all Moral Virtue, but Humane Society, did proceed from higher then any humane,
or voluntary causes.

Nor was that less abhorrent to me, which men in this factious age beg for a
Principle, viz. That all men by Nature, or the Law of Nature, are in a like
equal condition; and that the Laws of Nature are eternal, and immutable even by
God himself: And yet by a continued violence upon these eternal and immutable
Laws, men should every where in the world live in Society, or in the mutual
offices of commanding and obeying.

Yet did not I so confidently resolve these things, as to exclude what I could
argue against them: I therefore did suppose in my self a company of such men,
as were in a parity of condition; yet could I never conceive it possible that
ever any Civitas or Supreme power could be derived or created by them: For
either this Civitas must be superior to the Cives or People that made it, or
not: If it were not superior to it, then could it not govern or rule them; for
dominion is always placed in the superior part: If superior to it, then was the
Creature or Instrument superior to the Cause and Creator, which is most absurd.
Nor was it to me less monstrous to imagine, that any thing could give or
transfer that to another, which it self has not; but this people or multitude,
who should make this civitas, had neither Jus vitae or necis, nor Property
seperately nor conjunctly; they could not therefore endue another with that
power, which none of them, nor all of them together had, and without which,
there can be no supreme power which may protect and defend Subjects.

But I did not insist only upon this, but supposed that the cives could make a
civitas, which should be superior to them, and endew it with a power which none
of them, nor all of them had; yet was I no less perplexed then before, who
these cives, which should make this civil Pact should be? and who should be
subject to it? If only those be the cives, who made this civitas, and they
only subject to it* then were Women and Children, who were none of the cives
that made this civitas free and independent from it: Nor could all the people
or multitude of both Sexes, and all Ages, in such an imaginary state, be the
cives which must constitute this civitas by virtue of the civil Pact: For many
must necessarily be so young, as not being compotes mentium, they could have
understanding sufficient for the doing such an act: And if no Laws oblige Men
to their Pacts and Contracts done under such an age, then sure it must be
unreasonable, that Children and Infants should be obliged to their act, if they
then did it; or therefore obliged, because others had done it, upon whom they
had no dependence.

Well, but suppose these men in such a condition to be qualified to do such an
act, yet did another doubt arise, which I could no ways salve, viz. Who should
define at what age the Men should be, who should constitute this civitas? Well,
I went yet further, I supposed it granted, That it should be agreed at what age
Men in such a condition might give up their wills, and constitute a civitas;
yet was it not in reason probable, that this civitas should be of one days
continuance: For being formally constituted of such individual cives, it could
not be of any longer continuance then the cause, Sublata causa, tollitur and
effectus; but the next day, some of the cives would be probably dead, and
others grown up to be of age, who were none of those individuals which did
constitute the civitas. Well, but I supposed the cives who made Formae rerum
sicut numeri consistunt in indivisibili. They could not therefore be the cives,
that did constitute the civitas, and by consequence no such could remain as the
civitas.
this civitas to be immortal, and no posterity; yet could not I in reason
expect it to be of any continuance; for cujus est velle, ejus est nolle, and
not only all just and legal actions, but all Arts and Sciences, may truly and
ultimately be resolved into their first Principles, without any diminution to
them. The People therefore constant in nothing but inconstancy, could not in
reason be expected constant and obedient to their Creature the civitas only,
and yet so in nothing else: Besides, I always did believe, and yet do, that all
Men's Pacts and Wills must be conformable to the Laws of every place, and where
they are against them, then do they oblige no further then to Repentance: Much
more therefore ought all men's Wills and Pacts, to conform and submit to the
Laws of Nature, and never transgress that; and that all Pacts and Acts of men's
Wills made against it, oblige to nothing but Repentance: Nor is there any thing
more abominable, then to conceive that the Acts of men's Wills should irritate
the Law of Nature, which they say is immutable by God. Hence it is, I conceive,
that Mr. Hobbs, will not have all men to be of a like and equal condition lege
naturae, but jure naturae; and therefore most absurdly makes jus naturae, to be
contrary to lex naturae (and yet oftentimes in his Preface, and Cap. 8. Art.
10. confounds jus with lex) and that the Acts of men's Wills, to make them in a
better estate then God has made them, should be the Law of Nature, or of God:
Whereas on the contrary, If no man that ever was born in the World, which was
not a Posthumus King, but was born in subjection, not only to his Parents, or
as a Servant in a Family, but to something superior to these; then cannot the
will of that man, nor all the men in the World, alter or make that man in
another condition then that, whereof neither any act of his will, nor the will
of any man else, was the cause.

But yet did not I conclude things, only as I was an intellectual or rational
Creature; but being a Christian, I submitted all my Reason and Understanding to
the most high Authority of sacred Scripture, in those plain places which admit
of no Controversy, where both in the Old and New Testament, the first causes
of supreme Power are owned to be Gods Ordinance; Romans 13.
By God Kings reign, and Princes decree Prove. 8.
Justice; and there can be no power but from above, Joh. 19. 11. And all power
is in relation to something subject to it.

But because I would not seem to see only with mine own eyes, I desired yet to
be better informed of these things, and from whom better then Mr. Hobbs, and
Hugo Grotius, (Men no doubt of as eminent learning and parts, as any this last
Age has produced) these Men both derive their civitas from such Principles, as
is before spoken of, viz. From the Pacts and contracts of Men in a parity and
equal condition; but so far was I from being convinced, that (if I understand
them aright) I was amazed to see such inconsistible and impossible things to
come from Men, otherwise so learned.

For though Mr. Hobbs does lay down his Principles, and pursue his method much
more clearly then Grotius does; yet his Principles are so monstrous, That to me
it is impossible any ingenuous Man should assent to them. Indeed if Mr. Hobbs
would have supposed, that the state of Man had been either in Society, or out
of Society; and that, out of Society, Men had been in such a state as he makes
them, in his state of pure Nature, I should never have stumbled at it: But, he
forsooth, requires it for a Yet thus much I will tell Mr. Hobbs, he may as well
suppose a Brute an intellectual or rational Creature; or a man, no intellectual
or rational Creature; as no sociable, or out of Society.
Principle, That all Men jure naturali, are in a parity and equal condition,
and may kill one another without any offense or sin; and that Men continue in
this estate, until by their civil Pact, they oblige themselves to one another,
that the will of the civitas shall be the will of them all. Notwithstanding
this, I must needs say of Mr. Hobbs, That if Men have so little understanding,
as to make Jus natural to be contrary to Lex naturalis, and so little grace as
to believe that the civitas has all its power from the Pacts and wills of Men,
and yet impossible to command any thing contrary to the Law of Nature (which he
says is the Law of God) and tyranny to be only ab exercitio, when as it is
impossible for Kings to command any thing contrary to the Law of Nature; and
all Faith and Ghostly Power which our Savior left in his Church, to be
instrumental and subservient to it; and never look how little he understands a
Pact, or from whence Men become obliged to it; the cives of this Vtopia may do
well enough.

If I edified but little by Mr. Hobbs, yet I received much less satisfaction
from Grotius; for Mr. Hobbs defines his terms so clearly, as to me, he was
easily understood; whereas all Grotius his Principles are so perplexed, and
equivocal, that it is not possible for any Man to understand any thing clearly
from him. As the first thing in his Preface, he confounds, is, Societas and
Communitas; whereas Societas is as different from Communitas, as black is from
white; Societas, according to the definition of Aristotle, being Pol. lib. 1.
cap* 5.
Vnum quid it a constans ex diversis personis, ut sit unum quod imperet,
alterum quod pareat. Society is one thing so made up of diverse persons, that
one may command, another obey; Whereas community is, where any company of
Creatures are, without the offices of commanding and obeying.

Well, but having got out of his Preface, after some Propositions of his
Method, etc. he in the Tenth Paragraph of the First Chapter of the First Book
De jure Belli and Pacis, defines Jus Natural in a tedious general thing, to be
dictatum rectae rationis, etc. and this to be the Law of God; and about the
middle, to be immutable by God himself; and toward the latter end, to continue
but for a certain space; and toward the beginning he makes the Dominion which
is now in use, to be brought in by the will of Man, and this to be Jus Natural
too. Now let any ingenuous Man judge, what can be clearly deduced from Jus
Natural, which is the Law of God, and immutable by God; and yet to continue
but for a certain time, until a Dominion brought in by the will of Man, should
abrogate what was immutable by God; and this Dominion thus brought in against
this Jus Natural, to be Jus Natural too. If I have slandered Grotius, let any
Man see the Paragraph aforesaid.

It was to me an admirable thing to consider, that men so learned, should one
of them define the Law of Nature to be Dictamen rectae rationis, the other
Dictatum rectae rationis. Well, I will therefore see what Ratiocinatio is, and
what Dictamen, or Dictatum rectae rationis (which is the same thing;) and
whether this can to any ingenuous man be any probable definition of the Law of
Nature.

Aristotle, Eth. Lib. 6. Cap. 3. makes Ratiocination, and by consequence every
dictate of Reason, to be from Universals; and that there are some Principles
which do constitute the Ratiocination, of which there can be no Ratiocination.
These Principles for which no Reason can be given, and yet the reason of all
those things which can be deduced from them, are called Axiomata, Dignitates,
or Communes Notiones; and from these, men by Ratiocination or Right Reason, do
infer Arts and Sciences Scientia est actio, ars effectio. Eth. l. 6. c. 4. Both
begotten by right Reason. Ars est habitus ad faciendum idoneus cum vera ratione
conjunctus.
: Nay, all Ratiocination or Right reasoning whatsoever, may be resolved into
somewhat which is superior to this Ratiocination; for which no reason can be
given These things thus premised, I say it is impossible the Law of Nature
should be the dictate of Right Reason, and thus I prove it; Every Principle
which does constitute Ratiocination, and for which no Reason can be given, is
no dictate of Right Reason. But the Law of Nature is a Principle which does
constitute Ratiocination; and for which no reason can be given; Therefore the
Law of Nature is no dictate of Right Reason. If Mr. Hobbs denies the Minor
Proposition, set him show into what it can be further resolved, or what can
prove it: For though God be the prime and efficient cause of all things, but
what proceeds from the will of man, and into which, all things may be
ultimately resolved; yet by Principles Aristotle and all Philosophers,
understand those things which immediately proceed from God; and the Law of
Nature could not be the Law of God, if it did not immediately proceed from him;
but the Law of that thing from which it did immediately proceed; the Law of
Nature therefore is a Principle.
.

Well, but let us suppose the Law of Nature to be the dictate of Right Reason,
and see the consequence. Every dictate of Right Reason, is of less Dignity,
Authority, and Excellency, then the Right Reason, viz. The Effect, then the
Cause: But ex hypothesi, the Law of Nature, viz. the Law of God the Creator, is
the dictate of Right Reason. Therefore is the Law of the Creator, of less
Dignity, authority and excellency, then the faculty and attribute of the
creature, viz. Right reason; then which what can be more monstrous and
blasphemous?

Nor is this definition less ridiculous, then impossible and blasphemous: For
the dictates of Right reason are understood by one man, and not by another, and
may be learned and taught. Suppose now, one of these Masters of Reason should
come to the most plain and ignorant man in the world, (who is compos mentis)
and tell him, he would instruct and teach him the most excellent dictate of
Reason in the world, viz. That there is one God infinitely good, who is to be
worshipped and served by man; And that this God requires of every man, that in
that state wherein he has made him, he would not willingly do that to another,
which he would not have done to himself: would not this poor ignorant man
deride this Master of Reason, and tell him, he knew this, as well as himself?
But suppose he should be so impudent as to deny this; since Grotius is not in
case, I would desire Mr. Hobbs to prove it, or give a right reason thereof, and
learn this man his Dictate of Right reason.

Well, but let us see whether this Canting thing be worth the name of a
Definition. Omnis definitio; est exclusio aequivoci. If the Law of Nature be
the Dictate of Right reason, then does the Law of Nature exclude every thing
else from being the Dictate of Right reason, or this cannot be the definition
of it: I would know now of Mr. Hobbs; whether all Arts and Sciences, and
Prudent actions, be the Laws of Nature, or not? If they be the Laws of Nature,
then is every Inscientifical and Imprudent man, an Unjust man. If they be not
the Laws of Nature, and so not the Dictates of Right reason, then let Mr. Hobbs
show what else does dictate them. Nor is Mr. Hobbs less happy in defining a
Pact, upon which he grounds his Civitas. It is just therefore that this man,
who (Cap. 18. Art. 4.) makes all Science to be from Definitions only, or
Subjects without Predicates, (without which it is impossible there can be a
Proposition) and all Science to be from the memory (which is common to all
Beasts, as well as Mr. Hobbs; for so the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
masters crib, it being only retained in the memory) excluding the
Understanding, should so rashly define things, and understand them no better.

To believe there is a God to be worshipped and served; and that no man should
wilfully, in that state and condition wherein God has made him, do that to
another, which he would not have done to himself; is that Law which God has
engraven in the minds of all mortal men, wise and unwise, learned and
ignorant, noble and ignoble, in their wits, and is the foundation and basis of
all Humane society: And this is that first and universal cause, from which all
moral virtues (the dictates of Right reason from this cause) do more genuinely
and naturally flow, then any Proposition in Geometry does from the Axioms or
Principles of it: For what man is there in this world, of what estate and
condition soever, but desires not to be wronged and injured? Let not him then
in that state, wilfully wrong or injure any other of what estate soever. If he
be a Subject, and desires to be protected in his life and fortune, by the Laws
of his Country, from the violence and oppression of other men; let not him
abuse or violate the Laws of his Country, to the wrong or oppression of
another. If he desires every man should keep promise, and do justly by him; let
not him break his word, and deal unjustly with another. Is he a King? he would
not willingly be disseised or oppressed by another; let him not therefore
disseise or injustly oppress another. Does any King desire not to be invaded or
oppressed by his Subjects? let not him therefore oppress his Subjects. If he
had been a Subject, he would have desired protection from his Prince, by an
equal and moderate distribution of known Laws; let him therefore equally
moderately govern his Subjects by known Laws. And from this Law did always men
desire, though ignorant of the manner, to worship and serve GOD, although they
misplaced the Deity in the Sun, Moon, an Oak, Apollo, Jupiter, etc. And this is
that Law which shall judge and condemn the immoral actions and vices of men in
all Ages, especially in this latter Age, because they sinned against the Light
or Law of Nature, engraven in the minds of all men.

Now whether these men being Christians in name, yet having cast off all
Christian society, and not being of any Christian church or religion that I
ever heard of, should not be content here; but (although they scarce agree in
any thing else) proceed so far as to make the Laws of God subject and depending
upon the reasons and fantasies of men; and not to tell them where their
reasons shall begin, if not at the Laws of God, but every man left to go a
whoring after his own inventions? For what can then restrain man, where his
Reason is become superior to the Laws of God? and to make all humane society to
have its origination from the pacts and wills of men; have not been as great
enemies not only to Christian religion, but also to all humane society, as the
malice of the Devil could invent, let any sober unbiassed man judge? or if all
the confusions and distractions in Christendom (to the shame and scandal of
Christianity) have not had their origination from this pretense? Nor has this
senseless resolution of all things into Reason, ended only in the distractions
of State, but also been the first source and fountain from whence all these
distractions and confusions in the Church have arisen, without any possible
hope of ever reconciling them, where these principles are continued. Hence it
is, that the venerable and highest Authority of the sacred Scriptures, are
become the subject of all Tavern-discourses; and every man that scarce
understands any reason, must (forsooth) have a reason given him, why the
Scriptures are the Word of God. And yet in all other Authorities whatsoever,
men will deride the folly of others, who go about to prove them by Reason; for
Reason is begotten always from Authorities and Principles, and therefore
cannot Authorities and Principles be begotten from Reason.

I have been often almost astonished to consider, how such senseless,
blasphemous, and ridiculous things should merely from the authority of the
Assertors be imposed upon, and received by the world without contradiction;
whereas narrowly looked into, one would scarce believe the Authors had ever
understood Logic, or one leaf in Aristotle. And for my part, if I could not
ultimately resolve the Dictates of my Reason as a Christian, into plain places
of Scripture, so well as any Geometrician could any Proposition of Geometry
into the Principles of Euclids Elements; I would be content to let them wander
for ever without any termination, rather then admit them (the Scriptures) to be
a creature of a creature, and the subject of every wild fantastical conceit
and opinion. And if I could not ultimately resolve the reason of all my moral
actions as a man, into the Law of Nature which God has engraven in men's minds,
and not into the wills of men; I would be content to conclude with Carneades,
that men have at diverse times established several Laws for manners, and by them
have been often altered, but that there is no such thing as the Law of Nature;
and that all men, as well as other creatures, are naturally carried to their
profits: And so there is no such thing as Justice; or if there were, it were
the greatest folly, because men by endeavoring the good of others, prejudice
themselves.

Since the Grecians and Romans were the first, who in the world did make all
power to be from the People; I suppose that Mr. Hobbs and Grotius took their
Principles from them. Let us see whether by the People they understand the same
thing with the Romans and Grecians, or the same thing with one another. By the
People of Rome, or Athens, the Romans and Athenians understood them, and them
only, who were civitate donati, and not men born in a promiscuous rout and
parity, without all order and subordination; but made so by violent usurpation.
By the People, Mr. Hobbs understands the King or Court governing. By the
People, Grotius every where (I believe, for he no where that I can find,
defines the People) understands the Subjects governed, and they who in a parity
or equal condition constituted the Civitas.

Upon these and many other considerations and observations upon them, I was so
far from being convinced, that I became much more firmly established then
before in my Judgment, (for Opinion I will not have of those things, wherein I
am possessed of the constant practice of the world in all ages and places; the
plain, undubitable, and uncontrolled places of Scripture both in the Old and
New Testament, and no color of allegation against them from any other places;
the Authority of the highest Philosopher; my Country-Laws; and all those Theses
and Axioms upon which almost all Reason and Philosophy are grounded; and these
things opposed by such monstrous, feigned, equivocal and silly beggings of the
question, which no man, not blinded with faction, or stupid ignorance, can
grant) yet had not these Observations become public, if it had not been upon
an odd occasion, which was:

Upon a time being with a Brother-in-law, a Kinsman of mine (at dinner) came to
my Brothers; where, in discourse, he asked me if I had seen a Book of Tho.
Whites, called The Grounds of Obedience and Government? I answered no, nor did
I desire to see any thing of his doing, having conceived a prejudice of the
Man's ability and ingenuity. He confidently replied, that I should be convinced,
if I did but read it, and that he would send me the book. Yet was I so far from
accepting his courtesy, that I importunately desired him not to do it: But he
notwithstanding all importunity, on purpose sent his man with it that night to
me, being at that time much afflicted with my wonted Melancholy, which became
more excited when I had read some part of it: And seeing a thing so senseless
and void of all humanity, to be imposed upon the world, (which questionless was
intended to prefer some Faction or Interest of his;) and yet forsooth he tells
us, it is a second Edition corrected and amended by the Author; (wheresoever
therefore I name our Author, I mean Tho. White Gent.) I did in detestation of
the Thing (not of the Man, for I never saw him in all my life) set my self to
make these Observations upon it.

He harps upon the same string with Mr. Hobbs and Grotius, That all Supreme
Power is originally created by Men's wills subject to it: Yet being a fine
Gentleman in quirpo, he dances a Galliard by himself, and most senselesly makes
men out of society to be a Rational multitude, and to have Property before they
had Laws or Government, and to be a People after they had given up their power
to another to govern them. But lest it should be objected, that though our
Author be hood-winked, yet Mr. Hobbs and Grotius might be very clear-sighted
and barefaced, I thought it not amiss to make these Observations upon them
also. As a Preparative to a Purge, I pray (Reader) take these few Notes.

1. First I say, they falsely derive Government: For though they all differ in
the manner of it, yet is all Government so far from being so derived as any of
them would have it, in the first Institution, that if any of them can show any
one Government so derived since the beginning of the world, I will yield the
cause.

2. They feign that for a Principle, which never was, viz. That men by nature
are in a parity or equal condition: For never were men since the Creation, in
any age or place of the world, in such a condition. But suppose somewhere in
the world it might have been found, that men in a like condition did by their
acts and wills form themselves into a Society; yet is it a most unreasonable
thing to conclude from thence, that all power in Government is from the People:
For, Singulars are deduced and concluded from Universals; not Universals by
Singulars.

3. The Principle they beg, is destructive to all good manners; for, Justice is
the fountain of all humane Virtues and Morality, (as all Philosophers, and
best, and wisest men hold:) And if Justice be the duty which men owe their
Superiors, and that it may be truly and ultimately resolved into the first
cause, without any detriment or damage to it; and if all order, superiority,
and power in Government may truly and ultimately be resolved into the People,
or the wills of the Subjects, or Party governed; then the wills of the Subjects
being the fountain and first cause of all Order and Justice, that is Justice in
the People, to do what they list; then which, nothing can be more destructive
to all Virtue, Justice, and Good manners.

4. It is damnably destructive to Faith; for, All powers are of God, Romans 13.
and, No power can be given but from above, S. John 19. 11.

Nor were these Men, when they wrote their several Treatises, De Cive, De Jure
Belli and Pacis, and Grounds of Obedience and Government; much better in their
Religion (if I conceive a right Notion of Religion, viz. That it is Actus
Divini cultus, or the Public worship and service of God, in an unity, form and
communion) then their Writings show them to be for Justice and Government. For
though our Author be a Pretender to be of the Religion of the Church of Rome;
yet it would trouble the greatest Critique of this Age to show where the
Religion of either of the other were to be found. And who but such men as
these, would pin their faith upon the tales and fictions of Poets, before the
most venerable and sacred Authority of Holy Scripture? Nor can the eldest of
Poets writings be compared in antiquity with the Scriptures: For if it could,

Cur supra bellum Thebanum, and funera Trojae,
Non alias, alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
And the Theban and Trojan War happened after the Year of the World 2750. The
Trojan War about the time that Jephthah judged Israel; and the Thebani War in
that Age, or the Age immediately before. See Helv. and Sir Walt. Raleigh Hist.
World, lib. 2. cap. 13. sect. 7.

For my part, if in washing off the Fucus with which these men have obscured
the true causes of all Society, and has no color of verisimilitude in it, the
truth of all Humane, Christian, and Legal society may more clearly appear from
their natural and genuine causes; I shall then not think my time and pains
utterly lost, which otherwise I should.

If it be objected, that I have transgressed the bounds of Civility in these
Observations upon Mr. White; and that such opposing is rather like to increase
differences, then reconcile them: I answer, that if Mr. White (or at least to
my understanding) had not propounded some base Faction or Interest, and not any
Good intentions, to have been his end by this Discourse of the Grounds of
Obedience and Government; Or if he would have been content to have made it his
own case only, I should have been content to have taken no notice of it. But
since he is not only content to prostitute all Virtue and Morality in himself;
and not stay there, but make this public, and all men who are not of his
opinion, not to be Gro. 16. end.
worthy the name of Men; sure it is rather to be expected he should be severely
reprehended, and his absurdities so detected, that they may be avoided by other
men, then to be hoped that ever he should be reclaimed from them.

Note, neither Grotius nor our Author make any Government, but only Monarchy,
to be dissolvible: For if the Supremacy be once vested in a many-headed-Beast,
be it Court or People, then are they so sacred and inviolable, that neither of
them have one word, in what causes they forfeit their Soveraignties. And though
Grotius no where so defines the People, as any man may understand any thing by
it; yet sure by the People they mean (if they mean any thing) the Subjects of
any Prince or State. Suppose therefore that the People may dissolve Government,
as often as they see occasion; yet if the People be Vnum quid, made up of all the
individual Subjects of any Prince, then must the deposing of any Prince, if it
be the act of the People, be the act of every individual Subject; which is a
thing never done, nor will be unto the end of the world. All Grotius, and our
Authors Necessities and Reasons therefore for deposing of Princes by the
People, are mere Cantings, and invented only to nurse up Factions in the World
without end, until Monarchy or Regal power should be extirpated in all the
World.

Postscript to the Reader.
THe Edition of Bodin de Repub. cited in these Observations and Elements, is
that which was printed at Lions 1586. and afterward sold at Paris.

The Edition of Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis, here and hereafter cited, is
that printed at Amsterdam by John and Cornelius Blaeu, 1642.

The Edition of Mr. Hobbs his Philosophical Elements de Cive, here and
hereafter cited, is that printed at Amsterdam 1647. by L. Elzevirius

The Grounds of Obedience and Government, by Tho. White Gent. is the Second
Edition corrected and amended by the Author, and printed by J. Flesher, 1655.

Reader, I confess I have not always cited our Author Tho. White Gent. in his
very words; but if I have wronged him in the Sense, (there being so very little
in the whole Treatise) I acknowledge it a crime unpardonable.

Generatio Animalium cited, is that printed at Amsterdam by Lewis Elzevirius,
1651.

By what means Men attain Arts and Sciences.
1. NIhil est in intellectu, quod non prius fuerit in sensu, says the Of
Humane reason, and the manner of acquiring Knowledge from Aristotle; and Doctor
Harvies opinion.
highest Philosopher, Anal. Post. 2. Since only Man is a reasonable Creature,
and can by his reason attain to Knowledge, it will not be a superfluous
undertaking, to endeavor to show by what means Men attain to Knowledge; and
what Reason is: And since that most excellent Philosopher Doctor William Harvey
has taken so much pains, and more subtly and accurately disputed the manner
and Pref. Genesis Anim.
order of attaining Knowledge then any Man before him, we will take him in our
way. He says there is no Knowledge innate in us from the opinion of Aristotle,
etc. In the next Paragraph he says, but from whence, and how Page. 25.
this Knowledge comes to us. I do not think it will be unprofitable here to set
down, as well, to the more perfect understanding of the generation of living
Creatures, as also for the removing the doubt, which any Man might have deduced
from the opinion of Aristotle, for he affirms that all learning Analyt. Post.
Lib. 1. tit. 1.
and mental discipline is made from antecedent Knowledge; from whence it may
seem to follow, either we have no Knowledge, or that it is born with us, which
is dissentaneous to what was before.

2. This doubt is afterward loosed by Aristotle himself, where he teaches 16.
Lib. 2. cap. ult.
how Knowledge may be acquired; for after he had taught that all certain
Knowledge is to be had from a syllogism and demonstration, and had By the
opinion of Aristotle.
made manifest, that every demonstrative syllogism is made up of prime and
necessary principles, at length he enquireth; Quomodo principia nota fiant, and
quis sit notificans habitus, inquirit; simul etiam, utrum habitus, cum non
insint, ingenerentur; an, cum inessent, laterent? Non habemus (inquit) eos
habitus; accidit enim ut eos qui habent cognitiones exquisitiores
demonstratione, lateant. Si vero eos accipimus, cum antea non haberemus,
quomodo notum faceremus, and disceremus ex non antecedente cognitione?
Perspicuum igitur est, neque haberi, nec in ignorantibus, ac nullo habitu
praeditis gigni posse. Quare necesse est, facultatem quandam haberi, non tamen
talem, quae his praestantior sit, tanquam exquisitior. Videtur autem hoc inesse
omnibus animalibus: habent enim vim congenitam judicativam, quam appellant
sensum. Cum autem sensus insit; in aliis animalibus, res sensu percepta manet,
in aliis, non manet. In quibus igitur non manet; haec aut omnino, aut little
quae non manent, cognitionem non habent, extra (...) sentire: alia vero cum
sentiunt, unum quid in anima retinent. Cum autem multa animalia hujusmodi sint,
jam est discrimen quoddam; adeo ut in aliis ratio fiat ex hujusmodi rerum
memoria; in aliis, non fiat. Ex sensu igitur fit memoria, quemadmodum dicimus:
ex memoria vero saepe ejusdem rei facta, fit experientia. (multae enim numero
memoriae, sunt una experientia.) At vero ex experientia, sive ex omni and
universali quiescente in anima (nimirum uno praeter multa, quod in omnibus
illis inest unum and idem) fit principium artis, and scientiae: artis si
pertineat ad generationem; (viz. agenda, vel efficienda;) scientiae, si
pertineat ad id quod est (viz. cognitionem entis.) Itaque, nec insunt definiti
habitus; nec fiunt ex aliis habitibus notioribus, sed ex sensu.

3. From which words of Aristotle it is clearly manifest, by what order By the
opinion of Dr. Harvey.
the Knowledge of every Art or Science is acquired, viz. from the sense the
thing perceived remains still: from the permanency of the thing perceived,
comes the memory: from the memory multiplied, experience: from experience,
ratio universalis, definitiones, and maxima sive axiomata communia, cognitionis
certissima principia ex gr. Idem eidem, secundum idem, esse, and non esse,
impossible. Omnis affirmatio, vel negatio, aut vera est, aut falsa; and
hujusmodi alia.

Wherefore as we said before, there is no perfect Knowledge, which may be
called ours, which is within us; unless by some means it does proceed from
experiment made by us, and our sense; or at least, by these examined, proved,
and firmly builded, it may appear above any pre-existent Knowledge in us.
Because without memory there can be no experience, which is nothing else but
multiplied memory: in like manner memory cannot be, without permanence of the
thing perceived: and the thing perceived cannot remain in what it never was,
etc.

4. But multi multa, nemo omnia vidit. I do not think that all light of
understanding was so shut up in Aristotle's brain, that all things pronounced
Apology.
by him, are to be taken for granted Principles; yet do I entertain so
venerable an opinion of Aristotle, that I do admire him, as the most eminent of
all men, in all humane learning, among the Ancients; and not to be paralleld by
any of the Moderns: but inventis addere, is one of the chiefest ends of Man's
being; and there are yet, and so will be until the end of the World, many
things received for truth, which upon more search will be found but
verisimilitudes; and infinite things hidden from our Forefathers, which will be
infinitely found out by the present and subsequent generation; that the
Infinity of God may appear, as well to the present and subsequent age, as to
the antecedent, in all his works.

5. Well then, Aristotle says, and the Doctor subscribes to it, that All
things were nor in the senses, before they are in the understanding, according
to the opinion of Aristotle, and the Doctor.
Nihil est intellectu, quod non prius fuerit in sensu. I deny that there is
nothing in the understanding, which was not first in the senses: for there are
many things intelligible, which are not sensible; as time does, every article
of it, intelligibly pass away, not sensibly. I understand that the center of a
circle, is a point; and that a point, by the definition of it, est cujus nulla
pars est; it cannot therefore according to the true definition of it, be so
expressed, as to be the object of sense. So a right line is longitudo,
latitudinis expers; but neither a right line nor a point can be truly
represented to the sense, according to the truth of them, as they arise in the
understanding; and so two right, or supposed right lines, which are not
parallel, cannot be infinitely produced according to sense, but they will cut
one another; but intelligibly they may; for no Man can understand so small a
quantity of distance, before the intersection, but I can understand a smaller,
and another smaller then that, and so ad infinitum; and so Quantitas
divisibilis est in semper divisibila, and potest infinite augeri, and minui;
but this is only intelligibly, it cannot be actually or sensibly done; and so
the contactus of a right line with a circle, is a point in the understanding,
and not sensibly; and so is the touching of two circles, either within one
another, or without. Nay, neither Art, Science, nor any rational production
whatsoever a priori, but must necessarily be in the understanding before it can
be in the senses. I understand Animal to comprehend not only the Creatures I
have seen, but all those which are, were, or ever shall be; and so I understand
things equal to a third thing, are equal to one another; yet nor I, nor any Man
else ever saw two things equal to a third; and the whole body of Geometry is of
all Sciences most intelligible, and yet abstracted from all sensible matter.

6. If it be true that both Aristotle and the Doctor affirm, that all No Art or
Science arises from the Senses and memory.
Art and Science is acquired from the receiving a thing into the senses, and
that from the permanence of the thing in the sense the memory is made; and from
the multiplication of the memory, Experience; and from Experience, the
Principles of all Art and Science, and that it be true which Aristotle says,
to which the Doctor subscribes, Fit ex memoria, experientia hominibus: multae
etenim ejusdem res memoriae, unius experientiae vim efficient. Meta. l. 1. c. 1.
Quare experientia pene simile quid scientiae ac arti esse videtur; then does
it most evidently and perspicuously follow, that he that can longest retain
things in his sense, that is, has the best memory, is the most scientifical,
and most artificial Man: whereas we daily see that the Man that has the
greatest memory, is usually a very blockhead, and that he remembers almost all
the things which are done and said, yet cannot tell from what cause they did
proceed, but only remembers the things. Nor will that which the Doctor says,
Quippe sine memoria, nulla fit experientia, mend the matter: for as I do deny
any Art or Science can proceed from the sense, memory and experience; so do I
not affirm that without the memory, any Art or Science can be made. I say no
Art nor Science can arise from the apprehension of singulars into the sense,
and retaining of them there, and from experiment only. For Arts, and Sciences,
are not things merely apprehended, and received into the sense, and so retained
in memory, but something else which is truly and rightly derived from those
things, which are universally true, and never before known to the senses, or
remembered.

7. And as all the particular stories and things in the world retained Nor from
the understanding without the memory and senses
in the memory, cannot move one step to the attaining of any Art or Science; so
cannot the apprehension of universal causes in the understanding, of themselves
produce any thing in order to the attaining of any Art or Science. For
universal causes in nature prove nothing; but as meeting particular causes, do
determine those, and specify their Acts. The truth of both these is easily and
daily seen in Men, who are very dull, and yet of vast memories; who remember
all things, but can scarcely be ever made to discourse of, and understand any
thing; and of Men that are too light, and fantastical, who only talk
generally, without applying these generals to any particular. The one is like a
Ship, which is overladen with Ballast, and not having Sails proportionable,
can scarcely be made to sail with any wind: the other is like a Ship which
has no Ballast, and so much sail, that she is never in any steadiness, but
carried hither and thither upon every small puff of wind, the one will upon
any discourse or ratiocination, be still absurdly telling particular stories,
which he in his defect of understanding, supposes should be the universal and
prime reason of the discourse: whereas the other from the lightness of his
fantasy, and defect of memory; never applies his general notion, to any
particular thing, and so concludes nothing.

8. Whereas Aristotle and the Doctor affirm, that experiment proceeds Axioms
and Principles do not proceed from experiment,
from many memories, or memory multiplied, and that ratio universalis,
definitiones, etc. proceed from experiment. A Man may justly deny it, for it is
not many things, or multiplied things, which can make ratio universalis; but
ratio universalis, axioma, etc. is that which does not signify many things
only, but every thing which is comprehended in the terms; and it is impossible
that any Man should make experiment of all things, which are comprehended under
one general Notion.

9. Aristotle says, Per experientiam ars, and scientia hominibus efficitur,
Nor Art and Sciences. Met. lib. 1. c. 1. an finem.
Experientia enim (ut recte ait Polus Apud Plat. in Gorgia.
) artem efficit, imperitia vero casum, to which the Doctor subscribes, and
says, there can be no prudent or truly knowing Man, which by his proper
experiment, has not thoroughly understood a thing to be so. If this were
universally true, then could no wise or prudent Man understand thoroughly any
Law which forbids Theft or Murder upon the penalty of hanging; unless he should
steal and commit Murder, and so be hanged for his pains: and for my part I
will rather believe that if a Man puts his finger into the fire he will burn
it; and that if he be long over head and ears in the water, he will drown
himself, then make experiment thereby to be accounted a wise and prudent Man.
Afterward he says, From hence it is (viz. for want of experience) many
pretenders Page. 30.
to knowledge, and Sophisters cropping of the inventions of other Men, the same
things every where (the order only, and words changed, and a few things of
small moment added) do confidently challenge for their own; and render
Philosophy, which ought to be certain and perspicuons) obscure, intricate, and
confused. It is true, that in all argumentation a posteriori, viz. from the
effect to endeavor to find out the cause, there can be no direction without
experiment; and therefore it is a very difficult, if not an impossible thing,
that any Art, or Science, can be made from any conclusions in Philosophy which
are drawn a posteriori, which at the best cannot arise to higher then probable,
and opinonative, and can never be certain and perspicuous. And though the
Doctor from his great parts and experiment in Anatomy, has probably found out
things never before received; yet cannot any of those conclusions ever attain
to demonstrative certain and perspicuous conclusions: yet it does not hold true
in argumentation a priori, that all things are known by experiment; but that
infinite things are known and understood, which are abstracted from matter and
experiment, and are easily understood by any Man without experiment.

10. Nor is it true universally, that there is no knowledge innate in Man; for
the Laws of Nature are innate and connatural with Man; and Man is not naturally
without all Knowledge.
not acquired either by sense, experiment, or any thing else.

11. As I have said before, so do I say again, that there is no Age that has
not received many things for truths, which the next generation upon The manner
and order of attaining to Knowledge, is a subtle disquisition.
further inquiry, and looking into them, have found to be but verisimilitudes:
and that from things found out, infinite productions will be made as long as
the world indures: and as it is not fairplay to carp at another opinion and
not to set down his own, and give a reason for it. So will it be mere levity to
contest with another, if not upon superior Grounds; and he that shall contest
with so great a Philosopher, as Aristotle, in a thing so long received, and
uncontroverted, had need take great heed, and have his wits about him, least
instead of evicting his adversary, he only acquires the repute of a light and
foolish Man; But least we should skip short for want of taking our run far
enough back, we will begin at the beginning of all things.

12. As I am a Christian, and therefore by the First Chap. Genesis ought There is
but one first Entity, and that is God.
to believe, that God made Heaven and Earth, Man and all other Creatures; so if
I had not received Gods divine revelation of himself in the Scriptures, yet
should I never have been a Peripatetick, or Aristotelian, who held that not
only the world, but the species of all things in it, were from all eternity.
For there was either one first being, the true, prime, and efficient cause of
all things else, or two, or more first beings, or no first being, but all
things were originally from themselves: but the two latter are most manifestly
absurd and contrary to sense and reason; for unitas est, secundum quam
unumquodque eorum, quae sunt, unum dicitur; but the first is one thing, it is
therefore impossible there should be two firsts or more; nor is it less absurd
to suppose all things to have been from eternity, and so not to have proceeded
from one superior being, but had their being from themselves; for if all things
had from all eternity a power and being of themselves, then might they have
infinitely continued their being in their individuals; and we see that every
thing does naturally desire the preservation of its self; but this is most
manifestly false, for we see all things are in their individuals resoluble into
their first composition, and perpetuated by generation in their species; there
is therefore but one first being of all things (except sin, which is contrary
to the nature and essence of God, who is all good) which is God.

13. All things were either originally generated of their like, or from
themselves, or created by God. But nothing could generate any thing like God in
the beginning created all things.
it self before it was; and by the precedent proposition, no Creature could
have its original being from its self. All things therefore in the beginning
were created by God, and are his Creatures.

14. It is true, that the Scriptures do not observe an exact method in relating
Man was created in his perfection, and an intelligible, and rational creature
actually.
all actions according as they were done in time; but it is very probable that
Adam at his first Creation gave names to all Creatures, Genesis 2. 20. But whether
it were at Adams first Creation or not, yet could not Adams speech and defining
all Gods Creatures, be from any acquired habit, because there was no Creature
with whom he might converse and beget this habit, (Eve not being then made) nor
did Adam only give names to Creatures, but did discourse Rationally, and give
the Etymology of Woman, when he first saw her. Genesis 2. 23. 24.
Man therefore was created an intelligible and Rational Creature, actually.

15. Although Man were created a most perfect, Rational, and Intelligible Man
of all creatures is born the most impotent.
Creature; yet we see, that he is not only born actually void of understanding
and reason; but also the most impotent of all Creatures. For all viviparal
Creatures (although born blind privitively) yet in their very first production
find a way to their dams papps from whence they suck and receive nourishment;
whereas Man of a long time after his birth (so long time, that many other
Creatures in less time attain to their perfection) is unable to receive any
nourishment, but as he is directed by others. And all oviparal Creatures
without any help, receive that food which their Parents bring them; and all
Creatures which are generated per metamorphosin, are at their first being as
perfect as ever after.

16. I understand by Animalia perfectiora, or more perfect Creatures, Wherein
Man and other more perfect creatures do resemble one another.
those who are generated and produced from univocal generation or production,
that is, from the coition of male and female of the same species. Man, and all
more perfect creatures, are born with all the five senses of Hearing, Seeing,
Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling; and also with Will, Memory, and Fantasy. And
though by reason of Creatures natural impotency, at their first production,
these three latter are not so perspicuous, as to be perceived by them who do
not carefully mind them; yet it is evident enough to those, who more narrowly
observe them: For there is no Creature, at their very first production, which
either of themselves, or apted and disposed to receive food, but do receive it,
(if it has no natural defect or sickness) which it could not do without Will:
And all Creatures know, and can distinguish the lowing, bleating, barking, and
voice etc. of their Dams, or those that feed them, from others of the same
kind; which could not be without Memory: And not only Children in their cradles
will (excited by others) laugh and be pleasant, but also of themselves will
many times express much pleasure in their faces; but also Lambs, Colts, Calves,
etc. will be playing with one another, all which no doubt proceeds from some
pleasure which they fancy. They have moreover at their first being, the
passions of Love, Fear, Hate, etc. which is so evidently seen in all Creatures,
that there needs no example. And truly I think it very probable, that it is
from Fear, that every Child cries, upon his being born, apprehending danger
from those various new things it never saw before.

17. Although other Creatures have in their first being, as well as Wherein Man
is different from other creatures, and more excellent.
Man, all those Senses that Man has, and have moreover Will, Fantasy, and
Memory; yet are their actions determined by their objects, when they are not
overruled by fear; nor in process of time do they ever attain to be
intelligible or rational Creatures. It is worth the observation, that while Man
does in some sort attain to speech, understanding, and reason, he can either
not go, or else goes upon his hands and feet, with his face prone to the earth,
as if there were no difference between him and other Creatures; whereas when he
but begins to speak, and can in any sort observe the commands of his Parents,
he then begins to look up to Heaven as a more excellent Creature, and that from
thence he expects beatitude, and is to be thankful therefore. And though other
Creatures have Fantasy as well as Men, yet cannot they phancie any object
from their Senses so intelligibly, as to define it to be such a thing in all
the parts of it, excluding every thing else. Nor can they by the help of their
Memory and Fantasy, ever draw one Conclusion from any thing they ever saw,
and phancied.

18. Estius in Distinct. 17. of the 3. Book of his Comment of the Sentences,
What is the Will, according to the Schools.
p. 49. sect. 2. acknowledges a twofold will in Christ according to humane
nature; one rational, which is proper to man, conformable to the Understanding;
the other sensual, and is called Sensuality, and common to all living
creatures, conforming to the Sense. And although only the rational appetite be
properly called the Will, yet sometime the name of Will is attributed to the
sensual appetite. As Joh. 1. and Ephesians. 2. Voluntas carnis dominatur. And
Prosper in the first book de voc. Gent. cap. 2. besides the rational will,
acknowledges a sensual will: So writing: Sensualis voluntas, quam and carnalem
possumus dicere, non erigitur supra eum motum, qui de corporis sensibus
nascitur: qualis est in animis parvulorum, qui licet nullo judicio utantur,
ostendunt tamen aliquid se velli, cum sentiendo and ea quibus delectantur
amant, and ea quibus offenduntur oderunt. And afterward from the places of
Scripture which testify our Saviors grief, sorrow, and fear; these passions
being sensitive, do sufficiently convince that there was a sensual will in
Christ. In lib. 2. distinct. 6. page 51. a. he from Scotus distinguishes a
twofold will, absolute, and conditional; or voluntas efficax, and
complacentiae. Voluntas complacentiae, is that will, by which men desire what
they cannot attain to; as when who is sick, desires health, when it is not
possible to attain to it. Voluntas efficax, is that, which by such means
attains the end. And lib. 2. did. 24. page 261. he says truly, Voluntas cogi
non potest.

If Appetitus sensualis be the Will, then is the Will compulsible; for Rejected.
not only the Appetite, but all the outward Senses are patient, and therefore
compellible; which is contrary to what he affirms, that Voluntas cogi non
potest.

If Appetitus rationalis be the Will, then are those actions for which no
reason can be given, of Anger, Desire, and of all Children, unwilling actions;
which Aristotle Eth. l. 3. c. 3. justly derides as most ridiculous and absurd.
Besides, Appetitus rationalis are terms incompatible; for neither Man, nor any
creature, does appetere rationaliter, but naturaliter. Mr. Hobbs makes
Appetitus rationalis to be the Will, too.

19. Aristotle l. 3. c. 3. Eth. makes the Will the (...), to be that principle
What is the Will, the (...), by the authority of Aristotle, in creatures void
of reason.
or beginning in him, who does not ignorantly those singular things in which
any action consists. And that therefore Children, and other creatures void of
reason and understanding, have will, and do things spontaneously.

20. Counsel, in cap. 4. and 6. lib. 3. Eth. he makes to be neither Cupiditas,
Ira, Voluntas, or any Opinion. Voluntas he makes to be of the last or end of
Counsel; and Counsel to be of those things which may be done by us; What is the
Voluntas, Will, or (...), by the authority of Aristotle.
as a man wills to be well, he takes counsel how to attain to health. And he is
a fool, that takes counsel of those things he cannot do. Yet a man may will
things which cannot be, as to be immortal; or those things which he cannot do,
as if a man would have a Player, or Wrastler stronger then himself, to depart.
But this Definition, if it be any, is so perplexed and confused, as it is not
possible a man should definitely understand any thing by it: For if the Will be
the end or termination of Counsel, then all those actions which do not proceed
from Counsel, are not voluntary. But he makes the Will to be of those things,
of which we cannot take Counsel. So that he does not only confound Appetitus,
Cupiditas, and Voluntas, but makes Voluntas to be contrary to its self.

21. The Will is that Faculty, Empire, or Dominion of the Soul, What is the
Will.
which does not ignorantly imperate, or forbid any action or motion which is
not natural. I say not ignorantly: for those actions which oppress men by
disordered dreams, or by the Incubus, or (as we say) the Nightmare, are not
acts of the will. Nor must they be natural, as is the Systole and Diastole of
the Heart and Blood, or of the Brain, which is natural, and not in our power to
alter. But though the Will cannot forbid the Brain or Fantasy from working,
yet can it imperate the Fantasy what things it shall phancie or meditate.

22. In every action three things are to be considered, viz. the internum
Another definition of the will.
movens, the externum agens, and the end or ratio finalis of the action. The
internum movens is the will, the prime and efficient cause; the externum
movens, the mean or instrumental cause; the ratio finalis or end for which such
an action is done, is that which discerns the action to be good or bad, just or
unjust. If the end of the action be to attain any thing which the understanding
or reason dictates, then is such an action the act of the mind, which is proper
only to intellectual and reasonable Creatures. If it be to attain something
desired or feared, and for which no reason can be given, then is it common to
all living Creatures as well as Man.

23. Or thirdly, the Will is that faculty of the soul which does elect Another
definition of the will.
or reject the doing of things appearing just or unjust, desired or not
desired, prudent or imprudent. So that voluntas is one thing, and appetitus, or
cupiditas is another thing; and so velle is one thing, and intelligere another.
For By Appetitus, I mean all sensual desires of self-love, lust, revenge, etc.
appetitus or cupiditas, are natural and not in the power of the will; but the
doing or not doing of any thing, to the attaining of things coveted or desired,
is in the power of the will; and so many Men do understand many things to be
good for them, who do nothing to the attaining of them, viz. many Men are
sapient, not prudent. Thus we see that all Men do understand and desire
happiness, but all Men do not will, viz. do things in order to the attaining of
happiness.

24. Or lastly, I am content with Aristotle's definition of the will, Eth. 3. A
fourth definition.
cap. 4. and 6. That it is the ultimate resolution, end, or determination of
counsel; but it is not only so, but the ultimate resolution of those acts,
ends, or determinations of passions, irascible, concupiscible, or fearful, of
Creatures not mad, but knowingly doing them. The natural passions therefore of
concupiscence, appetite, anger, or fear, are no sins, because it is not in the
power of Man to avoid them; but the assenting to them, either by complacency of
cogitation, or by determining or resolving to do any thing in order thereunto,
is a sin; and this the Poet by the help of humane nature only, saw:

Nam scelus intra se tacitum qui cogitat ullum, Juv. Sat. 14.

Facti crimen habet.
25. The Council of a Prince are divided and propound several things The will
in reasonable Creatures illustrated by an example.
to him; the Prince who is the will, assents to, or elects the advice of one
part, and rejects the other; the passions or affections to propound such a
thing to the will, to be done or not done, because desired or feared; the
understanding and reason, judges the doing or not doing such a thing, to be
unreasonable or unjust. Here a Man may see, the understanding, the appetite,
and fear, but not the will, until something be assented to, as understood to be
good or bad; or desired, as pleasant, or profitable, or feared. So that the
reason and understanding is one thing, and the affections and fears other
things, and the will different from them all.

26. The internum movens, being the will in all actions not natural, nor
Creatures irrational have a will.
ignorant, all those outward actions of all Creatures must necessarily proceed
from the will, or internum movens in them.

27. Not only appetitus but sensus, are patient and natural in all Creatures;
Appetitus sensualis, is not the Will in Creatures irrational.
if therefore appetitus sensualis be the will in irrational Creatures, then
could not these Creatures do any thing, but first moved thereunto by their
sensual appetite; but the contrary hereof every man sees. Trajan had a Horse
given him in Persia, who at first sight of the Emperor, fell upon his knees. It
is almost incredible those things which Banks his Horse did, and yet none of
them from any sensual appetite. Thus we see all irrational Creatures may be
taught and habituated to those things which naturally they have no appetite
unto, nor moved by any outward object: As Horses are ridden, and learned to
amble, whereas naturally all four-footed Creatures trot; yet have they
naturally no appetite thereunto, nor moved by any outward object, but on the
contrary are averse from them.

28. Creatures void of Understanding and Reason, have these two Irrational
Creatures have Election in their Actions.
Passions to inform their Will, viz. appetitus and timor; and that they take
information from both these, is evident to any man; for there is no Creature
that pursues any Appetition, but apprehending danger forbears it. It is
observed of the Fox, that whenever hunted to ground, he never comes out, but
at the mouth of the Burrow, he lies and vents a while, and afterward for some
space, runs directly into the wind; and if he vents any thing which causes
fear, returns to ground again. Having been much addicted to hunt the Fox, I
have observed that many times, when the Fox has been hunted to ground, and
watched to be taken, he has not come out further then the mouth of the Burrow,
if he vented the watcher, (who therefore lies down the wind,) and has
continued sometime five or six nights in the ground, until he has been almost
starved; whereas at no time, if he were not watched, but he came out that
night. And after they were taken, they would not of a long time eat in sight of
any man, how hungry soever, until they became so habituated to men, that they
apprehended no danger from them. So Deer do naturally desire to eat Apples, but
if approaching, they vent them to have been handled by man, they forsake them,
and flee away affrighted: And so all other Creatures, upon apprehension of
danger, cease to pursue their appetite. Thus we see in Creatures irrational
among themselves, when they rage most in their lust and appetite, yet give way
to them by whom they are overcome. And from hence it is, I conceive, that
irrational Creatures are not only reclaimed from their natural fierceness, but
are taught to do those things which they have no appetite or natural
inclination to, by cunningly insinuating danger to them upon their not doing
them; and that this must be done by insinuation and cunning, and not by outward
force only, is evident; for the most furious and robust man is not the best
horse-breaker and pacer.

29. Aristotle, Eth. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. makes Virtue and Vice to be sited in the
power of Man, and therefore that Legislators may justly punish Vices Man is a
free Lord of all his Actions.
and reward Virtues; and that all exhortation to Virtue, and dehortation from
Vice, were vain and ridiculous, if it were not in the power of Man: Yet truly I
am rather of Plato's opinion, who makes Virtue to be from Meno.
a higher cause then is in Man. For though I do assent to Aristotle, that all
punishment for disobeying or transgressing Laws, and Exhortation there unto,
were vain and ridiculous, if it were not in our power to do them; yet is it not
the doing, or not doing of things commanded or forbidden by them who have a
right to command or forbid them, a Virtue; but the doing or not doing them in
such a formality as they are so commanded or forbidden, which makes them
virtues; which must needs proceed from a higher cause then is in man, or can be
taught him. As if a Prince commands another to do something which he ought to
do, he does it; but takes a reward or bribe from another to do it: I say, this
is not virtue in the Agent, because he did it not as commanded, but bribed:
Whereas another does his duty without reward, and it may be to his much
temporal detriment; this is virtue, and must needs be from some higher cause,
then is to be found ordinarily in men.

30. All Creatures have Souls, but not Minds: Other living Creatures, What is
the Mind, and whether to be found in Creatures irrational?
as well as Men, have vegetative Souls. The Mind is sometime taken for the
Will, rightly informed from the Understanding and Reason, Plato (Meno.)
Sometime for the Understanding, Arist. Eth. lib. 6. c. 6. Sometime for Reason
or Counsel, as we say often times, My mind gives me that such a thing is, or is
not. And Virgil. Aenead.

Nostram nunc accipe mentem.

In each sense, this is proper only to intellectual and rational Creatures.
Aristotle, Pol. lib. 1. cap. 5. makes the animus or vegetative Soul to have
dominion over the body of a Man, or other Creature, as a Master of a Family
over his Servants, who is notwithstanding commanded, and in the power of the
King or Civitas; but the Mind or the Will informed from the Understanding and
Reason, to have the dominion, not only over the body, but also over the
sensual or vegetative Soul, as a King or Civitas has over the Masters of
Families.

31. Man therefore being endowed not only with a vegetative Soul, Man's Actions
are more free then other Creatures void of reason.
which is common to all Creatures, as well as Man, but with a mind superior to
it; his actions are so much more free then other Creatures, by how much more
liberty he has to make election; but other Creatures actions can take
information only from their appetites and fears, whereas a Man in all his
actions may consult and take information from his Understanding and Reason.

32. Sin is an omission or transgression of some Law; but unreasonable Only
Man's Actions are sinful.
Creatures, not having any other Law then their appetite and fear, and their
actions being always conformable to them, they never sin. But man does not
always conform his actions to what he understands to be just, and forbears
those things which he understands, and his Reason tells him he ought not to do:
Therefore only Man's actions are sinful.

33. It is true, that Aristotle says, That the mind of Man has the dominion
What are Actions, and not voluntary.
of all his actions, and passions, as a King or Civitas has over his subjects:
Yet many times the King cannot restrain the disorders of his Subjects, nor the
mind always the passions of a man. And there is a Knowledge in irrational
Creatures; as the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; and the
whole body of them is but the organ or instrument of their vegetative Soul. And
there is mad Dogs and Horses, as well as men; where therefore madness so far
seizes upon Men or other Creatures, as they know not what they do, such actions
are not voluntary. Nor is this only in men frantic, and not compotes mentium,
but oftentimes in men well disposed; as excess of grief, or joy, many times
transports them into sudden and violent motions, or actions, which is not in
their power to restrain: But these actions being ignorantly done, by the
definition, are not voluntarily done; and by consequence, not sinful.

34. Memory is that faculty of the soul in living creatures, which retains What
is the Memory. If Aristotle had said, there is nothing in the memory which was
not before in the senses, I should have assented to it. I do much wonder,
Aristotle and the Doctor should affirm that experience is subsequent to memory,
and is from multiplied memory; whereas it is impossible but that experiment
must first be in the senses, and antecedent to the memory. And whereas they
say, that experience is from multiplied memory; A man may burn his fingers upon
once trial, as well as oftener.
the Idea's of those objects they have received into their senses, when the
things so received are removed from the senses. And that all creatures as well
as Man have Memory, is most evidently seen in all creatures, which can
distinguish the voice of them that feed them from others of the same kind, and
do more easily discern them, then men do another; which were impossible,
without Memory. Any Dog, Horse, Cow, or any other irrational creature, knows
his Keepers voice from any other man's: Let a Dog be carried an hundred miles
from a place, and if he loses his Master, and be not restrained before he be
well acquainted, he shall return home the same way he came. Nay, no question
but that the outward senses of irrational creatures are much more exquisite
then men's; and are much more prone in their will, and more subtle in their
fantasy to attain those things which are pleasant and natural to them, and do
much better remember those things they have received by their senses.

Annot. By this Proposition it is evidently false which Anal. post. 16. lib. 2.
cap. ult. Meta. l. 1. c. 1.
Aristotle says, In aliis animalibus res percepta manet, in aliis non manet.
And if it be true that he says a little after, Ex sensu fit memoria, and ex
memoria experientia, and experientia principium artis and scientiae; then are
all irrational Creatures better apted and disposed to apprehend the Principles
of all Arts and Sciences, then Men: for no question but the senses of
irrational Creatures are much more subtle and exquisite then in Men. And by
his position, of Memory being from the Sense, and Experiment from Memory, he
makes all Creatures to be as scientifical and artificial as Men; where he says,
that Experientia pene simile quid scientiae, ac arti esse videtur, etc. And
whereas De gen, anim. Page 21.
Dr. Harvey says, page 27. de Genesis Anim. that ex sensu permanet sensatum, ex
permanentia sensati fit memoria: I would know in which of the senses is this
permanens? It cannot be in any of the outward senses; for it is a contradiction
for any man to say, he remembers any thing he presently and actually sees,
feels, tastes, hears, or smells: It must be therefore, that this permanens of
the thing perceived, is retained by the Common sense (viz. of the Fantasy or
Understanding) which is a confounding of two faculties of the soul (viz. of the
Memory, and Fantasy or Understanding) in one, viz. the Common sense, or
Understanding. And this the Doctor plainly confesses, where he says, Quod in
ipsa visione, sive actu videndi, singular, clarum, and distinctum erat; id
ipsum mox remoto visibili (clausis nimirum oculis) in phantasia abstractum, vel
in memoria reservatum, obscurum and indistinctum apparet, etc.

35. The Understanding is that faculty of the soul, which apprehends What is
the Understanding.
universal and prime causes, for which no reason can be given; and does fancy
things true and false, just and unjust; and discerns and judges not only of
things represented to the outward senses, but also of things retained in the
memory. And as the Understanding does apprehend universal notions in the
abstract, without the reason, and for which no reason can be given; so does it
also those things which are rightly deduced from them by reason.

36. Those things are Principles, which constitute Ratiocination, and All
things in the Understanding were not first in the Senses, by the authority of
Aristotle.
for which no Reason can be given. Eth. lib. 6. cap. 3. Nothing can be Prime or
Principle, but to that faculty of the Soul sensitive or intellectual, which
does first apprehend it. For if there be any thing in the Understanding, which
was before in the Senses, this cannot be a Principle to the Understanding, but
to the Sense, which did first apprehend it: As if I say, I know such a thing is
true, because I saw it; this thing is not a Principle to the Understanding, but
the Sense, which did first apprehend it. But no man will ask a reason of the
Sense, viz. why I saw such a thing? for it is absurd, and no reason can be
given of it, because it was first represented to the Sense. But Arist. l. 6. c.
6. Eth. Men's, sive intellectus sit principiorum scientiarum. All things
therefore which are in the Understanding, by the authority of Aristotle, were
not first in the Senses.

37. I know this will at first blush seem a strange Paradox; yet narrowly There
is nothing in the understanding which was first in the senses.
looked into, is as true as any Proposition in Geometry: For the outward Senses
apprehend only the corporiety or substance of things represented unto them; but
the Understanding only the incorporiety of things so seen, etc. and discerns
and judges whether such things so apprehended by the Senses, be pleasant,
profitable, just or unjust, reasonable or unreasonable, commensurable, or
incommensurable. Nor is the Idea of any thing thus seen, heard, or felt, ever
after it be removed out of the sight, retained in the Understanding, but
Memory; where the Understanding discerns and judges, what before was in the
Senses. As if I see such a solid body, the Understanding judges whether this
body be commensurable or not, by any notion or proposition before understood:
This body afterward removed, and the Idea or form retained in the Memory, the
Understanding discerns and judges the passions of it so retained, which before
it did in the outward senses. So I hear such a story told of things before
done; afterward the sound is past, and the story retained in the Memory; the
Understanding there judges and phancies it. Only things corporeal and
substantial therefore being the objects of the outward Sense, and things
incorporeal and without substance the objects of the Understanding, there can
nothing be in the Understanding, which was first in the Senses. It is therefore
absurd for any man to say, he understands that such a man has such a hand, or
face, or did such an action; because being corporeal and the objects of the
Sense, they cannot be in the Understanding, but Memory. He therefore remembers
such a man had such a face, or hand, or did such an action. But he may most
properly say, he understands such a face, or hand, to be good or handsome; or
that such an action was good or bad: because these things being incorporeal,
cannot be apprehended by the outward Senses, but judged or phancied to be so by
the Understanding.

38. If it be true which Aristotle and all Philosophers affirm, that there
There is nothing judged or discerned in the senses or memory, which was not
before in the understanding.
cannot be any effect but from some efficient cause, nor act without an agent;
then is it not possible but that which is in the understanding, and does judge,
discern and phancie, is superior, and must precede every thing which is so
judged, discerned and phancied in the memory or senses. All things therefore
are so far from being in the senses, before they were in the understanding,
that it is not only impossible that any thing which was in the sense, should be
in the understanding; but also that which is in the understanding, must be,
before it can judge, discern, or phancie any thing, in the memory or senses:
And by consequence, no Art nor Science can be learned or taught another, who
does not first understand the Principles thereof; nor is it possible that the
Principles of any Art or Science can be taught. I know it is usual for men to
confound the sense with the understanding: As when a man talks unconclusively,
they say he talks not sense, (yet it may be he speaks very loud) that is truly,
he talks not understandingly, or not to be understood.

39. By the authority of Aristotle, Eth. lib. 6. cap. 6. the Understanding The
Understanding is a ray of Divine light in the soul of man.
does apprehend things either abstractly, or concretely. Abstractly without the
Reason, as Principles, for which no Reason can be given; or concretely with the
Reason, as when by the Reason it apprehends things deduced from such Principles
before understood, and for which no reason can be given; for Intellectus sit
principiorum, Scientia vero cum ratione conjuncta. The understanding therefore
of prime and universal causes, for which no reason can be given, can be nothing
else but radius divini luminis in animabus hominum; and by consequence it
cannot be learned, taught, or communicated by any Creature, or all the
Creatures in the world.

40. Only Man, of all Creatures of this world, understanding prime, Only Man,
of all the creatures of this inferior orb, is an intellectual creature.
necessary, and universal causes, and phancying things true and false, just and
unjust, only Man is an Intellectual creature.

41. What things are Principles.
I. Principles, by the authority of Aristotle, Eth. lib. 6. cap. 3. are those
things which are known to an Intellectual creature, which do constitute
Ratiocination, and of which no reason can be given; and (cap. 6.) are
apprehended only by the Mind or Intellect. Such are the Principles of Geometry;
and such are Idem, eidem, secundum idem, esse, and non esse, impossible; and,
Omnis affirmatio aut negatio, aut vera aut falsa; and, Cujus est nolle, ejus
est velle, etc.

II. Man not being only an Intellectual, but a Sociable creature, God has
engraven in the minds of all men certain Laws for which no reason can be given,
to which they ought to conform all their actions, for the preservation of peace
and society among men.

III. But because the Laws of Nature oftentimes only are ex Thesi; there must
be some things ex Hypothesi, which must be understood; and these must be prime
and superior to them to whom they are given, and for which they can give no
reason, or they cannot be the rule and reason of their actions. I require
Humane and Despotical Laws for Principles, to those who by right or due are
subject to them.

IV. But God having made Man not only intellectual, rational, and sociable, but
endued him with an immortal soul capable of eternal happiness, He has
extraordinarily and supernaturally revealed himself in the Scriptures, that men
submitting themselves and their Reasons to those Divine precepts, might work
out their salvation with fear and trembling. But if it be asked, How shall I
know the Scriptures to be Gods Word, since they are not known to be so by the
understanding, nor outward sense? I would ask that man, if he be a Christian,
how he came to be so? For his being a Christian, implies his belief in them as
the Word of God; and he is required no more: And if the power and grace of God
were not as much showed in converting the world to Christianity by the
preaching of a company of poor Fishermen (all Temporal powers persecuting and
contradicting it) as in all the Miracles of old under the Prophets and
Patriarchs? And whether the power and grace of God in his Son, was not more
visible under the New, then in the Prophets, and under the Old Law?

But because the Laws or Precepts of God in the Scripture command many things
in Thesi only, (as, Let all things be done decently and in order; 1 Cor. 14.
40. 1 Timothy 2.
and, Let prayers and supplications be made for all men, etc. But this Decency
and Order is no where prescribed or defined by the Scripture) and the Church
(to whom the right of defining such things, is given by God) ex Hypothesi: the
Laws therefore of Church or Ecclesiastical Laws, are principles, and necessary
for conservation of Christian society.

I require only Humane, Ecclesiastical and Despotical Laws for principles,
which do not immediately proceed from God. All other principles whatsoever
proceed, or are immediately created only by God alone.

42. All Men understand that they ought to obey the Laws of their No Laws
create any obligation in conscience from any thing, which was in the senses.
superiors. But by the 37. Proposition; there is nothing in the understanding
which was in the senses. Men's Obedience therefore, or their obligation in
conscience to the Laws of their superiors, is not from any thing which was in
the senses, But it does proceed from the connatural Laws of Nature, engraven by
God in the minds or understandings of Men, or from his Grace supernaturally
given to Men; and by consequence, those men who do not from innate good
principles, their duty in conscience, will never from any thing feared or
received into the senses, be it Whipping, Branding, or Hanging, ever be made
good, but only deterred from being bad.

43. Belief is the assenting to a thing to be true or false, not as either What
is Belief.
known to the understanding or outward senses, but as affirmed or denied by one
or more, who are credible persons.

44. Faith is the assenting to a thing to be true or false, not as known What
is Faith.
to the understanding or outward senses, but as commanded or forbidden by God
extraordinarily, and supernaturally.

45. It is an admirable thing to consider the providence of God (who Whether
things only credible, may be as certain as known to the senses, and incidently
of the divine excellency of truth above any sensible knowledge.
is the God of truth) in the preservation of those things, which impartially
relate the actions of Men, and the revolutions which have happened in the world.
Nor is it any more then a just and equal testimony Polybius in the Proem of his
History gives of Truth, viz. that she ought to be esteemed as the greatest
goddess; and that the greatest power ought to be ascribed to her, overcoming
and triumphing over all the oppositions of Men, and verisimilitudes. Nor can
any reason be given that Polybius, Livy, Plutarch, etc. did either write such
Histories, or that such Histories written by them, were truer then those which
are lost and rejected by Men, but only a kind of divine air informing Men of
their truth; whereas those books which are falsely and factiously written, are
exploded and neglected in a very short time; and yet whether they were truly or
falsely written, few or no Men can judge from any thing known to the outward
sense. I say few or no Man can so judge of them; for in that time when they
were written, there were many more false and factious Historians to delude Men,
then true and just to inform them. Nor can Men in subsequent generations from
any thing in their outward senses, judge or discern whether any thing they
record be true or false. Nay further, no Historian (except Caesar and Xenophon,
and some very few others, who recorded infinitely more things not known, then
known to them to be true) did ever know whether what he recorded were true or
not. To evidence this yet more fully, there was scarcely (except Caesar's and
Xenophons) ever any History truly written in those times, wherein the things
were done, that men might take information from their outward senses; but Men
were so carried by Faction or Interest, that in recording of things, they
record things not as true or false, but as advancing their Faction and
Interest: whereas Men in the subsequent generation not having those Passions
and Appetitions, nor any sense of these things; subjecting all their Passions
and Affections, as it were assisted by a divine Election, do make Election of
those things which are true, and reject others, which the Malice or Faction of
Men had imposed upon the World. And a Man is as certain, that there have been
such Men as Caesar, Hanibal, Alexander, etc. and as assured of their Actions,
as if he had seen them.

46. Since all things which proceed from God immediately, and for Faith is an
extraordinary Gift of God.
which no reason can be given by any Creature, may be justly required for
principles by intellectual and reasonable Creatures; and since the Scriptures
proceed immediately from God, or they could not be the Word of God, are
therefore the principles of Faith. And since there is nothing within man
naturally, which may assure him, that those things revealed in Scripture were
Gods Revelation; it does necessarily follow, That Faith, or the Belief of God
in the Scriptures, is Gods gift supernaturally and extraordinarily. Nor can all
the Arguments of Tradition, Church, Excellency of style, Truth, etc. move one
stone to the proof of them: For they were the Word of God, before any Church or
Tradition, etc. was. And if they had not been the Word of God before the Church
received them, and delivered them to posterity; their Reception and Tradition
could never have made them so. Besides, the Church having its being from the
Scriptures, it can never prove the cause of its being. And what was it less,
then the power and grace of God extraordinarily given to Moses, That the Bush
burned and was not consumed? And of all the miracles done by him, and the other
Prophets; and more then those, done by our Savior, and the Apostles, and
blessed Martyrs since? And that by the Preaching of a few Fishermen, against
all the Temporal Powers in the World, Christianity should be propagated
generally over the face of the Earth; and that I without any thing in me, or
desert of mine, am baptized into this Faith? And he that shall dispute the
truth of the grace and power of God in the Old and New Testament, and since
recorded in Ecclesiastical and Profane History, ought as much to be confuted
with clubs and hissing, as he that denies or disputes his Principles in any Art
or Science.

47. All Principles are true or false, just or unjust, good or bad; either All
Principles are prime and necessary, either necessitate absoluta, or necessitate
medii.
necessitate absoluta, or necessitate medii. Principles that are true or false,
necessitate absoluta, are so, that they are immutable by God himself, as that
two and two added, should not make four; or that things equal to the same
thing, should not be equal to one another; or that any being should be superior
to the cause of its being; or that contradictions should be true; or else true
or false, good or bad, just or unjust, necessitate ex hypothesi: And these
though they are necessary and principles to those to whom they are given, and
immutable by them; yet are they not principles and necessary to them, who made
and gave them. As the Laws of Nature, and Gods revealing himself in the
Scriptures, are principles, necessary, and immutable by all the Men in the
World; yet are they not principles, necessary, or immutable by God; but he
might, if it had pleased him, made something else the Law of Nature, or
otherwise revealed himself in the Scriptures. So Humane Laws must be prime,
necessary, and immutable by Subjects, or their conforming, or not conforming
their actions to them, could not be just or unjust: But they cannot be prime,
and necessary, or immutable by the Legislator, but as he sees occasion may
alter or make something else which was not before Laws for the Subjects to
conform and direct their actions to. It is therefore absurd and wild to
suppose, that the Law of Nature is Annotat.
simply necessary and immutable by God, or that the will of Men can make it
mutable.

48. All Science, all Learning, all Reasoning, and all Conclusions, by Contra
negantes Principia, non est disputandum.
the Authority of Aristotle, is begotten from pre-existent principles (for
which no reason can be given by the Learner) which being granted, do
nemonstrate the Conclusion; but by the Authority of Aristotle, and all
Philosophers, no Science or Conclusion can demonstrate the Principles. Where
therefore either by a defect in the Understanding, Men cannot, or by a
stubbornness in the Will, they will not apprehend Principles, there all
Reasoning, Learning, or Discourse is at an end. If therefore I would learn a
Man Geometry, and he either cannot, or will not apprehend the Axioms or common
Notions of it, it is impossible I should ever make him understand the
constitution of an equilateral Triangle: Or if a Man denies the Laws of my
Country, I cannot teach him, whether such an action be just or unjust: Or if a
Man denies the Law of Nature, I cannot prove that he ought to honor and obey
his Superior, and to deal justly and uprightly with all Men: Or if a Man denies
or disputes the Authority of the Scriptures, there cannot be any Conclusion or
Inference from them, whether as Christians, any thing ought to be, or not to be
done, or believed.

49. All demonstrative Science being begotten from certain and necessary From
whence the Confusions and Distractions in Christendom have arisen?
pre-existent Principles; the Laws of God and Man being pre-existent, where
they are clear and not inevident (which is not always the imperfection of Man's
Law, nor can ever be of Gods Law) Men may as clearly, and as demonstratively
demonstrate Conclusions from thence, as from the Axioms in Geometry: And no
question, that all the Confusions which have lately happened in Christendom, were
not caused from any want of understanding of the Laws of God or Man, but from
the perverse wills of Men, who would not be restrained from their wickedness,
neither by the Laws of God or Man.

50. Reason is a faculty of the Understanding, which does prepare, apt, What is
Reason?
and define things, either in the outward senses or memory, so as they may be
comprehended by something before known to the Understanding; or Reason, is that
which does dictate the doing of any thing conformable to something in the
Understanding.

51. All Propositions, by the authority of Aristotle, are demonstrable What is
an Axiom or common Notion?
or indemonstrable. Indemonstrable Propositions, are those Propositions which
are Axioms or common Notions, for which no reason can be given; and though
indemonstrable in themselves, do demonstrate all the Conclusions which follow
from them. An Axiom or common Notion, is such an indefinite, prime, and
necessary Proposition, which comprehending any definite thing within its terms,
does necessitate such a Conclusion.

52. A Definition is the comprehending every such individual thing What is a
Definition?
in such a term, as may express such a thing, excluding every thing else.

53. Although Definitions are properly terms comprehending individual Wherein a
Notion and Definition, differ?
things, yet is there oftentimes a necessity of comprehending Notions or Axioms
too, under significant terms; as a Law is a term which may signify all
rightful commands (which are prime and universal Propositions to them, who ow
obedience to such commands) which comprehending any action, does necessitate
such an action to be just. So Geometry not only comprehends all Propositions
which have reference to surveying or measuring of Ground; but also all the
Propositions in Euclids Elements, are comprehended under the terms or notion of
Geometry, etc. Definitions are of Singulars, Notions of Generals or Universals;
the Reason, Memory, and outward Senses, are of Definitions; the Understanding,
of Axioms or common Notions.

The Doctor does not only confound the Memory and Understanding, Annot. Page
21. de Genesis An.
where he says, Quod in ipsa visione, sive actu videndi, singular, clarum, and
indistinctum erat; id ipsum remoto visibili in phantasia, vel memoria
reservatum, (thereby making the fantasy and memory the same thing) obscurum
and indistinctum apparet, etc. But also here, and Page 27. he confounds Axioms,
and common Notions, with Definitions, where he says, That from experience comes
ratio Universalis, Definitiones, and maxima sive Axiomata communia, cognitionis
certissima. And the instances he gives of his meaning is quite awry, and
nothing to the purpose; For idem, eidem, secundum idem esse, and non esse
impossible, is not only not known from experiment, but is as much known to any
intellectual Creature, before experiment, as after: And so, omnis affirmatio,
and negatio, aut vera, aut falsa est. These Axioms are not Axioms, because they
are found true by experience; but because universally known to be true, before
any experiment was made of them; nor is it possible that experiment should be
made of all things, wherein they hold true; the truth therefore of them cannot
proceed from experience.

54. Although diverse Men do fancy the same thing seen or remembered; Why some
Men are more rational then others?
yet if they do not rationally fancy it, viz. by comprehending that thing
seen or remembered, in something before understood to be true or false, etc.
Then do they never conclude or agree in their inference. Those Men therefore,
who do not rightly conclude a thing, (either the Object of the outward Senses,
or the Idea of it reserved in the Memory) from something before understood, but
because they affect or desire it to be so, conclude affectionately, not
rationally. And Men who do so, are less rational, then other Men who do not.

55. Knowledge, is the knowing of a thing from the causes. What is Knowledge?


56. Knowledge or Science, how manifold?
All Knowledge or Science is either rational, or sensible.

57. What is rational Science?
All Rational Science, is a right Inference or Conclusion, mediately or
immediately, from some universal Cause known to the Understanding.

58. How Science differs from Reason?
Intellectus sit Principiorum, Scientia cum Ratione conjuncta. Eth. lib. 6.
cap. 6. Reason is the Instrument of the Understanding begetting; Science is the
thing, which from the Understanding by the Reason is begotten.

59. A Demonstrative Proposition is, when the Predicate or Axiom What is a
Demonstrative, Affirmative Proposition?
understood, comprehends the thing defined, which is remembered; Or any right
Inference, Conclusion, or Dictate of Right Reason from Necessary and Universal
Causes, may be the Predicate of any Demonstrative Proposition.

60. A Negative Demonstration is, when Reason shows that the Subject What is a
Negative, Demonstrative Proposition?
cannot be comprehended by the Predicate.

61. Logicians make three necessary parts or terms in every Proposition, The
necessary Parts of every roposition.
viz. the Nomen antecedens, the Nomen consequens, and the Copula. The Nomen
antecedens, is the subject or thing in the outward sense or memory defined. The
Nomen consequens, is the Predicate, or something known to the understanding,
which comprehends the Subject. And the Copula, is that which joins these two.
As, Omnis homo est animal: Homo is the Subject, or the thing seen or remembered:
Animal is the Predicate or Notion which comprehends Homo, which is the thing
understood; and Animal does not only comprehend Homo, and all other Creatures
which a man has seen or heard of, but all those Creatures which he shall ever
see or hear of: And est is the Copula which unites the Subject Homo with the
Predicate Animal.

Annot. When I say, the Subject is the thing sensible, or remembered, I always
except Metaphysics and Mathematics, which are considered without any sensible
matter. And indeed it is an admirable thing to consider, how intelligibly
Mathematics are understood without any sensible matter, more then any
corporeal things are.

62. It is truly observed, that every perfect creature is generated from
Rational Science is produced from the understanding by the reason and memory,
or outward senses.
matter and form, diffused in several bodies and creatures; and that this
matter and form, so long as it continues, thus diffused in diverse bodies, is
never qualified for generation or production of any creature, until they become
united into some place apted and disposed for production, where from the benign
influence of the Sun or celestial bodies, as from a more universal and
efficient cause, they evade into living creatures. Nor does this hold less true
in the production or generation of all rational Science; for the Reason by it
self without matter, cannot form, dispose, or define any thing. Nor does the
outward sense or memory apprehend things otherwise then as seen, etc. or
remembered, not as formed, disposed, or defined, so as to be the subject of a
Proposition. Since therefore the Reason cannot prepare, apt, or define, unless
the Memory or outward senses supply matter; nor the Memory without the Reason
dispose, prepare, or define any thing so as to be the subject of a Proposition;
it does necessarily follow, that the Reason united or conjoined with the
Memory, does prepare the subject of every Scientifical Proposition. But in
every Scientifical Proposition, there must be a Predicate, which comprehending
the Subject, must be understood. The Understanding therefore is the prime and
efficient cause of all rational Science; and the Reason is the formal cause,
which does dispose and prepare the matter in the Senses or Memory to be
comprehended, judged, or discerned by the Understanding: And by consequence,
the Reason and Memory, or Senses, are but the Instruments by which the
Understanding does generate and produce Science.

63. Only Man can rightly infer and deduce particular Conclusions Why only Man
is a reasonable creature.
from universal Causes, and can direct his actions conformable to things in his
understanding, (and not to his appetite and senses, which is common to all
living creatures as well as man:) only Man therefore is a rational creature.

64. All men naturally desire to know: And though by Aristotle's judgment, By
what means men attain to Science.
all Science is begotten from preexistent Knowledge, which from things granted
does demonstrate the Conclusions; yet must there be some manner and method
which men must use, by which others as well as themselves may understand this,
or that thing to be a Science, or scientifical Conclusion. Men therefore must
propose that method which Euclid observes, or all their science will be
equivocal and obscure, viz. First to define all those things of which his
science is compounded, in such terms, that every singular or individual may be
so comprehended, that it may be wholly with all the parts of it contained in
the definition, excluding every thing else: For if a man define a thing so,
that there be any so much as equivocation in it, as that it does not signify
this only thus desined, but may something else; then of necessity must all the
Science that bears a part of this definition, be equivocal and uncertain. And
as the definition must not be equivocal to signify more then the thing
defined, another thing as well as this; so neither must it signify less, viz.
any part of the thing defined, for the thing; for then all in which this thing
is a part, will be infinitely deficient and imperfect.

Secondly, After the definitions, I require such things as no ingenuous man
will deny: As, that I may add, divide, multiply, convert, etc. these things
thus defined.

Thirdly, I set down those Axioms, Principles, Effata, Pronuntiata, Common
Notions, or Indemonstrable Propositions, which are the first causes of the
Science, and do demonstrate all the Conclusions of it; but in themselves are
indemonstrable, and for which no reason can be given, but only the good will
and pleasure of him that made them so. And these Principles must be granted,
before any man can by his Reason produce any Conclusion. And if a man denies
these Principles, all Argumentation is at an end; for, Contra negantem
principia non est disputandum: And no man's Reason can work upon nothing; nor
prove, nor find out any thing, before something be first granted, by which a
man may prove it, or find it out.

65. I have known, and know many men, who have vast memories, Why some men are
more fantastical then others.
and very strong fantasies, who notwithstanding have been as unreasonable as
any; and would never admit of any discourse of any thing they fancied to
themselves, but upon a very slender opposition would fall into passion: And the
reason is, because they phancie things only because they please them, and do
not understand them as true. And if any man shows such a man some Consequence
which will not follow from what he phancies, or that it is inconsistible with
some known universal Truth; then does he seek to supply with passion what he
wants in reason, because he is crossed in what he desires should be true.
Whereas men who understand, or desire to understand their Thesis or Notion, not
only take pleasure that nothing can be inferred from it which is false, and
that it is not inconsistible with any thing true whatsoever; but will be so far
from falling into passion with any man that opposes it, that they would thank
any man, and take him for their friend, that can show them wherein, what they
suppose to be universally true, is not; or that it is inconsistible with
something which they suppose to be universally true. The Spirit of God says, He
is a fool that rages and is confident. These light fantastical men, who will
phancie things for truth, not because they are so, but because they would have
them so, do not only rage when they are convinced that those things they
phancie for truth, are made to appear either but verisimilitudes, or falsehoods;
but will take them for illwillers who convince them, and continue as confident
in their foolish apprehensions, as before.

66. As the levity of the Fantasy (which is always in agitation) apprehending
Why some men are more dull then others.
things without Reason, is the cause why men too suddenly apprehend
Verisimilitudes for Truth; so the want of Fantasy is the cause why many men
of vast memories, very slowly apprehend the cause of any thing. Where the
Fantasy is too light, there men apprehend or believe every thing for Truth,
they affect or desire, and are soon persuaded to any thing they are not
wilfully prejudiced to. Where it is crass and dull, and moves slowly, or as we
say, where men are endued pingui Minerva, there men are hardly moved to
understand any thing.

67. Sensible Knowledge, is the retaining the Idea of things in the What is
Sensible Knowledge.
memory, which before were in the outward senses. And there being neither
Reason nor Understanding to the attaining of this Knowledge, it is common to
other Creatures as well as Man: The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters
crib, says our Savior.

68. But all Causes from whence men do infer and discourse, are not Of
Argumentation a Posteriori.
so perspicuous, as are the Axioms in Geometry, or the Laws of God and a man's
Country. But some Causes are known to Nature, and not to us; as the Quadrature
of a Circle; and what proportion (or ratio rather) the subtending side of an
Isoceles right-angle Triangle, has to one of the comprehending sides. And some
Effects are certainly known to us, but the Causes are not known, either to the
understanding or outward sense; as, that Summer is hotter then in Winter, and
that men are sick and indisposed. I say therefore, where the Causes are but
probable and conjectural, whatever the Effect be, no Conclusion can possibly
amount any higher; for, Conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem.

69. All Arts and Sciences are begotten from pre-existent Principles, No Art or
Science arises from Argumentation a Posteriori.
which are known to be necessarily true. But in argumentation a posteriori, the
Effects are only known to be, but not the Causes, which are only probable. No
Art therefore, or Science, does arise from argumentation a posteriori.

70. By the 38. Proposition, it is impossible that any thing in the memory No
probable Conclusion arises from Experiment or Memory.
or the outward senses should be judged, phansied, or concluded, but by
something which was before in the understanding. Experiment therefore, memory,
or the outward senses, which only apprehend the material forms and effects of
things seen, etc. cannot conclude any thing probably, any more then a dead body
can move without life: besides, it is so ridiculous, that I wonder every man
does not deride it. Will any man say, a great Lout new whipped, is probably like
to make a good Scholar, because he has made experiment of the strokes of a
Rod? or that the Fool in St. Joneses is a wise fellow, because he makes
experiment of the power of the Sun by his every days sleeping in the rays of
it? Or that a Butcher is an excellent Philosopher, because he makes experiment
of killing Cattle? And that experiment and memory does not move one step to the
attaining of any probable Conclusions; the Physician or Philosopher reads the
lecture on the parts Anatomized, whereas the Surgeon dissects and makes the
experiment. And if experiment were the only way to attain to probable
conclusions in Physic and Philosophy, then not the Physician, but the
Apothecary were the There is no probable Conclusion, without Experiment or
Memory.
better Philosopher.

71. If by the 7. Proposition, the apprehension of universal Causes, certainly
and necessarily true, in the understanding, cannot produce or prove any thing
without the concurrence of particular causes; then in reason cannot probable
causes of themselves without the concurrence of particular causes, either known
to the outward sense or remembered, produce any thing. I will not therefore give
one rush for any Physicians, or Philosophers judgment, who is not an
experienced man.

72. There are some things which nature brings to pass, without any From whence
men attain to probable conclusions.
art or help of any Creature; others never without art and industry, as a
House, and all Arts and Sciences. In the first God is the great and only
Opificer: And it is only He who made Man and all other Creatures (not merely
spiritual) of such principles, and so compounded, that they every minute tend
to the resolution of their first principles; and yet in their thus dying,
something should generate in them, which should perpetuate the generation of
them in their species, as they shall dye in their individuals. Thus we see some
soil brings forth (without any art or industry of man) Grass, Firr, Broom, etc.
Some is of a petrifying quality; in other are Mines of Silver, Gold, Coal, etc.
and non omnis fert omnia tellus. Some men grow sick, others well, without any
cause from themselves: These causes therefore being only known to God, there
cannot be any demonstrative conclusion from them by men, because the causes are
not evidently and necessarily known. But although it be not Gods pleasure that
men should understand the causes of these things, so as to conclude
demonstratively from them; yet as having made two lights of different splendour,
vix. the Sun and Moon, though men see clearly only by the light of the Sun, yet
do men see, although obscurely and but probably, by the light of the Moon; so
though men do not in natural Philosophy and Physic from prime and necessary
causes, as from the light of the Sun, see so as to conclude demonstratively;
yet has not God always in these things totally shut out all light from men,
but they see as by the light of the Moon; and in Philosophy are Theses, and
Aphorisms in Physic, from whence by these senses, memory and experiment, men
proceed infinitely, and daily probably find out things, which before were not
so.

73. As in all Argumentation a priori, there must be Principles assented No
argumentation a Posteriori where Men agree not upon Principles.
to, which must be the rule and reason of the argumentation: and where men
either by stubbornness or defect of understanding, apprehend not Principles,
there of necessity can be no Art or Science taught; so in argumentation a
posteriori men must agree upon some Theses, or Aphorisms, which must be the
rules of the argumentation; men may discourse of the causes of things, and not
improbably conclude, where they can make no experiments; (as in the causes of
Meteors and Comets:) but no man can from all the experiment in the world
conclude any thing, but from something in the understanding which must be
assented, and comprehend that thing of which the experiment was made. When
therefore men by a defect in the understanding cannot apprehend Theses, or
Aphorisms, or by stubborness they will not; there all argumentation in either
Physic, or Natural Philosophy, is at an end, and it is impossible such men
should either learn or be taught.

74. Only man can by his reason from causes probable in his intellect, Why only
man attains conclusions a Posteriori. Annot.
rightly infer and conclude the causes of things in the memory or outward
senses, only man therefore can attain probable conclusions, or concludge a
Posteriori.

King James would affirm of his Hounds, that in their hunting they used reason,
for when they had overrun the scent, they would return on both sices of the
path where they came, and if on neither side they hit the scent off, they would
run back, concluding because it was not on, nor off on neither side, it must
necessarily be back where they came: But more narrowly looking into, this is
not done of the Hounds by any reason, or acquired habit, but from an internal
excited apperite moving them, as Birds make nests, and Bees hony-combs, which
they cannot but do at such times, but cannot at other times, nor yet learn nor
teach them other creatures, nay, nor of the same kind with themselves; take a
Hare, Dear, or Fox, etc. and let them be kept among Hounds in their kennel, or
so that the venatious appetite of them is not excited, and they will not meddle
with them: whereas men do not acquire Arts and Sciences by any necessary
impluse moving them, and only at such times when they cannot do otherwise: nor
are they excited thereunto by any material outward object, but may learn and
teach them other men, and not upon necessity, but upon all occasions as they
shall judge requisite.

75. Since every conclusion does follow the weaker part of the premises, and
since in all conclusions a posteriori, the effect is only known to the Things
known to the outward senses, are more evident then any probable conclusion.
outward senses, and the cause but probable in the intellect; the conclusion
cannot amount any higher then probable. But Men by their outward senses do
apprehend things more then probably. Things therefore apprehended by the
outward senses, are more evident then any probable conclusion; and by
consequence, no man will reasonably dispute probably against what another has
seen or felt, etc.

76. There is nothing so much resembles God, or Heaven, as Light; nor Things
known to the understanding, are more evident then to the outward senses.
any thing so much Hell, as Darkness. So incomprehensible is Light, that it
cannot be defined. In all other things, the motions, actions, accidents, or
passions happen in succession of time; only light diffunditur ab instanti. The
rays and effluence of the Sun, notwithstanding the immense distance of all the
created bodies in the Universe, at the same instant of time, not only give
light to them all; but their power and influence is the prime and efficient (at
least instrumental) cause of the generation and preservation of all corporeal
creatures in them. If a man considers the Light of the little world Man, in the
eye, (how it at the same time sees (notwithstanding the vast interposition of
space) so many and so admirable works of the Creation;) it cannot less then
beget an astonishment in him, of the great power and goodness of God toward
him; yet how infinitely short this outward visible sight of the eye is Note the
divine excellency of the understanding.
to the Divine Ray in the understanding, appears in this, that more is to be
applied to one principle known to the understanding, or to one demonstrative
conclusion from thence, then to the sight or sense of all the men of the world
to the contrary: Should therefore all the men in the world affirm, That they
had seen two things equal to a third, and not equal to one another; or that
they had seen an Orthogonial Triangle, the square of whose subtending side were
not equal to the squares of the comprehending sides; or a right lined Triangle,
whose three angles were not equal to two right, etc. yet would I ascribe more
to the truth of these thing known to the understanding, and from thence truly
demonstrated, then to the affirmation of all the men in the world; nay, so
necessary are these things, that God (who can annihilate all the Universe in a
moment,) cannot make them otherwise; or should all the men in the world affirm,
that I ought not to serve God, nor honor my King and Parents, nor keep promise,
nor give every man his due, etc. yet more is to be ascribed to these Laws
engraven in the mind of every man, then to the affirmation of all the world to
the contrary.

77. Arithmetical proportion is, when three or four numbers are so The
wonderful Harmony of the Faculties of the Soul.
ordained, that they increase equally; the extremes added make the same number
with the mean added or doubled, if the numbers be but three: As 3. 4. 5. 6. are
in Arithmetical proportion, for they increase equally; and 3. added to 6. is
equal to 4. added to 5. And so 3. 5. 7. are in Arithmetical proportion, for
they increase equally; and three added to 7. is equal to 5. doubled.

By Def. 4. lib. 5. Eucl. Proportio est rationum similitudo. And Def. 5. it
must consist of three terms at least, though indeed it must of four: For where
the terms are but three, the medium is iterated twice; as what proportion 4.
has to 6. 6. has to 9. All Geometrical proportion is either discrete, or
continued. Discrete is, when the similitudo rationum is only between the 1. and
the 2. and the 3. and 4. term: As 2. 3. 4. 6. is in Geometrical discrete
proportion; for, the similitudo rationis of 3. to 2. and of 6. to 4. is the
same, viz. sesquialtera; but the similitudo rationis of 4. to 3. is not the
same, it being sesquitertia. In continued proportion, the similitudo rationis
is the same in all the terms; as in 2. 4. 8. 16. the similitudo rationis of 4.
to 2. and 8. to 4. and 16. to 8. is the same, viz. dupla. In all Geometrical
proportion, the extremes multiplied into themselves, produce the same number
with the mean terms multiplied into themselves.

Harmonical proportion, increases neither equally, nor proportionally; nor do
the extremes added or multiplied, produce the like number with the mean: And
yet in an admirable manner and sweetness do the extremes so connect the mean,
that the proportion of the greater extreme to the lesser, is the same with the
differences between the two greater and the two lesser. As 2. 3. 6. increase
neither equally, nor proportionally; nor is the mean number 3. added or
multiplied, the same with the extremes 2. and 6. added or multiplied, but is in
harmonical proportion; because the difference between 6. and 3. the greater
extreme, is triple to the difference of 2. and 3. the lesser extreme, which is
the proportion between 6. and 2. viz. triple. And if there be any variation of
either of the extremes, all Harmony ceases. All Harmonical proportion consists
only in three terms.

As in Harmonical proportion the terms are necessarily three, so are the
Faculties of the Soul, viz. the Will, the Understanding, and Memory: And as the
mean term in Harmony is so placed, that if there be any excess or defect in
either of the extremes, all Harmony ceases; so has God placed the
Understanding in a mean between the Will and Memory, that if there be any
defect or excess in either, or both do not conform to the Understanding, all
Harmony of good and prudent actions ceases, and they become wicked and foolish.

78. Experience, is the trial or apprehension of things from the outward Of
Experience and what Knowledge arises from thence. Eth. lib. 9. c. ^
senses; and this is common to all sensible creatures, as well as man. And
therefore, although according to the judgment of Aristotle, Scientia be activa;
and therefore being only in the immaterial object of the understanding, it may
be learned and taught without experience: yet Art being faction, as it is
applicable to some material subject, cannot be taught without experience.
Notwithstanding de facto, from the outward senses only may many Conclusions in
Arts be taught men, who apprehend them not from their causes, as we see in
mechanical Handicraft-men, and Husbandmen; yet I think no man will affirm them
to be very understanding men, how experienced soever they are. But that man who
shall go about of his own head to acquire Knowledge from Experience only, shill
be a Fool as long as he lives, and live to see misery enough. That the
consequence of Experience may be taught irrational creatures, capable thereof
as well as men, is every day seen in Horses, Dogs, and Hawks, etc. who from
strokes, blandishment, and harsh words, are taught many things contrary to
their natural disposition.

79. It is therefore evident, that neither the Principles of Arts and Sciences,
Conclusion.
nor Arts and Sciences, nor any Conclusion a Posteriori, is to be enquired into
only from the Memory and Experiment, according to Aristotle's and the Doctor's
Judgment; but Science may be taught without Experiment: And that what is
begotten from the Memory, Observation and Experiment, is common to all sensible
creatures as well as men.

And whereas the Doctor says, That there can be no prudent and truly Page 29 de
Genesis Anim.
knowing man, who by his own experience has not thoroughly understood a thing
to be so; for, without that, we only have Opinion, and believe; but the
Knowledge is rather to be esteemed other men's, then ours: I say,

Felix quem fac^unt aliena pericula cantum. Let other men by experience know,
that Laws hang, whip, and otherwise punish; I say, let the Knowledge be theirs,
for all me. And in vain should all counsel, advice, discourse, and reasoning be
to any prudent man for the direction of his actions, if Experience only of our
calamity be the true and only way to attain to Knowledge. And though I be
infinitely more in love with one Demonstration a Priori, then it is possible
any other can be with any direct or probable Conclusion a Posteriori; yet will
not I therefore exclude all Argumentation a Posteriori, but reverence both the
memory of Aristotle and the Doctor, as two of the most eminent Philosophers of
the Ancients and Moderns, who by their learned Labors have transcendently well
deserved, both of the present Age, and shall of all Posterity.

Si placet in Logica, nil vetat esse novum. OBSERVATIONS UPON Mr. Tho. White
Gent. his Grounds of Obedience and Government, Dedicated to his best Friend Sir
Kenelme Digby.
The First GROUND.
Wherein consists the Perfection of Government.
Author. OUr Author begins and tells us, he has learned a Lesson in Cyropoedia
(it will prove a short one, and yet more then is true) wherein Xenophon moves
the Question, Why of all other living Creatures which are of different natures
from Man, we easily attain to the mastery and rule, but few Men are so
intelligent as to be fit to govern Men, and those the worthiest part of
mankind?

Observe. Why, some body that has better eyes then I, find any such thing in
Cyropoedia, as this last, but few Men, etc. But our Author who has made
Xenophon speak what he list, may best answer what he thinks good himself, which
he wisely does, and so makes up the first Paragraph.

By the way, it is a mavelous thing that Xenophon a Heathen man, in his
Proem, should in admiration recite those very things of Cyrus, which God by
that most noble Prophet (extracted from the loins of Royal Ancestors) foretold
almost One hundred and fifty years before Cyrus was born, in the very name of
Cyrus, which any man who compares this Proem with the six first Verses of
Isaiah, Chap. 45. may see.

Author. But our Author goes on and tells us, We need not look into Philosophy,
nor study learned Books, to know that the nature of man is inclined to have its
own will, and casts all things which are under his consideration to compass and
effect it: As also every ordinary man's knowledge and consideration, is far
beyond any we find in other living creatures; and by consequence, is far less
easily masterable then any of them.

Observe. If God had not made Man a Rational and Intellectual Creature, and
engraven the Law of Nature in his mind, that he might conform and direct his
Actions thereunto, but only his Will to be the Rule and Reason of them, I
should be content to subscribe to what our Author says in this Paragraph; but
indeed I shall not easily renounce all these to assent to him.

Author. Whence we may plainly collect, That were it possible for a Governor to
make every single Person in his Dominion understand particularly, that what was
ordered by the Government, was his own truest Interest; such an one would be
the most absolute and perfect Governor; and infallibly would find the charge
of governing most easy and sweet, as well to himself as subjects.

Observe. Our Author in the antecedent Paragraph makes Man inclined only to
have his will in all things: In this he tells us it is best for the Governor to
make every individual subject to understand; which is to no purpose, if every
man will have his will, and do only in order thereunto.

Author. Our Author to clear this case, both in Reason and Experience, tells in
the next Paragraph, Of driving a Wedge into a hard piece of Wood, and of
Blacksmiths laying their Iron upon their Anvile in a situation below their
Heads.

Observe. He means sure, such a position best sorts with his discourse.

Author. Upon which Principle it is, that they who tutor Dogs, Horses,
Elephants, and Hawks, knowing the ordinary attractive of Beasts to be meats,
and some kind of flattery, make them to understand to the proportion of their
capacity, that to do the action they breed them for, gains them food: To which
they join also certain motions of stroaking and gentle words, that make an
impression in the Beast of its own excellency, and that it pleases its Master.
In like manner to deter them from certain actions, Cudgels, whips, and harsh
words are used, which have a notabler efficacy then one could imagine, if he
saw it not by exerperience.

Observe. Our Author before having made Man only to have Will, here makes
Hawks, Beasts, and Beasts to have understanding; and by consequence himself a
verier Beast then Dogs, Horses, Elephants, and Hawks.

Author. This (viz. Flattery, Cudgels, Whips, and harsh words) applied to
mankind, drives the effect home (and see his Reason) for Man being a Rational
Creature, (whose inclination is to work according to Knowledge) desires to know
that the work prescribed him, is good.

Observe. Did ever any man hear that Flattery, Cudgels, Whips, and harsh words
were to be applied to Man, because he is a Rational Creature; and that from
thence he desires to know, that the work prescribed him, is for his good?
Indeed stripes are fittest for the back of a Fool; it may be it is from thence
our Author knows no other way of attaining his good. And here he makes Man to
work according to the inclination of his Knowledge, and before of his Will. And
I tell our Author, a Man may know his Masters will, and not do it; and
therefore a Man's Will and Knowledge are different things.

Author. Our Author concludes this Paragraph, That the Nature of Man is to be
free; and to act whatever he does, because it seems best unto him.

But in the next Paragraph he begins concluding, That to make Men work freely,
is to determine their actions; and concludes, That if Reasons were solid, when
the Governor proposed them, such must of necessity be for the most part the
sequel.

Observe. Thus has our Author learned new terms of Philosophy, which neither
the Schools, nor Aristotle ever heard of, viz. Of determining Men's actions to
make them work freely, and that necessity is but for the most part; the
contrary of which is true in both, for necessity is ad unum and determined, and
freedom ad plura.

Author. Yet these are things of no consideration with our Author; but he goes
on confidently, and in the next Paragraph tells us, Experience makes this same
as manifest as Reason concludes it; and then tells us of a Mother and Nurse,
and of a Sucking Child, and gay things, and I know not what indeed, and
nothing to the purpose; and at last concludes, That the perfection of
Government agreed on by all hands, is to make the obeyer understand, that it is
his own profit the action aims at.

Observe. Why, and I tell our Author, That to make the obeyer understand that it
is his own profit which the action aims it, is the next way to ruin this, or
any other action which any Governor undertakes for the good either of himself,
or the obeyer: For, Secrecy (the life of all actions and designs, a quality
wherein Cardinal Richlieu was so eminent) cannot be, if the obeyer must be made
to understand that it is for his good. Expedition for Performance, cannot
expect a return of the Subjects understanding, whether such a thing conduces to
their good or no: Besides, it is a madness for any man to go about to make
another man understand, what is not possible for him to do. Now Reasons and
Mysteries of State so far transcend the capacities of Subjects in general, that
it is impossible for them to understand them; and one of the chief ends of all
Government is, To suppress Faction, and retain the governed in their Obedience.
And the endeavoring to make the governed to understand, whether this or that be
better for them, will probably divide them into Factions, about this and that
(for Reason, God knows, but little will be found amongst them) to the danger
and destruction of one another. It is sufficient for the obeyer to understand,
that his Safety and Preservation depends upon his Obedience, and that his ruin
follows from his disobedience: And what General of an Army (who has but a
subordinate power) who commands a party upon a design, though to the peril of
their lives, will expect a return from that party, That they do not understand
that this design is for their good? With more Reason ought a Supreme Prince to
expect obedience from his Subjects to his commands: Rightly therefore says
Seneca, Nil mihi frigidius videtur, quam lex cum prologo, Jubeat enim non
suadeat lex. And Cicero, Cum legem dico, nihil a me intelligi volo quam
imperium, sine quo, etc.

The Second GROUND.
Author. That the Nature of Man reaches not to the Perfection of Government.

Observe. IT is true, That all Power in Government whatsoever, which is not
Legal or Ecclesiastical, is Natural; yet no Government or exercise of Power
whatsover is Natural, but Rational, Politic and Voluntary. Our Author
therefore, who goes about to make all Power in Government, Politic and
Voluntary, and Government to be Natural, is like to have a great task of it.
Well therefore may he be lost in a wood, and cry out, It is impossible for him
to find the way out, etc. He is like a blind man, who because he is so, would
persuade another that no body sees; or like a man that has lost his way, says,
There is no such thing as the high Road: Sure he thinks no man can see but with
our Authors eyes, or that it was said to him, as to Esdras, Accendam in cord
tuo lucernam intellectus: Why, if he had learned his Lesson a little further in
his Master Xenophon, he would have told him, That to govern Men, was neither to
be put into the number of those things which could not be done, nor to be
esteemed hard to be done, if a man knowingly handle it.

Author. Thus much for the Contents; and as for the Chapter, let any man show
any one line of the nature of Man, or Government, what either of them is, or
wherein this natural defect of Man in governing consists, and I shall be ready
(if our Authors mysteries transcend not my understanding) to be his Scholar:
Nay instead thereof, he tells you of Childrens inability of judging, and of the
grossness of the capacity of others.

Observe. What though? will it follow, because that many persons are Children
and Fools, that therefore Tho. White must never hope to be wiser whilst he
lives?

Author. Then he tells us, How most spend their time in business, and the
Prince must trust his Physician, Mariner, Soldier, Lawyer, Cook, Brewer, Baker,
and diverse other Trades and Knowledges, which he has no possibility to
understand so perfectly as to be a master in them.

Observe. Our Authors meaning is, if he mean any thing, sure, That the Prince is
not served by the Physician, Mariner, Soldier, Merchant, Cook, Brewer, Baker,
etc. but that he is governed by them: And if it be impossible to serve two
Masters, who equally command, how is it possible for a Prince to obey, and
serve all these Masters our Author makes him, which have the supreme power over
him, the Cook, Brewer, or Baker, which are the undersorts of Governors, as he
calls them Ground 8. And how can he be Prince, who must be subject and
subordinate to all?

Author. Our Author goes on and tells us, Nevertheless Nature does not recede
wholly from her Principle, in thus subjecting one man's understanding to
another, and the greater most times to the lesser; for it does not this
otherwise, then by making the party subjected, see, it is his own good to trust
another skill.

Observe. But if Government be supernatural, as the Ground says, how can a man
subject himself to another in that thing which was alike impossible to him and
the other? Nor is it less absurd to say, the party subjected may see it is his
own good to trust another skill, when as the thing to be seen is invisible,
and above the sight of one and the other.

Author. Notwithstanding this subjection our Author concludes, That the party
subjected, is still free and Master of his own action, and the commanding part
of it.

Observe. Which is absurd and a contradiction; for a man cannot be subject and
free to the same thing.

The Third GROUND.
Author. That a rational Ground is necessary to humane Action.

Observe. WHat our Author means by Rationality, I do not understand, nor I
believe he neither; for reason must presuppose something, before any man's
Reason can operate; and this thing granted must be superior to Reason, and the
Reason of the Inference, Conclusion, or discourse.

Author. And page 180. our Author says, God has no irrational, or dead title
over his Creatures.

Observe. True, but though God has no irrational title over his Creatures; yet
cannot God have a rational or derived title over his Creatures. For if it be
rational, or derived, then would I know from whom is it derived? If it be
absolute, and underived, then how can it be rational, or what can be the reason
of it?

Author. Well, but our Author says, As he has none in himself, so likewise has
he not given any to those he has put in Authority.

Observe. And I say, that if Authority be originally in God, from whence it must
be derived, then cannot it be an artificial or invented thing by our Author or
any body else: And indeed I must confess to our Author, that I can never hope
for a rational belief, of ever understanding any one Proposition in this Third
Ground; nor tell how to deduce one Proposition from it; I shall therefore
observe nothing more upon it, then that this whole Chapter is a general Canting.

The Fourth GROUND.
Of the virtue of Obedience, and wherein it consists.
Author. OUt of this we may easily understand what Nature intends by the virtue
of Obedience, (If any ingenuous man understands one Proposition out of it, I
will submit) and what are the limits and laws of it; For it is plain, that the
immediate end is, that our works and all that concern us may be well done, even
to those things wherein our selves have no skill, or not enough; and the more
remote end to be achieved by this, is that our life may be good and happy, and
the end of nature arrived at by us.

Observe. Wisely spoke, Lucullus! It were worth an enquiring, whether this be a
definition, notion, or proposition? But whether it be sense or nonsense, our
Author says it is easy to be understood, not what Obedience is, but what the
Laws and limits of it are? And then takes leave both of the Laws and limits of
it, and says it is plain, that the immediate end is, that our works and all
that concerns us may be well done, even to those things wherein our selves have
no skill, or not enough; and the more remote end to be atcheived by this, is,
that our life may be good and happy, and the end of Nature arived at by us. So
here are three ends, and all plain, viz. the Immediate end, the more Remote
end, and the end of Nature; but where the easy to-be-understood Laws and
limits of Obedience are, or which of the three ends is the plain and immediate
end of it, (and yet we our selves to have no skill in those things it concerns)
is sure an easy to be understood, plain, and immediate end only to our Author,
and no rational or intellectual creature beside.

What would our Author have? I cannot tell. Now because as well in Theology as
in Geometry, Physic, Philosophy, and in all Arts and Sciences whatsoever,
there must be quaedam postulata, some Axioms and Principles given, which must
be so plain and perspicuous, that no exception can be taken against them, and
these Aristotle calls Indemonstrable Propositions; for if there be any so much
as equivocation in any of them, the Conclusions and Inferences from them must
be infinitely more uncertain; And because that Definitio est exclusio
aequivoci, before we proceed, let us define what obedience is: Obedience then
is the conformation of ones will to the rules and precepts of his superior: As
when a Creature conforms his will to the rules and precepts of God; or when a
subject conforms his will to the Law of his Sovereign; or when a Son conformes
his will to his Fathers Commands: This is Obedience, and he that does not obey,
sins.

Author. Well our Author goes on and tells us, The Conditions are three.

First, That the matter of the action be such, as our selves are not
sufficiently skilful in; and yet Ground first, he says, The perfection of
Government is to make the obeyer understand. Secondly, That our Commander be a
Master in that Art.
Observe. Now how can I tell whether my Commander be skilful, in what I do not
understand?

Object. Why, he tells you in the precedent Ground, That I must trust my Lawyer
and my Physician, though I be neither.

Answ. True, but I am not bound to this Lawyer, or that Physician; but in case
of subjection, I am bound only to my Prince: Nor do I sin, if I follow not the
advice of either; which I do, in not obeying my Superior.

Author. Thirdly, That he be an Honorable person in whom we deal.

Observe. Our Author, no doubt, is a wise Fellow, and likely hopes that he or
his Patron may be this Honorable person, when this Fustian shall be acted. Now
here let any man see, (if any thing may be collected out of this mystical
nonsense, or what follows hereon in the two next subsequent pages) whether our
Author does not make Obedience to consist on the Obligors part, in conformity
to a delegate and subordinate power of their own making: As if I give my
Servant power to receive my Rents, or my Bailiff power to oversee and order my
grounds, which my Servant and Bailiff do, that then I obey my Servant and
Bailiff. Well therefore may our Author say, that it is a fallacious principle,
to maintain Obedience to be a principal virtue, Page 22.
since he understands no better: Why then I will tell our Author, that, at
worst, it is better then the Sacrifice of Fools, and therefore better then any
thing he can say or do without it.

But how mean a thing soever he makes Obedience here, yet he rarely keeps long
in a mind to any thing; for, page 98. he says, We know, by consequence, Ground
12.
how excellent a virtue this act of Obedience is; having a motive of so great a
price and high elevation above other ordinary employments, which reach no
farther then to his private good. And then most senselesly he confounds the
offices of Command and Obedience; and as absurdly prefers the obedience of the
Commander, because it is not commanded or limited, before the idiotical good of
the Subject: observing the same method in Obedience, as he does in his Laws;
sometimes they are the Peoples Laws, which restrain their Supreme Trustee, or
Governor; otherwhile they are the Trustees Laws, who may with our Authors
license at other times do what he list. Such plain, certain, and easy to be
understood things, are our Authors Laws and Obedience.

Observe. But oh, our Authors Will is such a thing, (as you know who rage and
are most confident) that by no means he will part with it: It Is all a case to
him, whether there be a King, or no King in Israel; for he will do what is
right in his own eyes. For our Author says, In renouncing the power Page 25.
of our Will, we renounce our Understanding also. Our Author for his part needs
not fear it; but sure he fears that if he do so, (because he cannot hope that
he is qualified enough to be a Privy-Councellor) that he has bound himself up
from dabling with the Grounds of Obedience and Government. Why, he should do
well to be of Counsel with Adam against God, for the Devil and he agree in the
same thing, viz. That it is not liberty enough for Adam to eat of the other
trees of the garden in Eden; no, Adam must not renounce his will and
understanding too, in order to his chiefest good (the knowledge of good and
evil) and making himself like unto God, by tasting the forbidden fruit: To our
Author it is not liberty enough, for the Subject to square his actions to the
Laws and Rules of his Country; he must not renounce his will, to be commanded
by King or Laws, but must have his will too in making of Laws. Now let our
Author tell me, what a Government this is like to prove: Who will hold the
plough, that is persuaded he may handle the scepter? Who will live in an
obscure cottage, that hopes he may govern at the helm? or eat his bread in the
sweat of his brows, who may expect to fare deliciously every day? And now let
me tell our Author once for all, That humane Laws are made to retain Subjects
in their obedience, lest a worse thing happen unto them. There must be no
starting out, or breaking loose from them: For, Laws are like the banks which
encompass waters; if there be the least hole in them, the banks will be blown
up, and the waters lose themselves.

The Fifth GROUND.
That Fidelity is different from Obedience, and wherein it consists.
Author. NOw some good body help a lame Dog over the style! Here we find our
Author taking monstrous pains, and in a great sweat; why what is the matter
trow? What! Our Author undertakes to show, that Servants owe their Masters no
obedience, but fidelity only. And this he would prove by a mighty argument,
viz. A man buys a piece of Cloth or other merchandise of another, and pays for
it; And therefore Servants owe their Masters no obedience. And if this will not
do it, his Ipse dixit must, or he loses an essential ingredient toward the
patching up of his Fools paradise.

Observe. Now herein our Author and I differ, (and I fear we shall never agree
in any thing:) Our Author will trust his servant, where he expects no
obedience; and I will make my servant obey me, whenas (it may be) I will not
trust him for a groat. And indeed our Author will do more for his servant, then
I see in reason any man should do for him: For, page 141. he tells us, In pure
Morality he may falsify and break promise, if he save any thing by it, and is
better then his word. I shall say no more in answer to this Ground, but object
the authority of the Holy Ghost against it, Ephesians. 5. 6. Servants be obedient
to them that are your Masters according to the flesh, etc.

The Sixth GROUND.
In what consists Right or Due.
Author. HEre our Author says, The next Consideration may appear too
Metaphysical a Nicety for a Moral Treatise: Yet he armed Cap-a-pe in complete
Ignorance, valiantly attempts it, and will tell you of I know not what, of
Reason, which takes nothing to be good, but what is good for a man's self; and
makes it the rule of his actions, to do what is fitting for him, or conformable
to his, that is, to a Rational nature. But this is a rule by which he treats
Horses, Dogs, Trees, and Stones, etc. and runs through all his actions.

Observe. Well: But since the men of this world were never more unreasonable,
and every man so pretending to Reason, and yet no man almost can tell what he
means by Reason, let us see what Ratio, Reason is; and what Reasoning is; and
why Man is only said to be a reasonable creature. Reason is properly that
power of the soul, by which a Man is discerned from other living creatures, and
by which he does excel and command them: By Horace it is put for the reasoning
and discoursing of the soul, for finding out what is true; Ratio ponitur pro
ratiocinatione and discursu animi, ad investigandum verum. Cicero lib. 2. ad
Heren. Ratio est causa quae demonstrat verum esse id, quod intendimus brevi
subjectione; Reason is the cause which shows that thing to be true, which we
intend in a short view: And Reason is many times equivocally used for Counsel,
as Cicero in Verr. Mea quidem ratio, cum in praeteritis rebus est cognita, tum
in reliquis explorata and provisa est; My counsel is as well known in things
past, as thoroughly tried and provided in other things. Sometime for Respect;
Habenda est ratio honoris, Men ought to respect their honor. Sometime for Care;
Habenda est ratio rei familiaris, Men must look after their houshold-affairs.
Sometime for Business; Rationem habet cum terra, quae nunquam recusat imperium,
He busieth himself with his land which never disobeys him. Thus far Calapine.
Sometime it is taken for Account, Lu. 16. 2. Read rationem villicationis tuae,
Give an account of thy Stewardship. Ratio, in the third Definition of the fifth
Book of Euclide, est duarum magnitudinum ejusdem generis, mutua quaedam
secundum quantitatem, habitudo: Reason is a certain mutual habit, of two
magnitudes of the same kind after their quantity: As when two Quantities of the
same kind, two Numbers, two Lines, two Superficies, two Solids, etc. are
compared one to another, according to their quantity, that is, accordingly as
one is greater, less, or equal to another; this comparison or mutual habit of
one to another, was by Geometricians called Ratio. But now, I know not by what
habit or custom, Proportio, (which definition 4o lib. 5. Euclid. is, Rationum
similitudo; And definition 5, consists in three terms at least, for indeed it
must consist in four; for where it is in three, the medium is iterated twice,
as what proportion four has to six, six has to nine, etc.) has eaten the
former quite up, and is only used.

Or take Reason thus: Reason is that by which men from given Principles, do
rightly infer and deduce Conclusions. And Reasoning is twofold, either a
priori, or a posteriori: A priori, from the cause, nature, and matter of
necessary truths, to show what effects follow from thence; and such
Propositions are called demonstrative or scientifical, shown and known from the
Causes; such are all Propositions in Geometry and Mathematiques: Or when the
Effect is certain, and the Cause probable; and these are but probable
Conclusions, such as those in Philosophy and Physic. As I would know the
reason why Summer is hotter then Winter, for so I find it to be; why, thus I
reason: It cannot be from the propinquity of the Sun to the Earth, in Summer
more then in Winter, for the Earth is but a Point in proportion to the
Universe; besides, the Sun is nearer to the Earth in Winter then in Summer, for
the Orbis magnus is not Spherical or Circular, but Eccentrical and Elliptical,
which is plain, because the revolution of the Earth, or the Suns motion, is
finished in less time from the Autumnal Equinox to the Vernal, then from the
Vernal to the Autumnal, and therefore nearer to the Earth in Winter then in
Summer. It is not then from the Suns nearness to the Earth, which makes the
Summer hotter then the Winter; I find, that the higher the Sun rises in our
Horizon, that is, the nearer it comes to our Zenith when at the Meridian, the
hotter it is: I therefore probably conclude, that the heat in Summer is caused
from the reflection of the Sun; and the nearer the radii are reflected to right
angles, the hotter it is; and the more obliquely they are reflected, the colder
it is. Or as when a Physician from the symptoms of his indisposed Patient,
endeavors to find out the causes of his distemper, etc. this is reasoning a
posteriori, from the effect to find out the cause: And men may reason from
uncertain and false Principles, as well as true, but then always the
Conclusions are so. And therefore all Clavius his Demonstrations in his
Practical Geometry, and at the end of the sixth Book of Euclid, of the
Quadrature of a Circle, though the Demonstrations be truly deduced, are
uncertain, because it does not certainly appear, That from the imaginary motion
of the two right lines he there speaks of, the Quadratrix line does cut the
Base so, that the side of the Quadratrix is a mean proportional between the
Base and the Arch of the Quadrant. And the Inferences and Conclusions which
have caused so much confusion and distraction in these times, are drawn from
feigned and false Principles. But in all true Propositions whatsoever, no
reason can be given for the first grounds and principles of them, but only the
will of the great Creator of all things, who therefore so made them, because it
so seemed good unto him.

Of all the creatures upon earth, Man only is reasonable, for Man only
contemplates God, and looks up to heaven, as thence expecting his beatitude.
Ovid. Metam. --

Pronaque cum spectant anamalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
And a little after,

Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera possit,
Natus homo est --
Only Man, from universal causes, can by Reasoning (the faculty of his
understanding and memory) rightly infer and conclude from them; only Man has
freedom in his will of doing, or not doing, and may (if it be not his own
fault) in all his actions, let his Will be informed by his Understanding and
Reason: whereas other Creatures do all things spontaneously, that is, by an
impulse of Nature, as they are moved by their objects or fears. Therefore only
Man does well, and only Man does ill; and only Man is happy, and only Man is
miserable.

Author. But our Author goes on and tells you of a Tailor and a Mariner, and I
know not what indeed, and concludes, That now not the nature of two men, but
their words and what follows out of them, ground their being active and
passive: This power of activity is in Latin called Jus or Justum; in English,
Right or Due. Our Author says before, He that makes a promise to another man,
puts himself and his Promissary into a rank of agencie and patiencie, upon a
new score, to wit that of Fidelity and Negotiating.

Observe. Did ever man huddle up so much insignificant bumbast as here is, or
who in this world did from hence ever claim any Right or Property in any thing?
Well, let us see then what we understand by Right or Due. Right or Due, is what
any Man or company of Men claim to be his or theirs, excluding all their
Fellow Subjects. And this Right, Due, or Property, we no where find to be given
by God immediately to any Man or Men, but only the Land of Promise to the
Children of Israel, the Portion of whose Inheritance fell to them by Lot. And
by nature no Man has any property in any thing, more then another, if it be
true as Cicero says, Privata nulla natura. And Horace,

Non propriae telluris herum natura nec illum
Nec me, nec quenquam statuit.
What then gives it but the Law or Supreme Power of the Nation? for Martial,
Hoc lege quod possis dicere, jure meum est.

The Seventh GROUND.
Why Men desire to live in Community, and of the necessity of Government.
Author. HEre our Author tells us First, It is fit to understand why Men desire
to live in Flocks and Multitudes.

Observe. Now would I know of our Author, what these Men are, and where to be
found, who desire to live so? Or when did Men ever in the World in any place,
either live, or desire to live so? Indeed it is a received opinion, that Man is
born a living Creature, apt and fit for society; the Greeks called him (...),
but indeed no Man does naturally desire the society, company or conversation of
another Man, because he is a Man; and therefore Men do not, nor ever did live
promiscuously in flocks and multitudes (as our Author says) without
subordination one under another; but in any the meanest and most contemptible
Family that ever was, the company are not all alike to one another, as those
are which live in flocks and herds, etc. But because no Infant can live, nor
any Man live well without the help of another, naturally there is in every Man
a solitude how to live, and so to live that his living be not a burden, or
troublesome to him. Man does not therefore desire the company or society of
others as men (for then he would desire the company and society of all men
alike, of Good, of Bad, of Virtuous, of Vicious, of Servants and Vile, as well
as Noble and Generous) but accidentally as expecting Profit, Honor, Knowledge,
etc. from him or them with whom he consorts or associates himself. And
therefore on the Exchange, in Faires, Markets, etc. Men do not Meet so as only
to see one another, and to make up such a Herd, for then they would meet in
other places as well as there, but that from their buying and selling and their
exchanging of Merchandise, they may derive from thence profit to themselves. It
is an admirable thing to see what a strange Ingenuity there is in those men, in
acquiring those things from other places, which Nature (by the sterility,
negation, etc. of their own Country, (for Non omnis fert omnia tellus,) has
deprived them of, above those Men who abound in their own, and are careless to
seek to supply their defects from otherwhere; as we see in Holland and Zealand,
the Corn, Butter, and Cheese made in both those Provinces will not maintain the
twentieth part of the Inhabitants: yet when did ever any man here in England
see Corn, etc. dear, but we were supplied from thence? and what place in the
World is there, which though above twenty times bigger then both those
Provinces, is equal to them in shipping, and yet have scarce a stick of wood
growing in either?

And men prefer that society wherein they suppose themselves honored and
esteemed, before that wherein they think themselves slighted and neglected; and
where Youth and Vigor do abound, there Men seek to them who will consort to
them in Hunting, Hawking, Shooting, etc. as they affect this and that for their
exercise: And vicious Men will endeavor to find out such society as will excite
and accompany them in those vices to which they are prone: And because only
Ingenious Men Philosophize, therefore Ingenious Men will not willingly consort
themselves, but with them from whom they expect either to learn, or to be
esteemed more Ingenious or more learned then any in the company; For naturally
every Man desires that from conversing with another, he may draw more Profit,
more Honor, more Pleasure, more Learning, etc. to himself; and when he has so
done, he is so far from being satisfied therewith, that he betakes himself to
solitariness how to increase what he has got into more, which no other
creatures which live in companies do, but when they have eaten up all in one
place, seek where they may devour it in another.

Author. Our Author goes on and tells us, The first community is of Man and
Wife,

Observe. Our Author is the first man that ever I heard of who desired to hold
his Wife in common.

Author. Our Author afterward tells us, That the first Origin of Men's meeting
and living together, is, that Men are most burdensome to themselves when they
are alone, and seek company to divert themselves, so to elude the length of
time.

Observe. So that he who cannot tell what to do, but is a burden to himself,
may keep company with our Author so to fool away the time. I have seen many
Chandlers Bills with all Items in them, but never saw any Section mangled with
three Firsts altogether, but here in our Author.

Author. Now our Author is got loose from his Firsts, and arrived at the next,
which is, That God and Nature have so managed mankind, that no one has of
himself as much as he desires, but regularly abounds in one kind of goods,
and wants some other which his neighbor has.

Observe. Now, who is he of whom our Author speaks? Why, one of his rational
multitude (as he calls them by and by) before they have chosen a Trustee;
what is here to do? Why his rational multitude have all things in common one
with another, no one abounds in any one thing more then another, but are like
swine feeding, eating, and promiscuously herding together, or a kennel of
Hounds devouring a dead Horse, who have it all in common, yet no Dog any more
right to any piece of the Horse than another, but as he gets it and eats it.

Author. In the third place comes Fear: For he that finds himself stored with
those things which he and others love, is subject to fear those whom he
suspects able to bereave him of them, and so seeks company of friends for
protection.

Observe. Now would I fain know of our Author, how this Man of his Rational
Multitude came by these things, he so fears to lose? Why, has not any of his
Multitude as much Right to them as he? Sure he must have surreptitiously
cheated or stolen them from the rest of the Rational Multitude, for I cannot
see what other Right he can have to them; It may be though it is not too
Meaphysical a nicety for a Moral Treatise, and our Author can resolve you; and
let the Reader read on and see, how he prefers the passion of Love before that
of Fear, which he says agrees both with Philosophy and Morality,

Author. Now our Author got within sight of Land, there is now nothing wanting
but that the Rational Multitude name their Trustee, who ought rather to be a
good and a wise Man, then a Fool and Knave, and our Authors Government is
perfect; yet for fear lest no Man but should understand it, in conclusion he
tells you, You see Government is naturally a Power of directing the Common
Affairs of the Multitude, by a voluntary submission of the Communities wills
to their Governors.

Observe. Now will I be burnt if ever any Man proclaimed himself such a
Cockscomb as our Author does all along this ground; In his Three Firsts, then
in his holding his Wife in Common, in his Care and Fear for the goods of the
Individuals of his Rational multitude, who possibly could have none at all, and
now by the giving up of theirs to the will of their Governor, which thing
(Ground 4.) he cannot see how it can be pleasing to God, Page 24.
nay he tells you, it is like a Man's mangling himself, or Origens guelding
himself, or Simeon Styletes chaining himself to a Hill, that he might not go
thence for Gods sake: But it may be our Author has a help at Mawe; for our
Author Ground 8. says, It is evident by this Resignation of the Peoples will,
the Magistrate receives such an activity and power, as he has explicated
before, did arise out of a man's promise to his Neighbor. So then, a Man may
mangle himself, Origin may gueld himself, and Simeon Styletes may chain himself
up to a Hill, though not for Gods sake, yet so far as it does arise from their
promise to their Neighbor.

Observe. But unless a Man should affect mistaking; I think of all men, our
Author is most accursed to it; for now he makes his Rational Multitude a
people, when they have made their Trustee or Supreme Governor; whereas, other
Men always understood by the people, them who had assumed the Supreme Power
in them; As when a Man says, the People of Athens or Rome, he means them in
whom the pretended Supreme Power was, and by the Multitude he means, them in
whom the Supreme Power was not.

Author. Now is our weary Trojan arrived at his wished shore, having sung his
Paean and erected a Trophy, says, No moderate and discreet person can doubt,
but a Government so ordered, is both necessary and connatural to a rational
multitude, and in a word, such as Humane nature requires, and is the best, if
not the only that suits to the disposition of freemen and prudent.

Observe. Yet sure, if after all this glorious boast, this Peacock but looks
upon his feet, he will let fall his tail; for his Second Ground is, That the
nature of Man reaches not to the perfection of Government: But what does our
Author here mean by Freemen? if by Freemen he understands men free to do what
they list, then our Author leaves them as he found them, and has done nothing
at all; but if these Freemen be subject to their Trustee so far as he
apprehends it fit and necessary for the good of the Commonwealth, then I
believe we shall find them as very slaves as any our Author (Ground 9.) makes:
So that after all this ado, our Author has made a multitude of slaves, or he
has made nothing at all.

And thus has our Author endeavored to show, why men desire to live in
Community, viz. By having nothing common at all.

The Eighth GROUND.
Of the Authority given to an Absolute Governor, and of Vnder-sorts of
Government.
Author. NOw comes our Author with a dog in a line, his Absolute Governor tied
up to certain Laws and Limits, which he has no right to transgress.

Observe. What is this our Authors Absolute Governor? Why, the Roman Dictator
was worth ten of this; for he had power of life and death, of disposing of all
Offices at his own will and pleasure, without the controlment of any either
Senate or People, Consul or Tribune, and this power to continue during the
exigence and danger of the Commonwealth. Yet so far was the Dictator from being
an absolute Governor, that he was the while but a Minister of the Peoples;
which was plain in Fabius Maximus, for Plutar. in vita Fabii and Live. lib. 22.
though he were chosen Dictator, yet during the danger of the Commonwealth, the
People made Minutius equal to him. And so was the Athenian Archon, who though
chosen for Ten years and called a Judge, and chiefest of power in the
Commonwealth, yet as Bodin observes cap. 8. fol. 80. de repub. was not the
Majesty of the Commonwealth in him, but he a Provider and Procurator of the
People, and was bound to give an account of his Government. And the reason why
the Dictator and Archon were not absolute Governors, is plain, because this
power was not immediately in them from God, but delegate and constituted from
another; And any power that makes any thing, may alter it; for, Unumquodque
dissolvi potest eo ligamine quo ligatum est.

Well, but let us see what manner of beast our Authors Absolute Governor is.
Why, our Author tells you, he is an Absolute Governor, but restrained and tied
up to certain Laws and Limits. Which is a contradiction and impossible; for in
being absolute, he is freed from all Laws and Limitations. And now I will tell
our Author, that if his absolute Governor be tied up to any humane Limits or
Laws, he has so little power, that it is impossible for him to protect and
defend his rational people: For suppose the Laws he is restrained to, be as
many as are contained in the body of the Civil Law, our Statutes, and all the
Acts and Ordinances made since 1641. and twenty times more, yet would not this
be sufficient for an absolute Governor: For all these are finite, and men's
actions are infinite; and therefore Enemies may find out such ways to invade
this free people, as this absolute Governor cannot find in his Laws, where he
has power to oppose them; and so this rational freeborn people must be left
destitute, if any Enemy may be found who can outwit them, and find a way to
oppress them out of the Laws and Limits which they have given their absolute
Governor. And who will desire any greater advantage against another, then to
have him look always one way? or what Enemy desires more against another, then
against such a one whose absolute Governor is tied up to certain Instructions,
and those known to themselves? And Laws are things which must be in esse; And
how can any man tell to day, what may happen to morrow? but Princes must to
morrow, and next day, and every day, steer their course according as the wind
and storms, shoals and deeps, etc. represent themselves, which no man can
possibly foresee.

Well, let us see what the restriction of any one thing in the Supreme Prince,
may bring upon himself and Subjects? Let us look upon a King of England after
the Act of Parliament, De tallagio non concedendo (an Act of Parliament, is the
Act of the King in Parliament, As when the Lords and Commons present any Bill
to the King, and he passes it; this is an Act of Parliament, which is no more a
Law of the Lords and Commons, then the Laws passed at the Petition or Rogation
of Coelius, Cassius, Sempronius, etc. were the Laws of Coelius, Cassius, and
Sempronius.) And let every King expect, that whatsoever the Subject can get of
the King by hook or crook, he will hold that as fast, as the King shall any
flower he leaves in his Crown.

Well then, if Edward the First will not pass this Law, he gets not a groat of
his Subjects in England toward the relief of his oppressed Subjects of
Aquitain in France, which Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon this Statute
observes.

Well then, the Scots in the year One thousand six hundred and forty
(having-transgressed all Laws of God and Humanity, as well as the Borders and
Bounds of their own Country) raise Arms the second time, and make an invasion
upon us, and seize upon Berwick and Newcastle; (but though the Kings hands were
tied up, yet the Divine Vengeance of Heaven shall overtake them and their
Country, by a hand they could so little fear, as I believe few of them knew
whether there were any such, or no.) And now oh you! who have not forced all
mankind from Humane breasts, come and stand amazed with horror for the most
deplorable condition, of the most Pious, the most Religious, the most Just, the
most Chaste, Virtuous, and Serenest Prince, that ever swayed the English
Scepter, and not to be paralleled by any Country whatsoever?

The Scots having invaded this Nation to treat with them a second time, was too
too much an indignity for their Natural Sovereign; besides, it was an affront
not to be endured by the Englishmen, That their Country must be made a prey to
such Locusts and Caterpillars, whenever they will pretend grievance in Kirk
and Discipline: To restrain them by force, it could not be without raising
money; By this Statute the King, they say, can raise none, but by Parliament;
and to call a Parliament in this mad conjuncture of times, was judged by
himself and Council, to be a means to increase the power of the Scots, by the
Parliaments joining with them, to the endangering himself and his Posterity.

Well then, what is to be done? what stand still and look on, while these
hungry Vermin devour and make a prey of his afflicted Subjects? No, the King
to make his goodness appear above his own danger, calls a Parliament; where not
deceived in his expectation, the Scots and they are Simeon and Levi straight,
sworn Brethren; and the first thing agreed between them was, That Humane Blood
must be offered up to them; (a preparative to a greater Draught) nor must
Strafford suffer by an ordinary way of Judicature by his Peers, but that the
King may be involved in the same Crime with themselves, he must die by Act of
Parliament; and then having made the King to divest himself of all possible
power to defend himself, when ever they will strike him, they give the Scots
Three hundred thousand pounds to be exported out of the Kingdom, because they
had made a prey, and devoured the goods of their fellow Subjects in the four
Northern Counties, which (forsooth!) these good Saints call Brotherly
Assistance.

See, oh see here, O my Countrymen, the Assertors and Avengers of the Honor of
the English Nation! These are the Noble Patriots of their Privileges, I am
sure not of your Liberties! These are the glorious Reformers of our Church and
State! These are they who in order to so many Protestations, Declarations,
Swearings and forswearings, have made Charles a more glorious King then any of
his Predecessors, more feared abroad and more renowned at home!

And now tell me, whether you had not better at first have given your pence and
your two pences, then paid your pounds and forty shillings since, you knew not
for what. Nor was our case much unlike the case of the Constantinopolitans, who
alleging Poverty and Privilege in opposition to their Safety and Defense,
became a prey to the Turks, 1453. their most merciless enemies, who put them
all to the sword; the Turks themselves wondering there should be so much wealth
in the World, as was found in the sacking of this one City.

The Ninth GROUND.
Of Slavery, and the lawfulness of it.
Author. HEre our Author tells us, We must first look into the notion of
Slavery, which signifies a Subjection to command in all things, and that merely
for the Masters profit. Well, I will not quarrel with our Author about the
notion of Slavery, but tell him, he mistakes it in all his specifications of
it: For his first, It is, he says, clearly against nature for a man to submit
his will so far, as to renounce his eternal bliss.

Observe. This is out of his notion, and is so monstrous, as it is not
imaginable any man should do it but Witches; and any man may choose, whether he
will do it or not, for no man's will can be compelled.

Author. The like he conceives of Subjection to be killed or maimed causelessly,
nay, or to be so penuriously abused, as to have no content in life; and the
reason he gives, is, It is evidently against the inclination of nature, to
consent to the loss either of life, or the profit of life, which is either to
be well in this world, or the next: And therefore it cannot be conformable to
nature, to renounce either, (so then a man must not by our Authors rule,
renounce any depraved affection or appetition in him, if it conduces to his
profit in this life) especially the quiet in this world, being the means to
gain bliss in the other.

Observe. And so our Author has shut out of doors all suffering for the
testimony of a good Conscience, because the quiet of this world, is the means
to gain bliss in the other.

Author. Nor does it scare our Author, he says, to cast his eyes upon so many
holy men and women, as have put themselves voluntarily upon penurious and
painful lives, because they enjoy the fruit of contemplation, and sweetness of
Conscience in expecting a great reward for what they did: But for a man to
renounce the content of this, who either thinks not of another, or at least
hopes nothing out of his resignation, this must of necessity be extremely
irrational, and against nature.

Observe. Why, if our Author had learned thus much out of the Poet,

Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore; Horace.

Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae.
He needed not to have thought it so irrational; for if the love of Virtue will
not make men do their duties, the fear of stripes and halters must, or our
Author will not get Paper to write his Grounds of Obedience and Government
upon. Our Authors next specification, is no more then every servant ought to do.

Now let us see what servitus or mancipium, or servitude is, and who are
properly Slaves, or as we use to term them, Vilains.

Slaves happen (Bodin says) to be so five ways: Either by birth, as the Bodln,
cap. 5. lib. 1. de Repub.
posterity of the Parents who are so; or accidentally, as prisoners taken in
war; or thirdly, those who for some offense or debt are condemned to slavery,
either for years or life; fourthly, they who voluntarily make themselves so;
and fifthly, those that are sold by Thieves and Pirates, are for the price paid
slaves, to the buyers: But whether this last be truly accounted slavery, is
disputable, that is, Whether such buyers may use them as slaves or no. See more
hereafter, Cap. Domestical Power.

Now Slaves have nothing properly, but whatsoever they get is their Lords, who
may sell them or give them away at their pleasure, and have power of life and
death over them. (Here in England the Lords power over their Vilains was
restrained, neither might the Lord maim his Vilain; for though the Vilain could
not recover any damage against his Lord, yet after Attainder the Lord was
finable to the King) See Litt. 194. And the Neife (who is the Vilains Wife or
Daughter) might have an appeal of Rape against her Lord, Litt. 190. But this
not being a condition for any one who bears the Image of God upon him, God did
restrain it, Levit. 25. 39. to them who were not Israelites, or Proselytes
only: Wherefore I conceive that neither Mahometans, Jews, or Christians (all
acknowledging the Moral Law) do not make Slaves of any who are of their Faith
and Religion from this ground; neither do I understand how the use of Vilains
used with us heretofore, can be justified, if they were Christians; for no
question Christianity makes not men in a worse condition in this world, then if
they had been Jews or Turks. What difference the Romans made between Slaves and
Libertines, and what Manumission is, and how many ways Slaves become free, read
Bodin de Repub. cap. 5. lib. 1. And of Manumission or Enfranchising of
Villains, read Littleton, and Com. of Sir Edward Coke thereon, Cap. Villenage.

Author. And now our Author tells you, how a Nation may enslave it self by its
too much wit; and most prudently and wisely takes care that it be not our case.
And so goes on very prettily in Questions and Answers; as, Whether any Nation
be by nature born to slavery? of Joseph, and the Nation of Egypt; of a Nation
and Nature, and how like Nation sounds to Nature, (Gens to Natura) and at last
concludes, Out of this Conclusion it is is easily seen, that the Turkish,
Muscovitical, and other whatsoever Governments settled upon this principle, That
the goods and lives of the Subjects are the Princes, not to defend (as our Laws
go) but to dispose at will, etc. neither do, nor can breed any obligation of
Obedience in the Subject, more then of Fear, and present Utility.

Observe. It seems then, neither Fear nor Utility may be expected from our
Authors Laws, with which his absolute Trustee is empowered. And what other
means (besides the law of God which commands us to be subject to the higher
Powers, Romans 13. and S. Peter, 1 Ep. cap. 2. 13. To submit our selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as supreme, etc.) can
any Governor propound to his Subjects for their conformity to his Laws, but
utility and reward for their obedience, and fear of punishment for their
disobedience?

And here our Author calls them Tyrannical, etc. What Is the matter? Have they
too much power? They have no more then God has given them; and in having less,
they should soon actually have none at all, and Aristocraties and Democraties
assume as much; Do they eat too good meat, or wear too good clothes? Why sure
Nature intended that the best things should be used, and who better use them
then the King? What, are many of their Subjects poor and miserable? It Is not
their fault; it is the curse of God upon the ground for Adams sin in not giving
up his will to Gods command, that in sorrow man should eat of it all the days
of his life, Genesis 3. 17. And if any of these Tyrannical Governors (as our
Author calls them) should divest themselves of all their power and greatness,
yet there would not be fewer poor laboring men: And let our Author show me in
any of these Goverments half so many Slaves and miserable men, as I will show
him have been under the Romans and other popular States. Nor need any man in
any of these be a Slave, if he will become Renegado to his Faith and Religion;
whereas under the Romans, etc. they were necessitated to it at the will of
their Lords. Will they, if they fear the power of any man to grow too great,
use means not fully warrantable in the known Laws, either to make it less, or
none at all? why, the Portian Law prescribed only banishment to the Citizens of
Rome, in any offense; yet Cethegus, Lentulus, Longinus, etc. were put to death
for being agents in Catilines Conspiracy. The Athenians would by their
Ostracism banish any man that they but suspected would grow too great. Will
they make unjust war without any cause given? why, the Romans undertook the
protection of the Mamertines, (Livy lib. 16.) a company of Sir Walter Raleigh,
book 5. ch 3.
Hellhounds who had murdered their Hosts the Messanians, and took possession of
Messana against the Carthaginians, which was the ground of the first Punick
war. And when Greece was divided amongst Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Arcadians,
Corinthians, Achaeans, etc. when was there any faith or troth among them, but
the weaker still bandying against the stronger, till they were all brought in
subjection to Philip the father of Alexander. Will they put men to death upon
no sufficient proof of crime against them? why, what proof of suspicion of
crime was there against the most excellent and divine Philosopher Socrates? or
against the victorious Athenian Captains at the battle of Arginusae? Will they
not reward their good Servants and Captains? what reward had Camillus,
Coriolanus, both the Scipio's, African and Asiatick, See Dio Siculus Bib lib
13. Where the Syracusans, before Dionysius his time, made it their pastime to
reward the virtue of their worthiest Commanders with death or banishment. And
Nicias lost the whole Athenian Army in Sicily, consisting of above forty
thousand men, for fear if he had preserved them, he should have been proscribed
or put to death by the Athenians. Thucid. lib. 7.
Themistocles, Alcibiades, Hermocrates, the noble Syracusan, Dion? etc. Will
they take severe revenge upon their enemies, although it may be they had no
just occasion given? The poor Melaeans, who were content not to have meddled in
the wars between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, and no occasion of war
against them but the will of the Athenians, after they were forced to yield up
their City at discretion, were all of military age slain, the women and
children made slaves, and Melos made a Colony to Five hundred of these cursed
Demagogues, as you may see at the end of the 5. book of Thucidides. And see
Plutarch in the Life of Sylla, what came upon the Athenians who first called
the Romans into Greece, when Sylla took Athens. Will they take severe revenge,
where (as our Authors calls it) the obeyer does not understand that it is his
own profit which the action aims at, (that is to say, when the Subject will not
obey?) Let him see the fate of the Capuans in Livy lib. 26. and of the
Mytileneans and Scionians in the 3. and 5. book of Thucidides. What, do they
not govern their Subjects in peace? Where was there ever any such dissension
and confusion as in Democratical and Aristocratical States? And the Grecians
have seen less war and disquiet two hundred years together under the Turk, then
ever they saw in three years, when it was divided into so many Aristocraties
and Democraties.

But our Author will not endure that the Subject should be protected in his
life and estate by the Law of these Tyrannical Governors. Why, what greater
obligation of obedience can there be to Government on the Subjects part, then
that he is thence protected in his life, and from thence holds whatsoever may
be called his? And since there never was, nor can be a fourth species of
Government, how much better is it for a Subject to obey one Individual Prince,
then by an imaginary liberty to make his obedience to many? for, Quantae molis
erit, dominis servire duobus?

Author. Well, but let us compare one of these Tyrannical Governors with our
Authors Absolute Governor; (For though our Authors Absolute Governor be a
Mungrel, extracted from equivocal generation, and such a Beast as Nature never
intended, and (Ground 8.) tied up to certain Laws and Limits of the People, yet
for all that, our Author can have a course too with his Lycisce, though tied up
in a line: But then it must be agreed between our Author and his Lycisce, that
they say it be for the good of the People; and then (Ground 11.) they are his
Laws, (alack the while, what is become of the Peoples Laws! etc.) And (Gr. 13.
p. 101.) The lawfulness of a Sovereign Commander is no other, then that he
truly thinks to be for the good of the Commonwealth.

Observe. So now, Casting of Dollars, and Coining of Dollars, is all the
difference between our Authors Trustee, and one of these Tyrannical Governors;
the same thing differently called by the Author.

The Tenth GROUND.
Why a Man is to hazard himself for the Common good?
INdeed herein (for ought I know) may be much Treasure and Learning; and there
let it be, for I never intend to look into it.

The Twelfth GROUND.
Who is such a Governor, and the Subjects Duty toward him.
Author. WE have long talked of a Supreme Governor; it is time we should point
him out, that he may be known. And since all agree that there are three sorts
of Government, Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; when they are simple,
there can be no doubt who is the Supreme Magistrate. Now mingled they may be,
either continually, as when all parts mixed are so often engaged that their
Authorities run jointly, or else some are continual, others but at certain
terms.

Observe. Our Author has talked long indeed, and to very little purpose of his
Supreme Governor, and now he thinks it high time to point him out, that he may
be known; and he thinks he has already so sufficiently described him, that any
Ingenious Rational Man may easily discern him, and so takes leave of him, and
tells us, All agree there are three sorts of Government, Monarchy, Aristocracy,
and Democracy, and that they may be mixed: May they so? Then sure they may be
more then three, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; Monarchy mixed with
Aristocracy, Monarchy mixed with Democracy, and Monarchy mixed both with
Aristocracy and Democracy: Aristocracy mixed with Monarchy, Aristocracy mixed
with Democracy, and Aristocracy mixed with both; and so Democracy mixed with
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and both. So that either these three sorts of Government
will admit of no mixture, or else there may be above three sorts of Government.

Author. The next stumble (for steps our Author makes none) is, What Monarchy
is, if it be mixed (but if it be mixed, how can it be Monarchy? for Regia
Majestas est indivisibilis) with Aristocracy or Democracy, so that they be
continually joint Actors, the Monarch is but a Servant, and the other part the
Master.

Observe. Could any Man give a name to this Government, it must be either
Aristomonarchy, or Demo-monarchy; in plain English the chief Government of one
Man alone, or the People-Government of one alone; but this is, our Author
says, but only when they are joint Actors, and then the Monarch is but a
servant. Did ever any Man talk so senselesly, as if he understood neither words
nor meaning? for Monarchy is the Government of one Person alone, which is
impossible if it be subservient to the Government of any Court or People,
unless our Author can make a Court or People not consisting of Men. Nor is the
Instants he gives of the Italian Dogs, and Lacedemonian Kings, any thing to the
purpose; for who in the World ever heard of the Monarch of Venice, Genoa, or
Lacedemon? It is true indeed that Euristhenes and his Brother Procles, the Sons
of Aristodemus, Grandchildren of Cleodaeus, Great Grandchildren of Hyllus, and
Adnepotes of Hercules, were the first two Kings of Lacedemon, Anno mundi 2848.
and out of their two Families called the Eurypontidan, and Agidan, the Kings of
Lacedemon did jointly reign, until that about the year of the world 3777.
Eurydamadas was the last of the Eurypontidan family, descended from Procles,
and almost at the same time Cleomines the last of the Agidan family, descended
from Eurysthenes, was overcome by Antigonus King of Macedon. Yet could not this
Government be properly called Monarchy, but Duarchy.

Author. Nor less childish is his mixture of Aristocracy and Democracy, for
these will as little admit of mixture as any other. But see what a wise
observation he makes, viz. The quarrel to be more balanced, because the
Government is divided in its self, and therefore dangerous.

Observe. So then, the mixture of Monarchy with either or both the other
Governments, makes no division; or to what purpose does our Author take notice
of this dangerous mixture only in these two? and then our Author makes no
doubt, but if Aristocracy gets power enough, she is in posture of Supreme
Authority. Very wittily observed, and a very great doubt wisely resolved.

Author. Monarchy and Democracy can hardly be so mixed, that Democracy be
perpetual, and Monarchy by spurts: for that is not Monarchy; the said Monarch
being not long enough in Power to be accounted a settled Magistrate, as we see
in the Decemvirs, Tribunes and Dictators among the Romans.

Observe. So then, here is Monarchy mixed with Democracy, and not mixed; and why
not mixed? because forsooth it is by spurts, and not long enough to be
accounted a settled Magistrate; no, how long then settles a Magistrate our
Author no where says; but if he had learned a very little Logic, he might
have known that majus and minus non variant speciem, and a Magistrate of an
hours settlement, is as much a Magistrate, as if he had been one never so long.
And then see the wild instance of the Man, for although in the Roman Dictators
there were some shadow of Monarchy, yet in the Tribunes being two, and the
Decemvirs being ten, there could be no possible color thereof, unless our
Author by his Logic can make two Men and ten Men to be but one Man alone. But
stultum est stolidas opiniones accuratius refellere. I will referr my self to
the censure of any Ingenuous and Judicious Reader, that has patience to read
any one Ground in this whole book, if there be more sense or reason in it, then
in this, and the foregoing Grounds of this Man's Obedience and Government.

The Thirteenth GROUND.
Of the Qualities of Laws and Commands in respect to Obedience.
HE that can find any good in this Ground of our Authors, let him take it for
me, I will not hinder him.

The Fourteenth GROUND.
In what conditions the Subject may resist Government.
Observe. WE left our Author Ground 7, wondering at a Jack-a-Lent of his own
making, and here we find him throwing stones at it to beat it down again; as
who indeed may so well mar it as he that made it? But why does our Author
say, the Subject may resist? for resistance is usually taken in an ill sense,
as when the subordinate resists his superior? Why? if his absolute Governor has
no power but what those Laws which the People (as he calls them) gave him, if
he does transgress, the People might remand him to his Duty, and if he does not
obey, he resists the People.

Author. Then our Author says, It is evident, if it be rational to resist
Government, it will be lawful also to break and remove it,

Observe. So that now all the fat is in the fire; all that our prudent
Architector has been all this while a building, is blown away with this small
wind: It may be a question hereafter where our Author shall next fetch his
fire, now his Ignis fatuus is out. Plut. in the life of Themistocles recites,
That Themistocles making himself merry with his Sons insolent usage of his
Mother, and his Mothers like usage of his Father, was wont to say, his Son
commanded all Greece: For the Athenians commanded the other Grecians; He
commanded the Athenians; his Wife, him, and his Son commanded his Wife. How
much greater power had our Author in this Government than Themistocles his
Child had over the Grecians? For in all our Authors Government you shall find
two degrees of Comparison above the superlative, viz. the peoples Power over
their supreme and absolute Governor, and our Authors supreme supremest Power,
who has a Power when he will, to make what he list the Peoples Laws, which
shall oblige and tie up their absolute Governor; And when the toy takes him,
they shall be the Governors Laws; And Ground 11. latter end, No supreme
Magistrate can be bound to any Laws, contrary to (what our Author or Governor
shall call) good Government. And now who would think so wise a fellow as our
Author, who in this Government had such a monstrous and most unlimited
sovereignty, should (by showing his power in giving his Rational multitude
liberty to dissolve it) lose it all in an instant? sure this Icarus, if he
neither drowns, nor otherwise kills himself in the fall, will only rise up
again to hang himself?

Well, but let us see whether upon our Authors principles this Government can
be dissolved, or be in the power of his People or Rational multitude. All Men
who have written of the Cause and Nature of things, have put a difference
between Natural, and Voluntary or Rational causes or things. Natural causes or
things are those which proceed immediately from God, and are above the Will or
Reason of Man; Voluntary causes or things are those which do not immediately
proceed from God, but from the Will and Reason of Man. But ex Hypothesi this
Government, Ground 7. page 48. is connatural, and Ground 8. page 50. Natural;
and therefore this Government is superior to the Wills or Reason of the People,
and cannot be by them dissolved; but the resisting of it is a violence upon
Nature, and not only Irrational, but Immoral and unjust.

Thus have we seen our Author make a Government, and thus have we seen our
Author mar his Government. Let him tell us Ground 15, ^herein consists the
Liberty of the Subject: Ground 16. Of the* dispossession of a Supreme Governor
and his Right: And Ground 17. Of a Governor dispossessed: (only because our
Author, Ground 17. tells us that Pope Urban the eight was an Intelligent
generous Prince, and well versed in public Government, and he made a decision,
that after five years quiet possession of an Estate, the Church was not bound
to take notice whether the title were lawful or no: I will tell our Author,
that if Pope Urban might not take notice after five years, who is the lawful
Governor, yet Pope Pius the fourth after above twice the time declared by Pope
Urban, might take notice of it, as you may see Hist. Con. Triden. 423. and 443.
So then Pope Pius may do that which Pope Urban is not bound to do) or say what
he will for me, I am content if after all this pains on my part, I shall not
(in the Judgment of wiser and more discerning Men then my Author or self) have
made my self like our Author in thus far answering him to his Grounds of
Obedience and Government.

OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. HOBBS De Cive.
Observe. HIs first Axiom or Principle he begs, both in the Preface, and second
Article of the first Book De Cive, is, That the beginning of Civil Society, is
from Mutual Fear. Yet in his Preface, and second Annotation upon this Article,
He fears that some men may deny it; yea, it is true, that very many men do deny
it.

This therefore being required for a Principle, and the first Principle, and by
consequence not to be proved, but to prove all that may be inferred from it;
and since that he grants that very many do deny this Principle; Then by very
many men must the whole body of De Cive be rejected: For, Contra negantes
principia non est disputandum.

But if men will not grant this Principle, (in the Pref. and Annot. abovesaid)
he will prove it so, that he will make them ashamed of it; and how, think you?
(It will be somewhat odd, sure, to prove Principles.) He tells you, That all
Cities, although they be at peace with their neighbors, yet keep Garrisons and
Soldiers upon their Frontiers: And that when men go to sleep, they shut their
doors; and that men taking a journey, do it with a sword; and that men treat
usually, before they fight.

Observe. All Science, all Learning, and all Reasoning whatsoever, by the
authority of Aristotle, is begotten from pre-existing Principles which prove
the Science and Learning; but by the judgment of Aristotle and all
Philosophers, and men in their wits, no Science, Learning, or Reasoning, can
prove the Principles. Besides, it is a contradiction, to say any thing is a
Principle, which can be proved; for that which proves it, is prime and a
principle to it. Would any man now think, that these Critiques and pretended
Masters of Reason had ever read one line in Logic, or Aristotle, who go about
to prove Principles, by such silly things, as have scarce any verisimilitude in
them?

Nor does he only make Fear to be the prime cause of all Humane Government and
Civil Society, but also (chap. 16. art. 1.) he makes it the cause of all
Religion, and Worship of God.

Observe. As if that men were not obliged to submit to higher Powers, not only
for wrath, (take it in what sense you will, either fear of the wrath of the
higher Powers, or mutual fear of the wrath of other men) but also for
conscience sake: And that God were not in gratitude to be worshipped and served
by ingenuous men, because he is good, and created them intellectual and
reasonable creatures; but only by a servile fear of his Judgments, from whence
only vile and vicious men seem to, but never truly serve or honor him. A pretty
institution of Religion and Government for the Men of Bedlam, and Wives of
Billingsgate.

He divides the whole Treatise into three titles, viz. Liberty, Empire, and
Religion. Under the title of Liberty, he speaks of men as they are in a state
of mere Nature, viz. of a state of men before they have by Pact given up their
natural right to one Person, or one Court or Company of men; so that the will
of this Man, or Court, shall be the will of all of them; and this he calls cap.
5. art. 9. Civitas, or Persona civilis.

If Mr. Hobbs had by a state of Nature understood such a state as S. Paul
Observe. Romans 2. 14.
does, viz. of men who have only the Law of Nature, and not Gods Divine Law
supernaturally revealed in the Scriptures, to be their rule and guide; and that
men in such a state not having the Law, may by Nature do the things contained
in the Law, (for this Law is engraven in the hearts of all men) he should have
disputed without an Adversary for me. But when he makes all men Jure naturali
(which is superior, and the cause of all Laws of Nature) to be equal, and in a
parity of condition, and every man by his own natural right to have a power
over every man, and to kill and destroy them, whenever it seems good unto
him, and yet without any sin; and that this State is only to be cured by the
Laws of Nature of his own making, (although he would have them to be Divine
Laws, and contrary to Natural rights) is such a monstrous Paradox and
absurdity, as I wonder any Ingenuous man should assent to it.

Under the title of Empire, he is not less wild and extravagant in his
concessions to the thing, be it King or Court, created by Do or Dedi, and not
Dabo or Faciam: For he makes it not only Sovereign Judge of all Ecclesiastical,
as well as Civil causes; but also impossible to command any thing contrary to
the Law of Nature. Yet he makes the Law of Nature, the Law of God; and this
Creature of creatures to be so infallible, that it is impossible to command any
thing contrary to it.

It is not worth the examining, what he would have under the title of Religion;
for men say, the man is of none himself, and complains (they say) he cannot
walk the streets, but the Boys point at him, saying, There goes HOBBS the
Atheist! It may be therefore the reason, why in all his Laws of Nature, he
allows no place for the Worship and Service of GOD.

But it is time to examine the particular Articles, upon which this Body De
Cive is built.

1. His marginal Note upon Art. 3. Cap. 1. is, Homines natura aequales esse
inter se.

Observe. There is no one Proposition in the world more false then this, nor
more destructive to all faith, and truth of Sacred History. For whereas he
says, that by nature Men are equal to one another; if the Scriptures be true,
that God made Adam an Universal Monarch (as he says) as well over his Cap. 10.
art. 3.
Wife and Children, as other Creatures; and that since Adam, God did never
create any Man, but the species of Mankind was continued by generation, and
that (as he says) Primogeniture is preferred by the Law of Cap. 3. art. 18.
Nature, (which Cap. 3. Art. 29. is immutable;) then it is impossible that Cap.
4. art. 15.
since Adam any two Men in the world can be equal, where God does not make them
so.

Indeed, if Mr. Hobbs had been an Athenian, who styled the Men of Observe. 2.
Attica (...), Men of the same Land; or a Peripatetick, who held that Men, and
the other things of the World, were from Eternity, as well as the World; or an
Egyptian, who held that (from the example of diverse creatures generated out of
the river Nile) Men at first were generated from equivocal generation, or that
Men had sprung out of the ground fungorum more; there might have been some
small semblance for his opinion.

2. His Argument to prove the Natural equality of all Men, is, Aequales sunt,
qui aequalia contra se invicem possunt: At qui maxima possunt, nimirum
occidere, aequalia possunt: Ergo, Homines natura aequales inter se.

His minor Proposition is no where proved; and I am sure, contrary Observe. Genesis
9. 6.
to what God says, Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,
for in the image of God made he man.

3. Nature has given to every Man a Right to all things, Cap. 1. art. 10.
Observe.


What thing is mine naturali jure (as he says, or lege naturali) is mine, so
that it is impossible it should be aliened, or made another by any act of my
will, or the will of all the men in the world; For natural causes do not depend
upon voluntary humane actions; and therefore the natural right which Nature has
given to every man, remains still with every man.

4. Filium in statu naturali intelligi non posse. Annot. art. 10. Observe.


And therefore from Adam to our Savior, could there be no such natural state;
For S. Luke, cap. 3. gives a Genealogy of Adams sons, and sons sons, to our
Savior: And since, I do not think Mr. Hobbs can show, that ever there was such
a state in the world.

5. The state of Man in Nature, is hostile. And cap. 8. art. 10. he says, Art.
12.
Men in the state of Nature may kill one another, so often as it seems good
unto them. And therefore he must invent and seek to make himself in a better
condition then God has made him, and that (forsooth) is, by seeking Art. 15.
cap. 1. Observe.
Peace, which he says, is the first Law of Nature.

Is it not strange, that a thing invented, and made by the wit and will of Man,
and that contrary to the state and condition in which God has made Man, should
here prove to be a Law of Nature, which is the Law of God?

And is not more strange, that God has made Man upright, and he has Observe 2.
Eccles. 7. 27.
sought out many inventions; and yet Man should have need of Mr. Hobbs his
help, to invent, and make him in a better state then God has made him, or else
he says, his conservation cannot be long expected? Art. 15.


Neither is it possible in such a state where all men may kill one another,
Observe. 3.
and where all things are alike and common to all men, that men should make any
pacts or contracts one with another: For besides, that where men have nothing
proper, there men cannot make pacts, or contract for any thing; also where
there is no precedent humane Law obliging, there cannot any man be obliged or
bound to any thing by his pact or contract; for to be bound, is in relation,
and must presuppose something which does bind; but if nothing binds me but my
Will, (which is a contradiction) I may unbind me when I will, for my Will is
free.

I deny that any man, or any company of men, can will any thing to be Observe. 4.
a Law to themselves: For, Omnis potentia activa est, principium transmutandi
aliud. And therefore the act of no man's Will, can have a power or obligation
upon himself; and by consequence cannot any man, or company of men, will, or
make another who shall give them Laws; for, Nemo potest transfer id in alium,
quod ipse non habet.

6. Legem naturalem esse dictamen rectae Rationis. Cap. 2. art. 1.


Observe. Would any man think that these Critiques and pretended Masters of
Reason, did either understand Reason or Logic? If Lex naturalis be dictamen
rectae Rationis, I ask of Mr. Hobbs, what is the reason of it? If it be a prime
cause or principle, then by the authority of Aristotle Eth. lib. 6. cap. 3. and
6. does it constitute the Ratiocination, and no reason can be given of it; for,
Men's sive Intellectus sit principiorum, Scientia vero cum ratione conjuncta.
Dictamen (therefore) rectae Rationis, cannot amount higher, then rightly to
infer or conclude from prime causes or principles; and by consequence cannot be
the Law of Nature, or God, if Mr. Hobbs cannot give something prime or superior
to it, from whence it may be inferred or deduced. And if the Laws of Nature, or
God, be the dictates of right Reason, then are the Laws of God the Creator,
subject and inferior to the faculty of a creature; which is not only absurd,
but most monstrous and blasphemous.

7. But because to bind, and to be bound, cannot be in the same thing; Cap. 2.
art. 5. and 13.
he makes obligans, him who accepts the will of other men, and obligatus, him
who does will, and so forsooth is become bound by his own will.

Observe. And had not this man more need to learn his Grammar better, (who makes
obligans the patient, and obligatus the agent) then undertake to write Elements
Philosophical De Cive? whereas the contrary is true in both; for obligans is he
who does will, and obligatus is he who accepts or receives the will of another.

8. The action of two men, or more, mutually transferring their Rights, is Cap.
2. art. 9.
called a Contract.

Observe. There was never, I think, two more gross mistakes committed in so few
words. For first he takes the fulfilling of a Contract, for the Contract it
self: A Contract is the mutual stipulation of two or more, that they will do or
give; and the mutual transferring of what is contracted for, fulfills and
adnulls the Contract; and there have been, and will be infinite Contracts,
where there is no transferring; nay, where there is a mutual transferring,
there can be no Contract. Secondly, no Contract can be of Rights, but only of
things in possession: The act of two or more mutually transferring, is the act
of two or more giving, not contracting.

In every Contract, either both (statim) perform that which is contracted for;
Ibidem.
or one performs, and the other is credited; or neither perform.

Observe. So that the Contract, and the Performance, are diverse things, which
immediately before he confounds. Nor can his statim at all help him; for the
Contract must precede, and the Performance be subsequent, it matters not how
much, or little time; for, Majus and minus non variant speciem. Secondly, If
one may perform, and the other be credited, or neither perform, then there may
be Contracts, where there is no mutual transferring; which is absurd by his
definition.

Where both soon after, statim, perform, there the Contract so soon as it is
performed, is fulfilled or finished.

Observe. Sure he takes great virtue to be in statim, which makes a Contract,
and the annulling, and fulfilling of a Contract, to be the same thing.

Where one, or both are credited, there he, cui creditur, promises that he
will afterward perform, such promise is called a Pact.

Observe. I do wonder therefore from whence his una persona or una curia can
derive their supreme power, whenas nothing can pass from either, or neither
part, by virtue of the civil pact. And no doubt this Civitas will be a noble
structure, built upon such a foundation, wherein I think no man did ever
pronounce so much, in so little, more rashly.

9. We are freed from Pacts by two things, either when the Pact is performed,
Cap. 2. art. 15.
or forgiven.

Observe. Therefore in the Civil pact, if any Right passes from the Subject to
the Supreme power, then has the Subject performed his pact, and so becomes
freed from his subjection.

10. No man by his Pact is obliged to an Impossibility. Cap. 2. art. 14. Observe.


And therefore can no Supreme power be derived from the Pacts of men: For where
there is not Jus vitae and necis, there can be no Supreme power; and no man
has a power over his own life, and therefore no man can give it or transfer it
to another.

11. No man can be obliged by his Pact, not to resist him, who brings or
intends damage to his body. Art. 18.


Observe. And therefore no penal Laws can be executed; but Subjects are freed
from their obedience, whenever they have so far transgressed Laws, that they
become liable to any corporal punishment; for where men may resist, there can
be no subjection.

12. Men must not resist where they cannot obey Princes, because it is against
Cap. 18. ar. 13.
the Civil pact.

Also by this article, Men must suffer martyrdom, rather then resist; which is
absurd by art. 18. cap. 2. for, martyrdom brings corporal punishment with it.

13. An Oath adds nothing to the obligation of a Pact or Contract, (says Cap.
2. art. 22.
Tho. Hobbs.)

Observe. But if Perjury be a greater crime then single Falsehood, then no doubt
but a man is more obliged to perform a Pact or Contract to which he has
sworn, then he who has not; and a man may see many men afraid to forswear
themselves, who make no conscience of telling a lie. And if no man be obliged
by an Oath, then is an Oath nothing but the taking of Gods name in vain; and it
had been a vain thing in Abraham to have made his eldest servant swear by the
Lord God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that Genesis 24. 2, 3.
he should not take a wife to his son of the daughters of Cannaan.

14. The second Law of Nature, is, Men must stand to their pacts. Cap. 3. art.
1.


Observe. Every Man is obliged to his promise by the Law of Nature, and all Men
are obliged to their pacts by the positive humane Laws of every place where
they made them: And to suppose, that the Supreme power of any place, is made
from the pacts of Men, and that Men are obliged to their pacts by the supreme
Power of that place, is absurd, and Idem per Idem.

15. See how learnedly he proves from Scripture the abolishing of Men's common
Right to all things, he cites Genesis 13. 8. And Abraham said to Lot, let there be
no strife I pray thee, between thee and me, and between my Cap. 4. art. 4.
Herdsmen and thy Herdsmen: behold the whole Land is before thee, depart from
me I pray thee.

Observe. Verse 7. is, And there was a strife between the Herdsmen of Abrams
cattle, and the Herdsmen of Lots cattle. So then before the abolishing of the
common Right of all things, Abram and Lot had property in their Servants and
Cattle, which is absurd and impossible, for nothing can be common and proper.

16. The succession was due to Esau by the Law of Nature, being the Cap. 4.
art. 15. prope finem. Observe.
eldest son of Isaac, if he had not sold it, or his Father otherwise appointed.

Yet he says truly, Cap. 3. Art. 29. the Laws of Nature are immutable; and
here he says, the Father may alter them, and the Son sell them. Primogeniture
being so sacred a thing, that Esau was said to be a despiser of his Genesis 25. 34.
birthright, that he set it at a price to save his life, and being due by the
Law of Nature, he could not transfer it to Jacob by any act of his; yet was it
just with God, because he despised it, to transfer it to Jacob.

17. The submission to the will of one Man, or one Council, then becomes the
Cap. 5. art. 7.
will of them all, when every one of them obliges himself by pact to one
another, not to resist the will of this Man, or this Council to which he has
submitted himself.

Observe. Here is nothing to pass, or to be transferred from one Man to another,
and therefore here can be no pact; and here I would fain know, how to bind, and
to be bound, can be the same thing, which Mr. Hobbs here makes. But every Man
binds himself forsooth, and therefore every Man may when he will disoblige
himself; for, unumquodque dissolvi potest eo ligamine, quo ligatum est.

18. The Right of punishing, is then to be understood to be given to any one,
Cap. 6. art. 5.
when every one does covenant that he will afford no help to him who shall be
punished.

Observe. What power of life or death is here any more, then if a company of Men
contract one with another, that they will afford Mr. Hobbs no relief, if
another Man will kill, maim, or punish Mr. Hobbs, that then this Man has a
power over Mr. Hobbs his life and person? and this Right forsooth he will call
gladium justitiae, Art. 6.

19. Having made the Temporal power to have its origination from the
Inventions, Pacts, Wills, and policies of Men, he makes it Judge of all Cap. 6.
art. 11.
Doctrins and Opinions of Faith, and this from convenience, for says he, If
one may command any thing upon pain of Temporal death, and another forbids it
upon penalty of eternal death, it will follow, not only innocent Citizens may
be punished, but the City it self be dissolved, for no Man can serve two
Masters.

Observe. I would know how, this granted, could Christianity be preached, when
the Temporal Laws every where did forbid it? Our Savior says, Whosoever hates not
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, St. Luke 14. ^6. St.
Math. 10. 28.
and Sisters, yea, and his own life, he cannot be my Disciple. And if Temporal
powers command any thing contrary to the Laws of God, we ought not to fear
them that can kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather* to
fear him, who is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. It Is true indeed,
no Man can serve two Masters, who may with equal Right command the same thing;
but a Man may serve two Masters who do not with equal Right command the same
thing; as a Tenant who owes Homage to his Lord, is the Lords Man of life and
limb, and of earthly worship, and ought to be true and faithful to him, (saving
Littleton Hom. cap. 1.
the Faith he owes to his Sovereign Lord the King) and so every servant ought
to obey his Master in all things, which do not contradict Gods nor his
Country-Laws; and so ought every Man to submit himself to Temporal powers in
all things, if they be not repugnant to Gods Laws. And let any Man see whether
the whole scope of this Article, be not to make all Faith, and Religion, as
well as Society, a mere invention and policy of Man, and humane constitution,
and Creature of a Creature; nor is the danger he makes, so much to be feared,
for Ecclesiastical Powers have nothing to do with Secular jurisdictions.

20. There are some doctrines held, he says, by which Citizens are empowered
Annot. art. 11. Cap. 6.
to deny Obedience to the Civitas, and to fight against Supreme Princes and
Powers, and that by Right, yea it behooves them; and this belongs to the power
which many do attribute to the Prince of the Church of Rome in aliena Civitate,
and to the power also which Bishops otherwhere, out of the Church of Rome,
ascribe to themselves.

Observe. I do not know, nor did ever hear that any Bishops out of the Church of
Rome, did ever ascribe to themselves this Power. Nor are there any Bishops in
the Western Churches of Christendom, out of England, Ireland, Sodorensis
Episcopus.
and the Isle of Man (if those in Scotland were not, which is a question:) and
sure this Hierarchy never challenged any such Power. But why does this Man take
such care for peace and quiet? when as by his own principles he justifies all
the actions of the League in France against Henry the fourth; for Henry the
third never gave nor sold the French Monarchy to Henry the Cap. 9 art. 13.
fourth, nor did the Duke of Main and his party upon the death of Henry the
third, oblige themselves by pacts one to another, that the will of Henry the
fourth should be the will of them all.

21. It is most manifestly false, and contrary to the practice of the Cap. 5.
art. 9.
whole world (where Men are not condemned to slavery) that servants have Cap.
8. art. 5.
no property against their Masters; for where servants are not slaves, they may
both sue, or implead, and be sued, or impleaded; nay they may sue their Masters
for Debt, or not performance of Covenants, etc.

22. Where he makes the Fathers power not to arise from Generation, but Cap. 9.
art. 1.
that Art. 7. Children are subject to their Father, no otherwise then Servants
are subject to their Masters; is so wild and groundless an opinion, that it is
not worth an answering.

23. It is, he says, a seditious opinion, that Faith and Sanctity are not
acquired Cap. 12. art. 6.
by reason, and study, but always supernaturally infused and inspired; and yet
he says, Cap. 18. Art. 4. prope finem, There is but one way to Science, i. e.
by definitions: but this way to Faith does hurt.

Observe. How these two are consistible, I do not understand.

24. Jus is contrary to Lex. Cap. 14. art. 2. prope finem. Observe.


Therefore by the 4. Axiom lib. 1. Euclid. Jus naturae, is contrary to Lex
naturae.

By Art. 1. cap. 4. Lex naturalis, est Lex divina. And therefore by Art. 2.
cap. 14. Lex divina, is contrary to Jus divinum; which is most abominable
Blasphemy. Nay he says, Cap. 8 ar. 10. and oftentimes in hi.s Preface.
Jus divinum positivum, is the Scripture; and here, Lex divina positiva, to be
the Scripture. So that he makes contraries to signify the same thing.

Observe. Lex naturae cannot be contrary to Jus divinum, nor different, but only
in this: Jus divinum, is an absolute right in God, to will or command any thing
to be a Law of Nature; and Lex naturae, is that which is so willed or commanded
by God. I deny therefore that any Creature can have Jus divinum; but that all
right which any Creature has, is either from some Divine, or Humane law.

Jus naturae, is superior and must precede Lex naturae.

By Art. 3. cap. 1. Every man has Jus naturae.

Therefore every man has a right above the Law of Nature; and so Mr. Hobbs may
save himself the trouble of his Philosophical Elements De Civie: For since he
makes every man above the Law of Nature, sure he can never make him subject to
any Humane Law.

25. It is impossible for the Civil Law to command any thing contrary to Cap.
14. ar. 10.
the Law of Nature.

Observe. Is it not a wonderful thing, that this man should make the Civitas to
be a humane Artifice and invention, and the Law of Nature to be the immutable
Law of God; and yet that it should be impossible that this Artifice (or created
Deity) to command any thing contrary to this immutable Law of God? Sure the
greatest Papalian never ascribed so much to the Pope in Cathedra. I will then
tell him wherein the Civitas may command Wherein the Civitas may command
contrary to the Law of Nature.
contrary to the Law of Nature, and wherein he is mistaken. The Laws of Nature
are either upon supposition of Humane Laws, or not upon supposition of Humane
Laws; as, Thou shall not steal, supposes a Humane Law, which gives Property;
but, Honor thy Parents, Be grateful for benefits received, etc. supposes no
Humane Law: And therefore if the Civitas commands me to dishonor my Parents, or
to be ungrateful for benefits received, (which de facto it may) this being but
a Humane Law, I am notwithstanding obliged to honor my Parents, and be grateful
for benefits received. But Mr. Hobbs supposing no Laws of Nature, but upon
supposition of Humane Laws, is the reason (I conceive) why he says, It is
impossible for the Civitas to command any thing contrary to the Law of Nature.

Yet will he have one exception, viz. That the Civitas commands nothing Ibidem.
Observe. 2.
to the contumely of God. If a man should ask him, whether there be no Law of
Nature, but the Honoring of God? If there be no other Law of Nature, then to
what purpose are all his Laws of Nature, of standing to Pacts, of seeking
Peace, etc.? Well, but if men by the Law of Nature are obliged to honor God,
and it be impossible, as he says, for the Civitas to command any thing contrary
to the Law of Nature, then is it impossible for the Civitas to command any
thing to the contumely of God; and so he has made a needless exception. But it
may be he does not think that men by the Law of Nature are bound to honor God;
for he has not so much as mentioned it in his Laws of Nature.

For then they are no Laws. Mr. Hobbs.


Yes, the Statues of Omri were Statutes, although they commanded to the
contumely of God; and so was Nebuchadnezors command for the worshipping Observe.
3.
the Golden Image, a Law, though made to the contumely and dishonor of God.

Whereas he says, Quid sit Adulterium, does depend upon the Civitas; I would
know of him, whether it were Adultery in David in lying with Bathsheba, Observe
4.
during Uriahs life? if it were, then is it not true, which Mr. Hobbs here
says; if it were not, then did God unjustly, so severely to punish him
therefore

Tyranny is not a State of a City, different from rightful Monarchy. Cap. 7.
art. 3.


Observe. True, upon your false and feigned Principles, where the wills and
pacts of men are made the cause and origination of all Power in Government;
where Men's wills are made their Laws, then which nothing can be more
destructive to all Laws divine and humane; and the most Wilful man should be
the most Just man: for to what purpose should there be any Laws Divine, or
Humane, if a Man's own will be a rule and Law to himself? and by this Man's
principles, it is only men's wills from which all Power in Government is
derived, and to which Men ought to be subject.

Yet, good Man, some difference he makes, viz. only in the exercise Mr. Hobbs.
of their Power; he forsooth is a King that rules well, and he is a Tyrant that
rules otherwise.

Observe. As if Absoloms kissing the Israelites, when they came to demand
Justice, and his desire to judge the people righteously, had made him a good
Title to the Crown of Israel; or that Jeroboam, or Athaliah had not been
Usurpers, but very Rightful Princes, if they had ruled well. But though he
makes no difference between Swordbearers and Swordtakers, between Gods
Ministers, and Thieves and Robbers; yet the Holy Ghost does, for Gods Minister
is a Swordbearer; and if he be not Gods Minister and a Romans 13. 4.
Swordbearer, but a Swordtaker, as our Savior calls them who have not a St.
Matthew. 26. 52.
just Authority, then whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, for in the image of God made he man. And if ever Man had a just Genesis 9. 6.
cause to have taken the sword, then had St. Peter in defense of his Lord God
and Master; but our Savior reprehends him, telling him that whosoever takes
the Sword shall perish by the Sword. And it is not wicked men whom Usurpers,
Tyrants, and Swordtakers so much murder (for it is no better) as virtuous and
honest: The worst of private Malefactors may justly with the Whore in Terence
answer to the best of Swordtakers (if there be any degree of goodness in any of
them) quamvis ego digna sum hac contumelia maxim, indignus tamen tu qui
feceris. And whereas he only makes Tyrannus ab exercitio, it is false; for the
abuse of a thing does not alter the nature of a thing, as a Man is a Man,
although a bad Man, who abuses those good parts which God has given him; so is
a Father, and a Master, a Father and Master, (yet bad ones) where they abuse
their Power; and so is a King, a King, although he abuses his Power; and the
Holy Ghost many times calls them wicked, and idolatrous, Kings etc. but never
Tyrants, as this Man does.

I would here gladly be satisfied of Mr. Hobbs, how (if God made Man Cap. 1.
art 12. and Cap. 8. art. 10.
in the state of pure nature, as he says, in such a cut-throatly condition,
and so much worse than any other creature, that men might jure naturali
everlastingly kill one another, and commit no offense, if the King or Civitas
does not restrain it) God could in justice have punished Cain for killing Abel,
Cap. 6. art. 16.
if Cain or Abel had not gone to Do or Dedi, and not to Dabo or Faciam with
Adam, and made him their King, or Civitas over them, and Adam have given them a
Law not to kill one another, (which I no where find, nor he proves, nor do I
see any color of reason to believe:) Nor had Adam any power to restrain his
Sons, or give them Law, as Father; for if you believe him, he tells you, that
Dominium paternum non oritur ex Cap. 9. art. 1.
generatione.

I would further be satisfied, how this civil pact can give the Civitas that
which none of them have, viz. Property, and power of life and death, without
which can be no Civitas or Supreme Power; or any Power at all, if we be
Christians, and believe God, who says, By me Kings reign, and Pro. 8. 5.
Princes decree justice, or judgment; and that, All powers are of God, and the
Romans 13. 1.
powers that be are ordained of God. If they be then Gods ordinances, and
ordained of him, then can they not be an artifice and invention of any Man, but
are, and ever have been, whether Do or Dedi ever had been or not.

And let any man judge whether he does not contradict himself. He Cap. 5. art.
4.
says, That the concord and consent of the Multitude, is not sufficient long to
preserve Peace; but that it behooves that something more be done, that they who
have once consented to peace and mutual aid, for the common good, should not
afterward, when any Private good varies from the Public, again disagree, be
restrained by Fear. And Art. 5. he says, Aristotle reckons among living
creatures, which he calls Politic, not only Man, but also many other, as the
Ant and Be, who although they be destitute of reason, by which they can make
covenants and submit themselves to Government; yet nevertheless by consenting,
that is, by desiring the same things, and by avoiding the same things, they so
direct their actions to one common end, that their Companies are obnoxious to
no seditions: Yet are not their Companies therefore Civitates, nor are those
Creatures to be called Politic, because their Government is only consent, or
many wills to one object, not (as is necessary in a City) one will.

Observe. Now mark, here he says, Consent only makes no Civitas; yet where he
would prove the beginning of his Institutive or Politic Government from
Scripture, he says, Tale fuit initium regni Dei, etc. Such was the Cap. 11. art
1.
Kingdom of God over the Jews, instituted by Moses: If you will hear my voice,
etc. ye shall be to me a Priestly Kingdom. And all the People together
answered, We will do whatsoever the Lord has spoken.

Observe. So here let any man see this great Master of Learning and Reason, make
the Initium of this Institutive or Politic Civitas to be derived from the
Consent of the Multitude; and in the same breath, before the Multitude did
consent, he makes God only by his servant Moses first to will, and after that
the People to consent. You come behind, and I follow after, whither of us went
before?

But suppose the beginning of this Civitas had its beginning from the Observe. 2.
Consent of the People, yet does he contradict himself as much as before; for
then this Initium, is the Initium, caput, corpus, and finis of it, for here is
nothing added to it. So that either here is no Civitas, and so Mr. Hobbs says
not true, and has taken great pains to no purpose; or else this Civitas is
wholly made from the Consent of the Multitude, which is absurd, and contrary to
Art. 4. and 5. Cap. 5.

Well, let us see whether he has better success with Art. 6. then the 4. and
5. where he says, Because the conspiracy of more Wills to the same end, is not
sufficient for the preservation and stable defense of Peace, (Doubtless it is
not less then a Judgment upon him, that he should call such a consent as he
here speaks of, a Conspiracy, which all men take in ill sense, of men
consenting to do some evil act:) it is requisite that the will of all be one,
concerning those things which are necessary to peace and defense: But this
cannot be, unless every man so subjects his will to the will of another, viz.
of another Man, or Court, that whatsoever he wills concerning those things
which are necessary to the common peace, be accounted the will of them all and
every one of them. And Art. 7. he says, This submission to the will of one Man,
or one Council, then is made the will of them all, when every one of them
obliges himself by pact to every one of the other, not to resist the will of
that Man, or that Council, to which he has submitted himself. And this a little
after, he says, is called Unio; and this Union so made, Art. 9. is called
Civitas, or Societas civilis, or Persona civilis.

Observe. If this Unio, or Civitas, or Societas, or Persona civilis be so
necessary to all Governments, and that it must (and therefore may) be made by
men's pacts one with another; I wonder why the Children of Israel should be 1 Samuel 8. 5.
so zealous to have a King to judge them, like all the Nations, if they could
by their pacts have made one, without ever asking one at Gods hands. Nor was
there at that time, or ever before, any such thing as ista Curia, or Democracy
ever heard of: For the Children of Israel desired a King to judge them like to
all the Nations; and at that time was Codrus King of the Athenians, Smendes or
Semendes King of the Sicyonians, Aletes King of the Corinthians, Eurysthenes
King of the Lacedaemonians. So that in those days, not among the Grecians was
there ever so much as Aristocracy or Democracy heard of. Nor was there ever any
place in the world, where there were men inhabiting, without Government; (For
that place [When there was no King in Israel] we shall answer afterward.) Nor
was there originally ever any Government, but Monarchy; and that never from any
Pacts of men: And this Government so continued everywhere, until it was
violated by seditious and rebellious men.

And whereas he makes this Civil Pact to be so necessary, and antecedent to all
Civil Government; I would fain know of Mr. Hobbs, whether Saul, David, Solomon,
Jehu, Hazael, Cyrus, etc. were not as much Kings, or Civitates (as he calls
them) as if they had all this Covenanting and making Pacts one with another,
That this man's will should be the will of them all, Not to resist the will of
David, Solomon, Hazael, etc. in those things which they deemed necessary for
the peace of the Israelites, Persians, Syrians, etc.? But if these were
Civitates, (as if Mr. Hobbs be a Christian, which I think may be a question, he
must needs confess) and yet not made so by his Civil pacts, nor indeed any
other; Then is this Unio so far from being essential or necessary to the making
of a King or Civitas, that as to the right of a King, it is no matter whether
it be made or not: For men, if they do not submit, and consent to rightful
Kings government, they disobey God. Deuteronomy. 17. 15.


Nor did God rob the Israelites, Syrians, or Persians, or any other Nation, of
any of their original right and power of making to themselves Kings, by giving
them Kings. Nor were these Kings Civitates Naturales, as he calls them, having
overcome by force, and commanding lest they Cap. 5. art. 12.
should kill. Xenophon in his Proeme to Cyropoedia, says: We know they did
partly obey Cyrus, who were severed from him many days journey, they who were
severed from him many months journey, and they who had never seen him; and
lastly they who could not hope ever to see Cyrus, yet were content to obey him.
And when he had reckoned up all the Countries subject to Cyrus, says, He
enjoyed the Dominion of all those Kingdoms, whose language was neither the same
with his, nor common with themselves: And yet there could be nothing less, then
for fear of him, so great a part of the world should obey; that all stricken
with fear, none should dare to disobey him.

Observe. And whereas he says, That is to be understood the will of the Council,
Art. 7.
which is the will of the major part of those Men, of whom the Council
consists: It is an improper speech; for, the will of the major part, cannot be
the will of the totality, but plurality; and if the will of the major part
could be the will of the whole, then were a part equal to the whole, which is
absurd, and impossible by Not. 9. Eucl. lib. 1,

And though he takes such pains about his Pacts, and makes them so essential,
and precedent to all Civitates, and that all Institutive Civitas is built upon;
yet such is Truths excellency, that he overthrows it all, where he says, Quare
tu appellas eum Tyrannum, quem Deus Regem fecit? It Is true Cap. 12. ar. 13.
indeed, if he be a King, only God can make him so: And if Civil power Pro. 8.
15. Isa. 3. 4.
had been artificial in the cause, then must it necessarily be, that some time
may be instanced where, and when this artifice was not: For all arts depending,
and being made from man's understanding and reason, there must be a time before
this art was found out; and if it were an art, it is not to be imagined that it
should always, in all times, be practiced every where in the habitable world:
And every man sees, that sometimes several arts are esteemed by some men, in
one place, and neglected by others in the same place, and in other places not
minded at all; and a famous Invention, or Art, is much cried up in one Age, not
minded, and neglected in another: whereas the mutual offices of Commanding, and
Obeying, were always among men, in all places, ever since there were men in the
world. It Is true therefore which Aristotle says, that Nascitur dominus, and
nascitur servus; Lib. 1. Pol. Cap. 3. art. 13.
although he would have it contrary to reason and experience. And by
consequence, the Kings of Denmark, Poland, and the Romans, are rather Kings by
courtesy, (as they call the sons of Dukes, and the eldest sons of Marquesses
and Earls, and the Judges when they are upon the Bench, Lords, though they be
none) rather then Kings indeed. And so the Emperor, and Duke of Venice, are
rather Supreme Powers in imagination, then truly so: which made our Edward the
Third to refuse the Empire, and Henry the Fourth of France to scorn it.

And if it be true which he says, as it is, that God makes Kings; then is it
Cap. 7. art. 15.
false where he says; that a Monarch may at his will declare his Successor.

Observe. Sure, this man would not have feared to have been of the Lady Jane's
Conspiracy against Queen Mary, the Lady Jane being declared Successor to
Edward the Sixth by his last will and Testament. Besides, if it be true, as it
is, which Sir Edward Coke says, that Solus Deus haeredem facere potest, non Co.
Lit. sect. 7.
homo, and this to Estates that descend by Humane Laws; then sure no man can
make an Heir to a Crown.

But if Mr. Hobbs shall ask me, If power in Government were not originally from
Pacts, how it came first into the world? I answer, That I am not bound to give
an account of things how they came to pass, whereof there is no record: It is
enough for me to affirm, That no time ever was wherein men did live together
out of Society and Government. Besides, Society being natural, it is an absurd
question; and a man may as well ask, why God made the world in that order and
frame that he has; or how he came to make Man a reasonable creature, and all
other irrational, as why a sociable?

Well, but if he shall say, that Laws ought to be known; and if Kings reign by
Gods law, then how can any man know that this man is King in this place, and
that man King in another place? I answer, That I am content to show this man by
Gods law to be King here, and that man to be King there, when any man shall
show me by any Humane law, that any Individual man is heir to any Estate. And
if there be that excellency in truth, that a right Heir to the meanest Estate
be rarely suppressed; then is this excellency of truth more perspicuous,
whenas I am confident that the right Heir to a Crown was never so suppressed,
but he was ever believed to be so by them, who had never seen him, and most
hated him. Besides, Jus is duplex, Jus proprietatis, and possessionis; Jus ad
rem, and Jus in re. And therefore any Prince who is possessed of a Crown, has a
Title good enough against any man else, but him who has the Jus proprietatis,
or Jus ad rem. And therefore ought no man, upon penalty of Damnation, to resist
the Higher powers which are, that is, which are in possession, if it does not
clearly Romans 13. 1.
and evidently appear, that this is only pretended power, and force indeed, to
the dispossession and disinheritance of another, against whose right and title
no just exception can be taken. Let this suffice here; we shall take occasion
to discourse hereof more hereafter.

I would fain know of Mr. Hobbs, Who gave the People this power of making
Kings, or Civitates? or what are the People that have, or when was it, that
they had it? At what age in pure nature, shall any man claim this right of
giving up his Will, or be an Instrument of making this Civil Pact? or who shall
define this time? Whether Women be not part of Mankind, and have not Wills as
much or more then Men; and are not as liable to punishment for not observance,
or transgressing humane Laws, as Men? Whether it be not reasonable, Posterity
may not give up their Wills to another, since they have not the same Wills with
their Ancestors? Whether the Ten Tribes did not rebel in giving up their Wills
to make Jeroboam King, though neither they or their ancestors ever made
Rehoboam, Solomon, or David King, by giving up their Wills? Whether the King or
Civitas claiming all right and power from the Multitude, and every one of the
Multitude claiming all right and power from the King or Civitas, be not Idem
per idem? And let any man judge whether there be any thing more unreasonable
then this man's Dictamen rectae Rationis.

OBSERVATIONS ON HVGO GROTIVS De Jure Belli and Pacis.
LEt us see whether Grotius his Fabric built upon this Popular foundation, be
not as absurd and monstrous, as either our Author's, or Mr. Hobbs's; and add
him to these two, and see whether these Three be in Harmonical proportion.

But before we proceed, we will take some direction from the greatest Light of
Nature, Aristotle; who says, All men Metap. l. 1. c. 1.
naturally desire to know; but there is but one way by which men can attain to
knowledge, viz. That they proceed from things known, to find out things less
known; and from things manifest, to find out things more obscure. Which is
evident: Naturaliter constituta est via ab iis quae sunt nobis notiora and
clariora, ad ea Phys. lib. 1. tit. 2, 3.
quae sunt clariora and notiora natura. Non enim eadem sunt and nobis nota, and
simpliciter: quare necesse est hoc modo progredi; nimirum, ex iis quae natura
quidem sunt obscuriora, nobis tamen sunt clariora, ad ea quae sunt notiora and
clariora natura. Ea vero sunt nobis primum perspicua and manifesta, quae sunt
magis confusa. Idcirco ab universalibus ad singularia progredi oportet: totum
enim secundum sensum notius est; universale autem est totum quiddam.

Well; Grotius says, In the beginning of Mankind, Community was another Mare
Lib. c. 5. p 34.
thing then what Dominion now is: For now Dominium signifies something proper,
which thing (to wit) is so one man's, as it is not another in the same manner.
We call that thing Common, whose propriety is collated amongst many by a
certain consort or consent, excluding other men. Linguarum paupertas coegit
voces easdem in re non eadem usurpare: The poverty of Tongues has forced men
to use the same words in a thing not the same. The Community which then was,
was nothing else but what was simply opposed to Property.

But in his Preface to this Book De Jure Belli and Pacis, and para. 3. lib. 1.
cap. 1. He shall not need to complain, that the poverty of Tongues compells him
to use the same words, in a thing not the same. For he himself uses things not
the same, (viz. Communitas and Societas) in the same word, viz. Communitas.

Observe. Now, that Community and Society is not the same thing: There is not,
nor ever was since the beginning of the world, any Family where men did not
live in Society; but in no Family did men ever live in Community. Nor did ever
men desire such a Community, as he here, and before in his Mare Lib. speaks of;
Nor can Mankind subsist in such a Community; and Lib. 1. cap. 1. para. 3. Lib
2. cap. 2. para. 2.
so he himself confesses. And Man may be therefore not improperly said to be a
reasonable creature, because he does not love and affect another because he is
of the same kind with himself, (as other creatures who live in companies do)
but chooses his society, as his Reason or conversation leads him.

But this Community (he says) which Man desires, is not of whatsoever
Community, but of peaceable, and ordained for the manner of his understanding,
with them who are of his own kind: which Community the Stoics called (...).

Observe. Does any Creature that lives in flocks and herds, not desire the
community of its own kind? and therefore Hogs, Deer and Goats keep in herds,
and Sheep in flocks. Or does any man think that Grotius could ever imagine,
that his Countrymen did desire Society or Community with other Nations for
their Understanding, or Profit? If they desire this Society or Community for
Profit, then are they out of Grotius his first Principle proper to Man; and for
ought I can understand, as very Beasts, as any who desire to live in Community.

But Cynthius aurem vellit: For, says he, Quod ergo dicitur natura, quodque
animal ad suas tantum utilitates ferri, ita universe sumptum, concedi non
debet. What thing therefore is called Nature, and that every Creature is
carried only to their profits, ought not to be granted so universally taken.
For even some of other living Creatures, the study of their profit, partly in
respect of their young ones, partly in respect of others of like kind with
themselves, aliquatenus temperant.

Observe. Is not here a Principle well defined! What so much as Equivocation can
be taken against this, or the other Principle of Men, and Beasts? or indeed,
what Man or Beast does understand any thing clearly from either of them? How
does this man take Aristotle's one only way to attain to knowledge, viz. from
known and manifest things, to find out things less known and more obscure;
whenas his very Principles are so obscure and equivocal, as either they are not
to be understood, or may signify one thing as well as another? Nay, let any
man see if he makes not his Countrymen generally verier Beasts then many other;
for they have no respect of others of like kind with themselves, but only study
their own profit: Grotius.
Which thing we believe, in them, does proceed from some outward understanding
principle; Ex principio aliquo intelligente extrinseco.

Observe. Has he not now well mended the matter, thus by a new term (I believe
never before heard of, nor for ought I understand, to be understood) to explane
a thing obscure, by a term more obscure? But the matter in controversy is not,
from what Principle Beasts desire Society; but, whether they desire Society, or
not?

When he is got loose from these Principles, he then says, But this Grotius
keeping of society, which in a rude manner we have expressed convenient to
humane intellect, is, the fountain of that right or law (ejus juris) which is
properly so called, by which abstinence from what is another, obligation to
perform promises, reparation for wrong done, etc. do appertain.

Observe. But sure the Man does much forget himself; for in this Community he
here speaks of, there can be no meum or tuum, and therefore no alienum, and by
consequence no alieni abstinentia; nor can any Man perform any promise, who can
have nothing wherewith to perform; nor make reparation for wrong, when he can
neither do any, nor has any thing to repair it withal.

Then he tells us, From this signification of Right or Law (ab hac Grotius.
juris significatione) flowed another larger, which (he says a little after)
consists in discerning what delights or hurts us, and in judging how things
should be wisely distributed.

Observe. What is there in this, which is proper to Man? does not every other
Creature by an instinct in nature (which God has given instead of reason)
discern much better then any Man does, what thing delights, and hurts them? and
all oviparal creatures more wisely distribute to their young ones, then the
wisest Man can to his Children.

He defines jus natural, to be Dictatum rectae rationis indicans actui Lib. 1.
cap. 1. para. 10.
alicui, ex ejus convenientia, aut disconvenientia, cum ipsa natura rationali,
inesse moralem turpitudinem aut necessitatem moralem, ac consequenter ab
auctore naturae Deo talem actum aut vetari aut praecipi. The Law of nature is
the dictate of right reason, showing to any action, from its convenience or
disconvenience with Rational nature, that there is in it a Moral turpitude or a
Moral necessity, and consequently such an act is commanded or forbidden by God
the Author of Nature.

Observe. Would not any man after all this ado, expect that Grotius had defined
something? But if definitio be exclusio aequivoci, then is that no definition
which may signify one thing as well as another; and if humane actions
convenient or disconvenient with Rational nature, may be prudent and
profitable, as well as Just and Moral, then is there not in every action
convenient and disconvenient with the Rational nature, a Moral turpitude or
necessity; and so every such action is not the Law of Nature, and so neither
commanded nor forbidden by God. But I forgive Grotius in this, not having
defined any thing less equivocally: as also his every where confounding jus
with lex, in regard the Romans, Civilians, and generally Lawyers do so; yet
thus much I do affirm, that if jus and lex according to Calepine, do differ as
Genus and Species, or at least as the cause and effect; (for it is impossible
there should be lex lata where there was not jus legislativum superior, and the
cause of the Law) then he which writes of these things must distinguish and
define them, or he shall never write clearly, or be clearly understood in any
thing which he writes of them.

But though he makes jus natural to be dictatum rectae rationis, viz. a
liberty or abstinence to every Man, to do or not do whatsoever is reasonable
Lib. 1. cap. 1. Parag. 10.
to him, and that this jus is the Law of God and unalterable by God himself;
yet without giving any reason for it, he says, Sciendum est praeterea etc. It
is to be further known, that natural Right or Law does not only act concerning
those things which are above a Man's will, but concerning many things which
follow a man's will. So, Dominion which is now brought in use, man's will brought
in: But being brought in, it is wickedness in me to take against thy will, that
which Natural law or right (Jus natural) shows to be of thy dominion.

Observe. So that his Principles before were either equivocal, or obscure; And
here is one, which signifies contradictory, and impossible things.

These things therefore granted, and being the easy, and known Principles upon
which Grotius lays his foundation, and so plain and perspicuous, as no
exception, nay not so much as equivocation can be taken against them, any of
them, or any part of them; Sure he shall not need much to use the help of
Geometry, to build a most exact and noble Structure, which shall not only be a
Landmark, but also a Sea-mark for all Kings and Commonwealths, now and
hereafter to govern and steer their actions by, tam per mare, quam per terram,
as well by Land as Sea; but also a secure Rule for Subjects to continue their
obedience, until they pretend a necessity for rebellion; if otherwise they
cannot find some relief out of such popular Orators as Cicero, Demosthenes,
Cleon, etc. which Grotius shall esteem of like weight with any testimony of
Scripture.

It is a most pleasant thing to see the excellency of Truth in her pure and
simple nakedness, how plain, easy, and beautiful she appears: whereas
Falsehood, with all the art, learning and industry of man, is still rendered more
perplexed, confused and dark, by how much is added to it.

And therefore to what a volume here has Grotius increased his Jus Natural!
Sometime it is Jus divinum voluntarium, jus divinum, jus humanum, jus humanum
voluntarium, jus gentium, jus civil, jus latius patens, jus arctius patens,
jus constitutum, jus immutabile, jus commune, jus gladii, jus divinum
perfectius, jus belli solenne, jus belli minus solenne, jus precarium, jus
revocabile, jus usufructuarium, jus temporarium, jus armorum movendorum
magistratuum minorum, jus naturae pro certo statu, jus rectorium, jus
aequatorium, jus superveniens regis, jus externum, jus internum, jus exterorum
supervenienti dominio, jus pignoris, jus retentionis, jus servitutis, jus
luendi pignoris, jus transeundi, jus morandi, jus habitandi, jus habendi loca
deserta, jus reductive, jus restrictive, jus gentium improprie, jus derelictum,
jus quaesitum, jus feciale, jus externum efficax, jus reale, jus inventionis,
jus primi occupantis, jus proprietatis, jus possessionis, jus dominii, jus
herile, jus paternum, etc. Whereas if he had made use of that plain and short
Sentence, which the greatest Glory of all the Heathen Roman Emperors professed
he learned Alex. Severus.
of the Christians, Quod tibi fieri non vis, ne feceris alteri; it would have
signified infinitely more, then is contained in all the confused obscurity
which he imposes upon the world in this Book De Jure Belli and Pacis, founded
upon this false and feigned Principle of the Original right and power of the
People, from whence he derives all power in Government. For, art thou a
Subject? thou would not willingly any man should forceably or fraudulently
take any thing, which the Law has given thee, from thee; Do not thou so by
another. Is he a King? he would not have his Subjects wronged by another; Let
not him wrong another Kings Subjects. If one Subject does another wrong, the
Law is open; he who is wronged may have relief by Action or Complaint, not by
Arms. If one King does wrong to another, he who is wronged has God and his
sword to defend himself, and do justice upon his Adversary. And whether the
doing, or not doing such a thing be wrong or injury, is every King, and not
Grotius Judge, and God the Judge of every King.

It is true, that in all Faculties whatsoever, and in all Arts and Sciences,
men must use Terms to express what they conceive by any general Notion and
Thesis, (Et ab universalibus ad particularia ratiocinando, oritur scientia) and
must alter their Terms as they proceed from one thing to another, and add to
them in the specifications of them; (for, Omnis additio probat minoritatem.)
But no man (who desires to be understood, or who desires to understand himself)
will undertake such a task as Grotius here does, to compile a Volume upon such
contradictory, equivocal, and obscure Principles: For, Conclusio sequitur
deteriorem partem. And if any part of a Proposition be but probable, though the
Sillogism be made in the clearest Mood, yet the Conclusion is no more.

And any man may much better thus reason, then Grotius does: -- A right-lined
Figure, is that which is comprehended under right lines; and that which is
comprehended under three right lines, is a right-lined Triangle. Sciendum
praeterea, etc. It is to be further understood, Right-lined Figures are not
only such as are contained under right lines, but may serve for many other
things besides. So, Spherical Figures, as they are now used by Astronomers, the
invention of man has found out; but being found out, these right-lined Figures
may serve for them also; (for, Spherical and right-lined Figures have many
things common to them both; as when they are cut transverse, they are cut to
right angles; and in Spherical and right-lined Triangles, two sides is more
then the third, howsoever taken; and in both, the sides have the same
proportion one to another, that their opposite angles have; nor are they in any
thing contrary one to another:) Yet if any man shall take a Spherical and
right-lined Triangle for the same thing, (as Grotius does Jus Natural, which
he makes to signify Community and Property, in the same Principle, which are
contrary one to another) I make no doubt but he might compile as big a Volume,
and almost as little to be understood, as this De jure Belli and Pacis.

Well, but let us see why Jus Natural is immutable by God himself. (Note,
Grotius every where almost confounds Jus with Lex; and here he takes Jus
Natural, for Lex Naturae.) For, Although (says he) the power of God is
immense, yet some things may be said to be, to which it does not extend it
self; because those things so said, are only said, and have no sense which may
express the thing, but are repugnant to themselves: So that twice Two should
not make Four, cannot be effected by God.

Observe. It is true, that God cannot make contradictory things, and things
repugnant to agree, and to be the same. But this is nothing to Grotius his
purpose, for a Similitude proves nothing; nor is there any analogy between the
things propounded by Grotius: For though things simply necessary be If Lex lata
had any obligation upon the Legislator, then were the Creator obliged and
subject to the creature; than which there is nothing more blasphemous.
immutable by God, yet the Law of Nature is the Law of God; and therefore being
a creature of God's, it cannot have any obligation upon God; but being the Law
of God given to Mankind, it is immutable by them; and God might, if it had
pleased him, have given something else for the Law of Nature to Mankind. Both
Grotius his Positions therefore in this Section are manifestly false, absurd,
and blasphemous, viz. That the Law of Nature is immutable by God himself; And,
That Usus communis is Jure naturali, and yet mutable by the will of Man.

And if I be demanded to show an example, that God is not obliged to the Law of
Nature, or that the Law of Nature is not immutable by God: I say, Jus suum
cuique tribuere, is from the Law of Nature; yet did the Children of Israel
borrow Jewels of gold, of silver, and raiment of the Ex. 12. 15, 16.
Egyptians, and all such things as they required of them, and spoiled them by
not making restitution, without any violence upon the Law of Nature, because
God commanded them; nay, they had sinned and disobeyed God, if they had not
done it. And so by the Law of Nature, every Father is obliged to preserve and
nourish his children; yet because when God commanded Abraham to offer up and
kill his son Isaac, Abraham was obedient to God and would have done it, God
takes it for the highest act of Abraham's faith, and swears by himself, That in
blessing he would bless him, and in Genesis 22. 17.
multiplying he would multiply his seed as the stars of heaven, etc. Yet can no
man borrow, with a resolution of not-restitution; nor any Father put his Son
without cause to death, where God does not command, though all the world should
command it, without a violence upon the Law of Nature. Nay I say, the Laws of
Nature being eternal, there was never any time when men ought not to give every
man his due; and so by consequence, no time when Grotius his Usus communis was,
since Men were born; but ever since Men were in the world, Dominion and
Property have been. Cain had his Genesis 4. 3, 4.
Fruit of the Tillage of the ground, and Abel had his Flock and the Firstlings
of his Flock; neither of which could be, if Grotius his Usus communis had been.

Object. But you may say, Property presupposes humane Laws, which must give it;
and humane Laws must happen in succession of time: And that therefore before
these humane Laws were, there could be no Property, and by consequence, all
things were common and undivided.

Sol. For the satisfying of this doubt, we must consider that God, in the
Creation, only created one Man, and out of him made Woman; and that ever since
no Man was ever made, but the species of Mankind has been continued by
generation. I grant that all things were common to Adam (except the forbidden
fruit;) but no Man that was ever born into the world (and not a Posthumous
King) who was not born in subjection to humane Laws. Nor did ever Adam derive
this Legislative right which he had over his Wife and Children, by any Pact,
Contract, or Submission of his Wife and Children; but had it from God, because
he was first made. 1 Timothy 2. 13.
It is therefore manifestly false, which these men beg, That by Nature all Men
are equal, and that the will of Man brought in Dominion. Nor do these men show
out of any sacred or profane History, that ever Dominion was brought in by
Man, or that Men had things common and undivided among them.

Well, but Grotius (having in this Paragraph, in a tedious unsignificant Lib.
1. cap. 1. para. 10.
thing, defined the Law of Nature so, as it may signify any thing, and made it
the Law of God; and that thing, which has quite routed this Law of God out of
the world, and set up another thing in stead of it, to be the Law of Nature;
and made the Law of Nature to be immutable by God himself, and yet to continue
but for a certain season) thinks he has not so perspicuously done this, but
that a certain Image of mutation may deceive them who take not heed; whenas the
Law of Nature, which is immutable, is not changed, but the thing of which the
Law of Nature does work, receives some mutation. For example: If a Creditor to
whom I am obliged, takes what Low him; now I am not bound to pay, not because
the Law of nature leaves to command to pay what I owe; but because what I did
owe, ceases to be. And to prove this, he brings Greek in Epictetus.

Observe. It is true, that universal causes in nature produce nothing, but as
meeting with particular material causes; the law of nature therefore of it self
produces nothing, but as meeting with particular material causes apted and
disposed for the law of nature to work upon; and therefore when these
particular causes cease, the obligation which the law of nature creates, ceases
also. As, Thou shall honor thy Father and Mother, is the law of nature; but
then there must be Parents and Children, or the law of nature creates no
obligation; and therefore when the particular cause ceases, the obligation of
the law of nature ceases also; as when Parents are dead, the law of nature in
that particular can have no obligation upon their Children. And so in the
instance which Grotius gives, a Debtor is by the law of nature obliged to pay
his Creditor: but this Debt being paid, the particular cause ceasing, the
obligation of the law of nature ceases also. What need therefore was there of
Arrianus his Greek out of Epictetus, to prove a prime and necessary truth,
which is of more authority then forty Arrianuses, and all the Greek in
Epictetus, Grotius, and all his Authors and Poets to boot?

Grotius goes on: So if God commands any man to be killed, or to take away any
thing that is another; It is not lawful that Murder or Theft be done, which
terms involve vice; but it is not Murder or Theft which is done by God, the
Author of life and all things.

They say, Nulla similitudo quatuor pedibus currit. I am sure this similitude
Observe. 2.
runs not upon one foot, for in this last the particular cause remains, whereas
in the former it is taken away; and if the law of nature be immutable by God,
and Thou shall not kill or steal, be from the law of nature, then it is Murder
and Theft, although commanded by God. Thus has Grotius instead of clearly
propounding his principles and orderly reasoning from them, thatched a company
of equivocal and contradictory principles, with Poets and Authors brought in by
head and heels; so as not any one proposition is clearly stated and disputed,
but the whole Treatise a most perplexed and unsignificant thing.

God conferred upon Mankind generally, Jus (Right) immediately after Lib. 2.
cap. 2. Para. 2.
the Creation; and again when the world was repaired after the flood, over all
the things of this inferior nature. There were, as Justin says, all things
common Lib. 43. Lib. 1. Para. 16. de jure Belli, etc.
and undivided to all Men, even as one Patrimony should be to all Men. God was
pleased peculiarly to give rights (dare jura) to one only people, viz. the
Hebrews.

Observe. Which is absurd and impossible by the ninth Notion of the first Book
of Euclid, viz. a part equal to the whole; the Hebrews not being all mankind,
but a part.

Grotius goes on, Hence it came to pass that every man gathered whatsoever Lib.
2. cap. 2. Para. 2.
he could snatch to their own uses, and consume what could be consumed; and
whatsoever any man had so snatched, that could no man take from him, but by
injury: but this State could not long continue.

Observe. How Is this? This is more monstrous and absurd then the other: what,
God gave a Right to Mankind, and that so immutable, that it is unalterable by
God himself, and yet not possible long to continue!

To prove this first Common Right of all things common and undivided to
Mankind, he refers to Genesis 1. 29. 30. And God said, I have given (...) (the
Septuagint has it to you in the plural number, when Adam only was created)
every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of the earth, and every tree in
the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat,
etc. Now how could God speak to Adam in the plural number, when Adam only was
created? It is said verse 27. So God created Adam in his own Image, in the
Image of God made he Man, Male and Female created he them: And therefore God
speaks here to Adam and Eve. Now whether God gave this Right to Adam and Eve in
Community to both alike, as Grotius would have it, or to Eve in subordination
to Adam, I refer it to any Christian Man to judge. Let the Woman learn in
silence with all subjection, etc. and the 1 Timothy 2. 11.
reason the Apostle gives is, Man was first made, then Eve. But suppose that
God gave this Right not only to Adam and Eve, but to all Mankind in Adam verse
13.
and Eve; yet by the authority of the Holy Ghost had Adam dominion over all
Mankind, because Adam was first made, and therefore God at the Creation of Man
made Government with Mankind.

Let us see whether Grotius has any better luck with his common and undivided
Right of all things, etc. immediately from the time of the world repaired after
the flood; which to prove, he refers to Genesis 9. 2. 3. And the fear ((...)) of
you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast, etc. every moving thing
that lives shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given you all
things.

Observe. Now then; if this were not given to Noah his Wife, and Noah's Children
in subordination to Noah, but as Grotius would have it, in community, to all
alike; then had Sem as much Right to all things as Noah, Ham as Sem, Japheth as
Ham, Sems wife was an intercommoner with Noah, Ham with Japheths wife, and
Noah's wife with them all, (if this be true, Mr. Hobbs makes Noah's Sons in an
ill case, where he says, filium in statu naturali intelligi non Annot. art.
10. cap. 1.
posse, no Son can be understood in the state of nature, and Sem, Ham, and
Japheth are Bastards, and not Noah's Sons.) Well, if Noah and his Wife, his Son
and their Wives had all things in common, that is, every one of them get what
they could snatch to their own uses, and consume what might be consumed; from
whence did Noah snatch his Vineyard, and drank the wine thereof until he was
drunken? If you believe Grotius, it was Sems Vineyard Verse 20.
as much as Noah's; Japheths Wives as much as Sems, and Hams Wife had as much
right to it as any body else. Poor Noah, thou have taken great pains here to
little purpose, if Hugo be thy Judge.

Well, Mr. Hobbs, rather then he will run upon Scylla, shall split himself
against Charybdis? and he makes jus to be the same thing with libertas, and
Cap. 1. art. 7.
the foundation of juris naturalis to be, that every Man as much as he can, may
defend his life and members. And, Natura dedit unicuique jus in omnia. Grotius
Art. 10. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Para. 2.
says, Erant omnia communia and indivisa omnibus, veluti unum cunctis
patrimonium. Which is all one and the same thing, differently expressed.

Thus far these Wits jump; we shall see them far enough asunder by and by. But
Mr. Hobbs no where tells us, when this Jus Natural was in the world; (sure it
was when Apes could speak, and Owls sing.) They both agree too, that this was a
time when there was no Government, or subordination of Men (nor Women, for
ought I can find) under one another; before Men had made Government, by giving
up their will to any Man, or Court. Mr. Hobbs calls this time, Status mere
naturalis: Grotius, Status Cap. 1. art. 10. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Part. 2.
qui durare non potuit. A little before he says, Quod quisque arripuerat, id ei
eripere alter nisi per injuriam non poterat. Mr. Hobbs says, It was not at all
Cap. 1. art 10.
profitable to Men, that they had such a common Right in all things; for the
effect of that Right is almost the same, as if there had been no Right at all:
For although a Man might say of every thing, This is mine; yet he could not
enjoy it because of his Neighbor, who with equal right, and force (here the
Wits begin to disagree) might pretend the same thing to be his. Nay, Mr. Hobbs
goes further, and is so far from supposing it an injury to take any thing from
any Man, in the state of pure Nature, that he makes this state hostile, and
Art. 2. Art. 3. Cap. 3. art. 4.
that Men may kill one another, and yet do them no injury. And the reason he
gives for it, is, That injury is done only to him, with whom we have made a
Contract; otherwise it is only damage any Man can do to another.

Observe. Here we see these Wits plainly to differ; next bout we shall see them
removed as far as Gades is from Ganges.

Grotius defines Li. 1. cap. 1. para. 10.
Jus natural, to be Dictatum rectae rationis, and a Deo ipso immutabile. Mr.
Hobbs Cap. 2. art. 1.
defines Legem naturalem, non esse consensum hominum, sed dictamen rectae
rationis. And, Cap. 3. art. 3.
Leges naturae sunt immutabiles; The Laws of Nature are immutable, and Art. 31.
the same with the Moral Law. (Here Men begin to speak, and the Apes to hold
their peace.) But Mr. Hobbs Cap. 14. art. 3.
makes Jus not only different, but also contrary to Lex: And therefore Mr.
Hobbs his Lex naturae, is contrary to Grotius his Jus naturae; and both
immutable. And now would I fain see some wiser man then either of these,
reconcile these two Wits.

It is a miserable condition Grotius makes all Governors to be in, that they
cannot make any Law which gives Property to any of the governed, (nor indeed,
for ought I can see, can there be any Government by this man's grounds, for he
confounds the relations) but that this Law must be against that Right, which
God conferred upon Mankind generally after the Creation and Flood, and is so
unalterable, that it cannot be changed, no not by God himself.

Let us see whether our Author can reconcile these two; (but for my part I much
fear him, because I do not take him to be so great a Master of Reason, nor so
Book-learned as either of the other two.) He in Ground 6. makes Jus or Justum,
Right or Due, to be when a man puts himself and his Promissary into a rank of
agencie and patiencie, upon a new score. And supposes in the next Ground, a
Company of Men without Government, whom (forsooth) he calls a Rational
Multitude; but most absurdly (not considering where there is no Government,
there can be no Law; and where there is no Law, there can be no Property, no
meum or tuum) he makes the Individuals of this Rational Multitude to abound
with many goods, and to want others; the love of which, and the fear of losing
them, are his chief reasons why Government is necessary.

Observe. But it may be, the reason why these men agree no better here, is,
because they are in the dark, where there is no Government. Well, we will see
how they agree when they have the light of Government: And first, Whether may
the Subject resist Authority, or Government? We will begin with our Author,
because we left before with him. Our Author tells us, Ground 14.
In what cases it is rational not only to resist, but also to depose
Government. What those cases are, I cannot tell; He that has nothing to do, may
look and see. But his last Grounds are; Neither Lawyers, nor Divines, are
Judges in those cases. So then it seems, only the Devil, our Author, and they
who be less book-learned then himself, are.

He tells us, wherein the Liberty of the Subject consists. He ties up his
Ground 15. Ground 8. Ground 11, 12.
Supreme Trustee to such Laws as the People entrust him withal; and yet gives
him leave to do whatsoever he thinks good.

Observe. The Governor and Governed are here in a very sweet and secure harmony;
but no doubt our Author will judge both the one and the other very righteously
and uprightly.

Grotius, de bello subditorum in superiores, states the question: In the five
Lib. 1. cap. 4. para. 1.
next Paragraphs seems to be in the Negative; but in the seventh Paragraph he
makes it a weighty question, Where there is Supreme Necessity? For, Certain
laws of God, says he, although they be generally pronounced, have a tacit
exception of highest necessity: Which thing was defined concerning the law of
the Sabbath, by the Wise men, in the times of the Hasamonaeans; from whence
came that proverb, Periculum animae impellit Sabbatum: which may be understood,
The danger of the soul necessitateth a Sabbath; or, the danger of the soul
destroys the Sabbath.

Observe. Grotius here is for the destruction, or he is like to have small
relief from this proverb.

And Judas, as Synesius says, gives this reason of his neglect of the Sabbath:
Grotius.
(...), We were brought into most certain danger of our lives. Which exception
is proved by Christ himself; as also in the other law, of not eating the
Shewbread.

Observe. And yet all this, in this case, will afford Grotius but small relief.
For, sins are twofold, either as they are omitted, or committed. Gods commands
are omitted, or transgressed, either as they refer to God individually; or
where they are omitted, or transgressed, to the wrong or injury of another. As
here in the observation of the Sabbath; the omitting of which duty, was a sin
only against God, for no man had any wrong done to him thereby: But, Thou shall
not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, etc. which if a man does, he not only
sins against God, but does wrong to another. Admit, in case of necessity, God
(who has made all things for man, and man only for himself) has dispensed
with many sins which related only to him, for man's preservation; (yet by
Grotius his good leave, we must not go too far; for I do not see then, how the
primitive Christians should have suffered martyrdom, and not have symbolized,
or resisted the Gentiles:) yet it does not therefore follow, that any man may
pretend any necessity, (nor can any one show that ever God did dispense
withal) to transgress Gods command, and to do that wrong and injury to others,
which is impossible for him to repair; as in Subjects making war against their
Superiors; for what recompense can be given for the blood and destruction which
they bring upon them who obey their Superior? And I hope neither Grotius, nor
any man else, will deny it is lawful to obey Superiors.

Yet from the authority of S. Peter, 1 ep. 2. 21. and qui animam ita perdit,
Grotius. S. Matt. 10. 19. S. Luc. 13. 33.
is vere eam acquivisse a Christo pronunciatur, and the example of the
primitive Christians, he seems to be in the negative.

Observe. But why in reason should he make Gods command to be in subornation to
a humane constitution, and that not founded upon any command of his neither? I
cannot tell. Well, see what he says for it: Here he has his Notandum Grotius.
primo homines non Dei praecepto, sed sponte adductos experimento infirmitatis
familiarum segregum adversus violentiam, in societatem civilem coiisse unde
ortum habet potestas civilis, quam ideo humanam ordinationem Petrus 1 Pet. 2.
13.
vocat, quamque alibi and divina ordinatio, quia hominum salubre institutum 1
Pet. 2. 13.
Deus probavit.

Observe. If there was never, nor can be a Family, where men be in a parity of
condition; and that, as Grotius here says, Civil power was made from Families;
then were not men in a parity and like condition, before they brought in the
Dominion which is now in use: And therefore all his whole Treatise founded
hereon, not only false, but repugnant and contrary to himself. And how is his
Notandum that Legal power is not made by Gods precept, but from the People,
proved by S. Peter? It is true, S. Peter calls it an ordinance of Man; but if
this be not Gods ordinance of Man, it is inconsistible with Romans 13. 1. and
with what he himself says immediately after, viz. for the Lords sake. It is
therefore the Lords ordinance of Man, and so quite contrary to Grotius his
Notandum. Where to look for the Divine ordinance, because God has called it a
wholesome Institution of Man, I cannot tell, nor care much.

Then Grotius, in seven Cases together, gives leave to make war: But ex
hypothesi, how it can be of Subjects making war against their Superiors, I do
not understand; unless it be in the fourth, where he says, A King loses his
Kingdom, if he be carried with a hostile mind to the destruction of all the
People. For in none of the other there can be any subjection. But how any man
should be so mad, as being a King, he should make himself worse then any
private man, by destroying his Subjects, I do not understand; and therefore
Grotius might very well have left his 4. or 11. Parag. alone. The rest of this
Chapter is, Wherein an Invader may be resisted. He speaks nothing against
Usurpation, for fear he calls his Countrymen in question. So Grotius seems to
leave it indifferent, whether there be a necessity of Subjects obedience. God
expressly, and the practice of the Primitive times were for it: Certain Laws of
God, although generally pronounced, have a tacit exception of highest
necessity, seems to be against it.

But Mr. Hobbs outruns the Constable, and Cap. 6. art. 12.
makes the King or Civitas not only impunible for whatsoever he shall do; and
Art. 20.
indissolvable by that power that made him; Art. 14.
And that the King or Supreme power is not bound by its own Laws; And Art. 15.
that no man has any thing proper against it: But also Art. 11.
this Civitas, or Supreme power, has power to examine what doctrine shall be
taught, against which none ought to say any thing contrary: For, says he, if
any one may command one thing upon pain of natural death, another forbid it
upon the penalty of eternal death, and both by right; it will fellow, not only
Citizens, although innocent, may be justly punished, but the City dissolved;
for, No man can serve two Masters.

Observe. True, not actively, where they command contradictories. Yet so it
pleases God, that not all who love and serve him, should go to heaven upon beds
of roses: Nor is any man a loser, if God for his temporal affliction, 1 Pet. 2.
21. S. Matt. 10. 39. S. Lu. 13. 33.
crowns him with eternal happiness. And therefore where it pleases God to give
(and not the People make) wicked and idolatrous Princes, for the sins of a
Nation; there must good men expect persecution and affliction. And if Mr. Hobbs
says true, then must no man speak against the golden Image Dan. 3.
Nebuchadnezzar had set up; nay, every man ought to fall down and worship it;
for he says, Obedience is not rightly distinguished, if it be distinguished
into Cap. 4. art. 23. Annot. art 7. cap. 16.
active and passive. But Mr. Hobbs has a help for this; for he says, The City
may command such a Worship of God, as is irrational; But if it be done at the
command of the Civitas to which the written Word of God is not known or
received, Cap 15. art. 1. 8
he has showed such a Worship of God to be rational. But, says he, Men must
have a care that they do not worship God so, where he reigns by Covenant, as by
the Covenant of Abraham; for there it is ill done, whether it be done by the
command of the Civitas, or not.

But whether as among the Jews heretofore, or with the Christians now, (for I
hope he will not deny God to reign as much over Christians by Covenant, as ever
he did over the Jews) how can any Man obey both, where contraries are
commanded, if there be no passive obedience? Yet he makes it an easy thing to
obey both God and Men actively, in the last chap. by distinguishing between
things necessary, and not necessary to Salvation; as if humane power did never,
nor will forbid things necessary to Salvation; but then Men may save themselves
by saying one thing, and meaning another, and making themselves Hypocrites, to
whom always our Savior pronounces woes.

We find but small consort yet between these three. Our Author makes it
Rational for Subjects to resist and depose. Grotius seems not to think so, both
by the precepts of God, and the practice of the Primitive Christians, unless a
King goes about to destroy all his Subjects. Yet too he says, Gods precepts,
many of them, though generally pronounced, have a tacit exception in case of
highest necessity,

Observe. But how shall I know whether in this? and therefore it is much better
to obey, then venture to break Gods positive command. But Mr. Hobbs makes a
subjection of Body and Souls absolutely, where God reigns not by Covenant; and
there too by distinguishing between things necessary, and not necessary to
Salvation.

Since there is so much contest about the power of the People, let us see what
these three understand by the People. Mr. Hobbs understands by Annot. art. 1.
cap. 6.
the People the Civitas which commands, wills, and does by the Will of one Man,
or by the agreeing Wills of more Men, which otherwise cannot be done in an
Assembly. Grotius no where that I know of, defines what he means by People: But
our Author in the seventh Ground, when there is no Government, makes them a
Rational Multitude; and when they have made themselves a Government, then
(forsooth) to be a People.

Salus populi suprema lex, is when the safety of the people or Subject is in
danger; then the supreme Governor is not to take notice of any Man's particular
interest whatsoever, he has sworn to the contrary; as when an Invasion, etc. is
made, though the King at his Coronation has sworn not to oppress nor take
without their consents, from any of his Subjects, any thing, which any of his
Subjects hold of him, or any of his Predecessors; yet rather then an Enemy
shall be relieved by any of his particular Subjects, to the endangering of the
rest, he then may destroy it, for the safety of the people is the highest Law:
and the end of all Government is, the preservation of the Subjects in general;
and in such cases the lesser evil is to be chosen; and no Laws but will suffer
a mischief, rather then undergo an inconvenience: And therefore could not the
Dictator be questioned for any thing done during his Dictatorship, because of
the danger of the people; and so the Romans always understood this Maxim of
Salus Populi suprema lex.

Let us see whether these Men leave Posterity in any better condition, then
they make the present Age, and see how they agree about succession, and whether
a Kingdom may be aliened by the present King, or he name his successor. Here we
must look upon Grotius either naturally, or relatively, and yet too, as
neither: As he is naturally a Hogan Mogan, he makes the King an Usufructuary
only, and then he says he can alter nothing Lib. 2. cap. 6. Para. 11.
at all, neither in part nor in the whole: And sometime like a Mercenary
stipendary to Lewis the 13. against all his precedent grounds of the power of
the People, and of Kings having originally all their Power from the contracts
and agreement of the People, which yet does not cease their power, he makes
neither King nor People judge of succession, for he says, the People have Lib.
2. cap. 7. Para. 27.
transferred all jurisdiction from themselves upon the King and his family,
neither during that, have the People any relicts of it; and yet he makes it a
very hard question, whether the People may alter succession as to them who are
not yet born, and determines it affirmatively in these words, Quare si Lib. 2.
cap. 4. Para. 10.
populus, a cujus voluntate jus regnandi proficiscitur, voluntatem mutet, iis
qui nondum nati sunt, ut quibus jus quaesitum nondum est, nullam facit
injuriam; and the reason he gives (forsooth) is a very sorry one, and a
similitude, Ejus qui nondum natus est nullum esse jus, sicut nec ulla sunt
accedentia rei non existentis. Nay he does not stay here, but goes on and
says, sicut autem populus express mutare voluntatem potest, ita and tacit
credi mutasse. But who shall be Judge of this implicit Faith, he says not one
word. Because of the damnable consequents, which must needs follow from this
determination, we will examine all the parts of it.

He almost every where makes a great stir with populus, and populus vult, and
populus mutare potest voluntatem express, and tacit; but never (that I can
any where find) defines, what the People is. If he had said the People of Rome,
or the People of Athens, or the People of Syracuse, he had said something,
though nothing to his purpose. For when a Man speaks of the People of Rome, or
Athens, etc. he speaks not formally of Men, as born in the Roman or Athenian
territories; but as men who were civitate donati, which it may be were not the
tenth part of the Romans, or Athenians; nor were ever the Roman, Athenian, or
Syracusan People, free People jure naturali (as he says) but by Civil
sanction, having made themselves so, unjustly usurping dominion over the rest
in their Tyranny and Dominions. It cannot be then that Grotius means by People,
such People as were the Romans or Athenians: If by People he means any thing in
the world, for above this 1700 years, there have not been any such upon the
face of the earth (if the Inhabitants of Switzerland be not such, who taking
advantage from the remiss Government of Wenceslaus, having beaten the Archduke
Leopoldus about the year 1400, made themselves a Democracy, and have almost
ever since continued Mercenary Man-killers to the interests of the Pope, the
Kings of France and Spain.) Grotius then not meaning such People, as were the
Romans, etc. I cannot imagine what he should mean by People, unless he means
Men, Women, and Children of all ages and conditions, all of them in a parity or
equal condition, abstracted from all Laws of God, or Man; and what a Harmony of
Confessions would arise from such a rour, any sober wise Man may judge? Thus
much for his populus.

Observe. Well, but be the People what it will, a beast, or no beast, a thing,
or nothing; it is from its will, all right of reigning proceeds, a cujus
voluntate jus regnandi proficiscitur. What, all Right of Governing, or Regal
Power proceed from the People? faith, let Grotius, or any of his followers show
ever since the beginning of the world any King made by the People, and I will
grant him all the rest, be it what it will: But see whether Grotius has not a
forked tongue, or not? here, and in twenty places more with Notandums, etc. he
makes all Regal Power to be from the wills of the People. In his Epistle to
Lewis the 13. he says, How beautiful, how glorious, how joyful to your
Conscience will it be, that when God shall have called thee to his Kingdom,
which alone is better then thine, thou may confidently say: I have received
this sword from thee for defense of Justice; this sword I return to thee, pure
and undefiled, rashly guilty of no bloodshed.

Observe. So that if he says true, that Lewis the 13. had his sword of Justice
from God, then does he say false here, and in twenty places more, that all
Power of Governing is from the wills of the people.

Well, but let us suppose a King made by the People; which is the party
governing, and which is the party governed? all Government being in the
predicament of Relation, where there is any one to govern or command, there
must be another to be governed and commanded. Well then, here are two, the
People, and the King made by the People, the one to govern, the other to be
governed. Say now which is the party governing, the King or the People? it
cannot be that the King should be the governing party, for he is but a
Creature, and a thing made by the People, and the Creator cannot be ruled and
governed by the Creature; the People then must be the party governing, and the
King must be the party governed; the King therefore of France (whom he so much
flatters) and all other Kings whatsoever, from this determination of Grotius,
are the governed party, and the People their Subjects are the governing party.
If therefore it be impossible to serve two Masters, who by equal right command,
I would fain know how it is possible for a King to obey above Ten hundred
thousand, every one of his Subjects having as much right to command him as
another? and it is very like indeed to be a very well ordered Government, and
much conducing to the benefit and safety of the People, where there is many
Hundred thousands commanding, and one individual person obeying.

But good Man, he is very careful, that though the People give Kings all their
Regal Power, that they part not with too much; nay though they make Kings, yet
if you believe him, they part with nothing at all, for otherwhere he says,
Imperium quod per Reges exercetur, non desinit impeperium Lib. 2. cap. 16.
Para. 16.
populi. Is not here a pretty play of a King, and no King? a King without
Power, and a People with all Power? So that at the same time, that he flatters
Lewis the 13. by telling him, neither King nor People are Judges of his
succession, he had before given the People of France a power of altering the
right of succession, without doing any wrong to his Son Lewis the 14, who now
rules; for he was res non existens when he wrote this book De jure belli and
pacis.

Sometime neither as Hogan Mogan, nor stipendary to Lewis the 13, Lib. 2. cap.
7. Para. 25.
directly, where he says, In alienable Kingdoms the King may disinherit his
heir.

Observe. Who gave him his Fee to say this? We cannot think it was Lewis, he
denies all his Grounds to pleasure him; yet latet anguis in herba; it may be,
because Henry the First was younger Son to Robert, and Robert disposessed his
eldest Son who bare his name, and made his younger Son King, from whom Lewis
derives himself. But how then can this stand with the 27 Para. that neither
King nor People are Judges in succession? or if Power which is exercised by a
King, does not cease the Power of the People, then cannot Lib. 2. cap. 16 Para.
16.
Kings give away their Kingdoms, nor disinherit their Heirs, for delegata
potestas non potest participari.

Observe. Well, let us see his reason for this: He says, Such a Kingdom is like
other alienable goods. Here the right of the alienation of a Kingdom is well
proved, viz. I may give a poor man a penny; and therefore a King may disinherit
his Heir, or give his Kingdom to whom he pleases. And so he says, Jacob did
disinherit Ruben.

Observe. What Kingdom was then given by any people to Jacob, to which Ruben was
Heir? Besides, for ought he knows, or can find by Cicero, Tacitus, Demosthenes,
Cleon, or any tale told by any Poet, the time when Jacob lived and died, was
then when all things were common and undivided; and how then could Jacob
disinherit Ruben?

Observe. Another Instance for the right of Alienation, is of David's
disinheriting Grotius.
Adonijah. Whether this be true, read 1 Chronicles. cap. 28. v. 5, 6, 7. And of all
my sons (for the Lord has given me many sons) he has chosen Solomon my son to
sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel. And he said unto
me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts; for I have chosen
him to be my son, and I will be his father. Moreover I will establish his
kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my judgments, as
at this day. Nor was it for any crime Adonijah did not reign after David; for
David had sworn Solomon should reign, before Adonijah's usurpation, 1 King. 1.
13.

Mr. Hobbs makes no doubt, but a Monarch may choose his Successor, and Cap. 7.
art. 15. Cap. 9. art. 12.
by his will dispose of the Supreme power of the City. And in the next Article
he gives him leave to give it, or sell it to whom he will.

Observe. King James was observed to make his Honors vile, because he exposed
them to sale, and so conferred them upon unworthy men, not as they deserved
them, but they were able to pay for them, thereby to satisfy his hungry
Countrymen, who were daily begging boons of him. How vile would this man make
Majesty? how light the ligeance which is due not only by nature, but by oath,
from all Subjects to their rightful Sovereigns? And, The Crown of England has
been so free at all times, that it has no earthly St. 16. Ric. 2. cap. 5.
subjection, but immediately subject to God touching the regality of the same
Crown, and to no other. And it is declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, upon demand made by the King, That they could not assent to any
thing in Parliament, that tended to the disinherison of the King and his Sir
Ed. Coke, Inst. 4. par. p. 15.
Crown, whereto they are sworn. How this can be consistent with this man's Sale
of Crowns, I do not understand.

Our Author is so in love with his Supreme and Absolute Trustee, that let him
but do what he list, and he may say with Tiberius Caesar, (...); When I am
dead, let the earth be mingled with fire.

Bodin, in the last Chapter of his Republique, because neither from Plato's nor
Xenophon's opinion, he can find Justice to consist in Geometrical nor
Arithmetical proportion, will therefore have it to consist in Harmonical; he
not understanding harmonical proportion: For he makes it consist in four terms,
viz. 4. 6. 8. 12. and what proportion 4. has to 6. he supposes Lex to have to
Aequitas; and what proportion 8. has to 12. (which is the same with 4. to 6.)
has Legis actio, to Judicis officium; and what proportion 4. has to 8. has the
Law, to the action of the Law; and what proportion 6. has to 12. (which is the
same with 4. to 8. viz. double) has Equity, to the office of the Judge.

He has indeed taken four numbers, out of which Arithmetical and Harmonical
proportion may be taken; as 4. 8. 12. is in Arithmetical proportion, and 6. 8.
12. is in Harmonical; but 4. 6. 8. 12. is in Geometrical proportion. Harmonical
proportion is, when three numbers are so ordained, that the proportion of the
greatest number to the least, is the same with the differences between the two
greater, and the two lesser: As in these three numbers, 6. 8. 12. the
proportion between 12. the greatest number, and 6. the least number, is double;
and the difference between 12. and 8. the greater numbers, is 4. and between 8.
and 6. the lesser numbers, is 2. and 4. is the double of 2. And therefore 6. 8.
12. are in Harmonical proportion. 8. to 6. is in proportione sesquitertia It
self and a third part; for 4. is 3. and a third part of 3.
, which makes Diatessaron. or a fourth Note in Music. 12. to 8. is in
proportione sesquialtera It self and half as much. 12. is 8. and half 8.
, which makes Diapente, or a fifth Note in Music. 12. to 6. is dupla
proportio, a Diapason, or an Eight. All other Notes are in proportione
sesquioctava It self and an eight part; as 72. contains 64. an eight part of
64. Suppose Ela 64. D-lasol is 72. Bfa-bemi is a fourth from Ela inclusively
85. Alamire is a fifth, it self, and half so much. 96. Elami is an eight from
Ela; 128. double to Ela. Multiply 64. and you may take the Gamut infinitely in
rational numbers without fractions, as from 512. and so forward.
, Nor can Harmonical or Musical mediety consist in four terms or numbers, as
Bodin would have it. But if either Justice, Equity, or Harmony be comprehended
in the Writings of these three terms, Grotius, Hobbs, and White; then let me
never expect Justice but from a Committee, nor Equity but from the University
of Bethlem, and be eternally doomed to the Noise that is made at the Yelling of
Tom Sternholds Psalms.

To what a condition here would these men reduce Mankind! For, what a condition
are men in, where there are no Laws? To what purpose are Laws, where there are
not they who may bear rule? Parum est nisi sunt qui possint jura gerere. And
who would look for Rulers out of these men's Writings? where men must cut one
another throats, to find them; and when they are found, then must men subject
themselves to them, either body and soul actively, and not passively only, that
is, suffer, when in their consciences they dare not act; or else to obey so
long as the fickle and inconstant Multitude will pretend a necessity of
rebelling or resisting, or judge it rational to resist and depose; and so to
the old trade of cutting throats again: Whether this thing, or that thing? this
man, or that man be Supreme? And after all this shall the poor Hobnail be no
wiser, nor in any better, but much worse condition then he was before.

It is rarely seen, that where men are not content with those Heirs See Sir
Edw. Coke Instit. 3. p. 35, 36.
which God gives them, that God does bless those men which are put in the place
of such Heirs. But without all question, where Subjects are not content with
what Sovereign God gives them, God did scarce ever bless any such as they made
to themselves. And let any sober man consider, into what a miserable condition
such Subjects or People have brought themselves: For they must needs live in
continual fear, lest the true Heir should recover his right against him whom
they have set up. But suppose that there be no fear that ever the right Heir
should come into his place; yet they have given a president to all Posterity,
not to submit to this whom they have set up: For why in reason should Posterity
be obliged to obey this, whenas they were not bound to obey the right Heir?
Neither was Subjects condition under Monarchy ever so bad, but the endeavoring
to reform it by force of Arms, has made it much worse. The examples of this are
infinite. It is usual therefore, where Subjects have taken up Arms and deposed
Government, to alter the Species of their Government. For this, if the
Government be converted from Monarchy into any other, See Mr. Hobbs Annotation
upon the 3. Article of the 10. Chap. De Cive.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
The Observators charge against his Adversaries grounds and superstructure,
wherein they all agree.
SInce there is so little harmony between these Three in their superstructure,
not only to one another, but also to themselves; it would make any man suspect,
if there were nothing else, that their grounds were false. We will therefore,
before we state our own principles and superstructure, set down theirs, and
show wherein they all agree, and wherein we differ. And,

1. Herein do all my three Adversaries and I differ: They all say, that by
Nature all men are in a like equal condition, and out of society, until by
voluntary pacts and acts of their will they shall have formed themselves into
society. I say, that men are by Nature born into society and subordination. To
warrant this, I have not only the consent of the present Age, but the constant
practice of all Ages in the world, from the testimonies of all Profane and
Sacred History; and that not only since the Flood, but before, if God made Adam
an universal Monarch, as well over his wife and children, as over all other
creatures; and that that there was a constant succession of the Patriarchs in
the Firstborn, from Seth to Noah. Whereas none of them can give testimony of
one man in the world that ever lived out of Society, or tell when, or who first
violated Nature so as to introduce it; and from whence it has ever since
continued all over the world, against the right of Nature.

2. They say, All power in Government was originally in the People. I say, that
for above three thousand years after the Creation (excepting the Locedemonian
Duarchy) was no Government but only Monarchy; nor was there any of them derived
from the People: And that wheresoever since the Creation, the People did assume
to themselves the Supremacy, they did it by unjust usurpation. Beside Nature, I
have almost infinite places in Sacred Writ to warrant that all Supreme power is
from God immediately; They, no color of any one.

3. They making men by Nature to be out of society, and by acts of their wills
to be in society, make Nature to be depending and subservient to the wills of
men; whereas Natural causes do immediately proceed from God, and are above the
will of man. Society therefore being natural, the actions of the wills of the
most perverse and wicked men in the world could never make them out of society;
but where they would not be commanded by their rightful Superiors, fell a
commanding and obeying among themselves.

4. They all not only invert Nature, and make Wills and Pacts superior to it in
the cause of Society; but all of them make the natural relations of rightful
Princes and Subjects to be dissolvible by the wills of men; yet after a
different manner. Grotius, when there is a necessity, makes them dissolvible by
the Subjects: Our Author, when the Subjects judge it reasonable: And Mr. Hobbs,
when the King or Civitas will give or sell the relations. Whereas Regal power
being Gods ordinance, is therefore superior to men's wills, and cannot be
aliened or dissolved by the will of man.

5. They all not only invert Nature, and make it alterable by the will of man,
but make the Law of Nature, or God, to take its origination from the civil pact
or will of man; whereas the Law of Nature is eternal and immutable by the will
of man, and connatural with every man, and always had, and ever shall have a
like obligation upon all men in all ages and places.

6. I say, They not only blasphemously make Nature and the Law of God
alienable, and depending upon the will of man; but also most illogically
confound the relations of agencie and patiencie in the same subject, and make
the Cives to constitute the civil pact, and to be subject to it; whereas Omnis
potentia activa est principium transmutandi aliud.

7. They invert Grammatical construction, in making the Cives who constitute
the Civitas, the patient or governed; and the Civitas who accepts the wills of
the Cives, to be the agent or governor: Whereas the contrary is true in both;
for, Obligans is the governor who does will, and obligatus the governed who
accepts the will of the governor.

8. They all most ridiculously make the Creature, the Civitas, superior to, and
the Governor of the Creator, viz. the Cives; whereas it is impossible any Being
should be prime or superior to the cause of its being.

9. They all of them make the Cives to endue the Civitas with that which none
of them have either separately or conjunctly, viz. a power of life and death,
and creating property; whereas Nil dat quod non habet, and nemo potest
transfer id in alium quod ipse non habet. If all these things be true, and
that I have not unjustly charged them in my Observations, how contrary they are
not only to one another, but to themselves in their superstructure; then let
the world judge, especially you my dear and native Countrymen, whether grounds
so unnatural, so blasphemous, so illogical, so contrary to common sense and
grammatical construction, so ridiculous and impossible, should be worthy to be
accounted the Principles of Humane society: Or whether they ought not to be
exploded by mankind, as fit for nothing but to abuse ignorant men, and to open
a gap for Sedition and Atheism. If I have here, or heretofore unjustly charged
them, two of my Adversaries are alive, and of age, and may answer for
themselves; and no question but Grotius has followers enough who may vindicate
him, if he has wrong done him. Or if I have committed any of these things, in
these Elements, let them make it appear, I will thank them for it.

A Premonition to the Reader.
BEside that part of this Treatise, which shows the causes and means by which
men attain Arts and Sciences; in this Preface, Observations and Elelements, I
have designed three things. First in the Preface, I design to demonstrate,
That it is impossible that the Cause of Humane Society should be originally
created by the pacts and wills of men; and the occasion of writing these
Observations. Secondly, in the Observations, I design to show, That the Causes
of Humane Society do not appear from these men's Grounds and Principles.
Thirdly, in the Elements, I endeavor to demonstrate the Causes of all Humane,
Christian, and Legal Society. And if any of my Adversaries, or any man else,
shall show me any errors in any of them, I profess I will ascribe it as an act
of Friendship to him.

I have one request more to the Reader, That he would look upon all these
Elements and Observations (except one half-sheet added to the Observations) to
be passed the Press, before His MAJESTY'S Acknowledgment or Restitution; until
the last Book, or one sheet or two of the Fourth Book of Justice, etc. And to
insert in page 9. of this Preface, line 22. after- [For which no reason can be
given] -- what is contained in the Margin, from -- [These things thus premised,
etc.]

ELEMENTS OF Power and Subjection: Or the Causes of all Humane, Christian, and
Legal SOCIETY.

Vir bonus est quis? Qui consulta Patrum, qui Leges juraque servat. By ROGER
COKE.



LONDON: Printed by T. N. for G. Bedel and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple
Gate. 1660.

TO THE READER.
Man's thoughts of Life, and Living, are odd things, pretty Antitheses, he
thinks his whole Life (though he should live a Thousand years) too short; and
yet every day, nay hour of his living, too long. Vicious Men therefore misplace
their happiness, in entertaining worldly pleasures, thereby to delude, and
spend their time, which they desire so much to continue in their Life, that in
their living, it might not seem to be. Virtuous Men have the same thoughts of
Life and living with vicious Men, but their actions discern them: For those
hours, which in their Life would otherwise seem tedious to them, they entertain
either in the Contemplations of God, or his Works; or by doing virtuously,
sweeten those sour effects, which idleness causes: So that the old
Philosophers would affirm, That not Years but Virtue should be the measure of
Man's life. And this reward has God (the Author of Virtue in Men, as Plato
divinely affirms) given Meno: prope finem.
to virtuous Men, that they not only take pleasure in remembering time past,
but also hope well in time to come, notwithstanding all the frowns of perverse
and wrinckled Fortune; whereas vicious Men are only pleased with deceiving the
present time, ashamed to look back upon their actions past, and affrighted upon
the apprehensions of death, and worldly calamities which (notwithstanding all
their Proteus shapes and Janus faces) happens to them, as well as virtuous Men,
in time to come.

There is no time wherein virtuous Men may not contemplate God either as God,
or in his Works, or do well; whereas many times vicious Men (though never so
rich and able to maintain their Vices) are either wearied with them, or have
not means to attain to what they call the fruition of them; and then they may
be truly accounted miserable, because they know not what to do, and are neither
pleased with the remembering of what is past, nor can hope well in time to come.
And indeed, no Man is so miserable as he who knows not how to entertain a day,
but by being vicious in it. Vicious Men desire that all their actions should be
buried in oblivion with them, and will make it a cause of quarrel for any Man
to mention those things they daily do as their actions; whereas it is only
Virtue that does eternise Men to all Posterity; for the whole Earth is a
Monument for famous Men, and their Virtues shall not only be testified by
inscription of Stone at home, but by an unwritten Record of the Mind, which
more then any Monument, will remain with every one for ever.

Sir Francis Bacon in his Life of Henry the Seventh, compares Times to Ways,
whereof some are more uphil and downhil, some are more plain and even; the one
is better for the Reader, the other for the Liver: Sometime it pleases God that
Virtue should be (as it were) so in fashion, That to be virtuous, is
commendable, and rewarded; other while, Virtue is not only persecuted by all
the contrary names, but virtuous Men are butchered, imprisoned, sequestered,
etc. and for no other cause but only their Virtue. Tacitus accounts it a
rare felicity of the Times, whenas an Historian may without danger Record the
History of the Times.

Polybius affirms of truth, That she ought to be Proem Hist.
esteemed of Men as the greatest Goddess, and that the greatest Power ought to
be attributed to her: For though all Men oppose her, and sometime many kinds of
verisimilitudes and appearances stand against her for a Lie; yet I know not
how, she by her self insinuates her self into the minds of Men: And sometime
on the sudden shows how potent she is; and sometime after she has been along
time obscured by darkness, at length of her self prevails, and expugneth the
Lie. If a Man vary the terms of Truth and Lie, into Virtue and Vice, this
affirmation will not less hold true. Virtue was never so oppressed by Ignorance
and Faction, but that the virtues of good Men shall find honorable mention
afterward: And Vice and Faction, however cried up at present, shall hereafter
be fully laid open, and their deformity discovered to all Posterity. Virtue is
the same in all Ages, and most amiable in her simple nakedness: and it is Vice
which has need of false glosses, and has such specious shows and pretenses
put upon it, to make it seem Virtue, which fucous and false paint continues no
longer then the present Faction.

Of all Virtues next after Religion, Justice is the most worthily ranged in the
first place, not only as including all other Virtues, but as excluding it all a
Man's actions are rendered as Vile and contemptible, other Vices are like Moats
in running waters, (and the smallest Moats are easilest seen in purest streams)
but injustice is like the poisoning the Fountain, which corrupts all the
stream. There is no Man that is so perfect, but some spots and stains may be
spied in his actions, which are soonest spied in the best Men; but no Man
(Heathen or Christian) can deserve the least reputation of being good or
Virtuous, who is an unjust Man. It was not Alexanders Venery, Riot,
Drunkenness, and Captivity to the Persian Effeminacy (Vices though bad enough)
but his occidit etiam Callisthenem, that was put in Counterpoiz Senec. de
beneficiis.
to all his Virtues. It is Justice, which (next after the most immortal,
greatest best God and Religion) fabricates, connects and establishes Nations
and Kingdoms in Unity and Peace. It is injustice which (next after Gods
punishments for their sins) subverts them to the ruin of the greatest part of
the inhabitants; so that Justice deservedly has the pre-eminence of Virtues
next after Religion, and Injustice is the foulest and vilest of all Vices,
after Atheism.

Though Justice be so high and noble a Virtue, yet I think there was never any
thing by learned Men (as Xenophon, Plato, Aristotle, Bodin, Grotius) more
mistaken. Not that I deny but that many Virtuous Men from their innate good
nature, have in their actions practiced that, which has been rarely well
defined; like Men who by a habit speak well, yet cannot give a Grammatical
construction of their speech; or like the Romans, who though the Grecians were
best at the Theory of Rhetoric and Poetry, were the best Orators and Poets; or
like the Physicians, who in blood-letting supposed the circulation of the
blood, yet none asserted it before the most renowned Philosopher Doctor William
Harvey; or like a Musician, who composes well, yet understands but little in
the Theory of Music.

For my part, as I hate Flattery as one of the basest Vices, and the most
inconsistent with Ingenuity, or Integrity, so had I much rather that these
Elements should be (...), though a present sufferer for them, then by any
sinister means to attain to any greatness whatsoever.

All things are at first appearance, curiously scanned, and censured by Men, it
may be most by them, who least understand them; for, Nihil est facilius quam
reprehendere alium. I desire nothing else of any ingenuous Reader, then that in
censuring any thing in this following discourse, he would declare what he would
have instead of it.

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. I know it is Humanum errare, and I not
having a beaten path to direct me to my journies end, and being unfit for so
great an underraking, although supplied with greater helps then I have found,
shall very probably be subject to stumble, having had so dark and feeble means
to keep my self upright. However, in all this Apostasy of Men in general, from
all Faith, Religion, and Moral honesty, I have endeavored to show from what
causes, all Vitues as well Theological, as Moral, flow; and that Men by
forsaking them must necessarily fall into all those calamities, and confusions
which now involve us. Whatsoever therefore my errors and defections are, they
ought rather to be forgiven, then to cause anger in any candid Reader: for my
part, I profess ingeniously, I will ascribe it an Act of friendship in any Man,
who shall direct my going in a more plain path, or show me where I have strayed
out of the way, by treading in this.

THE APPARATUS: OR, The different Nature of Man from other Creatures: And why
only Government is necessary to Mankind.
SInce there is nothing more manifest, then that there is every where in the
World Government; for no man can say, That this thing is his, or that thing
another man's, but he must presuppose a Superior Power, which gave him, and the
other man a Right in this, or that thing: And since from the evidence of all
Sacred and Profane History, no time was ever recorded, in which men were not
in subjection to one another: And since from Viz. Grotius, Hobbs, White.
these men's Principles, it is not possible that any Power in Government can be
derived; For to suppose by the Law of Nature all men to be equal, and to have a
common and undivided Right to all things, it is impossible that they can create
a power which may give Law, Property, and Power of Life and Death, when as they
themselves have none at all. But suppose all Men are by nature equal, and yet
have a right to create a supreme Power, which may give Property, yet then it
must follow, That all the Men of the World must be subject to one Individual
Government: For ex hypothesi, the Inhabitants of Greece have as much right to
all the things in Britain, as the Inhabitants of Britain have; and the Men of
Spain have as much right to all the things in Italy, as the Italians have; and
so have the French to all things in Italy, Germany, Persia, etc. Nor can the
Inhabitants of France, Germany, Spain, etc. frame to themselves any Government;
for ex hypothesi by the Law of Nature, the Persians, Indians, Moscovites, etc.
have as much right in France, Germany, Spain, etc. as the French, Germans, and
Spaniards have. And to suppose, that by the Law of Nature all Men have all
things in common; and to suppose, that whatsoever is or shall be renewed in
Spain, England, France, etc. is due by the Law of Nature only to Spaniards,
Englishmen, and French, etc. is to suppose a contradiction and impossibility.

Nor is that Fancy less groundless, which supposes that Regal power or
government was first instituted from an aggregation or consent of Families: For
how is it possible there should be a Family, where there is no Supreme power
which gave Property, in that place and habitation where that Family is? Nor
where there is no Law precedent obliging, can it be expected that any man will
(where he may be free at his own pleasure) be a Servant: Nor can it in reason
be supposed, that any man will contract with another to be his Servant, whereas
he may as well expect to be his Master. It shall be therefore our endeavor to
find out the true Causes and Principles of Power and Subjection. But before we
proceed, it will not be amiss to see, in a short view, the natural difference
between Man and other Creatures of this inferior orb; and why Humane or
Politic Government is only necessary to Mankind.

Of all the Creatures of this inferior orb, only Man uses Reason; by which with
the help of his Memory and Experience, he proceeds from things manifest and
known to the Understanding, to find out things less known, and more obscure:
yet still so, that subsequent Generations may infinitely add to what precedent
Ages had found out; whereas other Creatures do by an impulse of Nature (being
taught of no Creature, nor from any observation by themselves) insite and
connatural with them, at first attain to such perfection, that in succession of
time nothing is added to it. Thus we see all Birds at their first trial make
their nests with as much art and ingenuity, as those that do live longest; And
so the younger Bees make the honicomb as perfect as those who had done it twice
or thrice before. And certainly it is an admirable thing to consider, with how
great providence these smallest Creatures and imperfect Animals do choose out
places for their conceptions, even before they be living creatures, and but
only so in power; and with what unimitable art they build, fortify, and hide
the place wherein they repose them. I have seen an Indian Birds nest, which was
made upon a small bough growing over waters, which bough was too weak to
support the weight of a Monky, (the Monkies in those parts of India use to prey
upon young Birds) and provident Nature points out these places to those Birds
for the security of their young ones from the Monkies; for of all terrestrial
creatures, only Men and Monkies, and their kinds, swim not naturally; and the
Monky, if he in seeking to get the young birds, falls into the water, drowns
himself.

I have with great admiration seen Frogs (which are usually generated in the
month of March) confidently and carelessly swimming croaking upon one another
upon the surface of the water, whenas Horses and other cattle have been there;
but upon the coming of Ducks (who naturally prey upon and devour them) they
have been all hushed and gone, and not one to be seen: It being sure worthy
admiration, that Providence should so direct those spurious and imperfect
animals, and but of yesterdays being, and not of much longer continuance, to
know without any apprehension of danger those creatures who are not hurtful to
them, and to fear and avoid those who are enemies and prey upon them. Neither
is Providence less seen in all creatures (if a man considers it) in the
preservation of themselves and their young ones; so that a man must needs
confess, that in them is some particle of Divine air, and this their unlearned
art and wisdom is rather to be admired their imitated by us.

Man by his observation and experience finds out what things and Creatures are
hurtful or helpful to him; other Creatures by an instinct of Nature, at the
first sight know what things and Creatures are hurtful to them or not: thus we
see the timorous young Hare feeds securely among Horses and Cowes, and the
oldest Heart flies afrighted from the smallest dog. Man can never attain to
the knowledge of what things conduce most for his corporal preservation (and
therefore the oldest and most experienced and learned Physician may to morrow
find what the day before he was ignorant of; and yet shall never attain to the
perfection of knowing what is best for his own body) which other Creatures (by
avoiding those things which are hurtful, and choosing those things which are
most beneficial for themselves) do.

The careful Navigator by the help of some Theorems of longitude and latitude,
and the use of his Card and Compass, sails from one Coast to another, whereas
other Creatures by a propense disposition to this or that place, without any
observations and direction of their senses, fly to other regions where they
never were before. So Faulcons, Wildgeese, Woodcocks, etc. come from other
regions into England in the Autumn, and at the Spring forsake us. And
Swallows; Martyns, Hobbyes, etc. which brood with us in the Summer, when the
Antumn approaches, leave this Clymate for another, to which they cannot attain
by any sense or observation of their own. A Gentleman living in
Buckingham-shire had a Beagle sent him by Sea from the most Eastern part of
Suffolk to London, and from thence was conveyed by water into Buckingham-shire:
some time after, upon some distaste taken by the dog, he returned home to his
old Master by land, which was above an hundred miles: But what is most
admirable is, that omne genus Balaenae, as Dolphins, Whales, Porpices (which do
not keep in shoales or company; and although Fishes are animalia vivipara, that
is, bringing forth their young ones actual living Creatures, and do generate
viviparorum more) should in that vast body of the Ocean (when as by reason of
the grosseness of the Medium, they cannot use their sight at any small
distance, to perceive when they are near one another) at the seasons of
generation find one another. To proceed herein, were proper for Plinies natural
History, or Aristotle's History of living Creatures.

All Creatures are either animalia nociva, hurtful Creatures, which prey upon,
and devour other living Creatures; or innocua, which feed and eat upon such
vegetives as grow and are renewed by the earth or water; or sociabilia, which
are only Men who are better or worse then other living Creatures accidentally.
If they suffer themselves to be enslaved by their depraved passions and
appetitions, then they become worse than any hurtful Creature; but if they (by
depressing their passions and ill affections) rule their actions by reason,
they far transcend all other Creatures.

The end of Government is twofold, either to preserve the governed in peace
within themselves, or to protect them from foreign force or power; in neither
of which respects is Government requisite to other Creatures besides Men: For
animalia nociva are solivaga, and therefore no Government is required to keep
them in Peace one with another, whereas they do not company one with another.
And many other living Creatures who are not by nature hurtful, do not keep in
companies, and therefore no Government to preserve themselves in peace, is
requisite to them neither. It is an admirable thing to contemplate how nature
has granted to these hurtful and robustious Creatures, arms consentaneous to
their force, to protect themselves from outward force and violence of those
Creatures who are enemies unto them; as the Lion his paws and tail, the Bear
his paw, the Fox, Otter, Brock, etc. their Teeth; whereas other Creatures who
are by nature denied those arms to defend themselves, what a strange cunning
and dexterity has nature given them in the preservation of themselves, from
those Creatures who are hurtful to them, and prey upon them.

Those Creatures who live in Community one with another, by desiring the same
things, and avoiding the same things, to direct their actions to a common end,
that their companies are obnoxious to no seditions; and therefore Government is
not necessary to them neither, and of them is Man usually Protector against
their ravening enemies.

Men differ from other Creatures, for they are neither Animalia solivaga, not
gregalia, but sociabilia, that is, living in conversation and subordination;
and Man is born a living Creature, apted potentially for society, and alike
naked and unarmed as one whom nature intended a sociable, peaceful, and
politic Creature, and to be governed rather by reason, than force in all his
actions; and therefore has endewed him with hands and ingenuity, that having by
his ingenuity purchased himself necessaries, he might with his hands cloathe,
feed, and defend himself.

In all other Creatures the Laws of Nature (that is, those bounds which God by
Nature has set them) are securely obeyed and never transgressed by them, and
are only transgressed and violated by Man; and therefore the Laws of Nature are
not sufficient for the preservation of mankind in Peace; for by reason of the
discords which arise naturally in Men, for Honor and pre-eminence. Secondly the
appetite of possessing all things. Thirdly the desire to excel other Men in
wisdom and policy, and to that end are studious of novelty which causes
seditions and civil wars, that they might be esteemed wiser then the men of
this present Age, or their predecessorsby reason of which, present coersive
humane Laws are necessary for preserving peace among Men, that the fear of a
present punishment may deter men from those things, which because of their
Infidelity and Atheism they otherwise would not fear.

Isay, this Humane Power, from whence all Humane Laws are derived, is from the
Law of Nature, and if it shall seem strange to any Man that it should be
Humane, and yet derived from the Law of Nature; let that Man consider that only
Man is a Humane Creature, and does Humane and reasonable actions; and yet it is
from the Law of Nature, that only Man is a Humane Creature and can do Humane
and reasonable actions. And the Fathers and Husbands power is Humane; yet I
think no Man before Mr. Hobbs did ever deny, that they were from the Law of
Nature. I know in usual speech the supreme power of Nations, is called Politic
power, which is a mistaking of the cause for the effect, for it is not the
power which is politic in the cause, but in the effect and exercise; as take
an instance of my meaning, A Father has diverse Children of several
dispositions, one disposed to learning, another endewed with bodily strength,
and averse from learning; another has not bodily strength, yet a desire to
learning: but by reason of his gross Minerva, is not probably qualified to
attain to any great progress in it, etc. The Father breeds up his Studious Son
in literature, his Active Son which has no disposition to learning he makes a
Soldier, or Seaman; his Duller Child he binds an Apprentice to some Trade, etc.
Though the Fathers power be Natural, yet this exercise of it is Politic; so
though Regal Power be from the Law of Nature; yet must the exercise of it be
Politic. And therefore Humane Laws, and the exercise or Politic use of Humane
Power, cannot (though the Power of all Kings be alike, and from the Law of
Nature) be the same in several Nations, but different according to the nature,
manners, and dispositions of the Inhabitants. And we see the same King
governing in diverse places, by diverse Laws, accordingly as his Subjects are
different in manners, and dispositions. Humane Laws therefore, and the Politic
use of Regal Power; cannot be as the Laws of Nature are immutable, and the same
in all parts of the world, but ought to take their origination from the nature
and disposition of the Governed, and are alterable as Men's vices and manners do
alter.

The Method observed in the subsequent TREATISE, and the Reason of it.
ALl Science, all Learning, and all Reasoning by the Judgment of Aristotle is
begotten from pre-existing Principles, which being indemonstrable in
themselves, do demonstrate them. And since that all Society, or Power and
Subjection whatsoever, is created by Divine or Humane Laws; and since it is
impossible, there should be Lex Lata, where there was not Jus Legislativum
Superior, and the cause of it: In the First Book we treat of Rights, Laws,
Virtues, the Obligation of Laws; and of Pacts, Promises, Vows, Leagues, and
Gifts, and from whom Men become obliged to them.

These things thus premised, the Second Book treats of the Causes of all
Humane, Christian, and Legal Society; of Regal and Magistrates Power; of the
Three Species of Government, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, of
Sedition, and the causes of it: Of the Fathers, Husbands, Masters, and
Ecclesiastical Power.

The Third Book treats of Subjection, Succession, and the Municipal Laws of
this Nation.

The Fourth Book treats of Justice, Obedience, Judgment, and Equity.

The Fifth Book treats of the first Planting of Christianity under the British
and Saxon Kings; and of the Freedom of the British and English Churches before
the Conquest; and how far the Kings of England had exercised their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and how both British and Saxon Kings had been
Nursing-Fathers to the Church of Christ; and how far since the Conquest, the
Kings of England had exercised their Jurisdiction in the Assertion of their
Regal Power, in defense of the Church, until Henry the 8th, and of the
Reformation made by Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Queen Elizabeth, and of the Ecclesiastical
Laws made by them, Queen Mary, King James, and King Charles.

A more particular Survey of the Contents of the First Book.
Chap. I. THe First Chapter not only treats of those Rights which must
necessarily precede all Humane and Ecclesiastical Laws; but also of those
Rights which are created by Humane Laws.

Chap. II. Treats of Divine, Humane, Ecclesiastical, and Despotical Laws and
from whence they are derived.

Chap. III. Shows what Virtue is, and the causes of all Theological, Moral,
Humane, Prudential, and Personal Virtues.

Chap. IV. Treats of Particular, Moral Virtues, and

Chap. V. Proves them to be commanded by God in the old and New Testament.

Chap. VI. Demonstrates the Obligation of Divine and Humane Laws upon the
Persons and Consciences of Men.

Chap. VII. Is of Promises, Vows, Leagues, Pacts, or Contracts and Gifts, and
from whence Men become obliged to them; and does demonstrate, that it is
impossible that any Law or Legislative Right can arise from the Pacts or
Contracts of Men; which concludes the First Book.

DEFINITIONS.
JUs is a Right, Due, or Property in God, principally and absolutely; or in
some Jus, quid.
Man, or Men, by some Divine or Humane Law, excluding all others, but him or
them from whom it is derived.

First, All Right is either Jus Divinum or Natural, and this Right is The
Specifications of it.
only, primely, and absolutely in God, and incommunicable to any Creature: Or

Secondly, Jus Humanum is a Right which Men have from the Law of Nature: Or

Thirdly, Jus Ecclesiasticum, a Right by which the Tribe of Levi did under the
Old Law, exercise their Priestly Office and Function; and a Right by which
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, among Christians do execute their Office and
Functions: Or

Fourthly, Jus Legale, a Right which all Subjects have in their Estates and
Goods: And this Right is either Jus Proprietatis or Jus Usufructuarium.

2. Nature is either that eternal Being, which ever was in God, which Men What
is Nature.
call Natura Naturans: Or that first Being, which is in any Creature superior
to the Will of any Creature, and created only by God; and this Nature Men call
Natura Naturaliter; the depraved sinful Nature of Man was not originally
created by God, but afterward made by Man.

3. Jus Naturae Naturantis, is that Right which must necessarily precede What
is Jus Naturae Naturantis. What is Jus Naturae Naturaliter.
and create Lex Naturae.

4. Jus Naturae Naturaliter, is that Right which is created by the Law of
Nature; but because this Right is proper to Man only, we will call this Right
a Humane Right: As also that Power which is created by the Law of Nature,
although it be Natural Naturaliter, yet being proper to Man, we call it Humane
Power.

5. A Law is the declared Will of him who by right commands, forbids, or What
is a Law.
permits athing, together with a penalty annexed for not observance.

Lex dicitur a ligando, quia obligat, says Isidore rightly. Etymology of Lex.


Common Notions or Axioms.
1. ALL Right which any Man, or company of Men have, is derived either from the
Law of Nature, or some Divine Positive Law declared in the Scriptures, or from
some Humane Law, or particular Custom, which is always presumed to be created,
or permitted by Humane Laws.

2. Humane Laws and Customs refer to some particular place or Country, as they
are permitted or imposed by the supreme Power of that place or Country: viz.
By them who have right to impose or permit them.

3. The Laws of Nature oblige all Men of all conditions alike, without
exception, and are eternal and immutable by Man, and are, and always were
connatural with all Men.

4. No Being can precede, or be superior to the cause of its Being.

5. All Causes are superior, and precede their Effects.

THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. De Juribus.
1. LEx Humana lata has by the second Notion no being, Jus Humanum
Legislativum, is not from any Humane Law.
but as it is caused or created by him, who has the Jus Legislativum. Lex
Humana lata therefore cannot by the Fifth Notion create Jus Legislativum.

2. If Jus Humanum Legislativum were from Jus Humanum Legislativum is not
created by Divine positive institution.
Divine positive institution, then by the Fifth Notion must the Scriptures
precede all Legislative Right; but this is evidently repugnant, not only to the
Scriptures themselves, who testify not only the Right which Fathers and
Husband have over their Children, and Kings over their Subjects long before God
revealed them by Moses; but also this Lawgiving Right is in every place of the
world, whether the Scriptures be received or believed, or not. It is evident
therefore that this Law-giving Right is not created from Gods positive Laws in
the Scriptures.

3. Jus Humanum Legislativum, is not by the first Proposition from Jus Humanum
Legislativum, is from the Law of nature immediately.
any Humane Law; by the second Proposition, Jus Humanum Legislativum is not
from Divine positive Laws. Therefore by the first Notion, Jus Humanum
Legislativum, is from the Law of Nature.

4. By the third Notion the Laws of Nature are, and always were connatural Jus
Ecclesiasticum, is not from the Law of nature.
with Men; but the Right which God gave the Priests under the old Law; and to
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, under the new Law, happened long since, Men were
borne in the world, and therefore the Ecclesiastical Right of Bishops and
Priests, is not from the Law of Nature.

5. If Humane Laws could create the Right of Ecclesiastics; then by Nor from
any humane law.
the 2. Notion, he who may by right create Humane laws, might also create this
Ecclesiastical right. But this is evidently false; for all Kings, Fathers and
Husbands have a right of creating Humane laws; but none have the right of
creating the Ghostly right by which Ecclesiastics exercise their function or
office. This right therefore is not created by any Humane law.

6. By the 4. Propos. Ecclesiastical right is not from the law of Nature. All
Ecclesiastical right is by divine positive institution.
By the 5. Propos. it is not from any Humane law; therefore by the 1. Notion,
it is by Divine positive law or institution.

7. By the 2. Notion, all Humane laws are made by men; but it is impossible Jus
primi occupantis, is not from any humane law.
by the 4. Notion, that men should make laws, where no men are; therefore
cannot Jus primi occupantis be from any Humane law.

8. This right of first possession not being only due before Gods revelation
Nor from divine positive laws.
of himself in the Scriptures, but also where they are not believed or
received; it cannot be by the 4. Notion, from Gods divine positive laws.

9. All Right, by the 1. Notion, being either from the law of Nature, It is
from the law of nature.
or some Divine positive, or Humane law; and this right by the 7. Propos. not
being from any Humane law; and by the 8. Prop. not being from Divine positive
laws, it is by the 1. Notion due by the law of Nature.

It is proved lib. 3. cap. 11. that Subjection is natural; and therefore no
Annot.
natural Subject can put himself out of the power of his Sovereign: And by
consequence, this right of first occupying or finding, by any Subject or
Subjects, is the right of the Sovereign in whose power such Subject or Subjects
are; and such Subjects are the Instruments of occupying, or invention, by which
this right does accrue to the Supreme Power.

10. Jus Gentium, is a right which every Nation has to send Ambassadors Jus
gentium is from the law of nature.
to mediate Peace with any other, although in public hostility with them: And
this right not being topical, but general, by the 3. Notion it is from the Law
of Nature.

11. The Usufructuary right, which separated persons for Gods divine The right
which separated persons for the worship and service of God have to tithes is
from the law of nature.
worship and service have to Tithes, is not only general, and therefore by the
3. Notion, due by the Law of Nature: but also being due, and yet by no Humane
Law; and being due as well where Gods positive Institutions are not believed
and received, as where they are; This right, by the 1. Not. is due from the Law
of Nature; and by consequence, the detaining of them by the Laity, is a
violence upon the Law of Nature, for no Humane Law can dispense with the Law of
Nature.

12. The right of Subjects is either an Usufructuary right, or a right Jus
subditorum twofold, Proprietatis, or Usufructuarium, is from humane laws.
of Propriety. Jus Proprietatis, is when any Subject, or company of Subjects
have by some Law a right to any individual thing, excluding all other but him
from whom this right is derived, viz. the Supreme Power of the place. An
Usufructuary right is, when any man or men have no right of Property to the
thing, but only a right to the profits arising from it; as a Parson, Vicar,
Judge, and Fellows of Colleges have no Property in the Parsonage or
Vicarage-house or glebes, Judges place, or Fellowships of Colleges. And these
rights neither being due from any Law of Nature, nor any Divine positive Law,
are by the 1. Notion, from the Temporal or Humane Laws of every Nation.

13. Jura sanguinis, nullo jure civili dirimi possint. Nor is Primogeniture The
right of Primogeniture is due by the Law of Nature.
only preferred, where Gods revelation of himself in the Scriptures are
received, but where they are not received: Their right therefore of
Primogeniture is from the Law of Nature.

14. It is true, that Divine Laws oblige all men alike; and so Humane No Divine
or Humane laws give Right or Property to any man qua homo, but qua talis.
Laws oblige all Subjects alike: But the Right or Property created by Divine or
Humane Laws, by the Definition, is in some man or men, excluding all others but
him or them from whom it is derived. Right or Property therefore being such a
man's, excluding all others, it cannot be where it includes all men, either as
Men, or Subjects. Thus the Legislative right is from the Law of Nature; but
every man, as man, has not this Lawgiving right. So Jus primi occupantis, is
from the Law of Nature; but every man is not Primus occupans. And so the right
of Primogeniture; but every man is not Firstborn, etc. And so Gods divine Laws
in the Scriptures oblige all men alike; but yet do not they give to all men
alike the right of Preaching the Gospel, Administration of Sacraments, etc. but
only to such separated persons so qualified. And so Humane Laws oblige all
Subjects alike; but they do not give Right or Property to all alike, but to one
man, or more, excluding all other.

15. That is Right or Property, which is such a man's, or men's, excluding How
Community, and Right or Property differ.
others. That is Community, which is common to one man as much as another; as
the Common Road, the Air, or Seawater, etc.

CHAP. II. Of Laws.
1. AS in all Arts and Sciences there must be some Axioms and Principles,
Introduction.
which must prove those Arts and Sciences; and these must be first granted, and
be the reason of those Arts and Sciences, and yet no reason can be given of
them, before any man can deduce any thing from thence; for no man's Reason can
work upon nothing: So in all just and legal actions there must always be some
Law given, which is superior to the Agents reason, and the reason that such an
act is just or legal; and where there is no Law, there can neither be Justice,
nor transgression. It is not therefore the will or fancy of any Agent, that
makes any action just or legal; but the doing of it in conformity to the
precept of him who by right commands, or permits it, which makes it just and
legal. Et oportet neminem Regula.
sapientiorem esse legibus. And if private men's wills, judgments, or reasons
should be the rule of their actions, what one Subject is there of a thousand,
that would be content with that condition wherein the Law has placed him? It is
not therefore what I, or another judge fit or desire, but the directing our
actions in common to the rules and precepts of our Superiors, by which we may
hope to enjoy peace and unity, and be before God, Angels and Men, truly
accounted just and virtuous.

2. All Laws may be divided into Divine, Humane, Ecclesiastical, or Division of
Laws.
Despotical.

3. All Divine Laws are twofold, either Natural, engraven in the Divine Laws
how manifold.
minds of all Mortal Men, whereby they are to worship one God, and by all just
means to preserve peace with Men; or supernatural, viz. extraordinarily
revealed by God in the Old and New Testament.

4. All Divine Laws are created and derived from that divine and From whence
all Divine Laws are derived.
eternal Right, which was inseparably in God, before any such Laws were created
by him.

5. Humane Laws are threefold, viz. Secular, Temporal, or Civil, such are the
Laws of every Country; or Gamacal, viz. the Laws of the How manifold are Humane
Laws.
Husband; or Paternal, viz. the Laws of Parents to their Children.

6. All Humane Laws are derived from that Right or Power which From whence
derived.
the Law of Nature creates, in supreme Powers, Husbands and Parents.

7. They are called Humane Laws, because they are made by Men, Why called
Humane Laws.
who by the Law of Nature have a Right to make or create them.

8. All Ecclesiastical Laws are derived from that Right or Power From whence
Ecclesiastical Laws are derived-
which by divine positive institution, our Savior Christ left to his Church to
continue until his second coming again.

9. Ecclesiastical Laws are so called, because they only relate to the
discipline of the Church, and worship and service of God. Why so called.


10. Despotical Laws are derived from the Right or Power, Despotical Laws from
whence derived.
which every Master of a Family has over his Servants; which Right or Power is
created by Secular or Temporal Laws of the place where the Family is.

11. Two things must necessarily precede every Law, or it has no What must
precede every Law.
Obligation, viz. the Legislative Right, and the Declaration of it. So that Jus
divinum is one thing, and Lex divina another; and Jus natural is one thing,
and Lex naturae another. And so is Jus Humanum, and Lex Humana; and Jus
Ecclesiasticum, and Lex Ecclesiastica. And he that will confound these things,
cannot possibly ever write clearly upon the subject.

12. Humane and Despotical Laws are vindicative, or oblige to corporal What
Laws are vindicative.
punishment in this world.

13. Only Humane, Secular, Temporal, or Civil Laws are distributive, and create
property among Men in their Estates. What Laws are distributive.


14. Neither Divine nor Ecclesiastical Laws are vindicative, but oblige in
Conscience only. What Laws are neither distributive, nor vindicative.


How Men come to be punished Temporally, for not observing Ecclesiastical Laws.
15. Although Ecclesiastical Laws (as we shall prove in the next chap.) bind in
Conscience only, and therefore cannot impose any Corporal mulct or punishment,
yet the Secular Laws do; as if a Man be excommunicated, he shall have no
advantage or relief in any plea by the Common Law; Lit. vil. sect. 201.
and by the Common Statute Law whosoever is adjudged an Heretic, or Blasphemer,
shall be burnt; yet neither Common Law, nor Statute Law take cognizance of
either Excommnication, Heresy, or Blasphemy, before the Statute of the 2 H. 5.
7. In curia Christianitatis, (id est Ecclesiae) in qua servantur leges Christi,
cum tamen in foro Regio servantur Leges mundi, says Linwood; who says
moreover, Com. Stat. de circumspecte agatis.
That the Probate of Wills and Testaments, de consuetudine Angliae, not de jure
communi, belong to the Court-Christian. But whether Linwood says true or not,
Hen. 8. began by the Statute Law to encroach upon the Rights of the Church, and
by confounding the jurisdictions both of Church and State, making himself head
of both, has opened such a gap to let in all Schism and dissension, that the
Common-Lawyers, and Statute-Laws have upon the matter devoured all Church-rites
and power; nor are either the Common or Statute-Laws now in much more esteem
then the Ecclesiastical. Nor is it less then a Divine judgment upon those men,
who have so extravagantly attributed both powers to be in the King, (Between
Supreme Head, and Supreme Governor, I understand no difference; for if the
Supreme Governor has not supreme power or right of command, then necessarily
must such a Governor be an Usurper, or unjust Invader) in words only, but
indeed in their practice have denied him the exercise of the one, or the other
power, and ascribed them both to themselves, and Courts subordinate to the
King; That these men (I say) should be themselves, and all the Courts in as
little esteem as Ecclesiastical Rites and Constitutions; and the King, God
knows upon what account (for no color of pretense was ever yet so much as
reasonably pretended) violently restrained from the exercise of any either
Ecclesiastical or Civil power among us.

Here do not I admit of Mr. Hobbs his division of Civil Laws into Sacred Annot.
and Secular: (Did ever man before hear of Sacred Civil Laws?) Sacred Laws are
those Civil Laws (he says) which belong to Religion, that is, Cap. 14. art. 5.
the Ceremonies and Service of God, and are called Ecclesiastical. Secular Laws
are those (he says) which are wont to be called Civil, by a general name.] For
though Ecclesiastical Laws be made by Men, and therefore not Sacred, as he
says; yet is the power by which they are made, from Divine positive
institution, and therefore cannot have any right or power from Civil or Secular
sanctions, which at highest cannot amount to more then Humane.

16. A Law differs from Counsel, as my Understanding differs from How a Law
differs from Counsel.
my Will: my Will is that which imperates all my actions my Understanding
informs my Will, whether the doing or not not doing such an act be good or bad,
just or unjust, reasonable or unreasonable. A Law is the declared will of him
who by right commands: Counsel, the reason, advice or discourse of them, to
whom he who by right commands, refers any thing to be debated, (who are usually
called the Council) whether the willing or passing such a thing into a Law,
will be probably convenient or inconvenient either to him or his Subjects.

CHAP. III. Of Virtue.
1. THat Virtue is not always placed in a mean between two extremes,
Introduction. Virtue is not fited always in a mean between two extremes.
and those extremes to be Vices, according to the opinion of the ancient
Philosophers; I do subscribe to Mr. Hobbs, cap. 3. art. 32. de Cive; And that
from the reason he there gives, viz. that Fortitude in a good cause is a
virtue, although it be in the extreme. Nor does quantity in giving, be it much,
little, or indifferent, make Virtue, but the cause of giving. To these may be
added Gratitude and Patience, Justice and Obedience, which are not placed
between any extremes. But if I assent to Mr. Hobbs in this, I cannot less
dissent from him, where cap. 3. he makes Virtues to be the Laws of Nature; and
cap. 2. art. 1. the Law of Nature to be the Dictate of Right reason. For,

2. Virtue is the doing or forbearing any action, as it is dictated by What is
Virtue.
Right reason, from the Law of a Superior, or from some Notion known to an
Intellectual creature.

3. All Virtue is either Theological, Moral, Humane, Familistical, How manifold
is Virtue.
Personal, or Prudential.

4. Virtue being by the definition, the Dictate of Right reason from From
whence Theological virtue is derived.
some superior cause or notion; Theological virtue is a Dictate of Right
reason, from some revelation of God in the Scriptures, which otherwise had been
impossible for any man by the light of humane nature to have attained to. By
Theological virtues I do not mean only those three most eminent virtues of
Faith, Hope, and Charity, but all those actions of obedience due to them who
have oversight of me in the Lord, as a Christian; and to whom I owe my
obedience not by any Law of Nature, but as commanded by God in the Scriptures.

5. Moral Virtues are those Dictates of Right reason which flow from What are
Moral virtues, and from whence derived. What are Humane virtues, and from
whence caused. What are Familistical virtues. What are Personal virtues.
that light of Nature, engraven in the minds of Men, for the conservation of
peace and society among Men, so long as they live in this world.

6. Humane Virtues are those Dictates of Right reason, by which Subjects, Wives
and Children, conform their actions to the Laws or Precepts of Supreme powers,
Husbands and Parents.

7. Familistical Virtues, are those actions of Servants done in conformity to
the commands of the Masters of Families.

8. Personal Virtues, are those actions (which are dictated to diverse men from
principles of innate good nature) of Temperance, Continency, Patience,
Liberality and Frugality; whose contrary extremes are vices and sins.

9. Prudential Virtues are not dictated from any Divine or Humane What are
Prudential virtues, and from whence derived.
Laws; but from some Principles known to the understanding (which are more or
less, as men are more or less intelligible) whereby some Princes govern more
prudently then others, and some Masters of families govern their servants more
prudently then others. And these Virtues have not reference only to the
government of Men, but to other actions; as Prudence in managing of an Estate,
is a Virtue; or in men's governing their actions, so that they are esteemed, and
not despised by other men, are Virtues: yet these actions are no where
commanded, or forbidden by any Divine or Humane Laws. These Virtues are always
placed in Empire, not in Obedience.

10. God having made Man a rational creature, and endued him with The ratio
finalis of all virtues, and how they differ. First of Theological virtues.
an immortal Soul, capable of eternal happiness, has revealed himself
supernaturally in the Scriptures to Men as reasonable creatures; so that they
directing their actions conformable to his precepts therein contained, might by
faith or believing on him hope for eternal happiness.

11. The end of all Moral Virtue is, that men may preserve peace and The end of
Morality.
society, so long as they live in this world: And God has made Man a sociable
creature, as well as intellectual and rational; and therefore has engraven
these eternal and immutable Laws of Nature in the minds of all mortal men, that
by conforming their actions thereunto, they might preserve peace and society
with men. And though these of themselves are not sufficient to pully man up to
eternal happiness; yet let no man hope, that despising these Laws of the great
God of Nature, upon a pretended Faith he shall ever attain it.

12. But because the Law of Nature does oftentimes command in Thesi The end of
humane virtue.
only, and Humane Laws ex Hypothesi: as, Thou shall not steal, and shall give
every man his due, is from the Law of Nature; but that this thing is mine, and
that thing another man's, is by positive Humane laws. So though Moral virtues be
always the same, yet Humane virtues differ, accordingly as Laws in diverse
places are different. Thus it is a Moral virtue in Wives and Children, to honor
and obey their Husbands and Parents; but as a Humane virtue, the doing of such
a thing may be Virtue at one time, and Vice at another, as it is commanded or
forbidden by the Husband or Parents. So that Humane virtues in Subjects, Wives
and Children, are necessary to the conservation of society, where the laws or
principles of such actions are not plainly repugnant to Divine laws.

13. The end of all Familistical virtue is, that Servants by all just and The
end of Familistical virtues.
lawful means intend the good of their Masters, and make no dissentions or
discontents in their Families.

14. God having made man after his own image, as well in body as in The end of
Personal virtues.
soul; (for, He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in
the image of God made he man:) It is not therefore to be expected that any man
should, without sin against God, abuse the highest and noblest part of Gods
creation. All men therefore, in the first place, ought by all just and lawful
means to do well to themselves, and not by any excess or intemperance to abuse
that body which God has made in his own image.

15. Theological virtues relate to the attaining of Eternal happiness: The
difference between Theological, Moral, Humane, Familistical, and Personal
virtues.
Moral, Humane, and Familistical, to the conservation of society and peace in
their several places: Personal virtues, to the preservation of that body which
God has entrusted every man with keeping so long as he lives. We have spoken
of the end and difference of Prudential virtues, Parag. 9.

16. In all prudent and profitable actions, Prudentis est fortunam semper
Whether just and moral actions or virtues are to be enquired into by fortune,
as are Prudential?
in concilio adhibere: But that man who directs his just and moral actions to
Fortune, or the time and tide of men's affections, shall soon be accounted a
Weathercock and Time-server. In all prudent actions or virtues, there is no
other obligation or penalty, more then the reward or profit of the action, and
loss for the folly of imprudent actions: But in just and moral actions, men
must consider their duties, not profit; and are obliged to them,
notwithstanding temporal loss or trouble.

CHAP. IV. Of Particular Moral Virtues.
1. SInce that the Law of Nature is, That there is one God infinitely Religion
is the first and chief of Moral Virtues.
good to be worshipped and served, and that all men should in their several
stations endeavor by all just and lawful means to preserve Peace and Society in
this World; Then is Religion or the Public Worship and Service of a Deity the
first and chief of all Moral Virtues; and so conspicuous was this Virtue in all
ages and places to good men, by the Light of Nature only, that it was always
their first care to be in a Society of Men where God (however misplaced in an
Oak, Osiris, Iris, Jupiter, Apollo, etc.) was publicly worshipped and served.
And men who were of no Religion, were always stigmatized with the most
opprobrious name of Atheists, as the most vile of Men. Flaminem assiduum Jovi
Sacerdotalem creavit. Live. lib. 1.
Numa Pompilius therefore in the first place took care for the institution of a
Religion among the Romans, and to this end he created a Priest who should daily
offer Sacrifice to Jupiter. And so zealous were the Seldom: Annal: Angl. lib.
1. c 4. Caesar de Bell. Gal. lib. 6. Gamb. Brit. p. 12.
Druides (in the old age of our Ancestors, before Christianity was planted
among us) in their Religion or Public Forms of Worshipping of God, that none
but the Priests and Scholars might learn them; nor would they commit them to
Letters, both because they would not have them divulged, least they should grow
contemptible by being exposed to the view of the rude and ignorant multitude;
as also that their Scholars might the better retain them in their memory.
Nicias Orat. Thucid. lib. 7.
Nicias as the chief Argument of his justification, and hope of belief from the
gods in his greatest adversity, says, (...), I have worshipped the gods
frequently according to Law. And heretofore in the Church of England, set Forms
of Prayers were not only ordained, that her sons of her Religion, might meet
at public times to worship and serve God, but the Minister or Priest was
obliged every day to offer up the public worship and service of God, whether
there were any present but himself, or not, for all sorts of men in their
several vocations and stations: That as the fire upon the Altar among the Jews
might never go out, so among us Christians might no day pass, wherein the
Public Service of God was not offered up for all sorts of men.

2. That Men honor and obey their Superiors, Subjects their Sovereigns,
Children their Parents, Servants their Masters.

3. That Men be not Tale-bearers or Back-biters, but avoid evil communication.

4. That Men do not make advantage of another weakness to his damage.

5. That Man in all things keep his Integrity; that is, not to answer so
Integrity.
to another, as to deceive him by equivocation or mental reservation; if it
does not appear, that there is evil intent in the question.

6. That Men perform their promise made, although it be to their hinderance.
Promise.


7. That Men bear a grateful mind for benefits received, that is, that
Gratitude.
they do not suffer him from whom they receive a benefit, to be in a worse
condition then he was before he conferred it: And if they have not in their
power wherewith to satisfy, yet that they bear it so in their minds, as to be
ready to satisfy to their power. Some Creatures who are not endued with
Reason, do imitate this Virtue; the Storks when their Parents are viete and
broken with age, do relieve them by feeding and providing for them; wherefore
the Greeks called the Stork (...), Beneficiorum retributorem. See Grotius
Annotations upon his Preface De Jure Belli and Pac.

8. That men do well to their Wives, Children, and others, as by nature and
affinity allied unto them.

9. That men be merciful; wherein men ought not so much to observe the quantum,
as the cause of showing mercy or pity.

10. That in revenge men do not respect the evil past, but mind the future
good which may happen from the punishment.

11. That they neither by deeds, words, or countenance, use another
contumeliously.

12. That they be not high-minded or over-conceited of their birth, person, or
parts.

13. That they be lowly minded and modest.

14. Not to accept or respect persons in judgment.

15. Where no Law gives propriety, there ought community to be.

16. Those things which can neither be divided or used in common, that the
decision be by lot.

17. That the firstborn be preferred, and the Male before the Female.

18. That no man endeavor, etc. For that which is any man's by Divine
Institution, cannot be aliened neither by his will nor the will of all the men
in the world; and therefore cannot Episcopacy or Priesthood after Consecration
and Imposition of hands be transferred, because they are by Divine Institution:
Yet whatsoever Bishop or Priest shall endeavor for reward or price to alien it,
or deny it for safety of his life, may as well be esteemed a profane person as
Esau was.
That no man endeavor to transfer or alien, by Pact or Promise, that right
which God by the Law of Nature or Divine Institution has given him.

19. That Protection be granted to Ambassadors and Mediators of Peace.

20. That no man seek private Revenge for any supposed Injury.

21. That Judgment be pronounced without hope of reward, or for applause of men.

22. That where Evidence of Fact does not clearly appear, that they take
information from Witnesses.

23. That the Judge be indifferent, not biased to either party, either by
Natural relations, or by any precedent Obligation.

24. These Moral Virtues are commanded by the Moral Law, and are most truly and
properly so, as they are revealed and declared to mankind by God in the holy
Scriptures: For the Will of God commanding in the Scriptures (that is, in the
Old and New Testament) is in all things by highest right to be obeyed and
followed. And because God has created man with an immortal and eternal Soul,
and does not will the death, that is, the eternal death of a sinner; he offers
every man grace (who does not refuse it by preferring some other things) to lay
hold of those means which he has revealed in them, for the obtaining of his
eternal happiness.

25. But because a man cannot well bear all these Virtues in his mind, The sum
or cause of all Moral Virtues contained in the Second Table.
in every action which a man intends, if he would know whether it be against
the Law of Nature or not: Let him suppose himself in place of him with whom he
intends this action, and if he be not willing that this thing should be done to
him, let him not do it to another, for upon this short and easy rule,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them,
depends all the Law and the Prophets. Matthew. 7. 12.

CHAP. V. Moral Virtues are commanded by God in the holy Scripture.
1. THe Lord said, Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise
Religion or the worshipping of God in a Public set form, was instituted by God
under the old and new Testament.
shall ye bless the children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee,
and keep thee: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee; The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they
shall put my name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them, Numb. 6.
22, 23, 24. etc. and on this manner pray ye: our Father which art in Heaven
etc. Math. 6. 9. etc. And the Apostle, 2 Timothy exhorts that First of all prayers
and supplications (because there can be no Religion without it) be made for all
Men, especially for Kings, etc. And that the end of it is Religion, or the
uniting or binding Men to a public and formal worship of God, is plain by the
Apostle himself. Where he says, That men may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God. Romans 6. 15.

2. I council thee to keep the kings commandment, and that in regard of the
That men honor and obey their superiors.
oath of God. Eccles. 8. 2. Fear God, Honor the King, 1 Pet, 2, 17. The fear
of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, and who so provokes him sins against
his own soul. Prove. 20. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus 20. 12. He
that curses Father or Mother shall surely be put to death, Exodus 21. 15.
Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters, Ephesians. 6. 5. Let as many
servants as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of all honor.

3. Speak not evil of another, he that speaks evil of his brother, and That
men be not Talebearers.
judges his brother, speaks evil of the law, and judges the law: Ja. 4. 11.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good,
Ephesians. 4. 29. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly. Prove. 18. 8. When David asks the Lord the
question, Who shall abide in his Taberuacle. Psalm. 15. 1. He answers ver. 3.
He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

4, Oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor. Not
to defraud.
Zach. 7. 10.

5. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in the holy
Integrity.
hill? He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the
truth from his heart, Psalm. 15, 1, 2. He that walks righteously and speaks
uprightly etc. shall dwell on high. Jsa. 33. 15, 16.

6. That which is gone out of thy lips thou shall keep and perform. Deuteronomy. To
keep Promise.
23. 23.

7. Withhold not good from whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy
Gratitude.
hand to do it. Prove. 3. 27. And what can man give back again to God, for all
the benefits he has done for him. Psalm. 116. 11.

8. Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the To do
well to them.
nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 4. Husbands love your wives,
even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Ephesians. 5. 25.

9. Whosoever shall give you a cup of cold water to drink in my name, because
Mercy.
ye belong to Christ; verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. Mark
9. 41. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, St, Matthew. 5. 7.

10. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of
Revenge.
thy people. Levit. 29. 18.

11. I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother without cause, shall
Contumacy.
be in danger of judgment, and whosoever shall say unto his brother Racha,
shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever shall say unto his brother
thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire, Matthew. 5. 19, He that utters a
slander is a fool, Pro. 10. 18. A soft answer turns away wrath, Prove, 14. 21.

12. Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the Lord. Pro.
Pride.
16, 5. There be six things which the Lord does hate, yea, seven are an
abomination unto him, a proud look, etc. Pro. 6. 16, 17.

13. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Modesty.
Math. 5. 3. With the lowly there is wisdom. Pro. 11. 2. Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Levit. 19. 18, Whosoever will be great among you, let
him be your minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your
servant, even as the son of man came not to be ministered to, but to minister
and give his life a ransom for many. Matthew. 20. 26, 27, 28.

14. Of a truth I perceive that God is no accepter of persons. Act. 10. 34. Not
accepting of persons.
There is no iniquity with God nor acception of persons. Chro. 19.

15. Common ways, accession to Maritime places. St. August. lib. 4. quest.
What things ought to be common.
44. upon the book of Numb. affirms, The Children of Isarael had just cause of
war against the Edomites, Numb. 20. 18. because Edom would not let them pass
by the kings highway.

16. And they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he
Decision by Lot.
was numbered among the Apostles. Acts. 1. 26. The lot is cast into the lap, but
the whole disposing is of the Lord. Prove. 16. 33.

17. This is so evident, as wheresoever God did not interpose, in holy writ
Primogeniture.
the first borne male was always preferred. And from the authority of the
Apostle. 1. Tim. 2. 23. Adam was first formed, then Eve; wherefore Adam had the
dominion. and jura sanguinis nullo jure civili dirimi possint.

18. God pronounced Esau a despiser of his birthright. Genesis 25. 34. Because Not
endeavor to alien what they claim by divine Law.
he to save his life, sold his birthright; and Hebr. 12. 16. a profane person.

19. David had a just cause of war against Hanum for his evil entreating
Protection to Ambassadors.
of his Ambassadors. 1. Sam. c. 10.

20. Revenge is mine, I will repay it says the Lord. To. 12. 29. Revenge.


21. And thou shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise, and
perverteth No reward for judgment.
the words of the righteous. Exodus 23. 8.

22. At the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy
Witnesses.
of death be put to death. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. But if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be established. Matthew. 18. 16.

23. Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons, neither
Indifferent Judges.
take a gift. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.

24. It is easier for heaven and earth to pass, then one title of the law to
fail. Divine Laws are immutable, unless by God himself.
Luke 16. 17. Thy word is true from the beginning, and every of thy judgments
endures for ever. Ps. 119. 160. Yet God may alter his judgments when he
pleases, as Gods judgment pronounced against Nineveh, Yet within forty days
and Nineveh shall be destroyed. Jon. 3. 4. was changed by God, cap. 4. 11. It
was accounted Abraham's faith, St. James 2. 23. That he would have offered up
Isaac, though by the law of nature Abraham should have preserved his son; and
so God ceased the motion of the Sun and Moon upon Joshua's prayer, Jos. 10. 12.
And caused the same to go retrogade ten degrees upon the prayer of Hezekias and
Isaiah, 2 Kings 20. 11. It is true, that nothing less then that power which
made a Law, can alter it; the Laws therefore of God whether positive or
natural, have an eternal and immutable obligation upon all the men in the
world; but whatsoever power may make a Law, that power may alter it: Divine
Laws therefore whether positive or natural cannot have any obligation upon God,
but he may alter them when he pleases.

CHAP. VI. The Obligation of Divine and Humane Laws upon the Consciences and
Persons of Men.
1. COnscience comes of con and scio, to know together with reason, Conscience.
or some law. Conscientia est animi quaedam ratio and lex, qua de recte factis,
and secus admonemur: Conscience is a certain reason or law of the Mind, whereby
we are well or ill advised of our deeds. The laws therefore of Man may not only
be violated by doing contrary to them, but by consenting to them: As he which
does contrary to that he thinks, though the doing of the thing be just, yet
it is unjustly done by him; for, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23.

2. The affirmative precepts of God, they do semper obligare, yet they The
obligation of the laws of God.
do not oblige ad semper: As when he commands us to pray continually, it is not
to be expected a man should be always in the act of prayer; but so to live, as
he does nothing which may indispose him from praying. But Gods negative
precepts do not only always oblige, but oblige ad semper too; for there is no
time at all wherein it is lawful for a man to kill, to steal, to commit
adultery, etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. negative in all instances.

3. Ecclesiastical laws do oblige in Conscience. If thy brother shall neglect
Ecclesiastical laws oblige in conscience.
to hear thee, tell it to the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let
him be to thee as a heathen man or Publican, Mat. 18. 17. And the Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses chair; all therefore whatsoever they bid you, observe and
do; but do not after their works, for they say and do not, Mat. 23. 2, 3. If
then by the law of our Savior, the Jews were to observe and do whatsoever the
Scribes and Pharisees commanded them, because they sat in Moses seat; sure with
as much, or much more reason ought Christians to observe and do whatsoever the
Church, which our Savior Christ himself has planted, does command them.

4. My kingdom is not of this world, Joh. 18. 36. God sent not his Son In
conscience only.
into the world to judge the world, but that by him he might save the world,
Joh. 3. 17. And, O man, who has made me a Judge or divider amongst you? If then
our Saviors kingdom were not of this world; if God sent not his Son to judge
the world, and if our Savior were not a Judge among men; then cannot the
Church of Christ have any power from Christ in the kingdoms of the world, nor
to judge the world, nor to be a Judge or divider among men.

5. Ecclesiastical laws, according to the usage and custom of England, To what
things Ecclesiastical laws have reference.
relate to Blasphemy, Apostacy from Christianity, Heresies, Schisms, Holy
Orders, Admissions, Institution of Clerks, Celebration of Divine Service,
Rights of Matrimony, Divorces, general Bastardy, Subtraction, and Right of
Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Dilapidations, Excommunication, Reparation of
Churches, Probate of Testaments, Administrations and Accounts upon the same,
Simony, Incests, Fornications, Adulteries, Solicitation of Chastity, Pensions,
Procurations, Appeals in Ecclesiastical cases, Commutation of Penance, which
are determined by Ecclesiastical Judges.

6. So that there is a mixed Conusance in the Ecclesiastical Judicature, All
things determinable by Ecclesiastical Judges, are not merely spiritual.
viz. of things merely Spiritual, by which they are empowered to judge and take
conusance of, and that by no humane power, but only as they are empowered and
sent by our Savior, and are only his Ministers, viz. the taking conusance of
Blasphemy, Excommunication, Heresy, Holy Orders, Celebration of Divine
Service, etc. And this Ghostly power the Church and Ecclesiastical persons had,
before ever Temporal powers received the Gospel of Christ, or were converted to
Christianity. And also after it pleased God that Nations and Kingdoms were
converted to Christianity, and that Kings did become nursing fathers, and
Queens nursing mothers Isa. 49. 23.
to Gods Church; then did Kings cherish and defend Gods Church, and endued it
with many Privileges and Immunities, which ere while was persecuted by them,
or other Powers; but yet could not these Immunities or Privileges divest them
of that Ghostly power which our Savior by divine institution gave his Church.
It is true, no question but that originally not only all Bishoprics, and their
bounds, and the division of all Parishes, and the conusance the Church has of
Tithes, of Probate of Wills, of granting of Letters of Administration, and
Accounts upon the same, the right of Institution and Induction, and the
erection of all Ecclesiastical Courts, etc. were all originally of the Kings
foundation and donation; and that to him only, by all divine and humane laws,
belongs the care and preservation of all his Subjects, none excepted, in all
causes: And therefore not only all those things which relate to the extern
peace and quiet of the Church, although exercised by Ecclesiastical persons,
but all those privileges and immunities which the Church or Churchmen have in
a Church planted, which the Primitive Christians and Apostles had not, in the
persecution of the Church when planting, are originally Grants of Kings and
Supreme Powers, and so Temporal or Secular Laws; but in regard they
accidentally have reference to the Church, and are exercised by Ecclesiastical
persons, they are not improperly called the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And sure
either ignorance of this, or faction, has made men run into two contrary
extremes: one, That Kings have no right to their Crowns, but in ordine ad bonum
spirituale, and so cannot be Kings: or, That all power and jurisdiction in all
causes is from the King; and so cannot there be any such thing as Christian
faith, Religion, or any Ghostly power left by our Savior with his Church, to
continue to the end of the world; which every Christian man de fide ought to
believe, and submit to, before any Temporal Law or Power in the world.

Object. But beeause Ecclesiastical laws have not infallibility affixed to
them, if they command any thing repugnant to Divine laws, do they then oblige?

Answer. No, for God ought to be obeyed before Man; nay if any man in his
conscience believes that they do repugn Gods law (whereas they do not) in that
thing he ought not to submit to them. But let that man have a care that he have
not the spirit of pride in him, which he pretends to be Conscience; for an evil
Conscience shall never justify any man for his disobedience; nor shall ever
any man's hating of Idols, excuse his committing of Sacrilege. And let no man
hope that his fancying some errors in a Church, does give him a liberty of
putting himself out of the communion and society of the Church, and setting up
of himself in stead of it. No Christian man can hope for salvation, but as he
is a Member of Christ's Church; nor ought any Christian man to hope, that any
Heathen man can be saved in the ordinary way of salvation; For there is no name
under heaven by which a man can be saved, but only by the name of Jesus: And,
He that obeys not the Church, is to be accounted as a Heathen man, S. Mat. 18.
17.

7. Temporal or Secular laws oblige not only in Conscience, but also The
obligation of temporal Laws.
to temporal punishments. That they inflict temporal punishments, is evident
every where in the world, as well for spiritual, as temporal crimes. Thus did
Phineas turn away Gods wrath from the children of Israel, Numb. 25. 11. So did
Joshuah for Achans sacrilege, (that is, stealing or converting to common or
profane uses, what is dedicated and offered up to God) atone and pacify Gods
wrath by stoning Achan to death. Jos. 7. So did Solomon put Shimei to death by
David's will, because he cursed Gods Anointed and his Sovereign, which was a
spiritual crime. And God commands the temporal powers not to suffer a Witch to
live, and Witchcraft is a spiritual crime. And that temporal laws do oblige
as well in conscience, as inflict corporal pecumary mulcts, is evident Romans 13.
5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. And the subjection that the Apostle there speaks of, is to
temporal powers.

Object. But God has ordained temporal powers for the preservation of peace;
what if they command things which do not conduce to the preservation of peace
among men, ought they to be obeyed by them who are in subjection to them, or
not?

Answ. I answer, The question is absurd, for the temporal commands or laws
cannot hinder peace among men, but the disobedience to them is that which
hinders peace among men. Charity is the chiefect Theological Virtue, and
preferred before Faith, or Hope, Charity believes all things. 1 Cor. 13. And
how can I be a Charitable man, and not believe that supreme powers (assisted by
the best qualified men who make it their whole employment) see and understand
more, that such a law is for the good and peace of the governed, then I who am
not versed in those things, nor dounderstand from what reasons and grounds this
thing became a law? But who is he that disputes his obedience, and speaks evil
of dignities? No man that is a private man, that judges another, but condemns
himself. To. 2. 1. And speak not evil one of another; he that speaks evil of
his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the law, and judges the
law; but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law but a judge,
Jam, 4. 11.

8. Temporal Laws oblige the Conscience when they command nothing When Temporal
Laws oblige the Conscience.
contrary to the Law of God, nor his Church: when they command any thing
contrary to the Law of God, and impose a penalty for not observance, Men must
submit to the penalty, but obey God, For whosoever loses his life for my sake, and
the gospels, shall find it. St. Mar. 8. 35.

9. Temporal Laws oblige not in Conscience when they command Ecclesiastical
Laws oblige in Conscience before Temporal.
contrary to Ecclesiastical; for spiritual peace is to be preferred before
worldly, the good of the soul before that of the body; First seek the kingdom
of heaven and the righteousness thereof. St. Mat. 6, 33.

CHAP. VII. Of Promises, Contracts, etc.
1. A Promise is the giving of a Man's Faith unto another, that he will A
Promise.
do or give, or not do or give such a thing, fidem do me daturum vel
prestiturum, aut non; or dabo, or faciam, or non dabo or faciam, is a promise,
and to the performance of his promise is every Man obliged by the Law of Nature.

But when the Declaration of my will does not evade into Faith given, my Annot.
will being free continues free, after such declaration, as well as before. As
if I say, volo dare vel facere, I will or intend to do or give such a thing,
yet when I will I may will to do such a thing, and therefore if a Man make
twenty Wills, yet when be will, he may unwill them all. So if a Man upon things
appearing reasonable, does will to give or do any thing, yet if upon discourse
or reasoning it shall appear that the giving or doing such a thing will not
have such an event as he proposed, he may choose whether he will give or do
that thing: nay, if he be convinced that the doing of such an act, will not
have such an effect as he proposed, and shall notwithstanding do it, this is
the act of a wilful and not a prudent Man.

2. A Vow is when one plights his Faith to God, that he will give A Vow.
to God, or a Creature such a thing. All Promises and Vows are either made by
words in the future tense, as dabo, or faciam: or by words in the present
tense, as fidem do; but then the habendum, prestandum or faciendum, is always
in the futuretense, as fidem do me daturum vel facturum,

3. A Contract or Pact is the conditional act of two or more mutually A
Contract or Pact.
promising one another to give one another something in exchange, or when two
or more mutually promise one another, that if one will do or give such a thing,
that then the other will do or give such a thing, upon the doing or giving of
one part, the other is by Law obliged to perform his promise: or upon the
giving or receiving any part of what is contracted for, both parties are
obliged to perform their contract: As if I contract with another to give him
ten pounds for a horse, and give him six pence, or more or less (this being an
outward express sign of the contract) both parties are obliged, the one to pay
the residue of the money, and the other to deliver the horse: or upon the
payment, or delivery of the horse by one party, the Law obliges the other to
the performance of his promise. So if I promise another to give him five
shillings, etc. to do such a thing for my self or for another, if the other
accepts of any thing in acknowledgement that he will do that thing, both
parties are obliged by the Law; or upon the giving or doing of one party, the
Law obliges the other.

4. Absolute promises receive their obligation from a precedent, or Wherein a
bare promise and a Contract differ.
present consideration or condition; as if for a benefit received, or any
present consideration, I promise, etc. Contracts from a subsequent, as if I
promise to another, that if he will do for, or give me or another, such a
thing, that then I will do for him or give him such a thing; this being a
conditional promise or contract, upon the performance of the others
consideration or conditions, being subsequent to my promise, I am obliged by
Law to perform my promise made to him, and therefore ex nudo pacto non oritur
actio, for I am not obliged by any act of the other to perform any thing. All
contracts are made by words of the futuretense, as si aliquis dederit aut
fecerit, dabo aut faciam.

5. A contract differs from a mere obligation in this; a single obligation
Wherein a Contract differs from a single obligation.
is, when one or more for such a sum of Money, Lands, Houses, etc. had and
received from another, acknowledges him or themselves liable to such a penalty
to the other, if they perform not such a condition as is specified in the
obligation. A Contract or Pact is, when both or all parts are obliged to
perform.

All Promises, Vows, Contracts, and Obligations, ought to be only of Annotat.
things in possession, and that are men's so, as by an act of their wills they
may be another, as they are theirs: and therefore where any man has a mere
right to any thing (this being a shadow (another having the substance) or as
our Lawyers say, A chose in Action) he cannot by any Contract or otherwise
alien his right to another, but he can only release it to him in possession;
otherwise the right remains still in him, notwithstanding any Contract, etc.
that he would alien it. And I would gladly be satisfied how Mr. Hobbs in the
generation of his Civitas. can make mere rights to be tranferred and aliened
by the Pacts of men; and those natural rights too: This being granted, Mr.
Hobbs may by his Contract with another Man, make himself no Man, but a Horse or
an Ass, notwithstanding that by nature he is a Man.

6. Every Oath is either a calling God to witness, that what a Man testifies is
true or false; or else a speech added to a promise, whereby the What is an Oath.
promiser does renounce Gods mercy, if he performs not what he promises. But if
a Man Promises, Vows, Contracts, or swears to do any thing which is unlawful,
he ought not to perform it; for it is ill done to promise, etc. but worse to
do any thing unlawful.

7. A League is, when two or more do mutually give their faith to Foedus how
different from a Pact.
observe such conditions as are agreed between them, and herein it differs from
a Pact or Contract. A Contract or Pact is, when there is a precedent humane
Law, obliging the parties contracting to perform all the conditions specified
in the contract; A league is, where there is no humane Law obliging but only
the Law of Nature. And therefore all stipulations made by Princes one with
another, are confederacies or leagues, not Contracts or Pacts, because there is
no precedent humane Law, obliging them to perform their leagues.

8. A Gift is, what I do give to another, so as it is mine, do; and Donum.
though a gift be always in the present or preterperfect tense, yet the
Habendum may be in the future; as if I make a lease freehold, or create a State
in tail to one, and grant the reversion to another and his heirs, here though
the deed or gift be in the presenttense, yet the reversion or Habendum is in
the future. But no Man can give another any thing, but what depends upon his
will, and is his so, by some positive humane law, that by his giving he may so
make it another. For whatsoever is mine by the Law of Nature, cannot be
aliened or made another by my Will, nor by the Will of all the Men in the
world; for it is impossible, natural causes and relations should be dissolved
by Man's Will.

9. Feoffment is derived of foedum a Fee, quia est donatio foedi, and this A
Feoffment.
is the most ancient and necessary Conveyance which is used by the Common Law
(that is that Law which concerns tenures and estates, used only here in
England) and this deed or conveyance is either of absolute estates of corporeal
inheritances, absolutely passed to another by livery and seisin, made according
to the intent and purport of such Feoffment (he which conveys such estate of
inheritance being called the Feoffor, he to whom such inheritance is conveyed,
is called the Feoffee) or of absolute estates of inheritance which are not
corporeal, as Advousons, Commons, rents issuing out of lands which do lie in
grant, and do not pass by livery and seisin, but by delivery of the deed or
feoffment.

10. Do (or dedi, as our Lawyers say, which implies a warranty) to A,
Estates-Taile.
and his heirs for ever, makes a Feoffment: Do or Dedi, to A. and the heirs of
his body lawfully begotten, or to A. and the heirs male or female of his body
lawfully begotten; or to A. and the heirs male or female on the body of such a
Woman, or to a Woman and the Heirs of her body lawfully begotten, or heirs male
or female of her body lawfully begotten by such a man, creates a state tail;
and he which creates such an estate is called Donor, he to whom such estate is
granted, Donee.

11. Do or Dedi to such a man or woman for term of either of their Freehold.
lives, or to such a man or woman during the life of another, creates a
freehold.

12. Do or Dedi, or concedo or concessi, to such a man if he shall live so
Lease.
long, an estate for years, or to such a man and his heirs for such a term,
reserving, or not reserving such a rent or service, creates a lease; In both
the latter he who gives is called Lessor, he who takes, Lessee; and humane Laws
oblige as well to gifts as contracts. For natural Laws oblige in conscience
only, but men are obliged by mulcts and corporal punishments to contracts and
gifts. So that in most proper speaking, In every gift it is the Law which gives
the property to another by an act of the Donors will, and the Donor is the
instrument by which the Law conveys the property of any gift to another.

13. Humane Laws therefore obliging men to the performance of No Law or
Legislative Right arises from any Pact or Contract.
their Pacts, Contracts, and Gifts, it is impossible they should receive their
origination and first power from the Pacts and Contracts of Men: For where
there is no precedent humane Law obliging, men can neither make Pacts,
Contracts, or Gifts, nor have any thing to give and contract for And to suppose
that humane laws must precede and oblige men to they: Contracts and Pacts, and
that Contracts and Pacts must precede humane laws and give them their power, is
most manifestly absurd and contradictory.

THE CONTENTS of the Second Book.
Chap. I. HAving thus far treated of Rights and Laws, which are the prime and
efficient cause of all Humane, Christian, and Legal Society; We in the first
Chapter of this Book proceed to declare the Causes of all Society.

Chap. II. This Chap. shows the cause and end of Regal power.

Chap. III. Declares the attributes of it, and incidently the causes of
Magistrates power.

Chap. IV. Compares the three species of Government, viz. Monarchy, Democracy,
and Aristocracy; wherein the excellency of Monarchy appears above either of the
other, as well by reason and experience, as by the institution of God, and
consent of the world.

Chap. V. Shows the internal causes disposing men to sedition, as well from the
Party governing, as from the Subjects or party governed.

Chap. VI. Declares the causes and attributes of the Fathers power. And

Chap. VII. The causes and attributes of the Husbands power. In this Chap. is
demonstrated, that though the Fathers and Husbands power be from the Law of
Nature, yet may the exercise of them be restrained by the Supreme power of any
place, without any wrong or prejudice to them; which could not be done without
a violence upon the Law of Nature, if the Fathers and Husbands power were an
institution of God, and Supreme powers an institution of Man.

Chap. VIII. Contains the causes and attributes of Despotical, or the Masters
power; wherein is declared, that if it be impossible for any man to make
another his Master, then necessarily is it impossible any man should make
another his Prince or Sovereign.

Chap. IX. Treats of the causes and attributes of Ecclesiastical power.

DEFINITIONS.
1. SOciety, Aristotle in lib. 1. Pol. cap. 5. truly defines to be made up of
many What is Society.
divided parts or persons; so that there must necessarily be Unum quid quod
imparet, alterum quod pareat.

2. There are six sorts of Society. First, of Supreme powers and Subjects. How
manifold is the Society of Men.
Secondly, of Magistrates and those committed to their care or government; and
this is most properly called the Civitas, especially where the Magistrates and
those in their jurisdiction have a privileged or exempted authority peculiar
to them, and not the same with that which is not contained in their
jurisdiction. Such are the Societies of our Civitates, Boroughs and
Corporations in England, where the Magistrates jurisdiction is exempt and
privileged from the ordinary jurisdiction of Magistrates, where these
privileges and immunities are not. Thirdly, of Husband and Wife; and this
Society the Greeks called Gamaca. Fourthly, of Fathers and Children, which is
called Patrica. Fifthly, of Masters and Servants, which is called Despotica.
Besides these, there is a sixth Society, which is proper only to Christians,
viz. of Bishops, Curates, and Congregations committed to their charge.

3. Potestas est jus imperiale in aliqua persona, cujus praeceptum continet
What is power.
rationem obedientiae.

4. There are four kinds of Powers, viz. Divine, Humane or Natural, Legal How
many kinds of powers are there. What is Divine power.
and Ecclesiastical.

5. Divine power, or right of Command, is that power which is by highest right
solely and originally in God, and incommunicable to any Creature, from whence
all other Powers are mediately or immediately derived.

6. Humane power is a right of Command, created immediately by God, or What is
Humane power.
immediately derived from the Law of Nature.

7. Legal power is a right of Command, which is not immediately derived What is
Legal power.
from any positive or natural law of God, but from some Humane law.

8. Ecclesiastical power is an institution of our Savior, and left to continue
What is Ecclesiastical power. What is force or Tyranny.
in the Church of Christ, until his second coming to Judgment.

9. Force or Tyranny, is an usurpation of Command of any Creature, or company
of Creatures, not created by any law of God or Man. Nor is it the commanding of
one alone, which makes Tyranny: the very Grecians could account the Athenian
Thirty to be Tyrants; and so could the Romans the Decemviri and Triumviri. And
no question but it was malice and spite, which made the Grecians call all
Kings Tyrants; and both Romans and Grecians to make all Kings to be Ravenous
creatures. And all those Kings who abuse their power, are by men usually called
Tyrants, not justly. I find no such title given to Saul, Ahab, Ahaz,
Nabuchadnezzar, but Wicked and Idolatrous, often. Nor is a Father or Husband,
less a Father or Husband, if they abuse their powers, because they have a right
of Command.

10. Dominion or Government is the exercise of Command by any Creature What is
Dominion or Government.
or company of Creatures, who have a right, or no right of Command. So that
though all Government or Dominion be the exercise of Command, yet is not all
Government the exercise of Power; as the Dominion or Government of Thieves,
Robbers, and Pirates, etc. is the exercise of Command, who yet have no right of
Command.

11. All Power is Right, but all Right is not Power; as Jus Proprietatis How
Potestas differs from Jus.
and Usufructuarium, is Right, not Power.

Common Notion.
ALl Created Powers are from the Law of Nature, or Divine posisive Institution,
or Humane Laws.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Society, or the mutual offices of Commanding and Obeying.
1. IF all Commanding and Obeying had To command and to obey, is no humane
artifice or invention.
been an Humane artifice or invention, then was there a time when Men lived out
of Society, and in a parity or equal condition, without commanding and obeying.
But there is no such time recorded in Sacred or Profane history, wherein Men
lived so, or when, or who first invented or introduced these offices of
commanding and obeying: Besides, we see that Arts and Sciences are received in
one place, and not in another; and in the same place, and by the same men at
one time, and neglected at another: But at no time or place did ever men live
out of society, or commanding and obeying. All commanding therefore and obeying
is no Humane artifice or invention.

2. If then there was never any man born, but was born in subjection; To
command and to obey, is natural.
and all subjection being in the predicament of relation, which must suppose
something commanding; and if all things which are not artificial or invented,
are natural: Then is it as evident, as that Homo est animal rationale, that to
command, and to obey, is natural. And to this does the highest Philosopher give
testimony; Imperare and parere, non solum ex numero rerum Pol. lib. 1. cap.
necessariarum sunt, verumetiam ex utilium, and statim ab ortu primo nonnulla
inter se distiterint, alia ut parerent imperio, alia ut imperarent. And the
highest of Roman Orators and Lawyers, Cicero, who says, Sine imperio neque Lib.
1. de legibus.
domus ulla, neque civitas, nec hominum universum genus stare, nec ipse denique
mundus potest. Besides, we see in all seditious men and assertors of Liberty,
who will not be subject to rightful Governors, that none of them could ever yet
attain to make men any where in a parity of condition; but by a propense
natural disposition, when they have cast off the obedience due to others, they
fall to command and obey among themselves: But this not having any foundation
but from themselves, (Men being naturally ambitious of commanding, and
impatient of subjection) it is Gods judgment upon them, that they rarely
continue long in peace, but are obnoxious to continual seditions and confusions.

3. All powers being from God, and Gods ordinance mediately or immediately, To
command and to obey, is Gods ordinance, and from the law of nature.
Romans 13. and Power being in relation, must refer to something which is subject
to it. Power therefore and Subjection are the ordinance of God: But by the
antecedent proposition, the offices of commanding and obeying, viz. of Power
and Subjection, are natural. To command therefore, and to obey, is Gods natural
ordinance, or from the Law of Nature.

If then to command and obey, be no humane artifice or invention, but natural
Annot.
and Gods ordinance, then is it most senseless for men to beg it for a
principle, That all men are by nature in a parity and free condition, and that
the will of man brought in the Powers and obedience due to them, in use now in
the world, against Gods ordinance, and that freedom wherein by nature
originally all men were.

4. If to command and obey, as Supreme powers and Subjects, had been To command
and obey, as Supreme powers and Subjects, is no humane artifice or invention.
an humane artifice or invention, then was there a time when men lived out of
the offices of commanding and obeying, as Supreme powers and Subjects, and were
introduced by men: But there was never any such time recorded in sacred or
profane history, or that they were invented or introduced by men: To command
therefore and obey, as Supreme powers and Subjects, is no humane artifice or
invention.

It is the silliest thing in the world for men to dream of a Golden age, in
which Annot.
all things were alike and common to all men, and that men lived promiscuously
in a parity or equal condition; and never tell when that time was, or who lived
therein: And to say that th^^ Dominion and Subjection now in use, Man's will
brought in; and yet never t^^ who, any where in the world, did ever introduce
it. And sure if this commanding and obeying were brought in by the wills of
men, against that natural right and law wherein God has made man, it could not
possibly continue at all times and in all places of the world, but that
somewhere men would return to their own natural liberty.

5. To command and to obey, as Supreme powers and Subjects, is natural.
If all things be either artificial or natural, and the offices of commanding
and obeying, as Supreme powers and Subjects, be not artificial; then these
offices of commanding and obeying, as Supreme powers and Subjects, are natural.

6. To command and obey, as Supreme powers and Subjects, is Gods ordinance, and
due from the law of nature.
That Supreme power is Gods ordinance, and that Subjects must needs be
therefore subject to it, the Apostle says expressly Romans 13. But by the
precedent proposition they are natural; They are therefore Gods natural
ordinance, or due from the Law of Nature.

7. To command and obey, as Husband and Wife, is natu-ral.
This Aristotle in chap. 5. lib. 1. Pol. proves. Besides, these offices not
being topical, but universal, no where created by any humane Law, and due as
well where Gods revealed ordinance in the Scriptures is not received, as where
it is, they are natural, or due by the law of Nature. To command and obey as
Parents and Children, is from the Law of Nature.


8. The mutual offices of commanding and obeying, as Parents and Children, not
being from any Humane law, but being due in all places, as well where Gods
revelation of himself is received, as where not, are natural, or due from the
law of Nature.

9. God having created Man not only different from other creatures of How many
ways the offices of commanding and obeying are caused from the Law of Nature.
this orb, as intellectual and rational, but also as sociable, viz. living in
conversation and subordination, for extra societatem vivere neminem; He has
given by the law of Nature to some the power or right of commanding, and others
he has subjected to such powers. But he has created these powers diverse ways,
viz. either upon supposition of some mutual act of the parties commanding and
obeying; or upon supposition of some act of the parties commanding; or without
supposition of any act of either the parties commanding or obeying.

First, I say, the Law of Nature creates these offices of commanding and
obeying, upon supposition of some act of the parties commanding and obeying. As
Matrimony is the mutual act of the Husband and Wife: I A. B. take thee D. E. to
be my wedded wife; and I D. E. take thee A. B. to be my wedded Husband: by this
act of the Husband and Wife, God by the Law of Nature gives the Husband a power
or right of command over the Wife, and subjects the Wife to the Husband. Or,

Secondly, upon supposition of some act of the parties commanding: As the
Parents power arising from generation, the Parents must be supposed to
generate, before they can have a power or right of command. Or,

Thirdly, upon supposition of no act either of the parties commanding or
obeying, as in all rightful Hereditary Monarchies, these offices are as much
due from the Law of Nature, before any act of the parties commanding and
obeying, as after.

10. Gods Ordinance to Man being either that Law or Ordinance, All commanding
and obeying which God has ordained, is not from the Law of Nature.
which he has ordinarily engraven in the hearts of Men; or his gracious
goodness extraordinarily revealed in the Scriptures, and Gods revelation of
himself by Moses and Prophets, by our Savior, the Apostles and Evangelists,
was extraordinarily and supernaturally given to them by Gods especial grace;
nor could Men by any natural means attain to the belief of it. All offices
therefore of power and subjection to them which are created by Gods will so
revealed, are not created by the Law of nature.

11. All offices which are created by Divine Law, whether by the Law All
offices of commanding and obeying, are not Gods ordinance immediately.
of Nature, or by divine positive institution, being from higher then humane
causes, are indelible, and cannot be aliened, transferred, or communicated by
any humane act, for ejus est nolle, cujus est velle; and therefore cannot the
power and obedience of Parents and Children, of Husband and Wife, of King and
Subjects, be aliened, dissolved, communicated, or transferred; but the offices
of Masters and Servants, of Magistrates and those subject to them, are
alienable, communicable, and transferrable, and sometime are, and sometime are
not; they are not therefore from any immediate ordinance of God either positive
or natural. But the offices of commanding and obeying as Masters and Servants,
and Magistrates and those subject to them, are but temporary, and determinable
by the laws of him that made them; therefore not Gods ordinance.

12. Humane laws create Magistrates power two ways: Immediately, How many ways
power and subjection happens by humane laws to Magistrates and those subject to
them.
as when Supreme powers (which are the fountain from whence all Temporal laws
are derived) constitute any Magistrate, giving him jurisdiction over the
inhabitants of any place; or when the Laws or Higher powers enable such men to
nominate their Magistrate, there the Nominators are the instruments by which
the Law does transfer this Magisterial power.

13. The mutual offices of power and subjection between Masters and How many
ways humane laws create the power and subjection of Masters and Servants.
Servants, happen two ways; either created by the contract or pact of the
Master and Servant, (and we have before showed that all pacts and contracts
receive their obligation from Humane laws) as the means by which Humane laws do
create these offices; or else without any pact or contract of the parties
commanding and obeying, as in the cases of Slavery where prisoners are taken in
war, or men condemned thereunto for some offense; or of Apprentiship, where
children are bound for such a term, by the Laws of their Country, or Parents.
And I do grant Mr. Hobbs, Grotius and White, that this power and subjection,
Humana voluntas introduxit; but not the parties obeying, as they most senslesly
feign, but the Supreme powers or the parties commanding: And where they are not
so created, all men are originally free.

I do much wonder at those men, who make all Supreme or Regal power to have
Annot.
its origination from the consent and aggregation of many families: For they
not only confound the Masters power with the Fathers, which in the nature and
cause we have already showed, and shall more fully hereafter in their proper
Chapters show; but also make the Masters power to be from the Law of God, and
Regal power to be a Humane institution: whereas the contrary is true in both.
And what it is should move men to imagine, that after Adam's and Noah's
posterity dilated themselves into many families, that they should give Adam and
Noah more power then God gave them. I am sure no such thing, or the least
probability thereof appears in Scripture; or that after Adam's and Noah's
deaths, their Posterities became free and independent from all Government;
which was (no body can tell when) brought in by the Pacts of Men, or by consent
and submission of Families to it.

14. That power or right of command which God jure divino has as All power and
subjection, from what causes.
solely and absolutely over all his creatures, as the Creator, first and
efficient Cause of them; and therefore by highest right all obedience is
chiefly due to them before any creature in all things: Or else power and
subjection are caused from the Laws of Nature, or from the Law of God revealed
in the Scriptures, or from Humane positive Laws. All Society which is not
contained in these causes, is Tyranny in the party commanding; nor is any
obligation in Conscience to such Commands, from the party commanded.

Having thus far treated of the Causes of Power and Subjection conjunctly, we
shall hereafter in their several Chapters treat of them severally, and more at
large. And we insist more largely hereon, in regard these Powers and
Subjections are either so confounded in their Causes by other men, or such wild
things begged for Principles, that (so far as I understand) no ingenuous man
should grant.

CHAP. II. Of Regal and Magistrates power.
1. THere is no question but one of Man's chiefest happinesses in this
Introduction.
life, consists in the contemplation of God in his works; to contemplate the
Heavens and the Earth, the workmanship of his hands, and the admirable order
and motion of them all, being by him so made and created. Nor is God less seen
in the generation and birth of Man and other creatures, then in the creation of
the Universe. And as admirable is the preservation of every Man, as his
generation: For, abstracting from the internal cause,

Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus Virg. Aen. 6. prop. fin.

Men's agitat molem. --
How God does renew, and preserve every Man, and every part of Man, by a
perpetual motion, viz. the Systole and Diastole of the Blood. If a Man
considers his outward preservation, not only from the violence of other
creatures who are of much more force then himself, but also from the force and
violence of his own kind; (for, were he not restrained, Homo homini lupus: And
what are the People in general, but a sudden, rash, and furious Beast, carried
hither and thither upon every wild fancy, raging to have this thing done, and
presently lamenting because it is done?) He must needs As the Athenians did in
their sentence on Socrates and the Captains at the Fight at Arginusae.
confess there is no power under heaven which can restrain the raging of the
sea, and the madness of the people. The Psalmist therefore, Psalm. 77. when he
calls to mind the works of God, and his wonders of old; Thou thundrest from
heaven, thou shakest the earth, thou dividest the sea; and at last as the
greatest wonder of all, he says, Thou leadest thy people like sheep, by the
hands of Moses and Aaron. It is not therefore from any pacts and inventions of
Man, that he may hope for any security; but by submitting himself to what God
has ordained for his preservation.

2. Upon a survey taken in Scripture, how often Christi Domini are Regal power
cannot be created by the People.
used, they are found to be thirty three; two of which are spoken of the
Patriarchs, one of our Savior, and all the rest of Kings only. Once of our
Savior, Luke 2. 26. twice of the Patriarchs, Psalm. 105. 15. and 1 Chro. 16.
22. all the rest to Kings only and expressly. And though others were anointed,
yet none but our Savior, Patriarchs and Kings were the Lords anointed. Nor is
Gods anointed peculiar to them, (not the material anointing, and the receiving
and believing Gods revelation of him-self in the Scriptures, is essential to
the making of Gods anointed here; but all rightful Kings are so, whether they
be materially anointed, or believe Gods revelation of himself in the
Scriptures, or not: For not only Cyrus was not Isa. 45. 1.
materially anointed, and an unbeliever, yet Gods anointed; but Nabuchadnezzar
also, a cruel persecutor and destroyer of Gods people:) But Lam. 4. 20.
God calls them Mortal Gods too, Psalm. 82. 6. And is it not strange that our
Savior should say, No power can be but from above, data desuper; and that Joh.
19. 11.
Men should be so impudent as to affirm, that there is no power unless data de
subter? and that against all sense and reason, as well as faith: For it is
impossible that any Power should be superior to the cause of its being; or that
any thing should give that to another, which it self has not. How then can an
imaginary rout of Men give a power of life and death, and of creating property
(which not any of them, nor all of them together have) to another?

3. Humane Laws being the accidents, or effects of Regal Power, they Regal
power not made by Humane laws.
cannot be superior to give or create a being to the cause; Regal Power
therefore cannot be made or created by Humane Laws.

4. That in Regality, as well as in Subjects estates, jus proprietatis and The
possession or exercise of Regality, does not create Regal power.
possessionis have been divided, and Regal power usurped, and exercised by
them, who had no right thereunto, is not only testified by infinite Authorities
out of profane History, but also many times in Sacred Writ, as in the cases of
Absalom, Adonijah, Athaliah, etc. It is true indeed, that there is no visible
power under Heaven, but only Men's Consciences that can judge between an Usurper
and a rightful Prince; Yet ought men principally to have a care how they offend
herein; for God no where denounces a more dreadful sentence, nor showed a more
terrible judgment then upon such Romans 13.
Men, Number. 16. And if in Regality possession alone did create a just title,
then were summa injuria, summa justitia; it being (no question) the highest
injury to invade the highest authority or dominion of another.

5. If possession conjoined with the submission and acknowledgement Possession,
with the Subjects acknowledgment and submission, does not create Regal power.
of the Subjects, did create regal power or right of command which Kings have
over their Subjects, then were the dominion of Thieves and Pirates where others
submit to them, just, and Jeroboams title good to the kingdom of the Ten
Tribes; nor the Children of Israel Rebels, but true Subjects after they had
quietly submitted themselves to Jeroboam. But this is false, for God does
denounce them Rebels to the house of David unto this day, 1 Kings 12. 19. And
Jeroboam himself a Rebel, after he was quietly 1 King. 12. 19.
possessed, and acknowledged by the Ten Tribes, 2 Chronicles. 13. 6.

It is a very remarkable thing, that the Subjects of this Nation (although
Annot.
pretending to be Christians) have against all rules of Christian Faith, placed
all power in Government to be from the people, and their obligation to it, to
be from their own submission to it; and have by their often forswearing
themselves to this and that Government, not only habituated themselves into a
belief that there is no such thing as right or power in Government, but only
possession; but also taken away all Religion and Obligation of an Oath in
things lawful and indifferent. God no doubt permitting it, that they who would
not stand and be protected by his ordinance and institution, should fall into
all infidelity and perjury, and never be true to any thing they swear to, and
set up instead of it.

6. If the Law of God or Nature did create Regal Power by the acknowledgement
The Law of God or Nature does not create Regal power by the submission, or any
act of the Subject.
or submission of Men thereunto, or that Subjects were the essential
instruments by which Regal Power was originally created, and yet is continued
in the world; then were not Men only free from Regal or Higher Powers before
they did submit thereunto, but also free to make whom they would their Prince;
and so by consequence there can be no such thing as Hereditary Monarchy in the
world, which for many Hundred, nay Thousand years (where God was not pleased to
reign himself immediately over his peculiar people) was in the old time the
only Government in the world. For above 3000 years after the Creation, was
neither Aristocracy, Democracy, or Elective Monarchy ever heard of in the
world; and yet Hereditary Monarchy is in above 19 of 20 parts in the world the
only Government. Nor would any Government that ever was, or is in the world,
grant this liberty to any one born in their dominion; but upon resisting it, or
renouncing it, whether he ever submitted to it or not, proceed against him not
as an Enemy, but as a Rebel and Traitor. To suppose therefore that Subjects
acknowledgment and submission is previous the essential means by which God does
create Regal or Higher Powers, is upon the matter to give the Lie to all the
Powers and Governments that are, or ever were in the world.

7. None of these things therefore, but some higher cause must create Regal
power; and that Regal Power is the Ordinance of God, the Apostle Regal Power is
the Ordinance of God, and created by the Law of Nature.
says expressly, where he says, Romans 13, that he which resists the Higher or
Regal power, resists the Ordinance of God: And that this is not Gods
Ordinance only to them, who receive and believe his revelation of himself in
the Scriptures, is evident by his ordaining of Hazael, Cyrus, Nabuchadnezer,
etc. and to put all out of question, the Apostle here calls Higher or Regal
Power Gods Ordinance, and at that time whenas there was no King in the world
which did receive the Scriptures for the revealed word of God. Besides, Kings
reign by God, etc. Pro. 8. 5. and that Kings reign by God, not only where he is
believed as having extraordinarily revealed himself in the Scriptures; Job in
the state of nature long before the Job. 3. 6, 7.
Moral Law was given by Moses, says, Reges in solio collocat in aeternum,
Regal power therefore is Gods Ordinance, and from the Law of Nature.

8. Regal power being Gods Ordinance, and created by the Law of Adam had
Dominion over all Creatures, and not as Father, Husband, or Master of a Family.
Nature, there was never any time wherein Men were borne out of subjection to
it (not but that the Laws of Nature are often violated by Men) and that God
created Adam an universal Monarch or King over all his other Creatures, is
clearly said, Genesis 1. 27, 28. And God created man in his own image, in the
image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed
them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the
fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth. And
that this supreme power was given to Adam, not as Father, Husband, or Master of
a Family, is manifest; for he was neither Father, Husband, nor Master of a
Family; there being no Man or Woman in the world at that time.

9. The Scripture does not only command Wives to be subject Adam had Dominion
over Eve, and not as Husband only.
to their Husbands, but the Apostle gives reasons wherefore, viz. That the man
is not of the woman, but the woman of the man. Neither was the man created for
the woman, but the woman for the man. 1. Cor. 11, 8, 9. Nor does he prove this
subjection to be only due from the end of the woman's creation, and her being a
part of Man; but from Man's being first created, and to whom God had first given
Dominion over all Creatures before the Woman was made. 1 Timothy 2. 13.

10. Although God gave to Adam only of Dominion over all Creatures, yet was it
not intended that he alone should so enjoy that his Dominion, Adam had Dominion
over his Children, and not as Father only.
that others of his own kind should be wholly deprived of the use and benefit
of them, without which they could not possibly subsist. When therefore that
Cain and Abel were born, although the Dominion of all the Creatures continued
still in Adam, yet had Cain and Abel property in the Fruit of the Ground, and
of Sheep. But this property could not be given Genesis 4. 3. 4.
to them by Adam as Father; for the Fathers power arising from generation, and
the person being only generated, the Fathers power extends no further. The
property therefore that Cain and Abel had in the Fruits of the Ground, and
Cattle, was given them by Adam as King or Monarch.

11. Not only the Scriptures, and all Writers, many times express different The
state of Man before the flood, and after Adams death, was not Anarchy, but in
Society, and under Monarchy Hereditary. Genesis 23. 6.
things equivocally by one word; but also the same thing equivocally in
different words: As a Chief Governor is often called not only King, but Prince,
Duke, Sultan, Pharaoh, Ptolomy, Cham, etc. Paterfamilias signifies the Master
of a Family, whether he has a son or daughter in it, or not. Our Savior, as
the highest attribute of power, begins the Lords prayer with Our Father. So the
Scriptures by Patriarch, Prince, and King, understand the same thing. The
Patriarch Abraham is called a Prince of God, or a mighty Prince. A Prince sure
he was, that could give battle and overthrow four Kings at once, Genesis 26. 16.
And the King and Prince David is called by S. Peter the Patriarch David, Act.
2. 29. And Patriarchs as well as Kings are called Christi Domini. And that the
Patriarchs mentioned in Genesis 5. were not only men endued with the ordinary
power of Parents, but Princes in their generations, is manifest; otherwise it
had been a vain thing for the Scripture to have mentioned a Genealogy of the
Patriarchs from Seth to Noah, if every Father had had the same power with them.
Besides, Cain, who was elder then Seth, had a wife and children, yet was none
of Genesis 4. 17.
the Patriarchs; and the reason was, because God for the murder of his Genesis 5.
12.
brother Abel made him a vagabond and fugitive upon the earth. And as this
Patriarchal or Regal power was with the Patriarchs before the Flood, so was it
hereditary, where God did not interpose: For from Seth to Noah, only the
Firstborn had it, or are mentioned for Patriarchs in Scripture. God, no doubt,
by this great example teaching men, that where he does not interpose, this
Patriarchal or Regal power is hereditary, and descends only to the Eldest Son,
and Heir General.

12. If, as Grotius affirms, the state of Man had been Jure naturali in The
state of Man immediately after the flood, was not Anarchy, but Society, by the
testimony of Scripture.
a parity or promiscuous condition immediately after the Flood, and that this
Jus natural be immutable by God himself; and that this Dominion which is now
in use, the will of Man brought in, and that not the will of the party
commanding, but in subjection: It had been a very vain curse in Noah (or rather
of God by Noah) to have cursed Chanaan, and made him a servant of servants to
his brethren; or that God should bless both Sem and Japheth, and make Chanaan a
servant to them both. And let a man see the generations of Sem, Ham and
Japheth, where the Grandchildren of Japheth by Javan divided the Isles of the
Gentiles, not in a promiscuous condition, but Genesis 10. 5.
after their tongue, kindred, and in their nation. And so Nimrod the Grandchild
of Ham by Chus, became a mighty Hunter in the earth, etc. And the beginning of
his Kingdom was Babel, Erech, Acad, and Calneth in the land of Sinar. (There is
great division among Writers about Nimrod, whether he were the same with Belus
and Ninus, or not.) And as the posterity of Japheth did not inhabit the earth
in a parity and equal condition, so did not the posterity of Ham, but in their
kindreds, tongues, countries and nations. Verse 20.
And so did the posterity of Sem, v. 31. And Genesis 11. gives the genealogy of
Sem to Abram, which came to pass in less then three hundred years after the
Flood. And in Abraham's time, Pharaoh ruled in Egypt. cap. 12. and Amraphel was
King of Sinar, Arioch King of Elazar, Chodorlaomer King of Elam, and Thidal
King of the Nations, and Bera King of Sodom, Birsa Genesis 14. 1, 2, 3.
King of Gomorrha, Sinab King of Adma, Semeber King of Seboiim, and the King of
Bela.

There is no reason that I understand, why men should affirm Nimrod to be Annot.
the first Monarch after the Flood, from Genesis 10. 8. He began to be a mighty
one upon the earth; and that the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech,
Accad and Calneth. Which proves it no more, then if a man should say, That
David was a mighty one upon the earth, and the beginning of his kingdom was
Judah and Jerusalem; that therefore there was never any King before him.

13. We begin with Diodorus Siculus, who after that in the first Part The state
of Man most anciently, was never Anarchy, but Monarchy, by the authority of the
most ancient of Vulgar Histories.
of his first Book of the Antiquity of things, having discoursed of the
Creation of the World and Man, and given a conjectural opinion of the state of
Man before they had language, houses, or art enough to clothe themselves; and
having in the next Chap. discoursed of the fabulous Egyptian Gods; and in the
3. of the site of Egypt, and wonders of Nile; and in the 4. of the causes of
the inundation of it; in the first Chap. of the second Part he descends to his
History, and gives a narrative of the original Government of the Egyptians
under the Gods, Heroes, and Elective Kings for 18000. years together; and after
the Gods reigned Menas, and that his progeny in fifty two Kings, reigned 1400.
years, and did nothing memorable: And then Busiris and eight of his posterity
reigned, the last of which was called also Busiris, who built the great City
called of the Egyptians The City of the Sun, and of the Grecians, Thebes; not
only the most stately in Buildings, and adorned with all the Rarities of
Nature, of all the Cities of Egypt, but of the whole world. After him was
Osymandrus, and the eighth of his progeny from him, Uchoreus, who built the
City Memphis: And the twelfth of his offspring after him was Myris; and
Sesostres the seventh of his lineage was King, etc. In the first Chap. of the
second Book he treats of Ninus as the first King of the Assyrians, and of
Aricus King of the Arabians, contemporary with him; and of Barzanes King of the
Armenians, and of Farnus King of the Medians; and in Chap. 2. of Zoroaster King
of the Bactrians, etc.

In the 3. Book, treating of the Ethiopians beyond Lybia, he speaks of the
strange manner of the death of the Ethiopian Kings, until that Ergamenis King
of the Ethiopians, in the time of Ptolomy the Second, addicted to Philosophy
and the Greek learning, first despised that manner of dying, which was this:
The Priests which offered sacrifice in Meroe (and these were of greatest
authority) when it seemed good to them, would tell the King that he must die,
for so the Oracle of the Gods commanded, and that it was not meet that the will
of the Gods should be contemned for the will of a mortal man; and they add
other reasons, by which from an old observed custom they persuade the King to a
voluntary death; and all the ancient Kings obeyed the Priests of their own
accord, not compelled by arms or force, but overcome by superstition. In lib.
3. cap. 4. he makes four kinds of Libyans to inhabit the midland coasts about
Cyrene and Cirtes; whereof they who dwell to the South, are called Nasamones;
others sited at the West, Anochitae; others are called Marmaridae, which
inhabit between Egypt and Cyrene, and part of the Seacoast; the fourth kind
excelling in multitude of men, are called Maiae. The two latter obey Kings; the
third are under no Kings, but always intent upon robbery, they know no justice;
yet a little after he says, they every year swore the people subject to them,
to obey their Prince. He speaks not of the Government of the fourth, but of the
Amazons which in old time governed Libya.

Let us see the most ancient Government of Nations out of other From Egialus
came the Egialian Region, which was after called Apia.
Authors, Scaliger out of Africanus and Eusebius, in the year of the Julian
period 2625. which was in the year of the world 1750. makes Egialus King of
the Sicyonians (not an hundred years after the Flood) who reigned 52 years,
after him Europs 45 years, after him Telchin 20 years, after him Apis 25 years,
after him Thelxion 52 years, after him Aegyrus 34 years, after him Thurimachus
45 years, etc.

Aventinus makes Tuisco the son of Noah, who sent by his Father 131 years after
the flood, came into Europe with 20 Captains; and reigned as King of the
Germans 176 years; and that Ingaevon, Germanice Ingaab, as some say, others
Inwohner the brother of Mannus, reigned after him 45 years. After him Istaevon
the son of Ingaevon, (whose wife Freia, the Venus of the Germans, gave the name
Frey tag or Friday) reigned 50 years. After him succeeded Hermion or Horman,
the son of Istaevon, who reigned 63 years. To him succeeded Marsus the son of
Hermion, who reigned 46 years, etc.

Inachus in the year of the world 2094. was King of the Argives, who reigned 50
years. Phorone his son succeeded in his stead, who reigned 60 years. Apis the
grandchild of Phorone succeeded, and reigned 35 years. Argus, Apis his son
succeeded his father, and reigned 70 years. Criasus his son succeeded him, and
reigned 54 years, etc. Nay, the very Athenians, beginning at Cecrops, for 867
years were governed by hereditary Monarchs, before there were any footsteps of
the Democracy or Archon. Nor can any man show (unless where God was pleased
peculiarly to reign; or in the Lacedemonian Duarchy, who were governed by two
Kings descended from Eurysthenes and his brother Proclis, who ruled in
Lacedemon from about the year of the world 2848. until both lines became
extinct almost together, about the year of the world 3730.) for above 3000
years after the Creation any other Government but Monarchy Hereditary, nor any
of them made from any Pacts or Contracts of Men.

What therefore men feign to be originally in the People, was truly in Kings;
and Justin says truly, Principio Rerum, Gentium, Nationumque, imperium penes
Reges erat. It was then a Golden Age, (not when Men lived in a promiscuous Herd
or Rout, as these Men, and Poets feign; but) when Men content with their
Government of Kings, enjoyed peace and plenty in security: And it is Men's
wrangling about they know not what, and not content with Regal Government, that
has made such an Iron Age in the world. If a man looks into Persia, India,
Ethiopia, and other parts of the world, where Subjects content with those
Governors which God has given them, continue in obedience thereunto, he shall
find them not only live securely, but abound in all plenty and riches, and yet
may be said to enjoy a Golden Age; and contract the Iron Age to those wrangling
Europeans, who not content with Gods Ordinance, make to themselves an Iron Age,
and without end miserable, by being always obnoxious to Confusions and Civil
wars.

It is neither an Article of Faith, nor can there be one instance given

Ob. But God and Nature never made the same thing of different species, viz.
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy? I answer that God has made Man upright,
but he has sought out many inventions: Therefore let Aristocracies, and
Democracies, answer for themselves; anciently there was no Government in the
world but Monarchy, nor does God ever command obedience to others; and the very
Athenians for above 800 years could find a Government under Kings hereditarily,
before any footsteps of Aristocracy or Democracy was ever heard of in the
world; nor did they ever transgress the bounds of Europe, unless in the
Carthaginian State, and when the Magi usurped in Persia. It was Pride in the
Romans and Grecians, who not only esteemed all the world barbarous besides
themselves; and all Kings to be of the kind of ravenous beasts, but were the
first inventers of these Aristocracies, and Democracies, and made all Power in
Government to be Artificial and Political (not only in the exercise which is
true, but also) in the cause. This Jus Politicum was of a more large extent
with the Grecians, then the Jus Civil was with the Romans: For the Grecians
esteemed that to be Jus Politicum, which is common to all Men, conjoined with
any society; the Romans called that Jus Civil, which is proper to any City. So
to buy and sell, was by the Grecians called Politic; the Romans called not
those things Civil unless to sell by such a measure and at such a time; the
Romans called the Cloaks and other habits of vestments, used by themselves and
other people, civil. But let any Man judge whether these Men, Mr. Hobbs, White,
and Grotius, being Christians, and two of them very learned Men, do reasonably,
not only to reject all precepts and examples of Sacred writ, and all
Testimonies of the consent of the present World, and Testimonies of all most
ancient Histories, from the examples of those most unreasonable Men; besides,
the case between them, is as unlike as can be: For though they agree that this
Jus Politicum, or Civil, is so as well in the cause, as exercise, and all
power to be originally with the people; yet by the people did neither Romans
nor Grecians, understand a company of Men in a rout or promiscuous parity, but
they who were Civitate donati: nor did ever the People of Athens or Rome
acquire their Dominion from the people subject to them, by do or dedi, and not
dabo or faciam, as these men feign all power to be originally deduced, but by
rapine and extorting it from their rightful Kings in whom it undubitably was.

If it be questioned, how originally this power came into the world if not Rem
teneo, modum nescio; for the manner of it, how it came originally, I am not
bound to give an account, where the Scriptures and most ancient Historians do
not confirm it; it is enough, that I having proved it to be natural and Gods
Ordinance, it was never otherwise, especially having the practice of the
present world, and the Records of all profane and sacred History.

14. It is true indeed, that the Humane Laws, and the exercise of Regal Not
only Kings, but Kingdoms have their being from God and by the Law of Natore.
Power, is Politic, Voluntary, and Artificial; but that these Laws are
received and exercised in those places where they ought to be, which makes
Kingdoms, is expressly said by the Prophet Dan. cap. 4. in three places, The
most Highest rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives it to whom it pleases
him, ver. 7. And it was Nebuchad-nezzars punishment for his pride, that he
should have his dwelling with the beasts of the field, until he knew that the
most Highest rules in the kingdoms of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will, ver. 25, and 32. So that it is evident, not only Kings, but Kingdoms, not
only their (...), but their (...), their Right, but also Government, is from
God immediately; and that this is a Declaration of the Law of Nature, not only
long before God, by the Prophet Daniel speaks this, were Kingdoms upon the
earth; but also no Kingdom, or King, which at the time that this was spoken,
that did receive or believe Gods Revelation of himself in the Scriptures.
Kingdoms therefore, or the exercise of Regal Power, is Gods Ordinance as well
where the Scriptures are received, as not, and due by the Law of Nature; and by
consequence, the obstinate resistance of Kings in their Government, by their
subjects is a violence upon the Law of Nature.

15. Sir Francis Bacon in his life of Henry 7. relates that Perkin Warbeck How
many ways Regality comes to pass.
by the often affirming himself to be Richard Duke of York, second son of Ed.
4. did at last believe himself to be so indeed. The violent and frequent
usurpations of usurpers in this Island, and some other Northern and European
Region, has invested such a habit in Men, that (renouncing reason, as well as
all faith and belief of God in the Scriptures) they with much confidence
affirm, nothing but possession, or possession and submission of Subjects, to be
requisite with Kings. Both which do no more make a rightful King then a Man's
Deseisin, Abetting, or Intruding into the signiory of another, and the Tenants
attorning to him, does make him rightful Lord of the Manor. But neither humane
Laws, nor Man, nor any thing under Heaven, can endue any Creature with a power
over another life and fortune, who is of the same kind with himself, and
without which there can be no supreme power, and by consequence, no society
among Men. There are but four ways by which Regality can happen.

First, When it is immediately and expressly given by God, as it was to Saul,
David, Solomon, Hazael, Cyrus, etc.

Or Secondly, derived from him, who had Regality truly vested in him; but this
derivation must not be from the Election, Adoption, or the will of him who was
invested with the Regal Power, which at highest cannot amount higher then a
humane Law, which by the 3 para. of this chap. cannot create Regal Power. It
must therefore be derived by Primegeniture, which is derived from a higher
cause then humane Laws, for jura sanguinis nullo jure civili dirimi possint.

Or Thirdly by Lot, which we have showed to be by the Law of Nature.

Or Lastly, Jure Primi Occupantis (if its Occupant be capable thereof) for Man
being a sociable creature by Nature, and society according to Aristotle, being
contained in many divided parts, therefore in the society of Men there must be
unum quid, quod imparet; alterum Lib. 1. cap. 5. Pol.
quod pareat. But whether Aristocracy and Democracy be unum quid, that may jure
imperare, to me is a question, neither of them being any Institution of God; or
from the Law of Nature, but brought in by unjust usurpation and violence, and
against the universal consent and practice of the world for above Three
thousand years. I do exclude Conquest to be any cause of Regal power, where God
does not give it: For either this Conquest must be made by power, or force: If
it be made by power, or one who is Gods Sword Bearer, no new power arises from
thence, but only a dilatation of the exercise of the old, which was formerly in
him: But if it be done by Sword-takers, then is it no other then unjust
usurpation and robbery. The World being large, and the Men in it always
ambitious, I will not undertake to answer for the matters of fact which Men
have done in all Ages; nor do I doubt but that oftentimes the alterations and
conversions of Government have happened from the will of God.

Object. But it is evident by the Prophet Daniel, c. 4. 23. 25. that God rules
in the kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he pleases: And if that
he were pleased to make Saul, David, Solomon, and Jeroboam, who reigned over
his peculiar people, and Hazael, Cyrus, etc. who knew not God, Kings, and yet
neither by Lot, Primogeniture from a rightful King, or by right of First
possession; then for ought is known, these alterations which have otherwise
happened, and do come to pass in the world, may be from the will and gift of
God.

Sol. I answer, If it may be Gods will that these alterations and confusions
happen in the world, it may not be Gods will; and affirmanti incumbit probatio.
Let them therefore, or they that make these alterations and confusions, prove
that Gods will, and not their own perverse will, was the first cause of them.
It is true, and I grant that God does oftentimes for the punishment of a
Nation, convert the succession of their Kings into another line, (yet did he
never so far chastise any Nation, as to subject it to an Aristocracy or
Democracy.) So it is necessary, offenses come; yet shall that never excuse them
by whom they come. And so it many times happens, that men cannot avoid Gods
judgments, and die; it is no consequence therefore, that men should run
themselves into them, or kill themselves. It may be it is Gods will that my
Father should die, or that he will destroy my Country and Laws, etc. It does
not therefore follow, that a man may kill his Father, destroy his Country, or
endeavor to subvert the Laws thereof. Men are not always obliged to conform
their wills to Gods will, but to do what he wills and commands them. I am
obliged to pray for my Parents and Country, when it is Gods will they should be
destroyed. It was Gods will, that Jeroboam, for Solomon's sin, should be King of
ten 1 King. 11. 13.
Tribes of Israel; yet because the Tribes did will it, and not upon Gods
command, he pronounced them eternal Rebels, and Jeroboam a Rebel, because 1
King. 12. 19.
he took it upon those terms, 2 Chronicles. 13. 6. Nor do we find that ever Israel
joyed good day after: For the policy of Jeroboam, to continue Comparethese
times with these, and see the event
his dominion over them, must be preferred before Gods worship and service; in
order thereunto, Jeroboam must take counsel and make Calves, which he says
brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt; any Priests were good enough to
sacrifice to them, no matter whether they were Priests, or of the Tribe of
Levi, the lowest of the people would serve the turn; 1 King. 12. 32, 33.
yea forsooth, Jeroboam himself could hold forth to the people, and burn
incense, which before was peculiar to the Priests. But it is a strange thing,
that this invented policy of Jeroboams for the keeping of the ten Tribes in
their obedience to him, should be the cause of so wonderful a Captivity, 2
King. 17. 21, 22, 23.
that to this day it is unknown what became of them and their posterity.

16. Parum est jus, nisi sunt qui possunt jura gerere: And men have always The
miseries of men, when the Supreme power is rejected or unknown.
by woeful experience found, that all Tyranny of a rightful and known Prince, is
not to be compared with the miseries and calamities, where the Prince is not
known, or rejected, but every popular and ambitious Man arrogates and usurps to
himself what should be justly ascribed to the lawful Prince. Nor does the
calamities of miserable men in such a condition end so; but God no where showed
so great a judgment, as upon those men, (viz. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram) who
rejected their rightful and known Prince, Number. 16. Nor does he ever denounce a
more dreadful judgment, then upon those men who resist Higher powers, Romans 13.
How great then will his judgment be upon them who reject them?

17. He is a natural Prince of right, or by the Law of Nature, who Who is a
Natural Prince de jure.
truly prescribes from such Ancestors, that no mortal creature can make any
just exception, or superior claim. And so great a Lover of Men, and Truth, is
God, that scarce in all the world was it not known in any Nation, who was the
rightful Prince thereof, when his Subjects did reject him.

18. It is true, that there is no visible power under Heaven, but only Where
there are diversities of titles, which is to be preferred.
men's Consciences that can direct them, where Titles of Princes come in
question: But where diversity of Titles are alleged, that which is truly and
indubitably most ancient, is the best; for it is a true rule in all descents
whatsoever, that, Dormit aliquando, nunquam moritur jus: But this must be jus
apparens; for, De non apparentibus, and de non existentibus, eadem est ratio.
Whether the Title of the Heir general, or Heir male be better, we shall treat
more at large in Cap. of Succession.

19. Jus is duplex, Proprietatis, and Possessionis. And that this Right is Who
is a Natural King de facto, and not de jure.
divisible as well in Regality, as private men's Estates, is demonstrated by
para. 4. of this Chap. And if it be true, as it is, that no Being can be
superior or better then the Cause of its being; then will it necessarily
follow, that all Kings who inherit from Usurpers, cannot have a better title
then that which the Usurpers had, so long as a superior or better claim can be
made by another. Nor do I fear to affirm, Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. were
natural Kings of England, and did inherit the Crown of England de facto, but
not de jure.

20. Although nothing which is naught in the beginning, can be How Usurpation
may be bettered.
bettered by the continuance of time; yet may Usurpation, although naught in
the beginning, be bettered in time, viz. if the Usurpation be of that
continuance, that it outlives all claim that can be justly made by another;
for, Possession is title sufficient against all men, who have no jus ad rem.
Hence it was, I conceive, that Athaliah desired to cut off all the Royal seed
of the house of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 23. And that all Usurpers do not think
themselves fafe in their usurpations, unless they secure themselves by
attempting greater, viz. in destroying all the Progeny of those men, who can
make a better and more superior claim then they have. Where therefore
Democracies and Aristocracies, (if such many-headed beasts, by the Law of God
or Nature, be sufficiently qualified to be capable of this power) and Elective
Monarchies have been of that continuance, that no superior claim can be made
justly by another; let them continue their possessions still, for all me: Yet
would I not for any good in the world venture my life in any of them, or judge
any man to death in any of them, unless it could be made appear that God, or
the Law of Nature did ever institute any such things, or that any where in the
world they were not usurped, or introduced by them who had no right to do it.
But however, it is a most unreasonable thing, that their actions of Adoption
and Election should be taken for precedents in rightful Hereditary Monarchies,
which cannot admit them without a total dissolution, and do justly attribute
their Governments to a higher then humane cause.

21. Where in Hereditary Monarchies the whole Line is extinguished, Wherein the
decision is to be by Lot.
there the decision is to be by Lot; for, The lot is cast into the lap, but the
whole disposition of it is of the Lord, Pro. 16. 33. But if any one gets the
possession before such disposition, his Title by the antecedent proposition is
good enough; besides we have demonstrated by para. cap. 1. lib. 1. that Jus
primi occupantis is good by the Law of Nature.

22. If it be Misera servitus, ubi Jus est vagum aut incognitum; a miserable
How blessed and happy men are, where Supreme powers and Laws are certain.
servitude, where the Law (our Lawyers by Jus. understand Law) is wandering* or
unknown: Then by the Rule of contraries, it is a happy Freedom, where the Law
is certain and known, to which a man may safely and securely direct his
actions. If it be a miserable slavery, where the Law is wandering and unknown;
how much more miserable a slavery is it, where the Supreme Power is wandering
and unknown? What confusions, murders, rapine and spoil of all things sacred
and civil, must men necessarily fall under? The woeful and miserable condition
of this Nation since our late Distractions, has sufficiently manifested the
consequence of it. If then such a condition be so miserable, how happy then is
that Nation, where by Gods mercy men are certain who is their Prince, and to
whom they may securely pay their obedience, and assuredly expect protection in
their lives and estates? If there be nothing more servile and base, then to be
insulted and tyrannized over by them, who by no right command over us; how
ingenuous and virtuous is it to be subject, where by all Divine and Humane laws
we owe our obedience? For out of the offices of commanding and obeying, did
never any man live; and where men will not be subject to them who may by right
command over them, they shall be slaves either to their own ambition, or to
others, who by no right command over them. And if it be most woeful and horrible
by resisting Higher Powers to incur damnation; (Note, the Apostle does not say,
You must Romans 13.
needs be subject to Governments, and whosoever resists Government shall receive to
himself damnation; for the Empire of Thieves, Robbers and Usurpers, is
Government; but to Higher Powers who have a right of command from God:) to what
a condition then have men brought themselves, where either they are uncertain
of the Supreme Power, and so are either uncertain whether in their actions they
incur this dreadful sentence; or else where they are certain where the Supreme
Power is, and yet dare not for fear of their lives actively submit to it. Who
is the rightful English Sovereign, and to whom all Englishmen by all Laws of
God and Man owe their obedience, is so evident, that I never heard any man deny
or dispute it.

23. The ratio finalis, or the end for which God has ordained Kings, The end
for which Regality was ordained by God.
is for the protection of them whom God has committed to their charge and
government; not only by all just and due means to protect them from the outward
violence and oppression of their outward Enemies, but also in peace inwardly,
and by all means to suppress all faction and sedition of ambitious men, who
would disturb it. He chose David his servant, and took him Psalm. 78. 71, 72, 73.
from the sheepfolds, as he was following the ewes great with young; he took
him that he might feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance: So he fed
them with a faithful and true heart, and ruled them with all his power. And
that Kings may be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to Gods Church.
Isa. 49. 23.
And consonant to these revelations of God by these noble Prophets, is the
declaration of the Saintly King Edward Confessor: Rex auiem qui est summi Leg.
S. Edw. cap. 19.
Regis Vicarius, and ad hoc constitutus est, ut regnum and populum Domini, and
super omnia sanctam ecclesiam regat and defendat ab injuriosis, maleficos autem
distruat.

24. By this which has been said, it is evident that the power of all No power
arises from Conquest.
Kings is alike and equal, viz. Supreme, and Gods Ordinance, and from the Law
of Nature. The difference between Kings is only in the exercise of their power,
some being contracted into narrower terms, and others of a more vast extent and
dilatation. Where therefore one King extends the exercise of his power into the
dominion of another, by conquest or otherwise, no new power arises from hence,
but only an extension of the exercise of the old: And so by consequence, the
invasion, usurpation, or conquest of Subjects or others, who before had no
Regal power, cannot create any after.

25. Naturalia determinantur ad maxima and minima. There is nothing How far,
and when Conquest is to be obeyed and submitted to.
in Nature but bath its beginning, termination, and ending: And so Regal power
has its beginning, termination, and ending from the Laws of Nature; and all
men are to be subject to those powers, wheresoever they are: For no man, when
he comes into the power of any Prince, whether he be his natural Sovereign, or
nor, but is obliged and subject to the power of that Prince wherein he is;
therefore if a Frenchman goes into Spain, or a Spaniard comes into England,
they are subject to the powers of Spain and England, so long as they continue
there. And since it is impossible that two Supreme powers can be in one place;
where any one King comes to be in the exercise of another Kings power, he is
subject to that King so long as he continues in the exercise or dominion of
that King. By more reason therefore ought the Subjects of any Prince to be in
subjection to Supreme powers, so long as they continue in the exercise of their
power, whether it were by Conquest, or not. Besides, God has ordained Supreme
powers for men's preservation, not their destruction. And there must be some
visible power upon earth, which may put a period to and decide differences, or
they will be endless: But there is no power under heaven, but their sword, that
can put a period to the differences of Princes; what therefore in such case the
sword decides, ought to be obeyed; and the conquered Subjects, nay Princes who
come into the dominion or exercise of another power, ought to be subject to
it, so long as they continue therein: God therefore pronounces Zedekiah a
Rebel against Nebuchadnezzer. But this reason cannot 1 Chro. 36. 13.
hold for Subjects against their Sovereign, where the Law may decide their
Regal power cannot be transferred nor communicated by any humane or voluntary
act.
differences, and where by no Law of God or Man they are permitted to take the
sword.

26. Cujus est velle, ejus est nolle: No power less then that which made any
thing, can alter it: But Regal power is Gods ordinance; therefore nothing less
then the power of God can alter, transfer, or communicate it. Yet is the
exercise of it subject to violence: As, Gravia sursum, levia deorsum feruntur;
yet may a man by violence throw a stone upward, and depress smoke from
ascending, without altering the nature of either. So though Regal power cannot
be transferred nor communicated by Man, yet is the exercise of it not only
subject to violence and usurpation, but also being voluntary, may be suspended
by Supreme powers themselves, without any diminution of the power or right of
exercise of it. When therefore Subjects or Enemies do unjustly invade and
possess the Dominion of another, this possession does not divest the right or
jus ad rem of that other, but only suspend the exercise of the others power or
right during such usurpation. So may a King by a league or peace with others by
his act, suspend the exercise of his power in any place unjustly usurped from
him by others, yet without diminution of his power or right to that place: But
this act cannot oblige his Successor, nor himself after such term, but they
have a just cause of war if it be no^ restored.

Having thus far treated of the efficient or final cause of Regal power, it is
time to descend to the Attributes of it.

CHAP. III. Of the Attributes of Regal power, and incidently of the Power of
Magistrates.
1. WHo has the Supreme power, has the sword of Justice to punish The sword
of Justice is his, who has the Supreme power.
them who transgress Laws, and endeavor to cause sedition: He is the Minister
of God to thee for good; but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he
bears not the sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. And Gods rod in his hand,
Exodus 17. 9.

2. The end of all Government is, either to preserve the governed inwardly The
power of making War and Peace, belongs to the Supreme power.
in peace, or to defend them from the outward violence and opposition of
others. In vain therefore should Government be, if he who has the Supreme
power, may not as well defend Subjects from the violence of others outwardly,
as to preserve them from factions and feditions within. And this power God gave
to Moses, Joshuah, David, and all the Kings of Judah; nor can any King be a
Supreme Prince without it, nor the governed in a probable condition of hoping
for preservation from it.

3. Judgment is the determining of a good or bad action, which cannot All
Judgment is with him.
be in any who is subject to another. What therefore could be a more subtle
temptation of the Devil to our first Parents, then to tell them, Genesis 3. 5.
that by eating the forbidden fruit, they should be like to God, knowing good
and evil. Solomon, as the most requisite thing, prays to God, that he would
give him an understanding heart, that he might be able to judge between good
and bad, 1 King. 3. 9. And, The King by judgment establishes the land, Pro.
29. 4. And, Give the King thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness to the
Kings Son, that he may judge the people according to right, and defend the
poor, Psalm. 72. 1, 2.

4. The right of making Laws is with him: The Scepter shall not depart Jus
legislativum penes eum.
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo come, Genesis 49.
10. Submit your selves therefore to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 12. And this is the only
visible means by which Subjects may become safe, rich and happy.

5. In punishment, Equals cannot judge Equals, much less can Inferiors That he
does all things without punishment.
judge Superiors: But a Supreme Prince cannot have an Equal, much less a
Superior; therefore a Supreme Prince cannot be punished. If a Supreme Prince
might be punished for any thing he does, then cannot he do any thing but he
will be liable to punishment for so doing: For, what property can he give to
one, which will not offend some other? Nor did the veriest Thief or Murderer
ever suffer punishment, but some of his Comrades would seek revenge, and if
they might, would punish the Lawgiver. Besides, who shall judge his Prince? If
any one, then every one may. Let no man therefore be hasty to go out of his
sight, nor stand in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. Where
the word of a King is, there is power, and who shall say unto him, what do
thou? Eccles. 8. 3, 4. The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my
Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is
the Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 24. 6.

It may seem to some, that this unlimited power of doing any thing Annot.
with impunity, will only beget a confidence in Kings of doing what they list,
without ever taking care of their duty in preserving their Subjects from
intestine broils and factions, and from the outward force and violence of their
Enemies; whereas (more narrowly looked into) no men are so subject to care, and
have their wills less then they: For, private men, if they do any thing in
their passion, their fame and fortunes are alike, neither much removed from
their persons, few take notice of it: But they who are set in high place, all
men take notice of their actions. In the greatest Fortune therefore, is the
least Liberty; and that which in other men is termed Anger, in them is called
Pride and Tyranny. Besides, in private men it is enough that they themselves do
well; but Princes must have a care, that neither they, nor their Ministers do
ill.

6. Tibi soli peccavi, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 50. Humane Laws are the The
Supreme power is not obliged by his own Laws.
organs or instruments of the Power that governs; they cannot therefore
extend themselves to bind him from whom they are derived; for, Omnis potentia
activa, est principium transmutandi aliud. Besides, the Prince may free other
men from the obligation of the Laws, and therefore much more himself: And if
Supreme Princes were obliged by their own Laws, then were Humane Laws, as well
as the Laws of Nature, eternal and immutable, which is absurd; nor could Humane
Laws protect Subjects, when any thing happens (which comes to pass every day)
that was not foreseen at the making of the Laws. Humane Laws are made to oblige
and preserve the governed, necessitate coactionis; but they cannot have any
obligation upon Lawgiver who is the Supreme power, unless a man will grant that
an Effect may be prime and superior to the Cause. Nor were ever other
Governments subject to their own Laws. No man has any thing proper against the
Supreme power.


7. No Subject has any Property (except Ecclesiastics) but by the Laws of his
Country: But by the precedent Proposition, no Supreme Prince can be obliged by
his own Laws, and therefore no Subject can have property against him. If any
Subject had property against the Supreme power, then could not the Supreme
power impose a Forfeiture of Goods in case of Praemunire, Attaint, Conviction
of Treason or Felony: But the Consequence is false, and therefore the
Antecedent is false, That any man has any property against the Supreme power.
Besides, there could no Fine, nor Fine and Recovery be levied or suffered, if
he in Reversion or Remainder had property against the Supreme power: Nor could
an Act of Parliament enable Tenant for life to make sale of his Estate.

It is remarkable, that the Children of Israel should not be content to Annot.
have God to reign over them immediately, who did himself give them Laws, being
enquired of by the High Priest. Samuel might well say therefore unto them, Ye
shall cry in that day because of your King, which (not ye shall choose, but
which) ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord shall not hear you in that day, 1 Samuel 8. 18. For Gods ways and actions are always perfect, whereas by the reason
of humane frailty, the best man's actions are subject to imperfections. But if
it seems grievous to any man, that he holds his goods at the will of another;
let him consider, that God, since Adam, did never give any Nation (but only the
Children of Israel) Property, but always used the mediation of his Vicegerents:
And since Property must be derived from some Humane act, (for the Law of Nature
gives none but to Supreme Princes; and therefore the possessions of Kings are
called Sacra patrimonia, because Kings have no Superior but God Almighty:
Proedium Domini Regis est directum dominium, cujus nullus Author est nisi
Deus.) How Sir Ed. Co. Com. on Lit. p. 1. 6.
much better is it for Subjects to hold of one Man, then of many? For nothing
can be objected against one, but will have more force against many: And let any
man show me in these last five hundred years, any Subjects estate taken from
him without due and legal proceeding, by the act of any of the Kings of
England; and I will show him five hundred, who not being liable to any
punishment by Law, have been ruined themselves and their families in seven
years, and that for observing the Laws, and against the will of the King.

Obj. But many Actions have been brought against the King; which, if no Annot.
2.
man has Property against him, may seem inconsistent.

Answ. But the question here is not, what the King may do, but what he has
done; Not what the King may declare Law, but what he has already declared Law.

8. Majesty is from the Law of Nature immediately; but the power Power of
Magistrates from him.
of Magistrates is not so, but mediately, that is, from him who has the
Supreme power. Magistracy is the instrument or organ by which Majesty is
conveyed to every place, whither its own power is extended: And as Majesty is
restrained to the Laws of Nature, and is accountable to God for all the
omissions and transgressions of them; so Magistrates are restrained to Humane
Laws, and ought to give an account of their actions to him that has the
Supreme power. And as no man can offer violence or contempt to Humane Majesty,
but it is a contempt and violence to the Majesty of Heaven; so no man can offer
violence to, or contemn Magistrates, but it is done to Humane Majesty, from
whence their authority is derived. Wherefore Subjects must submit to Governors
who are sent by Kings, 1 Pet. 2. 14.

By this Proposition it is evident, that although Supreme power cannot Annot.
be divided, yet the exercise of it may: For where a King is an Enfant, he
cannot exercise his power, who can neither act any thing, nor expres what he
would have done; nay it is impossible for the best and wisest King that ever
was, to exercise his power every where; for one body can be but in one place at
once, though the power thereof may be diffused every where, as the light and
influence of the Sun is diffused every where, although the body of it can be
but in one place: And the exercise of power by Magistrates, is like Gods
governing the world by natural causes, who being the first Mover of all things,
produces natural effects by the order of second causes. Jethro his counsel to
Moses therefore is to be taken; Thou will surely wear away, both thou, and
this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art
not able to perform it thy self alone. Exodus 18. 18.

9. Quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur and id, sine quo res
The Right of calling Assemblies belongs to Christian Kings.
ipsa esse non potest; where any Law Divine or Humane, does give any thing, it
gives all the means, by which this otherwise could not be had. And that God by
the Law of Nature has given Kings a power to protect their Subjects, we have
sufficiently demonstrated; but it is impossible Princes should protect and
govern their Subjects, if they might not rule their actions. Now all actions
and motions are either regular or irregular: All regular motions and actions
may be reduced to one certain beginning; where the beginning is not one, and
certain, there they may be called commotions or confusions, rather then motions
or regular actions. But all Assemblies are motions, and therefore they must be
reduceable to some one certain principle, or they are irregular or commotions:
If then Christian Princes have not a right of calling Assemblies, but others as
well as they; then must it either necessarily follow that Christian Princes
have not power sufficient to govern and protect their Subjects, and that their
Subjects motions cannot be regular and orderly, but confounded and irregular,
and so the law of nature, and the end for which God ordained Princes, inverted.
For my part, I will not dispute the Power of God in the planting of the Church,
either under the old or new Law, how that he did dispense with the actions and
motions of his People and Ministers, and set Father against Son, etc. and that
to make his Power known, he would plant his Church, notwithstanding all
Temporal Powers whatsoever: but this I do affirm, that God after the
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, did give to Moses only this right
of calling Assemblies, as appears clearly by Numb. 10. 2. for only to him is
the charge of making the Trumpets to call the congregation together; It is
true, that verse. 8. the sons of Aaron shall blow with their Trumpets. but
neither Aaron nor the Priests had any Power to make them, but only Moses; they
must therefore have them from him, and be his Instruments; and this Power was
given to Moses as the supreme Magistrate, and not as High Priest, for Aaron was
then High Priest, being before consecrated, Levit. 8. Nor was this Right given
personally to Moses, but as a Law to last for ever. If any allegation be made
against Moses because he was a Priest, it must cease with Joshua and the Kings
after him, who were none; for Joshua by virtue of this ever lasting Law did
call an Assembly of all the Tribes, and therefore of Levi, to Sichem, and verse.
28. dissolved it. After him did David, Joshua. 24. 18. 1 Chro. 15. 4. 11.
call the High Priest, and other Priests, not to consult of any secular affair,
but about the removing the Ark; and afterward, 1 Chronicles. 23. 2. he gathered
together all the Lords of Israel, with the Priests and Levites; and as he
called them together, so his dismissed them, 1 Chronicles. 16. 43. The like did
Solomon when the Temple was dedicated, called the Assembly, 2 Chronicles, 5. 2.
dissolved it, cap. 7. 10. The like did Asa, when Religion was restored, and a
solemn Oath of association for the restoring of it. Jehosophat did it when 1
Chro. 15. 2 King. 10. 20. 2 Chro. 34. 29, 30. 2 Chro. 29.
he proclaimed a public Fast, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Jehu assembled them, when a
solemn Sacrifice was to be performed. Joash, in a case of Dilapidations.
Josias, when the Temple was to be purified, and a mass of superstition to be
removed. Hezekiah made a law for the Priests and all their brethren to
assemble, and in conformity to that law they did assemble; nor was this v. 15.
Assembly for any other thing then to cleanse the house of God, and for the
affairs of the service of God, being things merely spiritual. And since that
God has promised, that Kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing
mothers to his Church, it must be meant of Christian Kings; for this could not
be of Josias, because he was a King at the time of this prophecy, or before; it
could not therefore be meant of him, for the prophecy is de futuro, Kings shall
be, etc. Nor could it be meant of the Kings of Judah after him, for they were
all Idolaters, and persecutors of Gods Church. It was therefore meant of
Christian Kings: And how Kings can be Kings or Supreme powers, without this
right, I do not understand: Nor can that saying of our Savior's causing of
wars and distraction, be otherwise reasonably understood, but only where Kings
and Supreme powers have not received the Faith. And that Christian Kings did
generally exercise this power after they became Christians, we shall show
hereafter.

10. He is a rightful Supreme Governor, who is a Sword Bearer, that is, Who is
arightful Supreme Governor.
whom God has chosen to be his Minister; who has not taken the sword, excited
thereunto neither from any ambitious or spightful passion or affection, either
of himself or other men: That may make, and abrogate Laws, determine all
Controversies by himself or such Judges as he shall appoint, choose Magistrates
and Counselors, and in whom is the power of making War and Peace. Nor did God
give Kings to them only over whom he did reign by Covenant, but also to
Heathens who had not known him; as to the Persians, Syrians, Assyrians, etc. he
gave Cyrus, Hazael, Nebuchadnezzar, etc. And all antique History speaks only of
the Government by Kings; as Justin says, Principio rerum, gentium, nationumque
imperium penes Reges erat; before any other Government was usurped and made by
Men.

11. He is a Tyrant, who is a Sword-taker; who in stead of executing Who is a
Tyrant.
the wrath of God upon offenders, against all Law kills and murders them who
are not of his own faction; who has no power from God, but only force from the
wills of inconstant and seditious men. As Hos. 8. 4. says, They have set up
Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not. Nor is it the
Command of One, which makes Tyranny: The Grecians themselves called the Council
of the Thirty, after the Athenians were subdued by the Lacedaemonians, the
Thirty Tyrants of Athens.

I am confident there was never any thing so wildly and variously Annot. 1.
ghessed at, as the manner how Dominion and Power came into the world, by those
men who derive all power from the People originally. Bodin, cap. 6. de Rep. p.
46. makes all Dominion to be gotten at first by force; and page 46. d. he says,
It is very like, that without greatest force and breaking down the Laws of
Nature, Liberty could not be taken away. And many men will not distinguish
between Force and Power, but only in the possession. And sure Athaliah was as
much possessed of the Crown of Judah, and as quietly as any King before or
after her, for six years; and yet I do not find Jehojadah or the people
reprehended for restoring Joash. And the children of Israel did not rebel,
while they could quietly place 2 Chro. 13. 7.
Jeroboam over them; but Jeroboam was declared a Rebel, after he was possessed.

12. When they over whom God has given power, shall submit themselves What is
a rightful Government.
to that power, this is a rightful Government: When all who owe their
subjection, shall accept and receive the Laws of him, who by Right (that is, by
Birth, Revelation, Lot, First possession, or just Conquest) ought to command.
As the Children of Israel answered Joshua; All that thou command we will do,
and whithersoever thou sendest we will go: According as we hearkened unto Moses
in all things, so will we unto thee; only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he
was with Moses: Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy commandment, and
will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou command him, he shall be
put to death. Jos. 1. 16, 17, 18.

13. Anarchy is like a vacuum in Nature; so abhorrent, that the World The state
of Man out of power, is Tyranny.
will rather return into Chaos, then suffer it. And therefore Cicero, lib. 3.
de legibus, says truly, Sine imperio neque domus ulla, nec civitas, nec gens,
nec hominum universum genus stare, nec ipse denique mundus, potest. It Is no
wonder therefore if seditious men, when they have put themselves out of power,
are glad to submit to Tyranny, rather then be overwhelmed with the Chaos and
confusion of Anarchy.

Yet it is said Judge. 17. 6. and 21. 25. In those days there was no King in
Annot.
Israel, but every man did what was right in his own eyes: So it may seem that
men may subsist in an Anarchy. It is true indeed, there was no man that was
King in those days in Israel; nor was there then that absolute necessity of
one; for God had given them Property, and did govern the Israelites, and they
did enquire judgment of God, who did answer, cap. 20. 18. And men did in those
days commerce and exchange one with another; which is evident by Micha's
contracting with her Levite-Priest, for ten shekels of silver by the year, a
suit of apparel, and his victual, chapter 17. 10.

14. Princes do transgress their power, when they command any Wherein Princes
do transgress their power.
thing contrary to what God has commanded, or derogatory to the worship and
service of God; when they make unjust War; when they pronounce Judgment not
according to the declared and known Laws, but punish either by passion, or to
please factious men, as in the Earl of Straffords Case; or pass sentence
against one unheard, as in Cromwell Earl of Essex his Case.

I say, not punish upon passion, or to please men: For as the state of Annot.
affairs may be stated, Princes may punish, though not in a Judicial manner; as
when Subjects are in Arms against their Sovereign. Nor do I think that any
uninterested Casuist will deny, that Henry the Third of France did justly put
Henry Duke of Guise to death, though not judicially; the Duke having taken Arms
against him, and made him fly out of Paris, fomented seditions against him,
and taken pensions of the King of Spain to maintain war in France, and become
so popular, as the King had no means to proceed legally against him.

15. How careful Princes ought to be in commanding, or making of Laws.
The perfection of Government consists first and chiefly, that the Governor
have a perfect and indubitable Title, against which no just exception can be
taken. Secondly, that the Governor makes it his chiefest care, that the
Religion, or Worship and Service of God be duly administered. And thirdly, that
he does endeavor by known and established Laws to administer Judgment and
Justice indifferently to his Subjects, with careful moderation of the severity
of the Laws, whereas men by no fault of theirs incur the severity of them. And
lastly, by all just and due means to endeavor the preservation of his Subjects
from the oppression and violence of Foreiners, and to maintain Peace and
Commerce with his neighboring Nations. Such was our Government before our
unhappy differences; and such by Gods grace do I hope to see it again.

16. It were a fine may game to be a King, if Kings might make their How
careful Princes ought to be in commanding, or making Laws.
Will the rule of their actions. It is true indeed, God has not in all things
commanded Kings what Laws they shall govern their Subjects by: yet this natural
law are all Princes obliged to, that their Laws by which they govern do more
relate to the good of their Subjects in general, then their own particular
interest: And no question but a King commits a more grievous sin doing any
unjust thing to any of his Subjects, then if another had done it, in regard of
the relations which are between them; as a Fathers doing an unjust thing to his
Child, is a greater sin then if another had done it, by how much by the Law of
Nature he ought to have done well to his Child, rather then another. Princes
therefore by the Law of Nature, in governing, ought to have more respect to the
general good of their Subjects, then their own particular interest. Yet is
Magnificence a Royal virtue; and therefore ought not the Revenues of the Crown
to be parted with, by which it should be maintained: Nor would it conduce to
the benefit of the Subjects in general, to make the Revenues of the Crown poor:
Where Majesty grows contemptible, the exercise of Regal power is never
permanent. Princes therefore ought to have a great care, that by their vices,
prodigality of the Revenues of the Crown, remiss governing, or by so giving it
over to others that they so much neglect it in themselves, as to make
themselves vile and contemptible.

17. Though God has not commanded Kings in all things, what are Princes ought
not to be obeyed, when they command in derogation of Gods Majesty. 1 Samuel 12.
14. verse. 25.
the Laws by which they shall govern; and therefore diverse Kings govern their
Subjects by several Laws, as their Subjects differ in nature and manners: Yet
has he forbidden all Kings to make Laws derogatory to his Divine Majesty.
Samuel therefore threatens Saul, as well as the Israelites, that if he or they
disobey God, and do wickedly, they shall perish both they and their King. And
it was to Saul that God said, that Rebellion was as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubborness as the wickedness of idolatry. Nor was the sin of the Israelites in
committing idolatry, under the Kings of Judah and Israel, the less, though the
King commanded it: Nor did God scarce 1 Samuel 15. 23.
ever show a greater miracle, then in delivering the Three Children, and
Daniel, disobeying the Kings wicked commandment. Princes therefore ought not to
be obeyed in commanding things derogatory to the Majesty of God.

18. Nor ought Princes to be obeyed, when they command any thing Or contrary to
Religion.
contrary to Religion; for, The kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness thereof
is first to be sought: But the kingdom of Heaven is only to be sought by Faith
and Religion. Daniel therefore sinned not, when he obeyed not Darius in praying
to God. Nor do all our Parliamentary Laws add any thing to the obligation of
men's worship and service of God, in the Unity and Form of the Church of
England; for men were as much obliged in Conscience before such Laws, as after.
Not but that Kings ought to have as great, or greater care of preserving unity
and peace in Gods Church, as in their Temporal Dominions; and therefore may
punish disturbers of the peace of the Church, as well as the State: Yet when
the Temporal Magistrate shall arrogate to himself a power which our Savior
only left to his Church, and make all Ecclesiastical rights and constitutions
depending and subordinate to the Civil, whereby the Enemies of our Church have
taxed our Religion not for Christian, but Parliamentary; no doubt but it is a
crying sin, and I wish there had never been any such thing among us.

19. And as God is to be obeyed before men, in all things which concern Or the
Laws of Nature.
Faith and Religion; so in the observance of the Laws of Nature, is God to be
obeyed before men. As if a King commands me to dishonor my parents, this can be
but a Humane law; but to honor my parents, is a law which God has written in
my heart, and therefore ought to be preferred. If a King commands his Subjects
to dishonor him, or to deny obedience to him, this is but a Humane law; whereas
by the law of Nature I ought to honor and obey my King: I therefore ought not
to obey such a law. Amurath the Second of that name, King of the Turks, upon a
Vow resigned his Kingdom to his son Mahomet; yet upon the League made by
Uladislaus King of Pole and Hungary, with other Christian Princes against him,
he resumed his Regal authority, and so kept it until his death: And so might
Charles the Fifth, if he had pleased; nor was Philip any other then an
Instrument of his Fathers, during his Fathers life.

The King makes a Law, giving the succession of the Crown from the right Heir:
This ought not to be received; for Princes inherit by a higher Law then Humane.

20. The King commands a Judge to pervert Judgment; the Judge Or to pervert
Judgment.
ought to give true Judgment; for all Humane Laws (in peaceable times) ought to
be a priori, and proclaimed that all men after such a time should observe them.
This verbal command of the King wanting this formality, and it being impossible
for the Judge to observe both these commands; he ought, notwithstanding this
verbal command, to give Judgment according to Law.

The King, when there is no necessity or public danger, commands me Quaere.
who am no public Executioner, without any Judicial sentence to put a man to
death, for which he can make no compensation: As David's commanding Joab to
murder Uriah; although we find David only reprehended and punished therefore,
yet sure if Joab had not fulfilled David's wicked command, he had not sinned.

But you may object, Who shall judge whether this thing commanded be repugnant
to Gods Majesty, Man's faith, Religion, or the Law of Nature; the King, or the
Subject? I say, though the Subject has not an equal right of judging with the
King, whether this thing should be a Law, or not; yet every Subject has a
Conscience, as well as the King, which must dictate Whether Kings divest
themselves of Regality, by commanding what they ought not.
to him whether he ought to do, or not to do such a thing.

21. But if the King commands things contrary to Gods Majesty, and Divine Laws,
ought he not to be obeyed in those things which do not contradict them? It is
so mad and wild an objection, as it is scarce worth an answering; unless a man
will affirm, that my doing of an act which I ought not to have done, does
divest me of Humane nature; or that a Fathers or Masters commanding his Son or
Servant what he ought not, does annihilate the relations of Father and Son,
Master and Servant; or that Humane acts may dissolve Humane relations. A Prince
therefore ought to be obeyed in those things which he ought to command as
Prince, although he command such things as he ought not.

22. It may be it will be objected, That Temporal punishments being Though
inflicting punishment for not observance.
the usual concomitants for not observing Humane Laws, a good and conscientious
man may be punished for what he ought not to have done. I say, his case is the
same with his Lords and Saviors, and all those blessed and glorious primitive
Christians and Martyrs, who suffered for the testimony of a good conscience.
Nor has God made Heaven so easy a prize, that it should be always won easily
and delicately, but many times by suffering and martyrdom.

23. It is the most usual thing with seditious men, before they enter Whether
Princes ought to be resisted, where they are not to be obeyed.
into open sedition, to prepare men's minds with certain Cases, wherein Princes
commanding things derogatory to Gods Honor, or the Subjects Liberty, that then
in the preservation of themselves, and Gods honor, they ought to defend
themselves from the raging Tyranny of Princes; and to be sure, that whatsoever
they command, these good men will judge contrary to Gods Honor, and the Liberty
of the Subject.

It is worth the while, if a man's patience will give him leave, to look back
upon the thing calling it self Parliament: how after they had made the King
grant whatsoever they could think might be beneficial to the Subjects, (though
I might be sworn they never intended (as plainly appeared afterward) the good,
benefit, or liberty of the Subject;) what pious ways they invented to make
themselves great, and so good a Prince nothing, and odious to his Subjects: As
the demanding of six men, holding intelligence with his Subjects who had been
in open hostility and rebellion against him, (an affront not to be endured by
any King) to an ordinary and Legal Trial; this was not only denied, but Voted a
Breach of the Privilege of Parliament; whenas the Privilege of Parliament
extends not to so much as breach of the Peace, much less to Treason. They
pretend (though most falsely) that in case of extreme danger and necessity, the
Militia is in the Parliament, meaning themselves, excluding the King: And then
create Dangers, and write Letters how great Fleets of Danes, Swedes,
Hollanders, etc. were seen at Sea; (It must be from Westminster then, for there
were the Letters written, and the Fleets never since heard of.) Then, permit,
if not command the most insufferable affronts and indignities that ever were
offered to Majesty; yet if the King but offers to increase his Guard, this is
Voted no less then a raising of War against his Parliament and Subjects: whilst
all the while, against the Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti, Inst. par. 4. 14.
without any cause moving them, they maintain an illegal Rout of men for their
Guard, and go armed themselves. Nay, what needs a man instance particulars? All
the Kings commands in prosecution of the Laws, were Voted breaches of the
Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject. We will therefore
show that this Assertion is not only contrary to all Faith in both Testaments,
but also destructive to all Humane Society.

24. There is no man sure will deny, but that Saul did unjustly persecute To
resist Princes, though commanding unjustly, is contrary to faith in the Old
Testament. 1 Samuel 24. 6. cap. 26. 9.
David, with an intention to take away his life: Yet when David might twice
have resisted Saul, and taken away his life, 1 Samuel cap. 24 and cap. 26. he
refused to do it; and the reason was, because he was the Lords Anointed; And
who can lay his hand upon the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? etc.
Nebuchadnezzar King of the Assyrians, not only destroyed the land of Palestine
with fire and sword; not only destroyed Jorusalem, laying it level with the
ground, burnt the Temple, carried all things consecrated and dedicated to Gods
service, to Babylon, converting them to profane uses; not only killed their
King, carried the Jews themselves into most miserable servitude, but also to
the contumely and dishonor of Gods Majesty, erected an Image to be divinely
adored, upon no less penalty then to be thrown into the fiery furnace: Yet were
these most holy men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Dan. 3.
Abednego, so far from resisting the King, though they could not obey him, that
they patiently submitted themselves to the furnace, made seven times hotter for
their sakes; and the blessed men were so far from seeking revenge, that upon
Gods denouncing judgment to Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, Daniel (whose mischief
was no whit less intended) prays that the dream might be to them who hate his
Lord, and the interpretation thereof to his adversaries. Far unlike to the
spirit of Calvin, who commenting upon Daniel, makes Kings to divest themselves
of all power, when they command in dishonor to God; and to spit upon their
heads rather then obey them, etc. And though Nebuchadnezzar were so wicked, yet
being Jer. 25. 9.
a King, Gods calls him his servant.

25. S. Peter teaches, that it is thanksworthy, if a man for conscience
Against the faith of the New Testament. 1 Pet. cap. 2. 19, 20, 21, etc.
toward God endure grief, and suffer wrong undeservedly: For what praise is
it, if when we be buffeted for our faults, we take it patiently? But if when we
do well, we suffer wrong, and shall take it patiently, then is there thank with
God. For hereunto were we called; for Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an example that we should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed the vengeance to him that judges
righteously. What more plain lesson can be given to Christians to suffer, and
not to resist Princes, for the testimony of a good Conscience? And if ever man
had just cause to resist, then had our Savior, and S. Peter in his defense;
yet would not our Savior allow it, but tells him, that whosoever takes the sword,
Mat. 29. 52.
shall perish by the sword.

26. That which I as a private man may assume to my self as a man, Destructive
to all Humane Society.
is due to another as a man; otherwise it were a great arrogance in me, to
allow that to my self, which I condemn in another. But if I may ascribe to my
self a power of judging when I may resist my Prince, then ought I to allow it
in another; and so by consequence, every man should have a power of judging how
long he shall continue in obedience, and not resist his Sovereign. Now what
Society there can be, where any man may make himself free from all Humane Laws
(without which there can be no Society) and resist them when he sees occasion,
(for where men may resist, there can be no subjection) let any man judge. Nay,
where men did ever ascribe to themselves a right or power of resisting their
Sovereigns, they did never stay there, but made all the unjust usurpation and
hostile invasion they could upon them who continued in obedience to their
Prince: And what Law of God, or Man, or Rule of Society, gives me a liberty to
kill and murder innocent men, because I have sinned in resisting where I ought
not. By our Country-Laws, if a man assaulted another, who goes back to some
hedge, ditch, or wall, etc. beyond which he cannot pass, and then in his own
defense kills the assaulter; yet such a tender care had the Common Law of a
man's life, that though this were done by inevitable necessity in the
preservation of an innocent man's life, that he should have suffered death
therefore: And though by the Statute of Gloucester he shall save his life, yet
he shall forfeit his goods and chattels. Nor is this damnable opinion of
resisting Princes, Inst. 3 par. p. 55, 56.
less destructive to other men then the Assertors: For why may not any man do
that to them, which they of themselves have done to their rightful Sovereign,
and his obedient Subjects?

27. It is Humanum errare; Fallibility is concomitant with humane Wherein
Princes commanding unjustly, ought to be obeyed actively.
nature: And no doubt but Princes, being men, are subject to humane frailty.
Yet as Humane Laws will admit of (although not intend) a mischief to particular
men, rather then endure an Inconvenience; so the Laws of Nature will admit of
many things contrary to Nature, rather then endure a Vacuity. I say therefore,
that there are many things so inherent in the Prince individually, that they
are incommunicable to any other: And therefore the Prince offending herein
either through humane frailty, or passion; yet if he command unjustly, the sin
is his in so commanding, and not the Subjects in obeying. As if a Prince makes
unjust War, yet if the Subject obey him, it is not the Subjects sin in obeying,
but the Princes in making such a War: For if Subjects might judge whether a War
were justly undertaken, or not, and so be freed from his obedience, when he
would judge it unlawful; then any, or all Subjects, either through fear or
faction, might desert their Prince in any War, and so the Prince left destitute
of protecting himself or Subjects; whenas Salus populi est suprema lex; and of
this is the Prince the sole and individual Judge. If Princes give unjust
Judgment, the Executioners of Judgment ought to execute the Sentence although
unjust; for they are not obliged to take notice of the Injustice of the
Sentence, but of the Sentence. The Act of Parliament against Cromwell Earl of
Essex did oblige, although unjust; he being in peaceable times, Inst. 4. par.
37.
without any urgent necessity, condemned unheard; yet was it no sin in the
Executioner to execute it.

28. Monarchy is, where the Empire or power of governing is in one What is
Monarchy.
Person, from whom all Humane Laws, Magistracy, and Protection of Subjects is
to be expected.

29. Hereditary Monarchy is, where this Right, Title or Empire descends What is
Hereditary Monarchy.
to the Heir General, or Male; and this latter is proper only to France, and
that by a pretended Salique Law.

30. Delegata potestas non potest participari: No man can participate, No
Prince can give, sell, or transfer his power.
much less alien the power which he is entrusted with: But supreme power is
delegate from God to every Prince; and therefore no Prince can give, sell, or
bequeath his power to any other. The King is Gods Lieutenant upon earth, Coke 3
par. Inst. cap. Deodands, fol 57.

31. It may be the Electors are the Instruments by which the Elected Elective
Monarchy.
King or Monarch receives his power; but I do not understand how such a King
can be a Supreme Prince. Yet this by the way: Neither now nor heretofore was
ever such Prince chosen either by the people in general, or by the Masters in
families, nor the Electors chosen by them.

32. Aristocracy is when a company of men met in Council, ascribe Aristocracy.
to themselves whatsoever power is due to any rightful Monarch, not being
chosen by the people in general, but have places either by birth, or as they
are chosen by the Council, such is the state of Venice, such were the Roman
Senate, and Ephori of Lacedemon.

33. Democracy is, when they who being free of the City, do meet at a Democracy.
time and place appointed, where they choose Ministers and Officers, make and
alter laws, and do whatsoever they think good, or what shall appear good to
them, as represented to them by popular Orators: But because business might so
fall out, that there might be a necessity of making War or Peace, raising money
for defense of the Commonwealth, etc. besides the times and places appointed,
the Athenian Archon, and Tribunes of the Roman people had liberty given them to
assemble the people when they thought fit: I think no man can well tell whether
the Roman Government before Caesar's dictatorship were Democratical or
Aristocratical: For though men might appeal from the Consuls to the Tribunes,
yet by an Act of the Senate after the suppressing of the Gracchi, the Consuls
might provide that the Commonwealth should receive no detriment, which is as
general and high a power as can be given: No wonder then if Marius pretending
the power of the Common wealth, and Sylla the authority of the Senate, should
reduce both Rome and Senate to so lamentable a condition; and that Julius Caesar
assisted by Lucius Antonius and Quintus Curio the Tribunes of the people, and
Pompey by the Senate, should raise such War and commotion every where, to the
utter subversion of the absolute power (as they called it) both of Senate and
people.

CHAP. IV. Of the three Species of Government, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, and
Democracy.
1. IMperium est duplex, solutum legibus, and astrictum legibus; this is There
are but 3 species of Government, and all compounded Government, is either
supervacantous or destructive to the Governors and Governed,
Empire restrained to the Laws, and is of Magistrates, who although they
command private men, yet they themselves are bound by the laws and command of
their superiors, which is the power of our Judges, Justices, etc. That is
Majesty, an Empire, which is the Arbitrator, Moderator, Controuler, and maker
of all laws, and who justly has it, is accountable only to God: and this Empire
is so essential to all Government that without it there can be no Kingdom or
Commonwealth; there cannot be any property, any meum, or tuum, but what this
Empire gives; no man has any security of his life or estate, but as he is
preserved and protected by this power or command: And though government do
differ (as it has been and yet is in many places of the world) in specie, viz.
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, yet in all of them this power or command
is the same and equal, viz. Supreme: And this power or command must be in one
thing, viz. in one man, in one court, in one people; but if it be divided into
two or more, it is either supervacaneous, or destructive; for those two or more
in whom this divided Empire does consist, must either agree or disagree in the
same thing; if they agree to will or nill the same, then it is supervacaneous,
for it had been all one if but one part had willed it; and frustra fit per
plura, etc. but if they disagree in willing or nilling the same thing, it is
destructive, for it is impossible for the Subject to obey, because the Law it
self is a contradiction; and if the Subject obeys one, he disobeys the other,
and to obey neither brings Anarchy and confusion upon all the governed: What is
left then but the Subject to be divided, as well as the power? and a Kingdom
divided in it self cannot stand, St. Mar. 3. 24. Neither are the Governors, in
whom this divided power or command does consist, in any better case then the
Subject; for,

Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas Lucan.

Impatiens consortis erit.
It were infinite to enumerate the sad consequences which division of Kingdoms
have brought upon those Kingdoms where they were made; Let any man look upon
the Estate of the Roman Empire, when it was divided by Constantine the Great
among his three sons, Constantinus, Constantius, and Constans. Nor did ever the
Empire retain the name and dignity, after the division made by Theodosius to
his sons Arcadius and Honorius. Nor was the Western Empire ever raised again to
near the greatness it had in Charlemaines time, after the division made by
Lotharius, Lewis, and Charles, sons of Lodovicus Pius; and what horrible
confusions followed upon the divisions, is easy to be imagined, whenas in the
first Battle between the brethren, was slain the greatest part of the Nobility
of France* and more men died in it then in any other battle that happened in
France, since that fought between Ecius and Attila King of the Huns, in the
fields of Catalonia.

But that we may not go so far, and yet find examples nearer home, Rodry Maure,
or Rodry the great King of Wales, Son of Mersyn Frith, had issue three Sons,
Mervin, Anarawd, and Cadelh. In the year when he dyed viz. anno. dom. 877.
(King Alfred, alias Alured then reigning in England) this Great Rodry divided
his Kingdom of Wales into three Principalities. The First he called Guyneth,
the English Northwales, the Latinist Venedotia. The Second Principality was
called Powisland, in Latin Powisia, of some Westwales bordering upon England.
The Third he called Deherborth, the English Southwales, in Latin Demetia. The
First Principality, some say he gave to Mervin, others to Anarawd. The Second
to Anarawd, some say to Cadelh. The Third to Cadelh, some say to Mervin. The
First was the best because it was quietest. The Second often invaded and
troubled by the English. Into the Third often incursions were made by the
English, the Norman, and Fleming. The division of this Kingdom (however it was)
wrought in process of time, such a division between these Princes, as it was
never quiet until it came under one Monarch or King again: for the Royal
dignity of a Monarch or King, from whence all subordinate dignities, tanquam
lumen de lumine, are derived, without any diminution, will suffer no division,
Regia dignitas est indivisibilis; and quaelibet alia derivativa dignitas, est
similiter indivisibilis.

The most woeful event that fell out in this Kingdom, when Gordobug divided
this Kingdom between his two Suns, Ferrex and Porrex, and what heavy event came
to pass, until it was reduced again under one Monarch, let our Histories tell
you; and letting pass others, I cannot overpass the miserable estate within
this Kingdom under the Heptarchy; until all was reunited under one Sovereign;
and this is the reason that in England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Royal
dignity is descendible to the eldest daughter or sister, Sir E. Coke Inst. 4.
243.
etc. Regia dignitas est indivisibilis.

2. Of these Governments Monarchy is the best, as appears by reason, by How
many ways Monarchy is the best Government.
the consent of the world, by the institution of God, and his commanding
obedience only to this Government, and by woeful experience.

3. Monarchy in reason is the best Government, for the dignity and Monarchy is
the best Government in reason.
majesty of one man is more easy to be maintained then of many; The ills that
follow from bad Monarchs, are no worse than what do and always did happen from
the best of humane Laws, viz. mischiefs to particular men; Nor can the
mischiefs which happened to Silus, Sabinus, Sillanus, etc. (who not well
brooking the powers of Tiberius and Caligula, Emperors as bad as who were
worst) had been over lavish of their tongues in vilifying the power of the
Caesar's, and magnifying that of the Senate, and probably had they been able,
would have advanced the power of the Senate, to the abdication of Caesar's) be
compared with the inconveniences which came upon the Senate and people of Rome,
in those times of Silla, and Marius, of Caesar, and Pompey: Besides, factious
and discontented persons cannot hope for that encouragement in their designs,
where the supreme power is in one individual person, as where it is compounded
of many. The freedom and liberty of the Subject is more under one, then more,
for it is easier to obey one then many: The common people of Rome never enjoyed
so much liberty as under the Emperors; and therefore when after the death of
Caligula, the Senate endeavored to restore Rome to her ancient liberty as they
Sueton. in vita Claud. cap. 10.
called it, and extinguish the name and power of the Caesar's, and to that end
had seized upon the Capitol, they, aided by the Preterian coherts, continued
the power of their Emperors, in Claudius; and the day and night wherein the
Senate would not receive him, was the cause of much trouble, which Josephus
notes, l. 19. c. 30.

4. By the consent of the world; for every where in the known world By the
consent of the world.
before 1641. either in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, over Christians,
Mahumetans and Infidels, (except the State of Venice, the usurped power of the
Cantons in Switzerland, the State of the Neatherlands, the Hans-towns, Genoa
and Geneva, who seek protection of the Emperor and Kings of France) this
Government is established.

5. By God himself; for he never instituted any Government either in By Gods
owning it only.
Priesthood, Judges, or Kings, but only this, nor commands obedience to any
other. Can a man touch the Lords anointed and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26, 9. And
submit your yelves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, etc. St. Pet. 2. 13. Fear God, honor the King: And I
counsel thee to keep the Kings commandments, and that in regard of the oath of
God: And therefore what thing an Unite is in numbers, the Mind in the
faculties of the soul, a Center in a circle, the same is God the most
omnipotent King in the world, simple in unity, indivisible in nature, most holy
in purity, placed by an infinite interval far remote above the fabric of the
highest Heaven; joining this perspirable region with the celestial and
intelligible, keeps and preserves from ruin, as by a secure care, the whole
universe, framed and compounded in such admirable order and harmony, to whose
great example ought every good King (who is the Unite, the mind, and center of
his kingdom) that hopes to govern and preserve his subjects not only safe, but
honest and happy, wholly to betake himself.

6. By woeful experience: I do not find any man's life, (except the destitute and
deposed Princes, Arthur, Ed. 2. Rich. 2. Hen. 6. and his son, By woeful
experience.
Ed. 5. and his brother (herein, and in many other things doubtless more
unhappy then private men) and the Duke of Clarence, after conviction and
attainder, thought by the consent of Ed. 4. to be drowned in a Butt of Malmsey,
and Cromwell Earl of Essex, condemned and executed unheard in Parliament (see
a remarkable passage herein by Sir Ed. Co. Insti. 4. fo. 37. 38.) Queen
Katherine fifth wife to H. 8. Mary Queen of Scots, and the Earl of Strafford)
or estate, taken away by any of the Kings of England for these last 500 years
in an extraordinary and extrajudicial manner. (If the dissolution of the Abbeys
by Hen, 8. be objected, I answer, it was usual in Parliament, to alter many
things in the Common law: as the statute de donis conditionalibus, made a great
alteration in the Common law; for before, all estates which were not for life
and under, were either in fee absolute or conditional; and so the Statutes
which gave power of entry, where before no remedy was to be had by Common law,
but by a Cui in vita: And to Jointenants to compel others to sue a Writ of
partition, etc. In case of life, the ordinary way of trial was by Peers, the
Nobility by the Nobility, and the Commons by the Commons: but a Parliament
being a body compounded of heterogenial and dissimilary parts, viz. King,
Lords, and Commons, could not be Peers to any man, which was the usual way of
Trial with us; neither were the Estates so taken from Abbots, etc. but that
they enjoyed them, or a full value in lieu of them, during their lives, so that
by this act no wrong was done to any man living: Yet it is true which Sir Ed.
Co. says in his Comment upon Magna charta, chap. 1. Quod datum est Ecclesiae,
datum est Deo, what was given to the Church, was given to God; which by the Law
of God, Numb. 16, 37, 38. is unalterable, nor can be be employed to any profane
or common use.) So that I am confident, I may safely affirm, that the Subject
in seven years under the Long Parliament suffered extraordinarily and
extrajudicially, five hundred times more, then all their Ancestors in 500 years
before, did from their Kings: The Barons wars and those of York and Lancaster,
Wat Tyler, Jack Straw, etc. were caused by the rebellion and stubborness of the
Subject; nor is the sacred patrimony of the Crown and Church more secure then
that of private men, but invaded and made a prey to soldiers, Sequestrators and
Excise-men.

Hereditary Monarchy is better than elective in relation to the Subject. For
the Antiquity of this Government, even among the Grecians. see Thucid. 2 ed. by
H. Stephanus, 1588. p. 10. (...). Before that time (viz Trojan War) Kingdoms
were hereditary, and defined to certain honors.
7. Hereditary Monarchy is better then Elective, in relation to the Subject. If
a man but considers the calamities brought upon the Roman Empire, only by
choosing their Emperor, it were sufficient to make any man feat and tremble
(that has so much compassion in him as to pity wretched States) for that
Nation who choose their King. When Caesar's line was extinct in Nero, Galba* was
scarce chosen and received Emperor, when Otho excites the Pretorian Cohorts to
kill him and his adopted son Piso, to make way for himself. Vitellius is chosen
almost at the same instant by the German Legions, that Otho was chosen by the
Pretorian Cohorts: By this division the Empire is brought to so desolate a
condition, that Otho (a vicious man) did kill himself, to prevent its further
destruction; yet could not Otho's death purchase his Countries quiet: For, the
Moesian, Pannonian, and Dalmatian Legions, ascribe to themselves as good right
in choosing an Emperor, as the German, and name Vespasian. Rome the Mistress of
the known World, never felt such misery, as those Legions led by Antonius
Primus brought upon her; which Cornelius Tacitus, in the latter end of the
third book, and the beginning of the fourth book of his History, relates. That
Emperor the Soldiers chose, scarce ever pleased the Senate; what Emperor the
Senate chose, never pleased the Soldier. From Marcus Aurelius to Dioclesian
(who was the greatest Persecutor of the Christians, and renounced the Empire to
take upon him a private life) not one Emperor of ten died a natural death. In
Gallienus his time, Thirty at once; at no time less then three or four, but
like Hydra's heads, when one was cut off, another sprung up: Into such a
condition was the Empire brought by the Election of the Emperors. Nor was the
state of the Western Empire much better, which he who reads the History of
those times from Charles the Great, until the Constitution of Pope Gregory 5.
Anno 1002. for choosing Platina vita. Greg. 5. 151. b.
the Emperor, (Otho the Fifth not contradicting it) may see, which has
continued till this day: Yet the Electors considering the confusions caused in
the nominations of their Emperor, have ever since Rodolphus the First, who was
chosen An. 1272. continued their election in the House of Austria; so that upon
the matter, the Empire is become hereditary, and the choosing but a Ceremony.

7. The miseries consequent upon the election of either Native or The miseries
consequent upon the Election of a Subject.
Stranger, are many: For there is no Native, who is not in distaste with some
body; the choosing of whom gives power to take revenge not only upon him, but
those that opposed him in his election; for it is hardly imaginable, all should
agree in one. None of the rejected Competitors will be content to acknowledge
the Elected; in stead thereof they will rather study ways to raise dissension
about the manner of the Election, that either undue means were used in it, or
though they had the fewer Votes, yet they who voted for them, were greater,
better, or more Saint-like, whose Votes ought rather to be weighed, then the
others numbered. These, it may be, and many other considerations have caused the
Polonians, these many years, to look for him whom they choose their King, out
of Poland.

8. Let us see what the miseries consequent upon choosing of a Stranger The
miseries upon the Election of a Foreiner, be he King or Subject.
are. He who is chosen, is either a Subject, or a Sovereign, (for between these
two is no mean:) If he be a Subject, who (especially freeborn Sovereign people)
will endure that another being a stranger, and a Subject too, should command
over them? And where power is despised, the exercise of it is never permanent.
If he be a Sovereign, he having now two Kingdoms, can personally reside but in
one, which will disgust the other: It will be expected, that he observe the
manners and dispositions of this Kingdom more then his other, because the
people chose him; It will be expected by that Kingdom, that he retain the
observations of the dispositions and manners of it, because he is their born
King. Philip the Second did disgust the Flemings, because he retained his
Spanish habit. He cannot do any thing so much in order to the good of the one,
but it will as much excite the other to hate him; in being a servant to both,
he shall please neither. And what was it which caused all those Wars raised in
Bohemia, but the Election of Frederick, 1619. from whence too sprung all those
devastations, and almost destructions in Germany since, until the last Treaty
at Munster. From hence it was, that Sigismund the son of John King of Sweden,
being chosen King of Poland, the Kingdoms differing both in Manners and
Religion, (and it being impossible to please both) was not only himself, and
all his posterity for ever excluded from the Kingdom of Sweden, in a
Conspiracy at Lincopen, 1600. but has been the cause of all that misery and
desolation under which Poland lately lay: For, because Casimir the son of
Sigismund will not renounce the Right which God by Primogeniture has given him,
and acknowledge this Barbarian and Usurper; he joining with the Brandenburgher
and Transilvanian, (and seeks aid of the Turk too, who being the best Christian
of these four, refuses to give him any) robs, ruins and spoils Poland. Add
hereunto the calamities and confusions which happen in the intervals of their
Kings; which whosoever reads the History of Pole, may see: Whereas in an Hereditary
Kingdom, where the Heir is known and a Major, no confusions probably follow:
And no man sure will deny, but that an Hereditary Monarchy is better for the
peace and quiet of the people, then an Elective.

9. Hereditary Monarchy is better then Elective, in relation to the Hereditary
Monarchy is better then Elective, in reference to the Crown and patrimony
thereof.
Rights, Patrimony, and Dignity of the Crown: For where the Crown descends to
the Heir, the King will use what means he can for the advancement of the honor
and dignity thereof, that himself in his posterity, as well as his person, may
be great and renowned: whereas he who cannot hope that his Heir shall enjoy it,
will use what means he can for provision and maintenance for his Children,
although it be to the prejudice and dishonor of it; for sure no man can
imagine, that because a Man is a King, that therefore he should divest himself
of Nature, and neglect to use some means to get an Estate for his Posterity,
where there is none provided? If it be objected, that the Crown descends to the
Heir, not to the posterity, if more then one: I answer, That no Crown but has
many Offices and Dignities appertaining to it, which descend to the Heir, he
probably will not reject his own flesh and blood to advance strangers; whereas
in an Elective Kingdom it cannot be hoped for.

10. The Government in Britain and England, until 1641. was Monarchy The
Government of Britain was ever Monarchy Hereditary, before 1641.
hereditary: If you believe Mr. Seldom in the First Book cap. 1. of his
Analecton Anglo-Britanicon, he will tell you (upon the Faith of Jeoffrey of
Monmouth) the stem and progeny of Brutus the Nephew of Aeneas, and give you a
series of the Government of his posterity to Cassivellanus King of the
Trinobantes, when Caesar first made his invasion here, and cap. 5. from
Cassivellanus Essex and Middlesex.
to King Lucius: Now I trow our Author for the honor and reverence of the
Apostolic sea, will not deny Lucius to be a King, and the first Christian King
of the Britains, who, and whose subjects were baptized Plat. in vit. S.
Eleutherii, p. 21.
about anno 176. by Fugatius and Damianus, sent to this end by Pope
Eleutherius: And see Tacitus Lips. page 457. in vita Agricolae, Ii (Britanni
scilicet) his atque talibus invicem instincti, Voadica generis regii faemina
duce (neque enim sexum in imperjis discernunt) sumsere universi bellum, etc.
with these and the like speeches, inciting one another, by common consent they
resolve to arms, under the conduct of Voadica a Lady of the blood royal, (for
in matter of governing in chief, they make no distinction of sex.) It is not my
purpose here to relate a series and Catalogue of all the British Kings to the
Saxon Monarchs, nor of the Saxon to the Dane and Norman; I deny that in any of
these times, there was any other Government but Monarchy, (Aristocracy or
Democracy never) nor was ever any of those Kings chosen by the people.

Here by the way, though I affirm the Government of England and Britain to be
Monarchy, yet I do not affirm, that part of this Island which is called
England, was governed by one Monarch only, till King Athestan reduced it about
the year 938: nor the whole Island under one King, before it was united under
James, anno, 1602. And this Monarch not a thing in abeiance, an aerie title,
but an absolute, free and independent Monarchy. Stat. 24. H. 8. cap. 12. It is
resolved and declared, that by sundry and old antic Histories and Chronicles,
it is manifestly declared and expressed, that this Realm of England is an
Empire, and so has been accepted in the world.

Public Notaries made by the Emperor, claimed de Jure, to exercise their
office here in England, but were prohibited, because it was against the dignity
of a supreme King; see Sir Ed. Coke, Instit. 4. fo. 342. Omnis sub rege, and
ipse sub nullo, sed tantum sub Deo; And ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub
hominibus, sed sub Deo: And Rex autem qui vicarius summi Regis est and ad hoc
constitutus, ut regnum terrenum and populum domini, and super omnia sanctum
veneretur ecclesiam ejus and regat, ab injuriosis defendat, and maleficos ab ea
evellat, and destruat, and penitus disperdat; ibid: Now would I fain know, what
higher power can any man upon earth claim, then is here by the Law acknowledged
to be in the Kings of England.

Nor has any Subject any property in his estate, but what he claims from the
King; for all Lands and Tenements in England, in the hands of Subjects, are
holden mediately or immediately of the King, Sir Ed. Co. Com. on Lit. fol. 1.
and Inst. part. 4. page 363, 364. Nor have the Lords and Commons a concurring
power with the King in making Statute-Laws; for the King makes the Law, the
Lords and Commons consent, Co. Lit. 159. b. And what concurring power of Lords
and Commons is there in Magna Charta, but only, Henry by the grace of God King
of England, etc. We have granted to God, and by this our present Charter have
confirmed for us and our heirs for ever, etc. And Charta de Foresta has
nothing which makes it a Law, but, Edward by the grace of God, etc. We will
that all Forests etc. Stat. Hiberniae, made at Westminster 9 Feb. ann. 14 H. 3.
Henry etc. commands that the Customs recited in that Statute and used in the
Realm of England, be proclaimed in Ireland, and straightly kept and observed
there. And Stat. de Anno Bissextili, made at Westminster. ann. 21 H. 3. ann. 1236.
is, The King unto his Justices of the Bench, greeting. The Statute entitled,
Assisa panis and cerviciae, is made by the King. The Statute de Scaccario, is
nothing but what the King commands. And so let any man peruse all the ancient
Statutes of this Realm, and he shall not find any so much as Consent of the
Lords and Commons named in the making of them, though it may be it was implied.
Nor had the Lords and Commons in the Parliament Anno 1641. any more power de
jure, then their Predecessors had before them. And therefore the Common Law and
Statute Law of this Realm were nothing but the declared Will of the King: Nor
has any City or Borough, etc. any Privilege, but what they claim and hold
immediately from the Kings Grant.

Customs I take to be those Usages, which the Kings have permitted Sir Ed. Co.
comment. on. Littleton. 113*
to diverse of their Subjects, in several places of this Realm, time out of
mind, distinct, and not the same with the Common Law. And herein they differ
from Prescription, because this refers to the person, that to the place: so
Prescription is, what such an individual Man and his ancestors have done in
such a place; and Custom is, what diverse Men at once have used in such a City,
Borough, Manor or Village.

Add hereunto the Militia of the Kingdom, the Mint, the power of making War or
Peace, which were always in the King, and for the manageing of which, he has
usually taken the Results of his Ordinary Council, and who will deny the Kings
of England to have been Absolute Sovereigns? What the Government since 1641.
has been, I cannot tell, nor do I care: If you believe the Instrument, it will
tell you, It is in One Person, and the Freeborn People of this Nation; so in
Two, and divided. But who are the Freeborn People of this Nation? Every man
has as much right to this Freedom, as another; here is no Vassalage, no
Civitate donatus, in one more then another; so here all are Governors. Now
Government being (...), in the predicament of relation, This One Person and
Freeborn People must forgive me if I do not understand it.

11. Now if Monarchy be the best Government, then Democracy is the Democracy
the worst of Governments.
worst, because most different from it. He that will look further into the
inconveniences of Popular Government, let him read Hobbs de Cive, cap. 10.

12. The woes pronounced by God to that Kingdom whose King is a The woeful
estate of men in Aristoracies.
Child, Pro. 8. 15, 16. Isa. 3. 4. are as much or more to be feared in an
Aristocracy: For why may not Great men as well agree where the King is a Child,
as where there is no King at all? If any of these Governments be monstrous and
usurped, This, and Democracy are; for God never instituted any such, nor ever
commanded any obedience to either: nor was there ever any but originally were
introduced by unjust violence and usurpation. It is therefore just with God
that they who would not be content to be governed and protected by his
Ordinance, should be perpetually obnoxious to Seditions, Conspiracies, and
liable to serve many Masters, and always liable to pay Soldiers wages to force
them to perpetual slavery and poverty. Under bad Kings, innocent Subjects are
protected from the Ambitious; and their Tyranny extends usually to Courtiers,
and those who would unjustly usurp dominion over their Fellow Subjects: Whereas
bad Governors in States and Popular Governments, bring unavoidably confusion
and ruin upon the Governed in general.

Object. I do expect to have the State of Venice opposed to this assertion of
all Democratical and Aristocratical Governments being originally usurped.

Sol. But if it be true (as we shall hereafter demonstrate) that subjection of
Subjects to rightful Princes does depend upon higher then any humane or
voluntary causes; And therefore it was truly resolved by all the Judges of
England, That Natural Allegiance is not circumscribed to any place: Then
(although the Empire was much rent with divisions) could not the Calvin's case,
tit. 4. page 7.
Venetians, although driven by the fury of Attila's excursions, into those
Isles of the Adriatique sea, where Venice now stands, for their preservation,
free them from their obedience and subjection due to Valentinian; nor without
usurpation and wrong to him, could they erect themselves into an Aristocracy.

13. Perfection consists in Integrals; and where any thing is not Aristocracy
and Democracy are imperfect Governments.
made up of all the parts of it, there that thing is deficient and imperfect:
But the Government of Aristocracy and of Democracy does not consist of the
whole part of the Men governing, but of the major part: The Governments
therefore of Aristocracies and Democracies are deficient and imperfect
Governments.

Socrates asks Euthyphro, Whether in every action, one and the same Annot.
Plato. Euthyphro.
thing be the same thing to it self, pious or holy? and in like manner, Whether
an impious or profane thing, plainly contrary to an holy thing? Euthyphro
assents to it. Socrates bids Euthy. define what is holy, what profane: Euthy.
defines holy, to be the doing the will of the Gods; and profane, to do contrary
to the will of the Gods. Socrates asks Euthy. Whether the Gods had all the same
will? and whether it were true which the Poets, Painters, and Preachers report
of the Gods, that there was war, great counterfeiting, and fights among the
Gods? Euthy. confesses it, and more mavelous things which the common people
were ignorant of. Socrates asks Euthy. If a holy thing be grateful to God, and
a holy man be acceptable to God, whether holy and profane can be the same
thing? or whether they be not plainly contrary to one another? Euthy. confesses
it. Socrates asks Euthy. if the controversies, wars, and dissentions among the
Gods, were concerning things just and unjust, good and bad, honest and
dishonest? Euthy. confesses it. Socrates asks Euthy. Whether in all matters of
controversy, men must not have recourse to some certain Rule, to which with an
indifferent mind they must submit? Euthy. confesses. Socrates asks Euthy.
Whether they might not have recourse to the will of the Gods, whether that
thing and controversy between them were good or bad, just or unjust? Euthy.
assents. Socrates asks Euthy. Since that the dissentions of the Gods were
concerning things just and unjust, whether this thing might not put them into
dissentions and wars? Euthy. confesses. Socrates asks Euthy. Whether the Gods
do think other things just and unjust, honest and dishonest, good or bad? and
that they could not be at strife, unless about these things? Euthy. assents
they could not. Socrates asks, if the Gods love things good and just, and hate
and persecute those things contrary to them? Euthy. grants. Socrates asks,
Whether some of the Gods might not think the same things just, others unjust;
and while they dissent about those things, stir up sedition and wars among
themselves? Euthy. confesses. The same things therefore the Gods both love and
hate; and those things which are envied by some, are grateful to other of the
Gods, and the same things sacred, and profane; which Euthy. could not deny.
Such is the condition of men in Aristocracies and Democracies, that while they
seek to please one part of their Governors, they displease another. Nor can men
in such a condition be secure, that obeying one part, they shall displease
another part, and so excite them to endless debates and war. The sad and woeful
truth of these things, this poor Nation has of late made sufficient trial of.

14. There is nothing in this world, but is subject to humane frailty; The
incommodities of Monarchy.
no Roses without prickles. And though Monarchy be the best of Governments, yet
so long as it is exercised by Men, and since Kings are but Men, and therefore
subject to humane frailty, it cannot be expected that all Kings should so
perfectly exercise their authority, but that some mischiefs will happen from
them: Nor indeed can it be imagined but some mischiefs will happen to
particular men, from the best of Humane Laws; yet without Humane Laws and
Government, can never the inconvenience of Tumults and Confusions be avoided.

The Objections against Monarchy, are usually,

First, That in the infancy of a King, all things are subject to confusion and
alteration. It is true; and therefore God pronounces such an estate Prove. 8.
16.
woeful: Yet is such an estate no worse then Aristocracy, which is better then
Democracy.

Secondly, That subsequent Kings do not desire to rule by the Laws made by
their Ancestors, but by Laws made by themselves; and so their Subjects are
always in an unsettled condition, and subject to alterations. The Laws of the
Medes and Persians were unalterable, yet the Government was always Monarchy.
And let a man look into all places of the known world, where the Government is
Hereditary Monarchy, if the Government be not from long received and
established Laws, which is the Princes greatest security; and therefore in
reason ought rather to suffer some mischief from them, then venture an
inconvenience by altering them: Whereas in the other Governments, where
Factions and men's Interests bear so great a sway, they are daily subject to
mutilation and alteration. And let any man see how unlike all the Parliaments
since 1640. have been in their Interests and Factions; and all of them would
have innovated all the established Laws of this Nation, if they could have
agreed upon any thing in stead of them.

Thirdly, That it is an unreasonable thing, Men's lives and estates should
terminate in the Will of one Man, and it may be this Man a wicked and tyrannous
Man. But if it be necessary that these things must depend upon some Humane
cause, how much better is it for Men to be subject to one Man then many? Nor
can any thing be objected against Monarchy, but will be of more force against
either of the other Governments.

15. Those Men who imagine to frame a Democracy or Commonwealth It is abhorrent
and impossible to frame a Commonwealth in England from the example of the
Romans and Athenians.
here in England, from the example of the Romans or Athenians, etc. let them
consider two things. First, That by a general abhorrence of Mankind, Democracy
has been exploded upon the face of the Earth for above 1700 years, (if the
Cantons of Switzerland be not Democratical, who have almost ever since their
Rebellion against Wenceslaus about the year 1400. (when they first formed
themselves into a Democracy) continued mercenary Mankillers to the Interests of
the Pope, and the Kings of France and Spain.) Secondly, The state of the
Inhabitants of Rome and Athens, were the People, who were Civitate donati,
Libertines, or absolute Slaves; but with us the Case is quite another thing;
for, every Man has as much right to his Freedom as another, by birth. It is
therefore mere folly, from Causes so unlike, to produce like things. Besides,
if a man considers the condition of this Nation ever since Monarchy was
rejected, that in less then the revolution of Twenty years, the Public Charge
has been twenty times more then in Five hundred years before; Not only the
Nobility and Gentry in general sequestered and undone, but the Public Revenues
both of Church and Crown wasted and sold, all Veneration of Divine and Humane
Laws lost and neglected, all Commerce with Foreign Nations interrupted, and the
Nation hated and despised by Foreigners; the most Renowned places, which the
Piety of our Ancestors founded for the Worship and Service of God, profaned
and made Stables for Horses; The Governors, in stead of minding the Public
good, intending only by all unjust means to prefer themselves and creatures;
And at this day a greater Debt upon the Nation, then our Parliaments for 400
years have given our Kings, (except the sacrilegious gifts of Church Lands) and
the Nation still degenerating into worse; sure no sober man would be in love
with Commonwealths.

CHAP. V. Of Sedition.
1. BEfore we proceed to the Fathers, Husbands, and Masters Power, Of Sedition.
it will not be amiss to take a short view of Sedition, and what disposes men
to it of themselves, and how they are disposed to it by them who are in
supreme Authority. Sedition properly signifies Seditio, quid.
a going apart, or asunder: As the submitting and uniting of Subjects to their
lawful head, causes peace and quiet, from whence follows ease and plenty; so
sedition causes discord and War, which unless timely suppressed, either ends in
Tyranny, that is, by setting up one or more of the seditious, in place of him
who by right ought to command, or opens a gap to be overwhelmed of foreign
powers. See Hobbs de Cive, cap. 12.

2. This is the most ancient sin, the first of our first parents, the desire
The desire of judgment disposes men to sedition.
of being like to God, judging good and evil: Therefore God sent him out of
the garden to till the ground, Genesis 3. 22, 23. Absoloms ambition was, that he
might judge the land, 2 Samuel 15. 4. which only did belong to his Father; and by
the First proposition of cap. 3. lib. 2. all judgment belongs to him who is
supreme; The opinion therefore, that judgment of good and bad belongs to the
Subjects in general, or to any in particular, is a seditious opinion. It is
impossible that judgment removed from the head, should abide any where: for the
unreasonable appetite of men does deem things good or bad, not as they are in
themselves, but as they appear profitable, or not, to them; from whence it
comes to pass, that the same action is praised by one man as virtuous, and by
another is blamed as vicious; neither can there be any remedy for this thing,
but the submission of every man's judgment, to the judgment of another. Besides
judgment of good and evil, is to put an end to all difference; and what end can
there be of difference, when as either every man may judge alike, or no man can
tell who shall be Judge?

3. It was Adams answer to God, when he asked him whether he had Disobedience
to Laws.
eaten of the tree whereof he commanded him not to eat; The woman which thou
gave me, gave me of the tree, and I did eat. It is usual with seditious men
when they are disposed to sedition, to oppose the laws of God against humane,
and plead conscience, because through their stubbornness they will not receive
humane laws. What follows? No private man but may assume to himself as much
liberty as another, and every man will desire to seem as tender-conscienced as
another; so that, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum: Men pretending
conscience, destroy all society and government, It is therefore a seditious
opinion to affirm, that subjects sin obeying their Sovereigns in all things not
contradicting Faith, Religion, or the Law of Nature.

4. When men abound with wealth and ease, partly by their own natural Ambition.
affection, and excited by their flatterers, deem themselves slighted if they
have not honor and power in their conceit proportionable to their wealth, no
wonder if they study novelty to acquire popular affection, in lieu of what they
call Court-favor.

5. When men are over-conceited of their parts and abilities, and because Envy.
they are not preferred in Church or State, according to their desires, use
their abilities to promove the affections of a faction contrary to what is
Trump, (as they call it) which, where liberty may be not only disputed, but
opposed to Prerogative, shall never be wanting; a small deal of wisdom serves
the turn, a little eloquence is enough, if they can use some small flourish of
words (no matter whether they be to the purpose or not) at Markets, Sermons,
Bull-baitings, etc. and then tell the auditory, that this thing done in State
is against law, and that thing done in Church is against conscience; no minding
of what is their duty, all their talk is judging their superiors; and this
buzzed into the heads of light and inconstant men, begets all the talk of the
Country, and is believed with the same Faith they believe the Gospel or their
Creed; and if Authority shall endeavor to suppress the further growth of such
seditious practice, by punishing the Authors, it will be deemed by the
well-affected, no less then an invasion upon the liberty of the subject, and
persecution of the Gospel.

6. If Lex lata had any obligation upon the Legislator, then were the Creature
subject to the Creator, and the Father obliged to what he commands That supreme
Princes are obliged by their own Laws, is a seditious opinion.
his Son, and the Master to what he bids his Servant, and God to what he
commands Man, which is absurd, nor is it less absurd that the supreme power
should be obliged by the Laws given to Subjects. They who assert that supreme
Princes are obliged by their own Laws, should do well to make their Children
shoes and clothes, to serve them when they are men; For as men's vices and
manners vary, so must humane Laws. But men neither consider themselves nor
Princes, in asserting this: For Princes are in a more vile condition then the
poorest man, not to have the freedom of will; and they themselves are left to
the rigor of the Law without hope of mercy. How can any man accuse Hen. 7. for
his rigid exacting the penal laws; when by this opinion he had not power to
remit any thing of them? And why do men tax H. 8. for a cruel man and a Tyrant,
because he put so many men to death for not acknowledging his headship of the
Church, the not subscribing the six Articles, etc. if he were obliged by his
own Laws? Nay, they do not allow Queen Mary a power to relieve any Protestant,
given over to the secular power by Bishop Bonner. From this very opinion sprang
all the miseries for these last 18 years; Scots had liberty to invade us, but
the King was obliged by his own Laws not to relieve his oppressed and afflicted
Subjects. This was that which gave the Turks first entrance into Christendom;
for while the wrangling Grecians not content with their rightful Emperors,
place usurpers in their rooms, who to gratify them again, and to strengthen
themselves against the right heirs, care not what they grant their
well-affected Subjects, which so weakened the power of the Grecians, that
contesting with their Emperors about their liberties and privileges, which
their usurping Emperors had granted them, and neglecting their common (and at
first despised) enemies the Turks, they were all overcome in a short time by a
handful of men obedient to their Prince. And what private man can assume to
himself the knowledge of good and evil, that is, ascribe to himself a power
over his Superior, by judging whether he has transgressed the Law, or not? And
let any man show that ever our Parliaments, as they call themselves, Councils
of State or Safety, were ever obliged by their own Laws, and I will submit that
rightful Princes are obliged by their own Laws.

7. There is nothing more to be wished in this world, then that the That
supreme power may be moderated.
Will of them which command, might be moderated and restrained to Reason; as
that Kings, Fathers and Masters should never exact any thing of their Subjects,
Children and Servants, but what were reasonable. But it is impossible that the
Supreme power can be moderated, unless it be divided, or subject to the
Moderators: It is therefore a seditious opinion, That Supreme power may be
moderated.

8. All right that any Creature has to any thing, is either from the That any
man has any thing proper against the Supreme power.
Law of Nature, or from some Humane Law; but no Subject can have Praedium
directum cujus nullus author est nisi Deus. Sir E. Co. Com. Lit. page 1. b. qui
dominium non habet, dominus non est. And he that holds of none, is Lord of all;
which no Subject can be. It is therefore a seditious opinion, That any Subject
has any thing proper against his Sovereign.

9. There has not any thing for more then this last Century, caused so That the
people may reform, where Princes will not.
much dissension and bloodshed among Christians (to the shame of Christianity)
as the specious pretense of Reformation. The Turk, either restrained by God, or
not willing to be an Enemy to Mankind, has been only a spectator, not actor in
this Tragedy. The end does sanctify the means, was a doctrine generally
received among these Reformers; if the end were Reformation, it was no matter
by what means it was brought to pass. Hence it was, that every where in the
Western world, men disposed to sedition, made Reformation their pretense: No
Prince must use his power to restrain them; if he do, Calvin gives them a
lesson, Abdicant se potestate terreni Comment. on Dan. 6. 21.
Principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum; immo indigni sunt qui censeantur in
hominum numero; potius ergo oportet conspuere in illorum capita, quam illis
parere, ubi sic proterviunt ut velint spoliare Deum jure suo: Earthly Princes
do divest themselves of power, when they set themselves against God; yea, they
are not worthy to be accounted in the number of men: Men ought therefore rather
to spit upon their heads, then obey them, where they deal so saucily, as if
they would spoil God by their right. And Luther; Ab omnibus hominum legibus
exempti sumus, liberate nobis Christiana per Lib. de captiv. Babil. de
baptismo.
baptismum donata: We are freed from all Laws of Men, liberty being given us by
Baptism. Et scio nullam rempublicam feliciter legibus administrari; I know
there is no Commonwealth happily governed by Laws. And, Turpe enim est and
iniquiter servile, Christianum hominem, qui liber est, aliis Cap. de matrimonio.
quam coelestibus and divinis subjectum esse legibus: It is a filthy and unjust
servile thing, that a Christian man which is free, should be subject to any
Cap. de sacrord.
but Heavenly and Divine laws. And whether these men's followers have not well
practiced their Lectures, wheresoever they have been tolerated either in
Germany, Bohemia* Austria Upper and Lower, Hungaria, Transylvania, Sweden,
France, England, Scotland, Low Countries, Geneva, etc. let any man who has
read the Combustions of Christendom, judge; and the Anabaptists and all other
Sects may from their principles justify all their actions.

10. There is nothing more manifestly commanded by God in the That temporal
good follows in order to spiritual.
Old and New Testament, then obedience to Temporal Princes; yet there is
nothing more endeavored (to the shame of Christians) then by pretense of
Religion, to usher in Rebellion. By this opinion are all Christian Princes made
in a worse condition then Infidel or Mahumetan, and subject to the Spiritual
powers in their Temporal jurisdiction. But, mutato nomine, a new generation of
men have sprung up, and changed -- Bonum temporale sequitur in ordine ad bonum
spirituale, into -- The wicked have no right to their goods; and, It is lawful
for the children of Israel to rob the Egyptians.

11. The King is greater then the Singulars, and less then all his Subjects;
Rex major singulis, etc. is a seditious opinion.
is a Fools bolt shot at such random, that it is not worth the measuring
whether it be near the mark, or not: For not only all Subjects owe their
obedience, as much as every one; but never was any Prince universally rejected
or disobeyed by his Subjects.

12. See Sir Ed. Coke, 3. par. Inst. page 9. On si homme leva guerre encontre
That Subjects may upon any prerence levy war without consent of the Supreme
power, a seditious opinion. See Calv. case 11, 12.
nostre Seignieur le Roy: This was High Treason by the Common Law; for no
Subject can levy War within the Realm, without authority from the King, for to
him it only belongs. And a little after; If any levy War to expulse
strangers, to deliver men out of prisons, to remove Counselors, or any other
end pretending Reformation of their own heads, without warrant, this is a
levying of War against the King, because they take upon them the Royal
authority, which is against the King.

13. Let no Prince ever hope for obedience from his Subjects, who Negligence in
the worship of God.
takes no care that God be duly served by them: For, where the fear of God is
not, men will not honor their King, but are disposed to sedition.

14. Honor is nothing else, then the estimation of another power Contempt of
the Regal power, disposes men to sedition.
viz. That a man has power to protect, reward, and punish another. And prudent
Princes ought so to maintain the reputation of this in their Subjects, that it
may be received and believed of all: For besides that ill men will, where there
is no fear of punishment, become more licentious; generally all men ambitiously
(where they are not restrained by fear) desire to insult over their Superiors.
Aesop gives an Item of this last, in the Fable of the Logg which Jupiter gave
the Frogs for their King; when they became fearless of it, every one jumped
insultingly upon it: And examples of the former are clearly seen in men, who
condemned for offenses to death, they penitently acknowledge their faults, and
desire forgiveness of that Power that puts them to death; whereas scarce any
offender fearless of punishment, did ever submit and ask forgiveness for it.
Princes therefore ought principally to take care, how either by their vices,
remiss Government, or otherwise, they make their persons or power contemptible;
for when power is contemptible, the exercise of it is never permanent.

15. If the Age tends to worse, and men of this latter Age have been
Concessions of Princes to their Subjects, disposes them to sedition.
worse then in the precedent, as men generally hold; and if Princes power, in
Ages when Mankind did not so fast degenerate into all forbidden wickedness,
were not sufficient at all times to restrain the seditions and disorders of
their Subjects; then is it a most unreasonable thing in Princes to indulge this
ambitious desire of their Subjects, by granting them liberties and privileges
which they had not before. And if any man can show that ever any where in the
world, Princes did make their Subjects better by granting them a more then
usual liberty, but only made them more arrogant to demand more, until their
Majesty's and Authorities became so contemptible, that in stead of governing
their Subjects, they must be content to have what terms their Subjects please
to impose upon them, or to reject them, which in the end they will assuredly
do; I will be content to believe Princes do prudently, by granting to their
Subjects all their real Prerogatives, and retaining only, or some small matter
more, then the empty Title.

16. It is not only the office of a Prince, that good Laws be made, but If Laws
be not carefully executed.
that they be carefully put in execution. There is no man who does not will and
desire to be happy; but few men who are daily sollicitous and industrious to
attain to happiness. It is the part of foolish men, only to will and wish; but
the part of prudent men, to do wisely. A man shall see it in a family, where
the Master only commands, and never looks to the doing, that in a short time,
though he commands much, he will have little performed: And where Subjects have
gotten a licentious habit of neglecting or transgressing Laws, it will prove a
hard thing to reclaim them, whereas they might have been easily preserved in
their obedience by careful execution of the Laws.

17. There is nothing more dangerous in Church or State, then Innovation:
Alterations of Laws.
It is therefore the most secure way of governing (when men's manners and vices
do not require new Laws) by the ancient and received Laws of a Nation: This
will secure the Prince from the imputation of Tyranny; he may better hope to
preserve a strong house built upon a sure foundation, then by destroying it, to
undertake to build another, which he either knows not how to finish, or having
built it, cannot hope it will be better then the other, or cannot tell whether
it will be of any continuance, but falling will overwhelm him in the ruin of
it. Besides, the Subjects from the example of their Prince will become studious
of innovation, and censure whatsoever Laws he prescribes in lieu of the old
ones: Those he gives, if they please one, will displease another; it will be
the only talk of the City, Country, and Market: If he punish any opposer, (for
it is not possible but disadvantage will be to many, and the loser will speak)
he shall by all his faction be cried up for a Martyr and Patriot of his Country
and Laws: It will make Subjects diffident of their condition, and fearful that
having Property by the old Laws, they shall lose all by new ones. Yet there is
nothing in this world can secure men, and make their condition permanent: For,
what is usually objected by seditious men against their Prince, viz. the
invading and not suffering freeborn Subjects to have the benefit of their
ancient Laws and Customs, was imputed a crime to our late King, who was
persecuted by his own Subjects, because he adhered to the known and received
Laws of the Land; for, after the year 1642. there was not any Petition
presented to the King by one or both Houses of Parliament, but was against the
established Laws of this Nation. But no question, it was not the Kings
adherence to the Laws, but the iniquity of the Times, which brought so great a
calamity upon himself, his Queen and Posterity.

18. If there be any happiness in this world or the world to come, which
Resuming any thing granted to Subjects.
may be hoped for by any man, no question but it is to be attained by Justice
and Obedience; and Justice and Obedience is, in receiving and doing the
Commands of our Superiors; nor can any one be a just or obedient man in any
thing, wherein he makes not his Superior (that is, God, Church, King, Father,
Mother, or Master) the reason or rule of it. Yet there is nothing more desired
and pretended by ignorant and seditious men, then liberty: And wherein do they
place this liberty, but in weakening the power of him to whom they owe their
subjection? And the more any Prince grants to his Subjects, the more liberty
the Subjects ascribe to themselves, and the less power to their Sovereign; and
will rather be devoured by foreign Enemies, then endure that their true Prince
shall infringe their liberties by resuming any thing granted them, although it
be for their necessary defense and preservation.

19. Government is endangered either by intestine broils which are Granting
privileges to particular places, causes sedition.
raised by factious and seditious men, or foreign war; and Princes ought to be
more careful to preserve their Subjects in general from intestine then foreign
war: For besides that civil wars are more dangerous to the Crown then foreign,
so intestine wars always end in loss of subjects in general, whereas by foreign
wars much benefit may arise to King and subjects. And there is nothing so much
desired, and that can so much conduce to the suppression of factions and
seditions, as the equal and due administration of the same Laws to Subjects in
general. But in vain shall Princes endeavor to suppress factions and seditions,
when they make them, by making so many Factions, as they make Corporations: For
who does not see what an antipathy there is between the Country-Justices, and
the Magistrates (as they call them) of Corporations, where they agree not in
aliquo tertio, that is, in some mischief, plainly in advantage of the
Corporation? And let any man show one Corporation of an hundred, which has not
used the Privileges granted them by Princes, to the dissolving of that Power
which granted them their Privileges. Ecclesiasticus says, That without
Handicrafts men and Tradesmen Cap. 38. 32, 33.
a City cannot be inhabited; but they shall never sit in the place of
Judicature: And indeed, what thing can there be more abhorrent, then that men,
who by fraud and unjust gains have gotten much money, should therefore sit in
Judicature, and judge and condemn poor men to death for small offenses in
comparison of theirs, and different only in this, that the one committed their
offenses fraudulently and covertly, and the other forcibly and violently?

20. As in men's natural bodies, well-ordered action is much conducing Long
peace disposes men to sedition.
to the preservation of health, and overmuch ease and sloth the original of
many distempers, which cannot be recovered without bloodletting and physic: so
in the bodies of Kingdoms and Empires, a well-ordered Militia constantly kept
in action, conduces much to the preservation of a Nation; whereas sloth, and
neglecting military discipline, makes a Nation not only unfit and unweildy to
defend it self against its outward Enemies, but also contracts infinite Civil
distempers within it self, all tending to a Civil war. Well therefore might
Cato Major in his great wisdom cry out in open Senate, That soldiers and men of
war were to be still busied in arms far from home; for that in so doing all
should go well with the State, and the glory thereof increase. And the Romans
always judged an external war the most requisite and necessary remedy to
prevent an intestine. And no doubt but this is See Bod. de rep lib. 5. 563.
at this day, the Politic reason of the long wars which France makes against
Spain, rather then any fear or hatred of the Nations one to another. It is
therefore a miserable condition in which Princes are (without Gods great and
special favor to them) that either they must maintain a foreign war, and so
become accountable to God for all the blood which shall be spilt, if unjustly
undertaken; or else by long peace and ease dispose their own subjects to the
ruining and destroying of one another. It is said of Q. Eliz. that she would
never consent to the total subversion of Dunkirk, lest that by a careless
neglect of providing for themselves, the Seamen should be forgetful, and
unfitting for Naval warfare. And Scipio African would not give his consent to
the utter subversion of Carthage, lest that the Romans (Carthage being
destroyed) should not find another Nation which might keep the Roman Valor
exercised, and so by its own unactivity and sloth, it should degenerate and be
dissolved. Besides the excellencies of Military discipline, (not but that any
thing may be abused) by which Nations are protected from Foreign enemies; not
only Religion, Justice, Peace, Learning, etc. are internally preserved; it also
makes men industrious and active in business, valiant in dangers, temperate in
their desires, and to be wary and prudent in their actions. It is indeed an
admirable thing to consider, how the most wise, greatest, and best God has
attempered all things: Not only that all things are differing, if not contrary
to one another, but also has made and placed all Nations so enemies one to one
another, that he may by the help of one, revenge the injury and injustice which
is done by another; that so from fear of danger, all might be kept within the
bounds of their duty. Hence it was that God said, I will henceforth not cast
out before me one man of the nations which Josuah left when he died, that
through them I may prove Judge. 2. 21, 22. and 3. 1.
Israel, whether they will keep the way of the Lord and walk therein, as their
forefathers did, or not. And these are the nations which the Lord left, that he
might prove Israel.

21. There is nothing more establishes a Throne than Judgment, Selling of
places of Judicature, causes sedition.
(which is giving sentence according to Law) but he that buys the place, must
needs sell judgment, or else he will be a looser by it. And what can more
dispose Subjects to seditions, and to seek for judgment and right in an
extraordinary way, then that they cannot hope for it from corrupt Judges? Well
therefore said King Jugurth when he departed from Rome, Vade venalis civitas,
mox peritura si emptorem inveneris. Besides, who will fear to violate Laws, and
endeavor to raise sedition, if he may hope to buy off his punishment, which
should deter him from it, by corrupting the Judge?

22. Though no man has any thing proper against him who has supreme Imposing
and raising Taxes disposes to sedition.
power; and although no man can hope to preserve any thing which he has, but
as he, and what he has, is secured by that Power which gives him property;
which Power must be preserved by every man's life and fortune, or else no man
can hope to enjoy any thing he holds by that Power; and the paying of Taxes, is
to maintain others who are to expose themselves and their lives in defense of
what he and his fellow subjects enjoy: Yet are none of these things considered
by the greatest part of men; but as Mr. Hobbs observes, The raising of Taxes
makes men fire as those who are in Cap. 12. art. 9.
the disease called Incubus, (or as we say, ridden with the Nightmare) which
rising from the stomach, makes men think they are invaded, oppressed and
suffocated with great weight: Which thing, they who seem to themselves to be
oppressed with all the weight of the City, are prone to sedition; and men
declining in their fortunes, will not spare (though the fault be in themselves)
to impute their declining condition to the payment of the public Taxes; nor
will avaritious rich men fail to pretend poverty, and seek by innovation and
sedition to prevent them.

23. Honos est in honorante; Honor is nothing else, but the opinion of
Passionate desire to punish Subjects, especially where many are peccant, moves
to sedition.
another power, joined with goodness: Majesty does never appear so amiable, as
when arrayed in Clemency; whereas he who rigorously executes his power, will
be hated, and servilely feared by them who otherwise would honor and willingly
obey him. It were the most easy and natural thing in the world to govern well,
if the violent and rigid execution of Laws against all offenders, would cure
the maladies of State; nay, Subjects ought to be preserved (though peccant)
where the pardoning may appear an act of grace, not remisness, and the example
not encourage others to the like offense. Punishment ought always to look
forward, never backward; that is, Princes in punishing ought by the example to
deter others from the like offense; not to take pleasure in punishing any who
has offended him. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,
and will cause to cease the house of Israel, says the Lord, Hos. 1. 4. How
should God avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, whenas Jehu did
nothing but what the Lord commanded him? The reason is given, that Jehu took
pleasure in executing so dreadful a judgment upon his Masters house. Weak and
indisposed bodies are killed, never cured by violent physic; nor will Patients
ever seek to Physicians, who they fear will rather kill than cure them. Princes
who by violent and cruel ways do govern, suppress, yet nourish a fire, which
breaking out will hardly be quenched: Yet it is sometime the fate (I dare not
think through the fault) of most serene and clement Princes, to suffer death
and martyrdom from the senseless rage and fury of their seditious Subjects. If
then the insite piety of the most devout, religious, and best of Princes,
adorned with all the excelling virtues of Patience, Temperance, Chastity,
Justice, Mercy, love and tender care of his Subjects, Magnanimity in Adversity,
Moderation in Prosperity, could not secure Innocent Majesty from the violence
of unnatural Subjects; sure, Peace and happiness may by other men be endeavored
and prayed for in the next World, but it can scarcely be hoped for in this.

If there were neither Heaven nor Hell, no hope of bliss, or fear of Annot.
punishment hereafter; yet sure, so much Morality should be harbored in humane
breasts, as not causelessly to offer violence or injury to them of their own
kind: How much more unnatural, ungrateful, and inhumane then is it for
Subjects, against all Oaths of faith and allegiance, not only not to make any
restitution of those things which they hold of their Prince, before they
attempt any thing against him, but also to employ them all to the destruction
of that Person and Power, by whose grace and favor they enjoyed them. And if
that Monarchy be Tyranny, as Libertines affirm, and that all power is from the
People; then ought they not in reason to condemn it in the cause, and allow it
in the effect, and rob the People of so great a part of their original right,
by retaining their Estates which were all mediately or immediately holden of
the Crown. If Regal power be unjust and usurped in the cause, then cannot any
act of it be just or legal; and so by consequence all these famous Assertors of
Liberty do unjustly and illegally hold their Estates, which are nothing but
Concessions originally from the Crown, and do unjustly usurp them from the
People, from whom originally all power is derived. And where these men complain
so much of unjust, illegal, and arbitrary power of a Prince; let any man show
where ever, after they had usurped Regal power, they made Justice, Law, Equity
or Reason, but only their Rage and Will, the rule of their Actions and Laws.

24. It is a vain thing to expect that Subjects will long be governed in By
what degre^s, and from what causes, th^^ Nation became miserable.
peace, where either they are not governed by force of Arms, as the Turks,
English, Scots, Irish, and Low Dutch are; or where the Subjects have not that
estimation of their Prince, that by his power they are protected in their lives
and estates, and from him do claim whatsoever may be called theirs; and do not
unite themselves in a Religious Unity (which is the chiefest bond of Peace) or
Public Form and Communion of serving God: For, both in Church and State,
there must be some one thing to which all Subjects must indifferently submit
themselves, or it is impossible there should be any decision of their
differences in either. Where men therefore will not indifferently submit
themselves to the just and legal established Government in Church and State,
there necessarily must men (whatever they pretend or hope for) be forcibly
governed by Arms, or they will infinitely destroy one another. It is true
indeed, that Henry the Eighth, (who being of all mortal men the most unfit for
a Churchman, ascribed to himself the Headship of the Church, and) having
converted to his own use so great a part of the Church Lands, the veneration
which men retained of the Church, became vile and contemptible, and the Crown
lost the chief support thereby. The Crown thus left almost without support, it
descended to a Child; in whose Aristocratical reign, not only the Chantries and
diverse other Religious Houses were given by the Parliament and Bishops to the
King, but almost all things Sacred became a prey to the ravenous Courtiers.
Queen Mary endeavored to have had restored all to the Church again; but the
lands being incorporated into particular men's estates, it was not in her power.
After her, Queen Elizabeth by Act of Parliament so stopped the precipice of
things, that what was left in the Church, might not be aliened or made worse by
the Possessor; yet so, that she left a gap open for herself and her Favorites
to prey upon it: which was after shut by King James, and with great care
secured by King Charles. All this while grew up a Faction in Church and State,
which became the ruin of both: For not only in the Church, the Public
Liturgy, Communion, or Religion, was vilified and defamed; but the Governors
reviled with all opprobrious names of Tyrannical, Antichristian, etc. It is
true, the Majesty of the King was not so openly reviled, yet was it insensibly
daily undermined by them; in which they were much assisted by a company of
half-headed Lawyers, who in all Assemblies distilled this doctrine into
ignorant men, That the Law was above the King; and that they had Property
against him in their estates and goods. Whereby not only Citizens and Great
places became generally inclined to this new doctrine of the Teachers and
Lawyers; but the Country-Gentleman thought himself independent from the King
both in his life and estate; the Yeoman cared not for the Gentleman, and as
little regarded the King; so that the veneration of the Royal Name became every
day more contemptible and despised; all honor and reverence due to the King and
Church, was converted unto these Patriots of their Countries Liberty, and New
Lights: Nor could the Church relieve the Crown, (although the Governors were
well-affected toward it) being by all the Faction more hated, than the King
became despised; until in the end the chief Governors both of Church and State
not only became Victims to the rage and lust of seditious men, but the Revenues
of both a prey to their avarice. And now what is left for this miserable Nation
to expect (having forfeited all Piety and Allegiance to Gods Church and his
Anointed) but after all this consumption of the Blood, and Public and Private
Revenue of the Nation, and having lost all Reputation and Commerce abroad, for
the future to be Turk-like governed by armed and hungry Soldiers, without any
probable hope of Redemption.

Object. It may be it will be here objected, That though poor and contemptible
Princes be rarely long obeyed, especially where their Subjects are opulent; yet
had the Church never so great veneration, both for power and piety, as when in
the Primitive times it was poor; whereas afterward, when it became rich and
mighty, it did degenerate into many vices and heresies, and lost much of
estimation and piety which it had in its poverty.

Answ. I grant, that God did by his grace and power originally by a company of
poor men and Fishermen, against all the greatness of worldly power,
miraculously plant a Church; and that those poor men sent by God, were
supernaturally inspired by his grace, (which, not their poverty, was the cause
of their piety and sanctity, and that they were so highly honored by primitive
Christians:) yet sure, when God has supernaturally planted his Church, it
cannot be in reason expected he should preserve it always by miracle: And sure
those are very ungrateful men, not to contribute ordinary means, for the
preservation of what God has extraordinarily planted: Nor is there any thing
more vain, then to imagine that men are better, for being poor; or that
according to the ordinary course of things, they will not be by men in general
esteemed vile and contemptible, who are so.

Nil habet infaelix paupertas durius in se, Juveual.

Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
CHAP. VI. Of the Fathers power.
1. UNumquodque resolvitur in id, ex quo componitur; Dust shall return to the
Introduction.
earth as it was, and the Spirit to God who gave it, Eccle. 12. 7. It is not
the good will and pleasure of the All-prepotent God, that only the individuals
of one age, should see the greatness of his Majesty and power; therefore he was
pleased to create man as well as other Creatures in this inferior or be, in a
If Adam had not been created in a Mortal State, the Sacrament of the Tree of
life had been a vain institution.
mortal state; yet he endewed him generativa facultate, that though he does dye
in his person, yet he should live in his posterity, and as one generation
passes away, so another comes, but the earth abides for ever. Eccle. 1. 4.

2. There is nothing more evident, then that in perfect Creatures (of The power
of Parents alike over their Children.
which man is the most perfect) that God is the prime and efficient cause, or
God working by natural causes, the Sun is the efficient cause, and Male and
Female the Instrumental, Sol per hominem generat hominem. See Harvey de
generatione Animalium Cap. 33. Man and Woman therefore being the means whereby
God does renew the species of Mankind, and all Creatures having power over
themselves in all things, wherein they are not restrained by some natural or
humane Law, and every Child being alike part of either of his Parents, the
Power of Father and Mother is alike over their Children, and so by consequence
the subjection and obedience of every Child is alike due to Father and Mother:
And to honor thy Father and thy Mother, is the First precept of the second
Table of the Decalogue.

3. Man and Wife being but one person, and the Husband being the Why in
Matrimony the power is in the Father.
head of the Wife, and the Wife being in the power of the Husband, the Husband
has the power and command as well of the Children as of the Mother; yet the
piety and observance of Children to their Mother, is as much due as to their
Father.

4. Grotius, cap. 5. art. 2. de jure belli and pacis, out of Arist. pol. 1. cap
ult. Grotius his opinion of the Fathers power,
and eth. 5. cap. 10. distinguishes the Fathers power over Children into three
times, viz. 1. The time of their imperfect judgment; 2. The time of their
perfect judgment; 3. The time when they are out of the Fathers family. In the
first, all the actions of the Children are under the command of the Parents: In
the second time, whenas judgment is matured by age, and are of the family, they
are subject as part of the family: In the third, when he is matured by age, and
out of the family, the Son is in all things (...) of his own right. Yet he says
(and truly) parag. 5. The Fathers power so follows the Fathers person, that it
can never be pulled off nor transferred to any other; for, the Fathers power
arising from generation, is due to him by the Law of Nature, and so always the
same, if not aliened by the act of God. And therefore Confuted.
Quando and Ubi make no alteration in the Fathers power; for it is the same
when the Son is an Infant, and when adult; when he is part of the family, and
when not.

5. Where the Law of Nature gives a power which is not restrained The Father
has power of life and death over his children.
by the Law of Nature, the power is absolute: But it is evident, that the Law
of Nature gives Fathers a power over their Children without restriction;
Therefore the Fathers power is absolute, and by consequence he has power of
life and death over his Children. See Bodin. cap. 4. page 21. de rep. where he
says, That the Persians, the people of Higher Asia, the Hebrews, Romans,
Celtae, Gauls, the West Indians before the Spaniard subdued them, did use this
absolute power. And see page 23, 24. how he makes all the strife, disorders and
contentions among Brethren, their Father living, the wantonness, luxury and
riot of youth without fear of punishment, the contempt and scorn of the Fathers
person and power, and the decay of the glory and ennobled virtue of the Romans,
to proceed from the taking away of the Fathers power. Examples of the Fathers
power of life and death are hard to find, because it cannot easily be imagined
a Father should give judgment upon himself, (his son being part of himself) to
cut off any part of himself, which he hopes might by any means be cured: Yet
Quintus Fulvius did adjudge his son to death, for being of Catelines
Conspracie: Salust. de conj. Cat.
And see Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. where it is most evident, that the Father
has power of life and death; for the People do but execute the judgment of the
Father and Mother, That such a son is stubborn and rebellious, etc. The
exercise of this power is restrained generally among Christians by positive
humane Laws; but from what ground, I cannot tell.

6. The Fathers power arising from generation, and the person of the The Son
has propriety against his Father.
Son being only generated, the Fathers power can extend no further; and
therefore whatsoever the Son does acquire, it is his own, excluding his Father.

7. Though the Son out of wedlock is alike subject to both parents, Why out of
wedlock the Fathers commands are to be preferred before the Mothers.
because he is alike part of both; yet if the Father and Mother command
contrary things, whereby it becomes impossible for the Son to obey both, there
the command of the Father is to be preferred, because of the excellency of his
sex.

CHAP. VII. The Husbands Power.
1. THe Husbands power does not arise ex concubitu; for then a man has power
over all the women which he has, or shall have known, which is absurd;
besides, one woman known by several men, should be alike subject to them all,
which is impossible.

2. The Husbands power does not arise from his Wifes being a part of his
family; for any part of the family, may become no part of the family; but the
Wife can never be out of the power of her Husband, therefore the Husbands power
does not arise from the Wifes being a part of his family.

3. The Husbands power does not arise from the Wifes submission or subjecting
herself to her Husband, for that is but an act of her will, and unumquodque
dissolvi potest eo ligamine quo ligatum est; and therefore by an act of her
will, she may when she list set herself free.

4. It does not arise from the Husbands accepting of the Wifes will; for that
makes the Husband obedient to his Wife; obedience being no other thing, but the
accepting the will of another, which is unnatural.

5. The Husbands power does arise from the law of God or Nature, by From whence
the Husbands power does arise.
the conjunction of Man and Wife in wedlock: For these two individual persons,
by the law of God, are made one mystical person, of which the Husband is head;
and the head is the directive and ruling part of the body, therefore the
Husband is the director and ruler of his Wife.

Object. But if the Law of Nature, by Marriage, gives the Husband a power or
right of command over the Wife; why may it not be, that God by the Civil pact
might give a Prince or Court a right of command over those Men who made it?

Answ. I answer, That first a Similitude proves nothing. Secondly, The cases
are nothing alike: For, Marriage was an institution of God in Paradise; and the
power of the Husband over the Wife, being due by the Law of Nature, has been
ever since attributed by Mankind to the Husband; yet so, that after the death
of the Husband, the Wife becomes free from such subjection, until by Marriage
she again subjects herself. In none of these respects does this hold in the
Civil pact; for no such thing was ever instituted by God, nor any such thing
ever constituted or done by Man, but only a Chimera invented by capricious men,
to palliate sedition. Nor did ever any man become free from subjection to
Supreme powers, by the death of him or them to whom they made their subjection
by virtue of the Civil pact: Nor was it ever known in the world, that Men were
free before they made their Civil pact, as Women are before they marry.

6. God gives a power to the Husband without restriction, viz. Thy The Husband
has jus vitae and necis over his Wife.
desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee, Genesis 3. 16. And
therefore the Husbands power over the wife is without restriction, and by
consequence the Husband has power over the life of his Wife. Anciently among
the Gauls, this power was not restrained. The Romilian Law restrained the
Husbands Caesar lib. 3. de bell. Gal.
power to put his Wife to death, for four causes only. This power was used by
the West-Indians, before they were subdued by the Spaniard; and is generally
among the Idolaters and Mahumetans. But the exercise of the Fathers and
Husbands power of life and death over their Children and Wives, is restrained
not by any law of God (that I know of) but by the Temporal laws; and yet no
wrong done to the Fathers or Husbands neither: For, though their Children and
Wives be in their power by the law of Nature, yet by the law of Nature are they
in the power of their Sovereign, and subject unto him: And though the Fathers
and Husbands power be from the law of Nature, yet the exercise of it is humane,
politic, and voluntary; and the exercise of all Subjects voluntary actions,
may be restrained and determined by him, who has the supreme power; therefore
the Fathers and Husbands exercising their power over their Children and Wives,
may be restrained by him who commands by the highest right, which is the King.
But supposing the Husbands and Fathers power to be from the law of Nature, and
Regal power but a politic and invented thing, and made only by the will of
Man; it were then a violence upon the law of Nature, that any thing which has
no origination but from the inventions and wills of Men, should restrain the
exercise of that power which God has given Fathers and Husbands by the law of
Nature.

7. The Husband being the head of the Wife, she is in all respects of law The
Wife has nothing proper against her Husband.
deemed civiliter mortua, nor can take or purchase any thing during the
coverture; but whatsoever is given to the Wife, is ex facto the Husbands. Yet
Marriage being a Sacrament by the institution of our Savior, and Ephesians. 5. 25,
32. a Mystery of Christ and his Church, and so the cognizance thereof due to
the Ecclesiastical power; the Church, upon the penalty of Ecclesiastical
censure, may compel the Husband to allow his Wife Alimony, if without
sufficient cause he shall refuse to cohabit with her.

8. If Poligamy had not been lawful before our Savior Christ's time, Poligamy
was lawful before our Savior,
then had our Savior been illegitimate, being descended of Bathsheba, when
David had many other wives. Nor can the argument drawn from the necessity of
propagating Mankind, take place when David reigned; for there never was in so
small a Continent so great a number of people, as the Israelites were when
David reigned, as appears by the Number which Joab took, and for which David
was punished with so great a pestilence.

If it were, before the divine law of our Savior, lawful every where for Annot.
Men to have many Wives; I do wonder why Mr. Hobbs, cap. 17. art. 8. de Cive,
says, That our Savior made no laws but the institution of the Sacraments,
which are Baptism and the Eucharist: And if Matrimony be a Civil institution,
as he affirms, then Poligamy is lawful for all Christians who are in subjection
to the Turks, etc. where by the Temporal laws it is permitted; and the Kingdom
of Congo rejected Christianity for no other reason, but because they were not
allowed plurality of wives, which Mr. Hobbs could easily have dispensed with. I
do challenge Mr. Hobbs to show any one instance, where ever in the Christian
world (before all things ran riot here in England since 1642.) the Temporal
power took cognizance of Marriage.

9. Matrimony is the act of two free persons (viz. neither precontracted What
Matrimony is.
nor married, nor within the degrees prohibited by God, Levit. 18.) of
different sexes, capable of performing the end of marriage, mutually taking one
another for Husband and Wife: I N. take thee D. to be my wedded Wife; I D. take
thee N. to be my wedded Husband. But this must be done publicly, and Banns of
both parts publicly pronounced three Holidays, or a License procured from the
Ordinary for dispensation, with all the rites and solemnities injoined by the
Church, or else the Church takes no cognizance of it.

10. Where the Matrimony is subsequent to the allegation, there the Whether
Matrimony be dissolvible.
Vinculum is dissoluble: As if one man marries another man's Wife, or a Husband,
his Wife living, marries another; or if the parties contracting or marrying, be
within the degrees forbidden by God; or if either party were Lev 18.
precontracted, or frigid; these necessarily preceding the Matrimony, do
dissolve the bond: But where the matter or allegation is subsequent to the
Matrimony, there the bond of Matrimony cannot be dissolved, but only a Divorce
upon just cause is grantable to separate the Complainant a mensa and a thoro.
The reason why in this latter case the Matrimony cannot be dissolved; is,
because Marriage being an institution of God, it is in the cause superior to
any Humane law or act, and so by consequence cannot by them be dissolved. And
indeed, in proper speaking, where the Matrimony is subsequent, it is rather not
done, then dissolvible, the persons marrying being personae incapaces for such
an action.

11. The Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 5. 25, etc. shows the duty of Husbands: The duty of
Fathers and Husbands,
And Cato (though no lover of women) did think it sacrilege in the Husband to
strike his wife, Plut. vita Caton. cens. No question, the right and careful
education of Children, is the only means by which Parents may hope to have any
comfort of them here or hereafter; for, Train a child in the way when he is
young, and he will not depart from it when he is old, says the Preacher. Nor
can Parents expect to have their Children virtuous, if they be vicious
themselves; for, with what face can any Father condemn his Child for any thing
which he allows in himself? Besides, there is nothing ill, which naturally
Youth does not more suddenly apprehend then Men; therefore,

Maxima debetur puero reverentia, si quid Juveval.

Turpe paras. --
And ill habits are soon gotten by Children (if they be not carefully observed
and restrained) and hardly, if possibly left when they are Men.

CHAP. VIII. Of Domestical power.
1. THere are three sorts of Families; either by Affinity or Alliance, How many
sorts of Families there be.
or by Consanguinity, or a Legal or Houshold-Family. Of such a Family, and of
its Cause and Jurisdiction, we shall in this ensuing Chapter treat.

2. A Family is not the cohabitation of diverse persons in one house; A legal
family is not the cohabitation of diverse persons in the same house.
for then Inmates and Travelers, etc. were subject to the power of the Master
and Host. Besides, subjection cannot be, where it depends upon the will of the
Subject; when he will, he may choose whether he will obey: But it is evident
that Inmates and Travelers may, when they will, cease their subjection by
leaving of the house.

3. A Family is contained in the mutual offices of commanding and What a legal
family is.
obeying, of several persons under one head, in the same house: And the same
head may be of diverse Families; as when a Master keeps servants in two or more
different houses.

4. A Family may consist of Paterfamilias, who is Father and Husband, Of what
persons a family (in the largest sense) is compounded.
and the head or commanding part of the family of Wife, Children and Servants,
who are the obeying part of the family; or of the Mistress of the family who
commands, and of Children and Servants who obey.

5. But because a Family may consist, where as parts of the Family In the more
proper sense.
there is neither Father nor Mother, Husband nor Wife, nor Children; A Family
is properly, where several Servants obey the same Master or Mistress in the
same house.

6. Servants are twofold, either voluntarily serving with their consent Of
Servants.
first given; such as are those servants who for such wages serve their Masters
for such a term; or where they serve, whether they give consent or not, as
where men are slaves, or apprentices. The power which the head of the family
has over his Servants, is called potestas herilis or despotica, the Masters or
Mistresses power. We speak first of Masters power over Servants serving for
wages.

7. It is impossible that any man can oblige or subject himself to any The
Masters power does not arise from the Servants subjecting himself.
man or creature by any Act of his will, for no Act of any man's will can have
any power of himself; Omnis potentia activa, est principium transmutandi aliud:
every active power is the cause of alteration in another body; the Act
therefore of a man's will, can make no obligation in his body who does will it.
Besides, it is against all rules of relation, that to bind and to be bound can
be in the same thing; therefore it is much more absurd to suppose the whole man
should be obliged by a part of himself, that is, by his will: Add hereunto,
that if a man be obliged to his will, then is the most wilful man, the most
just man, and every man is obliged to do any thing because he has willed it,
then which there is nothing can be more immoral and destructive to all society
with mankind.

8. If the Masters power did arise from the Servants subjecting himself to him,
which is an Act of the Servants will, then an Act of the Servants Nor from the
Masters accepting his Servants submission. Annot.
will may have a power and obligation upon his Master, which is absurd, for
this makes the Master to obey his Servant.

Yet in usual speaking, voluntas is confounded with conatus; as we say that
God did accept Abraham's will for the deed, in that he was willing to have
offered up his son Isaac: whereas in proper speaking, God did will or command
Abraham to offer up his son; and Abraham did obey (that is receive or accept
Gods will) and did endeavor, not will (for it had been unnatural and murder in
Abraham to have willed without cause the death of Isaac) to have done it, when
God restrained him, and so God was pleased to accept of Abraham's endeavor to
have pleased him: And so when any servant does endeavor to do his Masters will,
though he be not able to perform it, yet ought the Master to accept it, because
he does what he can (not to do any act of his own will, but) to perform an act
of his Masters.

9. But suppose the Declaration of the Servants will, does evade into The
Masters power does not arise from the Servants promise.
his promise given to his Master, yet cannot the Masters power arise from
thence, because men are obliged to the performance of their promises by the Law
of nature only, and that Law does oblige only in Conscience, but the Masters
power obliges to corporal punishment: I say therefore, that no Masters power
arising from any Act of the Servants will or promise, nor from the Masters
acceptance, no Regal power can arise from the Princes acceptance of their
Subjects submission; for a great family is a kingdom, and a little kingdom is a
family, says Tho. Hobbes, cap. 8. art. 1. de Cive.

10. If the Masters Power did arise from the Law of Nature, then were The
Masters power does not arise from the Law of Nature.
the power of a Master over his servant eternal, and incommunicable; but the
contrary of this is evident in all places of the world; for there is no place
where the Power of Masters is not only dissolvible by the Laws, and consents of
the Master and Servant; but where it is not slavery, there the Masters power is
terminated to years, months, weeks, days, or hours, etc. which expiring, the
relations of Master and Servant are dissolved, the Masters power therefore is
not from the Law of Nature.

11. If the Masters power did arise from Divine positive institution, Nor by
Divine positive institution.
then, where Gods revelation of himself in the Scriptures is not received and
believed, have Masters no power over their Servants. But this is evidently
false; for not only before Gods revelation of himself in the Scriptures, had
Masters every where power or dominion over their Servants, but also every where
in the world Masters have power over their Servants, as well where the
Scriptures are not received, as where they are: The Masters power therefore
does not arise from Divine positive institution.

12. Nascitur servus, says Aristotle most truly: There was no man that From
whence the Masters power does arise.
was ever born in the world (unless a posthumous King) but was born in a
threefold subjection; first to the Laws of God, secondly to the Laws of his
Parents, and thirdly to the Laws of his Country: And the Laws of every Country
obliging men to the performance of their pacts and contracts, the Law of the
place is the efficient cause, by the Contract of the Master and Servant (being
the instrumental causes) of the Masters power; and not only gives the Master a
power over his Servant, but also obliges the Master to perform all his promises
specified in the Contract to his Servant.

It is evident therefore, that where there is no precedent Humane Law Annot.
obliging, there cannot be any Family; for, the Law, by the Masters Contract
with his Servant, gives him the power over his Servant. All Grotius his
Government then, founded upon the Contracts of Men, is utterly false, and by
consequence no one true Proposition can follow from thence. Yet truly, it is an
error pardonable in him, who with his first milk sucked in this Popular
principle: No question but he was a man as eminent in Humane learning, as any
man of this last Age, and I doubt not but of a sincere and peaceable
disposition. It is the excellency of Truth, that it is plain and easy to be
perceived; whereas Falsehood, with all art and learning, is rendered more
obscure, by how much more is added to it. And it is strange for a stander by to
see what monstrous absurdities Grotius runs into, to uphold his fabric: For he
makes God, at the Creation and Flood, lib. 2. cap. 2. par. 2.
to give Mankind a natural right, viz. all men alike, over all things, and this
natural right to be immutable by God himself; and yet without giving lib. 1.
par. 10.
any reason for it, he makes it mutable by the will of man; and Dominion, which
he there says was brought in by the will of man, he says is Jus natural too:
So Jus natural does signify that which God gave to mankind; and Jus natural
does signify that which man's will brought in contrary to what God gave to
mankind, then which what can be more absurd?

But Mr. Hobbs, cap. 2. art. 9. makes a Contract the act of two or more Annot.
2.
mutually transferring their rights; and a Pact to be, when one or both is
trusted, and he who is trusted, does promise that he will perform; and
supposes the Civitas institutive, to take its first being from the Pacts of
men: Which will not help him; for such Pacts, as well as Contracts, receive
their obligation from precedent humane laws: And therefore all his book de
Cive, which is derived from this begging the question, is false. Indeed, Mr.
Hobbs is, no question, a man of most exquisite parts and learning, and possibly
might have a peaceable intention in making the Civitas the Judge of all matters
of faith as well as manners: But sure, many things in his generation of it can
never consist; as his making Jus and Lex contrary one to another; his making
the Legislator to depend upon the Citizen, for without his consent and proper
pact either express or understood, the Legislative right can be conferred upon
none: And yet he says, Wherefore do Cap. 12. art. 3.
thou call him Tyrant, whom God has made King? His making the Civitas to
receive all power from the pacts and wills of men, and making the Civitas Head
of the Church, and Judge of Faith, makes the power of the Church and all Faith
to be a thing invented, and to receive their beginnings from the wills and
pacts of men; then which, what can be more destructive to Faith and Religion?
But for our Author Tho. White Gent. he is not worthy the name of a learned,
rational, nor honest man.

13. Slaves are born, or made so. Slaves born, are the children of such Slaves.
as were so. Slaves made so, happen two ways: For being condemned for some
crime committed against some humane Law, and therefore by the Condemned persons.
Law condemned to it. Where the Law condemns, it is the will of the Supreme
power which condemns, and therefore not the will of the Slave that makes it so:
I deny therefore that where the Law does not make Slavery, any man can make
himself a slave to another; nor can any man use another as a Slave, where he is
not made so by Law.

Or else, Slaves are Prisoners taken in War. There is no man will affirm,
Prisoners by War.
the taking of another man prisoner, gives the taker a power over the others
life; for then all men falling into the hands of Thieves and Pirates, the
Thieves and Pirates have a power over their lives, and so commit no murder in
putting them to death: But Slaves from being made Prisoners, is, when there is
competition between two Supreme powers, and they give their Subjects power over
all their Enemies which they shall take Prisoners. It is not therefore the
taking of another Prisoner, which gives a man power over another life, but a
precedent humane Law which gives this power over those Enemies, which any
Subject shall take Prisoner, (and sure no man was ever taken Prisoner by an act
of his will.) It is false therefore that Bodin says, That a man may make
himself a Slave of his own accord, lib. 1. c. 5. p. 31. de repub.
(a man may as well offer violence or kill himself) and that a man bought for a
price of Thieves and Pirates, is a Slave to the Buyer; for he is not made so by
any humane law: Nor can any act of force, ever give another any power; nor can
any continuance of time make any thing good which originally was not so; and
therefore if all commands were originally from force, as he affirms, then are
no commands now any better, and so no difference Page 46. de rep.
between the commands of Thieves and Pirates, and of Fathers and Kings.
Although a man lawfully taken prisoner by another, be in his power, Slavery
moderated.
so as it is in the Takers power to have taken away his life, and so an act of
grace in granting it; yet the Law which originally gave this power may moderate
it, as here in England the Law has restrained the Lord from killing or maiming
his Vilain. Slaves have nothing proper against their Master.

14. Apprentices are, when the Father or Mother do oblige a Child Apprentices.
for such a term to serve such a Master; and this act is binding, because by
the Law of Nature the Father has an absolute power over his Children: But
because of the impotencie of Children, who cannot by reason of their youth, and
want of art and experience, do any thing which may at first compensate their
diet and clothes; if the poverty or negligence of parents be such, that they
cannot or will not procure a Master for their Children; and where Children are
Orphans, they may be bound and compelled to serve Apprentiships in such manner
as is prescribed by the public humane Laws of the place.

15. Neither naturalis, nor delegata potestas can be communicated nor What
power is alienable.
aliened: But acquisita potestas (as the power of Masters over their servants
and slaves) may be sold, aliened, or otherwise given away: And therefore
Guardian in Chivalry may give or sell to another the Guardianship of his Ward;
but Guardian in Socage cannot, for his is delegata potestas.

16. The Master of every family deriving his power from the humane The Masters
power restrained to humane laws. Caveat.
laws of every place, his power is restrained to the laws of that place;
therefore ought he not to command his servant any thing which is against the
laws of the place. When I say, by humane laws such a thing is to be done, or
not done; I always except those laws which God did give to the Israelites, and
peculiar only to them, when he pleased immediately to reign over them; which
laws did supply those humane laws, by which his Vicegerents do procure peace
among us.

CHAP. IX. Of Ecclesiastical power.
THat there is a GOD, who is the Author of all good past, present, By the light
of nature, God is to be worshipped.
and to come, and that He is to be worshipped and adored not only for the
present, past, and future blessings in this world, but also in hope of eternal
happiness in the world to come; is so naturally ingraffed into the minds of all
men, that not scarce one man (compos mentis) in an That there is a God, and
this God to be worshipped and served, is innate in the minds of all men, Plato,
Euthyphro requires as the first axiom of all virtue.
age did ever deny it: It is no wonder therefore, if men attaining to such a
height of impiety as to sell their inheritance in Heaven, unjustly to purchase
possessions upon Earth, do always make the specious pretenses of Religion and
Reformation (as the easiest way to work upon the giddy and inconstant
multitude, carried hither and thither with every wind of doctrine) the Exordium
of all their Enterprises; for,

-- Quoties vis fallere plebem
Finge Deum.
2. But how they should worship him aright, from the imperfect use of The
difficulty of pleasing God from the light of nature.
their reason, prejudiced by their appetitions and affections, is not to be
imagined: For, to worship and serve God not according to the will and pleasure
of God, is superstition; and not to worship God, is atheism. It is therefore an
impossible thing, without the special assistance of Gods grace, that men should
not fall either into superstition or atheism.

3. It being impossible that any act of man's will can please How God will be
served.
God, be it what it will, (for Saul intended well in sparing Agag, and the best
of the cattle of the Amalekites for a sacrifice to God; and Uzzah in staying
the Ark:) God therefore by the light of humane nature being to be served, and
yet not according to the will or fancy of any creature; what then is left, but
that he will be served accordingly as he has revealed himself to mankind? For,
without faith it is impossible to please God; and faith is the believing in God
as he has revealed himself to mankind, conjoined with the love of it.

4. In the beginning of the world, God revealed himself to Adam, Gods
revelation to Adam.
that he would be served and obeyed by him, in abstaining from eating of the
Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2. 17. It is worth the observance,
that the Knowledge of good and evil, is in it self a thing to be desired and
endeavored, so as it be done in obedience, not disobedience to Gods command.
God therefore in punishing Adam, learns all men this lesson, that in all his
commands he will be simply and absolutely obeyed, without any disputing whether
it be good or bad to obey him. But Gods covenant with Adam, Adam soon made
void, by eating the forbidden fruit: God sent him forth therefore from the
garden of Eden, to dress the ground from whence he was taken.

5. God is said to reign by covenant, where he reveals himself how he God did
reign by covenant with our fathers before the flood.
will be worshipped and served. The Scriptures are silent how God did reign with
our fathers before the Flood; but that God did, is evident: for it was not
Abels sacrificing to God, which pleased God, for Cain sacrificed as well as
Abel; but by faith Abel offered unto God a more acceptable sacrifice, Heb. 11.
4. and the doing of any thing by faith, is the doing it in conformity to Gods
command, as he has supernaturally revealed himself: God therefore must first
command (or reveal himself) before Abel can do any thing by faith: And Enoch
walked with God; and Noah was a just man and perfect in his Genesis 5. 22. Genesis 6.
9.
generation, and Noah walked with God. Enoch's and Noah's walking with God, was
nothing else but walking with, and doing what God had commanded: And where
there is no Law, there can neither be Justice, nor transgression: Therefore
could neither Noah be just, nor the sons of men so malicious against God, that
all the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts were only every day evil;
if God, for Adams sin, had only withheld his Gen 6. 6.
grace from Mankind, and not revealed himself unto them; for then men had
sinned of infirmity, but here they sinned maliciously.

6. God did establish a covenant with Noah and his sons after the flood, God
did reign by covenant with Noah and his posterity after the flood.
in this form, Genesis 9. 9, 10, etc. Behold I, even I establish my covenant with
you, and with your seed after you, and with every living creature that is with
you, in fowl, in cattle, in every beast of the earth which is with you, of all
that go out of the ark, whatsoever living thing of the earth it be; And my
eovenant I make with you, that from henceforth all flesh shall not be rooted
out by the waters of a flood, neither shall there be a flood to destroy the
earth any more: And God said, This is the token of my covenant which I make
between me and you, and every living creature that is with you for ever; I do
set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token between me and the earth,
etc. Yet Mankind did distrust God, and said, Go to, let us build a city and a
tower, whose top may Genesis 11. 4.
reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name, lest peradventure we be
scattered abroad upon the whole earth. So that Wisdom says, Moreover the
nations in Sap. Solom. 10. 5.
their wicked conspiracy being confounded, she found out the righteous and
prescrved him blameless with God.

7. Yet God was so merciful unto Mankind, as not utterly to forsake Gods
covenant with Abraham.
them, but established his covenant with Abraham and his seed: I will make my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, by
an everlasting covenant, that I may be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee,
etc. Genesis 17. 7, etc. This is my covenant which you shall keep between me and
you, and thy seed after thee; Every man-child among you shall be circumcised,
etc. God did not make any new covenant with Isaac and Israel, but renewed that
which he had made with Abraham; and by this covenant the Israelites were not to
serve God as God simply, but as the God which had appeared and made a covenant
with Abraham, Isaac and Israel. Under this covenant God by Moses gave the
children of Israel the Moral, the Judicial, and Ceremonial law; and under this
covenant was the Messiah promised, and prophesied of by all the Prophets.

Mr. Hobbs, cap. 16. art. 13. says, The supreme power, and also the
interpretation Annot.
of Scripture was in Moses, while he lived, and not in Aaron: Nor do I gainsay
it; for, Moses was of the Tribe of Levi, as well as Aaron: Besides, what should
hinder but that God, when he pleased, might give that to Moses, which ever
after should be inseparable from the High Priest. But where he says from Number.
27, 18, 19, 20, 21. that Eleazer was not only High Priest, but also had the
supreme power, because that when Eleazer had enquired of God, Joshua and all
the people should go in and out at his word; It does not follow; for then had
neither David nor Saul, etc. the Sovereignty, who asked counsel of God by the
High Priest. It is true, that was Magisterial in Eleazer, which was Ministerial
in Aaron: It is true which he says, that Joshua had but part of the power which
Moses had: But if it Note this; for Mr. Hobbs does.
be true which he says, that both powers were in Eleazer, then had Joshua none
of the power which Moses had: But that Joshua had all temporal power, and not
from Eleazer, both in command of war and governing the people, is manifest
every where in all the book of Joshua; neither had Eleazer any thing to do with
the division which fell to the Israelites by lot: Behold, Joshua said, I have
divided unto you by lot, those nations that remain, etc. which thing does
belong only to the supreme Temporal power. And whereas he says, After the death
of Joshua in the time of the Judges unto King A^t. 15.
Saul, it is manifest that the Regal right instituted by God remained with the
High Priest; sure he will not deny that the supreme power was in Deborah, and
yet sure he will not affirm that she had the Sacerdotal power.

And whereas Mr. Hobbs says, That the Kings of Israel had power over the Cap.
11. ar. 16. prope finem.
Highpriests, and instanceth in Solomon's deposing Abiathar; If he means that
they had power over their persons, he disputes without an adversary for me: But
it does not follow from thence, that they had the Sacerdotal power in them; for
Solomon did restore Sadoc, who was of the line of Eleazer, to whom he ascribes
so much power, whereas Abiathar was of the family of Ithamar (one of Aarons
younger sons, whereof Eli was the first.) Jos. de antiq. Jud. l. 8. c. 1.
And he may as well infer that the Regal power was subject to the High Priest,
because Jehojada restored Jehoash after he had slain Athalia. And chapter 16 art.
16.
whereas he says, That the Kings being constituted, there is no doubt but both
powers were in them; It is false: For, if the Sacerdotal power were in the
King, then might the King execute his power; but Uzziah transgressed 2 Chro.
26. 16.
against the Lord his God, when he went into the temple of the Lord to burn
incense upon the altar of incense: For, as Azariah the Priest told him, ver. 18.
It appertains not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to
the Priests the sons of Aaron that are consecrated to burn incense, etc. See
Number. 18. 7. and Exodus 30. 7. And the Lord smote him with leprosy, and Ahaziah
thrust him out, v. 20. See the manner more at large, Joseph. lib. 9. cap. 11.
de antiq. Judaeor. And Saul was therefore rejected from being King, because in
case of extreme danger he did offer sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13. 14.

7. That our Savior Jesus Christ, God and Man, foretold by all the Prophets,
The new and last Covenant and Revelation of God to Mankind by his Son.
most especially by that most noble Prophet Isaiah, (descended from the Kings
of Judah,) took our nature upon him, in Augustus Cesars reign, when Janus
Temple was shut, and an universal peace over all the world, who by himself once
offered for us under Pontius Pilate the deputy, was a fulfilling of the
ceremonial Law, (being but a type of him to come) and a sufficient propitiation
and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world believing on him, being the
foundation of all Christian faith, I will not dispute.

Note Reader that our Savior being the Prince of Peace, this Prince Nota Been,
of Peace, was born into the world when there was an universal Peace; so being
the King of Peace was born (as if there could be no peace without it) when as
there was none but Monarchy (and that not elective) in all the world.

8. But because parum est lex, nisi sunt qui possunt jura gerere, it had been
What Order our Savior took in his life time, for executing of his last Will
and Testament and how executed.
to no purpose for our Savior to have made his last Will and Testament, if he
had not made Executors to have executed it, he chose and ordained twelve
Apostles, and seventy Disciples or Evangelists his Executors: note, that in the
Gospells, the Evangelists are usually called Christ's Disciples as well as
Apostles, but the Disciples the Evangelists are never called his Apostles;)
After our Saviors passion St. Peter in his exhortation for the choosing of
another in the place of Judas, who had betrayed his Master, says, Acts. 1. 20.
Let his habitation be void and no man dwelling therein, and his Bishopric
(...) let another take. Here the Apostles (who are also called Disciples)
appointed Joseph and Mathias, but the lot fell upon Mathias; these Appostles
created seven Deacons. Acts 6. 6. chosen by the multitude, after prayer, having
laid their hands upon them. Peter and John, Act. 8. 17. confirm and lay hands
on the Samaritans converted by the preaching of Philip. Saul is called to the
Apostleship after he was stricken blind, and had seen Jesus whom he had
persecuted, Act. 9. 3, 4, 5. Barnabas was sent to confirm the believers
converted by them who were scattered upon St. Stevens persecution at Phenice
and Cyprus, Act. 11. 22, 23. Paul and Barnabas confirm the Souls of the
Disciples, and ordain Elders in every Church, Act. 14. 22, 23. Paul said to
Barnabas, let us visit our brethren in every City where we have preached, Act.
15. 36. neither can it be showed that any in the Acts, did ordain, lay on their
hands, confirm or visit, but only the Apostles; so that as Apostles, that is,
men sent not only to preach, confirm, ordain, visit, etc. every where, were
none made but by our Savior; For St. Paul and Barnabas were Acts. 15. 2.
miraculously chosen by him; And the Lot fell upon Mathias, Act. 1. 26. and the
Lot is of the Lord.

9. But because our Savior would not leave his Church in so short-lived a
states as to be but of one Ages continuance (God having left with the Jews Our
Saviors promise to his Church.
sufficient power for the propagation of the Jewish priesthood, until all
should be fulfilled by our Savior) he says, Behold I am with you even unto
the end of the world, Amen, St. Matthew. 28. 20. But preaching the Gospel,
ordaining, laying on of hands, confirming, etc. are necessary fundamentals for
the constituting of a Christian Church unto the end of the world, etc. Our
Savior therefore will be with his Church unto the end of the world in
Preaching the Gospel, in ordaining, laying on of hands, confirming, etc.

10. It being evident that the Apostles did preach, ordain, etc. our The
Apostles did ordain Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons.
Savior having promised to be with the Apostles and Disciples (i. e. the
Church) unto the end of the world, therefore after the Apostles, preaching the
Gospel, ordaining, etc. should be in the Church, let us see to whom our Savior
did bequeath this ghostly power after the Apostles. The Apostles did ordain
Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, Episcopos, Presbyteros, Act. 14. 21.
Diaconos: That Presbyter is not the name of Age, but Office, is most manifest;
for when St. Paul. had ordained Presbyters or Elders in every City, sure he
made them no elder then they were; Besides he made Timothy a Presbyter when he
was but a young man, 1 Timothy 4. 12.

10. As our Savior did usually call his Apostles his Disciples, but never The
difference between a Presbiter and a Bishop.
called his Disciples or Evangelists his Apostles; so the Apostles did usually
call Bishops, Presbyters, but never called Presbyters, Bishops. As Act. 20. 17.
whom St. Paul calls Elders of the Church, v. 28. he calls (...), and St. John
the Apostle Ep. 2. 3. v. 1. calls himself the elder. It is true therefore that
every Bishop is (or at least ought to be) a Presbyter, but every Presbyter is
not a Bishop: For St. Paul says, Against an Elder or Presbyter receive not an
accusation, but before two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19. But equals cannot
judge equals, therefore Timothy as a Presbyter could not judge a Presbyter,
therefore he should judge him as being Bishop, and so by consequence Presbyters
are subject to the judgment of Bishops (that is in Episcopal jurisdiction.)
Besides, Bishops have power of ordination of Presbyters in every City, 1 Tit.
5. 1 Timothy 5. 22. but it is no where found that ever Presbyters did ordain
Bishops. It is not therefore Ecclesiastical practice only, that is, the
universal practice of all Christians in all ages until John Calvin, but the
institution of our Savior, by which Bishops do excel and govern Presbyters.
It was after the destruction of Jerusalem, that Episcopi and Presbyteri caepere
appellari Pontifices and sacerdotes, as the most learned Estius observes; and
that the name of Priest is not a Jewish Distin: 24. l. 4. page 35, 36.
word, is evident, for Melchisedech was not a Jew, and yet a Priest; and our
Savior a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.

11. What St. Paul in the end of his Epistle to Timothy, calls Bishop of An
Apostle and Bishop the same.
the Ephesians, St. John Revel. 2. 1. calls Angel of the Church of the
Ephesians. So St. Paul and St. John understand the same thing by Angel, and
Bishop; but Angelus and Apostolus are the same, and therefore Episcopus and
Apostolus are the same. But what need that be proved by deduction, which the
Apostle, Gal. 1. 19. expresses: For James was none of the twelve, yet being
Bishop of Jerusalem, St. Paul testifies him to be an Apostle. Besides it is
evident, Episcopatus is the office as well of an Apostle as a Bishop, Act. 1.
20. There is therefore no difference between an Apostle and a Bishop; only
Apostles constituted by our Savior, had their function universal, whereas the
Bishops or Apostles ordained by the Apostles, had but a Topical function, that
is, the exercise of their power was restrained to their City or Diocese: And
all Ecclesiastical writers do affirm that St. James did preside in the Council
of Jerusalem, although St. Peter with other of the Apostles were Members of it.

12. Our Savior having promised the ghostly power of Confirmaion, Ordination,
The Power of Bishops, which Priests have not.
etc. to be with his Church to the end of the world, and the power of
Ordination, Confirmation and Excommunication, being bequeathed only to the
Apostles, the power of Ordination, Confirmation, and Excommunication descend
only to the Apostles successors, viz. Bishops rightly ordained.

13. Not the voice and letter, but the genuine and true sense of the Of the
interpretation of Scriptures.
Word of God, is the Canon of Christian Doctrine; for the mind cannot be
governed by Scriptures, unless understood. It is necessary therefore that
Scriptures be interpreted before they be made a rule. It will therefore follow
that either God has left a Power which may interpret Scripture, or else that
God has revealed himself to Men without sense or meaning; but the latter of
these is most false and blasphemous, therefore it is true that God has left a
power upon earth which may interpret the Scriptures.

14. If the Scriptures were as Arts and Sciences, which are derived from The
Scriptures cannot be interpreted by themselves, that is, one place by another.
higher Principles or Axioms, which though they cannot be proved (but are as
Aristotle calls them, indemonstrable propositions) yet are so clear and
manifest, that no exception can be taken to them, then indeed the Scriptures as
well as Arts and Sciences, might be proved, one place by another, until they
were resolved to their first Principles; which though granted, cannot be
proved. But it is far otherwise with the Scriptures, for there is no Scripture
which is not of like Authority with any other, every Scripture being the Word
of God; one place of Scripture therefore cannot be interpreted by the
consequents which may follow from another, any more then the consequents which
follow from -- Quae eidem sunt aequalia, inter se sunt aequalia, may be
interpreted by Omne totum est majus sua part.

15. There is no prophecy of the Scripture of any private interpretation, Not
all they who do translate the Scriptures are the intepreters of them.
2. Pet. 1. 20. It is not therefore every one, who can translate the Scripture
out of one language into another, with his own private conceptions upon them,
which renders them to be interpreted by him. What then? has God revealed
himself to mankind in general without sense or meaning? No, it does not follow;
for as in temporal Laws, no man can interpret them but he that made them,
either by himself or them whom he shall constitute, yet every man may by his
reason and discourse direct his own actions in conformity to those Laws; but if
he shall do any act upon misconstruction or interpretation of his own, his
mistaking the meaning of the Law shall not excuse him: So private men may
endeavor to direct their actions accordingly as they suppose God has directed
them in the Scriptures, yet if upon their own heads they undertake to interpret
the Scriptures (although in order only to their own actions) their
misunderstanding the Scriptures, shall never excuse any unjust act.

16. Every Law of God is the Word of God, but every Word of God is not the Law
of God; as Jacob went into Egypt, is the Word, but not the To whom the
Authority of the interpretation of Scripture does belong.
the Law of God: The Scriptures contain Political, Historical, Moral, and
Natural things; which are not rules of the mystery of Christian Faith and
Religion. Those things which concern Morality and Temporal power and
Government, our Savior made no alteration in them; for he says, St. Matthew. 5.
17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come
to destroy, but to fulfill. And therefore, quid est homicidium? quid furtum?
quid sit meum vel tuum? etc. belongs to the Temporal power, as much since our
Savior as before; and truly I do not think I should do the Church of England
any wrong, if I should with Lindwood affirm, that not only the Probate of
Wills, but also the cognizance of Tithes was in the Church ex consuetudine
Angliae: but those things which relate to mysteries of Christian faith; as our
Saviors being the Son of God, took humane nature upon him, and was born of a
Virgin, preached repentance, died upon the cross for the sins of the world,
rose again the third day, etc. God to make his power known, by the preaching of
a few mean men and Fishermen, and from the mouths of babes and sucklings (all
Temporal power not only not permitting, but contradicting it) converted the
world to Christianity: And although our Savior gave power to all his Disciples
to preach the Gospel, yet only to the Apostles He expounded the Scriptures,
beginning at Moses; And it was Luke 24. 27.
the Apostles understandings which he opened, that they might understand the
Scriptures. And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: ver.
45.
Our Savior therefore having promised the continuance of all ghostly power in
his Church, and having given the power of the interpretation of the Scriptures
(that is, those Scriptures which concern him immediately) only to his Apostles,
the authority of the interpretation of the Scriptures is continued only in
their successors the Bishops: As my Father sent me, so send I you. S. Joh. 20.
21.


17. Our Savior being the Head of the Catholic Church, therefore To whom the
right of making Ecclesiastical laws belongs.
all the body of the Church cannot make one Article de fide; and, Whosoever shall
go about to add or diminish from the prophecy of the book of life, God shall
plague him, and take away his part from the book of life, Rev. 22. 18, 19. Yet
where he gives command to his Church to do any thing, but gives it no direction
how it should be done, as, Let all things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor.
14. 40. there he gives the Church a power to make laws for the execution of his
command: for, decency and order must presuppose laws and directions; and where
there are no laws, there things must necessarily be done indecently and
disorderly. It therefore belongs to the magisterial or governing part of the
Church (that is the Bishops) to make laws for the decency and order of the
Public service of God, Consecration, Sacraments, things offered up to God,
and Rites of Marriage.

18. It was only to Timothy as Bishop of the Ephesians, that S. Paul, To whom
the composing of Public Liturgies belongs.
1 Timothy cap. 2. exhorts, that first of all prayers, supplications,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. Therefore to Bishops
it only belongs: And S. Ambrose his Liturgy is continued in Milan to this day,
if no alteration were since the Council of Trent.

19. The next Order in the Church of Christ to Apostles and Bishops, Of Priests
and their function.
is that of Presbytery or Priesthood, as S. Paul says 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has
set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers.
The Sacerdotal or Priestly power, in most things is the same with Episcopal or
Pontificial: as, both of them have power to consecrate the Sacrament of our
Lords Supper, and give it to the Laity; both of them have power of Absolution
and Remission of the sins of believing and repenting sinners; both have power
of Benediction, of offering up the service of the Church; both of them have
power to preach the Gospel, that is, preach what our Savior, the Apostles and
Evangelists taught, and what Interpretation the Church has made; both have
power of public baptizing Infants; both have power of visitation of the Sick,
celebrating Marriage and pronouncing man and wife: But Ordination,
Confirmation, Excommunication, Interpretation of Scriptures, (And therefore if
any Priest preaches any other Interpretation of the Scriptures, than what the
received Interpretation of the Fathers of the Eastern and Western Churches have
made, and the Councils of the first 400 years after our Savior, which
Interpretation is received and acknowledged by the Bishops of the Church of
England, the Bishops by the testimony of two or three witnesses may judge him:)
Visiting Parochial Congregations, composing Public Forms of Prayers,
Consecration of Churches and things offered up to God, belong only to Bishops.

20. Deacons are almost in the same proportion to Priests, as Priests Of
Deacons and their function.
are to Bishops: Deacons may preach the Gospel, which is evident, for the
Samaritans were converted by the preaching of Philip. A Deacon is the Minister
of Bishop and Priest, to assist them in offering up the Public Act. 8. 12.
service of the Church, in giving the Cup after them in the Sacrament, in
taking the offerings of the Priest, in the Visitation of the sick, in Public
Baptism: But a Deacon cannot consecrate the Sacrament, pronounce Absolution nor
Benediction; and these three, no question, are the Orders which S. Paul calls,
first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers; 1 Cor. 12. 28.
for in all things, but only preaching and baptizing, a Deacon is the Minister
of the Priest and Bishop.

21. Ecclesia, says S. Cyprian, est plebs episcopo adunata; or as the Church
What is a Church.
of England has defined it, a Church is a Bishop, Curates, and Congregations
committed to his charge. Every Congregation being a Parish (that is, a Priest
rightly instituted and inducted, exercising his function, and the inhabitants
of that Parish conforming themselves to the rules of the Bishop.) Una ecclesia
plures episcopos non habet, plures presbyteros habet. And therefore S. James
says, If any among you be sick, let him call the elders of the Church, cap. 5.
14. such was the Church of Ephesus, of Smyrna, Laodicea, Antioch, etc. and such
is the Church of London, Rochester, etc.

A National Church, is the aggregation of several Churches in one A National
Church.
Kingdom, in the same form of Liturgy, Doctrine, and Public Worship of God:
such are the Churches of Greece, Moscovy, England, France, etc. The Catholic
Church, is all Christian Churches united to one Head The Catholic Church.
Christ Jesus.

22. He that hears not and obeys not the Church, is to be accounted He that
denies the authority of the Church denies the authority of the Scriptures. S.
Luke 10. 16.
as a Heathen man, Matthew. 18. 17. And what is a Heathen man, but he which
denies or believes not the Scriptures? Nor is it men, which men despise and set
at naught in despising the Church, but God and Christ himself; for, He that
despises you, (viz. them sent by Christ) despises me; and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me.

That Regality is a sacred order, being an institution of God, Genesis 49. 10.
Lords Anointed, is in more then thirty places expressed by God himself. It is
therefore, I conceive, why the Church of Rome allows Kings the Sacrament in
both kinds: But how Kings, as being Christian, can have any ghostly power,
(instituted by our Savior to be only in his Church, and that only by such
means as he has prescribed) I do not understand: For, Kings, as Kings, are no
essential part of Christ's Church, and therefore cannot create ghostly power.
And this King James confessed, as you may read in Spotswoods History, p. 514.
And if Kings by becoming Christian, have ghostly power, then is the power left
by our Savior to his Church, not only weakened by Kings being converted to
Christianity, but also divided, which is absurd. But if Solomon his offering a
peace offering for the people, and his blessing the people, be objected; I
answer, it does signify no more then a fathers blessing his children, and
praying to God that they may live peaceably: But none of the Kings did ever
offer a sin-offering or burn incense to the Lord, without reprehension by God.

Out of this it is evident, that God never forsook men, before they Adam did
first eat the forbidden fruit, before God drove him out of Paradise, and cursed
Mankind, and the ground for his sake; Then mankind sinned maliciously, before
God brought the general Cataclysme upon them; and they made a wicked
conspiracy, before God confounded them at Babel, but none were more maliciously
stubborn than the Jews, who when they were enjoined to observe the Ceremonial
Law, scarce ever observed it, but went a whoring after the Gods of the Nations,
Moab, Ammon, Ashteroh, etc. yet since our Savior has fulfilled it, never did
men so superstituously observe any thing, as they have done it. And now Oh that
I could more then power forth all Jeremies lamentations, in commiseration of
thee O my Mother Church and Native Country, much more deserving it then the
Jews, in the Babilonish Captivity! for Jeremiah foresaw their return and
restitution, whereas I cannot hope but that Christianity it self is in the very
wayne here among us: For not only Bishops and Priests are therefore hated,
because they are Christ's Ministers; and Puppets Mountebankes, and Tryers, set
up in the place of them; and not only all the carved works in the houses of
God, in despite of God, are beaten down with Axes and Hammers, and the houses
themselves destroyed and made stables for horses, but all the solemn days kept
in commemoration and gratitude for our Saviors Nativity, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. in despite of Christianity decryed as
superstitious, etc. Sure as glorious Christian Churches as ever were in
England, have been in Africa, etc, where (were it not for some poor Christian
slaves) there is not so much as any footsteps of Christianity left.

The Contents of the Third Book.
THe First Chap. contains the causes of Subjection of Subjects to Supreme
Powers, of Subjection of Children to Parents, of Servants to Masters, as also
to them who have oversight over us in the Lord.

The Second Chap. treats of succession of Princes in Hereditary Monarchies, and
discovers the fiction of the Salique Law in France; and that it was a mere
invention to exclude the just title of the Kings of England, and has been ill
observed by the French themselves, when it did not conduce to their advantage.

The Third Chap. treats of the Municipal Laws of my dear and native Country,
before they became invaded and subverted by those men, who in so many several
shapes since 1640. have arrogated to themselves the name of Parliament.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Subjection.
1. IT is observed by a Writer, that our Savior Introduction.
in communicating the Cup to his Disciples, as if he had foreseen that it would
be detained from the Laity, gave it in these words, Drink ye all of it; whereas
in partaking of the Bread he said only, take, eat, etc. I am sure it is well
worth the observation, that the Holy Ghost as foreseeing the great abuses which
should happen in the world, by the specious pretenses of Religion, Conscience,
the Power of the People or Parliaments, etc. commands Subjection to Higher
Powers, not in certain cases, but absolutely; and not certain persons, but
every Soul is to be Subject to the Higher Romans 13. 1.
Powers.

2. I say, Supreme or Regal Power being from God immediately by Subjection due
by the Law of Nature to Sovereigns.
the Law of Nature, it does necessarily follow that subjection of Subjects to
their Sovereign is due by the Law of Nature; nor can the relations be dissolved
but by God himself. I may, I think, without any affectation, affirm, that the
Judges in Calvin's case were as learned and upright as ever any before, or
since; let us therefore see their resolutions.

3. Those learned and upright Judges resolve tit. Ligeance. Ligeance What is
Ligeance.
is a true and faithful Obedience of the Subject due to his Sovereign. This
Ligeance and Obedience is an incident inseparable to every Subject; for as soon
as he is born, he owes by birthright Ligeance, and Obedience to his Sovereign;
Ligeantia est vinculum fidei, and quasi essentia Legis, and a little after page
5. Ligeance does not begin by the Oath of the Leete; For many men owe true
Ligeance, who were never sworn in the Leete. (Where note it is false, if not
Treasonable in Mr. Hobbs, who affirms that the Knowledge of the Legislator does
depend upon the Citizen: For every man, is as much a subject before he has
taken the Oath of Aligeance, as after.) And see whatsoever is due by the
constitution of man may be Page 25. tit. 5.
altered; but natural Ligeance of the Subject to his Sovereign cannot be
altered; ergo, natural Ligeance, or Obedience to the Sovereign is not due by
the Law or constitution of man. And again, whatsoever is due by the Law of
Nature cannot be altered, but Ligeance and Obedience of the Subject to the
Sovereign, is due by the Law of Nature, ergo; it cannot be altered. Et qui
abjurat regnum, amittit regnum, sed non regem; amittit patriam, sed non patrem
Page 9.
patriae.

4. Ligeantia ac quisita, or Denization is threefold, First, absolute to them
Ligeantia acquisita Page 5. and 6.
and their heirs. Secondly limited, as when the King does grant Letters of
Denization to an Alien, and the Heirs Males of his body, or for life. The third
is, when the King by Conquest conquers another Kingdom, or part of it, the
Antenati and Postnati are Denizens of the Kingdom, or Dominion so conquered.
Yet sure under correction, the Postnati are not only Denizens but Natural
Subjects. For Power and Subjection being by the Law of Nature, all men born in
the Dominion of any Sovereign, are his Natural Subjects; and with this does Sir
Ed. Coke agree. If a man come into England, and have issue two Sons, these two
Sons are Indigend Subjects born, because they Com. Lit. page 88.
are borne within the Realm, that is in the Dominion of the King; but if any be
borne out of the Realm, that is out of the Dominion of the King (although of
Natural Subjects to the King) they are alienigena. They therefore who are
Postnati in the exercise of the Kings power by Conquest, are his natural
Subjects.

5. Local Ligeance is, when any Subject of France is in England, or any English
in France, etc. so long as he is in the power of the King, he is de Local
Ligeance, tit. 3. page 6.
facto, his Leigeman. Therefore a Frenchman being in England, joined with
diverse Subjects of this Realm in Treason against the King and Queen, and the
indictment concluded contra ligeantiae suae debitum; For he owed the King a
Local Obedience; but if he have issue here, that issue is a Natural born
Subject, and it is not caelum nec solum, neither clymate nor soil, but
Ligeantia which makes a natural Subject; and therefore if Enemies possess any
fort, etc. the issue borne there is no Subject of the Kings, by as much reason
those Subjects borne after Conquest by any King of England, are his Natural
Subjects.

6. Legal Ligeance is, when at suit of the King, the Subject takes the Oath of
Ligeance to the King, which is; You shall swear that from this day ^igeantia
Le^^^^s, tit. 4. ^^g. 6. 7.
forward you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign the Lord King Charles
his Heirs, and truth and faith shall bear of life, and member, and Terrene
honor, and you shall neither know nor hear of any ill or damage intended unto
him, that you shall not defend, so help you Almighty God. The substance and
effect hereof is due by the Law of Nature, ex institutione natura; the form and
addition of the Oath is ex previsione hominis. In this Oath five things are
observed.

1. For the time, it is indefinite and without limit, from this day forward.
Five observable things in the Oath of Ligeance.


2. Two excellent things are required, that is, to be true and faithful. 3. To
whom? To our Sovereign Lord the King and his heirs. 4. In what manner? And
faith and troth shall bear etc. of life and member, that is, until the letting
out of the last drop of our dearest blood. 5. Where, and in what places ought
these things to be done? In all places whatsoever; for, You shall neither know
nor hear of any ill or damage etc. that you shall not defend etc. So as Natural
Ligeance is not circumscribed within any place.

7. Subjection, as well as Regality, being by the Law of Nature; Quae The
consequent upon Subjects endeavoring to dissolve their subjection.
Deus conjunxit, nemo separet. And let no man or men ever think to mend what
God has made: For besides the innocent blood which will be shed, besides the
rapine, plunder, sacrilegious profaning of all sacred things in the mending, if
God in his judgments does permit seditious men to prosper in their wickedness,
so as they suppose they have attained their Ends; yet their Ends never end in
peace among themselves: For, abstracting from the general fear common to them
all, of the right Heirs recovering his right; it cannot be expected that all
Competitors will be pleased; some will think others too great, none will think
themselves great enough; They themselves have made a president to evade all
subjection and obedience to Laws and Government, by pretending Liberty and
Reformation: So that after so much bloodshed, what can be expected but the
shedding of more, without ever hoping to have an end? Well therefore says Sir
Edward Coke: Inst. 3. p. 36.
Peruse over all our Books, Records and Histories, and you shall find a
principle in Law, a rule in Reason, and a trial in Experience, That Treason
does ever produce fatal and final destruction to the Offender, and never
attaineth to the desired end, (two incidents inseparable thereunto:) And
therefore let all men abandon it, as the most poisonous bait of the Devil of
Hell; and follow the precept of holy Scripture, Fear God, honor the King, and
meddle not with the seditious.

But it may be objected, That though Subjects Allegiance be natural,

Sol. It is true, there is no visible Power under Heaven which can judge
between an Usurper and rightful Prince, but the Consciences of men: Yet being
natural, a man may as well ask how a man shall know whether every Being be of
less excellency then the Cause of its being? or that things equal to a third,
are equal to one another? I am confident that (where the confusion was not made
by Popular rage and usurpation) since the beginning of the world, God did scarce
ever leave men so destitute, but they were morally certain to whom they did owe
their Topical and Natural obedience.

But if Regal power be the Ordinance of God, and Primogeniture be Adam; which
no man can believe.

Answ. I answer, That though Primogeniture be preferred by the Law of Nature,
and immutable by the will of Man; yet is not God subject thereunto, but before
the Flood, he rejected Cain, though the firstborn of Adam, and made him a
Vagabond, and none of the Patriarchs. So in the first age after the Flood, God
subjected Canaan, although the son of Ham, Japhets elder brother, to Japhet:
And so did God prefer Jacob before Esau, and Genesis 9. 27.
Ephraim before Manasses, and Solomon before Adonijah: Yet where and when God
did not reveal himself to Man otherwise, was ever Primogeniture preferred. Nor
can it in reason be expected, that God should be so cruel a Taskmaster to
require subjection upon penalty of Damnation, if it were not evident to whom
this subjection were due. It is sufficient that Subjects pay their obedience to
him, against whose title no just or superior title can be taken. Yet is not
this subjection always to be understood of active subjection; For no man is
bound (Government being intended for man's preservation, not destruction)
actually, so to submit to rightful Governors, that he be morally certain of
destruction therefore: Yet ought every man rather to suffer death, then
actually to renounce or resist rightful Governors, to whom by the Law of Nature
they owe obedience.

Henry 6. when all men were born either in subjection to him, his Father or
Grandfather, (who had no color or title to the Crown) whether in such case may
Subjects so born assist such a Prince against the right Heir? I say, I pray God
avert the like from ever being again in the English Nation! It Is true, the
right Heir has a just title of war against such a Prince: but whether Subjects
so born (their being so born, being no act of their will, but was caused by a
higher cause, viz. the will of God) may actually assist him to whom they were
so born in subjection, against him who has the superior title, I leave to God
and men's consciences.

9. But this Quaere can only have reference to Subjects who are born Diversity.
in Hereditary Monarchies; for in Aristocracies and Democracies there neither
is, or ever was any original right or power in them, but their Conventions do
necessarily depend upon an antecedent act of them, or the major part of them,
to meet at a certain time and place. Where therefore such Assemblies are
dissolved sine die, they are totally dissolved, however this dissolution
happens; nor does any man owe them obedience any longer, but his or their title
who next possesses, is good enough against them and all others who cannot make
a superior or more just claim. Nor can this have any reference to men born in
Elective Monarchies; for, the Election depending upon the wills of men, viz.
the Electors, (who originally had no right of Election) any Possession brought
in against such Election by the will of man, is title equivalent to it; nor do
Subjects in conscience owe obedience but to him who is possessed, or can make a
superior claim by a true descent from him against whom no just title can be
taken.

10. Bodin in his Republique makes a Quaere, Whether it were better Wherein
consists the liberty of the Subject.
for Subjects to be governed by few Laws, with a reservation in the breast of
the Judge, or some special Court, to redress extraordinary abuses, which cannot
be comprehended in the Laws; or so to multiply Laws, that no man should be
punished, where he could evade the Laws? And determines for the former; and the
reason he gives, is, That Laws, be they never so many, are finite, but men's
actions are infinite; and therefore though never so many Laws be made, yet may
men find evasions out of them to abuse and wrong other men, whereby this
multiplicity of Laws will rather ensnare other men, than avoid the end for
which they were intended. It is a folly much incident to Englishmen, that they
place not only Freedom in serving many Masters, but Liberty in many Laws. Let
any man take a survey of the Statute-Laws and Ordinances made since Henry the
Eighth his dissolution of Monasteries, to this year 1660. and see if they be
not four times more than all the Acts made before, only to the liberty of the
Lawyers Fees, for the ensnaring of the Subjects; it being no doubt the greatest
liberty of the Subject to be governed by few Laws, and these the same in all
places, if it were possible.

11. The power of Parents being from the law of nature, Childrens Of subjection
of children to parents.
subjection to them is due from the law of nature. Solon having written the
Athenian laws, being asked why he did decree no punishment upon him who should
kill his Parent, answered, There was no man so detestable as to think to do
such an act. He therefore did wisely not to make any law against that which was
never heard of, lest by doing so, he should not so much forbid, as admonish
Children to it. And what a curse did Canaan contract upon himself, for but
discovering his Fathers nakedness? Genesis 9. 25. And no question, Gods blessings
and cursings are never more efficaciously pronounced, than out of the mouths of
Parents; And, To honor thy father and mother, is the first Precept to which
there is a promise of reward annexed, viz. That thy days may be long in the
land, etc.

12. Although the power of Masters over their Servants be created by Of
servants to their masters.
positive humane laws; and therefore subjection of Servants to their Masters,
is caused by humane laws: Yet does not this exclude the obedience and
subjection which is due from Servants to their Masters by the law of nature,
and Divine positive laws; but Divine laws do include the subjection due from
Servants to their Masters, in thesi or general, and the laws of every Country,
ex hypothesi or particular: As, Thou shall not steal, is from the law of
Nature; but that the doing of such a thing is Theft, depends upon the
particular laws or usages of every Nation. And no question but Servants
generally, when the Apostles wrote, were no other than Slaves, over whom their
Masters had not only absolute dominion of whatsoever was theirs, but also power
of life and death, and that by no consent or submission of theirs. And if such
Servants ought to count their Masters worthy of all honor, how 1 Timothy 6. 1.
much more ought Servants to thank God, and willingly to serve and honor such
Masters, who not only command over them not against their consents, but also
command such things as they may easily perform?

13. Although this subjection be last in expression, yet it is first in Of
subjection to Ecclesiastical powers.
intention: For if this subjection or obedience had not been due, before any
obedience to Temporal commands; how could the Primitive Christians have met in
dens and caves, in daily Prayers, and Breaking of bread, whenas Temporal powers
did not only not permit, but forbid it? Nor did God ever show such terrible
vengeance upon any disobedience and presumption, as he did upon Corah, Dathan
and Abiram, Number. 16. and their Competitors, although their pretenses were very
fair (forsooth) That all the multitude were holy, every one among them, and the
Lord was among them, and Moses and Aaron did lift up themselves against the
congregation of the Lord; They, though none of the tribe of Levi nor separated
persons, could offer sacrifice and burn incense to the Lord, as well as Aaron
or any Priest. And no doubt but spiritual crimes are in their kind much worse
and displeasing to God, than carnal, whatsoever offenders do pretend: And let
us see what manner of men these pretended Reformers are which teach otherwise,
and consent not to the wholesome words, even to the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness; They are proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strife of words, 1 Timothy 6. 3,
4, 5.
from whence comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain is godliness, from such withdraw thy self: O my soul, enter not into their
secrets.

14. In all Humane Society, or Society which is created by the law of Diversity.
Nature, viz. of Supreme Powers and Subjects, of Husband and Wife, of Parents
and Children, the relations are indissolvible only by God, in those individual
persons in whom the offices are; nor can they be aliened, transferred either by
any act of themselves or any power else. All Society created by Humane laws, or
Legal Society, is alienable not only by the act of God, and by the Laws which
created it; for, Unumquodque dissolvi potest eo ligamine quo ligatum est: But
also by the act of the Master and Servant; for, Omnis consensus tollit errorem.
Christian Society does differ from either Humane or Legal; for though the cause
of Christian power be by Divine positive institution, and therefore
incommunicable or alienable; yet after it pleased God that Kings should be
nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to his Church, the exercise,
endowment, privileges and immunities of Christian power is of positive humane
institution. The obedience therefore or subjection due to them who have
oversight over us in the Lord, is not formally due to such Bishops and Priests
who have once had the oversight over us, but to such Bishops and Priests who
are legally constituted to exercise the jurisdiction or function in such
Dioceses or Parishes where they are so constituted; which exercise is alienable
or transferrible, though not at the will of the Incumbent, yet at the will of
Supreme powers, and legally at the will of the Donor.

CHAP. II. Of Inheritance and Succession.
1. NO humane law, can create a humane right; Jura sanguinis nullo jure No
Humane law can make a Royal heir.
civili dirimi possint: Nor is this right of succession from Divine positive
laws, but observed as well where Gods revelation of himself is not received, as
where it is. And if according to the resolution of all the most learned and
reverend Judges in Calvin's Case, subjection is from no humane law, but from
the law of nature, Then of necessity must Regal right and inheritance be from
the law of nature; for no man supposes subjection, where he does not
presuppose power. The Will therefore of Henry the Eight, where for want of
issue of Edward, Mary and Elizabeth, he gives the English Monarchy to the issue
of Frances and Elianor, daughters of Mary his younger sister, before the right
heirs of Margaret his eldest sister wife of James the Fourth of Scotland, was
void and not to be allowed; and so was that of Edward the Sixth, who did
disinherit his sisters Mary and Elizabeth, and gave the Crown to Jane daughter
of Frances the French Queen aforesaid by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk; and
so were the Acts of Parliament made by H. 4. 5. and 6. which entailed the Crown
upon their Heirs; so was the Acts of the last of Henry the 6. which entailed
the Crown upon him, and the heirs males of his body, and so were the Acts of
the first of Rich. 3. and H. 7. which entailed the Crown upon them and their
heirs. Neither is succession and inheritance of Crowns declared by any humane
Law in the world that I know of, but only the pretended French Salique Law,
which we shall examine afterward.

2. None but God can make an Heir to a Crown; solus Deus haeredem None but God
can make an Heir to a Crown.
facere potest, non homo. Co. Lit. Sect. 7. And this Heir which Sir E. Co.
here speaks of, is but heir in fee to Lands or Tenements, according to common
Law or Custom; if then only God can make such an Heir, then sure none but God
can make an Heir, which makes humane Laws, and permits Customs.

3. It is not only humane Laws, which say a bastard is filius terrae, and None
can inherit, not born in Matrimony. Genesis 22. 2.
quasi nullius filius: Et qui ex damnato coitu nascuntur, inter liberos non
computentur: but God calls Isaac Abraham's only Son, although at the same time
Abraham had his Son Ismael by Hagar, his Handmaid or Concubine. And Abraham
gave all he had to Isaac, but to the Sonns of the Concubins which Abraham had,
he gave gifts. Genesis 25. 5, 6. So though Ismael were Isaacs elder brother, yet
in comparison of Isaac born in wedlock, God himself did not account him
Abraham's Son. Nor can one instance be given, that ever by Gods either command
or permission, any born out of marriage did inherit. By the Law therefore of
God, as well as humane Law, none can inherit which are born out of matrimony.

4. That which no humane Law prescribes, and yet is observed by all The Issue
male shall inherit before the Issue female in Royalty.
men generally in all ages, is from the Law of Nature; But no humane Law
prescribes the male to inherit before the female in regality, yet it is
observed by all men generally; therefore that the issue male shall inherit
before the female in regality, is from the Law of Nature.

5. If primogeniture had not been a sacred thing, and inheritance annexed Of
the Issue male, the first born is to be preferred.
to it by the Law of Nature, then could not Esau have been pronounced a
profane person for selling his birthright, Heb. 12. 16. although he did it to
save his life, Genesis 25. 34. but being due by the Law of Nature, I say, Esau by
his sale could not transfer it to Jacob; yet because Esau did despise it. Genesis
25. 34. it was just with God to transfer it to Jacob; neither can it be showed
any where in sacred writ, but that always primogeniture in royal descent, was
a good title where God did not interpose.

6. Only the King can inherit and succeed, because his Royal capacity is Why
only the King is said to inherit and succeed, and Subjects do either inherit or
succeed, but never both.
affixed and inseparable with his person. In the Oath therefore of Ligeance,
Subjects swear to bear faith to the King, his Heirs and Successors; but no
Subject can both inherit and succeed, because there is no succession can be
affixed to the person of any Subject, by virtue of inheritance. All
Corporations therefore do not descend by inheritance, but are acquired, as they
are nominated or elected in such manner as is granted by the King or supreme
power.

7. There are but two ways by which hereditary or successive Monarchies How
many ways hereditary Monarchies descend.
do descend; the one is Lineal descent, the other Lineal, Agnatical, Cognatical
or Collateral; or as we say, the one descends to the heir general, the other
to the heir male. This latter by virtue of a Salique law takes place only in
France; we will therefore see what may be said and objected against the former,
and how the latter has been observed in France, and of what Authority it is.

8. That cannot be against the Law of God, which he has owned and Gynococratia
or inheritance of Women not unnatural, nor against the Law of God-
given a blessed president of; but that God has owned Gynaecocraty, and that in
a great and miraculous delivery of his own people, is evident in Deborah; And
that Women may inherit, when the daughters of Zelophehad made their plea for
their inheritance, Numb, 27. They first pleaded negatively, Our Father was not
of the company of them that gathered themselves against the Lord in the company
of Corah (which is a plain argument that rebellious Subjects have no property
against supreme powers, but forfeit their goods as well as lives, for God says
ver. 7. the daughters of Zelophehad spoke right;) why should the name of our
father be done away from his family because he has no Son? And God himself
says, ver. 8, 9. 10. If a man dye and have no Son, then shall the inheritance
pass to the daughter, and if he have no daughter, then shall the inheritance go
to his brethren, and if he have no brethren, then ye shall give the inheritance
unto his fathers brethren, etc. And that inheriting by the daughter when there
is no Son, in Britain (consonant to the Law of God) is as old as any record we
can find; when Voadicea led the Britans against the Romans, it was always a
thing observed among them. Neque enim sexum in imperiis discernunt: Tacit. Lip.
in vita Agric. 457. Wherein Regality differs in descent from Estates by Civil
Laws.


9. Although Gynaecocraty be neither against the divine Law of God or Nature;
yet it is only to be understood, that in regality the female shall inherit when
she is the eldest sister, and lineally descended from the Ancestor which has no
Heir male of his body lawfully begotten. For in Regality possessio fratris non
facit sororem esse haeredem. But if a King or Queen by inheritance have issue
by several venters or extractions, and by the latter a Son who does inherit,
who dies without issue; yet shall the Heir male descended from the Father,
although but of half blood to him, inherit before his sister; and the elder
sister descended from the Father, shall inherit before his sister although she
be of whole blood to him, from the reason aforesaid, and therefore Queen Mary
and Eliz. although but of half blood to Ed. the 6. did inherit before the Queen
of Scots, or the issue of the Queen Dowager of France by the Duke of Suffolk,
Charles Brandon, although they were of whole blood to him; and thus much does
Sir Ed. Coke testify. Com. Lit. cap. 1. Sect. 8. p. 15.


10 Before we examine the authority and observance of the Salique Law, First
Charge.
let us see the heinous charge which Monsieur Bodin brings against
Gynaecocatry, Bodins charge and incommodities against Gynaecocatry.
cap. 5. lib. 6. page 738. de rep. He says, Gynaecocraty is inimicitious to the
laws of Nature, which gives prudence, strength, magnanimity of mind, force to
command, to Men, takes them away from Women.

Answ. A fine general charge, this! If I can form an argument out of it, this
is it. All Government wherein prudence, strength, magnanimity etc. do not
command, is inimicitious to the Laws of Nature: But in Gynaecocraty neither
prudence etc. do command; Therefore Gynaecocraty is inimicitious to the Laws of
Nature. Now the Major proposition requiring strength, prudence, and magnanimity
in command, the Conclusion will be as strong against all Government, as
Gynaecocraty; for he has not defined what strength, prudence etc. is, nor who
shall be Judge what it is; and so any man who will but deny that there is
strength, prudence, etc. in the Governor, may by the Laws of Nature not obey,
nay it is against the Laws of Nature to obey. But in what case are all Pupil
Kings? Sure the man intended to make good Pepins and Hugh Capets Titles from
this Proposition, against Childerick and Charles of Lorrain. But that which is
most monstrous and impious, is, that it is inimicitious to the Laws of Nature
for any Child to obey and honor his Mother, because she has not prudence,
magnanimity, and force of command.

The Law of God not only took from Women the Government of Commonwealths,
Second charge.
but also of Families, whenas he deservedly subjected them to the command of
their Husbands. The argument out of this is: Whom God has subjected to the
command of their Husbands, cannot by the Law of God command in Families: But
God has subjected Women to the command of their Husbands; Therefore by the Law
of God Women cannot command in Families.

Answ. Yes, such Women as never were married nor subject to their Husbands,
may, granting the Major proposition. But I deny the Major proposition; for sure
it is no where against the Law of God, for a Widow to govern her Family.

As often as God testifies that he will take terrible vengeance against the
enemies Third charge.
of his Name, he threatens them to be subject to commands and laws of Women;
(for this he cites Isa. 8. although I cannot find any such thing there) as if
that were the utmost of evils, and extremity of calamities.

Answ. That this is false, is evident by Gods miraculous delivery of the
children of Israel by the leading and command of Deborah. Besides, how can God
command Women to command and give Laws, if it be against the Law of Nature?
Which is all one to say, God does command against the Law of Nature, that is,
his own Law.

The Roman Laws did seclude Women from all Civil offices, and Public Fourth
charge.
employments.

Answ. But though the Roman Laws did forbid it, yet if the Laws of France did
not allow it, how came Blanch the wife of Lewis the Eighth, Katherine de Medici
wife of Henry the Second, and Mary de Medici wife of Henry the Fourth, and Anne
the Mother of the present King, to manage the Regencie of France, as
imperiously during the minority of their Sons, as if they had been absolute
Princes?

That in Gynarchy the Wife is not subject, but superior to her Husband. Fifth
charge.


Answ. So heavy bodies will, against their nature, ascend to supply a Vacuity.

Answ. His sixth charge is an Invective against Vasti, Joan of Naples, called
the Sixth charge.
Wolf, Athaliah, Cleopatra, Zenobia, Hirene, (As indeed, telling of stories is
usually the greatest part of his reasoning; and that he will do so amply, that
Scaliger justly reprehends him with making, not writing Histories.) Now if I
should fall into the commendation of Ruth, Hester, Judith, Deborah, etc. I am
quit with him. It is true indeed, that it is a great blessing to any Nation,
that God gives them a Masculine Heir, endued with all those qualities he speaks
of: But when God does give a Child, (which he pronounces a woe to that Nation,
Eccles. 10. 16.) or a Female, Subjects must be content, and submit themselves
to Gods pleasure: For in going about to alter what God has done, they will
make themselves in a much more woeful condition; Nor could that be a judgment of
God upon a Nation, to give Fools, and Children, or Women for Heirs, if Subjects
at pleasure might alter them and set up others in their stead.

11. The Salique Law took its name either from the Country Salia, The
etymology of the Salique Law.
or the River Sal, or from contraction of Si aliqua, so often mentioned in the
Law.

12. There are three things observable in the Salique Law; the authority A
short view of the authority and observance of the Salique Law.
of it, the eternity of it, and the reason of it. For the authority of it, it
was made by the Lord knows whom; for the eternity of it, it shall end the Lord
knows when; and for the reason, De terra vero Salica nulla portio haereditalis
mulieri veniat, sed ad virilem sexum, tota terrae haereditas perveniat. Bodin.
de rep. p. 745.

13. For the authority of it, the learned do not agree by whom it was The
authority of it by D'-Avila.
made, nor whether any French King ever made any such, or not. D'avila in the
beginning of the first book of the Civil wars in France, recites the most
probable conjecture, which is, That the French when they left their habitation
to seek fresh quarters, sat down at the river Sala, (which divides Misnia
Westward from Turingia) and there forsooth did agree to choose themselves a
King, and did make Constitutions which should be fundamental and unalterable
ever after; and those Constitutions being made at the river Sala, are called
Salique Laws.

14. There is no story of Guy of Warwick, Amadis de Gaul, or the Dun How
probable.
Cows rib, but is of as much authority and probability as this. For, can it be
imagined that a company of Rogues and Thieves, going to rob and thieve at
Gads-hill, should agree at Greenwich to make unalterable Laws for their
government and succession, before they were possessed of any thing? and what
they make their Laws of, is nothing but what they shall rob and cheat other men
of.

15. But Bodin will not undertake to tell by whom, or when it was made, Bodin's
opinion.
(it is strange you will say, that making up his discourse almost of Histories,
he has nothing to say for this) he only says it is not new as many men think,
but engraven in the most ancient tables of the Salians, in these words, De
terra vero salica etc. ut supra: So Bodin names neither by whom, nor when,
Para. 12.
this Salique Law was made. Did ever man infer so fondly, that because the
Salian women did not inherit, therefore the French Crown cannot descend to
women? But mark now if this be a consequence: The women of the Land of Salia do
not inherit, and therefore no female can inherit the French Monarchy: then if
the men of the Land of Salia, will alter this constitution, the descent of the
French Monarchy is altered by an Act of the men of Salia; for, Cessante ratione
legis, cessat lex; and sublata causa, tollitur effectus. In their contest with
the Popes, the Kings of France say, they hold their Crown of God; whereas if
Bodin says true, they hold it by a Law written in the Tables of the Salians. I
can say no more for the authority of this Law, unless I should repeat the same
things again, out of De Serres and other learned French Historians.

16. This Law cannot be altered by the King and Estates general. The eternity
of it.
I had thought that only the Laws of Nature had been unalterable. It is a rule,
that Unumquodque dissolvi potest eo ligamine quo ligatum est: And if this
Salique Law be a constitution of Man, by that power which made it a
constitution, by that power it may be altered.

17. De terra vero Salica nulla portio haereditatis mulieri veniat, sed ad
virilem The reason of it.
sexum tota terrae hereditas perveniat: Now let any man that is in his wits, or
understands any thing of the nature of a Law, judge whether there be any shadow
of reason in this; For, a Law is the rule or direction of him who does govern,
to be observed by them who are governed. How then can the Crown of France
descend according to the customs of the Salians, if the French Crown be not
subject to the men of Salia, and they had given the King and his successors
this unalterable Law of not descending to the female? but where this country
Salia should be, I could never find so much as the name in any Geographer or
Historian, ancient or modern. Sure the Romans, so curious in searching and
describing of Countries would not have overseen it, especially the Emperor
Julian, warring so long in those parts of Germany, not above sixty years before
they suppose Pharameund departs out of Salia, for to seek better quarters in
Gaul.

18. The two main parts of the Salique Law are, That the Crown shall The two
main parts of the Salique Law.
descend to the next heir male, and if the heir be ana infant, that the next
Prince of the blood who is a Major, shall during his minority be his Guardian,
and Regent. Yet Bodin is fearful that the Salique Law was not bar enough
against our Ed. the third (being never before heard of, says Hail^n) he says,
page 745. Whenas the controversy concerning the Crown of France, was between
Philip Earl of Valoys and Ed. the third King of England, Philip defended the
Salique Law by the Voconian, which ordained by the consent of the Fathers and
Princes, that in that controversy no man should use the authority of foreign
Laws, but every one should study for his profit, the Salique Law. But when the
question was 1563, whether Charles the ninth were a Major at fourteen years of
Age current or complete, the Parliament of Paris would have taken upon them to
decide it, when Charles sends them word, I do not mean that you should deal in
any thing, but with the administration of good and speedy justice to my
subjects; understand hereafter that you are not confirmed in your offices by me
to be my Tutors or Protectors of my Realm, nor Governors of my City of Paris,
as hitherto you have persuaded your selves. Besides, Charles the seventh Anno
1420. was adjudged to banishment, and unworthy to succeed in any of the
signories of France by all the Courts of the Parliament of Paris. And so about
7 years since was the Prince of Condi; and so was Henry the forth by all the
three Estates at the general assembly at Bloys, Anno. 1588. So that is is
evident that this immutable Law, is not so inviolably kept by the French
themselves, when it does not serve their turn. How should the Voconion Law
oblige against Ed. the third, and not the Acts of Parliament of Paris, and
general Assembly at Blois, oblige against Charles the seventh, and Henry the
fourth? for, ubi eadem est ratio, ibi idem est jus.

19. There cannot be a more imprudent act, then to make any one Ward The
imprudence of the Salique Law.
to him who is his next heir, especially to a Crown, which frees any one from
all attainders; what then can be more imprudent then this part of the Salique
Law, which gives the pupil King into the hands of the next heir, who
murdering him, makes way for himself to the Kingship? By our Country Laws, no
man could be Guardian to the person of a Ward, but the next of blood to whom
the inheritance could not descend, But this part of the eternal Law has not of
late been observed by the French Nation, whereas the contrary has been, in the
regencie of the Queen mothers, Blanch, the mother of St. Lewis, of Francis the
second, Charles the ninth, Lewis the thirteenth, and Lewis the fourteenth.

20. Neither have the French better observed the other part of the It has been
ill observed by the French.
Salique Law, for the descending of the Crown to the heirs male; for, Pepin
having put King Childerick into a Monastery, had not any color of title, but
as he was chosen by the Parliament of Paris; so that it seems the Parliament of
Paris may do what the King and general Assembly cannot, and alter the most
fundamental constitutions of France, which forsooth at other times are
immutable; and Hugh Capet to make his title good against Charles of Lorrain,
the right Masculine heir of Pepin, did derive his pedigree from one of the
daughters of Charlemain son of Pepin; Nor could Lewis the ninth (a most
religious Prince) be resolved in conscience, till he was satisfied, that by his
Grandmothers side he was descended from the right heirs of Charles of Lorrain.
But I wonder with what face these Frenchmen can urge the Salique Law against
others, and yet practice the contrary themselves; For Charles the eight having
married Anne the Duchess of Britain (and by that title possessed the Duchy)
by whom he had Claude, married to Francis the first, who had issue Henry the
second, who had issue Francis the second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third
and Hercules, Elizabeth married to Philip the second of Spain, and Margaret
married to Henry the fourth. Now Francis, Charles, Henry and Hercules dying
without issue legitimate, I would know how against the Salique Law Charles and
his posterity should have a title to Britain, and yet King Philip and his
posterity be debarred of it by virtue of this pretended Salique Law.

CHAP. III. Of the Municipal Laws of England, before 1640.
1. TEmporal or Secular Laws are made to preserve men so long as Of Temporal
Laws, and incidently of the Municipal Laws of this Nation.
they live in this world, in unity and peace one with another; and these do not
bind in conscience only, but enjoin corporal and pecuniary mulcts for not
observance, or transgressing them. The Municipal Laws of this Kingdom are
either the Common Law, which are general usages of that long continuance, that
they have quite lost their prime institution. That they were not brought in by
the Conqueror, is most evident, Common Law or General usage.
for the Conqueror swore to observe the good approved and ancient Laws of this
Kingdom; and that the Subjects might the better observe Proem 8. part of Sir
Ed. Cokes Reports
their duty, and the Conquerors Oath, he caused twelve the most discreet; and
wise men in every shire throughout all England to be sworn before himself, that
without swerving either ad dextram, or ad sinistram, they should declare the
integrity of their Laws, without concealing, adding, or in any sort varying
from the truth; and Aldreb the Archbishop that crowned him, and Hugh the Bishop
of London, by the Kings commandment wrote that which the Jurats had delivered,
and these by Public Proclamation he declared to be authentic, and under
grievous punishment to be inviolably observed.

And that 441 years before the incarnation of Christ, Mulumutius, of Preface 3.
report.
some called Dunvallo M. of some Dovebant, did write two Books of the Laws of
the Britans, the one called Statuta Municipalia, and the other Leges
judiciariae, which is as much as to say, the Statute Law, and Common Law. And
356 years before our Savior, Mercia Proba Queen, and wife of King Gwintclin,
wrote a book of the Laws of England in the British tongue, calling it
Marchenleg. King Alfred, or King Alured, King of the West Saxons, 871 years
after Christ, wrote a book of the Laws of England, calling the same, Breviarum
quoddam quod composuit ex diversis legibus Trojanorum, Graecorum, Britanorum,
Saxonum, and Danorum.

In the year after our Savior 653. Sigabert or Sigisbert, Orientalium Anglorum
Rex, wrote a book, calling it, Legum instituta. King Edward of that name the
third before the Conquest, ex immensa legum congerie, quas Britanni, Romani,
Angli condiderunt, optima quaeque selegit, ac in unam coegit quam vocari voluit
Communem legem. But whether these latter were the Laws which are now used in
England, under correction may be question made, because the Authorities cited
are from such obscure and uncertain Authors, that no great credit is to be
given to them; nor are those Books (except Alfreds and Edwards, which are
obsolete and out of use with us, and so have been these 600 years) any where to
be found, whereby it may appear that they have any affinity with the
Common Law. But it does most certainly appear out of most authentical Records,
that time out of mind, before the Conquest, there had been Sheriffs, for the
Writ of Assise, and every other Original Writ, to whom they were directed,
except to the Coroner in special cases, who stands in place of the Sheriff; and
for Trials by the Oath of Twelve men; and that the Writs of Assise and other
Original Writs were retornable into the Kings Courts, and that there had been a
Court of Chancery for all Original Writs to issue out and none other; and that
those Manors that were in the hands of S. Edward the Confessor, are to this
day called Ancient Demesne. All which does more copiously and fully appear in
this Proeme to the Third Part of the Reports. And that the Chancery, Kings
Bench, Common Pleas, the Exchequer, be all the Kings Courts, and have been time
out of memory of man, so as no Proem, Rep. 8.
man knows which of them is antientest.

Afterward in the Proeme to the Ninth Part of his Reports, out of the Mirror of
Justices, which treats how the Land was governed almost twelve hundred years
since, having spoken of the Courts of Parliament, Chancery, Kings Bench, Common
Pleas, and the Exchequer, he descends to the Justiciarii Itinerantes, or
Justices in Eire: The Kings do right to all men by their Justices,
Commissioners itinerant, assigned to have Conusance Justices Itinerant, sec. 6.
of all Pleas. In aid of such Eires, the Sheriffs Turns and View of
Frankpledges are necessary, etc.

Then he treats of the Sheriffs Turn; That the Sheriffs, of ancient Sheriffs
Turn, sec. 7.
Ordinance, do hold general Assemblies twice a year in every Hundred, whither
all the Freeholders within the Hundred are bound to come by the service of
their Feifs (or Fees) that is to say, once after Michaelmas, and another time
after Easter, etc.

Leets or Courts of View of Frankpledge, are Assemblies ordained Leets or view
of Frankpledge, sec. 8.
once a year, not only of Freeholders, but of all in the Hundred, as well
Denizens as others (except Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and all
Religious people and Clerks, Earls, Barons, Knights, Married women, Persons
dumb and deaf, diseased, Bastards and Lepers, and those that are Deciners
elsewhere) to enquire of the offenses personal, and of all the circumstances, of
offenses done in those Hundreds, of the wrong done by the Kings or Queens
ministers, and of the wrong done to the King and the Commonalty. But this ought
not to be done by Bondmen or Women, but by the Oath of Twelve Freemen.

The County Court: which the Sheriffs hold from month to month, County Court
sec. 9.
or from five weeks to five weeks, according to the greatness or largeness of
the County.

Of Court-Barons and Hundred Courts. Court Baron, etc. sec. 10.


The other mean Courts, are the Courts of every Lord of the Fee, etc.
Pipowders, sec. 11.
Courts of Pipowders. And that from day to day speedy Justice be done to
Strangers in Fairs and Markets, as of Pipowders, according to the Law of
Merchants.

Court of Admiralty. The King has sovereign jurisdiction upon Admiralty, sec.
12.
the Sea.

Courts of the Forest. The Kings Ministers of his Forests have Courts-Forest
see. 13.
power by authority of their office to swear men, without the Kings Writ, for
safeguard of the peace, and the Kings right, and the common good, etc. He
treats of the Professors of the Law, as Counters, who are Sergeants and
Pleaders. Of Attorneys, Of Ministers of Justice, as Viscounts, Coroners,
Escheators, Bailiffs of Hundreds, etc. And also by the ancient Kings, Coroners
were ordained in every County, and Sheriffs to keep the Peace when the Earls
were absent from their charges, and Bailiff; in lieu of the Hundredors, etc.

Of the Prerogatives of the King; as of Deodands, Alienation to Aliens,
Teeasure found, Wreck, Waif, Estray, Chattels of Felons and Fugitives, Honors,
Hundreds, Soakes, Gaoles, Forests, chief Cities, chief Ports of the Sea, great
Manors. These held the first Kings as their right; and of the residue of the
Land did enfeoff the Earls, Barons, Knights, Sergeants and others, to hold of
the King by Services, provided and ordained for defense of the Realm. It was
ordained, that the Knights Fee should come to the eldest by succession of
heritage; and that Socage Fee should be partable between the Male-children, and
that the Liege-Lords should have the Marriage.

He treats in the first Chapter, of Crimes, and their divisions; of the crime
of Majesty, of Fausonnery, of Treason, of Burning, of Homicide, of Felony, of
Burglary, of Rape, etc. In the second, of Actions, of Judges, of Actors, etc.
In the third, of Exceptions dilatory and peremptory, that is, Pleas to the
Writ, and in Bar, etc. of Trial by Juries and by Battle, of Attaints, of
Challenges, of Fines, etc. In the fourth, of Judgments, and therein of
Jurisdiction, of Process in criminal causes, and in Actions real, personal, and
mixed. So as in this Mirror you may perfectly and truly discern the whole Body
of the Common Laws of England. Thus far Sir Edward Coke.

Mr. Lambert, in his unfolding the difficult things and words in his
translation of the Saxon Laws, says, King Alured when he had made a League with
Guthrun the Dane, having followed the most prudent counsel given by Jethro to
Moses, first divided England in Satrapias, Centurias, and Decurias. He called
Satrapiam (...), a (...), which signifies to divide; He called Centuriam (...),
and Decuriam (...) or (...), that is, a company of Ten men; and by those names
they are called to this day. And that no man might be ignorant, the Decuria did
consist of Ten men, whereof all of them were pledges that every one should be
forthcoming to any Action in Law; and if any one did any damage, the other
were bound to make it good; and from hence the other nine were called (...),
that is, Free-pledges: we in the Pleas of Courts call them Francos plegios. The
tenth man (...) called the Decurio or Tithingman, by which name he is most
known to the Eastern English, at this day: Others call him (...); others call
him (...), that is, the first or chief Surety or Pledge: The Kentish men call
him Borsholder corruptly for (...), that is, the first Surety. Centuria, or a
Hundred, was made up of ten Decuria's, as one Hundred is made up of ten times
ten. This (viz. Hundred) the men beyond Trent called by another name, not
unknown to the common people, (...) Wapentac. Alured then further ordained,
That every man of free condition should be enrolled in some Hundred, and be
conjoined into some Ten-men company: That of lesser businesses, the Decurions
or Court Leet might judge; and if any weightier matter were, it should be
deferred to the Hundred or County Court. Lastly, that the Alderman and Sheriff
(I take it, he calls them Senator and Praepositus) should compound the most
difficult Suits and of greatest moment, in that frequent Convention from all
parts of the Shire or County. And what the manner of judging was, King
Etheldred in the fourth Chapter of his Laws (which he enacted in a full Senate
or Parliament at Vanatnigum (...) Woodstock) expounds almost in these very
words: In all and every Hundred let there be Assemblies, and that Twelve
elderly men of free condition, together with the Sheriff (Praeposito) be
sworn, that they will not condemn the Innocent, or absolve the Guilty.

So that Mr. Lambert seems to be of opinion, that the Common Law had its
origination from King Alured or Alfred, who was King of all England, and a most
victorious, pious, prudent, and glorious Monarch; about the year of our Lord
890. And from a most deplorable condition, by reason of the Danish invasion and
robbery, reduced it to a most quiet calm, and laid that foundation, upon which
the body of the Common Law is since builded. But whosoever was the first
Founder and Establisher of them, certain it is they were ancient, and Laws
which better suit to the nature and disposition of Englishmen, then any other
that are, or ever were in the world, would do.

2. As those general Usages or Customs which are generally observed, Particular
Usages.
are called the Common Law; so there are almost infinite particular Usages,
Prescriptions and Customs in several parts of this Nation, which are observed
as Laws by the Inhabitants of those places, and to all intents and purposes
have the effect of Laws.

3. Statute-Laws are Acts of Parliament, which are neither general Statute Law.
nor particular Customs, but are Laws made by the Kings of this Land in
Parliament, upon sundry and diverse occasions, according to the then occasions,
as they represented themselves. For although all innovations are dangerous; and
therefore if it were possible, no doubt it were best that humane Laws (as the
Laws of Nature) might be immutable and eternal; but as God has created all
things transitory, and nothing in this world the same the next subsequent
minute, that it was before; and therefore the state of Humane affairs being
every day variable, and putting on a new face to morrow, which they had not
neither to day, nor yesterday; which cannot be certainly foreseen by any man,
or men, no more then any Master of a Ship can foresee what winds will blow to
morrow, or next day; or whether it will be serene, or stormy weather, whether
deep or Rockey Seas. Yet if no prudent Mariner will venture himself, and those
under his command to Sea, without sufficient provision against all the
contingencies which may happen, and be prevented; Then sure no man or men not
vainly blinded with ambition, will undertake to manage the Government of a
Nation without sufficient means to protect themselves and Subjects from all
future storms and confusions, which may either arise from within the Nation, or
be caused from without. Yet will it not follow that every day there should be
new Laws made, for Nihil semel perfectum and inventum, there is nothing which
is perfect so soon as begun; and many mischiefs and inconveniences may be
begun, and yet be prevented before they can be brought to perfection. But then
it must be presupposed that there may be remedies used, which must of necessity
be, that there be a present and coercive power in being, which may suppress,
and dissolve those mischiefs and inconveniences, by making new Laws, if the
old ones will not remedy them; and this is no new thing, but is, and always
was, in all governments that ever were, whether Monarchy, Aristocracy, or
Democracy.

A Parliament is a Politic body compounded of Heterogenial or Of what parts a
Parliament is compounded. Inst. 4. page 1.
dissimilar parts, viz. the King, the Lords spiritual and temporal, in one
distinct house, and of a house of Commons another distinct house.

Since there has been so much contest about the power and jurisdiction What
creates the Lords house.
and cause of Parliament; and since it being compounded of unlike parts, and
some of these unlike parts, nay pieces of those parts have assumed the name of
Parliament, We will examine all the parts of it, and see whether it be not all
made and created by the King, and into him only can be ultimately resolved, he
being principium, caput, and finis of it.

First, For the Lords spiritual they are all parts of the Lords house, and sit
there by succession in respect of their Counties or Baronies, parcel of their
Bishoprics; but all Bishoprics were originally of the Kings foundation and
donative per traditionem baculi (viz. the crosier) and annuli (viz. Inst. 4
par. 1.
the ring) whereby he was married to the Church. King Henry the first being
requested by the Bishop of Rome to make them Eligible, refused it; but King
John by his Charter bearing date 5 Iunii, an. 17. granted that the Com. Lit.
Sect. 648. page 344.
Bishoprics should be Eligible; so that the foundation, donation, and election
to Bishoprics was only and immediately caused by the King: and in this
capacity by virtue of the Kings Writ out of the Court of Chancery, does every
Bishop sit as a member of the upper house of Parliament. So that Inst. 4 par.
1. 4.
the Lords spiritual did immediately hold their Bishoprics of the King; and
were members of the upper house only by virtue of the Kings Writ.

Secondly, That the Lords Temporal are created immediately by the King, is so
manifest that I think no man will question it, and that every Temporal Lord is
empowered to sit as a Member of the Lords house by virtue of the Kings Writ
issuable ex debito justitiae, out of the Chancery. See Inst. 4. part. page 1.
and 4.

All the Judges of the Realm, Barons of the Exchequers, of the Coif, Temporal
Assistants of the Lords house.
the Kings learned Council, and the Civilians Masters of the Chancery, all
called to give their assistance and attendance in the Upper house of
Parliament, but have no voices in Parliament. How their Writs differ from the
Barons, see Inst. 4. part, page 4.

In every Writ of Summons to the Bishops, there is a clause requiring Spiritual
Assistants, or Procuratores Cleri.
them to summon these persons to appear personally at the Parliament, which is
in these words: Premonientes Decanum and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae
Norwicensis, ac Archidiaconos totumque Clerum vestrae Dioces. quod iidem Decani
and Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, ad dictum Capitulum per unum,
idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem potestatem
ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero divisim habentes praedict. die and loco
personaliter intersint ad consciendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de communi Concilio
dicti Regni nostri, Divina favente clementia, contigerit ordinari. So that not
only the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, but their Assistants, are only created
by the Kings Writ, or immediately by the Kings authority.

But since there is so much contest about the House of Commons, and The House
of Commons are not the Representatives of the Free people of the Nation.
men say they represent the Freeborn people of this Nation, and are the Supreme
Authority of the Nation: We will therefore enquire into the cause, and see what
may be the Freeborn people; and whether a House of Commons, as it now stands,
can be their Representative; and whether being their Representative, they may
be the Supreme Authority of this Nation?

First, What are the People? If any man had said the people of Rome, or the
people of Athens, or the people of Carthage, etc. a man had understood them,
and only them of Rome, Athens, or Carthage, etc. who were civitate donati. But
in England the case is much otherwise; for with us there is no civitate donatus
in one more then another, but all men are alike born free, and so by
consequence every man as a freeborn man of England has as much right to his
freedom one man as another. I say therefore, if every man of England has not a
like vote and power in electing Members for the House of Commons, then cannot
the House of Commons be the Representative of the Nation; for, Plus valet
contemptus unius, quam consensus omnium. But it is most manifestly evident,
that the House of Commons are not elected by the equal consent of the freeborn
people of England, (for not only two parts of three have not Forty shillings a
year, yet are as freeborn as they who have, and as liable to penalty for
transgressing Laws made in Parliament, as they who do elect; but many men have
double votes in the election, in Corporations where they send Burgesses, and
yet have like power with the Forty-shillings-men in electing a Knight of the
Shire; and such a place as Rising-Chase and Old Sarum, etc. have a like power
in this House with the County of York; and the Bishopric of Durham sends none
at all: So that it may be rather termed a Representative of the Free
Corporations, then a Representative of the Freeborn people of England.) The
House of Commons therefore cannot be a Representative of the Freeborn people of
England.

But suppose them the Representatives of the Freeborn people of this Nor the
Supreme Authority of the Nation.
Nation, yet cannot they be the Supreme Authority of it; for no power can act
beyond the power of its being. I say therefore, that no Representative can be
supreme, or superior to the cause of its being: The House of Commons therefore
cannot be (granting it the Representative of the Freeborn people of this
Nation) the Supreme Authority of the Nation.

But if the house of Commons be not sent by the people and their
Representatives; Who creates them, and by what right do they make a house of
Commons?

Before we answer this Quaere, we will see of what sorts of men a house Of
what sorts of men the house of Commons is compounded.
of Commons is compounded. A house of Commons is compounded of three sorts of
men, viz. Knights of Counties, Citizens sent by Cities, and Burgesses of
Corporations: Barons of the Cinque Ports are the same thing differently
expressed with Burgesses of Corporations. Now that all Cities, Buroughs,
Corporations, and Cinque Ports, are not so jure naturali, nor by any inherent
birthright, but from their Charter, which is nothing else but the Kings grant,
is so manifest, that I think no man in his wits will deny. But all Cities and
Corporations are not alike in privileges, but more or less as they are
empowered by their Charter or Grant of the King. Some Corporations have
Liberties and Privileges, and are empowered to send Burgesses; others have
Liberties and Privileges, but not qualified to send Burgesses; nay some Cities
have Liberties and Privileges, but not endewed with this right of having
Representative in the house of Commons, as the Cities of Durham and Ely.

And as neither Cities nor Buroughs are endewed with these their Liberties
What creates the house of Commons.
and Privileges by any inherent birthright; so neither are the Counties nor
Inhabitants endewed with any right of sending Knights of their Counties by any
inherent birthright; for then had all the Counties a like right one as another,
and all the Inhabitans a like vote; and they mighr create representatives as
often as they should see occasion. But all these are most evidently false; for
we have showed before, that not only the division of this Nation into Counties
was an act of the Kings, but all Counties are not alike endewed with this
Privilege, some Counties in Wales sending but one, and the County of Durham
none at all. Nor have all men a like vote in electing (and yet as much subject
to Laws made in Parliament as other men) but men only who have 40 s. yearly
freehold rent; nor can these 40 s. a year men, when they will, send their
representatives. What then does empower these to send representatives? Why let
Sir Ed. Coke say, Inst. 4. p. 1.
Knights of Shires, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Buroughs, are
respectively elected by the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, by force of the
Kings Writ. So that the Kings Writ is the first and efficient cause of the page
28.
house of Commons, as well of the Knights, as Citizens and Burgesses; the
Commons cannot begin nor be dissolved, without the King in person or
representation.

If then Rebellion be as the sin of Witchcraft, as the Holy Ghost says; Annot.
and if crimen lesae Majestatis be the highest crime and impiety, as all
Lawyers hold; and if Gratitude be one the chief of all Moral virtues, as all
men hold, for, si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, no man who is an ungrateful
man, but has rendered himself as if he had committed all manner of wickedness:
How impious then is it for men, only from the Kings grace endewed with this
high favor, to convert it in opposition and derogation of that power and person
from whence they originally received it! But they say, if the Commons did it,
then was it done by the people, and so just and not to be questioned, as if the
people were not a thing to be governed; and all as much subject to the King and
Laws as every one; or that a thing just or unjust in it self, were more just or
unjust, because more or fewer did it. Will any man say, the crucifying of our
Savior was therefore just, because many of the Jews did it? or that a rout or
riot is therefore lawful, because done by many men? or that it is not paricide
or regicide, if many Sons and Subjects kill their Parents, and King?

As all the Members of both houses are created by the King, so cannot The
Parliament cannot begin but by the King.
these Members be formed into a body but by the King, either by his Royal
presence or representation. By representation two ways; either by a Guardian
of England by Letters Patents under the great Seal, when the King is in remotis
out of the Realm: or by Commission under the great Seal of Inst. 4. p. 6.
England to certain Lords of Parliament representing the person of the King, he
being within the Realm, in respect of some infirmity.

This House is so far from being the Supreme Authority of the Nation, The
Jurisdiction of the Commons House.
that they are not a Court of Judicature, nor can impose an Oath, or take any
man's Examination. Yet Sir Ed. Coke says, Inst. 4. 28. that the House of Commons
is to many purposes a distinct Court, because (he says) they cannot be
prorogued or adjourned but by its self; yet gives no more. It is true indeed,
that to many purposes among themselves they do judge their Members, and
Elections, and have a Committee for Religion; but these things are more of
custom (whether good or bad, I cannot tell) then of any original right that I
know, or ever heard of. And Sir Ed. Coke, Inst. 4. 11. says, They being the
general Inquisitors of the Realm, have principal care in the beginning of
Parliaments to appoint Committees of Grievances (both in Church and
Commonwealth) of Courts of Justice, of Privileges, and of Advancement of
Trade. They have been wont too, ever since the Statute de Tallagie non
concedendo, of course to grant the King Aids in extraordinary cases.

The House of Peers, assisted as aforesaid, are the Supreme Court of The
Jurisdiction of the House of Lords.
Judicature in this Nation; not only to judge whether matters presented to them
by the Commons, be fit or requisite for the King to pass into Laws, (as
Monsieur Bodin well observes, who disputes this better then any of our English
Lawyers that I know of, has done) but also of Writs of Error, and of matters of
Fact either not determinable in other Courts, or else when though they are
determinable in other Courts, yet in regard of nicety or special matter they
cannot well discern or judge.

I have therefore been particular herein, as well to show into what cause Annot.
not only both Houses conjunctly, but every particular Member in either, have a
right of being; as also (since Non datur progressus ad infinitum) the
Parliament being a body compounded of heterogenial or dissimilar parts, if they
sever or divide, into what Subjects may, ultimately with good conscience,
resolve their faith and obedience. And no question, it is better any thing
should be Law, then that every thing should be lawful: And that is the greatest
slavery, where Subjects know not where to pay their obedience, and from whence
to expect protection; but where different Factions shall with equal right or
injury, impose their lusts and wills for Laws to their Fellow Subjects.

The Jurisdiction of Parliament is so transcendent, that it makes, inlargeth,
The Jurisdiction of Parliament.
diminishes, abrogateth, repealeth and reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances, concerning matters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common,
Civil, Martial, Maritime, and the rest: It may make Daughters and Heirs
apparent of a man or woman, during the life of the Ancestor; Com. Lit. 110.
adjudge an Infant or Minor of full age; attaint a man of Treason after his
death; it may Bastard a Child that is Legitimate, it may make a Bastard Inst. 2
par. 36.
Legitimate.

A Parliament was called before the Conquest, Michael Sinoth, Michael By what
other names called.
Gemote, Ealsa Witenage Mote; that is to say, the Great Court or Meeting of the
King and of the Wise men; sometime, of the King with the Council of his
Bishops, Nobles, and wisest of his people. The French call it Les estates, and
L'assemble des estates; (the Parliaments in France are no other Inst. par. 1.
110. a.
then our Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, and Chancery in
England.) The Germans call it a Diet. And Inst. 4. p. 2. it was anciently
called Witenage mote, Conventus sapientum, Commune concilium regni, Generale
concilium regni, Concilium regni, and Assisa generalis. Tully calls it,
Consessum Senatorum, a considendo, etc.

Object. But it may be it will be objected, That though the King be principium,
caput, and finis Parliamenti, and that every Member, as well as both Houses,
have their original right and sitting there from him; and that though Laws of
right ought to pass in Parliament at the rogation, request or petition of the
Commons, by the counsel and advice of the Lords; yet the Kings of the Nation
have long since divested themselves of this power, and have granted the Lords
and Commons a concurring power in the making of Laws, or by custom and usage it
has been so time out of mind, and so ought to be observed as a Law.

To the first I say, Kings reign by a higher then any humane law; and John made
it so. But I deny the assertion; for it is false, that ever any King of this
Realm did ever grant the Parliament, or either House, a concurring power of
making Laws with him.

For the second; No usage, prescription, or custom can take place,

David's calling all the Lords of Israel, the Lords of the Tribes, the Lords of
the Companies that ministered to the King by course, the Captains over thousands
and over hundreds, and the Lords that had the oversight over all the substance
and possession of David and of his sons, with the Chamberlains, and all the
mighty, and all the valiant, and all the active men, unto Jerusalem, to consult
concerning the building of God a house, 1 Chronicles. 28. 1, 2. was a Parliament. So
was that Convention of Solomon's, Inst. 4 par. 3. Ibid.
2 Chronicles. 2. and that Convention of the Israelites, Judge. 20. 11.

Ego Inas Dei gratia Westsaxonum rex, exhortatione and doctrina Cenredes patris
mei, and Heddes episcopi mei, and Erkenwaldes episcopi mei, and omnium
Aldremannorum meorum, and Seniorum sapientum regni mei, multaque congregatione
servorum Dei, sollicitus de salute animarum nostrarum, and statu regni mei,
constitui rectum conjugium, and recta judicia, pro stabilitate and
confirmatione populi mei, benigna sedulitate celebrari, and nullo Aldremanno
vel alicui de toto regimine nostro conscripta liceat abolere judicia; was an
Act of Parliament. Proem. par. 9. Reports.


Edwardus rex admonuit omnes sapientes suos qui fuerint Exoniae, ut
investigarent simul, and quaererent quomodo pax eorum melior esse possit quam
ante fuit; was an Act of Parliament by Edward King Alfreds son. Ibidem.


Haec sunt instituta quae Edgarus rex consilio sapientum suorum instituit; were
Acts of Parliament. Ibidem.


Hoc est consilium quod Etheldredus rex, and omnes sapientes sui condixere ad
emendationem pacis omni populis, apud Woodstock. Haec sunt verba pacis, and
prolocutionis quae Etheldredus rex, and omnes sapientes ejus cum exercitu
firmaverunt, qui cum Anulano, Justino, and Guemundo Stigrani filio venit: Et
haec instituerunt Etheldredus rex, and Sapientes ejus apud Habam; were Acts of
Ibidem.
Parliament.

Edmundus rex congregavit magnam Synodum Divini ordinis and Seculi apud
Londonum civitatem in Sancto Pasch. solenni: and hae sunt institutiones quas
Ed. rex, and episcopi sui, cum sapientibus suis instituerunt apud Culinconam,
etc. and paulo post: Ego Edmundus rex mando and praecipio omni populo senior',
and junior', qui in regione mea sunt, qui investigans investigari, cum
sapientibus Clericis and Laicis; were Acts of Parliament. Ibidem.


Haec sunt statuta Canuti regis Anglorum, Danorum, Norvegar' venerando
sapientum ejus consilio ad laudem and gloriam Dei, and sui regalitatem and
commune commodum habita in Sancto Natali Domini apud Wintoniam, etc. were Acts
passed in Parliament. Ibidem.


Rex Canutus an. regni sui 5. per 130 annos ante copilationem decretorum quae
an. Dom. 1150. fuer' copilat' anno 7 pontificatus Papae Eugenii tertii, and
ante copilation' aliorum Canon' quorumcunque, cunctos reg' sui praelat'
proceresque ac magnates ad suum convocans Parliam' in suo publico Parliam'
persistentibus personaliter in eodem Wulstano, and Adelnodo archiepisc' and
Ailwino episc' Elmehamense, and aliis episcopis ipsorum suffragan' septem
Ducibus, cum tot Comitibus, nec non diversorum monaster' nonnullis Abbatibus,
cum quamplurimis gregariis milit' ac cum populi multitudine copiosa, ac omnibus
adhuc in eodem Parliamento personalit' existent' votis Regiis unanimiter
consentientibus, praeceptum and decret' fuit, quod Monasterium Sancti Edmundi
etc. sit ab omni jurisdictione episcopor' com' illius ex tunc imperpet'
funditus liberum and exemptum, etc. Illustris rex Hardicanutus pred' regis
Canuti filius, haeres and success ac sui patris vestigior' devotus imitator,
etc. cum laud and favore Aegelnod' Dorobornensis, nunc Cantuariensis, and
Alfrici Eborac' episcopor', aliorumque episcopor' suffragan', nec non cunctorum
regni mei mandanorum principum descriptum constituit roboravitque praeceptum;
were Acts of Parliament. Ibidem.


Rex Eldredus convocavit Magnatos, Episcopos, Proceres, and Optimates ad
tractandum de publicis negotiis regni: And this was a Parliament. Inst. 4. p. 3.


But none of these (you will say) have the obligation of Laws upon us. Well,
let us see those Acts of Parliament which have, and what is the difference. By
the way, no Acts of Parliament are now, nor these 400 years have had the force
of Statute-Laws in England, but those made in Henry the Third's time, and
since. And what was the first and great Act of Magna charta, but -- Henry by
the grace of God King of England, Lord of Magna Charta an Act of Parliament.
Ireland, etc. We have granted to God, and by this our present Charter have
confirmed for us and our heirs for ever, That the Church of England shall be
free, and shall have all her whole rights and liberties inviolable. We have
granted also and given to all the Freemen of our Realm, for us and our heirs
for ever, those Liberties underwritten, to have and to hold to them and their
heirs, of us and our heirs for ever. Note, this great Charter which made the
Church and Nota been.
Kingdom of England the most free in the world, was a free and voluntary act of
an English Monarch in Parliament: And all that violation and destruction of all
those happy Grants and Concessions both in Church and State, have been made by
a cursed conspiracy of a factious and seditious company of men (falsely and
most injuriously arrogating to themselves the name of Parliament) without and
against the Kings good mind and pleasure.

Charta Foresta was -- Henry by the grace of God King of England, Lord of
Ireland, Duke of Normandy and of Guyen, etc. We will that all Forests which
King Henry our Grandfather afforested, shall be viewed by good and lawful men,
etc.

Statutum Hiberniae was nothing else but -- Henry by the grace of God King of
England, etc. To his trusty and welbeloved Gerard son of Maurice, Justicer of
Ireland, greeting. Commanding him to cause the Customs recited in the Act, and
used in England, to be proclaimed, and straightly kept and observed in Ireland.

Statutum de Anno Bissextili was -- The King unto the Justices of the An. 21.
H. 3.
Bench greeting etc. The Statute entitled Assisa panis and cervisiae, was --
An. 51. H. 3.
The King to all to whom these presents shall come, greeting. We have seen
certain Ordinances, etc.

Stat. de Scaccario: The King commands that all manner of Bailiffs, Sheriffs
An. 51. H. 3.
and other Officers, as well Justices of Chester, etc.

Statutes made in the Parliament at Marleborough; wherein the King An. 52. H. 3.
made these Acts, Ordinances and Statutes underwritten, which he wills to be
observed for ever firmly and inviolably of all his Subjects, as well high as
low.

Statute of Westminster the first, were the Acts of Edward the son of An. 3.
Ed. 1.
Henry, etc. by his Council, and the assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm, etc. the King
ordained and established these Acts underwritten, which he intends to be
necessary and profitable unto the whole Realm. First the King wills and
commands that the peace of Holy Church, and of the Land be well kept and
maintained in all points, and that common right be done to all as well poor as
rich, without respect of persons, etc.

Statutes made at Gloucester, where our Sovereign Lord the King for An. 6. Ed.
1.
the amendment of the Land, and for the relief of his people, etc. has
provided and established these Laws underwritten, willing and commanding that
from henceforth they be firmly observed within the Realm.

Statute of Rutland, has no other title then -- The King to his Treasurer An.
10. Ed. 1.
and Barons of the Exchequer, and to his Chamberlains greeting, etc.

Articuli super Chartas, were Grants in Parliament made by the King An. 20. Ed.
1.
at the request of the Prelates, Earls and Barons assembled in Parliament.
Note, the Commons are not so much as named in these Acts of Parliament.

The Statute of Quo Warranto made at Gloucester, and Statute de Protectionibus
An. 30. Ed. 1. An. 33. Ed. 1.
made at Westminster, the King only speaks.

Stat. de conjunctim Feoffatis: The King unto all to whom these, etc. An. 34.
Ed. 1.
greeting. And after the recital of the things contained in the Act, it is
said* In witness of which thing we have caused these our Letters Patents, I my
self being Witness at Westminster.

Statute of Amortising of Land, made by Ed. 1. only the King speaks.
Ordinatio pro statu Hiberniae, made 17 Ed. 1. the King speaks by the assent
of his Council.

Statute Ne Rector prosternat arbores in coemiterio, only the King speaks,
and neither Council nor Parliament mentioned. An. 35 Ed. 1.


Statute for Knights, has no other title then -- Our Lord the King has An. 1.
Ed. 2.
granted, etc. And Stat. de frangentibus prisonam, 1 Ed. 2. has nothing to
create it a Law, but, The King wills and commands; and neither Parliament
nor Council named in either of them.

Articuli Cleri made at Lincoln, the King and his Council are named. An. 9. Ed.
2.


The Statute of York was made by the King, by the assent of the Prelates, An.
12. Ed. 2.
Earls, Barons, and Commonalty there assembled: So that in these three Kings
reign, although the King did enact them in Parliament, yet the manner was
different almost in all.

In Ed. 3. his time, was the form of enacting Laws truly defined, and An. 1.
Ed. 3.
much used by him and the subsequent Kings. At the Parliament holden at
Westminster; King Edward at the request of the Commonalty, and by their
Petition made before him and his Council in the Parliament, and by the assent
of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men assembled at that
Parliament, has granted etc.

In the next Parliament holden at Northampton, the Laws are made by An. 2. Ed.
3.
him, and by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men,
and all the Commonalty assembled in Parliament.

Statutes made at Westminster, were enacted by the King, his Prelates, An. 4.
Ed. 3.
Earls, Barons, and other of the same Parliament, at the request of the Commons.

Statutes made at Westminster: The King by the assent of the Prelates, An. 5.
Ed. 3.
Earls, Barons, and other great men of the Realm, at the request of his people
granted, and established etc.

Statutes made at York, were enacted by the King in Parliament, upon An. 9. Ed.
3.
the Petition of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

Statute of Money made at York, was enacted by the King, with the An. 9. Ed. 3.
assent of the Prelates, Earls and Barons, and the Commons not so much as named.

Statutes made at Westminster, were made and established by the King, An. 10.
Ed. 3.
with the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of this
Realm, and at the request of the Knights and Commons.

Statutes of Purveyors made at Westminster, were enacted by the King, An. 10.
Ed. 3.
with the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and also at the request of the
Knights of the Shires, and the Commons by their petitions put in the said
Parliament.

Statutes made at Westminster, were to the honor of God, and of Holy An. 14 Ed.
3.
Church, by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other assembled at
Parliament.

And see almost all the Acts of Parliament in Ed. 3. his time, after in Rich.
2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Ed. 4. Rich. 3. the King always made the Law, and
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal did assent, at the instance, request or
petition of the Commons; or by the King with the assent of the Lords and
Commons; which was not, or but rarely used, unless in Rich. 2. his time. In
Hen. 7. his time, the Commons got to have their assent, as well as the Lords in
passing Laws. And this manner of passing Laws continued generally until Edward
the Sixth's time, where they were sometime made by the King, with the assent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament, and sometime by
the Parliament: But the form of enacting Laws by the King, and the Lords
Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament, was seldom or never
used before Queen Mary's time.

So that it is as clear as the Sun at noonday, That a King of England,
Sessions of Parliaments, do not derogate from Regal Power.
by the ancient usages of this Nation, is as free and absolute in the Session
of Parliament, as out. And the Act of a King in Parliament, is the free and
voluntary Act of an absolute Monarch; for the Act of the King in Parliament
passed by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the Petition
of the Commons, is not less the act of the King, because it is so passed;
unless a man will deny, that my Will being a faculty of my Soul, cannot
imperate an act, if it takes information from my Understanding or Reason;
Reason and Understanding being in proportion to the Will, as Counsel is to a
Law. King Charles of Sacred memory, commends to his Son, the then Prince of
Wales, in his last Letter and Admonition to him (though for his own particular
he had little Reason (God knows) so to do) the frequent use of Parliaments, as
the best means, by which, Laws may be received of the Subjects, and diffused to
all parts of the Nation, and to hold a right understanding between the King,
and his Subjects.

But as nullum medicamentum est idem omnibus; nay, the same Medicine at one
time may kill the same person, which at another time may cure him: And that
thing, which at one time may be a very probable reason of an action, at another
time, may be none at all, or quite contrary to Reason: So in Reasons of State,
that may be a very probable reason at one time, which may be none at all, or
perhaps destructive at another time. As Henry the Third had great Reason of
State, to form a House of Commons, and endue it with large privileges, to
secure himself against a stubborn and rebellious Nobility: But King Charles had
not the same Reason of State to indulge the House of Commons, contriving the
destruction of himself, the Church and Nobility, Laws and Liberties of this
Nation. Edward the First had great Reason of State to call a Parliament, and to
pass the Act De Tallagio non concedendo, for otherwise as the state of affairs
then stood, he could neither get money to assist his Friend and Ally, the Earl
of Flanders; nor relieve his distressed Subjects in Aquitaine oppressed by the
French King (which Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon this Statute observes;)
but King Charles had not the same Reason of State, to call the Parliament in
1640. who (instead of assisting their natural Sovereign against a Rebellious
Rabble of Mungrel Hebrides and Lysisks, give them Three hundred thousand pounds
to be exported out of the Kingdom for their Brotherly assistance.

Edward the First had great Reason of State to pass the Statute of Mortmaine,
when as men were so superstitiously given, that no man thought he could merit
Heaven, if he gave nothing to the Church; whereby such large Revenues accrued
to the Church, that the third part of the Revenues of the Nation was in
Church-mens hands; who pretending exemption from the Temporal Power, if some
remedy were not taken, the King would probably be left destitute of means to
protect himself, and his Subjects; yet is there not now that Reason of State,
when in a Sacrilegious age, all the Patrimony of the Church goes to wrack and
ruin; and men of Badges of Sacrilege, make marks of Saintship. It were
endless to enumerate how Reasons of State vary with the times: It must suffice,
that there be means always in the Supreme Power, to remedy and cure the
maladies and mischiefs of State, as they arise and represent themselves. Yet it
is a remarkable thing, That they who oblige Kings and Supreme Powers to their
own Laws, will never be obliged by either their own, or any Laws of God, if
ever the Supremacy comes to be vested in them; and let any man show me in Five
hundred years one time, wherein the Kings of England did alter the Laws out of
Parliament, and I will show him an hundred times in seven years, where men
arrogating to themselves the name of Parliament, have altered the Laws without
the King. They who oblige Supreme Powers to Humane Laws, the Conditions must
oblige God too to such things, as is contained in those Laws and Conditions, or
else it is impossible for Powers to protect their Subjects.

But Corruption optimi est pessima, there were never so vile things done as have
been by Parliaments, or by men calling themselves so. Sir Edward Inst. 4. page
37, 38.
Coke (being always mightily in love with Parliaments) gives instances but in
two, viz. Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, and Edmund Earl of March (the true and
undoubted Heir of the Crown of England) both condemned unheard, and without
trial in Parliament, when as he might have instanced twenty. Sir Thomas Seimer,
Admiral of England, and Brother to the Protector, Anno 1549. the third year of
Edward the Sixth, was condemned to death unheard by a Law in Parliament. Henry
the Third after all the Acts of Grace of Magna Charta, Charta de Foresta, etc.
(instead of means Good Governors are the Preservers or enlargers of the
Government. Parliaments have ever been the bane of the greatness of the English
Monarchy.
given him by Parliament, for the recovery of his right of the Duchy of
Normandy, usurped and taken by the French King from his Father King John, and
the Duchy of Guienne, and Earldom of March, the year before usurped and taken
from him by the French King) had all the exercise of Regal Government taken
from him, and given to the Twelve Peers, by the Insanum Parliamentum.
Mad Parliament; whereof ensued the Barons Wars, to the destruction and
confusion of so many Englishmen, as nothing but a Parliament could have done.
Henry the Fourth in the first year of his usurped Reign, had the Crown entailed
upon him and his Heirs in Parliament, from whence ensued all the Wars of the
Houses of York and Lancaster. At a Parliament holden Anne Dom. 1470. begun at
Westminster, 26 November, the Crowns of England and France, were entailed upon
Henry the Sixth, and the Heirs male of his body lawfully begotten; and for want
of such Heirs unto George Duke of Clarence, being the younger Brother of Edward
the Fourth, the undoubted Heir of the Crown of England; whereby a double
injustice was done, first to Henry the Sixth, excluding his Heirs general, then
to Edward the Fourth, to prefer his younger Brother Clarence before him, in case
of want of Heirs male to Henry the Sixth.

See the Factious Conspiracy of the Commons, together with the consequence
against the Duke of Suffolk. Speeds History, Henry 6. p. 675. Para. 47, 48.

The Parliament in the First of Richard the Third his Reign (though a bloody
Usurper) presented a Bill for the entailing the Crown upon his Heirs. Ann. 1
Hen. 7.
Nor was the Act of Parliament less injurious, which entailed the Crown upon
Henry the Seventh, and the Heirs of his body, (he having no color of title to
it, but in right of his Wife) and because he suspected his title, and reigned
in his own right to the wrong of his Wife, and after her decease, to the wrong
of his Son Henry the Eighth, in the eleventh year of his Reign, he got an Act
of Parliament to pass, which should protect all Subjects who should assist the
King (be he so by right, or not) for the time being. So that other offenses
should be punished; but he that perpetrates the highest villainy by invading a
Crown, should be protected by Law. Henry the Eight, by authority of Parliament,
an. 1533. Bastardized Queen Mary; and so soon as he had cut off Anne Bullens
head, by authority of Parliament Bastardized Queen Elizabeth, smally to his
credit, one would think.

Add hereunto the ridiculous, yet cruel Act of Hen. 8 his Headship of the
Church: So that a stranger being one day in Smithfield, and seeing one burnt
for denying the Six Articles, and another hanged for denying his Headship,
cried out, Bone Deus, quo modo hic agunt vivi! hic comburuntur Papistae, ibi
suspenduntur Antipapistae. The bloody Laws passed in Parliament in prosecution
of the Six Articles, in the time of Henry the 8. and the bloody Parliamentary
Laws for Religion, in Queen Mary's reign, etc. and all those Sacrilegious Acts
made in the reigns of Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. and sure no man can imagine such
horrid acts could be perpetrated but by Parliaments.

Nor have the General Assemblies in France (who were wont to be assembled once
or twice a year) demeaned themselves much better then the Parliaments in
England; but in stead of providing good Laws, fell into such Factions, and used
such affronts to the Regal power, that Lewis the Eleventh (a most subtle and
cunning Prince) was wont to say, It was time to put the French Kings, horce de
page, out of their minority, and from being Pages any more; and so he did. And
since his time they have been rarely convented in France: For since the General
Assembly at Bloys, anno 1587. by Henry the Third, where the famous Duke of
Guise was killed, there has been but one, anno 1614. in the fourth year of the
reign of Lewis the Thirteenth; and that succeeded so ilfavoredly, that there is
no probability of ever being another.

4. Besides the general and particular Customs, and Acts of Parliament, there
are almost infinite Corporations, Colleges and Companies, who have diverse and
sundry privileges, which are granted by the Kings Letters Patents, and are
observed as Laws, and to all intents and purposes have the effect of Laws.

5. But in all Maritime cases, (the Kings of England being Sovereigns of the
Narrow Seas, whatsoever Grotius says to the contrary) and all actions done upon
a Navigable river, are judged by the course of Civil law; and so the Probate of
Wills, and Letters of Administration are determinable by the Civil law.

Judge Jenkins, a learned Gentleman, and a stout Champion for the Laws of this
Nation, in the first page of his Lex terrae, divides the Laws of this Nation
into three grounds or species, viz. 1. The Customs, 2. Acts of Parliaments, and
3. Judicial Records; and that the two latter are declarations of the former
touching Royal government; so that he makes Custom to be the ground of Royal
government, and Acts of Parliament to have but a declaratory power of the
Common Law touching Royal government, and Judicial Records to be equivalent to
Acts of Parliament. In all which he is most manifestly mistaken: For first,
there are an exceeding many Acts of Parliament, which have no manner of
dependence or affinity with the Common Law, and so cannot be declarations of
it; nay, there are many Acts of Parliament which are so far from being
declarations of the Common Law, that they do annihilate it, and create other
things in lieu thereof; as the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. called the Statute
de donis conditionalibus, annihilated all the Conditional estates in Fee at
Common Law, and created estates in Tail in lieu thereof. At Common Law, no
Lands or Tenemers were deviseable by Will; but the Acts of 32 and 34 H. 8.
create a power of devising Lands and Tenements in Fee, by Will; and Tenants at
Common Law might choose whether they would attorn to any Grant of the Lord; but
now the Lords Grant is good without it, by 27 H. 8. cap. 10. Sir Ed. Coke com.
on Lit. sect. 574. says, Stat. 32. H. 8. takes away the reason of the
Common Law; so that, that cannot be a declaration of what, it takes away the
reason.

It were tedious to instance the Acts of Parliament which give one Jointenant a
power to compel the others to sue a Writ of Partition, which was denied at
Common Law; and right of Entry, where they were put to their Cui in vita, etc.
It may suffice, that in no Kings reign there have not been Acts of Parliament,
which have been so far from making declarations of the Common Law, that they
have made manifest alterations in it. And as the Common Law has no force nor
reason against an Act of Parliament, so has no particular Custom any force or
reason against it, for no man can prescribe against an Act of Parliament; and
all Lands in Gavel-kind were particular Customs, but taken away by Act of
Parliament. And many Acts of Parliament have not declared the Succession of the
English Diadem according to the usual custom thereof, but made manifest
alteration thereof, as in the Succession of Hen. 4. 5. and 6. Rich. 3. Hen. 7.
and 8. which being unjust, and the cause not depending upon Humane laws, ought
not to be obeyed.

Nor (secondly) is that a less error, that Judicial Records are equivalent to
Acts of Parliament; for they are so far from being equal to Acts of Parliament,
that in truth they are no Laws, but Inferences and Conclusions which are
deduced from Laws. For there is not any Judicial Record, which is not unjust,
if it cannot truly and ultimately be resolved in some general or particular
Custom, Act of the Parliament, or grant of the King. So that Acts of
Parliament, the Common Law, Particular Customs and Prescriptions, and Royal
Grants, are as Axioms, Postulata, or Principles in Arts or Sciences; and
Judicial Records, Reported Cases, and Yearsbooks, are Inferences, Conclusions,
or Sciences deduced from Acts of Parliament, the Common Law, and particular
Customs of this Land, or Concessions of the King.

Touching Royal Government; Royal Government being the ordinance of God, and
from the Law of Nature, is paramount to all Humane laws, and the prime and
efficient cause of them; they cannot therefore declare the cause, so as to
create any obligation, of what they are but the effects, and from whence
derived.

We have thus far treated of the means by which the Kings of this Nation have
(until 1640.) governed and preserved their Subjects internally. But because it
is the office of Kings, to preserve their Subjects as well from foreign force,
as internal broil; there is yet something wanting, of which we have not
treated, viz. The power of making War and Peace, and maintaining Alliance and
Traffic. Of these, in regard they refer to Foreign powers and jurisdictions,
and are not subject to the Laws of the Nation, we shall forbear to treat; only
affirming that it is necessary that at all times this power must be so vested
in the King, that at all times he may have the aids and assistance of his
Subjects in prosecution of the Ends aforesaid.

The end of the Third Book.
The Contents of the Fourth Book.
HAving thus far treated of all created Rights, and the causes of all Laws and
created Powers and Virtues, and these being previous and necessary to all
Justice and Obedience; We in this Book descend to treat of Justice in the first
Chap. as the most eminent and noble of all Humane virtues, it being that which
not only conserves private Families, but all Nations and Kingdoms in unity,
peace and society; and demonstrate it neither to be in Geometrical proportion,
as Plato would; nor Arithmetical proportion, as Zenophon held; nor in
Harmonical proportion, as Bodin taught: Nor is that corrective and distributive
Justice, which Aristotle affirmed to be in Arithmetical, and in Geometrical
proportion.

The Second Chap. treats of Obedience, and shows how that it necessarily
proceeds, and yet is different from Justice.

The Third Chap. treats of Judgment, and shows how it differs from Law and
Justice.

The Fourth Chap. treats of Equity, and shows how it differs from Judgment, and
how necessary Courts of Equity, as well as Judicature, are.

THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Justice.
1. JUstitia est habitus animi communi utilitate Cicero's definition of Justice.
servata, suum cuique tribuens, and Societatem conjunctionis Humanae munifice,
atque aeque tuens. Justice is a habit of the Mind, common utility being
conserved, giving to every one their right, and bountifully and equally Cicero.
lib. 1. de legibus.
defending the Society of Mankind. Et Justitia est quae suum cuique
distribuit; Justice is that which does distribute to every man what is his
right. Where he says, That Justitia est obtemperatio scriptis legibus; we will
show that is not properly Justice, but Obedience only.

2. Justice is the upright doing of an act conserving Society, in that Quid sit
Justitia.
formality as it is commanded, or permitted by him, who by right may command or
permit it. Justice is the doing of a just action; the doing of a just action,
is the upright doing of any act, as it is commanded or permitted by him, who by
right may command or permit it, preserving Peace and Society. I say, Justice
must have these two properties, viz. upright doing (that is, abstraction from
all affections of love, hate, or self-interest) and the Law or Command of him,
who by right may command or permit such an act: Other actions proceeding from
Wisdom, Reason, Experiment, or Discourse, etc. are prudent, profitable, etc.
but none are just, or honest actions, which cannot be truly and ultimately
resolved into the Law or Command of him, who by right may command, or permit
such an act. So Quotuplex.
that Justice is twofold, either commanded or permitted.

3. Injustice is the abuse or falsifying the Law or Command of him, What is
Injustice.
who by right commands, to the hurt or prejudice of another. As a Law preceding
and Integrity, are inseparable incidents to Justice; so Hypocracy, seeming
just, and yet abusing or falsifying a Law, and the damage of another or more,
are incidents inseparable to injustice.

4. Let us see who may by right command, and who are obliged to do God commands
by highest right.
in conformity to their Laws and Commands. I say, God by highest right ought to
command all the created things in Heaven and Earth; and all Creatures are
chiefly and absolutely obliged to do whatsoever he commands, without any
reasoning or disputing why he so commands; For the earth is Psalm. 24. 1. Job
41. 11. Psalm. 50. 12.
the Lords, and all that therein is; the compass of the World, and all that
dwell therein: And whatsoever is under the whole Heaven, is Gods; and the World
is mine, and the fullness thereof. All Gods commands therefore have a like and
equal influence upon all his Creatures; all Creatures, as compared to him, are
alike vile, and between him and them is no proportion. To abuse then or
falsify any Law of God or Nature, to the hurt or prejudice of another, is a
sin of injustice in all Gods Creatures; and therefore in all men, and therefore
in all sorts of men: As if any man promises another, that he will do, or give
him such a thing, although it be to his hinderance, he wilfully breaks his
promise. I say, this is a sin of injustice in the promiser; for he abuses and
falsifies the Law of Nature, which obliges every man to the performance of his
promise, to his hinderance, to whom he made his promise. And though this be the
Law of Nature which does only oblige in Conscience, yet is such a promiser an
unjust man, nor does he deserve to be trusted as a friend, or honest man.

But this must always be understood of private men, and they not preengaged
Annot.
before, for the first promise is to be performed: Neither must the performance
of a private man's promise, be to the hurt or damage of another man; for by the
Law of Nature he was obliged to hurt no man, and to give to every man his due,
before he made such promise. A public person promises to another, to do or
give him such a thing which will be prejudicial to his trust, I say he ought
not to perform it; for he was obliged to perform his trust, before he made such
promise. What then, does preengagement, the not injuring of another, or public
employment, free men and let them loose from all Law of God and Nature? I
answer, nothing less, for they sin not less then private freemen, in not
performing their promise, but commit a greater sin in breaking their first
promise, and betraying their public trust, etc. then if they should perform
their promise: So that in promising they sin, but in the performance they
commit a greater sin.

5. A King promises he will not hurt any of his Subjects in their persons How
Kings promises are to be interpreted and performed.
or estates, without due Process, and after judgment given according to the
known Laws. He being a King, was obliged as King to do to the best of his
power, all things in order to the good and preservation of his subjects in
general; and therefore is obliged to this latter promise only, as it is
consistent with his former: He ought only to protect his subjects in
particular, as it does relate to the good and benefit of his subjects in
general. I say therefore, notwithstanding any such subsequent promise, is not
any King obliged to it; but may in case of public necessity, govern by Martial
Law, and destroy any particular Subjects estate, rather then enemies, or
seditious men should make advantage thereof to the endangering of the public:
Nor is this any new thing, but always was in all species of Governments since
the World began; nor does any King sin in making such promise, for he may
justly do it, and thereby secure the minds of his Subjects, who would
otherwise be in a continual diffidence; nor does he sin in not performing this
promise, when it becomes inconsistble with the public good; for no King can
possibly foresee all the public necessities and dangers which may happen.

6. No man's being greater or lesser, does free him from his duty which
Injustice in Princes.
he owes to the Laws of God; all men being alike, as compared to God. Kings
therefore being so, are not disobliged to the Laws of God and Nature: It was
therefore a sin of injustice in Ahab, to take the possession of Naboth's
Vineyard, the property and inheritance of the Israelites being given by God,
and unalienable by the Children of Israel. I say this was a sin of injustice in
Ahab; for his being a King, did not free him from Gods Laws, but did without
any public necessity, abuse the power and command which God had given him as
King, to the damage and hurt of Naboth and his posterity. David's putting Uriah
to death, and Ahabs consenting to Naboth's death, although after his death,
were sins of injustice; for they were entrusted by God to be Kings for the good
of their Subjects: Whereas they did abuse and falsify their trust to the
highest wrong of others, whom they ought to have protected: Princes are Gods
Ministers for their Subjects good.

7. Man being a reasonable and sociable Creature, which being inconsistible Rom
13. 4. Kings by right command next after God.
with community and parity, and mankind being only conservable in Society,
that is in the mutual commanding and obeying of different parties: And as God
by highest right, ought in all things to be obeyed, so Kings ought to be obeyed
next after God in all things: For every Soul ought to be subject to the higher
powers; for there are no powers but of God, and the powers that be, are
ordained of God: And through me Kings reign, Romans 13. 1. Prove. 8. 15.
and Princes make just Laws. All things therefore which Princes command (where
God has not left necessary Laws for the good and governing of their Subjects,
which he was only pleased to do to his peculiar people the Israelites,) are
therefore just, because they command them, they commanding nothing repugnant to
the Laws of God.

8. A Prince commands a Judge to execute the known Laws uprightly; Injustice in
Subjects.
he becomes corrupt, and sells, or otherwise purloyns judgment. I say this is a
sin of injustice in the Judge, for he abuses the command of his Prince, who by
right might command him to the damage of another, against whom false judgment
is given. It is an act of injustice in all Subjects in general, to abuse the
trust committed to them by their Sovereigns, for he by right may command, and
entrust them; nor can they abuse their trust, but it must be to the damage of
the Prince, or some other. But besides express Obedience of Subjects to their
Sovereigns, when they are particularly entrusted by them, there is a general
and implied Obedience which Subjects ow to their Sovereigns, and the Laws of
their Country, as Subjects; whether they be employed in any place of trust, or
not: For subjection being in the predicament of Relation, does imply a right of
command; and no man can be subject, where there is nothing to which he is
subject. It is therefore a sin of injustice in any Subject, to pretend or abuse
any of his Countries Laws, to the hurt or damage of another.

9. Since therefore, Kings by highest right, next after God, may command;
Highest injustice in Subjects.
then by consequence is that the highest sin of injustice, next after
Luciferian pride of Creatures, making themselves equal or superior to their
Creator, for Subjects to tread under foot all Sacred and Civil Laws, to make
themselves superior to their Sovereigns, to whom by all Divine and Humane Laws
they ow their obedience, to the ruin and destruction of so many thousands of
innocent men, women, and children, and families of all sorts, which must
necessarily come to pass in the attaining their ends. And that Subjects do
abuse all Humane Laws, in pretending them to the advancing of themselves above
all Humane Laws, and their rightful Superiors; There neither is, nor ever was,
any Government in the World, good or bad, just or unjust, that did ever permit
subjects, without authority from it, to take up arms: And by our Countrey-Laws,
If any man levy war to expulse strangers, to deliver men out of prison, or
against any Statute, or any other end, pretending Reformation of their own
head; this is a levying war against the King, because they take upon them the
Royal Authority, which is against the King. Inst. 3. p. 9.

10. All Stipulations, Oaths, Promises, etc. made by Subjects against All
Oaths, Promises, etc. made against Prince or Laws, are void. Husbands by right
may command their Wives.
their Prince, or Laws, are void, and not to be performed; for they were
Subjects, and obliged to their Prince and Laws, before they made such Oath,
Stipulation, Promise, etc.

11. God is not only the Author of Government and Obedience, of Order, and
Society in Nations and Kingdoms, but also in Man and Wife; for being reasonable
and sociable Creatures, does imply a necessity of mutual commanding and
obeying. God first created man, and by so creating him, gave him the power and
dominion over the woman. It is therefore an act 1 Timothy 2. 13. Justice and
injustice in a Wife.
of Justice in every Wife, uprightly to fulfill the Law or Command of her
Husband to the benefit of him, or another, he commanding nothing derogatory to
the Laws of God or his Country; and a sin of injustice in the Wife, to
falsify or abuse any Law or Command of her Husband, to the hurt or prejudice
of her Husband or another.

12. God is not less the Author of Power, or Right of Command in Of Justice and
injustice in Wives and Children.
Parents, then in Husbands. As therefore it is an act of Justice for Wives and
Children, uprightly to do any act which is commanded them by their Husbands and
Parents (they not commanding contrary to the Laws of God, or their Country) so
it is injustice in Children, as well as Wives, to falsify any Command or Law
of their Parents, to the hurt or prejudice of another.

13. Suppose the Father and the Husband command the Wife contrary Whether the
Wife ought to obey the Father or Husband.
things, whereby it becomes impossible that the Wife should serve both: Which
ought she to serve? I say, the Husband: For though the Fathers power be from
God, and so inseparable by any act of Man; yet is not God obliged to his own
Laws, but may give that which he gave the Father, to another. And Matrimony
being an Institution of God in Paradise, and the Husbands power from the Law of
Nature, that is from God, the Wife becomes subject to her Husband; retaining
notwithstanding her piety and observance, which is always due to her Father.

14. All Societies, that is, all companies of Men, whether of Master Masters of
Families by right command their Servants. Cicero, lib. 1. de leg.
and Servants, of Father and Children, of Husband and Wife, of King and
Subjects, are contained in the mutual Offices of commanding and obeying. It is
true, that Cicero says, Cum dico legem, a me dici nihil aliud intelligi volo,
quam imperium; sine quo nec domus ulla, nec civitas, nec gens, nec hominum
universum genus stare, nec rerum natura omnis, nec ipse mundus potest. Where
therefore the Laws of Nature are not sufficient, there must be a supply of
Humane Laws. Israelites) or Nature; but that ever since there were Families,
the Masters, or Mistresses of the Families derived and had their power or right
of command over their Servants, from their Countries Laws. If Adams Family be
objected, I say, that Adam commanded not as Master of a Family only, but as a
Universal Monarch, not only over all the Creatures irrational that God had
made, but also over his Wife and Posterity as King, and not as Father and
Husband only: For no Father, or Master of a Family, can create any property in
his Son or Servant; nor had ever any Subject (who was not an Israelite)
property, from any Law of God or Nature. But it is evident, that Cain had
property in the Fruit of the Genesis 4. 3, 4.
Ground, and Abel in his Flocks; they therefore derived it from Adam as King.

15. Since Humane Laws are necessary for the conservation of all Of Justice and
injustice in Servants.
Societies of Men, and the Masters power not being contrary to any Law of God
or Nature, the Master of every Family has right of command over his Servants
by the Laws of his Country, he commanding nothing repugnant to the Laws of God
or his Country. It is therefore Justice in every Servant, uprightly to execute
such commands of their Masters; and injustice to falsify or abuse such
commands, to the hurt, or prejudice of another.

16. Suppose the Father makes his Son a Servant (for every Father has Whether
the Son ought to prefer the commands of of his Father or Master.
the same right over his Childs person, that a King has over his Subjects)
and the Father and Master command the Son contrary things: Which shall the Son
serve? I say (the Fathers power being from the Law of Nature, and so
inseparable by any act of Man) the Son ought to serve the Father; but the
Father being as much in the power of his Sovereign, as the Son in his Fathers,
the Father shall make good to the Master whatsoever he shall be damnified by
such command; the Laws of the Fathers Country obliging Subjects to perform
their Contracts.

17. Suppose the Master command contrary to the Laws of God or his How far the
Servant owes his Master subjection.
Country, and the Servant executes such command; shall this excuse the Servant?
No; for being a Servant, does not free him from the obligation of the Laws of
God or his Country, as a Subject. Well, but if the Master commands upon
corporal punishment, (for the Masters power obliges to corporal punishment) to
do something contrary to the Laws? I answer, That jus vitae and necis, which
Masters had over their Servants, is generally restrained every where as well
among Mahumetans, as Jews and Christians, where men are of the same faith: So
that Masters cannot put their Servants to death, as Masters, for any crime: If
they otherwise punish them unjustly, the Servants have their remedies by the
Laws of their Country.

18. It is Injustice in any man to tell another, that he gave such a price
Injustice in Commutation.
for such a commodity, whenas he gave not so much; thereby to deceive another,
who believes him, and gives him thereafter to a greater value then the thing is
worth. I say, this is a sin of injustice in the Seller; for, in Lying, he did
falsify the Law of the God of Truth, to the damage of the Buyer.

19. In Justice commanded, no man ought to do more or less, but to the Of
permissive Justice in a King.
utmost of his power ought to do what is commanded him, in that formality as it
is commanded. In Justice permissive, it is not always so; but the utmost or
rigid exacting of what is permitted, is highest injury: As a King is permitted
to execute his Laws; but the rigid executing of all Laws against all Offenders,
at all times, without any consideration of inability, or other circumstance of
person, time, or place, is highest injury to his Subjects: For it is impossible
(though Laws should be general, and not respect the persons, but the good of
the Subjects) that all Laws can, at all times, be alike observed by all
Subjects: And therefore though it be permitted to a King to execute all his
Laws, or else he should have none to be executed; yet in the execution of them
he ought to weigh circumstances of person, time and place; whether it were the
malice, or defense of the person offending; or whether he were able to fulfill
such Law, or not, etc. Or otherwise, Summum jus, est summa injuria.

20. As a King, so ought not a Subject rigidly to exact of another In a Subject.
whatsoever is by Law permitted him, at all times: As a Tenant by sterility of
the year, inundation of waters, etc. is so damnified, that he is not able fully
to satisfy his Landlord, but to his utter ruin: I say, in such case the
Landlord ought to remit of what, by rigor of the laws, he might justly take: Or
if in such case the Landlord shall rigidly exact his utmost due, to his Tenants
ruin, (when it is not the Tenants fault) such exaction, such summum jus, est
summa injuria. A man is permitted to sue any man for triflings, tres passes of
pedibus ambulando, etc. yet if upon all occasions a man shall sue every man
that steps out of the footpath, such a man will be counted a wrangling knave,
and such suing summa injuria. Yet is not the Law in fault, but the men; for if
it were not permitted to men to exact their rents, and sue for small
trespasses, then would no Tenant pay rent, nor should any man be secure of
enjoying what he is possessed of.

21. It is true that Aristotle says, That he is a just man that keeps the laws,
Who is a just man. Eth. lib. 5. cap. 2. 3.
and that he is an unjust man who commits contrary to laws; and that therefore
one Justice contains all other virtues. God having made Man as well a sociable,
as reasonable creature, and a free Lord of all his actions, whose will may
freely imperate his actions (not as it is with irrational creatures, whose
objects determine their actions) as he pleases; neither did ever yet in this
world any man do any act virtuous or vicious, but it was freely in his own
choice whether he had done it, or not: And by making him sociable, made him
more excellent then the other creatures of this orb. We do not therefore look
for Justice in so large a sense as Aristotle here takes; where every particular
or personal virtue may be taken for Justice.

22. We take that virtue to be Justice, which conduces to the preservation The
excellency of Justice.
of Society; (for, other personal virtees, as Temperance, Chastity, Frugality,
etc. although not as virtues, yet may they be found in other creatures:) which
is only proper to Man, and wherein Man does excel all other creatures. And no
question but that the meanest Servant, uprightly and conscientiously performing
the trust and command which his Master commands him, is as just and honest a
man, as the greatest man whatsoever.

23. Nor is it less true that Aristotle says, That he that commits any Who is
an unjust man.
thing against the Laws, is an unjust man; and so the commission of any thing
against the Laws, is a sin of injustice; and every sin, a sin of injustice: But
by reason of humane frailty, it is very difficult, if not impossible for the
most just man, not to be an unjust man, where injustice is taken in such a
latitude: And in this sense, the most just and righteous Subject that ever was,
stands in need of Gods mercy and the Kings. But the injustice we look for, we
take in a more restrained notion; not every unlawful act done upon ignorance or
passion, etc. but where men premeditately and wilfully make the laws of God or
man, a cloak and pandar to shelter and hide their unjust and illegal actions:
They that tread under foot all Sacred and Civil sanctions intended for the
conservation of peace and society among men, to set up themselves above all
laws of God or man; and to make way for their own lusts, in stead of Divine and
Humane laws; They who, the Prophet David says, imagine mischief as by a law:
Such men, such actions, are Psalm. 94. 20.
most properly unjust men, and acts of injustice.

24. Injustice differs from Injury, only in agencie and patiencie, in him How
Injustice differs from Injury.
who does, and in him who suffers. It is injustice for any man, unjustly to
make use of any law of God or man, or Temporal power (which must be from some
law of God or man) to the hurt or prejudice of another; and such hurt or
prejudice, is injury to whom it is done.

25. Damage is nothing else but loss; Injury is loss unjustly done. So How
Injury differs from Damage.
that all Injury is damage, but every damage is not injury: As a man has a
house etc. burnt by lightening; this is damage, no injury: A man is punished
justly for some fault; this is damage, no injury. Injury always is done by
injustice, that is, when the doing is countenanced by some Law, or Greatness:
Damage is, when the doing is neither countenanced by Law or Power; as Neighbors
who live by one another, do usually do one another Trespass, whith is damage,
but no injury.

26. We have declared before, that no man ought to make use of Volenti non fit
injuria, how to be understood.
(or abuse indeed) any gifts whereby he does excel another, to the damage and
hurt of another, who is not so well qualified. And no question but that God
will require of every man an account of all those talents wherewith he did
entrust him for good: And if he were pleased to punish him so severely, who had
hid his talent, because he had not increased it and done S. Matthew. 25, 26, etc.
good; how severely then will God take revenge upon him, who abuses those
natural gifts wherein he excells another, to the hurt and prejudice of his
weaker brother? But humane laws being made for the rule of outward actions,
(for only God sees the hearts and inward thoughts of men) Courts of Judicature
cannot judge whether it were this man's folly, abused by the craftiness of
another; but whether this man did this thing, or not; and no Fool or Madman
shall be received against his own act, although his Heir shall. It is not
therefore that an innocent or foolish man may not be injured, although he will
willing; but that he shall not be judged injured by any Civil Court, where it
may be made appear he was willing.

27. Bodin in the sixth book cap. 6. de repub. says, That Plato judged that
page 747. Plato's opinion of Justice.
the best form a Commonwealth, which was compounded of Popular command, and a
Tyrant: (Note, the Grecians did usually call Kings Tyrants, and did many times
take Tyrant in a good sense) yet dissenting from himself, he made his Civitas
not only in State, but also in manner of Governing, Popular; as one who gave to
the multitude of all the Citizens the power of making Laws, of creating
Magistrates, of indicting War, of making Peace, and lastly of giving rewards
and punishments. A Civitas being established after this manner, he denied it
could be happy, unless it were governed by a Geometrical proportion; for he
thought that God, the most ancient Moderator of this world, whom every best
Lawgiver ought to imitate, does preserve all things in Geometrical proportion.
He was often wont to boast, (...). Which things, although they be Plato's, yet
are no where found in his writings. But a Popular Empire Rejected by Bodin, as
repugnant to himself.
constituted by Plato, is plainly contrary to Geometrical proportion, because
the people follow an Equality of things: And Equality agrees with Arithmetical
proportion, no ways with Geometrical.

28. And because Xenophon, emulous of Plato, thought that Cities and Laws
Xenophons opinion of Justice.
ought to be constituted and distributed in Arithmetical equality, induces
Cyrus, as yet a boy, beaten, because created a King by his companions, he had
so commanded the Vestments to be exchanged, that the greater were given to the
greater, and the lesser to the shorter. Cyrus so beaten by his Master, is
taught that he is born a Persian, and therefore should use the laws and manners
of the Persians, which give that to every one, which is his property; not the
Medes, who thought that, that was to be given to every one, that was fit and
commodious for him. Plato, when he was advertised the stripes were to be
inflicted upon him, not Cyrus, rejected Cyropoedia. This contention therefore
of Xenophon and Plato being divulged by speeches among the Grecians, afforded
increase to two factions of the Great men, and People: Some following the
Popular state, did greatly love the Arithmetical proportion of Justice; Others,
because they did excel in Riches and Nobility, were not less in love with the
Geometrical proportion, agreeing with Aristocracy. (But it is strange, Plato
bred in a Popular State, should assert Justice to be in Geometrical proportion;
and Xenophon in a Mungrel Aristocracy, made up of two Kings and the Ephori,
should assert Justice to be in Arithmetical.)

29. Justice in Arithmetical proportion, he says, was like Polycretus rule,
Page 751. a. compared.
of all the most right, and as it were, Iron macerated with Vinegar, so as it
should be inflexible. The Geometrical form of governing a City, did imitate a
Lesbian Rule; for, this was made of Lead, and flexible in every part, that so
it might be accommodated to every thing, that nothing might be lost of the
matter of it, so far as it might be done. But this (he says after) being so
flexible, loses the name of a Rule.

30. But neither of these forms of Justice will down with him: For in the
Arithmetical form, he says, That women, tender and young children, 76^.
Xenophons (...) rejected by Bodin, and why,
old men, and those afflicted with sickness, should have the same punishment
for the same offense, with robust and stout men; which might be fatal to one,
and not scarce felt by the other. Yet was this against the practice of all
Democratical States; for neither in the Roman nor Athenian States, were all men
alike punished for the like offense: The Romans, who were civitate donati, were
not by the Laws to be put to death, nor punished as Slaves for any offense. Nor
were the Popular States less dissenting from their Principles in conferring
rewards and greatness upon men: For, when were men ever so great, as in Popular
States? as Pompey, Caesar, Crassus, Lucullus, Pericles, etc.

31. Nor is he less out of love with the Geometrical form of Governing, Plato's
rejected also, and why.
or Justice; for then, he says, all Patricians or Noblemen must marry only with
Patricians, and Plebeians with Plebeians; all places of Honor must be always
conferred, not for virtue or desert, but as men were Great, or Noble: So that
from hence he says, were almost perpetual dissentions p. 774. a.
between the Senators and Plebeians, until the Consulship, Censure, Preture,
and the High Priesthood were communicated to the Common people, some few
excepted.

32. Well, but because Bodin cannot find Justice to consist in Arithmetical
Bodins opinion of Justice.
nor Geometrical proportion, he will try what may be done by Harmonical, and
says, That is worthy consideration, that they have divided both proportions of
Justice, but have no where remembered the proportion p. 747. a.
of Harmonical Justice. Neither any of the Latins, or Grecians ever
accommodated Harmonical proportions, either to the distribution of the Laws, or
the moderating of the Civitates, (Governments I think he means) which as it
excells the other in dignity, so also is it referred to the Regal kind of
Civitas which we seek for, after a certain manner attempered by Aristocratical
and Democratical proportion. (We shall, I believe, find a very odd Harmonical
proportion, after a certain manner attempered by Arithmetical and Geometrical
proportion.)

33. He defines the form of governing of a Civitas in the Harmonical How
proved. Page 751. C.
Laws of Justice, to consist in these four terms, viz. The Law, Equity, the
Action of the Law, and the Office of a Judge, which have the same proportion
among themselves, that these four numbers, 4. 6. 8. 12. have. For what
proportion 4 has to 6. the same has 8 to 12; and again, what proportion has
4 to 8. has 6 to 12; so also is Lex to Equitas, and the Action of the Law, to
the Office of the Magistrate, and contrariwise; for the Action serves the Laws,
and the Office of the Magistrate, Equity. But if you should transpose the
numbers compounded by Harmonical Law, and make the Magistrate above Equity, and
the Action superior to the Law; the Harmony of the City, and Concent of Music
will perish. It would vex any Saint, much more any ingenuous Reader, to see
what a stir he keeps with converting numbers, in continued and dis-joyned
Geometrical proportion, and all to no more purpose, then to read all the
particular stories which he cites and makes to prove any of his Positions: Nor
does he ever show any color of reason, how Law, Equity, the Action of the Law,
and Office of a Judge, have like proportion to one another, as 4. 6. 8. 12.
have.

34. He says a little above in this Page B. and truly, that the Lesbian
Examined in his Politics.
Rule, if it may be wreathed, because it is made of Lead, does lose the name of
a Rule; and the force and name of a Law does perish, if a Judge may so bend and
unbend it, in all the parts thereof, by his arbitrament, as if he were a
Moderator and Arbiter of the Laws, which ought to be a Minister of them; (now
if by Equity he does not mean moderation of the Laws, let him mean what he will
for all me; nor does he ever say what he means by it) yet he says, That as the
Magistrate is the power of the Law, Page 755. A.
so is Equity in the power of the Magistrate, which is inconsistent with what
he said before, That the Magistrate who is a Judge, cannot be a Moderator of
the Laws; and with that which he propounds in his terms of Harmonical Justice,
that the Office of the Magistrate or Judge, is subservient to Equity; nay he
says, That the Harmony of the Civitas does perish, if the Judge or Magistrate
be above, or superior to Equity. Here is fine Harmonical consort indeed, where
the Judge or Magistrate is made only a Minister, and not a Moderator of the
Law; where the Office of the Judge is made subservient to Equity, and yet
Equity to be in the power of the Judge or Magistrate; and the Harmony of the
City to cease, if the Judge or Magistrate be above, or superior to Equity.

35. First, Let us see whether he has better success with his Mathematics,
His Mathematics examined.
then with his Politics; although here he only affirms 4. 6. 8. 12. to be in
Harmonical proportion, yet he does not go about to prove it before Page 774.
Well, but before we examine it, let us take the definition of Harmonical
proportion: Harmonical proportion is, when three numbers are so ordained, that
the difference which the Major and the Minor extreme, have to the mean, is in
the same proportion that the Major, is to the lesser: As 3. 4. 6. are in
Harmonical proportion, because the difference which 6. the Major extreme has
to 4. is 2. and the difference which 4. has to 3. the lesser is 1. Now 2. the
difference of the Major extreme 6. to the medium 4. being double to the
difference of 4. the mean, to the lesser extreme 3. and 6. the Major being
double to 3. the Minor, 3. 4. 6. are in Harmonical proportion. Bodin says, 4.
6. 8. 12. are in Harmonical proportion, as the Page 774.
proportion of the first to the second, and the third to the fourth is Diapent.
And again, the first to the third, and the second to the fourth is Diapason,
the proportion of the second to the third containing a Diatesseron, coupling
the first with the extremes, the means to either, procreates altogether His
first instance refelled.
a most sweet concent. But how does the Analogy of the second to the third, of
6. to 8. couple the extremes of 4. and 12. or how can 4. 6. 8. 12. be in
Harmonical proportion; when as the difference of 12. to 8. and 6. to 4. is but
double, and the proportion of 12. to 4. triple?

Secondly, But though he has not found Harmonical proportion here, His second
confuted.
(sure then his Harmonical Justice upon which it is built, will be but a very
mean structure) it may be he finds it somewhere else, where he says, 4. 6. 8.
Page, mar. 750.
are in Harmonical proportion; which because the difference of 8. to 6. and 6.
to 4. is equal, and the proportion of 8. to 4. double, is impossible by the
definition.

Thirdly, Well, he has but one instance more of Harmonical proportion that I
know of, and if he be out at that, he is past cure, for ought I can help him.
He says, that 1. 2. 3. 4. are in Harmonical proportion, he Page 775. D.
would prove it Page 776. A. the number two to three constitutes a Diapent, the
number three to four a Diatesseron, the extremes from one to four a double
Diapason: But this is nothing to Harmonical proportion; nor is it None of his
numbers in Harmonical proportion.
possible that 1. 2. 3. 4. should be in Harmonical proportion, when as the
difference of 4. to 3. and 2. to 1. is equal, and the proportion of 4. to 1. is
quadraple; nor can 2. 3. 4. be in Musical proportion; for the difference of 4.
to 3. and 3. to 2. equal, and the proportion of 4. to 2. double; nor of 1. 2.
3. For the differences of the greater extremes are equal, and the proportions
triple.

36. Aristotle Ethics, 6 Book, Cap. 7. declares the proper nature of
particular Aristotle divides Justice into
Justice into Distributive, Corrective or Commutative Justice: This latter he
says is in Arithmetical proportion, the former in Geometrical. Corrective, or
Commutative Justice consists in Promutation, Buying, Selling, Corrective
Exchange, etc. where the person of the buyer is not to be considered, whether
greater or lesser, richer or poorer; but an equal value or price is and
to be taken by the vendor for such a commodity, be the buyer rich or poor.
Distributative Justice consists he says in Geometrical proportion, and is
Distributative.
referred to the dignities and merits of men; so that here men ought to respect
the person and the quality of him, to whom any thing is attributed or given,
(...), more to him who is more worthy, and less to him who is less worthy.

37. It is true indeed, That if in Promutation a man sets such a value
Corrective Justice examined.
upon such a thing, and does not respect the person or quality of any buyer,
that then such vendor does equally to all sellers, and in exchanging observes
Arithmetical proportion: But if it be true, as it is that he says, That he is a
Eth. l. 5. c. 2, 3.
just man that keeps the Laws, and that there be no Law which sets a price upon
what thing the seller exchanges, or sells to another; then it cannot be a sin
of Injustice for any vendor, not to observe this Arithmetical Rule which
Aristotle propounds in Promutation.

38. Nor is it less true, That if a Prince in conferring honor, or otherwise
Distributative Justice examined.
rewarding a man for any merit, or great service done to him, or his Country,
gives more honor, or reward to such a man, then to another deserving less; then
such a Prince does a prudent action, and observes Geometrical proportion in it;
but what is this to Justice: For if there be no Law commanding such a thing,
then cannot the not doing of it, be a sin of Injustice; nor is it properly a
sin of injustice, not to reward or repay benefits, but of ingratitude.

Grotius, Lib. 1. Para. 8. disputes against the opinion of Aristotle, That
Grotius his opinion of Justice*
Justice is properly distinguished into Arithmetical and Geometrical
proportion; but Paragraph 9. where he should declare what Justice is, he only
confounds, Jus, Lex, and Justitia; and instead of setting down what Justice is
(which he neither does here, nor any where else that I know of) he forsooth
divides Jus into Jus natural, and voluntarium; which may signify either of
them, or both together hum drum. Community and Property, the Law of God,
immutable by God himself, and yet mutable by the will of Man. In the Dedication
of this Jus Belli and Pacis, he makes Lewis the Thirteenth to be just, because
he does by imitating him, honor the memory of his Father; (yet do I think there
were scarce ever two men more unlike;) and just, because he does by his
example, instruct his Brother; and just, because he gave his Sisters great
Portions; just, because he inflicts no great punishment upon his rebellious
Subjects, (sure never man took Mercy for Justice before;) and just, because he
allows his Subjects Liberty of Conscience.

CHAP. II. Of Obedience.
1. OBedience is the accepting of the Law or Command of him, who Obedience,
what.
by right commands; when I by no act of my will put any obsticle, whereby such
Law or Command, may be executed or received.

2. Obedience differs from Justice, as a part differs from the whole: Obedience
How Obedience differs from Justice.
is employed in Justice, Patience is only necessary to Obedience, but Agency to
Justice. Every just man must be an obedient man; but the converse do not always
hold, That every obedient man, is a just man. As a Prince commands such a man
to be a Justice of Peace, etc. in such a Town or Division, he is received by
them of the Town or Division. This is an act of Obedience in them of such a
Town or Division; not of Justice, because they are Patients only, and not
Agents.

3. Disobedience is the refusing to accept the Law or Command of How
Disobedience differs from Injustice.
him, who by right commands. Injustice is the counterfeiting Obedience to Laws,
and yet abusing them to the prejudice of another: As he who by right commands
me to do such a thing, if I refuse to do it, This is a Sin of Disobedience: If
I undertake to do it, and instead of upright doing of it, I abuse it to the
prejudice of any man; this is a Sin of Injustice.

4. Obedience is not only a virtue in it self, but also the first and only The
Excellency of Obedience.
Introduction to all virtues Theological and Moral. For not only in Moral
virtues I must subject my will to the rule and precept of him who by right
commands; but also in Theological virtues my will must be the patient, and
admit of Gods grace, as the prime and efficient cause, before it be possible
that I should be qualified to do any virtuous action, either Theological, or
Moral; and God (being all good, and a lover of Man, and hating nothing
Philanthropos
that he has made) freely offers this his grace to all men; and it is man's
fault and stubbornness that he refuses to admit of this grace of God; without
which nothing can be good, nothing can be just, or virtuous; without which no
man can reasonably hope for any Temporal happiness in this world, or eternal
Beatitude in the world to come.

5. It is not always the doing, or abstaining from what is commanded Gods
Grace only is the true and efficient cause of virtue in men
or forbidden, which is virtue, but only the ingenuous and upright doing or
abstaining from that, which is commanded or forbidden, as it is commanded or
forbidden by him who by right may command or forbid. I say that Ingenuity,
integrity, and abstraction from all affections of profit, pleasure, love, hate,
fear, etc. are essential to all virtues; for if the doing or forbearing any
action proceeds from any of these causes, then is not that action virtuous, but
profitable, pleasant, lovely, hateful, fearful, etc. Jehu did what God
commanded him in executing Gods judgments upon Ahabs posterity, but not doing
uprightly what God commanded him, in that formality as God commanded him; but
if ye be mine, and will hearken to my voice, take ye the heads of your Masters
Sons, and come to me to Jezreel to morrow 2 Kings 10. 6.
by this time, and then instead of pitying so great a calamity upon so many
young Princes, insulting over them, he in derision says to the people, Ye be
righteous: behold I conspired against my Master and slew him, but who slew all
Verse. 9.
these? hence it was that God said, I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
Hosea. 1. 4.
house of Jehu, say Interpreters: But it was a virtue in David to forbear the
killing of Saul, whenas he could have done it, and was promised by God to be
King after him; and in Jehodajah to preserve Joash, although by danger of his
life. It was not virtue in Amnon to abstain from the company of Tamar, whenas
he hated her because he had abused her; but it was in Joseph that he refused to
accompany his Mistress, whenas he might have securely enjoyed her. Nor is it
any virtue for any man to do, or forbear any thing for fear of punishment, for
so horses, dogs, and other irrational creatures, will do or not do many things
for fear of stripes, which are commanded or forbidden by their Masters. Nor is
it any virtue in a Judge to pronounce true judgment if he be hired thereunto by
any reward, or bribe. Where therefore neither worldly pleasure, profit, love,
fear, hate, nor any sublunary thing, (but it may be loss to all these) do not
move a man to the doing or not doing of what in conscience he ought to do or
forbear; there nothing less then Gods grace and power in such a man, can be the
true and efficient cause of such an action.

6. It is a most admirable thing to consider how (notwithstanding all Why only
Man can do virtuous Actions.
the various natures, dispositions, and events of things) this one Providence,
foresees and provides for all created things in the whole universe, until she
brings them all to their designed end. Nor does this providence foresee and
provide for all things from an eternal, and fatal decree impelling all actions
of all creatures. For then there could be no such thing as good, or bad men,
but God were the efficient cause of vice, as well as virtue in men, but by a
mean foresight or knowledge does often determine necessary effects from
contingent causes. Which does not only plainly appear from very many places of
Scripture, as that the men of Keilah would have delivered David if he 1 Samuel
23. 12.
had not escaped thence; that God would have destroyed Niniveh within forty
days, if the men had not repented; that God would have gathered the children
of Jerusalem together as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but Matthew. 23. 27.
they would not; that if the mighty works had been done in Tire and Sidon,
which were done in Chorazin, they had repented in dust and ashes, etc. Matthew.
11. 21.
but also all Gods promises and cursings upon men do depend upon their
obedience, or disobedience to what he commands. And however this rigid opinion
of Fate, and the eternal determination of all things be asserted by the
Stoics; yet do not I think that the most wicked man that ever was, did ever
attribute any wicked action to any such cause; but pretended conscience,
pleasure, profit, or his own will (never Gods.) It is true indeed that God has
made man in flesh and blood, and so prone to desire many things which he ought
not: But though diverse men do naturally affect and desire things they ought
not; yet God has so made every man a free Lord of all his actions, that there
is no man but may choose whether he will do, or not any thing to the attaining
of his appetitions and affections. And man's excellency above other creatures
consists in this, that his actions are not determined by his objects, as other
creatures are; but he may freely do this action, as it is moved in him from the
appetition of pleasure, profit, pride, etc. or abstain from it as he apprehends
it forbidden by him who may forbid: And so may any man freely do or endeavor to
do any thing which he ought to do, though to his temporal disadvantage, (but
this having no Temporal motive, must proceed from Gods grace) which no creature
upon earth can do but only man; only man therefore can do virtuous actions.

CHAP. III. Of Judgment.
1. JUdgment is the definitive of him who by right commands, permits, What is
Judgment.
or forbids a thing, either by himself or instrument, whether any thing be done
conformable to a Law commanding, permitting, or forbidding it.

2. Herein judgment differs from a Law. A Law is the declared will of How it
differs from a Law.
him who by right commands, permits, or forbids a thing, together with a
penalty annexed for not observance, after some reasonable time fixed whereby the
obliged may take notice of such declaration. Judgment is the sencence of him
who so commands, forbids, or permits, whether such an act were an omission or
transgression of any Law so declared.

3. Justice is the upright doing of any just or legal action, conformable to
the Law of him who by right commands: Judgment is the discerning of How
Judgment differs from Justice.
a good or bad action.

4. All judgment must necessarily be the act of three persons at least, What
persons are necessary in Judgment.
viz. the Judge, the accuser, and the party accused, or as we say, the Judge,
the Plaintiff, and Defendant.

5. The end or ratio finalis of Judgment, is either to determine differences,
The end of Judgment.
or punish offenders.

CHAP. IV. Of Equity.
1. EQuity is twofold, either a remission or moderation of the Laws How
manifold is Equity.
when the execution of Laws will rather kill then cure a distemper in the
Subject; as when many Subjects either upon passion, or being seduced, have so
far transgressed Laws, that they have forfeited by Law their lives and estates;
yet in such case are not supreme powers rigidly to exact all which the Law
gives them, but it is equity so to punish the principal Authors, and other
Subjects, that others may be deterred from the like, and the generality
offending, preserved. So where the Law commands upon penalty, and it becomes
impossible for the Subject to perform, (as it ever was, and will be) there it
is equity to remit the penalty. Where therefore the Law obliges a Tenant to pay
his Landlord such a Rent, yet if by inundation of waters, sterility of the
season, etc. it comes to pass that the Tenant by no fault of his, either
cannot, or it will be the ruin of himself and family, to pay it, there it is
equity in the Landlord to remit, or moderate what by Law he might justly exact.

Or secondly, a supplement of the Law in cases wherein things in conscience
ought to be done, yet for want of some formalities, or niceties they cannot in
strictness of Law be exacted.

2. Equity is, when with a sincere intention, men (although it be to How Equity
differs from Judgment.
their prejudice) endeavor to please God. Judgment, a giving sentence according
to Laws.

3. In Courts of Judicature, the Judges proceed according to the declared The
necessity of Courts of Equity.
Laws, and ought not in judgment to vary or swerve from them, but proceed as
they are empowered by Law and their Commission; and Laws are made usually ad
terrorem, rather to affright men, then to punish all offenders; which Laws were
they not moderated, it were impossible for all men to subsist under the burden
of them; nor is there any man but has need of Gods mercy, and the Kings. Courts
of Equity therefore are as necessary, as Judicial.

The end of the Fourth Book.
The Contents of the Fifth Book.
HAving before treated of the Causes of all Regal and Ecclesiastical power; and
having in the last Chapter of the Third Book treated of the Laws and Civil
Government of this Nation, being the exercise of Regal power in reference to
the public preservation of Peace and Society in it: In this First Chap. we
shall treat how far Ecclesiastical power has been exercised in this Nation, and
by whom; Whether originally the Britanick and English-Saxon Churches were free,
or subject to the Papal power, quoad exercitium? And whether as well before the
Conquest, as after, the Kings of this Nation were not Nursing Fathers to the
Church of Christ? And whether always before the Conquest, the Royal Government
did not extend as well to the Persons, as Possessions of Ecclesiastical
persons? And whether all Bishoprics were not originally of the Kings
foundation?

In the reciting the Ecclesiastical Laws made by the Kings and Queens of this
Realm, we shall observe three periods, viz. The Ecclesiastical Laws made by the
Kings of England before the Conquest; The Laws made by the Conqueror and
subsequent Kings, until Henry the Eighth; And lastly, the Laws made by him, and
the Kings and Queens after him, until the end of King Charles his Reign.

Note (good Reader) that in the reciting of these Laws, I do not affirm that
these Laws made by the Kings of this Realm, did never incroach upon that
Ghostly power which our Savior by Divine positive institution left only to his
Church; and therefore make no construction upon them, but only when they are
recited and objected as Authorities against that Power. My design is to show,
(having already demonstrated, that by the Law of Nature, the persons of all
Subjects born in the dominion of rightful Kings, are their natural Subjects;
which is an indelible character, and can never be washed out; and therefore
Subjects being Ecclesiastical persons, cannot free them from it: And that all
privileges and endowments which Ecclesiastical persons enjoy besides their
ghostly power, is created by the King:) That the exercise of the Kings power
over the persons and possessions of Ecclesiastics, as also Laws made by them
for the order and preservation of the extern peace of the Church, is no new
thing, as has been by some objected.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
How far the Kings, Popes, and Bishops of England have exercised their
Spiritual Jurisdiction in England before Henry the Eighth.
IT cannot, sure, be reasonably denied Apology.
by any man, but that Ignorance is the mother of all Error; nor is any man
better in any kind whatsoever, for being innurtured or ignorant: We daily see
no where more feuds If learning or knowledge were the cause of dissentions or
distractions, how then comes it to pass that all dissentions are determined by
learned and knowing men, or else they would be endless?
and dissentions, then among ignorant and mean men; which, were there not Laws
to decide their difference, would be endless, and Mankind left in a worse
condition then any other creatures. Nor is Education and Learning any cause of
the dissentions and debates which arise among learned, and better educated men;
but some internal cause proceeding from pride, or some other appetitions or
affection in them. And though Education and Learning does not totally alter
men's natures from bad to good; yet does it soften men's manners, and makes them
not to be so brutish as those who are destitute of Learning and Civil
breeding: For,

-- Didicisse fideliter Arts,
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
It is true indeed, that in that state in which God has placed all men here,
they do not see all things truly; but men are, and always were, and will be
subject to humane error and frailty; and in many things (notwithstanding all
the arts and helps which can be devised) men will never be reconciled. But that
men should therefore condemn all Science and Learning, is like to a man that,
if he sees and hears not all things distinctly and clearly, (although it may be
he sees and hears well enough to do things which are necessary for his
conservation) that therefore he will put out his eyes, and have his ears always
stopped. Nor shall ever ignorance of any man's duty, totally excuse him for his
not observance of Laws, be they Divine or Humane: Nor shall the blind belief of
Subjects in their Superiors, whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, ever totally
excuse them from those things which are due, and they believe that they owe to
God. I am not so very a Hobbian, as to believe that it is impossible for
Supreme powers to command any thing contrary to the Law of Nature; nor yet so
very a Papalian, as to think that the Pope is infallible: Especially since it
is evident, that Aarons joining with the people in their idolatry, did not
excuse Exodus 32.
the Israelites of old; nor did the command of both King and Priests ever under
the Old Law excuse the subject Israelites from Gods judgments upon them for
their idolatry. Nor is this very opinion of them in the Church of Rome, of the
Popes infallibility, believed by themselves, however urged against others who
are not of her communion: For then were not only General Councils
supervacaneous and useless things, but also there could be no difference among
them which is superior, a Pope, or General Council. Nor do they less deny it in
their practice, then their opinion: For when Sixtus Quintus had excommunicated
(9 Sept. 1585.) the King of Navar and Prince of Conde, and as he affirmed, made
them incapable of succession to the French Monarchy; yet were most part of the
French troubled at it, doubting the Privileges of the Gallic Church would be
trodden under foot, (which they needed not have doubted or feared, if they had
believed the Pope to have been infallible;) and all the Parliament of Paris
(who were all of the Church of Rome) desired the King, Henry the Third, to have
the Bull torn in pieces, as you may read, Davila 575. And the Parliaments of
Chalons and Tours did not only decree the Bull of Gregory 14. to the Prelates
and Catholics of the Kings party, (under pain of Excommunication, of being
deprived of their Dignities and Benefices, and of being used as Heretics and
Sectaries, that within a certain time they should withdraw themselves from
those places that yielded obedience to Henry of Bourbon, and from the union and
fellowship of his Faction) to be publicly burnt; but it was so far rejected
and scorned by the very Prelates and all other Catholics of the Kings party,
that it did extremely confirm them all in the Kings obedience, being before
unsettled and inclining to the Cardinal of Bourbons faction; as you may read
more at large in the Twelfth book of Davila's History.

But it may be they will say, That this was not in matter of Faith, and that
the Popes infallibility is affixed to Faith. Yet this can be no objection by
those men, who ascribe all infallibility to the Pope, and that all his Acts and
Decrees are to be received and obeyed, by an implicit faith, as Divine
oracles. Well, but suppose these determinations of the Pope were not concerning
matters of Faith, (as no doubt they were not) then how comes the Pope, because
he is infallible in the Faith, that he takes upon him to be Judge and
Determiner of those things, which no ways appertain to it, but are as much
where Christianity is not planted, as where it is.

Object. Yet it will be objected, That if the Church be not Judge of what
conduces to the peace and safety of the Kingdom and Church, then who shall?
and so farewell to all Government, and peace in Church or State.

But before I answer this Quaere, I would be resolved one Question, or two: Who
shall be Judge whether the Pope, or a General Council be superior? Who shall
judge whether in any Determination of the Popes, it be concerning matter of
Faith or not? or whether it be determined in Gathedra or not? In the many
Schisms of the Papacy, who should judge who was the true Pope? or who shall
judge whether Alexander the tenth be now the true Pope? or who ever gave the
Cardinals (who were an humane institution many hundred years after our Savior)
this power of Election of the Pope, that whosoever they should so elect should
be universal Bishop, and St. Peter's successor?

Although I might justly insist hereupon, nor can these things upon these men's
principles, who maintain the Popes infallibility, (at least in my
understanding) be solved; and so are they, for all their boast of unity among
themselves in as much confusion and dissension even in their very principles,
as other men; yet am not I ashamed to give an account of my obedience both to
my Church and King.

Answer. I say, that God has made man a sociable, intellectual, and reasonable
creature, and endewed him with an immortal soul potentially capable of eternal
happiness. Nor will God be served by man, having so made him, only by a base
servile fear, and without the intellectual and rational faculties of the
soul, and therefore has engraven by nature in the heart of every man, certain
rules by which he is to direct his actions, which are the first principles and
foundations upon which I honor my Parents, King, and them who are set over me
for my direction, in order to my eternal good. And although that out of the
Church, and not being preserved by humane Laws, I can neither hope for safety
in this world, nor salvation in the world to come; yet who he is, from whom all
humane Laws are derived, or what is the Church in which I must hope for
salvation, there is no visible Judge under Heaven, but only men's consciences to
direct them, viz. those directions which God either by nature has given to men,
or revealed supernaturally in the Scriptures. Nor does a man's conscience thus
informed, leave him after it be informed who it is from whom he ought to expect
protection, and to whom he owes his obedience, as well spiritual as temporal;
for though there be no visible means for men to hope for peace in Church or
State, yet does it not follow, that by all men, all things which may be
commanded for the Laws of the Church and State, are to be observed as the Laws
of Church and State; as if the Church command men to worship Images, or any
creature for the Creator (which under the old Law it many times did, nor do I
understand how it can be excused in the Church of Rome) or if men be commanded
by higher powers, immoral things, as to dishonor them, or their Parents; or
whenas temporal powers command things plainly derogatory to the ghostly power
of the Church; or the Church commands things contrary to the duty men owe to
their King and Country, which we daily see both the one, and the other do,
which makes some men in their passion ultimately resolve their Temporal and
Ecclesiastical obedience into the Church; others into the secular power: and
many deny all obedience to either, and set up themselves, or something else in
stead of either. But though men's affections carry them several ways, yet
ought not all reason therefore and conscience to forsake all men; for although
I ought not to judge either King, or Church, if they command any thing they
ought not, yet have I and every man else a conscience to direct them whether I
ought to do all things whatsoever commanded by King or Church. Nor ought men to
be frighted out of their consciences, viz. the Law of God by nature informing
them, or his Law supernaturally revealed, by his grace directing them, because
a perverse company of Schismatical and seditious men, have abused all Temporal
and Ecclesiastical Laws and Powers, by pretending conscience. Nor will a blind
obedience in all things to the Church of Rome cause unity and peace among
Christians, although it be so much magnified by them: for let any man read the
lives of H. 4. 5. 6. and 7. and Frederick 1. and 2. Emperors, whenas the whole
Empire was of the Roman Catholic Religion, and see if ever greater broils
were in the Christian World, and let them judge whether Obedience to the Popes
by so great a part of the Empire, were not the cause of them? or whether all
the Wars in Christendom caused by Boniface the eight, and Julius the second,
were not against Christians in the communion and form of the Church of Rome?

But where secular or ecclesiastical Laws do plainly command things, not
plainly derogatory to Gods Law, (for where they do, God is in all things to be
obeyed before man) so as it is doubtful whether they do repugne Gods Law or
not, then certainly the best way is to submit to them; for a man's conscience
wrong informed does not excuse him from any Article of his duty; and if it may
be the Laws do repugne Gods Law, it may be they do not; and in controverted and
doubtful cases, the Law is always presumed to be on the Governors part. Nor
shall any man's conscience ever excuse him, if the Laws either of Church or
Country do command things repugnant to Gods word, from the duty and obedience
he owes to them in all things, where they do not repugne it. Nor does it free
any man from his subjection to higher power, but where he cannot submit, he
ought to suffer. And no question that where two evils unavoidable happen, the
least is to be taken; as if a man in the communion of the Church of Rome, be
reduced to that necessity of simply conforming himself to all things used in
the Church of Rome, although his conscience cannot digest many things, or be
excluded out of the visible Church of Christ, he had better be of such a
Church, then of none at all.

Sure God never affixt such infallibility to men how great or good soever, that
simple and blind obedience should be always given to their Laws; as if there
were neither Laws of God, or any to whom they were given, intellectual or
reasonable creatures. And though no man ought to censure, much less to reproach
the actions of his superior, yet are no men's actions so censured, as great
men's, and so much the more by how much the greater they are: for,

Omne animi vitium, tanto conspectius in se Iuvenal.

Crimen habet, quanto major qui peccat habetur.
And if Sabinianus were so malicious a detractor from the works of St. Gregory;
if Bonifacius the eight used such undue means for the attaining the Papacy; if
Gregory the seventh were so wicked as the Council of Brixia makes him; if
Alexander the sixth were so wicked a man as Platina makes him; if so many
decrees of the antecedent Popes have been abrogated by the subsequent Popes; if
Marcellinus burned Incense to Idols; if Liberius consented to the Arrians, and
gave his suffrage to the condemnation of St. Athanasius; if Honorius were
condemned for a Monothalite by the sixth general Council; if John 22. were
condemned by the Divines of Paris for teaching that the souls of the just
shall not see God until the general resurrection; then is it not possible, but
that either contradictions are no contradictions, but the same things, or the
Popes have not always been infallible. But it is more then time to return to
the question.

1. That St. Paul did preach the Gospel here in England, is affirmed by By whom
Christian Faith was first preached, and a Church planted in Britain. Lib. 2.
cap. 40.
Theodo. lib. 9. de curandis Graecorum affectibus: Paulum e priori captivitate
Roma dimissum, Britannis and aliis in Occidente Evangelium predicasse. And
Nicephorus says that Simon Zelotes Doctrinam Evangelii ad Occidentalium
oceanum insulasque Britannicas perfert. But that ever a Christian Church was
planted in this Island, before that at the request of King Lucius (in the reign
of Commodus, and not of Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus, as Beda says)
Elutherius sent Fugatius and Damianus, I do no where find; for not only the
superstition of the Druides was publicly professed, but after that a Christian
Church was planted, Lucius converted the three Archiflamines of London, York,
and Carleton into Archbishopricks, and the other Flamines Platina in vita St.
Eleutherii.
into Bishoprics. Yet that ever after the Bishop of Rome did claim any power
or jurisdiction of these British Churches, I no where find; nay the contrary is
very probable; for they not only adhered in the observation of Easter to the
Eastern Church, from St. John's observation thereof at Ephesus, and not
according to the determination of Pius, Anicetus, and Soter Bishops Beda lib.
2. cap. 2.
of Rome; but also the British Bishops when Augustine was sent by St. Gregory
to preach, and convert the English Saxons to Christianity, did refuse to
acknowledge any superiority from him, nor by any persuasion or command of him
would, or could leave their ancient usages without consent of their fellows,
as a man may see in Beda. Nor were these Bishops in those days Lib. 2. cap. 2.
ever esteemed (nay not by Beda himself, as much a reverencer as he was of the
Church of Rome) Heretics, or Schismatics, and out of the Pall of the Lib. 2.
cap. 2.
Church, etc. but right Catholic and godly men.

2. That the English Saxons after they had driven the ancient Britains The
conversion of the English Saxons, by the Pope Gregory the great.
not only out of all that part of Britain, which is now called England, some
into Britaigne in France called Britania Aremorica (from whence it is supposed
that Country took its denomination) others into Wales; but also Christianity it
self; and themselves continued Pagan until they first received the Faith by
the preaching of Augustine, and Miletus sent by Gregory the great; is consonant
to all the Histories of the Church, nor does to me appear any color of Reason,
or Authority to the contrary.

3. But that St. Gregory did not at that time arrogate to himself the Neither
St. Gregory nor any of his predecessors did assume the title of head of the
Church.
Title either of universal Bishop, head of the Catholic Church, or any
superiority over Temporal Princes, is as clear as if it were written with a
sunbeam. For in the contest between St. Gregory, and John Jejunator Bishop of
Constantinople about superiority, universal Bishop and head of the Church.
Gregory says in his Epistle to Mauritius, Nullus Romanorum Pontificum hoc
singularitatis nomen assumpsit; nullus Praedecessorum meorum hoc tam profano
vocabulo uti consensit: None of all the Bishop^ of Rome ever took upon him this
name of singularity (viz. of Universal Bishop) none of my Predecessors would
ever use this profane style. Et universa Ecclesia corruit, quando is qui
appellatur universalis cadit; The whole Church falls, when he which is called
Universal Bishop, falls. Et nos hunc honorem oblatum nolumus recipere; We
would not accept of this honor offered unto us. Epist. 80.
And in his Epistle to John claiming to himself this title, he says, Tu quid
Christo universalis ecclesiae capiti, in extremi judicii dicturus es examine,
qui cuncta ejus membra tibimet conaris Universalis appellatione supponere? What
answer will thou make to Christ the Head of the universal Church, at the trial
of the last Judgment, which thus by the name of Universal Bishop seek to
make all his members subject unto thee? And unto Anastasius Bishop of Antioch
he writes, Ut de honoris vestri injuria taceam, si unus episcopus lib. 6. ep.
188.
vocatur universalis, universa ecclesia corruit; si unus, universus cadit: Not
to speak of the injury done to your honor, if one Bishop be called universal,
then if that one universal Bishop goes down, the whole Church falls. And
afterward, Vos eandem causam nullam dicere non debetis, quia si hanc
aequanimiter portamus, universae ecclesiae fidem corrumpimus: Ye ought not to
say, it is a business of no importance; for if we patiently abide these things,
we destroy the faith of the whole Church. And comparing the pride of this Name
with the pride of Antichrist, he says, Nunquid non! cum se Antichristus veniens
Deum dixerit, frivolum valde erit? sed tamen nimis perniciosum. Si quantitatem
vocis attendimus, duae sunt syllabae; si pondus lib. 6. ep. 194.
iniquitatis, universa pernicies. And lib. 4. ep. 33. he says, In isto scelesto
vocabulo consentire, nihil aliud est quam fidem perdere: To consent to this
wicked Name, is nothing else but to lose the Faith. This and much more you may
read in lib. 4. ep. 80. and ep. 99. and in S. Gregory's epist. to Eulogius
Patriarch of Alexandria. Howbeit Boniface the Third, within less then three
years after the death of S. Gregory, did assume the title of Universal Bishop
and Head of the Church, but rather by the donation of Phocas (who had no more
right to give it, then the Parliament had to give Henry the Eighth the Head of
the Church of England, nor had Phocas any color of title to the Empire) and
have continued it ever since.

4. S. Gregory in his 76. Epistle to the Emperor Maurice, says, Nunquid Neither
S. Gregory nor his predecessors did claim superiority over Temporal Princes.
ego in hac re, piissime Domine, propriam causam defendo? Do I herein defend
mine own cause, O gracious Lord? And, Dominus meus fuisti, quando adhuc Dominus
omnium non eras: ecce per me servum ultimum suum, and vestrum, respondebit
Christus: You were then my Lord, when you were not Lord of all (viz. the
Empire) behold, Christ himself shall answer by me who am his, and your meanest
servant. And when the Emperor Maurice had made a law, That no Soldier should
turn Monk, until his warfare were ended; G^eg. ad Man^. Aug. lib 3. e^. 61.
Gregory disliked the law, and gave the Emperor this sense of it: Ego quidem
missioni subjectus eandem legem per diversas terrarum parts transmitto, and
quia lex ipsa omnipotenti Dec minime concordat, ecce per suggestionis meae
paginam dominis nunciavi; utrobique ergo quae debui exolvi, qui and Imperatori
obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo quid sensi, minime tacui: I being subject to
your command, have transmitted your Law to be published through diverse parts
(...). 2. ep. 61.
of the world; And because the Law it self is not pleasing to Almighty God, I
have represented my opinion thereof to my Lords; whereforee I have performed my
duty on both sides, in yielding obedience to the Emperor, and not concealing
what I thought for God. And Boniface the First sent an humble supplication to
Honorius, desiring him by his authority to provide some remedy against the
ambitious contention of the Clergy concerning the Bishopric of Rome. The
Emperor Honorius at his request established Did. 92. cap. Eccle. cap. Victor.
a law, That none should be made Bishop of Rome through ambition, charging all
Ecclesiastical Ministers to cease from ambition; appointing moreover, that if
two were elected, neither of them should be taken, but the election to proceed
further to another to be chosen by a full consent of voices, as it is expressed
did. 79. cap. Si duo. If then S. Gregory himself were so zealous an opposer of
Universal Bishop and Head of the Church, and to that purpose introduced that
sentence of Servus servorum Dei, to deter all subsequent Bishops of Rome from
such arrogance: And if S. Gregory did acknowledge himself so humble a Subject
to Maurice; and that Boniface the First did petition Honorius by his authority
to provide against the irregularities in the very election of the Bishop of
Rome, (there was no such thing in these days as Cardinals, and the Election of
the Pope in the Conclave) then sure in the days of S. Gregory and before,
neither did the Popes assume this title of Head of the Church, nor a power of
disposing and transferring Kingdoms at their pleasure. But, affirmanti incumbit
probatio; and let any man that affirms either, prove either.

5. That above one half of what is now called Britain, did retain the Though S.
Cregory were the first, yet was he not the only Converter of the English
Saxons.
Christian faith, notwithstanding the persecution of the Saxons, is
sufficiently evident, if we consider Scotland and Wales, which always retained
Christianity since it was first planted. Nor were the very Saxons themselves
utterly destitute of Christianity: For, Berta the wife of Ethelbert King of
Kent, and daughter to the French King, was tolerated to observe the rites of
Christian religion with Bishop Luidhard; and this was before that S. Gregory
was excited, or inspired to undertake to preach to the English Saxons. It is
true, that Ethelbert after his own conversion did endeavor to Seld. Anae.
Anglo. Brit. lib. 2. cap. 2. page 62.
have planted the Christian faith both in the Kingdoms of Northumberland and
the East Angles, with fair hopes of good success for a season; but it took not
effect; for within a short time both Kings and Kingdoms forsook their Religion,
and apostated from Christ. The Kingdoms of the West Saxons and of the
South Saxons, under Kingils their King (who did unite the Heptarchy into a
Monarchy) were converted by the preaching Speed in the Kings of the
West Saxons, an. 611. Beda lib. 3. cap. 4, 5. Idem lib. 3. cap 21. Speed in the
Kings of the East Angles, an. 636.
of Berinus an Italian, by the persuasions of Oswald King of Northumberland.
Oswald King of Northumberland was baptized in Scotland, and Religion luckily
planted in that Kingdom by Aidan a Scottish Bishop. Penda King of Mercia was
converted, and Christened by Finanus Successor of Aidan, by means of a Marriage
with a Christian Princess of the Royal family of Northumberland. Sigibert King
of the East Angles, in whose days, and by whose means Religion took root among
the East Saxons, was converted and Christened in France.

6. No sooner was the name of Christ preached, but the English presently The
zeal of our Ancestors upon their conversion*
with such fervent devotion and zeal consecrated themselves unto Christ, that
they took incredible pains in propagating Christianity, in celebrating Divine
service, performing all functions and duties of piety, building Churches, and
endowing them with rich livings, so that there was not another Region in
Christendom that could make reckoning of more Monasteries richly endowed; yea,
and diverse Kings there were, that preferred a religious and Monastical life,
before their Crown and Kingdom. So that many holy men also this Land brought
forth, which for their firm profession of Christian Religion, constant
perseverance therein, and sincere piety, were canonized Saints, that it gave
place to no Christian Province in this behalf: And like as Britain was called
by Porphyry, a plenteous province of Tyrants; so England may be truly named, a
most fruitful Island of Saints. Camb. Brit: tit. Angl. Sax.

7. The Bishop of Derry in his book of the Just vindication of the Church The
Popes universal power was not received under the English Saxon Kings before the
Conquest.
of England, page 57. does affirm, that not any of the petite Saxon Kings or
their Subjects, though some of them indebted to S. Gregory for their
Conversion, and all of them much weakened by their sevenfold division, (for at
first there was of seven Kings but only one who was a Christian, namely the
King of Kent; neither was it any of his progeny who afterward did unite the
Heptarchy into a Monarchy) much less that any of the succeeding Kings of
England, or of Great Britain, did ever make any solemn, formal, or obliging
acknowledgment of their submission to the Church of Rome. But on the contrary,
when Austin first arrived in England, he stayed in the Island of Thanet until
he knew the Kings pleasure, and offered not to preach in Kent, until he had the
Kings license to preach throughout his Dominions, etc. Neither was there any
Appellant, from the Conversion of the English, (he says) to Rome, until Wilfrid
Archbishop of York, who notwithstanding page 60.
that he gained Sentence upon Sentence at Rome in his favor, and
notwithstanding that the Pope did send express Nuntio's into England on purpose
to see the Sentence executed, yet could he not obtain his restitution, or
benefit of his Sentence, for six years during the reigns of Egbert, and Alfred
his son: yea, Alfred told the Popes Nuntio's expressly, That he honored Spelm.
council. an. 705.
them as his Parents for their grave lives and honorable aspects, but he could
not give any assent to their Legation; because it was against reason, that a
person twice condemned by the whole Council of the English, should be restored
upon the Popes Letter. And after he says, That after Alfred and page 62.
Theodore were both dead, (Theodore was the Archbishop of York, that opposed
Wilfrids Donation from the Pope, and continued it so long as he lived) we find
the Sentence of the Pope, and Wilfrids Restitution still opposed by the
surviving Bishops in Alfreds Sons reign, etc. Neither were there any Appeals to
Rome from that time until after the Conquest, in the reign of Henry the First,
by Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury.

8. See Comment. Lit. sect. 648. page 344. where it appears by our All
Bishoprics were of the Kings foundation originally, and donative.
books and diverse Acts of Parliament, that at first all the Bishoprics in
England were of the Kings foundation, and Donative, per traditionem baculi (id
est) the Crosier, which was the Pastoral staff, and annuli, the ring whereby he
was married to the Church. King Henry the First being requested by the Bishop
of Rome to make them elective, refused it: But King John by his Charter bearing
date quinto Junii, anno decimo septimo, When they became eligible, and by what
power.
granted that the Bishoprics should be eligible. So that all Bishoprics were
not only at first of the Kings foundation, and Donative, but afterward became
eligible from no other cause but the Kings Charter.

9. That the sacred character of Priesthood does not free men from The Kings of
England before the Couquest did exercise their Regal power over all persons in
all cases.
the subjection due to the Laws of their Prince and Country, is not only
evident by many examples in Sacred Writ, and by almost infinite precepts and
examples of Gospel, and holy Martyrs in primitive times, but also by a
concurrent consent of all Histories where Christianity has been planted; And
that these powers have been justly exercised by the Kings of England before the
Conquest, among the many Laws of Ina, Withred, Alfred, Edward, Athelstan,
Edmund, Edgar, Athelred, Canutus, and Edward, take these of Canutus.

Si quis sacra tenens pejerasse convictus fuerit, ei manus praeciditor, ni
dimidiatam Lambert Saxon laws, lex 33. f. 113.
sui capitis astimationem domino, atque episcopo dependerit: neque vero
deinceps qui juret dignus putandus est, nisi quidem Deo cumulate satisfecerit,
atque ab ejusmodi in posterum nefario scelere abstinendi fidejussores
admoverit. If any in Holy orders be convict of Perjury, let him be branded on
the hand, unless he shall pay to the King and Bishop half the price of his
head: Neither shall he afterward be esteemed worthy to take an Oath, unless he
shall have abundantly satisfied God, and shall have given Sureties that
afterward he shall abstain from such wickedness.

Si quis eorum qui arae deservierint, alicui mortem obtulerit, omni cum divini,
lex 36. 114.
tum humani juris patrocinio excludatur: nisi quidem cum exilio cumulate id
sceleris compensarit, atque caesi etiam cognatis satisfecerit, aut saltem (una
cum hominibus qui jurent idoneis) omnem criminis suspicionem diluerit. Hanc
vero quae Deo and hominibus debetur compensationem, intra ter denos (idque cum
fortunarum suarum omnium discrimine) dies aggreditor. If any one who serves at
the Altar, shall kill any man, let him be excluded from the protection of
Divine and Humane laws; unless with his banishment he may abundantly satisfy
that wickedness, and shall also give satisfaction to the kindred of him who is
killed, or at least (together with sufficient men who shall give Law-gager.
their oaths) shall wash away all suspicion of the crime. And let him go in
hand to make this compensation which is due to God and men, within thirty days,
(and that upon the forfeiture of all his fortunes.)

Si eorum qui arae deservierint aliquis hominem occiderit, aut insigne aliquod
lex 38. ibid.
perpetrarit flagitium, gradu and honor dispoliatus, proinde atque ei Papa
circumscripserit habitandi locum, exulato, ac cumulate compensato. Sin is
crimen fuerit inficiatus, excusatio tripla esto. Atque in hanc quae Deo and
hominibus debetur compensationem, intra ter denos aggrediatur dies, ab omni
legis commoditate destitutus habetor. If any one who serves at the Altar, shall
kill a man, or commit any foul offense, despoiled of his honor, let him be
banished the place of his habitation, and make abundant satisfaction, yea
though the Pope make it void. But if he deny the crime, let his excuse be
threefold; and if within thirty days he does not endeavor to give this
satisfaction which is due to God and man, let him be outlawed.

Si quis sacris inauguratus, rei capitalis obnoxious extiterit, comprehenditor,
lex 40. 115.
atque ut tandem episcopo criminis admissi poenas dependat, asservator. If any
one in Holy orders be guilty of any capital crime, let him be apprehended and
fafely kept, until he be punished by the Bishop for the crime committed.

Si quis sacrum ordinem, atque vivendi formulam commutarit, pro ipsa lex 46.
116.
ordinis dignitate, sive capitis aestimatione, mulcta, legis violatae poena,
sive rebus suis omnibus compensato. If any one shall change his holy order and
form of living, for the dignity of the order or price of the head, let him be
fined for punishment of the violation of the Law, or forfeit all he has.

But how far this good Prince was from having any spite to Holy Orders, or men
separated to the Worship of God and Service at the Holy Altar; he does enact,
Siquis sacris initiatus, incolave in iis quae ad fortunas Law 37. fol. 114.
vitamve ejus spectarint decipiatur, tum ei rex (ni is aliunde habuerit) loco
Patroni, and cognatorum esto. Fraudator vero Regi (prout ipsa feret facti
ratio) satisfacito, aut graves sceleris admissi poenas rex ipse repetito:
Christiana siquidem fide imbuti regis est, Deo illatas graviter (pro facti
ratione) ulcisci injurias. If any one entered into Holy Orders, or one living
with him be imposed upon, or cheated in those things which belong to his estate
or life, then let the King himself (unless he can procure it otherwise) be to
him in place of Patron and Kindred; but the Cheator shall make the King
satisfaction (according to the valor of the fact) or the King himself shall
take great punishment of the wickedness committed; for it is the part of a King
endued with Christian religion, severely to punish injuries (according to the
quality of the deed) offered to God.

10. For the proving of this, Sir Edward Coke in the Proeme to the The ancient
Common Law did not admit of Appeals to Rome in cases Spiritual.
sixth Part of his Reports, cites an Act of Parliament made 10 H. 2. an. 1164.
where it was enacted: As concerning Appellations, if any shall arise from the
Archdeacon, they must proceed to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop;
and if the Archbishop do fail in doing Justice, it must lastly come to the
King, that by his precept the controversy may be ended in the Archbishops
Court, so that there ought not to be any proceeding further without the assent
of the King. And that this among many other might not taste of innovation, the
Record says, This recognition or record was made of a certain part of the
customs and liberties of the Predecessors of the King, to wit, of Henry his
Grandfather, and of other Kings, which ought to be observed in the Kingdom, and
held of all for the dissentions and discords often arising between the Clergy,
and our Sovereign Lord the Kings Justicers, and the Peers of the Realm: And all
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Clergy, with the Earls, Barons, and
all the Nobles etc. have sworn, and assuredly promised in the word of mouth,
in one consent, to keep and observe the said recognition toward the King and
his heirs in good sooth, without evil meaning for ever.

11. The Revenue of Danegelt was first enacted because of Pirates: The Kings
before the Conquest, by their own authority did impose Taxes upon Church Lands.
For, infesting the Country, they did persist as much as they could to the
devastation of it; And to repress their insolence, the yearly return of
Danegelt was enacted, viz. Twelve pence for every Hide of all the Country, (Mr.
Seldom in lib. 2. cap. 4. Analecton Anglobritannicon, fol. 77. makes a Hide of
land to be as much as could be tilled by one plough in a year. Mr. Lambert in
the Laws of King Edward, fol. 128. makes a Hide to be one hundred acres of
land) to maintain them who should resist the irruption of the Pirates, when
they met them. But from the Danegelt every Church should be free and quiet, and
all land which was in the dominion of the Church, wheresoever it lay, paying
nothing at all in such redemption; for men did more confide in the prayers of
the Church, then in the defense of arms. But if Lex vult non supervacaneum,
then is it clear that the Church Lands were liable to be taxed by the King; for
it had been a supervacaneous thing to have excepted the lands of the Church in
this Law, if the lands of the Church had not been liable to have been taxed at
all. And to manifest more clearly, that the exemption of Church-land from
Taxes, was a mere concession of our Kings; take the Stat. of Ethelulph the
successor of Egbert, written Analect. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 4. page 77.
with his own hand. Our Lord reigning for ever! Whilst that we see perilous
times in our days, the fire of war, the taking away of our goods, together with
the cruel depredations of our destroying enemies and barbarous Pagan nations do
lie upon us, the multiplied tribulations do afflict us even to utter
destruction: Wherefore I Ethelulph King of the West Saxons, with the council of
the Bishops and my Princes giving wholesome council, and the only remedy, have
consented, I have determined that every portion given to the holy Church,
whether of either Sex serving God, or to miserable Laymen always the tenth
Mansion where it is least, or the tenth part of all Goods, be made for ever
free, that it be safe and defended from all secular services, yea from the
Kings greater or lesser tributes, or the taxations which we call Winterden; and
that it be free of all things for the forgiveness of our souls and sins, to
serve God alone, without Expedition, building of Bridge, and fortifying of
Castle.

12. If King Ethelbert were obliged to S. Gregory for the Conversion At what
time the Pope first usurped jurisdiction over the Crown of England.
of the English Saxons to the Faith, Prince Edgar Athelin was smally beholding
to Pope Alexander 2. For, Edgar being Grandson to Edmund Ironside, and the
undoubted Heir to the English Monarchy after the death of Edward the Confessor;
Alexander not only allows the Conquerors pretensions to the Crown of England,
but interdicts all those who should Speed fol. 405. par. 27. See the effects of
the Popes curse, Speed fol. 415. par. 2.
oppose him. So that though Harold were an Usurper, yet was his Holiness his
Interdiction as much against the undoubted Title of Edgar, as against Harold:
Nor were all titles of rights and interests of the English Monarchy ever
perfect and complete from that time, until they were all united and perfected
in King James.

13. How far the Britanick Churches were from any dependence upon At what time
the first contest happened between the King and Pope about the investiture of
Bishops.
the Church of Rome, we have already showed: And so free were the Churches of
England under the Saxon Kings before the Conquest, that before the Appeal of
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury to Pope Paschal 2. scarce any Appeal was ever
made to Rome, but that of Wilfreds, which was overruled by the King and Church.
So that for near a thousand years after the Conversion of the Britains and
Saxons to the Faith, although by means of S. Eleutherius and Gregory the Great;
we do not find any thing which may prove the superiority of the Roman Church
over either the Britanick or English. And how strange a thing the investiture
of the English Bishops by the Pope, was to the King and Kingdom of England,
appears by the Letter of Paschal to Anselm, in answer to Anselm's; Significasti
Reges and De Elect. Pet. cap. 4.
Regni Majores admiratione promotos, etc. You have signified to me, that Kings
and Nobles were moved with admiration, that the Pall was offered to you by our
Ministers, upon condition that you should take an Oath which they brought you
written from us. And the King not only opposed this Popes Letter, but pleaded
the Fundamental Laws and Customs of the Land: Consuetudo regni mei est a patre
meo instituta, ut nullius praeter licentiam Regis appelletur Papae; qui
consuetudines regni mei tollit, potestatem quoque and coronam Regis violat: It
is a Custom of my Kingdom instituted by my Father, that no man may appeal to
the Pope without the Kings license; He that takes away the Customs of my
Kingdom, does violate the Power and Crown of the King. And these Laws were no
other then the Laws of the Confessor, viz. the old Saxon Laws; but also in the
execution of these, things the Bishops of England adhered to the King and Laws,
and denied their suffrage to their Primate, as you may read in the Bishop of
Derry's Vindication of the Church of England, p. 63, 64.

14. After, page 65. he instances out of Sir Hen Spelman, conc. an. 78.
Legations as rare as Appeals before the Conquest.
that Gregory Bishop of Ostium, the Popes Legate, did confess that he was the
first Roman Priest that was sent into these parts of Britain, from the time of
Austin; and that those Legates were no other then ordinary Messengers or
Ambassadors sent from one Neighbor to another: Such a thing as Legantine
Court, or a Nuntio's Court, was not known in the British world, and long after.

15. See Speed in the Life of Stephen, para. 4. where Stephen having The Pope
and all the English Hierarchy conspire with Stephen against Maud the undoubted
Heir of Henry the first.
entered his Government in the year of our Lord 1135. the 2. of December, and
was crowned at Westminster the 26. of the same month, being. S Stephen's day,
by William Corbel the Archbishop of Canterbury; who with the rest of the
Bishops doing him homage, and knowing now he would yield to any conditions,
(for performance whereof his brother the Bishop of Winchester did there engage
himself for a Pledge) they all took their Oath of Allegiance conditionally
(traitorously I might say) to obey him as their King, so long as he should
preserve their Liberties, and the vigor of Discipline. And that the Lay-Barons
made use also of this policy, appears by Robert Earl of Gloucester, who swear
to be true Liegeman to the King, as long as the King would preserve to him his
dignity, and keep all covenants, etc. And having buried the body of Henry the
First, he went to Oxford, where he acknowledged he attained the Crown by
Election only, and that the Pope Innocentius confirmed the same.

16. The next contest, which after Anselm happened between the King The second
contest between the King and Pope, and from what cause.
and the Pope, was caused by Tho. Becket Archbishop of Canterbury: For, Stephen
the Usurper having made a Law, whereby the Temporal Judges might not meddle
with Ecclesiastical persons; Henry the Second, upon many disorders committed by
the Clergy, did repeal this Law, and restored the ancient Laws of this Realm
(commonly called Avitae leges) whereby the persons of Priests were not exempted
from being judged by the Temporal Judges: And though the Archbishop swear to
observe the Laws restored by the King, yet was he absolved by Pope Alexander 3.
Nor could the Archbishop ever after be brought to conform to the Laws called
Avitae leges; which was the cause of his assassination, and of great trouble to
the King and Realm. And whether this man did deserve to be canonized for his
stubborn disobedience to the Laws of his Country, which no ways concerned
Faith, but only Civil and Temporal obedience, and those not new neither, but a
restitution of the ancient Laws; let any man judge.

17. The first occasion of the quarrel between King John and Innocent The
quarrel between King John and the Pope.
the Third, was: Hubert the Archbishop of Canterbury being dead, the Monks of
S. Augustine in that City, elected without any license of the King, one
Rainold, and took an oath of him to go to Rome and take his investiture from
the Pope. The King incensed hereat, caused John Gray to be chosen, and desired
the Pope to ratify this last choice: The Pope notwithstanding confirms the
former: The King hereupon grows angry, and diverse of the Monks, against their
own act, refuse to accept him. The Pope, (although Rainold were chosen by the
Monks, and confirmed by the Pope) advises the Monks to choose Stephen Langton;
the Monks do so; the King is highly exasperated, and forbids all Appeals to
Rome, and did allege that he had Bishops, Prelates, Nobles and Magistrates of
his own, who could (according to the Laws of the Land) decide and determine all
Controversies which should arise in Church or Commonweal. The Pope insisted
upon the election of the Cardinal, (Stephen Langton was Cardinal of Chirsogone)
and required the King not only to give him the quiet possession of the Sea, but
also to recall all such Monks as were exiled, and to restore them to their
Goods which were seized on by the King for the last choice, and for default to
interdict him and the whole Realm. The King is so far from obeying, that he
seized upon the Lands and Goods of those Bishops to whom the Pope had
(forsooth) given the power of Interdiction. The Pope constant in his
resolutions, by Pandulphus and Durant interdicts the King and Kingdom, and
gives it the French King. King John driven into a great strait, gives his Crown
and Kingdom to the Pope; he good man had before given it to the French King
Philip the second, surnamed Augustus; and his son Lewis had gotten such footing
in England, that he would not be gotten out: The Pope interdicts both father
and son, but his curses took not such place that they would give over what they
had gotten by the first grant; nor did these troubles end, until the English
Nation uniting themselves under Henry 3. did by plain force drive Lewis out of
England; to such an insufferable height was the Papacy grown in those days.

18. Although the stubborn Barons made Henry 3. swear to observe The Bishops in
H. 2 his reign, conspire against him.
the Ordinances made in the Mad Parliament at Oxford; and the Archbishop of
Canterbury and nine other Bishops did denounce a Curse against all those, who
either by direction, arms or otherwise should withstand the Ordinance of the
Twelve Peers, which gave the exercise of all Regality to them; yet did the Pope
absolve him from it very easily. Addit. Matthew. Paris 990.

19. How zealous the most noble Prince Edward the first was in the Contests
between the Pope and Ed. 2.
cause of Christianity, and how observant of the Papal power, is evident by his
victorious Voyage into Holy Land: But he afterward became hated by the
Churchmen, both in respect of the Statute of Mortmain made in the fourth year
of his Reign, and also because that (by the advice of William Marchyan his
chiefest Treasurer) he seized into his hands the Plate, Jewels, and Treasure of
the Churches and Religious Houses within the Realm, and compelled the Clergy to
give him the one half of one years value of all their Ecclesiastical promotions
and dignities. But such was the felicity of this Prince, that neither Pope nor
Clergy durst openly oppugn him; but in the 27. year of his Reign, at the
request of Boniface 8. says Martin, he set John Baliol (adjudged by Edward
before King of Scotland) at liberty: And having conquered Scotland in the 33.
year of his Reign, Robert Bruce procured an Instrument from the Pope, that the
Kingdom of Scotland was holden of the Church of Rome, and therefore required
the King to desist from the prosecution of his Wars there: But how little King
Edward regarded this Instrument, and what answer he returned to the Pope, you
may read in our English Chronicles; nor do I find that ever more prosecution
was made by the Pope in this Kings lifetime.

20. From this time until Henry the Eighth, the Kings of England and In the
reign of Hen. 4.
the Popes kept so good correspondence, that they never went so far as
Excommunication or Interdiction on the Popes part; and how far the Kings did
restrain the Popes jurisdiction in their several reigns, after the Conquest,
shall be showed in Chap. 3. Yet I cannot pass over one thing of the whole
Hierarchy of the Church of England (except only the Bishop of Carlisle) who all
factiously and traitorously conspired, or adhered to Henry the Fourth his
unjust Usurpation, and Deposition of their Sovereign Richard the Second.

CHAP. II.
Of Ecclesiastical Laws made by the Saxon and Danish Kings before the Conquest.
I Inas by Gods gift King of the West Saxons, by the advice and instruction
Inas began to reign in the year of Christ 712 died 727.
of Cenredes my Father, and Heddes my Bishop, and Eorkenwoldes my Bishop, and
with all my Counselors, Earls.
Ealdermen, and them of best birth of the Wisest of my people, and eke in a
great Assembly of Gods Servants, did religiously study as well for the health
of my soul, as for the common profit of our Kingdom, that right Laws of
Marriage, and just Judgment be firmly established through every folk; and that
hereafter it shall not be lawful for any Ealderman, or any under our rule, to
make void these our Dooms or Judgments.

Cap. 1.
Of the Rule of Gods Servants. First we command that Gods Servants have a right
rule of living: After that we command all folk to observe these Laws and Dooms,
or Judgments.

Cap. 2.
Of Children. A Child shall be baptized within thirty days after it be born; if
that be not done, let thirty shillings be forfeited: If that it die before it
be baptized, he shall forfeit all he has.

Cap. 3.
Of working upon Sunday. If a Slave work on Sunday by his Masters command, let
him be free and the Master shall pay thirty shillings: But if the Servant did
his work without command of his Master, beat his hide, or make him to fear a
hide-beating. If a Free servant do any work without his Masters bidding, let
him forfeit his freedom, or sixty shillings; and a Priest double so much.

Cap. 4.
Of First Fruits. First Fruits shall be paid upon the Mass of S. Martin; he who
shall not then pay them, shall forfeit forty shillings, and pay twelvefold the
value of the fruits.

Cap. 5.
Of Church-Priviledge, or Sanctuary. If any man guilty of death, flee to the
Church, let his life be spared, and let right be done to him: And if any man
deserving stripes, implores help of the Church, let him be remitted his stripes.

Cap. 6.
Of Fighting. If a man strike in the Kings house, he shall forfeit all he has;
and let it depend upon the Kings judgment, whether he shall lose his life. If
one strike in a Cathedral Church.
Minster, he shall pay one hundred and twenty shillings, etc.

Cap. 62.
Of First fruits. Every man shall pay First Fruits for the Roof and Hearth,
where he shall be upon the day of the birth of our Savior.

Cap. 75.
Of the killing of Godfather or Godson. If any one shall slay his Godson, or
his Godfather, he shall compensate so much to his next of kin, as the
compensation due to his Lord had been: And this payment to the value of him
which is killed, shall be increased or lessened, accordingly as the payment to
the Lord for the Servant killed should have been performed. If it be the Kings
Godson which is killed, he shall satisfy the King and his kindred; but if the
next of kin kills him, he shall pay to the Godfather so much, as should have
been paid to the Lord for the slaughter of his Servant. If he be a Bishops son,
he shall pay half so much.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by King Alfred or Alured, who began to reign in the
Year 871.
The Preface.
GOD did speak these words to Moses, and thus said: I am the Lord thy God, I
led thee out of Egypt land, and of the house of bondage; Thou shall not choose
other Gods before me.

Do not take my Name in idleness; for I will not hold him innocent, who on
idleness takes my Name. Remember thou keep holy the Seventh day; Do thy work
on six days, and on the Seventh rest, thou and thy son and thy daughter, thy
servant and handmaid, and thy work-cattel, and the stranger that is within thy
door: For on six days Christ made heaven and earth, sea and all things thereon
were created by him, and rested on the Seventh day, and therefore the Lord
hallowed it. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, whom the Lord gave thee, that
thou may live long on earth. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not steal. Thou
shall not commit adultery. Nor report false witness of thy neighbor; nor covet
thou thy neighbors inheritance without right: Nor work golden gods, or silver.
Thou shall constitute these Judgments.

If a man buy a Christian man, he shall serve six years, the seventh let him be
free without cost: With the same vestment he came in, with the same let him go
out; if he have a wife, let her go out with him; if his Lord gave him his wife,
she and her Children.
bearns are the Lords. But if the servant shall say, I will not part from my
Lord, nor from my wife, nor from my children, nor from my work; then let his
Lord bring him to the door of the Temple, and there let him bore his ear with
an eal, for a sign that ever after he is his servant. If any man sell his
daughter for an handmaid, he shall not use her as an handmaid, he shall use her
courteously, neither shall he sell her to other folk; and if she be negligent,
let him be pacified, let him set her free to stranger folk; if he ally her to
his son in marriage, let him give a garment, the reward of her modesty, and
endow her; but if he will do none of these, let him set her free without price.

If a man slay another willingly, he shall be slain himself; but if a man slay
another not lurking or lying in wait, or unwillingly, or of necessity, so as he
were given into his hand by God, let him flee to Sanctuary and save his life,
and forfeit nothing. If a man of ambition and guile slay his neighbor, let him
be taken from mine altar and be put to death. If a man slay his father or
mother, he shall be put to death. If a man forestall a Freeman, and he sell him
to another man, he shall be put to death. If a man revile his father or mother,
he shall be put to death. If a man slay another with a stone, or with his fist,
and yet he can go with a staff; get him a Physician, and let him do his work
while he is impotent. If a man willingly slay his Note, slay is to strike, as
well as kill.
servant or his handmaid, so as he does not die in a day, but live two or three
nights, although he be guilty, let him be free, because they were his goods;
but if he die the same day, let him be guilty. If a man by contention hurt a
wife with child, let him repair the damage that shall be adjudged; if she die,
he shall be put to death. If a man put out another eye, let him lose his eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound with
wound, skar with skar. If a man strike his servant or handmaid so as he loses
an eye, let him be free therefore; or if he strike out a tooth, let him be
free. If an ox gore any man or woman so as he die, let him be stoned and eat
his flesh, and let the master of the ox be guiltless, if in two or three days
he did not know that the ox gored a man: if he knew it, and yet would keep
him, and the ox afterward kill a man or woman, let the ox be stoned, and the
master either put to death, or pay that price which shall be imposed upon him
for the life, be it son or daughter, the law is the same; if he be a servant or
handmaid which is gored to death, let the ox be stoned, and thirty shillings
be paid to the master. If a man dig a pit and shall leave it uncovered, he
shall pay the value of any beast that falls into it and dies. If the ox of one
gores the ox of another so as he dies, let the live ox be sold, and his price
and the flesh of the dead one be given to the Lord; if after the ox wound
another and he die, let him sell the ox, and give the price and the flesh of
the ox that is killed to the Lord thereof. If the master knew the ox had
gored another, and would not take warning nor sell him, he shall give two, and
four sheep for one; if he has not wherewith to pay, let him be sold for theft.

If a Thief break a man's house in the night, and there be slain, he shall not
be guilty of manslaughter; but if it be after sunrise, he shall be guilty of
manslaughter, if ready to be killed, he were not necessitated. If a man shall
put fire into standing corn and burn it, the author shall give the value of the
damage. If a man trust another with goods to keep, and he privily steal them,
let him repay double; but if it be not found that he which was entrusted, used
no deceit, let him be excused. If the thing entrusted were a living creature,
if he can bring witness that it was taken away by enemies, or that it is dead,
he shall not repay; but if he cannot bring witness, nor free himself from
guilt, let him swear he is not guilty. If a man corrupt a virgin unbetrothed,
and slept with her, let him be fined, and take her to wife; but if her father
will not so bestow her, let him pay her portion, after the value of virgins
portion. Women Fortune Tellers, Charmers and Soothsayers, suffer not to live.
He that has had any thing to do with a beast, shall be put to death. He that
offers sacrifice to any other Gods, shall suffer death. A stranger or
inhabitant thou shall not hurt, for thou were a stranger in the land of Egypt.
A widow or orphan do not oppress nor vex; if you shall oppress, and they
complain, I will hear their prayrs, and slay you with my sword, your wives
shall be widows, children orphans. If thou lend money to thy acquaintance, be
not a gainer from him, nor exact usury of him. If thou take the garment of one
for a pledge, who has only that for a covering, restore it before the sun set;
but if he complain to me, I will hear him for my mercy. Do not speak evil of
the Lord, nor curse him who is the Prince of the people. Pay thy Tithes, and
thy first born and first fruits give to God. Do not taste the flesh torn from
beasts, but cast it to the dogs. Do not trust to a deceitful man's word, nor
hearken to it as to obey it; nor favor him in judgment, nor esteem his witness
but as a tale. Do not follow the ill counsel of the people, nor in controversy
of right incline to the opinion of the multitude; nor do thou hold any thing
common with wrong. If thou shall find any fourfooted beast of thine adversary
straying out of the way, reclaim him. Judge rightly; do not judge otherwise to
the poor and adversary, then to the rich and friend. Do not tell a Lie. Do not
slay the innocent and just. Do not take a gift, for it oftentimes blinds the
eyes of the wise, and perverts the speech of the prudent. Do no injury to the
stranger nor inhabitant. Do not take the names of other Gods in swearing, nor
have them in thy mouth.

These are those Laws which the Almighty God himself did give to Moses, and
commanded him to keep; and also the only begotten Son of God, when he came
into the World, openly taught, That he did not come down to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it with gentleness and goodness; for he delivered the rule of
true Piety. After that, they nailed him to the Cross, before that his Apostles
(were together, nor were scattered for preaching the Gospel) converted many
Nations; and sent Apostles and Interpreters of the Scripture to Antioch, Syria,
and Cilicia, to learn Christ's Law; and what should then befall them, should by a
Messenger be sent back to them in writing. This is that Epistle which the
Apostles sent to all the people of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, which were
converted from the bondage of the Gentiles to Christ.

The Apostles and Elder Brethren, wish health to you. As Soon as we heard that
certain men, which went from us, had troubled you with words, and commanded
some things which they had not in command from us, and had made your souls sad,
rather then instructed you with sound and wholesome Doctrine; it seemed good to
us, being met together, to send to you Barnabas and Paul, who had ventured
their life for the Name of Christ: With them we send Judas and Sylas, who shall
speak the same words. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, not to impose
more necessary burden, then these things upon you; That ye abstain from things
offered to Idols, and Blood, and things strangled, and from fornication; and
that ye will that which ye would other men should do to you. From this one
Commandment it is manifest, That a man should restore every man his right,
neither is there need of any other Law-book. This he should remember, who sits
a Judge over other men, That he should not give that judgment upon other men,
which he would not have given upon himself. After the Gospel of Christ was
preached, many Nations, as also the English, by Faith joined themselves to the
Word of God: Some Bishops and other famous men, as well in England, as other
Regions, held a Council of wise men; and these men, taught by Gods mercy,
imposed upon every sinner a pecuniary mulct, and left the power of exacting it
to the Magistrates, without any offense to God, having obtained leave; only to
the betrayer and forsaker of our Lord, they did not judge fit that this light
punishment should be inflicted, because they deemed such a man not worthy to be
spared, as well, because God would have such contemners of him unworthy of all
mercy, as also, that Christ, Gods Son, would not have mercy on them that
betrayed him to death; and he bid them to worship God before any other. They
therefore, in many Synods, constituted punishments for all sins, and commanded
them to be written.

These Laws have I Alfred the King gathered together, and commanded to be
written, a good part whereof our Ancestors have religiously observed; there are
also many things worthy to be observed of us with like Religion in this age;
yet some there are which seem less profitable to us, by the advice of wise men
I have altered, some I have made new: And because it may seem rashness for any
one to command to be written more then his own Decrees; as also it would be an
uncertain thing how they would be esteemed afterward, of which we make great
account: Whatsoever are worthy to be observed in the acts of Inas my Kinsman,
of Offa King of the Mercians, or Ethelbert, who was the first of Englishmen
that was baptized, I have collected them all, and the other left: And in taking
them, I Alfred King of the West Saxons have used the counsel of the most wise
men, and it has pleased them all to judge them worthy to be kept.

Of the Privilege of the Church. Cap. 2.

If any man guilty of any crime, shall flee to a Religious house, if that
belong not to the Farm of the King, or some Honorable family, let him there
remain three nights, in which, let him heed his salvation (unless in the
interim he return into favor:) And if any one shall during that time weaken him
with fear of stripes, bonds or wounds, let him be free as the custom of the
Nation is, with the price of his head and with fine, and the damage of
violation of the liberty of the Church, with One hundred and twenty shillings
to boot.

Of the Privilege of Sanctuary. Cap. 5.

We do further grant this peace to every Church consecrated by a Bishop: If an
enemy afflict another, and he implores help of the Temple, let him in seven
days be taken out by no man; if for hunger he can live so long, and not opened
his way by force: If a man does otherwise, let him be held a breaker of the
King and Church, and also of a more grievous crime, if he shall have stolen any
thing thence. If the Governor have more then ordinary occasion to use that
place, provide for him in another house, which has not more doors then that
which shuts the Church, and let the Governor take care that in the mean time he
gets no meat; But if he will give his arms into the power of his adversaries,
let them keep him safe thirty days, and then give him into the hands of his
kindred. Also the freedom of the Church is, if any guilty man flee to the
Church before he be accused, and there confess it in Gods name, he shall be
remitted half of his mulct.

Of Sacrilege. Cap. 6.

If a man steal any thing in a Church, let him pay the value of the thing
stolen, and that punishment belonging to that value, and that hand wherewith he
stole be cut off; if he will redeem his hand, and it be granted him, let it be
with the price of his head. If a man steal upon a Sunday, Christmas Day,
Easter Day, Holy Thursday, or upon a Communion-day, let him pay double, as also
in the Fast of Lent.

Of them who steal money out of Churches. 8.

If any man shall take money out of a Church.
Minster without the Kings leave, or the Bishops, he shall pay 120 shillings,
half to the King, half to the Bishop and the Lord of the Church.

Of the Fighting of Priests. 21.

If a Priest slay any man, let all he has acquired be confiscate, and the
Bishop degrade him, and let him be thrust out of the Church, unless the Lord of
the house will forgive him the price of his head.

Of him who binds himself to God, (or enters into Religion.) 28.

If any other accuse a man entered into Religion (or bound to God) that he has
not performed something of those things which he has mentioned, let him give a
Fore-oath in four Churches; and the other, if he will justify himself, let him
do it in twelve Churches.

Of Fight. 38.

This Chapter gives a Privilege for the honor of the Church, in case of
Manslaughter, to him who flees thither.

Of Mass-Holidays. 39.

All Freemen have freedom granted them on these Holidays, but not Servants. The
twelve days in Christmas, the day on which Christ subdued the Devil, the
Anniversary feast of S. Gregory, and seven days before Easter and seven days
after, the Feast-days of S. Peter and S. Paul. In Autumn, the whole week which
is before the Feast of Mary, the Feast-days of all Saints, and the four
Wednesdays in Ember-weeks, let servants have all holy liberty given, and
freedom, that they may spend all their endeavor upon the benefit of those
things, which they have heretofore received in Gods name, or for whatsoever
benefit he shall hereafter earn.

The League of King Edovard and Guthrun.
Preface.
THese are the institutions of King Alfred and King Guthrun; and then King
Edoard and King Guthrun made in those very times, when the Danes and English
made league, and bound themselves, that those things which are afterward
recited, should be often amplified and increased to the common benefit of the
Realm.

Before all things, they propounded one God to be devoutly and holily
worshipped, and that there should be no Heathen worship, etc.

Therefore they first decree, that the peace of the Church be kept within

Furthermore, if any man shall renounce the Christian faith, so as by

If a man entered Religion (or bound to God by promise) steal, or Englishmen,
let him be fined thirty shillings; but if it happen among the Danes, let him
pay half a mark. If a Mass-priest upon appointed days provide not Oil, or deny
Baptism, as the use is; among the English let him be fined, and with the Danes
the breach of the Law is twelve Quaere the value of an Oran.
Oran. If any man of Religion commit any thing worthy of death, let him be
taken and held to the Bishops judgment.

Of Incest.
Furthermore it seemed good to the wise men, that of men guilty of Incest, the
King shall have the higher, and the Bishop the lower, unless he shall
abundantly make recompense to God and men, and shall perform what is enjoined
them by the Bishop. If two brethren, or two of the same alliance, commit
fornication with the same wife, let them be fined the value of their head, or
be punished for the transgression of the Law according as is meet, and as the
crime deserves.

If a man condemned to death, desires ingenuously to confess his sins

If a Dane pay not his Tithes, let him undergo the punishment of the Englishman
be fined. If a Dane withhold what is due to Rome, let him be punished for the
breach of the Law; let an Englishman be fined. If any Dane pay not to the
Candles, let him be punished for breach of the Law; let an Englishman be fined.
If a Dane shall not pay the just Alms of the Plough, let him be punished for
breach of the (...).
Law; let an Englishman be fined. If a Dane shall suppress or retain any Divine
Laws or Duties, let him be punished for breach of the Law; let an Englishman be
fined. If any man wilfully wound another offering Divine service, let him be
guilty of death; but if he shall die, let him be outlawed, and all Ministers of
Justice apprehend him, hurt, or unwilling: And if it were his fault that he was
stricken, or did against Gods law, or resisted the King, if a man so flatter
himself, let him be without recompense, or as we say, he has the means in his
own hands.

Of working on Holidays.
If a Dane sell any thing upon Sunday, let him forfeit the thing and twelve
Englishman thirty shillings. If a Freeman do any work upon an Holiday, let him
forfeit his freedom, or be fined and punished for breach of the Law; let a
Servant be beaten, or be made to fear being beaten. If a Dane shall make his
Servant work upon a Holiday, let him be punished for breach of the Law, and an
Englishman be fined.

Laws Ecclesiastical made by King Aethelstan, Who began to reign in the year of
our Lord 924.
I Aethelstan King, by the prudent counsel of Walshelmes mine Archbishop and
other my Bishops, command all Governors that are in my Government, in the name
of God and all his Saints, and for their good will toward them, that before
all things they pay just Tithes, as well out of our property, as the duties of
living creatures and fruits of the earth; and that all Bishops, Ealdermen and
Sheriffs do the same thing: And I will that my Bishops and Sheriffs, who sit in
judgment upon other men, that they observe this rule, and that they finish all
these things upon the day we have appointed, viz. the Anniversary of S. John
Baptist beheaded.

Further when we think with our self, what the most excellent Father Jacob said
to God, I will offer my tithes, and a peace offering to thee; and what the Lord
spoke in the Gospel, To the all-having man shall be given, and he shall abound:
We moreover may think on those things, which are so terribly written in this
very book; If you will not pay your tithes, giving us only the tenth part, the
nine parts shall be taken from you. Also we are admonished that Heavenly things
are more excellent then Earthly, and eternal things then our frail bodies.
Whenever therefore ye hear what the Lord commands, and what we ought to
follow, those things only I would have you to do, which you can justly and
lawfully prepare.

Of Church-breaking.
Cap. 5. Concerning the Ordal, see Versteg. an. and Seld. annal. Anglo lib. 2.
cap. 8. and Lamberts pref. Saxon laws. Cap. 23.
And we command concerning Church-breaking, if he be a man of the threefold *
Ordal, let him give satisfaction as is rehearsed in the Judgment-book.

Of them willing to undergo the Ordal.
If any man will undergo the Ordal, then let him come three days before the
Mass-priest hallow it, and feed himself with bread and salt, and water and
worts, before he go to Trial, and let him go to Mass every day and The trial of
the Ordal, was either to be soused over head and ears in cold water, or to
thrust his hand a cubit deep into boiling hot water, or to go barefoot, or hold
a burning hot iron in the Triers hand: If they neither shak'd the rope to be
pulled out of the water, nor burned, nor scalded their hands or feet, they were
acquitted.
offer his gift; and upon the day he shall undergo the Ordal, let him take the
Eucharist, and swear that he is innocent and knows nothing of the wickedness
whereof he is accused. If it be of cold Water that the Question made, let him
be plunged over head and ears half an ell in the water; but if it be of Iron,
let him hold it three days before he put it out of his hand. And the Accuser
shall proceed to follow the oath he made before, and both shall fast by the
command of God and the Bishop; and let there be on neither side above twelve
men; but if the Accused comes with more then twelve men, then unless they will
depart, let the Ordals be void.

And upon each Friday, let every one of Gods Ministers in every Church sing the
50. Psalm, for the King, and for all that will as he wills, and for all other
who deserve well of him. If a man accuse another of any crime, let him make him
recompense, unless he did it upon (...).
Procession-days; and if he do so afterward, let it be as before it was.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by King Edmund, Who began to reign in the Year 940.
EDmund the King, in the Solemn Feast of Easter, gathered to London a great
company as well of Ecclesiastics, as of the People. There was Oda and Wulstan
Archbishops, and many other Bishops, that they might as well take care for the
health of their own souls, as for the souls of them committed to their charge.

Of the Man who has vowed Chastity.
First, they who are entered into Religion, and who should give Gods people an
example of virtue to imitate, according to their Order, be they Men or Women,
let them live chaste: But if they shall not do it, then let the Canon punish
them, that is, let them forfeit all they have in the world; and if they mend
not their manners, not be buried in the Sanctuary.

Of Tithes and Church-scot.
Every Christian which shall not pay his Tithes, his First Fruits, and his
Alms, let him be accursed.

Of him who shall defloure a Nun, or commit Adultery.
If a man shall carnally know a Nun, let him be as if he had killed a man, or
be denied Burial in the Sanctuary; and let the same Law be to him who commits
Adultery.

Of Re-edifying the Church.
We will that every Bishop at his own costs shall repair the House of God, and
also mind the King, that all Gods Houses be well adorned; which thing is very
behooful.

Of men Perjured, and worshipping Heathen Gods.
They who are Perjured, and offer Heathenish sacrifice, shall be for ever shut
out from things pertaining to God, unless they soon repent and mend their
manners.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by King Eadgar, Who began to reign in the year of our
Lord 959.
THe Laws which Eadgar the King, in a great Assembly, ordained to the glory of
God, the ornament of himself, and the profit of all his Nation.

First let the Church of God enjoy all its rights and immunities, and

Of Church-tribute.
If a man of free condition has a Church upon his freehold, which has a place
of Burial belonging to it, let him bestow one third part of his Tithes upon the
Church; but if there be no place of Burial about the Church, let the Lord of
the ground give to the Priest of the nine parts, what he will. And let the
Church-tribute of every Church be paid out of the lands of all Freemen.

Of Tithes.
And let every one pay tithes of young living creatures, before Pentecost; and
the tithes of the fruits of the earth, before the Sure it is meant the Autumnal
Equinox; for no tithes can be renewed before the Vernal.
Equinox; and Church-tribute, at the feast of S. Martin. If any one shall not
pay, let him incur the punishment expressed in the Doom-book: And if any one
shall not pay his tithes as we have set down, then may the Kings Sheriff, and
the Bishop, and the Mass-priest of the Church meet, and take the tenth part due
to the Church, and return the ninth part back again to him without thanks; as
to the other eight parts, let the Lord have one half, the Bishop the other. Let
this be, though he be the Kings man, or of free condition.

Of the Hearth-penny.
And let the Hearth-penny be paid before the Feast of S. Peter; and if it then
be not paid, let him carry that penny and thirty pence more to Rome, and
confirm by a certain Certificate in writing, that he did detain it; and let him
pay over and above one hundred and twenty shillings to the King. If afterward a
man shall not pay it, and carry the penny and thirty pence to Rome, he shall
pay two hundred shillings to the King; but if he shall make default the third
time, he shall forfeit all he has.

Of Festival, and Fasting-days.
Let every Sunday be held a Feasting-day, from noontide of Saturday until the
twilight of Monday; he which will not celebrate it, let him undergo the penalty
in the Judgment-book; and other Feast-days shall be bidden; and let all
Fasting-days be held with all godliness.

Canons set forth under King Edgar.
THese things which follow, belong to the Constitutions of King Edgar,
concerning the Manner of Life of Men ordained to Gods service.

1. We teach, that the Minister of God do zealously serve and minister to God,
and intercede to God for all Christian people; and that every one of them be
faithful and obedient to their Superiors, and unanimous in common necessity,
affording help to one another before God and men, and that they be firm and
faithful to their Secular Lords.

2. And we teach, that every one give another honor, and that the younger do
religiously pay love and obedience to the elder, and that the elder do
diligently instruct the younger.

3. And we teach, that at every Synod, every year be had Books and Vestiments
agreeable to the service of God; and Ink and Parchment to write their
Constitutions, and moreover a Three-days assembly.

4. And we teach, that every Priest coming to the Synod have his Clerk, and man
fed at his hand or faithful in service, and none unknown, or given to folly;
and let them all come together in the faith and love of God almighty.

5. We also teach, that if any ill happen to a Priest, or any one do him wrong,
it be referred to the Synod; and let all take it as offered to them all, and
bring help that reparation may be made according to the will of the Bishop.

6. And we teach, that the Priest make known to the Synod, if any in his Parish
be found contumacious against God, or who does nourish any grievous sin; and
that he is not able, or dares not produce him to amendment for fear of the
world.

7. And we teach, that among Priests there be no strifes and wrangling, nor let
them be deferred to the Secular power; but let them be composed among
themselves, or if need be, put off to the Bishop.

8. And we teach, no Priest whether consecrate at Benedict, shall forsake his
Church at his own will, but have it for his rightful wife.

9. We also teach, that no Priest meddle with those things which belong to
another Priest, whether in his Church or Parish, or acquaintance or fraternity,
nor in any other thing belonging to him.

10. And we teach, that no Priest take away the Scholar of another, not having
first asked leave of him to whom he belonged.

11. And we teach, that every Priest diligently learn to increase the learning
of Handicraft trades.

12. And we teach, that every learned Priest does not despise an halflearned
Priest; but as much as in him lies, endeavor to make him more learned.

13. And we teach, that no Priest well descended, does lightly esteem a Priest
meanly descended; for to a man rightly judging, all men are of the same stock.

14. And we teach, that every Priest behave himself so, that he be not a
Merchant without right, nor use merchandise.

15. And we teach, that every Priest administer Baptism as soon as he shall be
required; and that they admonish all within their Parish, that they have a care
that all their Infants be baptized within thirty seven nights, and that none
does too long defer to be confirmed of the Bishop.

16. And we teach, that all Priests do with all diligence promove the Christian
religion, and by all their strength blot out the superstition of the Gentiles;
and we do forbid feigned Will Worship, Negromancy, Divinations, Witchcrafts,
Divine worship of men, and those things which lead mortal men into diverse
errors; and in (...) on (...), and of diverse other Trees, Stones, and the
Fantasy of diverse things which deceive men, which ought not.

17. And we teach, that every Christian man take care that his children be
christened, and learn them their Paternoster and Creed.

18. And we teach, that on Festival days every one abstain from the profane
Verses and Songs of the Gentiles, and from Devilish Plays.

19. And we teach, that every one abstain from fabulous and foolish readings,
and from filthy and blasphemous idle talk.

20. And we teach, that upon Sunday every one abstain from merchandise, and
popular meetings.

21. And we teach, that every one abstain from the company of Harlots, and
embrace his right wife.

22. And we teach, that every one learn his Paternoster and Creed, before he
be buried in a consecrated Churchyard, or be accounted fit to receive the
Eucharist; and that he be unworthy the name of Christian, that will not learn
these things, nor suffer other men in Baptism to be washed with holy water, nor
in confirmation admit of the hands of the Bishop, but all that he could avoided
them.

23. And we teach, that upon Festival and Fasting-days, there be no
extraordinary contentions among men.

24. And we teach, that upon Festival and Fasting days there be no
administration of Oaths, or the Ordale.

25. And we teach, that upon Festival and Fasting times every man forbear to
accompany his wife.

26. And we teach, that Priests keep their Churches with all worthiness in
Divine Ministry, and to pure service, and to nothing else; and that they suffer
not any thing more, nor any thing less, neither within, nor near it. Let there
be no vain speech, nor any thing indecently done: This is not a place of
inordinate drinking, nor of any manner of vanity; Neither may a Dog come into
the Churchyard, nor more Hogs then a man can rule.

27. And we teach, that no man repose any thing in the Church, which may be
there held uncomely.

28. And we teach, that in the Churches Vigils every one behave himself
modestly, and diligently betake himself to prayer, and not given to drinking or
luxury.

29. And we teach, that no man be buried in the Church, who by a good life did
not please God, and thence be judged worthy of such sepulture.

30. And we teach, that no Priest celebrate Mass in any house, which is not a
consecrated Church, unless it be for the extreme sickness of any one.

31. And we teach, that no Priest do at any time celebrate Mass, unless it be
upon a consecrated Altar.

32. And we teach, that a Priest never celebrate Mass without book, and that he
have the Canon before his eyes, unless something hinder it.

33. And we teach, that every Priest celebrating Mass, has his Coporal, and
Subumle under his Alban, and all his Missal vestiments, as is meet, duly woven.

34. And we teach, that every Priest be very careful to have a good book, or at
least faithfully corrected.

35. And we teach, that no Mass-priest celebrate Mass alone, lest he so should
want them who might answer.

36. And we teach, that no man receive the Eucharist but fasting, unless it be
in dangerous sickness.

37. And we teach, that no Priest celebrate Mass above thrice at most in one
day.

38. And we teach, that the Priest always has (as is meet) the Eucharist
prepared, and that he keep it in cleanness, and be very careful that it does
not wax old: But if it be longer kept then is meet, so that it grows nauseous,
then let it be burnt with pure fire, and be put under the altar, and let him
who is guilty of the offense ask God forgiveness.

39. And we teach, that not at any time the Priest be so rash, that he
celebrates Mass, unless he has all things pertaining to the Eucharist, viz.
Pure oblation, pure wine, and pure water. Woe to them who begin Mass, if any of
these be wanting; and woe to him who uncleanly has prepared any thing to this
purpose; he is like those Jews who mingled vinegar and gall, and afterward in
scorn offered it to Christ.

40. And we teach, that at no time a Priest is worthy to celebrate Mass, who
has not received the Eucharist; neither in Sacred orders may he consecrate
another, who is not consecrate himself.

41. And we teach, that every Cup in which the Eucharist is consecrated be
Fusil, and that it be never be consecrated in wood.

42. And we teach, that all things about the Altar and belonging to the Church
be very clean and worthy, and that nothing unworthy be brought hither, but what
is holy may be worthily reposed; and let a light always burn in the Church
whilst Mass is singing.

43. And we teach, that no man neglect any thing which is consecrated, viz.
Holy water, Salt, Frankincense, Bread, etc.

44. And we teach, that no woman approach the altar whilst Mass is celebrated.

45. And we teach, that no man ring the Bells but at the appointed times, and
that every Priest then sing his hourly Song in the Church, and in the fear of
God diligently invoke and pour out his prayers for all men.

46. And we teach, that neither Mass nor Parish Priest do come within the door
of the Church, or any seat in it, without his Surplice, nor to any office at
the altar, without his designed vesture.

47. And we teach, that no man ordained in Sacred Orders, nourish his hair, nor
without cause permits himself to be shaven, if he hopes the blessing of God,
and S. Peter, and ours.

48. And we teach, that upon Festival and Fasting-days, all Priests be
unanimous, and set forth to the people the same things in one and the same
manner, lest otherwise they might lead them into error.

49. And we teach, that every Fast be made more grateful by the distribution of
alms; for, whosoever out of his devotion to God, diligently gives alms; without
doubt he renders his Fast more pleasing to God.

50. And we teach, that Priests in the office of the Church do unanimously
endeavor it, and that in every Church they deserve a like yearly stipend.

51. And we teach, that Priests diligently instruct youth, and draw them to
learn arts, that afterward they may have the aid of the Church.

52. And we teach, that Priests upon every Sunday preach to the people, and
show themselves an example of good life.

53. And we teach, that no Christian man eats blood of any kind. (Litura est.)

54. And we teach, that Priests instruct the people of these things which of
right ought to be rendered to God, viz. Tithes and other things, among which
that which is called the Alms of the Plough, within fifteen nights *
Ciricsetum, vel Primitias seminum.
after Easter; the tithes of young living creatures, before Whitsuntide; the
tithe of the Fruits of the earth, before the celebration of All Saints; and
Peter Pence.
Rome-money at the feast of S. Peter; and Ciricsceatum (idem cum Ciricsetum) at
the feast of S. Martin.

55. And we teach, that Priests so distribute the alms of the people, that they
render God more merciful, and the people more disposed to alms.

56. And we teach, that Priests sing Psalms when they distribute the alms
given, and exhort the poor that they diligently pray for the people which gave
these alms.

57. And we teach, that Priests themselves avoid drunkenness, and be careful
that it may be avoided by other men.

58. And we teach, that no Priest be either Poet or Stage Player, whether it be
to please himself or other men; but that he so behave himself as is meet for
his order, prudent, and worshipful.

59. And we teach, that Priests do not swear, and be careful to prevent it in
others.

60. And we teach, that no Priest love the company of Women more then is meet,
but that he love his own proper wife, that is the Church.

61. And we teach, that no Priest bears false witness, nor be of council with
Thieves.

62. And we teach, that a Priest, besides his duty, never entangle himself with
the Ordale, or Foreign oaths.

63. And we teach, that in purgation a Priest swear not against a man of free
condition, unless he of free condition swore before.

64. And we teach that a Priest be not a Hunter, nor Hawker, nor Drinker, but
conversant with his Books, as becomes his order.

65. And we teach, that every Priest should teach Confession and Penance, and
that men confessing their sins might also make satisfaction; and that as need
requires, he administer the Eucharist, and the Unction, if it be desired: After
death let it be carefully covered, and where the body is, let nothing vain or
unseemly be permitted, but buried in the fear of God.

66. And we teach, that every Priest has oil, as well to baptize infants, as
to anoint the sick, and all other apparel due to their public ministry; and by
all means promote the Christian faith, here by well preaching, there by showing
an example in well living. Then shall he so be enriched, that Almighty God may
be merciful to him.

67. And we teach, that every Priest repeating his Chrism, does not forget to
tell what he should have done for the King and Bishop in his prayers.

Of Confession.
1. When any one will make confession of his sins, let him do it manly and not
blush to confess his sins and wickedness in accusing himself; because from
thence comes indulgence, and because without confession there is no
forgiveness; for confession heals, confession justifies.

[Here is a great space in the original Manuscript.] O Lord, I beg that thy
mercy may prevent this thy servant, that all his iniquities may suddenly be
blotted out by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Hear, I beseech thee, O Lord, the prayers of the humble crying unto thee, I
beseech thee O Lord.

2. This thing is to be seriously meditated by him who is constituted Physician
for the souls of men, and that he should have known their actions, viz. that he
may rightly discern them, and hold a right reason, in imposing censure upon
every one of them. However the matter be, let not the Physician prejudge the
Sinner, nor thrust him into desperation. When any one will confess his sins,
first he shall hear him courteously what this his intention should be, and
whether he would or could humbly confess those things he had committed, and
search out all his guilt.

3. Ask him of his manners, and extort his guilt, and lay before him all those
things he has done. But this keep always secret, that you may never in the same
manner judge rich and poor, freemen and servants, those elder and those
younger, the healthful and unhealthful, the humble and proud, the strong and
weak, them in Gods service, and the secular.

A prudent Judge shall wisely distinguish concerning the fact, viz. What, how,
where, and when it was committed: And though in no place or time sin is lawful,
yet upon Festival and Fasting-days, and Festival places, every one ought more
carefully to obstain from this. And by how much the greater, or of more dignity
any one is, so much more grievously is every one to be corrected before God and
man for his sins: For to the strong and feeble, a like burden is not to be
imposed, nor upon one infirm as one healthful, but men must distinguish between
them with a prudent moderation.

4. After these things, the Penitent may humbly arise to his confession, and
first say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Governor of all things, and in
his Son, and in the Holy Ghost; and I believe there is life after death, and I
believe I shall rise again in the day of Judgment; and I believe that I by the
power of God and his mercy am worthy of all these things.

5. After these things, with a sorrowful mind he may humbly make his confession
to his Confessor, and bowing his head may say in this manner: I confess to
Almighty God, and Confessor my spiritual Physician, all the sins which ever I
have committed by the pollution of Evil Spirits, whether in deed or thought,
whether with men or women, or any other creature, whether by nature or against
nature.

6. I confess my Gluttony morning and evening; I confess all my avarice, envy
and backbiting, and deceitful vice, lying and vain-boasting, vain speech,
ungodly prodigality and haughtiness in every kind, which has any ways happened
to this unbridled body of mine: I confess I have often been the author of sin,
the favorer of sin, conscious of sin, and teacher of sin.

7. I confess in my mind to have committed Murder, and Perjuries, and Sedition,
and Pride, and neglect of all Gods commands. I confess all those things which I
ever saw with mine eyes, either coveting, or unduly reproaching; and also all
those vain and superfluous things, which I have heard with mine ears, or spoke
with my tongue.

8. I confess all sins of my body, of skin and flesh, and bones and nerves, and
of kidneys and gristles, and of my tongue and lips, and of my jaws, and teeth,
and hair; of my marrow, and of every other thing which is soft or hard, wet or
dry. I confess I have observed my Baptism worse then I have promised to my
Lord, and the profession by which I was bound to keep for the praise of God and
his Saints, and the eternal health of my self. I confess I have often neglected
my Canonical hours, and have often forsworn the Life of God, and taken his
Name in vain.

9. I ask and beseech my Lord for remission of all these, that the Devil may
never by his snares prevail against me, lest at any time I should die without
confession and amendment of my sins, even as to day I have confessed all my
sins before our Lord and Savior Christ, who governs heaven and earth, and
before that Altar and those Relics, and before my Confessor and Mass-priest
of the Lord; and as I have given a pure and true confession, and am ready to
correct all my sins, and as much as in me lies, with all carefulness hereafter
to avoid them.

10. And thou, O Jesu Christ my Savior, have mercy upon my soul, and forgive,
I pray, and blot out all my sins and transgressions, which I have ever either
heretofore or lately committed; and lead me into thy heavenly kingdom, that
there I may be conversant with the Elected and thy Saints without end and for
ever. Now I humbly beseech thee, O Priest of God, that thou be a witness for me
in the day of Judgment, that the Devil hereafter may have no power over me, and
that thou may be a pleader for me to the Lord, that I may amend my sins and
transgressions, and desist from committing the like again. May God enable me to
perform this, who lives and reigns without end in everlasting. Amen.

The manner of injoining Penance.
1. If an old man or young man, rich or poor man, sound or infirm, shall
unwillingly offend another of any order, it shall not be so taken as if he had
wilfully done it, or on set purpose: And also if any one compelled by necessity
shall have committed any sin; for this thing, because he did by necessity
commit it, he shall always rather deserve forgiveness and milder censure.

2. Each Deed is to be carefully distinguished, for Gods and Man's sake.

These Services are observed in Parts beyond Sea, viz.

3. That every Bishop take his Episcopal seat upon that Wednesday which is
called the head of the * Fast; and then let every one in his Diocese come unto
him who is guilty of any grievous crime, and when he shall have Ashwednesday.
confessed this, his Confessor shall teach him penance proportionable to the
crime he is guilty of: And if any one be worthy of a more grievous sentence, he
shall separate him from the communion of the Church; yet shall he grant and
exhort him that he follow his necessary employment, and so at length he may
return home having obtained pardon.

4. And after that, upon Maunday-Thursday, let all be called together to the
same place; and the Bishop singing over them some of the Hymns, pronounce
absolution to them, and give them leave to return home with his benediction to
them. This is to be observed of all Christians.

5. Yet ought the Priest diligently to enquire with what contrition, and with
what perfection and plenitude every one has fulfilled the penance enjoined
him, and accordingly grant this remission.

6. If a Layman without cause kill another, let him fast seven years in bread
and water, and four of them as his Confessor shall appoint, and also the seven
years penance to boot, and always bewail his sin all he can, because it is
unknown to men how much his penance has prevailed with God.

7. If a man desire to kill another, and cannot fulfill it, let him fast three
years, viz. one with bread and water, the other two as his Confessor shall
injoin him.

8. If a man shall unwillingly slay a Layman, let him fast three years, one
with bread and water, the other two as his Confessor shall appoint, and let him
always lament his transgressions.

9. If he were a Subdeacon, let him fast six years; if he were a Deacon, let
him fast seven years; if he were a Mass-priest, ten years; and if a Bishop,
twelve, and always lament.

10. If any man so chastise his son, that he thereof die, although against his
will; let him fast five years with bread and water ut supra.

11. If a Bishop or Mass-priest shall kill any one, let him lose the dignity of
his Order, and his penance be always.

12. If a woman shall kill an infant either in her womb, or after it shall be
born, whether by taking a potion, or any other way; let her fast ten years,
viz. three in bread and water, and the other seven accordingly as her Confessor
shall in mercy impose, and always bewail the fact.

13. If a man without cause in his rage slay his (...), let him fast 3 years.

14. If a husband shall out of any impious jealousy beat his wife, so as she
therefore dies guiltless; yet let him fast three years, and always bewail his
misdeed.

15. If a man shall of his own accord have killed himself, whether with a
weapon, or any other devilish instigation, it is not lawful for any man to sing
a Mass for such a man, nor to bury him with singing Psalms, nor to cover him
with earth being laid in a lawful sepulcher. The same Judgment is to be given
upon him, who mischievously ended his life with pain; as also a Thief,
Murderer, or Betrayer of his Master.

16. If any one of twenty years of age has defiled himself with a beast, be it
male or female, let him fast fifteen years. And if he has a wife, and be forty
years old, and shall have done such a thing, let him both abstain and fast all
his life long; nor let him presume, until he be ready to die, to take the body
of our Lord. A young man, or foolish, shall be grievously beaten, who shall
commit any such fault.

17. Whosoever shall break wedlock, be it wife or husband, shall fast three
days in every week with bread and water, for the space of 7 years.

18. Whosoever repudiates his wife and takes another, dissolves the wedlock. No
man ought to cast off, though for life or death, any of those things which by
due right belong to Christians; neither may he be buried, who does this among
Christians: And concerning a Wife, let the same thing be done: And the Kindred
who were present, or gave counsel to these things, let them be punished with
the same sentence, unless they sooner repent and diligently amend.

19. If a man has a Wife, and also a Concubine, let no Priest give them any
thing belonging to Christian rights, unless he penitently return to amendment:
The same Law shall be to a woman, whether she were Wife or Concubine.

20. If any one married commit adultery with the lawful wife of another, or any
wife with the lawful husband of another; let either of them fast seven years,
viz. three in bread and water, and four as the Confessor shall teach, and
lament their transgressions as long as they live.

21. If any woman shall take to her two brethren in marriage, one after
another, they deserve judgment, and to be put to most strict penance as long as
they live, as their Confessor shall instruct them; and dying, the Priest confer
upon them the due obsequies of Christians, if they shall have promised this,
that they would have longer done their penance, if they should longer have
lived.

22. If any one shall have continued in the exercise of any sin all his
life-long without any repentance; we know not what counsel we can imagine for
this man, unless to leave him to Gods judgment; nor can he be absolved.

23. If a woman be betrothed to a man, it is not lawful for another to marry
her; if any man does, let him be excommunicated.

24. If any man takes away by deceit a Wife or Virgin for his Concubine,
against her will, let him be excommunicated.

25. If any one shall entice away the Waiting Woman of another, to lie with
her, and shall lie with her against her will; if he be in Orders, he shall lose
the dignity of his Order; but if he be a Laick, he shall be excommunicated from
every Christian thing.

26. If a Virgin be betrothed, and before marriage be made a Captive, or by any
other accident be carried away from him to whom she is betrothed, and it happen
that afterward she come into the sight of her Spouse, leave being first asked,
they may cohabit carnaliter, because she was taken from him against her will.

27. If a woman shall enter into Religion, and afterward returning to worldly
vanities, shall take the administration of a family, thinking with herself,
that she may satisfy God from whom she has turned aside, out of her goods;
this can in no wise be, unless she turn away from the custom of her sin, and
return to Christ, that she may lead her life as her Confessor shall instruct
her, and always carefully amend her trangression.

28. If a Mass-priest or Monk kill a man, let him lose the dignity of his
Order, and fast ten years, viz. five with bread and water, and all the other
five, three days in every week, in the rest let him enjoy meat, and while he
lives, diligently lament his crime. A Deacon, eight years with bread and water,
and the other as abovesaid: A Clerk, six years, whereof four with bread and
water: A Laick, five years, three with bread and water, ut supra.

29. If any man kill a man in Orders, or his next Cousin, he shall forfeit his
land and goods, and shall be done to as the Pope shall appoint, and moreover
shall always lament.

30. If a Mass-priest or Monk be wantonly lustful, or violate matrimony, let
him fast ten years, and always lament; a Deacon seven, a Clerk six, a Laick
five. So be it.

31. If a Mass-priest, or Monk, or Deacon has a lawful wife before he took
Orders, and having left her, entered into Religion; yet afterward raging in
lust, shall privily take her; let every one of them fast as for manslaughter,
and moreover vehemently lament.

32. If a Mass-priest, or Monk, or Deacon, or Laick, or Clerk shall commit
fornication with a Nun, let every one fast as is meet for his Order, as for
homicide, and as long as he lives abstain from flesh; and a Nun ten years, as
also a Mass-priest, and always lament the fact.

33. If any one would have any carnal knowledge of a Nun, and she would not,
let him fast one year with bread and water for his wicked thought. If a man
would know carnally the lawful wife of another, and she would not, let him fast
one year for his impious thought with bread and water.

34. If any man would know the lawful wife of another, and she would not, let
him fast three Lents with bread and water, viz. the first in Summer, another in
Autumn, and a third in Winter.

35. If any one would have to do any unlawful thing with a woman, let him fast
forty days in bread and water.

36. If a man shall have taken another with his daughter, let him compound with
the harlot, and either of them fast a year upon Wednesdays and Fridays; on
other days they may eat any meat but flesh, and embrace their own wedlock.

37. If a man know carnally a beast, let him fast fifteen years, viz. eight in
bread and water; in the other seven, three Lents in every year; and upon
Wednesdays and Fridays as long as he lives, and always lament his sin.

38. If a man defile himself voluntarily, let him fast three years, and in
every one of them forty days in bread and water, and abstain from flesh upon
every one except Sunday.

39. If any one kill another with witchcraft, let him fast seven years, viz.
three years in bread and water, and on the four other, three days in every week
in bread and water, and always lament.

40. If any man shall have given a disease to another, let him fast three
years, viz. one in bread and water. But if he chance to die thereof, then let
him fast seven years, as is here ascribed, and always lament his misdeeds.

41. If any one uses witchcraft to procure love, and therefore compound any
drugs or amorous potion to eat or drink, or use Negromancie; if he be a Laick,
let him fast upon Wednesdaies and Fridaies half a year in bread and water, but
upon other days let him enjoy meat, that is not flesh. A Clerk, one year ut
supra, three days in every week in bread and water. A Deacon three years ut
supra. A Mass priest five years, whereof one in bread and water, and on every
Friday of the other in bread and water, and on the other days let him abstain
from flesh.

42. If any man against nature, and against the good creature of God, any ways
defiles himself, let him lament whilst he lives what he has perpetrated.

43. If any one overlaies an infant in sleep, whereof it dies, let him fast
three years, one of them in bread and water, and in the other two, three days
in every week. But if it shall happen from drunkenness, he shall be more
grievously punished as his Confessor shall teach, and the delinquent always
lament.

44. If an infirm infant dies a Heathen, and this came to pass by fault of the
Priest, let him lose the degree of his Ordination, and diligently make
compensation. And if it happened through the negligence of his friends, let them
fast three years, viz. one in bread and water, and the other two, three days
in a week, and always bewail it.

45. If any shall sell any Christian to Heathen, let him be unworthy to enjoy
any benefit of Christian folk, unless he speedily redeem him home again,
because he had sold him from home: And if he cannot do this, let him distribute
that price altogether on Gods grace, and free another Captive with another
ransom, and set him free. And this let him fulfill three years, as his
Confessor shall appoint: And if he has not means by which he may redeem the
Captive, let him increase his punishment into seven years penance, and always
lament.

46. If any shall grievously offend by manifold sinning, and desires at length
to leave and correct these things, let him often go to the Monastery, and there
always serve God and man as he shall be taught; or let him depart a great way
from his country, and always repent whilst he lives, and help his soul, at
least her eon earth, with all profound amendment which he may find, as shall be
taught him.

Of Satisfaction.
1. In this kind of confession, the help of some Divine does very much conduce
to the expiation of sin, not less then the counsel of some learned Physician to
the curing of a disease.

2. Oftentimes men sin by concupiscence, and sometimes through the instigation
of the Devil; and that is most terrible, that men bound to God, so often
against God, as they lose their dignity.

3. And to amend this, there is need of severe penance, but always according
to the manner of the order and sin, as is ordained in the Canons; and every one
ought with all his strength and endeavor, and also with trouble from the
bottom of his heart to go about this. Some may undergo the penance of one year,
some of more, but always after the manner of the sin; some of one month,
others of more; some of one week, others of more weeks; and some of one day,
others of more; and some all the days of their life.

4. It behooves a Physician, who will heal grievous wounds, to make use of
exquisite medicines: But there are none so grievous wounds as these sins, for
these wounds lead men to eternal death, unless by confession, repentance or
satisfaction they make themselves whole.

5. Therefore, both man and woman may be Physicians who should heal these
wounds: First the wound is to be inquired into by good counsel; then the
ulcerated matter, which does inwardly putrify, is to be let out, that is, he
purge himself through confession.

6. Every man who will blot out his sins by confession, embraces found
doctrine, not less then he, who takes a healthful potion from the Physician, a
deadly disease.

7. No Physician can rightly cure any disease or wound, until the venomous
matter which putrifies inwardly, be drawn out: Neither can any man rightly
teach penance, who refuses to confess; nor can without confession of sins,
pronounce absolution; like as he cannot well be made sound, who has drunk any
deadly thing, unless the venomous force be expelled.

8. Confession being finished, any man may by penance easily obtain Gods mercy,
if he does this from the bottom of his heart, and moreover deplore that he
seduced by the Devil committed these sins.

9. A prudent amendment does very much benefit this confession, as the cure of
a sickness a good Physician. Concerning the works of any one, the Confessor may
enquire by the Canons, and moderate according to the power and wealth of them
confessing, as he believes the contrition and carefulness of any ones heart.

10. That is great penance, when a Laick must lay down his arms, and make
pilgrimage far and near barefoot; who must not lie two nights in one place, who
fasts much and watches, who days and nights prays earnestly, and who willingly
wearies himself, and who is so untrimmed, that no iron has touched his hair or
nails.

11. Who neither comes into warm bath, nor soft bed, nor tastes flesh, nor
drink which may make him drunk; who comes not into a Church, but yet zealously
seeks holy places, and confesses his sins, and asks intercession; who kisses no
body, yet bitterly deplores his sins.

12. He is propitious to himself, who in this manner prejudgeth himself: And
indeed this man is happy, although in nothing he is more unwatchful, then that
he might fully correct himself. Neither was there ever in the world any so
grievous a sinner, but he might appease God, if he ardently went this way.

13. There are many ways to appease God for sins; and alms do very much
conduce to the forgiveness of them.

14. He who has means sufficient, let him build a Church to the praise of God;
and if he has more besides, let him give land to it, and bring in young men,
who may perform holy service for him, and therefore daily minister to God; and
let him repair Gods Church for his means, and Highwaies; let him make Bridges
over unpassable waters, and dirty places; let him distribute for Gods sake that
which he has, and with as much diligence as he can; let him carefully relieve
the poor, widows, orphans and strangers; let him manumiss his own servant, let
him redeem servants from other men to be set free, especially the poor man
taken in war; let him feed and clothe men in want, and allow them houseroom and
firing, and bath and bedding; and in his necessity in all places let him make
intercession in singing Masses and Psalms; and let him in his devotion toward
his Lord God very much chastise himself, by abstaining from meat and drink, and
all other bodily desires.

15. And he who has less means, let him set himself all he can, that in his
devotion toward God he paies tithes of all he possesses; that he examine
himself as often as he can, and often with alms visit Churches, and salute Holy
places with lights, and give his house meat, and protection to them that need,
and also fire and some nourishment, and bed and bath, and take care to clothe
and feed the poor as much as he can.

16. For Gods love let him visit the sorrowful and sick, and bury the dead,
often in secret lie prostrate upon his knees, and often lie prostrate and
stretched out upon the ground; let him fast, watch and pray, night and day
diligently. He who has not means sufficient to perform all these things, let
him endeavor to do as much as he is able: Let him wear out his body against
lust, if ever by delicacie or lust he has pleased the devil: Now let him by
fasting correct that sin, which before he had committed by gluttony; and let
him often watch and labor, if at any time he were wonted to the contrary, and
given to ease, when he ought not, or had at other times beyond measure watched
in vain: Let him afflict himself with cold, and frozen baths, for that heat
whereof he sinned by lust. If he has any where offended another unjustly, let
him diligently make amends; and if another has offended him, let him be
appeased as much as in him lies, against those sins which grew up in himself
from the seed of the Devil: And if he has misled any one out of the way, that
he might make any gain thereof, let him carefully reduce him to the right way.
This is that which I will. If he shall have provoked any one to sin, let him do
to him what is necessary, viz. Let him reclaim him from his sins, and again
lead him in the right way. He who diligently dehorts another from his sins,
renders his own the lighter.

17. This judgment every one by the council of his Confessor may give himself,
who with a constant mind will break off his sins and correct them, viz. Let him
distribute for Gods love all he has; let him leave with them, lands, country,
and all the desirable things of this world, and serve the Lord day and night,
and endeavor by all the power he can against his worldly desires all the days
of his life. What then is left? that by exhorting others, he gathers to him for
the study of godliness, by all possible means he can.

Here in these following, shall be said how any Sick man may redeem his
declared Fast.

18. Every man may redeem the fast of one day with one penny; and any one may
redeem the fast of one day with two hundred and twenty Psalms; and any one may
redeem the fast of twelve months, with 30s. or by setting free any one of that
price: And for one days fast let him sing six times Beati, and also six times
Pater noster; and for the fast of one day, let that man bend his knee, and bow
himself to the ground sixty times, saying Pater noster. And also a man may
absolve the fast of one day, if in his prayers to God he through all his
members lift up himself to God by true confession and right faith, and fifteen
times sing Miserere mei Deus, and also Pater noster fifteen times; Then is a
lightening of the sins of the whole day granted to him.

19. Any man may absolve a seven Winters fast in one year, if he daily shall
sing the Psalms of the Psalter, and do the same at night, and fifty on the
evening; one Mass may absolve the fast of twelve days, and with ten Masses the
fast of four months may be bought off, and with thirty Masses the fast of a
whole year may be bought off, if any man will out of true love to God intercede
for himself, and confess his sins to his Confessor, and amend those things as
he is bidden, and always afterward avoid them.

Of the Penance of Mighty men.
1. Thus a mighty man, and having many friends, may by the help of his friends
mitigate his penance. First, in the name of God, and by the testimony of his
Confessor, let him manifest a right faith, and forgive all who may have sinned
against him, and make his confession without any omission of his sins, and
endeavor to repent, and take his penance with much grief.

2. Then let him lay down his Arms, and unprofitable things, and (...), and
taking his staff in his hand, let him go diligently barefoot, and let him use
hair-shirts, nor come on a bed, but lie in a cottage, and do this the number of
seven years, and prepare himself three years on this manner, and take to his
aid twelve of his companions; let them fast three days with bread, crude
pottage, and water; and let him get as well as he can, to finish the work,
seven times an hundred and twenty men, who may every one of them fast for his
sake three days; so the number of these Fasts will amount to so many Fasts, as
there are days in the seven years.

3. When any one fasts, let him distribute the dishes wherein his meat was, to
all the poor men of God; and in the three days of his Fast, let him lay aside
all worldly business, and day and night as often as he can go to Church, and
diligently watch there in Alms light, and cry to God, and beg remission of sins
with a sorrowful spirit and bended knees. Also let him often stretch himself
upon the sign of the Cross, now standing upright, now prostrate upon the
ground; and let every mighty man learn sincerely to weep and deplore his sins;
and also on those three days feed as many poor men as he can; upon the fourth,
let him stoop down to wash their feet; and let there upon the same day be
celebrated for the Penitent so many Masses, as any one can by any means
perform, and on the time of the Masses let him be absolved; and then let him
take the Eucharist, unless that through too much guilt he be so hindered, that
he dares not take it: Yet let him promise for the future, as much as in him
lies, always to do well, and whilst he lives, by Gods help, to avoid
injustice, so as he may always and rightly hold his Christendom, and renounce
Heathenism. Mind, O ye Ministers of God, his words, and diligently correct his
works, that so he may set up all Justice, and, by the help of God, as much as
in him lies, destroy Injustice. It is very necessary he should perform that to
God, even in the least thing, which he has promised.

4. This is the lightening of the penance of Great men, who abound in many
friends: But it is not granted to an Indigent man to proceed so: It is
therefore expedient more strongly to exact this of him; and that as is meet
that every one should wash away his sins, and undergo himself his correction.
Scriptum est enim, Quia unusquisque onus suum portabit.

These Canons are set out in the Original by Abraham VVheelock, and by him
translated into Latin, in his Addition to the History of Bid, between the
Laws of King Edgar and Ethelred, page 65. until 88.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by Canutus, who began to reign in the year of our
Lord 1016.
THis is the Decree, which Canutus King of England, of Denmark and Norway, by
the counsel of the wise men, to the glory of the Immortal God, the ornament of
the Royal Majesty, and the utility of the people, has ordained at Winchester,
upon Christmas. day.
Midwintertide.

1. First of all, let all men devoutly and holily worship only one God, and
strictly hold themselves to one rule of Christian religion, and obey with all
faith and observance King Canutus.

2. And protect Gods Church, and defend it, and frequent it as well for the
health of our soul, as the commodity of others. It is meet that one peace be
comprehended in all Christian Churches, and also that all Christian men have it
in great veneration. For, Gods peace is to be wished for before other things;
next after that, the Kings peace is to be kept. It is therefore very meet, that
the peace of the Church of God, and the tranquillity delivered into the Kings
hand, be always kept inviolable. If any man shall violate either, let him be
fined and suffer death, unless the King shall forgive it. But if any one shall
ever hereafter break the peace of the Church of God, so as he kill a man within
the walls of a Church, let it be inexpiable, and all men for the love of God
persecute him as an enemy, unless he flee from thence to some Asylum, that the
King may suffer him to enjoy his life, after he had abundantly given recompense
to God and man: Which if he shall do, and pay to Christ and the King the price
of his head, then let him be inlawed: And then if he go about to make
compensation, and the King suffer it, let him pay the whole mulct of the
Church, which is in the name of the breach of the Kings peace, and purge the
Church, and be ready to perform what is meet to the Kindred and Lord of him who
is killed, and be very diligent to return into Gods favor.

3. And if any man break the peace of the Church, and do not kill any man, let
him make compensation according to the nature of the crime, whether he did
strike, or stole, or committed any other wickedness. First then, let the mulct
be paid according to the nature of the crime, and the excellency of the Church:
For there is not one and the same terrene dignity of all Churches, although all
are of the same Divine consecration. Those crimes which may be expiated, if
done in a Mother Church, let them pacify the King, that is, with five pounds
in English money; and a Middle-church with an hundred and twenty shillings, and
that is the Kings fine; and if it be a lesser, where there is little Service,
and has a churchyard, with sixty shillings; and if a Field-church without a
churchyard, with thirty shillings.

4. All Christian men ought principally to be very careful, that Gods Holiness,
and Orders, and Places consecrated to him, be religiously observed, and to give
a due respect to every degree: For let them understand that will, or can, much
and more is it that the Priest has to do for the benefit of the people, if he
rightly consider it; much is the Supplications, and more is the Consecrations,
by which in consecrating Baptism and the Eucharist, the Devil is beaten and
driven back; and Angels do incompass holy things, and defend their deeds, and
through Gods power the Priest does sustain them, as often as he does truly
serve Christ. That is it, they do all the while the Priest does from his soul
beg of Christ, and earnestly request of him those things which are necessary
for the life of the people: They therefore for the fear of God ought to be
preferred in dignity before other men.

5. And if any man accuse a Priest Regular, and he is conscious of no such
crime, let him celebrate the Mass, and take the Eucharist thereon, if he fear
not to do it, and it shall free him from the calumny of one man: But if there
be a threefold accusation, having taken the Eucharist, (if he presume to do it)
and having joined himself to two of his Order, let him blot out all suspicion
of the supposed crime. If any one shall accuse a Deacon being a Regular, of a
crime by a single testimony, the Deacon conjoining himself with two of his
Order, may free himself from the crime: But if there be a threefold accusation
against him, the Elders of that Order being assembled, let him free himself of
the crime. If any accuse a Country-Priest, who has bound himself in no Order
of Religion, let him purge himself as a Deacon living by rule. If any man who
serves at the Altar be accused of a crime, and is so friendless that he cannot
get one who will swear with him, let him eat the execrated bread, and let God
judge of the thing; unless it be lawful by taking the Eucharist to free himself
from the crime. If any man in holy orders be accused of capital Broils, so as
that he were the author or counselor of the death of another, let him be
acquitted by offering himself to the kindred of them who were so beguiled or
slain; and if he has no kindred, let him betake himself to his companion, or
fast until he be lean, and eat the execrated (...)
bread, and let God give judgment thereupon. But let not a Monk anywhere with
right accuse another of breach of friendship, or pay any thing for feuds; for
he has rejected whatsoever he might acquire by the right of kindred, when he
first bound himself to the rule he professes. If a Mass-priest be not very
upright in taking of witness, or be forsworn, or be the author or counselor
of any theft, let him be dispoiled of the dignity of his function, and be
deprived as well of all society and friendship, as honor, unless he shall give
abundant satisfaction to God and man, as he shall be commanded by the Bishop;
yet let him give security, that afterward he shall not commit such things. But
if he will purge himself, let him do it by the triple purgation, or according
to the nature of the crime.

An exhortation to Churchmen to live well. 6. And we command, that every one of
all Orders do diligently and holily keep the Religion of his Office; especially
the Servants of God, Bishops, and Abbots, and Monks, and Nuns, and Canons do
bend their minds to their duty, and live according to their Rule; That they
often call upon Christ day and night, and pray for all Christian folk. And we
pray, and teach all Gods Ministers, especially Priests, as they obey God, they
favor chastity, so that they may shun Gods wrath, and avoid the flames of hell.
And certainly they know it is not lawful for them to satisfy their lust to
accompany any woman: And they who will abstain from flesh, and nourish
chastity, shall obtain Gods mercy, and with equal right enjoy a heap of earthly
honor, as though he were a man of free condition. Although this be in the Saxon
in this Chapter, yet both Mr. Lambert and Wheelock in their translations have
placed it in the 7. Chap.
And that every Christian man, for the fear of God, does restrain the unlawful
lusts of the flesh, and obey the commands of Gods law.

Of forbidden Matrimony. Cap. 7.

And we teach, and pray, and command on Gods name, that no Christian man
whatsoever does marry within the sixth degree of his kindred, nor does take to
wife the widow of his kinsman who was within the sixth degree, nor that he
marries any within the like degree to her who was his wife; nor his Gossip, nor
a Vestal Nun, nor one Repudiate, let no Christian man marry. And lastly, he who
shall carefully embrace Gods laws, and study to keep his soul from the flames
of hell, let him not be a follower of Harlots, nor have more wives then one,
and that she be his bewedded wife.

Of paying Tithes. 8.

And let every one, every year, pay justly his dues to God: That is,
Plough-alms, fifteen nights after Easter; the Tithes of young living creatures,
at Whitsuntide; and the Tithes of the Fruits of the earth, at the feast of All
Saints. But if any one will not pay his Tithes after the manner aforesaid, viz.
of the tenth acre of Plough-land, then let the Kings Sheriff, the Bishop, the
Lord of the Soil, and the Priest of the Church meet, and no thank to him,
restore the tenth part to the Church to which it was due, and leave the ninth
to him: As concerning the other eight parts, let the Lord of the Soil have one
half, and the Bishop the other, be he the Kings man, or any Nobleman's.

Of Peter Pence. 9.

And the money due to Rome, is to be paid upon the feast of S. Peter: He who
shall not pay it, shall pay that penny to the Bishop, and thirty pence beside,
and two hundred and twenty shillings to the King.

Of First Fruits. 10.

Let the First Fruits be paid at the feast of S. Martin; and if a man shall
forbear, he shall give them elevenfold to the Bishop, and two hundred and
twenty shillings to the King.

Of the Tithes belonging to the Church of a Freeman, 11.

If a Freeman has a Church upon his Demesnes, which has a Churchyard, then it
shall be in his power to confer upon his Church the third part of his Tithes:
But if there be no Burying place belonging to the Church, then may the Lord of
the Soil give the Priest so much of the nine other parts as shall seem good to
him; and let the Hearth money be first paid to the Church by every Freeman.

Of money for Lights, 12.

And let money be given to Lights, thrice every year: First upon the feast of
Easter, let one halfpenniworth of wax be imposed upon every Hide of land; and
so much again upon the famous feast of All Saints; and the like to be done upon
the feast of the Purification of S. Mary.

Of the money called Symbolum animae, and of Burial. 14.

And it is meet, that after a grave be opened, the Burial-money be forthwith
told out. And if a man bury one dead, out of the bounds of his parish, yet
shall the Burial-money notwithstanding be restored to the Church to which of
right it did belong.

Of Gods right, in observing Festivals and Fasts. 15.

And let every one defend all Gods right, all he can: Let him celebrate
Festival and Fasting-days; also Sunday keep a feast from Saturday noon to
Monday light, and let every man abstain from bodily labor.

Of Sunday. 16.

And we expressly forbid any Market to be kept, or any Convention of the people
to be made upon a Sunday, unless there be urgent necessity: And also let every
man upon a Holiday abstain from hunting, and all bodily labor.

Of Fasts. 17.

And we command that every man observe all these Fasts, whether of the
Ember-weeks, or Lent, or any other Fast, with all godliness; And to fast all
the days of S. Mary, and the feasts of all the Apostles; but of Philip and
James we command not to be kept Fast, because of the Festivity of Easter: And
upon every Friday, if it be not a Festival, fast. And let no man fast from
Easter until Whitsuntide, or from Christmas, until the Octaba's of Epiphany,
unless he were willing, or injoined by the Priest.

Of the times of Vacation. 18.

And we forbid the Ordal upon all Festivals, Ember weeks, and other right
Fasting days, and all Pleadings at Law from the feast of the Anniversary of the
coming of our Lord, until eight days after Epiphany; and from Septuagesima,
until the fifteenth day after Easter. And indeed, the wise men have ordained,
that the Annual feasts of S. Edward and S. Dunstan be religiously observed of
the Englishmen upon the 15. Kalends of April, and 15. Kalends of June. Let
every Christian man, upon these solemn feasts, as is meet, be peaceable and
free from all fraud and malice: And if any one did owe any thing to another,
whether in the nature of pledge, or compensation, let him either repay it
before these days, or soon after.

An Exhortation to Confession and Penance. 19.

And we command for Gods love, that all Christian men understand those things
which are necessary for the good of their souls: For, a time will come, when we
would rather have obeyed Gods will, when we had time given us, then to have
enjoyed all the goods which all men enjoyed in the world. Certainly a reward
will be given to every one of us, according to the deeds of every one: Then woe
be to the miserable, which in their life deserved the eternal punishments of
hell. And therefore, that we may diligently avoid our misdeeds, let us
ingenuously confess our sins, and abstain from all wickedness for the future,
and duly compensate, and command those Laws to others, which shall not be
grievous to obey. This is right Judgment, and with God acceptable; and he is
truly blessed, which by rule shall judge. For, Almighty God, the Creator of all
things, created us all, and with an inestimable price redeemed us, viz. with
his own life poured out upon us.

An exhortation to the Eucharist, and honest life. Cap. 19.

And let every Christian man do all those things which conduce to his health,
and be very careful of his Christendom. And he which will do all things
necessary for the good of his soul, which all ought to do, must understand,
that thrice at least every year he must prepare himself to receive the
Eucharist; and he who trusts that he shall be acceptable, must rightly observe
all his words and deeds, and religiously keep his oath and faith given, and do
justice all he can, in all parts of our Dominion, and diligently follow Gods
justice in word and deed. So then at length all of us shall abundantly obtain
Gods mercy.

Of Fealty to the Lord. 20.

Further we will follow what we teach others, always to be faithful to our
Lord, and defend his honor with all our might, and obey his will: For,
whatsoever we shall do to our Lord in right and virtue, will be to our self a
great ease. For in this thing, God the Creator of all things, and Lord, will be
faithful to us. It is therefore very meet, that Lords govern their servants
with reason.

To worship God from the heart, and faith. 21.

And we greatly admonish all Christian men, that inwardly from their heart they
love God, and that they steadfastly hold Christian religion, and devoutly obey
Gods teachers, and diligently learn Gods law, and contemplate it, and often and
much follow it, to the profit of themselves.

That men thoroughly learn the Lords Prayer, and Apostles Creed. 22.

And we teach, that every Christian man so learn, that at least he thoroughly
understand the right Faith, the Pater noster, and Apostles Creed. For, with one
of these every Christian man does pray to God; and with the other profess a
right faith to him. Christ himself first sang the Lords Prayer, and taught it
his Disciples: And that godly Prayer is made up of seven petitions, which
whosoever shall not counterfeitly, but from his heart speak, speaks with God
himself of all those things which are necessary to this life, and the life to
come. How then can any man with any reason pray to God from his soul, unless he
believes on God, and inwardly has a right faith? For, he that will not learn
these things, after death shall neither partake of any part of rest with
Christians, neither alive shall he be admitted to the Eucharist, nor lastly
shall be deemed worthy the name of a Christian man. Nay, it shall not be lawful
for him to answer for any one in Baptism, or before the Bishop in Confirmation,
unless he shall learn these and thoroughly con them.

That deadly sins be avoided. 23.

And we teach, that every man does always, and carefully avoid all dangerous
and deadly sins; and if he by chance offend by the impulse of the Devil, let
him make amends therefore, by the instruction of the Priest.

And among these, Avoutery. Cap. 24.

And we teach, that every one as long as he lives; does avoid all Avoutry and
forbidden lust, and breach of wedlock.

That men be fearful of the dreadful Judgment. 25.

And we teach, that the fear of God may always so sink into the souls of men,
that days and nights they may fear punishments for their sins, and dread the
day of Judgment, and be affrighted for the torments of Hell, continually think
of the last day of their life.

That Bishops and Priests faithfully perform their duties. 26.

Truly, Bishops are Gods proclaimers, and Interpreters of Gods law: It is their
part openly to set forth the benefit of Divine things, and expose themselves by
well living an example to imitate; and they who will, may give their ears and
mind to these things. He is a bad Keeper, who will not defend his Flock at
least with his voice, if he can do no more, against him who shall go about to
spoil it. And there is one most hurtful Devil of all other, who always
mightily endeavors to bring destruction upon the souls of men. Wherefore it
will be expedient that Pastors watch, ward, and proclaim to the people, what
dangers hang over them from their mighty adversaries, and that they be provided
against them. We call Bishops and Priests, Pastors, to whom it belongs by
teaching and doctrine, to look to, and defend the flock of the Lord, lest at
any time the Wolf enflamed by rage and wickedness, should bite and tear them
with his teeth. But yet if any one will shut his ears against the Divine
precepts and admonitions, be it between God and himself, and let the Name of
God be always praised; To whom be all praise, glory and honor, world without
end, Amen.

Among the Humane Laws (so styled) of Canutus, I find these inserted. Of
Casting out of Witches and Sorcerers. 4.

And we command, that this our Dition be every where purged and cleansed from
all deadly wickedness: And if Witches, Fortune Tellers, secret Murderers, or
any Common Bawds, be any where taken in our Kingdom, let them be banished out
of the confines of it; or in the Kingdom, (unless they become of a better mind,
and mend their manners) let them be put to a vile death. Who will not obey
right, and Divine and Humane Laws (unless they repent, and make abundant
satisfaction) be commanded to be banished, etc.

Of abolishing the Superstition of the Gentiles. 5.

We plainly forbid all Heathenish Adoration. It is barbarous Worship, whether
any one worship Idols, (viz. the Gods of the Gentiles) the Sun, the Moon, Fire,
or Running water, Fountains, or Stones, or any kind of Trees or Wood, or has
observed the superstition of Witches, etc.

Although at any time no leave is given for Injustice, yet without doubt
Iniquity is most forbidden upon Holy days, and in Holy places; and by how much
a man is richer, and placed in dignity above other men, by so much more
abundantly shall he make amends to God and men for wrong done. And how he shall
compensate to God, we refer to the precepts out of Scripture, and to Men, as is
set down in Humane laws.

Of killing a Minister of the Altar. Cap. 36.

If any of them who serve at the Altar, be killed of any man, let that man be
excluded out of the patronage of all Divine and Humane laws; unless together
with banishment, he make abundant satisfaction for that wickedness, and give
satisfaction to the Kindred of him who was killed; or at least, together with
sufficient men who may be sworn, wash out all suspicion of the crime. And this
satisfaction ought to be made to God and men within thirty days, upon the
penalty of the forfeiture of all he has.

Vide Para. 9. of the antecedent Chap. 37.

Vide Para. 10. of the antecedent Chap. 38.

Of Arresting or beating one in Orders. 39.

39. If any one shall imprison, beat, or use a man bound to God ignominiously,
let him make amends as is meet: Let him pay to the Bishop for the dignity of
his order, a mulct by the name of Cleansing the Altar.
(...); and to the Lord or King full satisfaction for breach of the Peace; or
at least wash out the crime with a full and perfect excuse.

Of a man Ordained guilty of Death. 40.

If any one in Holy Orders be guilty of Death, let him be taken and held to
what punishment shall be inflicted upon him by the Bishop.

Of a man condemned, who desires a Confessor. 41.

If any man condemned to death, freely desires a Confessor to confess his sins,
let it be granted him: But if any one shall deny it him, let him pay the King
an hundred and twenty shillings, or at least purge himself from the crime, and
have five men joined with him, and be himself the sixth.

Of observing Sunday and Festivals. 42.

No man, as much as possible can be, condemned for any crime, unless he did
resist or flee, shall be put to death upon a Sunday, but shall be kept bound
until the feast be passed. If any Freeman work upon a Holy day, then let him
stand in the pillory, and give satisfaction to God, as it shall be commanded
him: If a Servant do any work, let him be beaten, or be put into fear of
beating for it. If a Master command his Servant unwilling to work upon a
Festival, let him be fined to his Servant, and the Servant free for the time to
come: And if the Master be a Dane, let him pay the mulct of the Law-breaking;
An Englishman shall be fined according to the nature of the fact, or excuse it.

That men observe Lent and Festivals. 44.

If a man break Lent by Fighting, Marriage, Rapine, or by committing any other
wickedness, let his compensation be double. The like Law is, according to the
nature of the fact, if any of these be committed upon any solemn Festival. And
if any one will purge, let him bring a threefold purgation.

Of deteining the Duties of the Church by force. Cap. 45.

If a Dane shall resist by force any one desiring the rights or duties
belonging to God, let him be punished for breach of the Law; An Englishman
shall be assessed in a deeper mulct, unless he purge himself with eleven men,
and be himself the twelfth man. But if he wound any man, let him make amends
and pay a grievous mulct to the Lord, and let his hands be bored through,
unless he shall redeem them from the Bishop. But if he killed any one, let him
be outlawed, and pursued by all Magistrates with all the harm that they
lawfully may: And if afterward that man so pursued be killed, let it be
confirmed, and unpunished, and no further enquired after.

Of a man breaking Holy Order. 46.

If any man violate his Order or Rule of living, let him be fined according to
the dignity of his Order, or price of his head, for punishment of the breach of
the Law, or forfeit all he has.

Of Repairing the Church. 63.

All men by right ought to use their endeavor to repair the Church.

Of him who keeps a man Excommunicated, or Outlawed. 64.

If any man shall unjustly keep any Fugitive from Gods law, let him be restored
to right, and forgiven those things which did appertain to him, and let him pay
to the King the price of his head: But if any one shall keep and hold any other
excluded from the protection of Divine or Humane laws, he shall endanger
himself, and all he has.

The Conclusion of Canutus his Laws.
Now I beseech all men, and in the name of Almighty God command every man, that
they be truly from their heart converted to God, and with all care and
diligence search out what is to be followed, and what avoided. And truly it
does much conduce to our souls health, that we love God, and hold his precepts
and admonitions, and hear his word by his teachers: For we shall bring forth
these to be seen in that day, wherein God shall come to give judgment upon all
men according to those things they did whilst they lived. And then at length
shall that blessed Keeper bring the Flock committed to his charge, into the
Heavenly kingdom, and the joys of Angels, for those things which he had done in
his life; and also that blessed Flock follow that Pastor, who has wreathed it
out of the hands of the Devil, and give the gain to God. And further we study,
that all men may so agree to please God, that for the time to come we may avoid
the flames of Hellfire. The Interpreters of Gods Law ought often to preach the
benefit of Divine things; and indeed it is their function, and does much
benefit all men to salvation: And all men ought with a good mind diligently to
hear, and have Gods admonitions always fixed in their soul for their profit.
And lastly, that every one, by his words and deeds all he can, holily and
thankfully do well, to the greater amplitude and glory of God his Lord; for so
at length we shall abundantly all of us obtain Gods mercy. Let the name of the
Lord be praised, to whom be laud, honor and glory for ever. God Almighty be
merciful to us all, according to his will. Amen.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by Good King Edovard, Who began to reign Anno Salutis
1042.
Of Clerks, and their Possessions. Cap. 2.

LEt every Clerk, and also Scholars, and all their goods and possessions
wheresoever they be, enjoy the peace of God and his Church.

Of the Times and Days of the Kings Peace. 3.

From the coming of our Lord, until eight days after Epiphany, let the peace of
God and his holy Church be all over our Kingdom; also from Septuagesima, until
eight days after Easter; also from the Ascension of our Lord, until eight days
after Whitsuntide; also all the days in Ember-weeks; also upon every Saturday
from the ninth hour, and all the day following until Monday; also upon the
Vigils of S. Mary, S. Michael, S. John the Baptist, of all the Apostles and
Saints whose solemnities are celebrated by Priests upon Sunday; and All Saints
upon the Kalends of November, always from the ninth hour of the Vigil, and
the following Solemnity. Also in Parishes in which the Dedication is observed;
also in the Parishes of Churches where the proper Feast of the Saint is
celebrated. And if any one will come devoutly to the celebration of the Saint,
he shall enjoy peace going, staying and returning. Also to all Christians going
to Church to pray, be peace in going and returning. In like manner at
Dedications, Synods, to men coming to Chapters, whether they be summoned, or of
themselves have any thing to do, be highest peace. Also if any man
excommunicated, flee to the Bishop for absolution, let him freely, in going and
returning, enjoy the peace of God and his Church. But if any man shall do
otherwise with him, let the Bishop do justice therefore: But if any arrogant
man will not amend for the justice of the Bishop, the Bishop may make the
matter known to the King; and the King may constrain the malefactor to make him
amends whom he has outlawed, viz. first to the Bishop, then to him; and so
they shall be two swords, and the sword shall help the sword.

Of the Justice of the Church. 4.

Wheresoever the Kings Justice is, or before whomsoever Pleas are holden, if
one sent of the Bishops coming there, opens the cause of the holy Church, it
shall first be determined: For it is just that God be every where honored
before others.

Of all Tenants of the Church. 5.

Whosoever shall hold any thing of the Church, or have a mansion upon the
ground of the Church, shall not be compelled to hold Pleas out of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, although he be outlawed, unless (which God forbid) he
shall have default of right in the Court Ecclesiastical.

Of Guilty men fleeing to the Church. 6.

Whosoever, guilty or nocent, shall flee to the Church for protection, after
that he has gotten the entrance of the Church, let him not be apprehended of
any man pursuing him, unless by the Bishop or his Minister; but if in fleeing
he enters into the House or Court of any Priest, let him enjoy the same
security and peace he should have had at the Church, so as the house of the
Priest and his Court stood upon the ground of the Church. Here, if the thief or
stealer be, what he has evil gotten, (if it be at hand) let him restore; but
if he has wholly consumed it, and has wherewith to restore of his own, let
him make full satisfaction for the damage he brought to him who was damnified.
But if, as is usual, the Thief has not wherewith to do it, and by chance has
often gone out of the Church, and Priests houses, having restored the thing
taken away, let him abjure the Province, and not return; and if by chance he
shall return, let no man presume to entertain him, unless he have leave from
the King.

Of breaking the Peace of the Church.
If any one shall violently infringe the Peace of the Church, the Justice Cap.
7.
belongs to the Bishops; but if one guilty in avoiding their Judgment, or
arrogantly contemning it, shall despise it, let the complaint thereof be
brought to the King within forty days, and let the Kings Justice make him give
Security and Pledges (if he can get them) until he first give God, afterward
the Church, satisfaction. But if within one and thirty days, either by his
friends or acquaintance, or by the Justice of the King, he cannot be found out,
the King shall Outlaw him by the word of his own mouth: i. e. he shall be
excluded out of all protection of the King: But if after he shall be found, and
can be retained, let him be restored alive to the King, or his head if he shall
defend himself, Lupinum enim gerit caput, which in English is called (...).
This is the common and general Law concerning all men Outlawed.

Of the Tithes to be restored to the Church, of Sheep and Hoggs. 8.

The tenth sheaf of all kind of corn is due to God, and therefore to be
restored to God: And if any one has a company of Mares, let him restore the
tenth colt to God; he who has but one or two, for every single colt, one
single penny: In like manner, who has many Cowes, the tenth calf; who has but
one or two, for every calf one single halfpeny: and who make Cheese, give to
God the tenth; but if he make none, milk the tenth day. In like manner the tenth
Lamb, the tenth Fleece, the tenth Cheese, the tenth Butter, and the tenth Hogg.

Of Bees.
In like manner the tenth of the profit of Bees; as also of under-Wood, In some
these two Chapters are joined.
of Meadow, and Waters, and Mills, Parks, Warrens, Fishponds, tender Sprouts,
and Gardens, and Merchandise, and all other things which God shall give, the
tenth part is to be restored to him who gave the nine parts together with the
tenth; who shall have detained it, let him be compelled to restitution by the
Justice of the Bishop and King (if need be.) For these things St. Augustine
has Preached, and are granted by the King, Barons, and People; but afterward
by the instinct of the Devil many have detained it, and Priests careless of
growing rich, did not care to take pains to get them, because they had
sufficient means of living: For in many places now there are three or four
Churches, where then there was but only one, and so they began to be
diminished.

Of them who are judged to be brought to Judgment or Water, by the Cap. 9.
Justice of the King.
In that day wherein Judgment ought to be done, let the Minister of the Bishop
and his Clerks come thither, and in like manner the Justice of the King, with
Legal men of that Province, who may see and hear that all things be rightly
done; and whom the Lord by his mercy will save, let them be quit and freely
depart; and whom the iniquity of the fault the Lord shall not condemn, let the
Justice of the King do justice upon them. But the Barons who have their
jurisdiction of their men, let them see that they do so concerning them, as
they incur not displeasure with God, and offend not the King. And if a Suit
does arise concerning men of other Baronies in their Courts, let the Justice of
the King be present, because without it the Suit cannot be determined. If any
of the Barons has not Justice in the Hundred where the Plea shall be holden,
it shall be determined at the next Church where the Judgment of the King shall
be, saving the Right of those Barons.

Of Romescot. 10.

Every one who shall have Thirty pence of current money in his house, of his
own property, (by the Law of England) shall pay a Peter penny; and by the Law
of the Danes, half a Mark. But that penny ought to be summoned upon the Feasts
of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and collected at the Feast which is called To
the Bonds, so that it be not detained beyond that day: If any one shall longer
detain it, let complaint be brought to the justice of the King, because this
penny is the Alms of the King, and it is justice he cause this penny to be
restored, and the forfeiture of the Bishop and King. But if a man has more
houses, let him restore the Peter-penny for that wherein he resides, upon the
feast of Peter and Paul the Apostles.

Of the Office of the King, and of the Right and Appendixes of the 17.
Crown of the Kingdom of Britain.
And the King, because he is the Vicar of the highest King, and to this purpose
ordained, that he may both govern and rule the terrene kingdom and people of
the Lord, and above all things the holy Church, and that he defend the same
from wrong-doers, and destroy and root out workers of mischief.

Besides these, Sir Ed. Coke in Cawdries Case, instances in King Kenulph; for
that King Kenulph by his Letters Patents, with the consent and council of his
Bishops and Senators of his Kingdom, did give to the Monastery of Abingdon in
the County of Berks, and to one Ruchnius then Abbot of the said Monastery, etc.
a certain portion of his Country, etc. and that the said Ruchnius etc. should
be ever free from Ecclesiastical right or jurisdiction, and that the Inhabiters
of it from thenceforth be kept under the yoke of no Bishop or their Officials,
but in all events of things and discussions of causes they be subject to the
Decree of the Abbot of the Monastery aforesaid. And that this Charter was above
Counting to the time Sir Ed. Coke. wrote.
850 years since, which was in the year 755. and after confirmed by Edwin of
Britain, King and Monarch of Englishmen; and this Grant did continue until the
dissolution of the Abbey by Henry the 8.

So that the Kings of this Nation have not only of ancient time been Nursing
fathers to Gods Church, and have exercised their Regal power over the persons
of all their Subjects in all cases; but have even dispensed with, and conferred
Episcopal jurisdiction. But this was only matter of fact, and done but only in
one place; nor was it ever established by a Law, before the Statute of Lollard,
and by Henry the Eight, and the First of Eliz. Yet it was afterward (as shall
appear in the next Chap.) used by diverse Kings, and often adjudged by the
Judges before Henry the Eighth.

CHAP. III.
Ecclesiastical Laws made by William the First, who began to reign in the year
of Christ 1067.
THat Nations and Kingdoms have their origination from God, we Introduction.
have already in its proper place asserted. And that these Kingdoms thus
created by God, have periods, alterations, and conversions set by him, which
cannot be foreseen or prevented by man, is certainly as clear and evident as
the former; and often owned by God himself in Sacred Writ, as well over his own
people, as others. But that therefore any man or men should therefore endeavor
to make alterations in Kingdoms, is like to a man, who becaufe all men
naturally die, thinks he may kill any man, and father the fact upon God. And if
God, even over his own peculiar people, did for the sins of the Kings and
people, especially the Israelites, so often convert the line of the Kings; then
can it not in reason be expected, in this Iron and much more sinful Age, that
God should every where continue a fixed and certain succession of Kings
according to the ordinary course of Nature, viz. Primogeniture: But that
therefore the Pope or any other creature, may arrogate to themselves a right or
power superior to the Law of Nature, is no less absurd, then that a Son may
kill his Father, because all Fathers have periods set by Nature, which they
cannot pass. And that all Subjects do by birth owe a natural subjection to
rightful Princes in whose dominion they were born, which relations can never be
dissolved but by God himself, we have in their proper places demonstrated: Yet
may the exercise of this power be suspended, so long as such Subjects come into
the power of other Princes, whether it be by conquest or otherwise, and do owe
them a temporary obedience, so long as they continue there; and their posterity
born in their dominions, owe such Princes a natural obedience, which can never
be dissolved. And also that since there is no other Judge under Heaven to
decide the controversy of Princes, but their swords, (which can never be
alleged by any Subjects who have Laws to decide their differences) such
decision is good, as to the exercise of any Princes power over all them who
fall under ir, and all Subjects born in such exercise of power or dominion,
become natural Subjects to any Prince who by conquest acquires the dominion of
another; we have also demonstrated in its proper place. Yet whether it were of
old, that Popes did arrogate to themselves this right of deposing Temporal
Princes, or debarring them of their right, which about this time was frequently
asserted by, and practiced by the Popes, and which Pope Alexander was pleased
to confer upon the Conqueror, against all Right and Law, to the manifest
prejudice of Eadgar Athelin) let us see the Epistle of S. Eleutherius to King
Lucius, as it is cited in chap. 17. of S. Edovards Laws.

In the year from the passion of Christ, 169. or 156. our Lord Eleutherius the
Pope, wrote to Lucius King of Britain, at the Petition of the King and Peers of
the Kingdom of Britain. You have required of us, that the Roman Laws and of
Caesar be transmitted to you, which you would use in the Kingdom of Britain. We
can always reprove the Roman Laws, and those of Caesar, but not at all the Law
of God: For ye have by Gods mercy of late received into your Kingdom of Britain
the Law and Faith of Christ, you have of your self in your Kingdom sufficient
Authority, from whence through Gods grace, by the advice of your Kingdom, to
make a Law, and by it; through Gods patience, you shall rule the Kingdom of
Britain. And you are the Vicar of God in your Kingdom, according to the Kingly
Prophet, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness of all the world, and all who
inhabit therein: And again according to the Kingly Prophet, Thou have loved
Justice, and hated iniquity, and therefore thy God has anointed thee with oil
of gladness above thy fellows. And again according to the Kingly Prophet, God
is thy Judgment, etc. Therefore neither the Judgment nor Justice of Caesar,
for they are sons of the King, Christian Nations, and people of the Kingdom,
who live under your Protection and Peace, and Reign, and are according to the
Gospel, Even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, etc. But they are
Nations and your People of the Kingdom of Britain, and who divided, you ought
to congregate, recall, nourish, hold with your hand, protect, and rule into one
for concord and peace, and to the Faith, and to the Law of Christ and his holy
Church, and always to defend it from evil doers, and malicious men, and its
enemies. Woe to the Kingdom whose King is a boy, and whose Princes eat together
in the morning: I Do not call a King because of his small and tender age, but
because of his folly and iniquity, and rage, according to the Prophet King, Men
of blood and deceitful, shall not live out half their days, etc. By eating, we
understand the Pallat, by the Pallat, Luxury, by Luxury, all things filthy and
evil, according to King Solomon, Wisdom shall not enter into the soul of the
evil doer, nor shall dwell in a body subject to sins. Rex dicitur a Regendo,
non a Regno: A King thou shall be so long as thou rulest well, which thing if
thou will not do, the name of King shall not remain in thee, and thou shall
lose the name of King, which God forbid. God Almighty grant to you so to Rule
your Kingdom of Britain, that you may Reign with him for ever, whose Vicar you
are, in the Kingdom aforesaid, who with the Father and Son, etc.

Of the Right and Ecclesiastical freedom of Asylum's. Cap. 1.
That is to say, Peace to the holy Church. Of whatsoever forfeiture any one is
guilty this time, and he can come to the holy Church, let him have peace of
life and member; and if any one has set his hand against that which the
Mother Church shall require, whether it be an Abbey, or Church of Religion, let
him restore that which he has taken out, and one hundred shillings for
forfeiture; and concerning the Mother-Parish-Church twenty shillings; and
concerning a Chapel ten shillings. And according to the peace of the King, in
the Laws of the Mercians, he shall make amends with En perchen^la^*
one hundred shillings; accordingly as of Heinefare, and prepensed lying in
wait.

Of Peter Pence, or Romescot. Cap. 18.
A Freeman who has Field-Beasts valued at thirty pence, shall pay a
Peter-peny. For four pence which the Lord shall give, all his Borderers, and
his Boner, and his Servants be quit. A Burger who has of his proper goods so
much as shall be esteemed half a Mark, let him pay a Peterpeny. He who in the
Law of the Danes is a Freeman, and has field-cattel which are valued worth
half a Mark in silver, ought to give a penny to St. Peter, and for that penny
shall all be quit who reside in his Demains.

Of them who do not pay the Roman Tribute, or of St. Peter. Cap. 20.
Who shall deny the penny of St. Peter, the penny let him pay by the Justice of
the Church, and thirty pence forfeiture, and if he will be impleaded concerning
it by the Justice of the King, let him forfeit to the Bishop thirty pence, and
forty shillings to the King.

Of Religion and the public Peace. 51.
First of all we Ordain above all things, That one God be worshipped all over
our Kingdom, and the one Faith of Christ be always kept inviolate, etc.

The Laws are Translated out of the Original, set forth by Mr. Abraham Whelock
in his Appendix to the History of Bid, from page 150. to 107.

Sir Ed. Coke in Caudrys Case, cites a quare Impedit, 7 Ed. 3. tit. 19. where
it is agreed that no man can make an appropriation of any Church having cure of
souls, being a thing Ecclesiastical, and to be made by some person
Ecclesiastical, but he that has Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; but William the
first, of himself, without any other (as King of England) made appropriation of
Churches with cure to Ecclesiastical persons, wherefore it does follow he had
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Here is nothing but argumentum a facto ad jus, and
a man may as well infer, that Saul, Jeroboam, and Azariah did offer sacrifice
and burn incense, and therefore they had Sacerdotal power in them; or that King
John did give the Crown, and received it again from him, and therefore the
Crown of England is holden of the Pope.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by Henry the first, Who began to Reign in the year of
Christ 1100.
THese at last are the happy joys of the long wished for peace and liberty
Proem.
by which the glorious Caesar Henry does shine forth to his whole kingdom, in
Divine and Secular Laws, written Institutes and Exhibitions of good Works,
Moderate, Just, Valiant, Prudent, whom God may make to command with happy
auspices, and healthful prosperity of body and mind, with his famous wife Maud
the second, and their children for ever, and the everlasting peace of this
Nation.

His Epistle to all his Leigmen. 1.

Henry by the Grace of God King of Englishmen, to all Barons, and his Leigmen,
French, English, health. Know that I by Gods mercy and the Common Counsel [and
consent] of the Barons of the Kingdom of England, am Crowned King of the
Kingdom aforesaid; and because the Kingdom was oppressed by unjust exactions,
I, in respect of God, and the love which I have toward you [all] first of all
make the Church of God free, so that I will neither sell, nor let to farm, nor
after the death of an Archbishop or Bishop, or Abbot, will take any thing of
the Demesns of the Church, or her men, until the successor be come in, etc.

Of the propriety of Causes. Cap. 5.

In all Causes Ecclesiastical and Secular, legally, and in order to be handled,
some are Accusers, some Defenders, some are Witnesses, some are Judges: In
every discussion of honesty, fitting men are to be joined together, and that
without any exaction, until the quality of the Causes, and the intention of the
Accused, the manner of Witnesses, and election of Judges be weighed with
upright scrutiny: Let there be no foreign Judgments, nor celebrated by their
improper Judge in place or time, nor in a doubtful case, or the party accused
being absent, the sentence being pronounced notandum, that for all, if the
accused had competent warning, and lawful leave of answering and defending, he
be not denied or impleaded, or outlawed, or circumvented by some stealth, or
judged by deceit: If he be satisfied in the Witnesses, Judges, and Persons. If
he consent to the Judges, or hurt, or contradict. It is not altogether so in
Ecclesiastical business as Secular: in Secular business, after that any is
called, shall come, and begin to plead in the Court, it is not lawful to go
back before the Cause be determined, although they shall agree; but in
Ecclesiastical business it is lawful to go back in the Cause aforesaid. If a
man suspect a Judge, or think himself oppressed; surely Judges ought not to be
so, nisi quos impetitus Elegerit: Neither may any one be heard, or give
judgment before that they be chosen, and he who refuses to consent to the
elected, let no man communicate with him, until he obey; but if in judgment
there arises dissension among the parties, of which a strife comes forth, let
the sentence of the more prevail. It is Enacted in the Cause of Faith, or of
any Ecclestastical Order, he ought to judge, who neither takes reward, nor is
of another Law, and will do nothing without an accuser: For God and our Lord
Jesus Christ did know Judas to be a Thief; but because he was not accused,
therefore he was not rejected, and whatsoever he acted among the Apostles, for
the dignity of his Office, remained firm: As also Clerks ought not to receive
Laiks Accusers, so ought not Laics to receive Clerks to be Accusers of Clerks
in their Accusations and Informations; and Witnesses ought to be legitimate,
and present without any infamy or suspicion, or manifest spot, because they
cannot rightly accuse Priests, who cannot be Priests, nor of their Order; nor
is it needful to Judge a man before he has had lawful Accusers present, and
accepts a place of defense to wash out his crimes. And it is our pleasure, as
often as many crimes are objected to Clerks by Accusers, and they cannot make
good one of the first of which they are accused, they shall not be admitted to
the rest. And a Bishop shall not be condemned, unless by seventy two Witnesses,
nor the Archbishop be judged of any. A Presbyter-Cardinal Note the pre-eminence
of a Bishop in England at this time, above a Cardinal.
shall not be condemned, unless by forty four Witnesses: a Deacon-Cardinal
shall not be condemned, unless by twenty six Witnesses, nor a Subdeacon under
seven; nor let the greater despair for the force of the lesser men; and there
always the Cause may be Pleaded, where the Crime is admitted. If a man
stricken, will, he may plead his cause before his Judge; and if he will not
before his Judge, he may hold his peace; and as for men stricken, as often as
they desire respit, let it be granted: And every man which objects a crime, let
him write that he will prove it; and if before he be changed, he will not
follow, he is convinced, no crime is to be accounted: But if he will prosecute,
if he shall not prove what he objects, let him undergo the penalty which he
brought; the Apostle says, Against a Presbyter a writing is not to be received
without two or three approved witnesses; how much more against Bishops, if
these things be observed of Presbyters, and other faithful men? If any one will
accuse any of the Clerks in an accusation of Fornication, according to the
precept of St. Paul, two or three testimonies are required from him; but if he
cannot prove what he says, by the testimonies given, the accuser may take the
excommunication of the accused; and let no man believe him concerning himself,
declaring upon another crime; but a confession extorted by fear or fraud, is
invalid. Let a Priest beware, that whosoever confesses his sins to him, he tell
no body of them, because he confesses to him, not to his neighbors, or
strangers; which thing if he do, let it be set down, and repent all the days of
his life ignobly in Pilgrimage. And if at any time a Bishop says any man has
confessed to him any proper crime, and he deny it, let not the Bishop think it
does not belong to his injury, that he is not believed for himself alone, and
if for scruple of his conscience, he says he will not communicate to him;
oftentimes good men are silent, and suffer the ill things which they have
known, because they are forsaken in their documents, and cannot allow of their
Judges; for although they are true, yet are they not believed of the the Judge,
unless they be proved by certain appearances: But we cannot at all forbid men
from the Communion, although this Prohibition be not mortal, but medicinal,
unless men confess of their own accord, and be convicted by judgment: From
hence it is such a man is to be named, as the Apostle says, who confesses, or
is convinced by ordinary judgment; but if by judgment it cannot be taken
away, let it rather be tolerated, lest some man in perversely avoiding ill men
departing from the Church, should go before them to Hell: The Communion does
not defile any man by partaking the Sacraments, but the confession of their
deeds: other men's sins hurt not him who lives well in the Church. Of habit and
clothing we read nothing commanded by God; what things are for pomp, are
forbidden: And if you shall ask, Can thou not have an humble heart in a proud
dressing (as Hester) God not only in his anger, but also pity, overthrows
sinners.

And they are overthrown two ways: either as the Sodomites, where the men were
punished for their sins; or as the Ninivites, where the very sins of the men
were punished and destroyed; and all men are alike to beloved, but you cannot
alike profit with all; these are rather to be advised with, who for the
opportunity of time and places, and of other things, are more strictly joined
together: To thee either is guilty, both he which hides the truth, and he which
tells a lie, because this will not profit, and that desires to hurt; arrogance
is not so to be shunned that truth should be left. He that at any time shall
accuse a Priest before friendly admonition to his Judges, or Secular Judges,
let him be excommunicated. If a Bishop shall have strayed from the faith, or
secretly admonished of his subjects, has appeared incorrigible, then let him
be accused at the Archbishops, or Apostolical seat; for his other actions he
ought rather to be tolerated then corrected. If any Bishop be accused for
certain crimes, let him be heard of all the Bishops in his Province, not
condemned, nor judged, before he has lawful accusers present, and of his
Province, not aliens, and he may not refuse Judges elected by him, unless there
be an Appeal, which thing is lawful for them designed for punishment; but no
affliction, or the keeping the thing detained, ought to injure the Appellant,
or the vitiated Cause aided by remedy of the Appeal: Some men have demanded a
year and six months to be granted for filling up the Machinations of unskilful
men, and to prepare their Reasons, and confirm Witnesses, and seek Counsel,
some men a year, in which time most men agree; but less then six months cannot
be found. But if Bishops or Clerks were ejected by force or fear, or first
dispoyled of their goods, let all their goods be legally restored to them, and
have so much time as appeared they were disseised before that they be
Canonically called in to Judgment. Gregory in the Decrees. A Presbyter or
Deacon, or any Clerk accused by the people, if the Witnesses who should prove
the truth, were not certain of the crime committed, let an Oath be in the mean,
and bring him for a witness of the purity of his innocence, to whom all things
are naked and open. Also this thing St. Sixtus the Pope remembers he had done
to one Bassus, although made guilty by much examination, he could sufficiently
evade the suspicion, and avoid the emulation; Jerome upon Jeremy lib. primo, not
giving this to them who would not, or of their own accord, had not made choice
of making a form. An Oath ought to have companions, Truth, Justice, and
Judgment; if those things be wanting, it is not an Oath, but perjury: For if
any one by compulsion be compelled to abjure that thing, which for many years
he has quietly held, the perjury shall not be by him swearing, but by him
compelling: It makes not a man guilty, where the mind is not guilty. Let no
man circumvent or deceive himself. He who by a false stone swears, is perjured:
by whatsoever art of words any one swears, God so takes, as he to whom men
swear, does understand. But without doubt it is a less evil to swear truly by a
false God, then to swear falsely by a true God; for by how much more that by
which men swear is more holy, so much more punishale is perjury: Who exacts an
Oath, it is much to the purpose, if he knows that to be a false Oath, or not
knows or knows, and gives sentence; the Laws are mine, as my faith stands; I
dare not say it is no sin, yet it is a humane temptation; if he knows him to
have done it, and compels him to swear, it is Homicide. Siquis juret falsumte
sciente, si te non audierit utrum sit procedendus, si proditus and periculum
mortis incurrat, difficillima question est cui plus noceat, illi cui juratur an
Sacerdoti. Mihi videtur quod ille cui magis prodest vel obest; veritatem jurare
necessitate cogente non est peccatum. An Oath is not to be kept when bad, it is
unadvisedly pronounced. The Oath of a son and daughter, the father not knowing
it, and Vows of a Monk, the Abbot not knowing of it, and the Oaths of a child
are void.

Of the Pleas of the Church belonging to the King. Cap. 11.

There are some Pleas of Christianity, in which the King has part, in this
manner: If the King should suffer, that he who in the Church has committed
Homicide, let him come to amendment. First let him restore to the Bishop and
King, the price of his Nativity, and so he may inlaw himself; and then let him
dispose five pounds for the peace of the Church, and seek to be reconciled to
the Church, as belongs to it, and fully make amends, both to Kindred and
Donation. If any man detains the right Tenth, let the Sheriff of the Bishop and
King, and of the Lord of the Ground go with the Priest, and without thanks take
away, and restore to the Church what shall belong to it, and leave the Ninth
part to him who would not pay the Tenth; let them divide the rest into two
parts, let the Lord have one half, the Bishop the other, be he a Kings man or
another, Romfeath ought to be restored upon the Feast of St. Peter in bonds; he
who shall keep it beyond that time, let him restore that penny to the Bishop,
and thirty pence, let him add to the King 50 s. Who shall keep Cherisceat
beyond the Feast of St. Martin, let him restore it to the Bishop, and pay
eleven fold, and to the King 50 sol. Who married, shall commit adultery, let
the King or Lord of him have the superior, the Bishop the inferior: Who shall
commit perjury upon holy things, Laying his hand upon the book, I think.
let himlose his hand, or half his were, (viz. half the price of his head,) and
this is common to his Lord, and the Bishop. Who shall bear false witness, let
him not afterward be admitted for witness, but restore to the King, or the
Lord of the Soil Helfeng'. Neither Mr. Lambert nor Whelock give any
construction of Helfeng, that I can find.
Who shall kill a man in Orders, or malign him, let him make him amends as is
right, and the amends of the Altar according to the dignity of his Order; to
the King or Lord, sufficient breach of the peace, or deny it with full
purgation [Plena lada neget.] If any man guilty of death desires confession,
let it never be denied him; but if any man shall do it, let him pay the King
one hundred and twenty shillings, or swear with five men that he did it not. If
a freeman work upon Holy days, let him amend his helfeng, and at least
diligently make composition with the Lord. If any man by force holds the
Rectitudes of God, [Rectitudines Dei] let a Dane pay lahite, an Englishman,
full witam, or deny it with eleven; Or twelve in Mr. Seldens Ms. and Mr.
Whelocks.
if he should there wound any man, let him amend this, and restore full witam,
and redeem his hand of the Bishop, or lose it: If he kill a man, let him be
outlawed, and every man that desires right, follow him with clamor; if it comes
to pass that he be killed by this, that he resisted right, if this thing be
verified, let him be unrevenged. He who shall make a breach of his Order, let
him amend it according to the dignity of the Order, wera, Wita, Lahilita,
Lastita, Mr. Seldens and Mr. Whelocks Ms.
and with all mercy. Let every widow be without a husband twelve months,
afterward she may choose whom she will; and if within a year she take a
husband, let her lose her Morgangifan, Dower.
and all her money which she had from her first husband, and let her husband
forfeit to the King the price of his head, or to whom the King shall grant it.
If a man unjustly hold a fugitive of God, let him restore him to right, and pay
to him whose he shall be, and satisfy the King according to Legergild. If any
man has a man excommunicated, or keep him outlawed, and all his forgiveness,
and all amendment, commonly made better by Christ and the King, is utterly
lost, wheresoever the Law of God shall be refused to be justly kept, according
to the word of the Bishop, and it will be expedient that he be compelled by the
Secular power. Because Justice and Secular distriction are necessary for the
most part in Divine Laws and Secular Institutes, for that otherwise many men
cannot be recalled from their ill ways, many will not be inclined to the
worship of God, and observance of the Law, from whence by the much infesting of
ill men, it is provided for the profitable dispensation of peace, that the more
weighty pleas, and things more to be punished, be brought to Justice alone, or
the mercy of the Prince, that pardon may be more abundantly had to men desiring
it, and punishment to sinners; but in causes which may be amended, for the
compassion of the Saints it is permitted, that the earthly Lords, by their
leave, may presume to take pecunial amends according to the Law of the Country.

Of the kinds of Causes. Cap. 21.

There are also some kinds of Causes put before, as we have said, to be more
freely expedited, in the amendment of which, the King does more particularly
communicate wheresoever they are done in Divine or Secular things over Kings
men, and Ecclesiastical, and of Barons men, and he has totally or particularly
Or, acephalos.
acefalos, and pauperes, sive socham; of which are Adultery, Fornication,
homicide in a Church, breach of the peace, or order, or Christianity or
Legality, if it be needful to be done by the Secular power, that right may be
done.

De Christiana consuetudine locutionum secundum quod sunt. 64.

Toward the latter end interline 25. and end, A Priest who leads a regular
life, in a simple accusation, may swear alone, in a threefold, with two of his
Order; a Deacon in a simple compellation, may accompany himself with two
Deacons, in a threefold with six. A Country Priest may purge himself as a
regular Deacon; a Priest accused by his Bishop or Archdeacon, may swear himself
the sixth of lawful Priests, as they are prepared at Mass.

Of killing a Minister of the Altar. 66.

If any should kill a Minister of the Altar, let him be outlawed before God and
man, unless he repent with worthy satisfaction, and justly compound with his
parents, or thoroughly deny it with purgation of his head, Werilada.
and begin this within thirty nights before God and man, above all he has. If
any Minister of the Altar kill any man, or if it be extraordinarily declared by
bad actions, let him be both deprived of his Order, and go on Pilgrimage as the
Pope shall enjoin him, and amend the work: But if he will purge himself, he may
do it triply, but unless he shall begin this within thirty nights, let him be
outlawed before God and men. If any man any ways afflict any man Ordained, with
stripes, or bonds, let him make him amends as is meet, and to the Bishop the
amends of the Altar according to the dignity of his Order, to the King or
Lords, sufficient breach of the Kings peace, Mundbrecho.
or deny it with sufficient purgation. Plenlada.
If any man condemned to death, desires to be confessed, let it never be denied
him; but if any man should deny him, let him give the King in satisfaction one
hundred shillings, or swear with six men that he did not do it. If any man by
force takes away Gods rights, let a Dane amend with Lah sliht, full Wytam with
an Englishman, or thus deny it, let him take eleven, and he be the twelfth, etc.

Of Homicides by men Ordained. Cap. 73.

If a Bishop kill a man, let it be recorded, and let him repent twelve years,
seven years in bread and water, and five let him fast three days in a week, and
on others let him use common sustenance. If a Priest kill a man, or a Monk, let
him lose his Order, and repent ten years, six in bread and water, and four let
him fast three days in a week, on others let him use his meat. If a Presbyter
wound a man, let him fast one hundred day. If a Deacon kill a man, let him be
degraded, and repent seven years, four in bread and water, and three let him
fast three days in a week, upon other let him use common meat. If a Clerk shall
kill a man, let him repent six years, four in bread and water, two years, three
days in the week. If a Laick kill a man, let him repent five years, three in
bread and water, and two years let him fast three days in the week. If a man
kill a man in Orders, or his neighbor, let him depart out of his Country, and
go to Rome, and make the Pope and his Council; let him in like manner repent of
Adultery, or Fornication, or lying with a Nun.

These Laws are likewise set out by Mr. Abraham Whelock in the Appendix to his
History of Bid.

Sir Ed. Coke, Candrys Case, says Henry the first, did Ordain Anno 16. Regni
sui, as well in regard of his Ecclesiastical as Regal power, that whenever
the Abbot of Reading shall die, that all the Possessions do remain entire and
free. But how this should make any thing for the Kings Ecclesiastical Right in
all Cases I do not understand; for this Ordinance was only concerning the
Possessions of the Abbey, and it is no Question but all the Bishoprics as well
as Abbeys, were originally of the Kings foundation, and it appears by the
Margent, that the King was the particular Founder of this Abbey; what then
hinders but that the King might dispose of the Revenues as he should think fit,
without having any Ghostly power in him.?

Ecclesiastical Laws made by Henry the third.
Magna Charta.
FIrst we have granted to God, and by this our present Chapter have confirmed
Cap. 1.
for us and our heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall be free; and
shall enjoy all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable.

Reserves to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Templars, Hospitalers,
Cap. 38. According to Sir Edward Coke, Inst. 2. yet the Statute-book in large
divides this Act but into thirty seven Chapters.
and all persons Ecclesiastical; all their free Liberties which they have had
in time passed: and all these Customs and Liberties aforesaid, which we have
granted to be holden within this Realm; as much as appertains to us and our
heirs, we shall observe. And all men as well Spiritual as Temporal (as much as
in them is) shall observe the fame against all persons likewise. And for this
our Gift and Grant of these Liberties, and of other contained in our Charter of
Liberties of our Forest, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Freeholders, and other our Subjects have given to us the fifteenth
part of their movables; and we have granted to them on the other part, that
neither we nor our heirs, shall procure or do any thing, whereby the Liberty in
this Charter contained shall be infringed or broken: And if any thing be
procured by any person, contrary to the premises, it shall be of no force nor
effect.

In the Reign of Hen. 3. Cawdries Case. 3 H. 3. tit. Proh. 13. 4 H. 3. etc.

In all the time of Henry 3. and his Progenitors Kings of England, and ever
since, if any man did sue before any Judge Ecclesiastical within the Realm, for
any thing whereof that Court by allowance and custom had not any lawful
cognizance, the King did ever by his Writ under the Great Seal prohibit them to
proceed. Answ. It is true indeed, that not only Probate of Testaments, but
Cognizance of Tithes, Granting of Letters of Administration, Mortuaries,
Pensions, Reparation of Churches, do not belong to Ecclesiastical cognizance by
any Divine positive institution, but by allowance and custom of England: And if
all Customs suppose some Grant originally from Supreme humane Powers, then what
hinders but that the King might prohibit any Judge Ecclesiastical within the
Realm, for any thing whereof that Court by allowance and custom had not lawful
conusance? for, Cujus est velle, ejus est nolle. And if the suggestion made to
the Plea.
King, whereupon the Prohibition was grounded, were after found untrue, then
the King by his Writ of Consultation under the Great Seal, did allow and permit
them to proceed. Also in all the Reign of H. 3. and his Progenitors Kings of
England, if any Issue were joined upon Loyalty of Marriage, General Bastardy,
or such like, the King did ever write to the Bishop of the Diocese, as Mediate
Officer and Minister of his Court, to certify the Loyalty of the Marriage,
Bastardy, or such like: All which prove that those Courts were under the Kings
jurisdiction and commandment.

It is true, that not only all Courts, and planting of Christianity, were
originally by the Kings command or permission, but the persons of all men
within the Realm are in his power: And Marriage, and Bastardy being so
essential, and whereupon the strength of men's estates and inheritances do
depend, what hinders the King to write to the Bishop, to certify the Loyalty
of the Marriage? And if it pleases him to do it as his mediate officer, who
shall contradict is? Well, let it be granted, the Kings of England, in cases of
Bastardy and Loyal Matrimony, have written to the Bishop of the Diocese as his
mediate officer, yet it will not follow that the Bishop is the Kings mediate
officer in all things and cases which relate to his Episcopal function and
jurisdiction.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by Edward the First.
THe King wills that the peace of the holy Church be maintained in Stat.
West. an. 3. Ed. 1. 1275.
all points, and that Religious Houses shall not be overcharged, nor any
Purveyance be made of any Prelate, without the owners consent. They who shall
offend, and be thereof attainted, shall be committed to the Kings prison, and
after shall make fine and be punished according to the quantity and manner of
the trespass, and after as the King in his Court shall think fit, etc.

It is provided also, That when any Clerk is taken for guilty of felony, Cap. 1.
and is demanded by the Ordinary, he shall be delivered to him according to the
privilege of the holy Church, on such peril as belongs to it after the
custom aforetimes used. And the King admonishes the Prelates, and enjoineth
them upon the faith that they ow to him, and for the common profit and peace of
the Realm, that they which be indicted of such offenses by solemn Inquest of
lawful men in the Kings Court, in no manner shall be delivered without due
purgation, so that the King shall not need to proide any other remedy therein.

The Statute of Circumspecte agatis, made 13 Ed. 1. 1285.

Certain Cases wherein the Kings Prohibition does not lie. Cap. 1.

The King to his Judges sends greeting. Use your selves circumspectly in all
matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy, not punishing them if
they hold plea in Court Christian of such things as be merely Spiritual, that
is to wit, of Penance injoined by Prelates for deadly sin, of Fornication,
Avowtry, and such like, for the which sometimes corporal penance, and sometime
pecuniary is enjoined, specially if a Freeman be convict of such things. As
also Prelates do punish for leaving the Churchyard unclosed, or for that the
Church is uncovered, or not conveniently decked; in which cases none other
penance can be enjoined but pecuniary.

Item, If a Parson demand of his Parishioners, Oblations or Tithes due and
accustomed; or if any Parson do sue against another Parson for Tithes greater
or smaller, so that the fourth part of the value of the benefits be not
demanded.

Item, If a Parson demand Mortuaries, in places where a Mortuary has been used
to be given.

Item, If a Prelate of a Church, or a Patron demand of a Parson a Pension due
to him; All such demands are to be made in a Spiritual Court. And for laying
violent hands on a Clerk, and in case of Defamation, it has been granted
already that it shall be tried in a Spiritual Court, when money is not
demanded, but a thing done for punishment of sin, and likewise for the breaking
of an Oath. In all cases afore-rehearsed, the Spiritual Judge shall have power
to take knowledge, notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition.

Statutum de asportatis Religiosorum, made Anno 35. Ed. 1. 1307.
Of late it came to the knowledge of our Lord the King, by the grievous
complaint of the Honorable persons, Lords, and other Noblemen of his Realm,
That whereas Monasteries, Priories, and other Religious Houses were founded to
the honor and glory of God, and the advancement of the Holy Church, by the King
and his Progenitors, and by the said Noblemen and their Ancestors, and a very
great portion of Lands and Tenements have been given by them to the said
Monasteries, Priories, and Houses, and the Religious men serving God in them,
to the intent that Clerks and Laymen might be admitted in such Monasteries,
Priories, and Religious Houses, according to their sufficient ability, and that
sick and feeble men might be maintained, Hospitality, Almsgiving, and other
charitable deeds might be done, and that in them prayers might be said for the
souls of the said Founders and their heirs: The Abbots, Priors, and Governors
of the said Houses, and certain Aliens their Superiors, as the Abbots and
Priors of Cistercienses, and Promonstratenses, and of the Order of S. Augustine
and S. Benedict, and many more of other Religion and Order, have at their own
pleasures set diverse insupportable tallages, payments and impositions uyon
every of the said Monasteries and Houses in subjection unto them in England,
Ireland, Scotland and Wales, without the privity of our Lord the King and his
Nobility, contrary to the laws and customs of the said Realm; and thereby the
number of the said Religious persons, and other servants in the said Houses and
Religious places being oppressed by such tallages, payments and impositions,
the service of God is diminished, Alms be not given to the poor, the sick and
feeble; the healths of the living, and the souls of the dead be miserably
defrauded; Hospitality, almsgiving, and other godly deeds do cease. And so that
which in times past was charitably given to godly uses, and to the increase of
the service of God, is now converted to an evil end; by permission whereof
there grows great scandal to the people, and infinite losses and disheritances
are like to ensue to the Founders of the said Houses, and their Heirs, unless
speedy and sufficient remedy be provided to redress so many and grievous
detriments.

Wherefore our Lord the King, considering that it would be very prejudicial to
him and his people, if he should any longer suffer so great losses and injuries
to be winked at: And therefore being willing to maintain and defend the
Monasteries, Priories, and other Religious houses erected in his Kingdom, and
in all Lands subject to his dominion, and from henceforth to provide sufficient
remedy to reform such oppressions, as he is bound: By the counsel of his Earls,
Barons, Great men, and other Nobles of his Kingdom, in his Parliament holden at
Westminster in the 35. year of his reign, has ordained and enacted,

Religious persons shall send nothing to their Superiors beyond the Sea.
That no Abbot, Prior, Master, Warden, or any other Religious person of
whatsoever condition, state or religion he be, being under the Kings power or
jurisdiction, shall by himself, or by merchants or others, secretly or openly,
by any device or means, carry or send, or by any other means cause to be sent
any Tax imposed by the Abbots, Priors, Masters or Wardens of Religious houses
their Superiors, or assessed amongst themselves, out of the kingdom and his
dominion, under the name of a rent, tallage, or any kind of imposition, or
otherwise by way of exchange, mutual sale, or other contract, however it may be
termed. Neither shall depart into any other country for visitation, or upon any
other color, by that means to carry the goods of their Monasteries and Houses
out of the Kingdom and Dominion aforesaid. And if any will presume to offend
this present Statute, he shall be grievously punished according to the quality
of his offense, and according to his contempt of the Kings prohibition.

No Impositions shall be taxed by Priors Aliens.
Moreover, our Lord the King does inhibit all and singular Abbots, Priors,
Masters and Governors of Religious houses and places, being Aliens, to whose
authority, subjection and obedience, the Houses of the same Orders in his
kingdom and domion be subject; that they do not at any time hereafter impose,
or by any means assess any tallages, payments, charges, or other burdens
whatsoever, upon the Monasseries, Priories, or other Religious houses in
subjection to them (as is aforesaid) and that upon pain of all they have, or
may forfeit.

By whom the Common Seal of an Abbey shall be kept, and how used.
And further, our Lord the King has ordained and established, that the Abbots
of the Orders of Cisterciensis, and Promonstratensis, and other Religious
Orders, whose Seal has heretofore been used to remain only in the custody of
the Abbot, and not of the Covent; shall hereafter have a Common Seal, and that
shall remain in the custody of the Prior of the Monastery or House, and four of
the most worthy and discreet men of the Covent of the same House, to be laid up
in safe keeping under the Private Seal of the Abbot of the same House: So that
the Abbot or Prior which does govern the House, shall be able of himself to
establish nothing, though heretofore it has been otherwise used. And if it
fortune hereafter, that writings of Obligations, Donations, Purchases, Sales,
Alienations, or of any other Contracts, be sealed with any other Seal then such
a Common Seal kept as is aforesaid, they shall be adjudged void and of no force
in Law. But it is not the meaning of our Lord the King, to exclude the Abbots,
Priors, and other Religious Aliens, by the Ordinances and Statutes aforesaid,
from executing the office of Visitation in his Kingdom and Dominion; but they
may visit at their pleasures by themselves or others the Monasteries and other
places in his Kingdom and Dominion in subjection to them, according to the duty
of their office, in these things only that belong to Regular observation, and
the discipline of their Order. Provided, that they which shall execute this
office of Visitation, shall carry, or cause to be carried out of his Kingdom or
Dominion, none of the goods or things of such Monasteries, Priors, and Houses,
saving only their reasonable and competent charges.

Stat. Ne Rector prosternat arbores in Caemiterio, made 35 Ed. 1. Anno Dom.
1307. In what cases, and by whom, Trees may be felled in a Churchyard.
Because we do understand, that controversies do ofttimes grow between Parsons
of Churches and their Parishioners, touching Trees growing in the Churchyard,
both of them pretending that they do belong unto themselves: We have thought
good rather to decide this controversy by writing then by Statute. Forasmuch
as a Churchyard that is dedicated, is the soil of a Church, and whatsoever is
planted belongs to the soil, it must needs follow, that those Trees which be
growing in the Churchyard, are to be reckoned amongst the goods of the Church,
the which Laymen have no authority to dispose; but, as the holy Scripture does
testify, the charge of them is committed only to Priests to be disposed of.
And yet seeing those Trees be often planted to defend the force of the wind
from hurting of the Church; We do prohibit the Parsons of the Church, that they
do not presume to fell them down unadvisedly, but when the Chancel of the
church does want necessary reparations: Neither shall they be converted.

In the Reign of Edward the First.
A Bull of Excommunication brought by one Subject against another, 30 E. 3. li.
Ass. Pl. 19, etc.
was adjudged by the Common law, Treason against the King, his crown and
dignity.

Edw. 1. seized the lands of the Archbishop of York, because he refused Par. 2.
19. E. 1. Quare non admisit.
to admit his Clerk, but pleaded that the Bishop of Rome long time before
provided to the said Church.

The King and his Council did not receive the constitution of the Bishop Para.
3. Stat. de Biga. 4 Ed. 1.
of Rome at Lions, which excluded men twice married, or Bigami, from all
privileges of Clergy.

It was declared, that the holy Church of England was founded in the Stat. 25
Ed. 1. Carlisle.
state of Prelacy within this Realm of England, by the King and his
progenitors; And that the Bishop of Rome usurping the seigniory of such
Benefices, etc. that the said oppressions, grievances and damages in this
Realm, from thenceforth shall not be suffered.

Articuli Cleri, made at Lincoln, Anno 9 E. 2. and Anno Dom. 1315.
The King to all whom etc. sends greeting. Understand ye, that whereas of
late in times of our Progenitors sometimes Kings of England, in diverse their
Parliaments, and likewise after that we had undertaken the governance of the
Realm, in our Parliaments many Articles containing diverse grievances (committed
against the Church of England, the Prelates and Clergy) were propounded by the
Prelates and Clerks of our Realm, and further great instance was made, that
convenient remedy might be provided therein: And of late in our Parliament
holden at Lincoln the ninth year of our reign, we

No Prohibition shall be granted where Tithes be demanded, but where
First, whereas Laymen do purchase Prohibitions generally upon Tithes,
Obventions, Oblations, Mortuaries, Redemption of penance, violent laying hands
on Clerks or Coverts, and in cases of Defamation, in which cases Spiritual
penance ought to be injoined: The King does answer to this Article, That in
Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Mortuaries, (when they are propounded under
these names) the Kings prohibition shall hold no place, although for the long
withholding of the same, the money may be esteemed at a sum certain. But if a
Clerk or a Religious man do fell his Tithes being gathered in his barn, or
otherwhere, to any man for money, if the money be not demanded before a
Spiritual Judge, the Kings Prohibition shall lie; for by the sale, the
spiritual goods are made temporal, and the Tithes are turned into chattels.
Regist. fol. 34. 39. v. N. B. f. 3032. Fitz. N. B. fo. 40, etc. and Rast. pla.
fo. 484, etc.

Debate upon the right of Tithes exceeding the fourth part. Enjoining
Also if debate do arise upon the right of Tithes, having his original from the
right of Patronage, and the quantity of the same Tithes do come unto the fourth
part of the goods of the Church, the Kings Prohibition shall hold place, if the
case come before a Judge Spiritual. Also if a Prelate enjoin a penance
pecuniary to a man for his offense, and if it be demanded, the Kings
Prohibition shall hold place: But if Prelates enjoin a penance corporal, and
they which be so punished will redeem upon their own accord such penances by
money, if money be demanded before a Judge Spiritual, the Kings prohibition
shall hold no place.

Laying violent hands upon a Clerk. Excommunication for
Moreover, if any lay violent hands upon a Clerk, the amends for the Peace
broken shall be before the King. And for the Excommunication before a Prelate,
that Penance corporal may be enjoined, which if the offender will redeem of his
own good will, by giving money to the Prelate, or to the party grieved, it
shall be required before the Prelate, and the Kings Prohibition shall not lie.

Prelates may correct for Defamation.
In Defamations also Prelates shall correct in manner aforesaid, the Kings
Prohibition notwithstanding; first enjoining a penance corporal, which if the
offender will redeem, the Prelate may freely receive the money, though the
Kings Prohibition be granted.

No Prohibition where the Tithe is demanded of a new Mill.
Also if any one do erect in his ground a Mill of new, and after the Parson of
the same place demands Tithe for the same, the Kings Prohibition does issue
in this form: Quia de tali molendino hactenus decimae non fuerunt solutae,
prohibemus, etc. Et sententiam Excommunicationis, si quam hac occasion
promulgaveritis, revocetis omnino.] The Answer. In such case the Kings
Prohibition was never granted by the Kings assent, nor never shall, which has
decreed that it shall not hereafter lie in such cases.

Where a Suit for one offense may be prosecuted both in Court Spiritual
Also if any cause or matter, the knowledge whereof belongs to a Court
Spiritual, and shall be definitively determined before a Judge Spiritual, and
does pass into a Judgment, and shall not be suspended by an Appeal; and after
if upon the same thing a Question is moved before a Temporal Judge between the
same parties, and it be proved by witness or instruments; such an Exception is
not to be admitted in a Temporal Court. The Answer. When any one case is
debated before Judges Spiritual and Temporal, as above appears (upon the case
of laying violent hands upon a Clerk) it is thought notwithstanding the
Spiritual Judgment, the Kings Court shall discuss the same matter, as the party
shall think expedient for himself.

In what case only the Kings Letter shall be sent to discharge an
Also the Kings Letter directed unto Ordinaries, that have wrapped those that
be in subjection unto them in the sentence of Excommunication, that they should
assoil them by a certain day, or else that they do appear and show wherefore
they have excommunicated them. The Answer. The King decrees, that hereafter no
such Letter shall be suffered to go forth, but in case where it is found that
the Kings liberty is prejudiced by such Excommunication.

Clerks in the Kings service shall be discharged of their Residence, but shall
Also Barons of the Kings Exchequer claiming by their privilege, that they
ought to make answer to no complainant out of the same place, extend the same
privilege unto the Clerks abiding there, called to Orders, or unto Residence,
and inhibit Ordinaries, that by no means, or for any cause (so long as they be
in the Exchequer, or Kings service) that they call not them to Judgment. Ans.
It pleases our Lord the King, that such Clerks as attend in this service, if
they offend, shall be correct by their Ordinaries, like as other; but so long
as they are occupied about the Exchequer, they shall not be bound to keep
residence in their Churches. This is added of new by the Kings Council. The
King and his Ancestors, since time out of mind, have used that Clerks which are
employed in his service, during such time as they are in his service shall not
be compelled to keep residence at their Benefices: And such things as be
thought necessary for the King aad Commonweal, ought not to be said to be
prejudicial to the liberty of the Church.

Distresses shall not be taken in the Highways, nor in the ancient Fees
Also the Kings Officers, as Sheriffs and other, do enter into the Fees of the
Church to take Distresses; and sometimes they take the Parsons beasts in the
Highway, where they have nothing but the land belonging to the Church. The
Answer. The Kings pleasure is, that from henceforth such Distresses shall
neither he taken in the Kings Highway, nor in the Fees wherewith Churches in
tiimes past have been endowed: Nevertheless he wills Distresses to be taken
in possession of the Church newly purchased by Ecclesiastical persons.

They that abjure the Realm, shall be in peace as long as they be in the
Also where some flying unto the Church, abjure the Realm according to the
custom of the Realm, and Laymen or their enemies do pursue them and pluck them
from the Kings Highway, and they be hanged or headed; and whilst they be in
the Church, are kept in the Churchyard with armed men, and sometime in the
Church so straightly, that they cannot depart from the hallowed ground to empty
their belly, and cannot be suffered to have necessaries brought unto them for
their living. The Answer. They that abjure the Realm, so long as they be in the
common way, shall be in the Kings peace, nor ought to be disturbed of any man;
and when they be in the Church, their Keepers ought not to abide in the
Churchyard, except necessity or peril of escape do require so: And as long as
they be in the Church, they shall not be compelled to flee away, but they shall
have necessaries for their living, and may go forth to empty their belly. And
the Kings pleasure is, that Thieves or Appellors (whenever they will) may
confess their offenses unto Priests; but let the Confessors beware that they do
not erroniously inform such Appellors.

Religious Houses shall not be charged by compulsion, with Corodies, Pensions,
Also it is desired, that our Lord the King, and the Great men of the Realm, do
nor charge Religious houses or Spiritual persons for Corodies, Pensions, or
Sojourning in Religious houses, and other places of the church, or with taking
up of horses or carts, whereby such houses are impoverished, and Gods service
diminished, and by reason of such charges, Priests and other Ministers of the
Church deputed unto Divine service, are oftentimes compelled to depart from the
places aforesaid. The Answer. The Kings pleasure is, that upon the contents in
their Petition from henceforth they shall not be unduly charged: And if the
contrary be done by Great men or other, they shall have remedy after the form
of the Statutes made in the time of King Edward Father to the King that now is.
And the like remedy shall be done for corodies and pensions exacted by
compulsion, whereof no mention is made in the said Statutes.

A Clerk excommunicated, may be taken out of the Parish where he dwells.
Also if any of the Kings tenure be called before their Ordinaries out of the
Parish where they continue; if they be excommunicate for their manifest
contumacy, and after forty days a Writ goes out to take them, and they pretend
their privilege that they ought not to be cited out of their Town and Parish
where their dwelling is, and so the Kings Writ that went out to take them is
denied. The Answer. It was never yet denied, nor shall be hereafter.

The examination of a Parson presented to a Benefice, belongs to a
Also it is desired that Spiritual persons, whom our Lord the King does present
unto Benefices of the Church (if the Bishop will not admit them either for lack
of learning, or for other cause reasonable) may not be under examination of
Lay-persons in the cases aforesaid, as it is now attempted contrary to the
Decrees canonical, but that they may sue unto a Spiritual Judge for remedy as
right shall require. The Answer. Of the ability of a Parson presented unto a
Benefice of the Church, the examination belongs to a Spiritual Judge, and so it
has been used heretofore, and shall be hereafter.

There shall be a free election of the Dignities of the Church.
Also if any Dignity be vacant, where election is to be made, it is moved that
the Electors may freely make their election without fear of any Power temporal,
and that all prayers and oppressions shall in this behalf cease. Ans. They
shall be made free according to the form of Statutes and Ordinances.

A Clerk fleeing into the Church for Felony, shall not be compelled to objure.
Moreover, though a Clerk ought not to be judged before a Temporal Judge, nor
any thing may be done against him that concerns life or member; nevertheless
Temporal Judges cause that Clerks fleeing unto the Church, and peradventure
confessing their offenses, do abjure the Realm, and for the same cause admit
their abjurations, although hereupon they cannot be their Judges; and so power
is wrongfully given to Lay-persons to put to death such Clerks, if such persons
chance to be found within the Realm after their abjuration: The Prelates and
Clergy desire such remedy to be provided herein, that the immunity or
privilege of the Church, and Spiritual persons, may be saved and unbroken. The
Answer. A Clerk fleeing to the Church for felony, to obtain the privilege of
the Church, if he affirm himself to be a Clerk, he shall not be compelled to
abjure the Realm, but yielding himself to the Law of the Realm, shall enjoy the
privilege of the Church according to the laudable custom of the Realm
heretofore used.

The privilege of the Church being demanded by the Ordinary, shall not be
Also notwithstanding that a confession made before him that is not lawful
Judge thereof, is not sufficient whereon Process may be awarded, or sentence
given, yet some temporal Judges (though they have been stantly desired
thereunto) do not deliver to their Ordinaries according to the premises, such
Clerks as confess before them their heinous offenses, as Theft, Robbery, and
Murder; but admit their Accusation, which commonly they call an Appeal, albeit
to this respect they be not of their Court, nor can be judged or condemned
before them upon their own confession, without breaking of the Churches
privileges. The answer, the privilege of the Church being demanded in due
form by the Ordinary, shall not be denied unto the Appealer as to a Clerk: We
desiring to provide for the state of the Church of England, and for the
tranquillity and quiet of the Prelates and Clergy aforesaid, as far forth as we
lawfully may do to the honor of God, and the emendation of the Church, Prelates
and Clergy of the same, ratifying, confirming, and approving, all and every of
the Articles aforesaid, with all and every of the Answers made and contained in
the same, do grant and command them to be kept firmly, and observed for ever,
willing and granting for us and our heirs, that the aforesaid Prelates and
Clergy, and their successors, shall use, execute and practice for ever, the
jurisdiction of the Church in the premises, after the tenor of the answers
aforesaid, without quarrel, inquieting, or vexation of our heirs, or any of our
Officers, whatsoever they be.

In the Reign of King Edward the second.
Albeit the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis, made in the 13. of Ed. 1.
Candries Case.
and by the general allowance and usage, the Ecclesiastical Court held Plea of
Tithes, Obventions, Oblations, Mortuaries, Redemptions of Penance, laying of
violent hands upon a Clerk, Defamations, etc. Yet did not the Clergy think
themselves assured nor quiet from Prohibitions Purchased by Subjects until Ed.
2. by his Letters Partents under the Broad Seal, in and by consent of
Parliament, upon Petition of the Clergy, had granted unto them to have
Jurisdiction in those cases. The King in Parliament holden in the ninth year of
his Reign, after particular answers made to those Petitions, concerning the
matters abovesaid, does grant and give his Royal assent in these words.

We desiring as much as of right we may, to provide for the state of the Cap. 2.
Church of England, and the tranquillity of the Prelates of the said Clergy, to
the honor of God, and the amendment of the state of the said Church, and of
the Prelates and Clergy, ratifying and approving all and singular the said
answers, which appears in the said Act, and all and singular things in the said
answers contained, we do for us and our heirs grant and command, that the same
be inviolably kept for ever: Willing and granting for us and our heirs, that
the said Prelates and Clergy, and successors for ever, do exercise
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the premises, according to the tenor of the said
answer.

A Satute of the Clergy made Anno 18. Ed. 3. Anno Dom. 1344. Bigamy shall be
tried by the Ordinary, and not by Inquest.
Item. If any Clerk be arraigned before our Justices, at our Suit, or the Suit
of the party, and the Clerk holds him to his Clergy, alleging that he ought
not before them thereupon to answer, and if any man for us, or for the same
party, will suggest that he has married two Wives, or one Widow, that upon the
same, the Justices shall not have cognizance or power to try the Bigamy by
Inquest, or in other manner; but it shall be sent to the Spiritual Court, as
has been done in times past, in case of Bastardy, and till the Certificate be
made by the Ordinary, the party in whom the Bigamy is alleged by the words
aforesaid, or in other manner, shall abide in prison unless he be mainpernable.

Item. If Prelates, Clerks beneficed, or Religious people which have Cap. 3.
purchased Lands, and the same have put to Mortmain, be impeached upon the same
before our Justices, and they show our Charter of License, and Process thereupon
made by an Inquest of ad quod Damnum, or of our Grace, or by Fine, they shall
be freely let in peace, without being further Impeached for the same Purchase;
and in case they cannot sufficiently show that they have entered by due Process
after License to them granted, in general or in special, that they shall be
well received to make a convenient Fine for the same, and that the inquiry of
this Article shall wholly cease, according to the accord comprised in this
Parliament.

Item, That the Statues touching the Purveiances of us and our son, made in
times past by us and our Progenitors, for the people of holy 4.
Church, be holden in all parts: And that in the Commissions to be made upon
such Purveiances, the Fees of holy Church shall be excepted in every place
where they be found.

Item, That no Prohibition shall be awarded out of the Chancery, but 5.
in case where we have the cognizance, and of right ought to have.

Item, Whereas Commissions be newly made to diverse Justices, that 6.
they shall make enquiries upon Judges of the holy Church, whether they made
just process or excessive in Causes Testimentary or other, which notoriously
pertains to the cognizance of holy Church, the said Justices have enquired,
and caused to be Indicted, Judges of the holy Church, in blemishing of the
Franchise of the holy Church: That such Commissions be repealed, and from
henceforth defended, saving the Article in Air, such as ought to be.

No Scire facias shall be awarded against a Clerk for Tithes.
Item, Whereas Writs of Scire facias have been granted to warn Prelates, 7.
Religious, and other Clerks, to answer Dismes in our Chancery, and to show if
they have any thing, or can any thing say, wherefore such Dismes ought not to
be restored to the said Demandants, and to answer as well to us, as to the
party to such Dismes: That such Writs from henceforth be not granted, and that
the process hanging upon such Writs be annulled and repealed, and that the
parties be dismissed from the Secular Judges of such manner of Pleas; saving to
us our right, such as we and our ancestors have had, and were wont to have of
reason. In witness whereof, at the request of the said Prelates, to these
present Letters we have set our Seal: Dated at London this 8th of July, the
year of our Reign of England 18. of France the 5th.

In the Reign of Ed. 3. 16 Ed. 3. tit. Excom. 4.

An Excommunication by the Archbishop, albeit it be disannulled by the Pope or
his Legates, is to be allowed, neither ought the Judges to give any allowance of
any such sentence of the Pope or his Legate.

It is often resolved that all the Bishoprics within England were founded In
the Reign of Ed. 3.
by the Kings Progenitors, and therefore the Advousons of them all belong to
the King, and at first they were Donative; and if that any incumbent of any
Church with cure die, if the Patron present not within six months, the Bishop
of that Dioces ought to collate, to the end the Cure may not be destitute of a
Pastor: if he be negligent by the space of six months, the Metropolitan of
that Dioces shall confer one to that Church; and if he also leave the Church
destitute by the space of six months, then the common Law gives to the King as
Supreme within his own Kingdom, and not to the Bishop of Rome, power to provide
a competent Pastor for that Church.

The King may not only exempt any Ecclesiastical person from the Jurisdiction
17 Ed. 3. 23.
of the Ordinary, but may grant him Episcopal Jurisdiction: And thus it appears
there, the King had done of ancient time to the Archdeacon of Richmond. This
resolution is not grounded upon any Custom or Law, but only upon a particular
fact of a King; and a facto ad jus non valet argumentum.

All Religious or Ecclesiastical Houses whereof the King was Founder, are by
the King exempt from Ordinary Jurisdiction, and only visitable, and 20 E. 3.
Excom. 9. 19. Ed. 3.
corrigible by the Kings Ecclesiastical Commission. This resolution too is
only grounded upon matter of Fact; and what man will warrant all the Facts of
Kings not to be repugnant to the Laws of God and man? Yet shall not these men
in other things of much less moment, allow the Kings Proclamations to be Legal,
nor any thing less then the Commons Law, or Acts of Parliament.

The Abbot of Bury was exempted from Episcopal jurisdiction, by the Kings
Charter: This is nothing neither but matter of Fact. 20 Ed. 3. tit. Excom. 6.


The King presents to a Benefice, and his presentee was disturbed by one who
had obtained Bulls from Rome, for which offense he was condemned 21 Ed. 3. 40.
fol. 40.
to perpetual imprisonment, etc.

Tithes arising out of any parish the King shall have, for that he having the
Supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is bound to provide a sufficient Pastor 22
Ed. 3. l. 1. Ass. pl. 75.
that shall have the cure of souls of that place which is not within any
parish: And by the common Laws of England it is evident, that no man, unless he
be Ecclesiastical, or have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, can have inheritance of
Tithes.

The King shall present to his free chapels (in default of the Dean) by 27 Ed.
3. fol. 84.
lapsin respect of his supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And Fitz Herbert
says that the King in that case does present by laps as Ordinary, Fitz not.
Br. 34.

Au Excommunication under the Popes Bull, is of no force to disable any man
within England; and no suit for any cause, though spiritually rising in 30 Ed.
3. lib. Ass. pl. 19, etc.
this Realm, ought to be determined in the court of Rome.

In an Attachment upon a Prohibition, the Popes Bull of Excommunication of the
plaintiff, was adjudged insufficient. 21 Ed. 3. tit. Excom. 6. 33 Ed. 3. tit.
Agel de Roy. 38 Ass. pl. 20.


Reges sacro Oleo uncti, sunt Spiritualis jurisdictionis capaces.

A Prior which is the Kings Debtor, and ought to have Tithes of another
spiritual person, may choose either to sue for substraction of his Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical court, or in the Exchequer, Fitz Herbert in his N. B. fol. 30.
holceth, that before the St. 18 Ed. 3. Cap. 7. the right of Tithes were
determinable at the temporal courts at the election of the party. And the
courts of diverse Manors of the Kings and other Lords in ancient times, had the
probate of last Wills and Testaments, and it appears by 11 H. 7. fol. 12.
That the probate of Wills and Testaments did not appertain to the
Ecclesiastical courts, but that of late time they were determinable there.

The King by his Charter did translate Canons secular, into regular and 38 Lib.
Ass. pl. 22. 46 Ed. 3. Proem 6.
religious persons.

Nicholas Moris elected Abbot of Waltham, which was exempt from ordinary
Jurisdiction sent to Rome to be confirmed by the Pope, who not having regard to
the said Election, gave to the said Nicholas the said Abbey, with all the said
Spiritualities, and Temporalities; the Bull was adjudged against the Laws of
England, and the Abbot for obtaining the same, was fallen into the Kings mercy,
whereupon all his Possessions were seized into the Kings hands.

Where the Abbot of Westminster had a Prior and Covent who were Regular, 49 Ed.
3. lib. ass. pl. 8.
and mort in Law, yet the King by his Charter did divide that Corporation, and
made the Prior and Covent a distinct and capable body to sue and be sued by
themselves.

It was Enacted by the whole Parliament, That as well they who obtained St. de
25 Ed. 3. de Provisoribus.
provisions from Rome, as they that put them in execution should be out of the
Kings Protection, and that a man might do with them as enemies to the King, etc.

It was afterward in open Parliament by grievous complaint of all the St. 25.
Ed. 3.
Commons of this Realm, showed, that the grievances and mischiefs aforesaid did
daily abound, to the great damage and destruction of this Realm, more then ever
before, viz. that of late the Bishop of Rome by procurement of Clerks, and
otherwise had reserved, and did reserve daily to his collation generally and
especially, as well Archbishopricks, Abbeys, and Priories, as all other
dignities, and other benefices of England, which were of the Advowry of people
of the holy Church, and gave the same to Aliens as well as to Citizens, and
takes of all such benefices the first fruits, and many other profits, and a
great part of the treasure of this Realm was carried away, and dispended out of
the Realm by the Purchasers of such graces; and also by such privy
reservations, many Clerks advanced by the true Patrons, which peaceably holden
their advancements by long time, were suddenly put out. Wherefore the said
Commons did pray the said Sovereign the King, that since the right of the Crown
of England, and the Law of the said Realm was such, that upon mischiefs and
damages which happened to this Realm, he ought, and was bound of the accord of
his people, therefore to provide remedy and Law, etc. The said King Ed. 3.
seeing the mischiefs and damage aforesaid, etc. and forasmuch as he was bound
by his Oath, to see the same to be kept as a Law of this Realm, though that by
sufferance and negligence it had been sithence attempted to the contrary; also
having regard to the grievous complaints made to him by his people in diverse
his Parliaments holden heretofore, willing to ordain remedy for the great
damage and mischiefs which had happened, and daily did happen to the Church of
England by the said cause, by the assent of all the great men, and the
commonalty of the said Realm, to the honor of God, and profit of the said
Church of England, and of his Realm, did order and establish, that the free
election of all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other dignities and benefices
electory in England, should hold from henceforth in the manner as they were
granted by the Kings progenitors, and founded by the ancestors of other Lords,
and that all Prelates, and other people of the holy Church, which had Advowsons
of any benefices of the Kings gift, or of any of his progenitors, or of other
Lords and Donors, to do divine service, and other charges thereof ordained,
should have their collations and presentiments freely, as they were enfeoffed by
their donors; and in case that reservation, collation, or provision be made by
the Court of Rome, of any Archbishopric, Bishopric, Dignity or other Benefice
in disturbance of the election, collation, or presentiments aforesaid: That at
the time of the avoidance, that such reservations, collations, and provisions
ought to take effect, the said Ed. 3. and his heirs should have and enjoy for
the same time, collations to the Archbishopricks, and other dignities elective,
which is of his Avowry, such as his Progenitors had before that free election
was granted, since that the elections were first granted by the Kings
progenitors upon a certain form and condition, as to demand license of the King
to choose, and after the election, to have his Royal assent, and not in other
manner: which condition not kept, the King ought by reason to resort to his
first nature.

Upon complaint made by the great men and commons, it was assented St. 27 Ed. 3.
and accorded by the King, great men and commons aforesaid, that all the people
of the Kings Allegiance, of what condition that they be, which shall draw any
out of the Realm, in plea whereof, the conusance pertains to the Kings Court,
or of things whereof Judgment were given in the Kings Court, or which did sue
in any other Court, to defeat or impeach the Judgments given in the Kings
Court, should incur the danger of a Praemunire.

Made to confirm the Acts made the 25. and 27. years of the said Kings Reign;
but those that made those good Laws against such capital offenders, St. 28 Ed.
3. Cap. 1. 2. 3. 4.
were cursed, defamed, and reproved by such as maintained the usurped
jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, against which an especial Act of Parliament
was made by the King and his whole Realm, prohibiting thereby such defamations
and reproofs.

In the Reign of Richard the second.
Against an Incumbent of the Church of England, another sueth a provision 12
Rich. 2. tit. Jurisdict. 18.
in the Court of Rome, and there pursues until he recovereth the Church
against the Incumbent, and afterward brought an action of account against him,
as receiver of diverse sums of money (which in troath were the oblations and
offerings which the Incumbent had received) and the whole Court was of opinion
against the Plaintiff, and thereupon he became nonsuit.

It is declared by that Parliament, that the Crown of England has been St. 16
R. 2. Cap. 5.
so free at all times, that it has been in subjection to no Realm, but
immediately subject to God, and none other, and that the same ought not in any
thing touching the Regality of the same Crown, be to the Bishop of Rome, nor
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, by him frustrated or defeated at his will,
to the perpetual destruction of the King his Sovereignty, Crown and Regality,
and of all his Realm. And the Commons in that Parliament affirmed, that the
things attempted by the Bishop of Rome, be declared against the Kings Crown,
and his Regality, used and approved in the time of all his Progenitors.

In the Reign of H. 4. H. 4. fol. 9*

It is resolved that the Popes Collector, though he has the Popes Bull to that
purpose, has no jurisdiction within this Realm, and there the Archbishops and
Bishops, etc. of this Realm, are called the Kings spiritual Judges.

By the ancient Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm, no man could be convicted of
Heresy, being High Treason against the Almighty, but by the Archbishop, Fitz.
not. B. 269. Candries Case.
and all the Clergy of that Province, and after abjured thereupon, and after
that newly convicted and condemned by the Clergy of that Province, in the
general council of the convocation: but the St. of 2 H. 4. Ca. 15. does give
the Bishop of the Dioces power to condemn a Heretic, and that before that
Statute, he could not be committed to the secular power to be burnt, until he
had once abjured, and was again relapsed to thar or some other Heresy; whereby
it appears that the King by the consent of Parliament, directed the
proceedings in the Court Ecclesiastical, in case of Heresy, and other matters
more Spiritual: Well, but suppose the King did so, it proves nothing; for it is
but matter of Fact: But it does not appear neither that this direction of the
King by consent of Parliament, did direct the proceedings in the Court in the
conusance of Heresy, but only for the punishment of Heresy adjudged in the
Ecclesiastical Court; and all men know that it is the Temporal, not
Ecclesiastical power, (although it may be executed, or pronounced by
Ecclesiastical persons) that punishes men for Spiritual Crimes.

The Pope cannot alter the Laws of England.
The Judges say that the Statutes which restrain the Popes provisions 11 H. 4.
37. 11 H. 4. fol. 69. 76.
to the Benefices of the Advowsons of Spiritual men, were made, for that the
Spiritual durst not in their just Cause, say against the Popes provisions: so
as those Statutes were made in affirmance of the common Law.

Excommunication made by the Pope, is of no force in England, and the same
being certified by the Pope into any Court in England, ought not to 14 H. 4.
fol. 14, etc.
be allowed, neither is any Certificate of any Excommunication available in
Law, but that which is made by some Bishop in England; for the Bishops are by
the common Laws, the immediate Officers, and Ministers of Justice to the Kings
Court in Causes Ecclesiastical.

If any Bishop do Excommunicate any person for a cause that belongs 14 H. 4.
14.
not to him, the King may write to the Bishop, and command him to assoyl, and
absolve the party.

If any person of Religion obtain of the Bishop of Rome to be exempt St. 2. H.
4. Cap. 3.
from obedience regular or ordinary, he is in case of a Praemunire, which is an
offense, as has been said, contra Regem, coronam, and dignitatem ejus.

Upon complaint of the Commons of the horrible mischiefs, and damnable customs
which there were introduced by the Church of Rome, that no St 6. H. 4. Cap. 1.
person, Abbot or other, should have any provisions of Archbishopric, or
Bishopric which should be void, till he had compounded with the Popes Chamber,
to pay great and excessive sums of money, as well for the first fruits of the
same Archbishopric or Bishopric, as for the other less services in the said
Court, and that the said sums, or greater part thereof be paid beforehand,
which sums passed the double or treble of that that was accustomed of old time
to be paid, etc. It was therefore Enacted, That they, and every of them that
did pay greater sums then had of old time been accustomed to be paid into the
said Chamber, should incur the forfeiture of as much as they may forfeit to the
King.

No person, Religious or Secular, of what estate or condition that he St 7. H.
4. Cap. 6.
were, by color of any Bulls containing Privileges, to be discharged of
Tithes appertaining to Parish-Churches, Prebends, Hospitals, Vicaredges
Purchased before the first year of King R. 2. or after, not executed, should
put in execution anysuch Bills so Purchased, or any such Bulls to be Purchased
in time to come, upon pain of a Praemunire. In the Reign of Hen. 5.

In an Act of Parliament made in the third year of Henry 5. it is Declared,
(...) H. 5. ^^^. 4. ^
That whereas in the time of H. 4. father to the said King, the seventh year of
his Reign, to eschew many discords and debates, and diverse other mischiefs
which were like to arise and happen, because of many provisions then made, or
to be made by the Pope, and also of license thereupon granted by the said King,
among other things, it was Ordained and Established, That no such License, or
Pardon so granted before the same Ordinance, or afterward to be granted, shall
be available to any Benefice full of any Incumbent, at the day of the date of
such License or Pardon granted: Nevertheless, diverse persons having provisions
of the Pope, of diverse Benefices in England, and elsewhere, and Licenses Royal
to execute the same Provisions, have by color of the same Provisions, Licenses
and acceptations of the said Benefices, subtly excluded diverse persons of
their Benefies, in which they had been incumbents by a long season, of the
collation of the very Patrons Spiritual, to whom duly made to their intent, to
the final destruction and enervation of the Estates of the same Incumbents. The
King, willing to avoid such mischiefs, has Ordained and Established, That all
the Incumbents of every benefice of Holy Church, of the Patronage, Collation,
or presentation of Spiritual Patrons, may quietly and peaceably enjoy their
said Benefices, without being inquieted, molested, or any way grieved by any
color of such provisions, licencies, and acceptations; and that all licenses
and pardons, upon and by such provisions made in any manner, should be void and
of no valor: and if any feel himself grieved, molested, or inquieted in any
wise from henceforth by any, by color of such provisions, licenses, pardons,
or acceptations, that the same molesters, grievers or inquesters, and every of
them, have, and incur the pains and punishments contained in the Statutes of
Provisors before that time. H. 4. St. 2 H. 5. Cap. 7. Lollardy.
Was made for extirpation of Heresy and Lollardy, whereby full power and
authority was given to the Justices of Peace, and Justices of Assize, to
enquire of those that hold Errors, Heresies, or Lollardry, and of their
maintainers, etc. and that the Sheriff or other Officer, etc. may Arrest and
apprehend them. A man should undertake a very hard task, that goes about to
maintain, that all Humane Laws did never transgress their limits, nor encroach
upon things that were not properly in their conusance; and this Law ill suits
with the temper of these times.

The King by consent of Parliament, gives power to Ordinaries to enquire St.
2* H. 5. Cap. 1.
of the Foundation, Erection, and Governance of Hospitals, other then such as
be of the Kings Foundation, and thereupon to make correction and reformation,
according to the Ecclesiastical Law, nor could any other Power grant such
Ordinances.

In the Reign of Henry the sixth. 8 H. 6. fol. 3.

Excommunication made and certified by the Pope, is of no force to disable any
man within England: and this is by the ancient Common Laws, before any Statute
was made concerning foreign Jurisdiction.

The King only may grant or license to Found a Spiritual Corporation. 9 H. 6.
fol. 16.


The Pope wrote Letters in derogation of the King and his Regality, 1 H. 6.
fol. 1^.
and the Churchmen durst not speak against them; but Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, for their safe keeping, put them into the fire.

In the Reign of Edward the fourth.
The Pope in the Reign of King Ed. 4. granted to the Prior of St. John's, H. 7.
f. 20.
to have Sanctuary within his Priory, and this was pleaded, and claimed by the
Prior; but it was resolved by the Judges, that the Pope had no power to grant
any Sanctuary within this Realm, and therefore by Judgment of Law it ought to
be disallowed.

There it appears that the opinion of the Kings Bench had been oftentimes,
Ed. 4. 3.
that if one Spirital person, sueth another Spiritual person in the Court of
Rome, for a matter Spiritual, where he may have remedy before his Ordinary,
that is, of the Bishop of the Diocese within the Realm, Quia trahit ipsum in
placitum extra regnum, incurreth the danger of a Praemunire; a heinous offense,
being contra Legiantiae suae debitum, in contemptum Domini Regis, and contra
coronam and dignitatem suam.

In the Kings Court of Record, where Felonies are determined, the Bishop or his
Deputy ought to give his attendance, to the end that if any man 9 Ed. 4. 28.
that is Indicted or Arraigned for Felony, do demand the benefit of his Clergy,
that the Ordinary may inform the Court of his sufficiency, or insufficiency,
that is, whether he can read as a Clerk, or not; whereof notwithstanding the
Ordinary is not to judge, but a Minister to the Kings Court; and the Judges of
that Court are to judge of the sufficiency or insufficiency of the party,
whatsoever the Ordinary do inform them, and upon due examination of the party,
may give judgment above the Ordinaries information: For the Kings Judges, are
Judges of the Cause; whether the Ordinary be a Judge of Legit, or non Legit,
matters not much: for if he be Judge, or Minister, no doubt but he is the Kings
Judge, or Minister. And I my self have seen Chief Justice Littleton overrule
the Ordinary in the Case of one Brudbank, after the Ordinaries Deputy had
pronounced legit ut Clericus, and give sentence of death upon him for his non
legit, and he was hanged.

The Popes Excommunication is of no force within the Kingdom of England. 12 Ed.
4. f. 46.

In the Reign of King Ed. 4. a Legate came from the Pope to Callis, to have come
into England, but the King and his Council would not let him come into England,
until he had taken an Oath that he should attempt nothing against the King or
his Crown: And so the like was done to another of the Popes Legates. And this
is so reported, 1 H. 7. fol. 10.

In the Reign of Richard the third.
It is resolved by the Judges, that a Judgment of Excommunication in the
Church of Rome, shall not prejudice any man within England at the Common Law.

In the Reign of Henry the seventh. 1 H. 7. fol. 10.

The Pope had Excommunicated all persons whatsoever, who had bought Alume of
the Florentines; and it was resolved by all the Judges, that the Popes
Excommunication ought not to be obeyed, or to be put in execution within the
Realm of England.

It was enacted, ordained and established, by the advice and assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in the said Parliament assembled,
That it be lawful to all Archbishops and Bishops, and other Ordinaries having
Episcopal jurisdiction, to punish and chastise such Priests, Clerks, and
Religious men being within the bounds of their jurisdiction, as shall be
committed before them by examination, and lawful proof requisite by the Law of
the Church, of Advoutry, Fornication, Incest, or any other fleshly
incontinency, by committing them to ward or prison, there to abide in ward
until such time as shall be thought to their discretions convenient for the
quality and quantity of their trespass. And that none of the Archbishops,
Bishops or Ordinaries aforesaid be thereof chargeable, of, to, or upon any
action of false or wrongful Imprisonment, but that they be utterly discharged
thereof in any of the cases aforesaid by virtue of this Act.

The King is a mixed person, because he has Ecclesiastical and Temporal 10 H.
7. 18.
jurisdiction.

By the Ecclesiastical Laws allowed within this Realm, a Priest cannot 11 H. 7.
12.
have two Benefices, nor a Bastard can have a Priest: But the King may by his
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction dispense with both these, because they be
mala prohibita, but not mala per se.

How far Henry the Eighth exercised his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
IT was enacted, That if any person or persons at any time after the St. 21. H.
8. 13.
first of April 1530. contrary to the Act, should procure and obtain at the
Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any License or Licenses, Union, Toleration, or
Dispensation to receive or take any more Benefices with cure, then was limited
by the said Act; or else at any time after the said day should put in execution
any such License, Toleration, or Dispensation, before that time obtained
contrary to the said Act; That then every such person or persons so after the
said day, suing for himself, or receiving or taking such Benefice by force of
such License or Licenses, Union, Toleration, or Dispensation, that is to say,
the same person or persons only, and no other, should for every such default
incur the danger, pain and penalty of Twenty pounds sterling, and should also
lose the whole profits of every such Benefice or Benefices, as he receives or
takes by force of any such License or Licenses, Union, Toleration or
Dispensation. And that if any person or persons did procure or obtain at the
Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any manner of License or Dispensation to be
nonresident at their Dignities, Prebends or Benefices, contrary to the said
Act; that then every such person putting in execution any such Dispensation or
License for himself, from the said first of April 1530. should run and incur
the penalty, damage, and pain of Twenty pounds sterling, for every time so
doing to be forfeited and recovered; and yet such License or Dispensation so
procured, or to be put in execution, to be void and of none effect.

It was enacted, That no person from thenceforth cited or summoned, 23 H. 8.
cap. 9.
or otherwise called to appear by himself or herself, or by any Procurator,
before any Ordinary, Archdeacon, Commissary, Official, or any other Judge
Spiritual out of the Diocese, or peculiar Jurisdiction, where the person which
shall be cited, summoned, or otherwise (as is abovesaid) called, shall be
inhabiting and dwelling, at the time of awarding or going forth of the same
citation or summons: Except it be for, in, or upon any of the cases, or causes
hereafter written, viz. for any Spiritual offense or cause, committed or done,
or omitted, forstowed or neglected to be done contrary to right and duty, by
the Bishop, Archdeacon, Commissary, Official, or other person having Spiritual
jurisdiction, or being a Spiritual Judge, or by any other person or persons
within the Diocese, or other Jurisdiction whereunto he or she shall be cited,
or otherwise lawfully called to appear and answer: And that every Spiritual
Judge offending contrary to the purport of this Act, shall forfeit Ten
shillings sterling, the one half to the King, the other half to any person that
will sue for the same in any of the Kings Courts; in which action no protection
shall be allowed, nor Wager of Law or Essoine be admitted.

In which, Sir E. Coke (Cawdries case) says, there were twenty four Bishops,
Stat. 24. H. 8. cap. 12.
twenty nine Abbots and Priors; for so many then were Lords of Parliament. It
is declared, That where by diverse sundry old authentic Histories and
Chronicles, it was manifestly declared and expressed, that this Realm of
England is an Empire, and has been so accounted in the world, governed by one
Supreme Head and King, having the dignity and Royal estate of the Imperial
crown of the same, unto whom a Body Politic compact of all sorts and degrees
of people, divided in terms, and by names of Spirituality and Temporality, been
bound and ought to bear next to God, a natural and humble obedience; He being
also institute and furnished by the goodness of God, with plenary, whole and
entire power, pre-eminence, authority, prerogative, and jurisdiction, to render
and yield justice and final determination to all manner of folk, resiants or
subjects within this his Realm, in all causes, matters, debates and contentions
happening to occur, insurge or begin within the limits thereof, without
restraint or provocation to any Foreign Princes or Potentates in the world: The
body Spiritual whereof having power, when any cause of Law Divine happened to
come in question, or of Spiritual Learning, that it was declared, interpreted
and showed by that part of the said body Politic called the Spiritual body
then, being usually called the English Church, which always has been reputed,
and also found of that sort, that both for knowledge, integrity, and
sufficiency of number, it has been always thought, and was also at that hour
sufficient and meet of it self, without the intermedling of any exterior person
or persons, to declare and determine all such doubts, and to administer all
such offices and duties, as to the the rooms Spiritual did appertain. For the
due administration whereof, and to keep them from corruption and sinister
affection, the Kings noble Progenitors and Antecessors of the Nobles of this
Realm, have sufficiently endowed the said Church both with honor and
possessions. And the Laws Temporal for trial of Property of Lands and Goods,
and for the conservation of the people of this Realm in unity and peace without
rapine and spoil, was, and yet is administered, adjudged, and executed by sundry
Judges and Ministers of the other part of the said Body Politic, called the
Temporalty: And both their Authorities and Jurisdictions do conjoin together in
the due administration of Justice, the one to help the other.

This Statute does moreover affirm, that Ed. 1. Ed. 3. Rich. 2. H. 4. and other
Kings did make diverse Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, etc. for the entire and sure
conservation of the prerogatives, liberties and preheminences of the said
Imperial Crown, and of the Jurisdictions Spiritual and Temporal of the same, to
keep it from the annoyance as well from the Sea of Rome, as from other Foreign
Potentates, and does make all Causes determinable by any Spiritual
jurisdiction, to be adjudged within the Kings authority.

All First Fruits, and all contributions to the Sea of Rome by any Bishop, St.
25. H. 8, cap. 20.
were forbidden upon pain of forfeiture of all the goods and cattals for ever,
and all the Temporal lands and possessions of every Archbishopric or
Bishopric, during the time that he or they who offend contrary to the said
Act, shall possess and enjoy the said Archbishopric or Bishopric. And that if
any presented to the Sea of Rome by the King to a Bishopric, and he be there
delayed, he may be consecrated by an Archbishop in England; and that an
Archbishop presented to the Sea of Rome to be there consecrated, and there
let, may be consecrated by two Bishops of England. And because the Pope
hereof informed, did not redress and reform the said exactions, nor give answer
to the Kings mind; therefore the said Statute did prohibit any man to be
presented to the Sea of Rome for the dignity of an Archbishop or Bishop, or
that any Annates or First Fruits be paid to the Bishop of Rome; and that upon
the avoidance of any Archbishopric or Bishopric, the King, his heirs and
successors may grant to the Prior and Covent, or Dean and Chapter of the
Cathedral Churches or Monasteries, where the Sea of such Archbishopric or
Bishopric shall happen to be void, a License under the Great seal, as of old
time has been accustomed, to proceed to Election of an Archbishop or Bishop of
the Sea so being void, with a Letter missive containing the name of the person
which they shall elect and choose; and for default of such Election, the King
by his Letters Patents may nominate an Archbishop or Bishop; and that every
Archbishop and Bishop to whose hands any such presentment or nomination shall
be directed, shall with speed invest and consecrate the person nominated and
presented by the King, his heirs and successors. And if any Archbishop or
Bishop, Prior and Covent, Dean and Chapter, shall for the space of twenty days
next after such License or Nomination come to their hands, neglect, or shall
execute any Censures, Excommunications, Interdictions, etc. contrary to the
execution of any thing contained in this Act, that then they incur the penalty
of a Praemunire.

An act concerning the exoneration of the Kings subjects from exactions St. 25.
H. 8. cap. 21.
and impositions before that time paid to the Sea of Rome, and for having
Licenses and Dispensations within this Realm, without suing further for the
same.

The King shall be reputed Supreme Head of the Church of England, St. 26. H. 8.
cap. 1.
and have authority to reform and redress all Errors, Heresies, and abuses in
the same.

Every Archbishop and Bishop disposed to have a Suffragan, may elect 26 H. 8.
c. 14.
discreet Spiritual persons, being learned, and of good conversation, and
present them under their seals to the King, making humble request to his
Majesty to give to one of the two such title, name, style and dignity of Bishop
of such of the Sees as the King shall think fit; and that every such person to
whom the King shall give any such style and title of the Sees abovenamed, viz.
the Towns of Thetford, Ipswich, Colchester, Dover, Gilford, Southampton,
Taunton, Shaftsbury, Molton, Marlborough, Bedford, Leicester, Gloucester,
Shrewsbury, Bristow, Penrith, Bridgwater, Nottingham, Grantham, Hull,
Huntington, Cambridge, and the Towns of Perth and Barwick, S. Germans in
Cornwall, and the Isle of Wight, shall be called Bishop Suffragan of the same
See, whereunto he shall be named; and that every Archbishop and Bishop, for
their own peculiar Diocese, may and shall give to every such Bishop Suffragan
such Commissions as have been accustomed for Suffragans heretofore to have, or
else such Commissions as by them shall be thought requisite, reasonable and
convenient; And that no Suffragan shall use any ordinary jurisdiction, or
Episcopal power, otherwise, nor longer time, then shall be limited by such
Commission, upon pain of the penalties mentioned in the Statute of Provisions
made the 16. of Rich. 2.

The King shall have authority to name Thirty two persons, sixteen St. 27 H. 8.
cap. 15.
Spiritual, and sixteen Temporal, to examine the Laws and Constitutions
heretofore made according to the Statute of 25 H. 8. 9. But no Laws or
Constitutions shall be made without the Kings assent, nor contrary to the Kings
Prerogative, or the Laws of the Land.

If any person shall extol the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, he shall 28 H.
8. c. 10.
incur the penalty of a Praemunire, provided Anno 16 Ric. 2. Every
Ecclesiastical and Lay-Officer shall be sworn to renounce the said Bishop and
his Authority, and to resist it to his power; and to repute any Oath taken in
maintenance of the said Bishop or his Authority, to be void: And the refusing
of the said Oath, to be Treason.

Makes all Bulls and Dispensations from the Bishop or See of Rome to 28 H. 8.
c. 16.
any of the Subject of this Realm, void.

The King may nominate such number of Bishops, Sees for Bishops, 31 H. 8. c. 9.
Cathedral Churches, and endow them with such possessions as he will.

1. If any person by word, writing, printing, ciphering, or otherwise, do
preach, teach, dispute, or hold opinion, That in the blessed Sacrament 31 H. 8.
c. 14. called the Statute of the Six Articles.
of the Altar under form of bread and wine (after the consecration thereof)
there is not really the natural body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ
conceived of the Virgin Mary; or that after the said consecration there remains
any substance of bread or wine, or any other substance, but the substance of
Christ God and man: Or that in the flesh under the form of bread, is not the
very blood of Christ: Or that with the blood under the form of wine, is not the
very flesh of Christ, as well apart, as though they were both together: Or
affirm the said Sacrament to be of other substance then is aforesaid; Or
deprave the said blessed Sacrament: Then he shall be adjudged a Heretic, and
suffer death by burning, and shall forfeit to the King all his lands,
tenements, hereditaments, goods and chattels, as in case of High Treason. 2. Or
if any person preach in any Sermon or Collation openly made, or teach in any
Common School or Congregation, or obstinately affirm or defend, That the
Communion of the blessed Sacrament in both kinds, is necessary for the health
of man's soul, or ought to be administered in both kinds: Or that it is necessary
to be received by any person (other then by Priests) being at Mass, and
consecrating the same. 3. Or that any man, after the Order of Priesthood
received, may marry or contract matrimony. 4. Or that any man or woman, which
advisedly has vowed or professed, or should vow or profess chastity or
widowhood, may marry or contract marriage. 5. Or that Private Masses be not
lawful, or not laudable, or should not be used, or be not agreeable to the Laws
of God. 6. Or that Auricular confession is not expedient, and necessary to be
used in the Church of God; He shall be adjudged, suffer death, and forfeit
lands and goods as a Felon. If any Priest, or other man or woman, which
advisedly has vowed chastity or widowhood, do actually marry or contract
matrimony with another; Or any man which is, or has been a Priest, do carnally
use any woman, to whom he is, or has been married, or with whom he has
contracted matrimony, or openly be conversant or familiar with any such woman;
both man and woman shall be adjudged Felons. Commissions shall be awarded to
the Bishop of the Diocese, his Chancellor, Commissary, and others, to enquire
of the Heresies, Felonies, and offenses aforesaid: And also Justices of Peace
in their Sessions, and every Steward, Under-Steward, and Deputy of Steward, in
their Leets or Law-day, by the oath of twelve men, have authority to enquire of
the Heresies, Felonies, and offenses aforesaid.

See the 7. Chap. of B. Bramhalls Just Vindication of the Church of England,
where he endeavors to show that not only the Emperor, the King of France, nay,
and the King of Spain, have in effect done the same things with Henry the
Eighth, upon occasion, or at least plead for it, although for their interests
they have not continued the exercise of their Jurisdiction, as the Kings of
England have done.

A short view or reflection upon Henry the Eight, and his Reformation.
How zealous a Defender of the Pope, and See of Rome, Henry the Eight K. H. 8.
a zealous defender of the Pope and Papacy.
was in the beginning of his Reign, is evident by his book written against
Martin Luther: For, not being born Henry the seventh's eldest son, his Father
being a wondtrful frugal Prince, and observing good natural parts in him, bred
him up in literature, and destinated him to the Archbishopric of Canterbury,
as being the cheapest, and highest preferment he could give him. But his elder
brother being dead, and after him his father; The King esteeming it a great
honor to employ himself in so famous a controversy as was then maintained by
the Wits of Christendom, in defense and opposition of the Church of Rome, wrote
a book of the Seven Sacraments, defending also the Papacy, and oppugned the
Doctrine of Luther. This thing was so grateful to the Pope, that Leo 10.
honored him with the Title of Defender of the Faith. But after he had been
married to his brothers wife above twenty years, and inflamed with lustful
affection to Anne Bullein a Paragon and Minion From what cause the King became
estranged from the Pope.
of the Court, he became (he said) troubled in conscience for having married
his brothers wife; and therefore desired that the Pope would examine the case,
and satisfy his scruple of conscience. (It is a very remarkable thing, that
this ungodly Dispensation of Julius 2. for H. 8. his marrying with his brothers
wife, should be the cause of the King and Kingdoms defection from the Papacy
under Clement 7.) The Pope, to satisfy the King, gave the Cardinals Wolsey and
Campeius a power Legatine to hear and determine the validity, or invalidity of
the marriage; but the Queen refusing to submit to their determination, appealed
from them to the Pope. The Pope had now a Wolf by the ears, whom he could
neither keep, nor well let go: For, in pronouncing the marriage void, he feared
to incense Charles the Fifth (being Nephew to Queen Katherine, and the most
potent Prince in Christendom) and in confirming it, he feared to lose Henry the
then most beloved Son of the Church, and great Defender of the Papacy, not only
in writing, but also in joining with and assisting the French King Francis the
First, for freeing him from captivity, being a prisoner under Charles. The Pope
therefore desires the advantage of time, and proceeds slowly toward a
determination: The King as impatient in his desires, expects a sentence from
the Pope; which not being to be had, he procures Instruments from the
Universities of Cambridge, Oxford, and Paris, together with the Opinion of
Learned men, That the marriage with his Brothers wife, was contrary to the Law
of God, and void. The King not expecting the Popes sentence, anno 1533. marries
his beloved Anne, (but such love is usually too hot to hold, for about two
years after he cut off her head:) yet the King did not wholly renounce the
Papacy, but still expecting the Popes sentence.

The Pope, for the reasons aforesaid, not desiring to end the business, The
slow proceedings of the Pope.
but to expect advantage from time, reduces the matter into several points or
heads, which he would have particularly disputed; and at the time of the Kings
marriage with Anne, was not got further then the article of Attentates, in
which the Pope gave sentence against the King, that it was not lawful for him
to put away his wife by his own authority, without the Ecclesiastical Judge.
For which cause the King in the beginning of 1534. denied the Pope his
obedience, commanding his Subjects not to pay any money to Rome, nor to pay the
ordinary Peter Pence. This infinitely troubled the Court of Rome, and they
daily consulted of a remedy: Some thought to proceed against the King with
censures, and to interdict all Christian nations all commerce with England; But
the moderate counsel pleased best, to temporise with him, and to mediate a
composition by the French King. K. Francis accepted the charge, and sent the
Bishop of Paris to Rome, to negotiate a Pacification with the Pope; where they
still proceeded in the cause gently, and with resolution not to come to
censures, if the Emperor did not proceed first, or at the same time with his
forces. They had divided the cause into twenty three articles, and then they
handled whether Prince Arthur had had carnal conjunction with Queen Katherine;
in this they spent time till Midlent was past, when the 19. of March news came,
that a Libel was published in England against the Pope and the whole Court of
Rome, and besides, a Comedy had been made in presence of the King and Court, to
the great disgrace and shame of the Pope, and every Cardinal in particular. For
which cause all being inflamed with choler, ran headlong to give sentence;
which was pronounced in the Consistory the 24. of the same month, That the
marriage between Henry and Katherine was good; that he was bound to take her to
wife, and that in case he did not, he should be excommunicated.

But the Pope was soon displeased with this precipitation: For, six days His
rash censure repented of,
after, the French Kings letters came, That the King was content to accept the
sentence concerning Attentates, and to render obedience, upon condition that
the Cardinals whom he mistrusted, should not meddle in the business, and that
persons not suspected should be sent to Cambray to take information; ^and
and the King had sent his Proctors before, to assist in the Cause at Rome.
Wherefore the Pope went about to devise some pretense to suspend the
precipitate sentence, and again to set the cause on its feet.

But the King, so soon as he had seen it, said. It was no matter; for the
Utterly loses the obedience of England.
Pope should be Bishop of Rome, and himself sole Lord of his Kingdom: And that
he would do according to the ancient manner of the Eastern church, not leaving
to be a good Christian, nor suffering the Lutheran Heresy, or any other to be
brought into his Kingdom.

From that time forward, Henry the Eighth, of a zealous Assertor of the No
anger lost between the King and Pope.
Papacy both by pen and purse, became the first, and greatest Opposer of it, of
all the Western Christian Princes; (for the Eastern Christian Princes, except
sometimes the Emperors of Greece, and the Kings of Holy Land, did seldom or
never submit to the Papacy in her Spirituals) yet did he afterward seed to be
reconciled to the Pope, even by means of his Nephew Charles the Fifth. Nor were
the Popes much behind hand with him: For besides Clement's petty
Excommunication, Paul the Third, Anno 1538. thundered out such a terrible
Excommunication against him, as the like was never heard of; which deprived him
of his kingdom, and his adherents of whatsoever they possessed, commanding his
Subjects to deny him obedience, and Strangers to have no commerce in the
kingdom; and all to take arms against, and persecute both him and his
followers, granting them their states and goods for their prey, and their
persons for slaves. But the Popes anger ended in words; whereas the Kings deeds
took place against the Pope.

But what there was in all the Kings reign, which might be called Reformation,
What was the Kings Reformation.
I do not understand: For, whatsoever the King took from the Pope (except
Peter Pence) he ascribed to himself. If the Pope would be Head of the
Catholic Church, the King would be Head of the Church of England: If the Pope
challenged Annates and First Fruits of the Bishops and Clergy, the King would
do no less: If the Pope did give Abbots and Priors power, being Ecclesiastical
persons, to make diverse Impropriations to their benefit, the King will take a
power to take them all away, and convert them into Lay-fees, and incorporate
them so into particular men's estates, that they shall never return to the
Church more. Nor had he any love or desire of Reformation of the Church, but
only to the Church Lands; for, all the Rites, Ceremonies, and Religion of the
Church of Rome was continued, and that with such bloody cruelty, that a
Stranger going over Smithfield one day, and seeing two men there executed, one
for denying the Kings Headship of the Church, and another for subscribing to
the Six Articles, cried out, Bone Deus, quomodo hic agunt vivi! hic
suspenduntur Papistae, ibi comburuntur Antipapistae. And so zealous did he
continue herein, that Pope Paul the Third, after he had fulminated so
dreadfully against him, Hist. Conc-Trid. fol. 90:
proposed him for an Example to be imitated by Charles the Fifth.

Although such was the temper of this Prince, that he never spared man The
exclusion of the Papai jurisdiction, was an act of the King, Kingdom, and
Church, of England.
in his rage, woman in his lust, nor any thing which might be called sacred in
his avarice; yet so absolute was he, that his Divorce was attested by both the
Universities at home, besides that at Paris abroad; his freeing himself and the
Nation from the jurisdiction of the Pope, was not only assented to by a Synod
and Convocation of all the Clergy of England, but the English and Irish
Nobility did make their submissions by an Indenture to Sir Anthony Sellinger,
then* chief Governor of Ireland, wherein they did acknowledge King Henry to be
their lawful Sovereign, and confessed the Kings Supremacy Bram. Vind. of the
Church of England, p. 43.
in all causes, and utterly renounced the Pope. But Divorce, banishing the
Papal authority, Dissolution of Abbeys, and all, were easily passed and
assented to in Parliament.

But whatsoever the King were otherwise, yet sure the Popes passion The Pope
was more unjust in his censures then the King was in excluding the Papal
jurisdiction.
against him carried them to greater extravagancies and exorbitancies, then
were on his part against them. For, suppose that the Pope had de facto the
Investitures of Bishops, Peter Pence, Annates and First Fruits paid them, and
did exercise a jurisdiction over all the Church and Clergy; yet no question,
all these things were by the grants and permission of precedent Kings; and if
Kings may grant and permit these things, then what hinders but that they may
recall them? for, Cujus est velle, ejus est nolle. Besides, we have already
showed, that although there were not that bitter personal spite between the
Kings of England and and the Popes formerly, as was between Henry 8. and
Clement 7. and Paul 3. yet did many of them ascribe as little to the Pope, as
Henry did. But for a Pope to deprive a Christian Prince of his kingdom, over
whom he had no manner of right; his Adherents, of whatsoever they possessed; to
command his Subjects to deny their obedience to their Sovereign, and Strangers
not to have any commerce in the kingdom; and all to take arms against him and
his followers, granting them their estates and goods for a prey, and their
persons for slaves, is so unlike to the example and precept of S. Peter (whom
they pretend to succeed) who not only suffered death under Temporal power, but,
inspired by God, does command so expressly obedience to Kings, not as
subordinate to himself, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
but as supreme: And of our Savior himself, who both suffered himself under
Temporal power, and paid tribute to Caesar, and took not away, but fulfilled
the Moral Law, which commands obedience to Princes and Higher powers, and whose
kingdom was not of this world; that sure no Turk or Infidel was so much an
enemy to Christians, or indeed rather to mankind, as to have desired it.

The state of the Church, and of the Ecclesiastical Laws made by Edward the
sixth.
THe time of this Kings reign, being a Child, (and therefore woeful) and of his
Father, were perilous days: The Father in his Laws scarce ever took advice but
from his passion, lust, or avarice; the Son (although a Prince of infinite hope
and goodness, yet) wanting the authority and reputation requisite in a
Sovereign, was either not able to restrain, or else persuaded it was
beneficial, to give reins to a company of Sacrilegious Harpies, and Courtiers,
to make a total prey not only upon all Colleges, Free-Chappels, Chantries, and
all their Lands, except them of the Universities and some few other, which by
the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 14. were given to Camb. pref. Eliz. Reg. and Life
of Ed. 6.
the King upon specious pretenses; but the Lands of the Bishops generally
became a prey unto them. So much worse is it for every thing to be lawful, then
that any thing should be Law.

It was enacted, That if any man spoke irreverently or contemptuously An. 1.
Ed. 6. c. 6.
of the Sacrament of the Altar, he should be imprisoned and fined at the Kings
will and pleasure; and that Justices of Peace might enquire of offenders: Yet
should not the person offending be arraigned or tried, unless the Bishop of the
Diocese, or his Chancellor, or Deputy learned were required to be at the
Quarter Sessions; to which purpose a new Writ was made. Rex etc. Episc. L.
salutem. Praecipimus tibi, quod tu, Cancellarius tuus, vel alius deputatus tuus
sufficienter eruditus, sitis cum Justiciariis nostris ad pacem in com. nostro
B. conservand. assignat. apud D. tali die, ad sessionem nostram, tunc and
ibidem tenend. ad dand. consilium and advisament. eisdem Justitiariis nostris
ad pacem, super arraiment and deliberationem offendet: contra Formam statuti
concernend. sacrosanctum Sacramentum Altaris. And by this Satute it was
Enacted, that the Sacrament should be delivered to the people under both
Kinds, viz. of Bread and Wine.

From thenceforth no Conge deslier shall be granted, nor any Election An. 1 Ed.
6. Cap. 2.
shall be made of any Archbishop or Bishop, by the Dean and Chapter; but when
any Archbishopric or Bishopric shall be voided, the King by his Letters
Patents may confer the same to any person whom he shall think meet, etc, All
summons, citations, and other process Ecclesiastical, shall be made in the name,
and with the style of the King, as in the Writs of the common Law, and the test
thereof shall be in the name of the Archbishop, or Bishop, etc. All persons
that have the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have in their
Seals of Office, the Kings Arms, with certain characters under them for the
knowledge of their dioces; but the Archbishop of Canterbury shall use his own
Seal, and his own name in all faculties and dispensations.

A man speaking against the Kings Headship of the Church, shall, being An. 1
Ed. 6. Cap. 12.
thereof attaint or convict, forfeit all his Goods and Chattels to the King,
and suffer imprisonment during the Kings will and pleasure for the first
offense: and for the second offense, forfeit to the King the whole issues and
profits of all his Lands, and all his Goods and Chattels, and suffer perpetual
imprisonment: and for the third offense, shall be adjudged a Traitor, and
suffer death, and forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, as
in cases of High Treason. And it shall be deemed Treason for any, by Printing,
Writing, or Deed, to affirm the King not to be Head of the Church.

An Act for uniformity of Service, and administration of Sacraments; being An.
2 and 3 Ed. 6 Cap. 1.
before diverse, and different, viz. of Sarum, of York, of Bangor, and of
Lincoln; and diverse and sundry forms and fashions were used in Cathedrals, and
Parish-Churches of England and Wales, as well concerning Mattens, or Morning
Prayer, and the Evening Song, as also concerning the holy Communion, commonly
called the Mass, with diverse and sundry rites and ceremonies concerning the
same, and in the administration of the Sacraments of the Church: The Statute
does inflict upon every Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister that ought
or should say or sing the said Common Prayer, mentioned in the said Book,
Entitled, the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and
other rites and ceremonies of the Church, after the use of the Church of
England, and shall refuse it, or use any other form, or shall Preach, Declare,
or speak any thing in derogation of the said Book, or any thing contained
therein, and be thereof lawfully convict by a Jury of twelve men, or by
confession, shall forfeit to the King for the first offense, the profit of all
his Spiritual benefices and promotions arising in a whole year, and suffet
imprisonment for six months, without bail or mainprize. And for the second
offense, shall suffer a years imprisonment, and be deprived of all his
spiritual promotions; and for the third offense, shall suffer imprisonment
during life. It was Enacted that the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and
Justices of Assize, should have power and authority in the open and general
Sessions, to hear and determine the offenses committed against this Act; yet so
that every Archbishop, and Bishop had liberty to join and associate himself to
the said Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or to the Justices of Assize.

All books called Antiphoners, Missals, Grails, Portuasses, Primers in Latin
An. 3. and 4. Ed. 6. Cap. 10.
or in English, and other books used for service in the Church (saving such as
are set forth by the Kings Authority) shall be clearly abolished. All Images,
graven, painted, or carved, taken out of any Church or Chapel, and the
aforesaid books shall be defaced, or openly burnt.

Such form and manner of making and consecrating of Archbishops, and Anno 3 and
4. Ed. 6. Cap. 12.
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and other Ministers of the Church, as by six
Prelates, and six other men of this Realm, learned in the Law of God, by the
King to be appointed and assigned, or by most of the number of them shall be
devised for that purpose, and set forth under the Great Seal before the first
of April next coming, shall be lawfully exercised and used, and none other.

An Act for uniformity of Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments An. 5.
and 6. Ed. 6. Cap. 1.
in the English Tongue; and that every person upon every Sunday and Holiday
(having no lawful cause to be absent) do resort to his Parish Church; and they
which refuse, are to be punished by the censure of the Church: and that all
persons who shall be at any other common prayer or Sacraments, shall for the
first offense, suffer Imprisonment for six months, without bail or mainprise,
for the second Imprisonment during a whole year, and for the third Imprisonment
during life.

All the Sundays of the year, the Feast of our Lord Jesus, his Circumcision, of
the Epiphany, of the Purification of the blessed Virgin, of St. Matthew An. 5.
and 6. Ed. 6. Cap. 2.
the Apostle, of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, of St. Mark the
Evangelist, of St. Philip and Jacob the Apostles, of the Ascension of our Lord
Jesus Christ, of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, of St. Peter the
Apostle, of St. James the Apostle, of St. Barthelomew the Apostle, of St.
Matthew the Apostle, of St. Michael the Archangel, of St. Luke the Evangelist,
of St. Simon and Jude the Apostles, of All Saints, of St. Andrew the Apostle,
of St. Thomas the Apostle, of the Nativity of our Lord, of St. Stephen the
Martyr, of St. John the Evangelist, of the holy Innocents, Monday and Tuesday
in Easter-week, Monday and Tuesday in Whitson-week, are to be observed and kept
for Holy days, and none other.

And that every even, or day next going before any of the aforesaid days of the
Feasts, of the Nativity of our Lord, of Easter, of the Ascension of our Lord,
Pentecost, of the Purification, of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, of
all Saints, and of all the Feasts of the Apostles (other then the Feasts of St.
John the Evangelist, and Philip and Jacob) shall be kept for fasting days, and
none other. Archbishops, Bishops in their Dioces, and all other, having
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Jurisdiction, may enquire of every person offending
in the premises, and punish every offender by censures of the Church, and
enjoin him such penance as by the spiritual Judge shall be thought meet.

This Statute does not abrogate abstinence from flesh in Lent, and Fridays and
Saturdays, or any day appointed to be kept by virtue of an Act made the second
and third Ed. 6. Cap. 19.

When any Holy day happens on the Monday, the fast of that day shall be kept
upon the Saturday immediately before, and not upon the Sunday.

A view of the Reformation of Ed. 6. and of the lawfulness of it.
That the Book of commom Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, The
Reformation made by Ed. 6. was not merely a civil sanction.
and other rites and ceremonies of the Church, after the use of the Church of
England, was framed and composed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain
of the most learned and discreet Bishops of the Land, assembled to that purpose
by the King, is clearly expressed in the Preface to the Act of the 2. and 3.
Ed. 6. Cap. 1.

The right that Christian Kings have to call and assemble Synods, It is no new
thing for Kings to assemble the Bishops and Church to redress and reform errors.
Councels and Convocations, for the redress and reformation of errors and
corruptions in the Church, is properly the subject of another Treatise; but
that the Kings and supreme Powers before Christianity under the old Law, from
Moses to Maccabees, did always use it; and that the first great Nicene Council,
the second general Council at Constantinople, the third at Ephesus, the fourth
at Calcedon, the fifth at Constantinople, the sixth at Constantinople, the
seventh at Ephesus, were all called by Christian Emperors, is manifested by the
Bishop of Winchester, Andrews, in the Sermon of the Right and Power of calling
Assemblies; nor were the general Councels convoked by Emperors; but the
Emperors and Kings did convoke, and assemble Provincial and National Assemblies
and Synods: He shows that the Bishop of Syracuse in Sicily, and Restitutus
Bishop of London in Britain, were summoned to a Synod in France, by the Emperor
Constantine' Writ only; this was in the beginning of his Reign; in the latter
end of it; in the thirtieth year of his Reign; and the year before his death,
he called the Council at Tire, and from thence removed it to Jerusalem, and
from thence called them to appear before himself at Constantinople. After him
Constans called one at Sardis, Valentinian at Lampsacus, Theodosius at
Aquileia, Gratian at Thessalonica, Nay, when the Emperors were professed
Arrians, even then did the Bishops acknowledge their power to call Councels;
came to them being called, sued to them that they might be called; came to them
as Hosius to that of Arimine; Liberius to that of Sirmium, and that of
Seleucia, sued for them as Liberius to Constantius: as Leo to Theodosius, for
the second Ephesine Council; Innocentius to Arcadius: and sometime they sped as
Leo; and sometime not as Liberius, and Innocentius, and yet when they sped not,
they held themselves quiet, and never presumed to draw themselves together of
their own heads.

After the Empire fell in pieces, and the Western Empire fell into the hands of
Kings; in Italy, Theodoric called one at Rome; Alaric at Agatha: In France,
Clowis (the first Christian King there) called one at Orleans; Childebert at
Auvern, Theodebert called another at Orleans; and Cherebert at Toures: And
after them, Gunthramn, Clowis, Carloman and Pepin; at Masscon first and second;
at Chalons: That which is called Francia, and that which is in Vernis. Twenty
of them at least in France.

In Spain by ten several Kings, in two Councels at Braccara, and in ten at
Tolledo, by the space of three hundred years together. And how? under what
terms? Peruse the Council themselves, their very acts spoke, Ex praecepto,
Imperio, Jussu, Sanctione, Nutu, Decreto, Ex evocatione, Dispositione Regis:
One says, Potestas permissa est nobis; another, facultas data est nobis: a
third, Injunctu est nobis a rege: and this for about eight hundred years after
Christ.

Then arose another Empire here in the West under Charles the Great; and he
called six several Councils, at Frankfort, Arles, Tours, Chalons, Mentz, and
Rhemes. And what says he in them? In that at Rhemes: In conventu mere priscorum
Imperatorum congregato a piissimo Domino nostro Carolo; That he called that
Convention by no other right, then as the manner of the ancient Emperors had
been to do.

After him, Ludovicus Pius, Lotharius, Ludovicus Balbus, Carolus Calvus,
Carolus Crassus, and Arnulphus, at the several Councils of Aken, Mentz, Melden,
Worms, Colen, and Tribur; and so held it nine hundred years after Christ; for
about that year (a year or two over or under) was holden the Council at Tribur
in Germany, by the Emperors decree, and himself President in it. Nor are the
Kings of England less absolute, then either Emperors, Kings of Spain or France.
And see B. Bramhalls Just Vindication of the Church of England, cap. 7. how the
Emperors, Kings of France, Spain and Portugal, have by their own authority
convened National and Provincial Councils, which have not only determined
without the Papal authority, but very often in contradiction to it. Nor are
either the English or British Churches, or ever were, less free then the
Gallicane, the liberties whereof in the Chapter aforesaid are set down, viz.

1. The Pope cannot command or ordain any thing directly or indirectly
concerning any Temporal affairs, within the Dominions of the King of France.

2. The Spiritual authority and power of the Pope, is not absolute in The
privileges of the Gallican Church.
France, but limited and restrained to the canons and rules of the ancient
Councils of the Church, and received in that Kingdom.

3. No command whatsoever of the Pope can free the French Clergy from their
obligation to obey the commands of their Sovereign.

4. The most Christian King has had power at all times, according to the
occurrence and exigence of affairs, to assemble or cause to be assembled Synods
Provincial or National, and therein to treat not only of such things as concern
the conservation of the Civil estate, but also of such things as concern
Ecclesiastical order and discipline in his own dominions; and therein to make
Rules, Chapters, Laws, Ordinances, and Pragmatique Sanctions in his own name,
and by his own authority. Many of which have been received among the Decrees of
the Catholic Church, and some of them approved by General Councils.

5. The Pope cannot send a Legate a latere into France, with power to reform,
judge, collate, dispense, or do such things accustomed to be specified in the
autoritative Bull of his Legation, except it be upon the desire, or with the
approbation of the most Christian King. Neither can the said Legate execute his
charge, until he has promised to the King in writing, under his oath upon his
holy Orders, not to make use of his Legantine power in the Kings dominions,
longer then it shall please the King; and that so soon as he shall be
admonished of the Kings pleasure to forbid it, he shall give it over: And that
whilst he does use it, shall be exercised conformable to the Kings will,
without attempting any thing to the prejudice of the Decrees of General
Councils, or the Liberties and Privileges of the Gallicane Church, and the
Universities of France.

6. The Commissions and Bulls of the Popes Legate are to be seen, examined and
approved by the Court of Parliament, and to be registered and published with
such cautions and modifications, as that Court shall judge expedient for the
good of the Kingdom, and to be executed according to the said cautions, and not
otherwise.

7. The Prelates of the French Church (although commanded by the Pope) for what
cause soever it be, may not depart out of the Kingdom, without the Kings
commandment or license.

8. The Pope cannot by himself, or his delegates, judge any thing which
concerns the state, pre-eminence or privileges of the Crown of France, nor any
thing pertaining to it; nor can there be any question or process about the
state or pretensions of the King, but in his Courts.

9. Papal Bulls, Citations, Excommunications, etc. are not to be executed in
France, without the Kings command or permission; and after permission, only by
the authority of the King, and not by authority of the Pope, to shun mixture
and confusion of Jurisdictions.

10. Neither the King nor his Realm, nor his Officers, can be excommunicated or
interdicted by the Pope, nor his Subjects absolved from their Oath of
Allegiance.

11. The Pope cannot impose Pensions in France upon any Benefices having cure
of souls, nor upon any others, but according to the canons, according to the
express condition of resignation, or ad redimendum vexationem.

12. All Bulls and Missives, which come from Rome to France, are to be seen and
visited, to try if there be nothing in them prejudicial in any manner to the
estate and liberties of the Church of France, or to the Royal authority.

13. It is lawful to appeal from the Pope to a future Council.

14. Ecclefiastical persons may be convented, judged and sentenced before a
Secular Judge, for the first grievous or enormous crime, or for lesser offenses
after a Relapse, which renders them incorrigible in the eye of the Law.

15. All places of France are obliged to swear fealty to the King, and to
receive from him investitures for their fees and manors.

16. The Courts of Parliament, in case of Appeals as from abuse, have right and
power to declare null, void, and to revoke the Popes Bull and Excommunications,
and to forbid the execution of them, when they are found contrary to Sacred
Decrees, the liberty of the French Church, or the Prerogative Royal.

17. General Councils are above the Pope, and may depose him and put another in
his place, and take cognizance of Appeals from the Pope.

18. All Bishops have their power immediately from Christ, not from the Pope,
and are equally successors of S. Peter and of the other Apostles, and Vicars of
Christ.

19. Provisions, Reservations, Expective graces, etc. have no place in France.

20. The Pope cannot exempt any Church, Monastery, or Ecclesiastical body from
the jurisdiction of the Ordinary, nor erect Bishoprics into Archbishopricks,
nor unite them, nor divide them without the Kings license.

21. All those are not Heretics, excommunicated, or damned, who differ in some
things from the doctrine of the Pope, who appeal from his decrees, and hinder
the execution of the ordinances of him or his Legates.

Although the Sesession of the Church, King, and Kingdom of England, The
reformation of King 1 d. was not Schismatical.
from the Papacy, were an Act of Schism; yet being done in the Reign of H. 8.
one of the greatest favorers of the Papacy that ever was King of England, and
to his death, as great an assertor of the Rites, Ceremonies, and Religion of
it, and in such a state independent from the Church of Rome, was the Church and
Kingdom at the time of Edwards Reformation; whatsoever therefore his
Reformation was, yet could it not be Schismatical.

Whatever the Romanists pretend to unity and peace in their Church, yet The
rites and ceremonies of Edwards reformation, were more uniform then before.
it is most manifest, that in the Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, in
several places were used diverse forms of Prayer, commonly called the Service of
the Church, viz. that of Sarum, of York, of Bangor and Lincoln; but also of
late, diverse and sundry forms and fashions were used in the Cathedral, and
Parishes Church of England and Wales, as well concerning the mattens, or
morning prayer, and evening song, as also concerning the holy Communion,
commonly called the Mass, with diverse and sundry rites and ceremonies
concerning the same, and in the administration of other Sacraments of See
preamble to the Statute of 2 and 3. Ed. 6. Cap. 1. That the Scriptures, Lords
Prayer, and Creed, should be read in the English tongue, is no new thing in
England.
the Church, whereas the service enjoined in the Reign of Ed. 6 was uniform in
all places of England and Wales, as well in Parish Churches as Cathedrals.

In the Reign of King Ethelbald, in the year of our Saviors incarnation 748. in
a convocation held in the Province of Canterbury, Cuthbert, the Archbishop of
his Clergy did Enact, that the sacred Scriptures should be read in their
monasteries, the Lords Prayer and Creed, taught in the English tongue. Speed in
the Reign of Ethelbald, para. 4. page 343. and how much it was against the Word
of God, and the custom of the ancient Church, to use a tongue unknown to the
people, in common prayer, and administration of Sacraments, see the conference
at Westminster, an primo Eliz. which were never yet answered, that I know of.

If any thing Heretical had been contained in the common Prayer, administration
Edwards reformation was not Heretical.
of Sacraments, etc. made in the Reign of Ed. 6. it would have been
sufficiently shot at, having so many adversaries at home and abroad; but no
such crime was ever (that I ever heard of) imputed to it; if there be, let the
adversaries of it yet show it, and affirmanti incumbit probatio.

If then not only the Kings and supreme powers always under the old Covenant,
King Edwards Reformation was warrant-able, materially and formally.
had this right of invoking the high Priest, and other Priests; and if God
always punished the Kings of Judah and Israel for suffering the people to
commit Idolatry; and if God himself so often commends the zeal and reformation
of Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Asa, Josiah, etc. and if ever since Christianity, the
Bishops by that Divine Canon to Timothy, have always had in 1 Timothy cap 2.
their particular Churches, right of composing public Liturgies, and in
national Synods, a right of composing public and national Liturgies: And the
Liturgy of Edward being composed, and received by the Bishops of the Church of
England, to that end convened and assembly by the King; this Liturgy being
neither schismattical, nor containing any thing heretical, is both for matter
and form, warrantable.

Object. If the Sacrilege and extention of the civil Jurisdiction in giving
the civil Magistrate license to take cognizance of the public Liturgy, and
administration of the Sacraments be objected:

The answer is easy, Let the Courtiers and Parliament answer for it; the
Church was patient, not agent in them.

The Church of Rome having robbed the poor laity of one half of the institution
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and kept the people in such The King and
Church had great reason to make Reformation in Religion.
stupid ignorance, that in the public worship and service of God, they should
neither use their reason nor understanding, by imposing it upon them in an
unknown tongue; as if in the public worship and service of God, he were not to
be served by intellectual and rational creatures, and had filled the Mass with
more prayers to the Virgin Mary and Saints: (which could no ways relieve them,
and so at best super fluous and vain) there was great reason in the King and
Church, to a make a reformation of the Religion and public Worship and Service
of God.

Of Queen Mary's Ecclesiastical Laws.
Although King Ed. were a Prince of transcendent Virtue and Learning far above
his years, yet doubtless his youth was not only much abused in his Reign,
where a man might have seen all the woes pronounced by God, upon that Nation,
where the King is a child, or where a company of men in Parliament arrogate to
themselves the Politic capacity of a King, abstracted from his person; but
also at his very death (caused, not without suspicion of poison,) was he
deluded upon specious pretenses by his whole Council, but principally by the
Duke of Northumberland (to make way for the Lady Jane Gray, in the time of his
sickness married to his fourth son Guilford Dudley) to declare the said Lady
Jane the rightful heir and successor to the English Monarchy, to the manifest
wrong and injury, not only of Queen Mary, and Elizabeth, afterward Queens of
England, but also of Mary Queen of Scots, heir to Margaret the eldest daughter
of Henry the seventh; whereas the Lady Janes Title was descended from Mary the
younger daughter of H. 7. yet it so pleased God, that this unjust Will, should
only bring destruction both to the Lady Jane and her husband: whereas the
Ladies, Mary and Elizabeth, and the Posterity of Mary Queen of Scots, did all
succeed and enjoy the possession of the English Diadem, of which they were
debarred by this Will of King Edward. That the Title of Head of the Church was
continued by Queen Mary, appears by the Parliament begun and holden at
Westminster the fifth of October, in the first year of her Reign, in the first
and second session of it, where she is styled, our Gracious Sovereign Lady,
Mary by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, and in Earth Supreme Head of the Church of England and Ireland; but in
the second Parliament of her Reign, being holden at Westminster, the second of
April, the first year of her Reign, the Title of Supreme Head of the Church of
England and Ireland, is not mentioned.

Declares Queen Mary to be born in lawful Matrimony, and all sentences Stat.
An. Pri. Cap. 1. sess. 2. Mariae.
of divorce to the contrary repealed; particularly the sentence of Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, touching the Kings marriage with Queen
Katherine, and the two Acts of Parliament of the 25 H. 8. 22. and 28 H. 8. 7.
confirming the same.

A Repeal of the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. 2. made against such as speak unreverently
St. An. Pri. Ma. sess. 2. Cap. 2.
of the body and blood of Christ, and of the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. 2. touching
Election of Bishops, and the 2 Ed. 6. 1. concerning the uniformity of service,
and administration of the Sacraments: and of 2 Ed. 6. 21. made to take away all
positive Laws, ordained against the marriage of Priests. and of the 3 Ed. 6.
10. made for the abolishing of diverse books and Images; and of the 3 Ed. 6. 12.
made for the ordering of Ecclesiastical Ministers: and of the 5 Ed. 6. 1. made
for the uniformity of common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments: and of
the 5 Ed. 6. 3. made for the keeping of Holy days, and Fasting days: and of the
5 Ed. 6. 12. touching the Marriage of Priests, and legitimation of their
children. All such divine service, and administration of Sacraments, as were
most commonly used in England in the last year of H. 8. shall be used through
the Realm, after the 20 day of December Anno Dom. 1553. and no other kind of
service, nor administration of Sacraments.

It is Enacted, That if any person or persons, of their own power and
authority, after the 20. of December, shall willingly, and of purpose, by open
or St. An. 1 Mariae Sess. 2. Cap. 3.
overt word, fact, etc. maliciously or contemptuously neglect, vex, or disturb,
etc. any Preacher or Preachers licensed, allowed or authorized to Preach by the
Queens Highness, or by any Archbishop, or Bishop of this Realm, or by any other
lawful Ordinary, or by either of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or
otherwise lawfully authorized by reason of his Cure or Benefice, etc. in any
open Sermon, Preaching or Collation, in any Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, etc.

Or if any person shall wilfully disturb, etc. any Parson, Vicar,
Parish Priest, Curat, or other lawful Priest, saying or celebrating the Mass,
or other divine service, sacraments, or sacramentals, as was commonly
frequented and used in the last year of H. 8. or afterward should be allowed
and set forth, or authorized by the Queen.

Or if any person shall contemptuously, unlawfully, or maliciously deface,
spoil, abuse, or unreverently handle or order the most blessed, comfortable and
holy sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
commonly called the Sacrament of the Altar, being in any Church, Chapel, or
other decent place, or the Piece, or Canapy wherein the same Sacrament is, or
shall be, or pull down, deface, spoil, or otherwise break any Altar or Altars,
or any Crucifix, or Cross in any Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, That then
every such offender, his ayders and abettors, shall be apprehended, etc. by the
Constable or Churchwarden of the place wherein the said offenses shall be
committed.

Which persons so apprehended, etc, with convenient speed shall be brought, and
carried to any Justice of Peace within the said Shire, etc. where the said
offense shall be committed, and the said Justice of Peace upon due accusation,
shall forthwith commit the said person or persons, to safe custody, as by the
discretion of the said Justice shall be thought meet, and within six days next
after such accusation, the said Justice, with other Justices of Peace in the
said Shire, City, etc. shall diligently examine the acts and offenses aforesaid.

And if two of the said Justices of Peace shall upon examination, find the
person or persons so accused, guilty of any of the said offenses, by two
sufficient witnesses, or by confession, the said Justices of Peace shall commit
the person or persons so accused, to the Gaol of the County, City, Borough,
etc. where the said offenses were committed, without bail or mainprize, by the
space of three months, and further to the next quarter sessions to be holden
in the said shire, city, borough, etc. next after the end of the said three
months, which quarter sessions the party offending, upon his repentance and
reconciliation, shall be discharged out of prison, upon sufficient security for
his good behavior for one whole year; but if he or they will not repent and be
reconciled, then to be committed again to the said Gaol, there to remain until
he or they shall repent and be reconciled for their offenses.

If any person shall receive the offender or disturb the arrest, he shall
forfeit to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, for every such offense the
sum of five pounds. If any offender be not taken, but escape he shall
forfeit to the Queen for every such escape five pounds.

The Justices of Peace, Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, all
Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of Peace, within any City, Borough, or
Town-corporate, have power and authority to enquire into, hear and determine
the offenses and misdemeanors aforesaid, and to set fines and amerciaments
therefore.

This Act does not take away any authority, jurisdiction, etc. of
Ecclesiastical Laws then in force.

This Statute repeales all Statutes made against the Church of Rome,
particularly Anno 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.
the Statute of 21 H. 8. 13. made against plurality of Benefices, taking of
Farms by Spiritual men* and non residence. The Statute of 23 H. 8. 9. That no
person shall be cited out of his Diocese wherein he or she dwells, except for
certain cases. Stat. 24 H. 8. 12. That Appeals in such cases as had been proved
in the Sea of Rome should not from henceforth be had, nor used but within this
Realm. Stat. 25 H. 8. 19. entitled The submission of the Clergy to the Kings
Majesty. Stat. 25 H. 8. 20. concerning restraints of Payments of Primates and
First Fruits of Arch-bishopricks and Bishoprics to the Sea of Rome. Stat. 25
H. 8. 21. concerning the exoneration of the Kings Subjects from exactions and
impositions before that time paid to the Sea of Rome, and for having licenses
and dispensations within this Realm, without suing further for the same. Stat.
26 H. 8. 1. concerning the Kings being supreme head of the Church, and to have
Authority to reform, and redress all errors, heresies, and abuses in the same.
Stat. 26 H. 8. 14. for nomination and confirmation of Suffragans within this
Realm. Stat. 27 H. 8. 15. whereby the King should have power to nominate 32.
persons of his Clergy and Lay Fee for making Ecclesiastical Laws. Stat. 28 H.
8. 10. Extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome. Stat. 28. H. 8. 16.
For release of such as then had obtained pretenced licenses and dispensations
from the Sea of Rome. Stat. 28. H. 8. 7. for the establishment of the
succession of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that concerns a Prohibition
to marry within the Degrees expressed in the said Act. Stat. 31 H. 8. 9.
authorizing the King to make Bishops by his Letters Patents. Stat. 32 H. 8. 38.
concerning precontracts of Marriages, and touching degrees of consanguinity.
Stat. 35 H. 8. 3. for ratification of the Kings Style. The corporal oath made
in the Stat. of 35 H. 8. 1. that every Subject of this Realm should be bound to
take against the power, authority, and jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome. Stat.
37 H. 8. 17. That the Doctors of the Civil Law which were married might
exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. So much of that Statute of the first Ed.
6. 1. as contains certain Provisions, Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, for and
against such as should by open preachings, express words, sayings, writing,
printing, overt-deed or act, affirm or set forth, That the King of this Realm,
for the time being, is not, or ought not to be the supreme head in earth of the
Churches of England and Ireland, nor of any of them; or that the Bishop of
Rome, or any other person or persons, other than the K. of England for the time
being, is or ought to be supreme head of the same Churches, or any of them, as
in the said Act more at large may appear. It is enacted, that these clauses,
and other of the foresaid Act concerning the Supremacy, and all, and every
branch, article, words, and sentence in the same, sounding or tending to the
Derogation of the supremacy of the Popes Holiness, or the Sea of Rome, and all
pains, penalties and forfeitures made against them, that should by any means
set forth or extol the said Supremacy, should from thenceforth be utterly void.

It did moreover generally repeal all clauses, sentences and articles of every
other Statute made since the 20 H. 8. against the supreme authority of the
Popes Holiness, or See Apostolic of Rome.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons professing themselves reduced
and received by their Majesty's intercession to the unity of Christ's Church,
and obedience of the Apostolic See of Rome, and the Pope governing the same,
did make humble suite to their Majesty's to be Intercessors, that by authority
of the Popes Holiness, and by the ministration of Cardinal Poole, by
dispensation, tolleration, or permission, respectively as the case shall
require, be abolished these Articles following, and generally all others, when
any occasion shall so require, may be provided for and confirmed.

1. That all Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, Hospitalls, Colleges, Schools,
and other such foundations now continuing, made by authority of Parl. or
otherwise established according to the order of the Laws of this Realm, since
the Schism, may be confirmed and continue for ever.

2. That Marriages made infragradus Prohibitos, consanguinitatis, affinitatis,
cognationis spiritualis, or what might be made void propter impedimentum
Publicae honestatis justitiae, or for any cause prohibited by the Canons only,
may be confirmed; and children born of those Marriages declared legitimate, so
as those Marriages were made according to the Laws of the Realm for the time
being, and be not directly against the Laws of God, nor in such case as the Sea Apostolic has not used to dispense withal.

3. That institution of Benefices and other promotions Ecclesiastical, and
dispensations made according to the form of the Act of Parliament may likewise
be confirmed.

4. That all Judicial Processes made before any Ordinaries of this Realm, or
before any Delegates upon any Appeals, according to the order of the Laws of
this Realm, may likewise be ratified and confirmed.

5. That the Lands and Goods of Bishoprics, Monasteries, Chanteries, etc.
dispersed abroad to sundry persons by gift, exchange, purchase, etc. according
to the Laws of the Land for the time being, shall so continue.

It was enacted, that the title of supreme head of the Church, never was nor
could be attributed to by any King or Governor.

It was enacted that all Bulls, Dispensations, and Privileges obtained before
the 20 year of H. 8. or any time since of the Sea of Rome, and not containing
matter prejudicial to the Imperial Crown, or Laws of this Realm, should be
put in execution.

This Statute did restore the Pope and Apostolic See, together with the
Jurisdiction the Bishops had in the Realm, to all the Authority they had before
the 20 of H. 8.

It is a very remarkable thing that this Statute does affirm, that nothing
done or moved in this Statute should be prejudicall to the Liberties of the
Crown, before the 20 of H. 8. and that the Statute of 24 H. 8. 12. and the
Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 20. which takes away all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
from the Pope, and vests it in the King, should be but declaratory of the
ancient and common Law of this Land. See Coke de jure Regis Ecclesiastico 28.
a. b. 31. one of these must necessarily be false.

Thus did Queen Mary restore by Parl, all the Papal Jurisdiction, which
Description of Queen Mary.
was exercised before the 20 of Henry the 8. and would have restored all the
Abbey and Chantery Lands taken away by her Father and Brother, had it been in
her power; but many alienations, descents, and purchases having been made of
them, she was not able to perform it, being a Princess no doubt, wondrous free
from sacrilege, zealous and constant in her Religion, merciful (when her
Religion was not concerned) and just: Her mercy appears in her not only
pardoning all the Council, who had subscribed to her disinheriting; but it was
thought she would not have taken away the life of the Lady Jane (although
guilty of so high a crime, as having actually invaded the Crown) if the Duke of
Suffolk her Father (formerly pardoned by the Queens mere grace) had not most
unjustly and unthankfully excited her Subjects against her, which together with
Wiats Rebellion, for her own security, did necessitate her for her own security
to execute her. Her justice appears in this; the Lord Sturton having been at
variance with one Hargill and his Son, Gentlemen, knocked the poor Gentlemen on
the head, and after cut their throats, and buried their bodies in a Pit 15.
foot deep, hoping this villainy would never come to light, or if it did, he
assured himself of the Queens favor, being zealously addicted to the Popish
Religion; which did him not good, for the Queen abhorred and rejected all
mention of Pardon for him, only he had this grace, that the other Murderers
were hanged in a hempen, but he in a silken halter,

Ecclesiastical Laws made in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
IT is declared that in the Reign of H. 8. diverse good Laws and Statutes Anno
1. Eliz. cap. 1.
were made, as well for the utter extinguishing of all usurped and foreign
Powers and Authorities of this Realm, and other her dominions and Countries, as
also for the restoring, and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the
ancient Jurisdiction, Authorities, Superiorities and Preheminencies to the same
of right belonging and appertaining; By reason whereof her most humble Subjects
from the time of the 25 H. 8. were continually kept in good order, and were
disburdened of diverse great and intolerable charges and vexations, before that
time unlawfully taken and exacted by such foreign Power and Authority as before
that was usurped. * And to the The Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. cap. 8. which
restored to the Pope all which this Stat. takes away, declares that nothing was
done prejudicial to the Crown in so doing.
intent that all usurped power, Spiritual and Temporal, might for ever be
extinguished, and never be used or obeyed in this Realm, or any other her
Majesty's Dominions: It was therefore by the Authority of that Parliament
enacted, That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate Spiritual
or Temporal, should at any time after the last day of that Session of
Parliament use, enjoy, or exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction,
Authority, Pre-eminence or Privilege Spiritual or Ecclesiastical within this
Realm, or within any other the Queens Dominions or Countries, that then were,
or hereafter should be; but from henceforth the same should be clearly
abolished out of this Realm, and all other her Dominions for ever. And it was
then also established and enacted, That such Jurisdiction, Privileges,
Superiorities and Preheminences, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had heretofore been, or might
lawfully be exercised or used for the visitation of Ecclesiastical state and
persons, and for reformation, order and correction of the same, and of all
manner of errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and
enormities, should for ever by authority of that Parliament be united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: And that the Queen her Heirs and
Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, should have full power and authority
by virtue of that Act, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to
assign, name and authorize, when, and as often as the Queen, her Heirs and
Successors shall think meet and convenient: and for such and so long time as
should please the Queen, her heirs and successors, such person or persons being
natural born Subjects to the Queen, her heirs or successors, as the said Queen
her heirs or successors should think meet, to exercise, use, occupy and execute
under the said Queen, her heirs and successors, all manner of Jurisdictions,
Privileges and Preheminences in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these Realms of England or Ireland, or
any other her Dominions and Countries; and to visit, reform, redress, order,
correct and amend all such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, contempts and
enormities whatsoever, which by any manner spiritual, or ecclesiastical
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, could or might lawfully be reformed,
ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended to the pleasure of
Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and conservation of the peace and unity
of this Realm. And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned,
authorized and appointed by the said Queen, her heirs and successors, after the
said Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, should
have full power and authority by virtue of that Act, and of the Letters Patents
under the said Queen, her heirs and successors, to exercise, use, and execute
all the premises according to the tenor and effect of the said Letters
Patents, any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

This Statute does create the oath of Supremacy to be taken by all men who hold
any Office, or take from the Queen her heirs and successors any Fees or Wages
within this Realm, or other her Highness Realms or Domiminions: the form and
tenor of it is,

I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other her Highness
Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
causes, as Temporal; and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm; and
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdiction, Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise, that from henceforth I shall
bear faith and true allegiance to the Queens Majesty, her Heirs, and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities, granted or belonging to the Queens
Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

If any person dwelling or inhabiting within this Realm, or any other of the
Queens, should within 30. days after the determination of the Session of that
Parliament, by Writing, Printing Teaching, etc. maintain any foreign Power or
Jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual; or shall advisedly put in use any
such foreign Power or Jurisdiction within any of her Highness Dominions, he and
his Aiders, Abettors, Counselors, etc. shall forfeit to the Queen, her Heirs
and Successors, all his goods and chattels, as well real as personal.

If any person so convict be not worth in Goods and Chattels the sum of 20 s.
every such person upon conviction, over and besides the forfeiture of his Goods
and Chattels, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of a whole year without
Bail or Mainprise.

And that all and every the Benefices, Prebends, and other Ecclesiastical
promotions and dignities of every person spiritual so offending and being
attaint, shall be utterly void; and the Patron and Donor may present, as if the
Incumbent were actually dead. For the second offense the party offending shall
incur the danger of a Praemunire. For the third offense after conviction and
Attainder the party offending shall suffer death, and forfeiture of all his
Goods, as in case of High Treason.

The offender must be impeached for preaching, teaching or speaking any thing
against the Premises, within a year after such preaching, teaching or
speaking: and if any person shall be imprisoned for preaching, teaching or
speaking against this Statute, and if be not indicted within the space of one
half year next after his offense, that he be discharged and set at liberty.

No matter of Religion, or cause Ecclesiastical made by this Parliament shall
be judged Error, Heresy, Schism, or schismatic opinion.

Such Persons as shall be authorized by Letters Patents under the Broadseale
of England, shall have jurisdiction, power or authority spiritual to visit,
reform, order or correct any errors, heresies, schisms, abuses or enormities:
But by virtue of this Act they have not authority to determine or adjudge any
thing to be heresy, but only such as heretofore have been determined by
Canonicall-Scripture, or the 4 first general Counsels, or any of them, or by
any General Council, wherein the same was declared heresy by express and
plain words of Scripture, or such as should be determined Heresy by the high
Court of Parl. with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation.

This Statute revives the 23 H. 8. 9. 24 H. 8. 12. 25 H. 8. 20. 25 H. 8. 21. 26
H. 8. 14. 28 H. 8. 16. So much of the Act of the 32 H. 8. 38. concerning
precontracts of Marriages, and touching degrees of Consanguinity as by the 2
Ed. 6. 23. was not repealed, the 37 H. 8. 17. the 1 Ed. 6. 1.

This Act repeales the Statute of the 1 and 2. Ph. and M. 6. the 1 and 2 Ph.
and M. 8, except those things touching the Praemunire in the said Statute: It
repeales the 5 R. 2. 5. the 2 H. 4. 15. the 2 H. 5. 7. made for the punishment
of Heresies, by fire and faggot.

This statute repeales the statute of the first of Mary and the 2, and revives
Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 2.
the statute of the 5 and 6 of Ed. 6. for the uniformity of Prayer and
administration of the Sacraments, with the alteration or addition of certain
Lessons to be used every Sunday of the year, and the form of the Letany
altered and corrected, and two sentences only added in the delivery of the
Sacrament to the Communicants.

If any Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister, that ought or should say
or sing Common Prayer, mentioned in the said Book, in such Cathedral or
Parish Church, or other places where he should Minister the same, in such
manner and form as is mentioned in the said Book, refuse to do the same, or
use any other form, or shall preach, declare or speak any thing in derogation
of the said book or any thing therein contained, or any part thereof, and
shall thereof be lawfully convicted, according to the Laws of the Land, by the
Verdict of 12 men, or confession, or notorious evidence of the fact; shall
forfeit to the Queen, etc. for the first offense, the profits of one whole
year, next after such conviction, of all his spiritual Benefices, and suffer
imprisonment for the space of six months without Bail or Mainprize.

If any such person, once convicted concerning the Premises, shall after such
conviction offend, and be thereof lawfully convict, shall suffer imprisonment
for the space of one whole year, and be deprived ipso facto of all his
spiritual promotions; and that it shall be lawful for all Patrons and Donors
of such Spiritual promotions to present or collate to the same as if the
person or persons so offending were dead.

If any person be convicted the third time of the premises, he shall ipso
facto be deprived of all his spiritual promotions, and shall suffer
imprisonment during life.

Any person that shall offend, and be convicted inform aforesaid, concerning
any of the premises, not being beneficial, or having any spiritual
promotion, shall for the first offense after such conviction, suffer
imprisonment for the space of one whole year without Bail or Mainprise: and for
the second offense, after lawful conviction, shall suffer imprisonment during
life.

If any person shall do or speak any thing in derogation of the book of
Common Prayer, or disturb or interrupt any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister in
any Cathedral or Parshi Church or Chapel in the celebration of the
Common Prayer, or ministration of the Sacraments; or shall compel or cause any
other Service to be celebrated, being thereof lawfully convict, shall for the
first offense forfeit to the Queen, etc. the sum of one hundred Marks, and
for the second offense the sum of four hundred Marks, and for the third
offense he shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, and suffer imprisonment
during life.

If any person shall for the first offense be convict of the premises in form
aforesaid, and shall not pay the sum to be paid by virtue of his conviction,
that instead thereof he shall suffer imprisonment for the space of 6. months
without Bail or Mainprise; and he that shall not pay for the second conviction
shall suffer imprisonment for the space of 12. months without Bail or Mainprise.

Every person shall (having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent)
diligently and faithfully endeavor to resort to the usual places where
Common Prayer and such Service of God shall be used, upon Sundays and other
days appointed to be kept holy, and there abide orderly and soberly during the
time of Common Prayer, Preaching, and other Service of God, upon pain of
punishment by censures of the Church, and twelve pence to be levied by the
Churchwardens to those of the poor of the Parish by way of distress.

The Ordinaries, and all other Officers Ecclesiastical, as well in places
exempt as not exempt within their Diocese, have power and authority by this Act
to correct, and reform, and punish by Church censures all who shall offend
within their Jurisdictions.

The Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assise in open and
general Sessions have power to hear, determine and punish these offenses, yet
so that every Archbishop and Bishop in their several Diocesses by virtue of
this Act may associate or join themselves with the said Justices.

No person shall be molested for any offenses abovesaid, unless he be indicted
at the next general Sessions, next after such offenses are committed.

All Lords of Parliament for their third offense shall be tried by their Peers.

Chief Officers of Cities and Boroughs have the like authority to hear and
determine the offenses aforesaid, as the Justices of Assize, and Oyer and
Determiner have.

Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons and other
Ordinaries, having any peculiar Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, have by virtue of
this Act power in their Visitations, Synods, and elsewhere within their
Jurisdictions, to enquire and take the accusations, and informations of all the
offenses aforesaid, and to punish the same by Admonition, Excommunication,
Sequestration, or Deprivation, and other censures, in like form as heretofore
has been used by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws.

Any person offending in the premises, and punished therefore by the Ordinary,
having a testimonial thereof under the Ordinaries Seal, shall not for the same
offense be convicted before the Justices; and likewise punished for the first
offense by the Justices, he shall not again receive punishment of the Ordinary.

Such Ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers shall be retained Anno 5
Eliz. cap. 1.
and be in use, as was in this Church of England by authority of Parliament in
the 2 year of the Reign of Ed. 6. until other Order shall be taken by
authority of the Queen, with the advice of the Commissioners appointed and
authorized under the Great Seal of England for causes Ecclesiastical, or of
the Metropolitan of the Realm.

It was enacted, That whatsoever person inhabiting in the Queens Dominions, who
by word or deed should maintain that the Bishop of Rome had any authority or
jurisdiction in any of the Queens Realms or Dominions, should incur the
danger of a Praemunire.

If any man shall the second time maintain the Pope to have any jurisdiction or
authority in any of the Queens Dominions, it shall be Treason.

The Oath set forth in the first Eliz. cap. 1. shall be taken of all
Ecclesiastical Orders, of all degrees in the University, of Schoolmasters,
Utterbarristers, Benchers, Readers, Ancients, Pronotaries, Atturneys,
Philizers, Sheriffs, Escheators, Feodaries, Officers of the Common Law,
Officers of any Court: but none above the degree of a Baron may be compelled.
The Bishop may tender the oath to any spiritual person in his Diocese. The
Lord Chancellor or Keeper shall direct Commissions under the Broad-seal to any
person or persons giving them authority to minister the oath to any such
persons, as by the aforesaid Commission, the said Commissioners shall be
authorized to tender the oath unto.

Any person aforesaid refusing to take the Oath, and being thereof legally
convicted within one year, shall for the first offense incur the danger of a
Praemunire; and for the second shall suffer as in case of High Treason.

Every Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron for any of the Cinque Ports, shall
take the said Oath, and in case of refusal shall be deemed no Knight, Citizen,
Burgess or Baron.

It was enacted, That if any person in the Queens Dominions should use Anno 13
Eliz. cap. 1.
or put in use any Bull of absolution, or reconciliation formerly had, or
afterward to be obtained from the Bishop of Rome, his successors, or any
claiming under him: or if any person shall by virtue of such Bull, take upon
him to grant or promise to any person, any such absolution or reconciliation:
or if any person shall willingly receive such absolution or reconciliation, or
shall obtain from the Bishop of Rome any manner of Bull, Writing, or Instrument
containing any thing whatsoever, or shall publish any such Writing or
Instrument, shall be adjudged a Traitor.

The aiders, comforters, and maintainers of the offenders after offense, shall
incur the pains and penalties of a Praemunire.

Every person to whom such Absolution, Reconciliation, Bull, Writing or
Instrument shall be offered, moved, or persuaded to be put in use, and shall
conceal such motion or persuasion, and not disclose the same within six weeks
following, to some of the Queens Council, or to the President, or
Vice President of the North parts, or in the Marches of Wales, shall incur the
danger and penalty of a Praemunire.

The bringers into the Realm, or using any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Pictures. Beads,
etc. from the Bishop of Rome, or any claiming authority from the Bishop of Rome
to consecrate the same, as well the parties bringing, as the parties receiving,
shall incur the danger of a Praemunire.

But if any person to whom such Agnus Dei, etc. shall be tendered, shall
apprehend the person tendering the same, and bring him to the next Justice of
Peace within the County where the said tender shall be made, if it be in his
power; or for lack of ability, shall within three days disclose the names of
the person so tendering, or his place of resort to the Bishop of that Diocese,
or to any Justice of Peace of that Shire where such persons are resiant; or if
any person receive such Agnus Dei, etc. and shall within one day after receipt
deliver the same to any Justice of Peace within the same Shire, that then every
such person shall not incur the penalties abovesaid.

All they who within three months after dissolution of the Parliament, shall
bring in, and deliver all such Bulls, Writings, Instruments of Reconciliation
to the Bishop of the Diocese wherein such absolution had been made, to be
cancelled, and confess and acknowledge his offense, and desire to be received
into the Church of England, shall be clearly pardoned of such offense. And
every person who had received any absolution from the Bishop or See of Rome, or
any reconciliation unto the Bishop or See of Rome, since the first year of the
Queen, and shall within three months after any Session or dissolution of the
Parliament come before the Bishop of the Diocese where such absolution or
reconciliation was made, and publicly acknowledge his offense therein, and
humbly desire to be restored and admitted into the Church of England, shall be
clearly pardoned of such offense.

If any Justice of Peace, to whom any matter, or offense before mentioned,
shall be uttered, do not within 14. days after signify and declare the same
to some one of the Queens Privy Council, that then such Justice shall incur
the danger of a Praemunire.

Noblemen shall be tried by their Peers.

Saving to all persons, Bodies politic and corporate, their heirs and
successors, others then the said offenders and their heirs, all rights, titles,
possessions, etc. as they or any of them had, at the day of committing the
offense aforesaid, or before.

Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. makes it Treason for any who shall have, or pretend to
have power, or shall by any means put in practice to absolve, persuade, or
withdraw any of the Queens Subjects from their natural obedience; or withdraw
them for that intent from the Religion now by her Highness authority
established, to the Romish Religion: Or if any person shall by any means be
willingly absolved, or willingly be reconciled, or shall promise any obedience
to any foreign pretended Authority, Prince, State, or Potentate, and be thereof
lawfully convict, shall suffer as in case of High Treason.

The aiders, maintainers and concealers, who shall not within twenty days at
furthest disclose the same to some Justice of Peace or higher Officer, shall
suffer as in case of Misprision of Treason.

Every person who shall sing or say Mass, shall forfeit 200 marks, and suffer
imprisonment during one whole year: And every person who shall willingly hear
Mass, shall forfeit one hundred marks, and suffer imprisonment for a year.

Every person above sixteen years of age, who shall not repair to some Church,
Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, and forbear the same, contrary to the
Stat. 1 Eliz. for uniformity of Common Prayer, shall forfeit 20 pounds for
every month; and over and besides, if he or she shall forbear for the space of
12. months after certificate thereof in writing made into the Kings Bench by
the Ordinary, a Justice of Assise and Jail-delivery, or a Justice of peace of
the County where such offender shall dwell or be, shall for his obstinacy be
bound with two sufficient Sureties in the sum of 200 pounds at least to the
good behavior, and so continue bound, until such time as he shall conform
himself and come to Church, according to the true intent of the Statute of the
said 1 Eliz.

Every person, Body politic or corporate, who shall maintain a Schoolmaster
who shall not repair to the Church as aforesaid, or be allowed by the Ordinary
of the Diocese where such Schoolmaster shall be kept, shall forfeit for every
month ten pound: And such Schoolmaster presuming to teach any thing contrary
to this Act, and being thereof lawfully convict, shall be disabled to be a
Teacher of Youth, and shall suffer imprisonment without Bayl ot Mainprise for
the space of a year.

No Ordinary or their Ministers shall take any thing for the allowance of any
Schoolmasters.

All offenses aforesaid, and all offenses against the first Eliz. 1. 5 Eliz. 1.
13 Eliz. 2. etc. are inquirable into by the Justices of peace, and other
Justices named in the said Act, within a year and day after such offenses
committed. Justices of Oyer and Terminer of Assiize, of Goale-delivery, in
their limits, Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, have power to hear
and determine the offenses aforesaid (except Treason, and Misprision of Treason.

Every person guilty of any offense against this Statute other then Treason and
Misprision of Treason, which shall before he be indicted, or at his Arraignment
before Judgment, submit and conform himself before the Bishop of the Diocese
where he shall be resident, and before the Justice of Peace where he shall be
arraigned or tried, (having not before made like submission) shall upon his
recognition of such submission in open Assizes or Sessions in the County where
such person shall be resident, be discharged of all the said offenses.

The forfeitures of the moneys limited by this Act shall be divided into three
equal parts, whereof one third part to the Queen to her use, another for the
relief of the poor in the Parish where such offense is committed, to be
delivered by warrant of the principle Officers in the receipt of the Exchequer,
without further warrant from her Majesty; the other third part to such person
as will sue for the same in any court of Record, in which no Essoin, or
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed. He that shall forfeit such sums
as are specified in this Act, and be not able, or shall not pay the same within
3. months after Judgment, shall be committed to prison and there remain
until he have paid the said sums, or conform himself to go to Church.

He that usually on Sunday shall have in his house the Divine Service as it is
established, and be thereat usually present, and not obstinately refuse to come
to Church, and shall at least four times in the year be present at the Divine
Service in his Parish Church, or in some open Church or Chapel of ease, shall
incur no damage, nor danger by this Act.

Every Grant, Conveyance, Bond, Judgment and Execution, of covetous purpose to
defraud the Queen, or any other person, shall be holden utterly void.

Trial of a Peer for any Treason, or misprision of Treason, by this Act shall
be by his Peers.

This Act, nor any thing contained therein (is said) not to extend to take away
any, or abridge the authority or jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Censures,
for any cause, or matter, but that Archbishops and Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Judges may do and proceed, as before the making of it.

All Jesuits made within or without the Realm since the Nativity of St. Stat.
27 Eliz. cap. 2.
John the Baptist, in the first year of the Queen, shall within 40. days next
after the Session of Parliament, if they be not wind-bound, depart out of
England and other the Queens Dominions.

If any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or Religious or
Ecclesiastical person whatsoever, born within the Dominions of the Queen, and
made since the feast of the Nativity of St. John in the first year of the
Queen, or hereafter to be made by any Authority from the Church of Rome, shall
after the said forty days after the Session of Parliament (other then in such
special cases as in this Act is expressed) be found in any of the Queens
Dominions, every such person shall be adjudged a Traitor.

All they which shall receive any such Jesuit or Priest after such time shall
be adjudged a felon without benefit of Clergy.

If Any Subject of England then being, or after shall be of, or brought up in
any College of Jesuits, or seminaries already erected, or to be erected, out
of the Realm, shall not within six months next after Proclamation in that
behalf made in London, under the broad Seal, return into this Realm, and within
two days after, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the
peace of the County where he shall arrive, submit himself to her Majesty and
her Laws, and take the Oath set forth in the first year of her Reign; That
then every such person which shall otherwise return, shall be taken and deemed
as a Traitor.

Whosoever shall any ways send relief to any Jesuit or seminary beyond the
seas, or give any maintenance to any College of Jesuits or Seminaries, shall
incur the danger of a Praemunire.

None during the Queens life shall send his or her Child, or other person
(except Merchants, or such only who serve in their Trade as Merchants, or
Mariners) beyond the Seas, without the Queens special license, or under four
of the Counsels hands, upon the penalty of one hundred pounds.

Every offense committed against this Act may be heard and determined as well
in the Kings Bench, as also in any County within this Realm, or any of the
Queens Dominions where the offense shall be committed, or where the offender
shall be apprehended.

This Act shall not extend to any Jesuit, etc. before mentioned, as shall
within the said 40. days, or within 40. days after he come into the Realm,
submit himself to some Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, or to some Justice
of Peace within the County where he shall arrive, and do thereupon truly and
sincerely before the Archbishop, Bishop, or Justice of Peace, take the said
Oath set forth the first of Eliz. and under his hand confess afterward to
continue in due obedience to the Queens Laws made, or to be made in causes of
Religion.

Peers shall be tried by their Peers for any offense made Treason, Felony, or
Praemunire by this Act.

Any person being a Subject of this Realm, which shall after the said 40. days
know any such Jesuit, or Priest, etc. and shall not discover the same to some
Justice of Peace, or Higher Officer within 12. days, every such person shall
be fined and imprisoned according to the Queens pleasure; and every such
Justice of Peace, or higher Officer, which shall not discover the same within
28. days to some of the Queens Council, or to the President, or
Vice President of the Queens Council established in the North or Marches of
Wales, then he or they so offending shall forfeit 200 Marks.

Such of the Privy Council, President, or Vice President abovesaid, to whom
such information shall be made, shall thereupon deliver a note in writing,
subscribed by his own hand, to the party by whom he shall receive such
information, testifying that such information was made to him.

All such Oaths, Bonds and Submissions as shall be made, by force of this Act
shall be certified into the Chancery, by such Parties before whom the same
shall be made, within three months after such submission, upon pain of
forfeiture of 100 l. for every such offense to the Queen.

If any person so submitting himself shall within 10. years after come within
10. miles of the place where her Majesty shall be, without special license had
from her Majesty under her hand, that then such person to have no benefit of
such submission.

Enacts, That every Feofment, Gift, Grant, Conveyance, Alienation, Estate,
Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 6.
Lease, Encumbrance, Limitation of use, of, or out of any Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments whatsoever had or made since the beginning of the Queens Reign,
or after, by any person who had not repaired, or shall not repair to some
Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer; or which is or shall be
revokable at the pleasure of such offender, or in any wise directly or
indirectly, intended or meant, to, or for the behoof or disposition of such
offender, or in consideration whereby his Family may be maintained, shall be
deemed and taken for utterly void, etc.

Every conviction heretofore recorded for any offense before mentioned, not
already estreated or certified into the Queens Court of Exchequer, shall from
the Justices before whom the record of such conviction shall be remaining be
estreated and certified into the Exchequer, before the end of the next Easter
Term in such convenient certainty, for the time and other circumstances, as the
Court may thereupon award out process for seizure of the Lands and Goods of
every such offender as has not paid their forfeitures according to Statutes in
such case provided. And every conviction hereafter for any offense before
mentioned, shall be in the Court called the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes, or
general Jail-delivery, and not elsewhere, and shall from the Justices before
whom the Record of such conviction shall remain, be estreated and certified
into the Exchequer, before the end of the Term next ensuing after every such
conviction, in such convenient certainty as is aforesaid.

Every offender in not repairing to Divine Service, and has been heretofore
convict, and not made his submission, and been conformable according to the
true intent of this Statute, shall without other indictment or conviction pay
into the receipt of the Exchequer all such sums of money as according to the
rate of twenty pounds for every month since the same conviction, in manner
following, viz. one Moity before the end of Trinity Term, the other Moity
before the end of Hilary Term, or at such other times as the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, and Chief Baron, or any two of them, shall by composition upon good
security be limited before the end of the said Trinity Term, if any such
composition shall happen to be: And shall also in every Easter and Michaelmas
Term, until such time as the same person do make such submission, pay into the
Exchequer 20 l. for* every month, which shall incur in all that mean time.

For default of Payment of the said 20 l. a month in every Easter and
Michaelmas Term, after such conviction, the Queen by process out of the said
Exchequer may take, seize and enjoy all the Goods, and two parts as well of all
the Lands and Tenements, etc. of such offender, as of all other Lands and
Tenements liable to such seizure, by the true intent of this Act, leaving only
a third part for the relief of the offender, his Wife Children and Family.

For the more speedy conviction of such offender, the Indictment shall be
sufficient although it be not mentioned, that the offender was, or is
inhabiting within the Realm of England, or any other of the Queens Dominions:
But if it shall happen that any such offender were not within any of the Queens
Dominions, that in such case the party shall be relieved by plea to be put in,
in that behalf and not otherwise. And upon Indictment a Proclamation shall be
made the same Assizes or Jail-delivery, that the party indicted shall yield his
body to the Sheriff: and if at next Assizes or Goaldelivery the said party
shall not make appearance of Record, that then such default shall be deemed a
sufficient conviction in Law.

If any such offender shall make submission, and become conformable according
to the form of the Statute made in the 23 of Eliz. or shall fortune to die,
that then no forfeiture of 20 l. a month, nor seizure of Lands, from and after
such submission and conformity, or death, and full satisfaction of all
arrearages of 20 l. monthly before such seizure due, or payable, shall ensue,
or be continued against such offender, so long as he shall continue in coming
to divine Service according to the intent of the Statute.

The Lord Treasurer of England, Chancellor, and chief Baron, or any two of them
may assign and dispose of the full third part of the twenty pounds for every
month, paid into the receipt of the Exchequer toward the relief of the Poor,
of Houses of correction, and of impotent and maimed Soldiers.

This Act, or any thing contained in it, does not in any wise extend to make
void or impeach any Grant or Lease made bona fide, without fraud or covin, and
not revocable at the will and pleasure of the offender.

This Act, or any thing contained therein, shall not in any wise be construed
to continue any seizure of any Lands or Tenements of such offender in her
Majesty's hands, after the said offenders death, which Lands or Tenements he
shall have or be seized of only for term of life, or in right of his wife.

For the preventing of such great inconveniences and perils as may happen Stat.
Anno 35 Eliz. cap. D.
and grow by the wicked practices of seditious Sectaries and disloyal persons,
it was enacted, That every person above sixteen years of age that shall
obstinately refuse to come to Divine Service, established by Law, and shall
forbear the same by the space of a month without lawful excuse; or shall at
any time after forty days after the Session of that Parliament by word or
writing advisedly go about to move or persuade any of the Queens Subjects, or
any other within her Realms or Dominions, to deny or withstand her Majesty's
power or authority in causes Ecclesiastical, united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm; or shall advisedly persuade any person to
forbear coming to Church to hear Divine Service established; or to come to, or
be present at any unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles, etc. upon pretense of
Religion, contrary to the established Laws: Or if any person shall obstinately
refuse to repair to some usual place of Common Prayer, and shall forbear to
hear Divine Service by the space of a month, or shall after forty days
willingly join in any such Assemblies, Conventicles, etc. under color of
exercising Religion, contrary to the Laws of this Realm; That every person so
offending, and being thereof lawfully convict, shall be committed to prison
without bail or mainprise, until they conform to come to Church and hear
Divine Service according to Law, and make such submission and declaration, as
in this Act is afterward declared and appointed.

If any person who shall offend as aforesaid, shall not within three months
after they be convicted, conform themselves to the obedience of the Laws, in
coming to Church to hear Divine Service, and in making such public confession
and submission as in this Act is appointed, being thereunto required by the
Bishop of the Diocese, or any Justice of Peace where the person shall happen
to be, or by the Minister or Curate of the Parish: that in every such case,
every such offender, being thereunto warned by any Justice of Peace of the
County, shall upon his or their corporal oath, before the Justices of Peace in
the open Quarter Sessions, or at the Assizes abjure the Realm, and all other
the Queens Dominions for ever, unless her Majesty shall license the party to
return; and shall depart out of the Realm at such Port, and within such times
as shall be appointed by the said Justices before whom the said abjuration was
made, unless the offender be let by such lawful and reasonable means, as
by the common Laws are permitted in cases of abjuration of Felony; and in such
cases of let or stay then within such reasonable time after as the Common Law
requires in case of Abjuration for Felony; the Justices of Peace before whom
any such abjuration shall be made, shall cause the same to be presently entered
into record before them, and shall certify the same to the Justices of Assizes
and Jail-delivery of the said County at the next Assizes.

If any such offender, which by the tenor of this Act is to be abjured, shall
refuse to make such abjuration, and shall not go to such Haven within such
time appointed, and depart out of the Realm, or after such departure shall
return without license; that in such case the party offending shall suffer as
in case of Felony without benefit of the Clergy.

If any person offending against this Act, shall before he be required, as
aforesaid, to make such abjuration, repair to some Parish Church on some Sunday
or Festival, and then and there hear Divine Service, and before Sermon or
reading of the Gospel make public and open submission and declaration in
conformity to the Laws according to this Act, that then every such penalties
inflicted by this Act be discharged. The submission to be made is.

I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge that I have grievously offended
God, in contemning her Majesty's Godly and lawful Government and Authority, by
absenting my self from Church and hearing Divine Service, contrary to the Godly
Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and in using and frequenting disordered and
unlawful Conventicles and Assemblies under pretense and color of exercise of
Religion. And I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and testify
in my conscience, that no other person has or ought to have Authority over her
Majesty. And I do promise and protest without any dissimulation, or any color
or means of any dispensation, That from henceforth I will from time to time
obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and Statutes, in repairing to the Church
and hearing Divine Service, and do my uttermost endeavor to perfom the same.

The Minister of every Parish where such submission and declaration shall be
made, shall presently enter the same into a book to be kept by every Parish for
that purpose, and within ten days after certify the same in writing to the
Bishop of the Diocese.

If any such offender after such submission shall afterward relapse, and
obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, or usual place of Divine Service,
or shall be present at any such Conventicles, etc. under color of exercise of
Religion, contrary to her Majesty's Laws: That then every such offender shall
lose the benefit he might have had by virtue of his Submission.

If any person shall hereafter relieve, maintain, or keep in his house or
otherwise any person which shall obstinately refuse to come to some Church, or
usual place of Common Prayer, or shall forbear the same by the space of a
month; that then every such person so offending after such notice given him by
the Ordinary of the Diocese, or any Justice of Assize of the Circuit, or any
Justice of Peace of the County, or any Minister, Curate or Churchwarden of the
Parish where such person shall be, shall forfeit to the Queen for every person
so relieved after such notice, forty pound for every month, that he or they
shall relieve, etc. any person so offending.

This Act shall in no wise extend to punish or impeach any person for relieving
or keeping his Father, Wife, Mother, Child, Ward, Brother or Sister, or his
Wives Father or Mother, not having any certain place of habitation of their
own, or the Husbands or Wives of any of them: or for relieving, maintaining or
keeping any such person as shall be committed by Authority to the custody of
any by whom they shall be so relieved or maintained. These two last clauses are
repealed by the 3 Jac. 4.

All duties, forfeitures and payments, due to the Queen by virtue of this Act,
or the Act of the 23 of Eliz. concerning Recusants, may be recovered and levied
to her Majesty's use by action of debt, bill, plaint, information or otherwise,
in any of the Courts called the Kings bench, Commonpleas, or Exchequer, in such
sort as by the ordinary course of the Common Law, any other debt due by any
person in any other Case might be recovered or levied, where no Essoin,
Protection or Wager of Law be admitted.

The third part of the Penalties had or received by virtue of this Act, shall
be employed and bestowed to such good and charitable uses, in such manner and
form as is limited and appointed in the Statute made in the 29 Eliz. c. 6.
concerning Recusants.

No popish Recusant or feme covert shall be compelled to abjure by this Act.
Every person that should abjure by virtue of this Act, and refuse, being
thereunto required as aforesaid, shall forfeit to the Queen all his goods and
chattels for ever, and his Lands and Tenements during life; the wife of any
such offender shall not lose her Dowre, nor any corruption of blood shall grow
or be, by reason of any offense mentioned in this Act.

Every Person above sixteen years of age, borne within any of the Stat. 35
Eliz. cap. 2.
Queens Dominions, or made a Denizen, being a popish Recusant, and before the
end of that Session of Parliament, convicted for not repairing to some Church
or usual place uf Divine-service, but forbearing the same, contrary to the
Laws established, and having a certain place of abode within the Realm, shall
within forty days next after the Session of Parliament (if they be in the
Realm, and not restrained by imprisonment, or by command of her Majesty, or by
order of six or more of the Privy-Councell, or by such sickness and infirmity
of body, that they shall not be able to travel without imminent danger of
their life, and in such cases of absence out of the Realm, restraint or stay,
then within two days next after they shall return into the Realm, and be
enlarged of such imprisonment, or shall be able to travel) repair to their
usual place of abode, and shall not at any time after remove above five miles
from thence.

Every person born in any of the Queens Dominions, or Denizen, which had, or
should have any certain place of abode within this Realm, which being a Popish
Recusant, and thereof lawfully convict for not repairing to some Church or
usual place of Divine Service, and being within the Realm at the time they
shall be convicted, shall within forty days after such conviction (if they be
not restrained by imprisonment or otherwise, as aforesaid; and in such cases of
restraint, then within twenty days after they shall be enlarged, or be able to
travel) repair to the place of their usual dwelling, and not at any time
after remove above five miles from thence, upon pain of forfeiture of all his
Goods and Chattels, and all his Rents, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to
the Queen during the life of the offender.

Every Person above sixteen years of age, borne in any of the Queens
Dominions, who has no certain place of abode within the Relme, and being a
popish Recusant, and not usually repairing to some Church, or usual place of
Common Prayer, but forbearing the same, contrary to the Laws established,
shall within 40 days after the Session of Parliament (if they be within the
Realm, and not imprisoned or stayed as aforesaid, and in such case of absence
out of the Realm, imprisonment or stay, then within twenty days after return
into the Realm, and be enlarged, or able to travel) repair to the place of
birth, or where the Father or Mother of such person shall then be dwelling,
and shall not remove above five miles from thence, upon pain of forfeiting all
his goods and chattels, and all his Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Rents and
Annuities to the Queen, during the life of the Offender.

Every offender aforesaid that has Lands or Tenements, by copy of Court-Roll,
etc. shall forfeit all such copyhold estates, during the life of the offender
(if his estate so long continue) to the Lord, of whom they are immediately
holden (if the Lord be not a popish Recusant, nor convicted for not coming to
Divine Service, nor seized upon trust for such Recusant) and in such Case the
forfeiture to be to the Queens Majesty.

All such Persons as by this Act are to make their repair to their place of
dwelling, or to the place of their birth, or where their Father and Mother
shall be dwelling, and not to pass above five miles from thence, shall within
twenty days after their coming to any of the said places, notify their
coming thither, and present themselves, and deliver their true names in writing
to the Minister and Curat of the Parish, and to the Constable, Headborough or
Tything-man of the Town, and thereupon the Minister or Curate shall presently
enter the same into a book to be kept in every parish for that purpose; and
afterward the said Minister or Curate, and the said Constable, Headborough or
Tything-man, shall certify the same in writing to the Justices of Peace of the
same County, at the next quarter Sessions and the said Justices shall enter or
cause the same to be entered by the Clerk of the Peace in the Rolls of the same
Sessions.

Every popish Recusant (not being a Feme covert, and not having a state of
inheritance of freehold to the clear yearly value of twenty marks, or in
goods and chattels to the value of forty pounds) that shall not within the
limited time repair to the usual place of his abode, or to the place of his
birth, or the dwelling of his Father or Mother; and thereupon notify their
coming, and present themselves, and deliver their true names in writing to the
Minister or Curate of the Parish, and to the Constable, Head-borough or
Tything-man of the Town, within such time, and in such manner as aforesaid, or
shall after remove five miles from thence, and shall not within three months
next after such person shall be apprehended, conform himself to resort usually
to divine Service, and in making such public confession and submission, as
hereafter is expressed, being thereunto required by the Bishop of the Diocese,
or any Justice of Peace in the County where the same person shall chance to be,
or by the Minister or Curate of the Parish; That in every such case, every such
offender, being thereunto warned by any two Justices of Peace, or Coroner of
the County where such offender shall be, shall upon his corporal Oath before
any two Justices of Peace or Coroner or the same County, abjure this Realm,
and all Dominions of the Queens for ever, and thereupon shall depart the Realm
in such time as shall be assigned by the said Justices or Coroner, unless
hindered by such reasonable means, as by the Common Law is allowed in cases of
abjuration of felony; and in such cases within such reasonable time after as
the Common Law requires in case of abjuration of felony.

Every Justice of Peace and Coroner before whom any such abjuration shall
happen to be made, shall presently cause the same to be entered of Record
before them, and shall certify the same to the Justices of Assize, or next
Goal delivery of the said County.

If any such offender, which is to be abjured, shall refuse to make abjuration,
or after abjuration shall refuse to go to such Haven within the time
appointed, and depart the Realm, or after shall return without license from
the Queen; that then, in every such case, the person offending shall suffer as
a Felon, without benefit of the Clergy.

Every person suspected to be a Jesuit or Seminarie-Priest, who being examined
by lawful authority, and refuses to answer directly whether he be a Jesuit
or not, shall be committed to prison without bail or mainprize, until he
answer directly.

Every person confined as aforesaid to the compass of five miles, that has
necessary occasion of business, upon license from two Justices of the Peace in
the same County, under their hands, with the assent of the Bishop of the
Diocese in writing, or of the Lieutenant, or of any deputy Lieutenant of the
same County, may travel about his necessary business, for such time only as
is contained in the License.

No person so restrained as aforesaid, which shall be urged by Process without
fraud or covin, and be bound to make appearance in any of her Majesty's Courts,
or shall be sent to by three or more of her Majesty's Council, or by four or
more Commissioners appointed by her Majesty to make appearance before her
Council or Commissioners; in every such case shall incur any forfeiture or
loss for traveling or making appearance accordingly.

Every person so restrained, as aforesaid, shall be bound to yield their bodies
to the Sherif of the County, upon Proclamation in that behalf made, nor shall
incur any penalty for so doing.

If any person which shall offend against this Act, shall before he be thereof
convict, come to some parish Church on some Sunday, or Festival day, and then
hear divine Service, and at Service time, or at the reading of the Gospel,
make open submission and declaration of his conformity to the Queens Laws, as
hereafter is declared, that then every such offender shall be clearly
discharged. The form of the submission is,

I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge, That I have grievously offended
God, in contemning her Majesty's godly and lawful government and authority, by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to
the godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and am heartily sorry for the same;
and do acknowledge and testify in my Conscience, That the Bishop or See of
Rome has not, or ought to have any power or authority over her Majesty, or
within any of her Majesty's Dominions or Realms: And I do promise and Protest
without dissimulation, or any color or means of dispensation, That from
henceforth I will from time to time obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and
Statutes, in repairing to Church, and hearing Divine Service, and do my utmost
endeavor to maintain and defend the same.

The Minister or Curate of every parish where such submission shall be made,
shall presently cause the same to be entered into a book to be kept in every
Parish for that purpose, and within ten days after shall certify the same to
the Bishop of the Diocese.

Every offender that shall after such submission, relapse and become Recusant,
in not repairing to Church to hear Divine service as aforesaid, shall lose all
benefit he might have enjoyed by such submission.

Every woman married shall be bound by every article, branch and matter
contained in this Act, other then the branch or article of abjuration, nor
shall any woman married be compelled to make abjuration.

Of the Reformation made by Queen Elizabeth.
QUeen Mary dying upon the 17. November. 1558. the same day both The Pope did
reject the Queen before the Queen rejected the Pope
Houses of Parliament without any contradiction did acknowledge and receive
Elizabeth to be the true and undoubted Heir to the Crown of England, and
without delay with sound of Trumpet dissolved the Parliament: for that being
called by Queen Mary could have no being, or continue after her death. The
Queen caused an account to be given of her assumption to the Pope (who was
Paulus Quartus) with letters of Credence to Sir Edward Cerne, who was
Ambassador to her Sister and not departed from Rome. But the Pope was so far
from acknowledging her, that he answered, that that Kingdom (viz. of England)
was held in Fee of the Apostolic See, that she could not succeed being
illegitimate; that he could not contradict the Declaration of Clement the
Seventh, and Paul the Third; that it was a great boldness to assume the name of
Government without him; that for this she deserved not to be heard in any
thing; yet being desirous to show a fatherly affection, if she will renounce
her pretensions, and refer her self wholly to his free disposition, he will do
whatsoever may be done in the honor of the Apostolic See. * And afterward he
commanded Sir Edward Hist conc. Trint. 411.
Cerne, who had continued Ambassador at Rome for Henry the Eighth, Queen Mary,
and then for Queen Elizabeth, to lay down his office of Ambassador (that I may
use his own very words says the Author) by force of a Mandat made by Lively
voice from the Oracle of our most Holy Lord the Pope, by virtue of holy
obedience, and under pain of the greater Excommunication, and also of loss of
all his goods, that he should not depart out of the City, but undertake the
Government of an Hospital of the English. * It is true Indeed that Pius 4. (a
man of much more moderate disposition Camb. Eliz. Keg. Page 28.
then his Predecessor) did in the year 1560. by Letters, sent by Vineentius
Parpalia Abbot of St. Saviors to her full of humanity, not only acknowledge
her Queen of England, and invited her to return into the bosom of the Church,
but also (as the report went) promised to recall the sentence pronounced
against her Mothers Marriages as unjust, to confirm the book of Comon-prayer
in English by his authority, and to permit the use of the Sacrament in both
kinds to the People of England, in case she will join her self to the Church of
Rome, and acknowledge the Primary of the Roman See. * And afterward in the
year 1561. in Letters full of affection by Abbot Camb. Eliz. Reg. 58. 59.
Martinego, he invited her to the Council of Trint, Camb. Eliz. Reg. 68. 69.
but matters were so far thrust off the hinges, that not only Parpalia returned
without any fruit, but Martinego was denied access into England.

Not only the Archbishop of York, but all the other Bishops (except The
Bishops except Carlisle refuse to crown her.
Carlisle) did refuse to Crown the Queen, both because she had been instructed
in the Protestant Religion, and because she had forbidden the Archbishop of
York a little before he was to celebrate Divine service, to elevate the Host
for adoration, and had suffered the Letany with the Epistles and Gospel to be
used in the popular tongue. It is no wonder therefore if the Parliament which
happened immediately after, and the Commons especially, who once usually swayed
only by passion and affection, and much averse from the Religion of the Church
of Rome, did endue the Queen with such plentiful power, as to make her supreme
Governor (the title of Head was waved) in all causes, as well Spiritual as
Temporal.

This power the Queen well understanding, and what advantage would be How far
the Queen did declare her Power in Ecclesiastical matters.
made thereof by her adversaries, did by Proclamation, and after by her
Injunctions declare, that she took nothing upon her more, then what anciently
of right be longed to the Crown of England, to wit that she had supreme power
and jurisdiction under God over all sorts of people within the Kingdom of
England, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Lay persons; and that no foreign
Power has or ought to have any jurisdiction or authority over them. Camb.
Eliz. Reg. 39. 40.

In the 37. Article of the Church of England she declares, We give to How far
the Church of England declares the Prerogative of Princes.
Our Princes that Prerogative which we see in holy Scripture always given to
all godly Princes by God himself, to rule all estates and degrees of men
committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal,
and to restrain with the sword all stubborn and evil doors.

But whatsoever the Queen or Church did declare, the Lawyers would The Lawyers
exception of the Statute of 1 Fliz. cap. 1.
not lose so much Grist as this Stat. of the first of Eliz. brought to their
Mill, and therefore the fourth conclusion in the 3 part Institutes 43 is, That
when an Act of Parliament is made concerning things merely spiritual, as
Heresy, etc. yet the Act, being part of the Laws of the Land, the same shall
be construed and interpreted by the Judges of the Common Law, who usually
confer with those that are learned in that profession, so that all Spiritual
jurisdiction does utterly vanish, whenever the Temporal power shall do any
thing in derogation of it; and in truth ever since the Statute of the first of
Elizabeth, all cognizance not only of Heresy, etc. but the cognizance of the
worship and service of God, and administration of Sacraments, have (upon the
matter) been determined at Quarter Sessions and assizes, and since ths uniting
of all foreign jurisdiction in the Crown, many places in England, that were
not in ordinary Episcopal jurisdiction, and immediately under the Pope, are
become out of all cure of Souls, and for ought can be known, are not any part
of any Christian Church.

If the Queen be supreme Governor in all Spiritual cases under Christ, then
are not Bishops and Priests immediately Christ's Ministers, but the Queens: Nay
then may she ordain, confirm, and consecrate the Sacraments, which the Church
of England, Art. 37. and King James Spot. Hist. anno 7 Regni does deny.

The preamble of the first of Eliz. cap. 1. Is a supplication of the Lords
Obsecrable things in the 1. and 2. chap. 1 Eliz.
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, that those things therein might be
passed into a Law, whereas the Lords Spiritual Camb. Eliz. Reg. 16.
being nine (nor were there then fourteen alive) and all who were present not
only stiffly opposed it, but were all of them deprived because they would not
conform thereunto, and take the Oath of Supremacy made by that Act. In the 2.
chap. Page 36.
1 Eliz. there is a very strange clause: viz. The Queens Majesty, the Lords
Temporal, and Commons assembled, do in Gods name, earnestly require and
charge all Archbishops and Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that they endeavor
themselves to the utmost of their knowledge, that the due execution of that
Law* may be had throughout their Diocesses and Charges, as they will answer
before God, for such evils and Plagues, wherewith God may justly punish his
people for neglecting this good and wholesome Law; and yet the Temporal powers
by this very Law, have power to hear and determine all things in it as well as
the Spiritual; whereas Praeces and lachrima sunt arma Ecclesiae, all always
the Church formerly did supplicate protection from the temporal powers.

The Queen did not make an alteration and change in the Religion and By what
degrees Religion was charged.
Service of God on a sudden, but by degrees; for, for a whole month or more
after the death of Queen Mary, the Roman Religion continued in the same state
it did before; upon the twenty seventh of December, leave was granted to have
the Epistles, Gospells, ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, Creed and Letany
in the English tongue. The two and twentieth of March, when the Nobles and
Commons were met in Parliament, the entire use of the Lords Supper, viz. in
both kinds, was allowed, and the Law made to that intent in Edward the sixts
days, revived and put in new force. The twenty fourth of June the Sacrifice of
Mass was abolished, and the Liturgy in the English Tongue established by
Parliament. In July the Oath of Supremacy was propounded to the Bishops and
others; and in Aug. Images were removed out of Churches, and broken ot burnt,
Cambd. Eliza. Reg. 39.

From the first of Eliz. until the eleventh year of her Reign, no person How
the Laws made for conformity to the Service of the Church were observed.
of what persuasion soever, at any time refused to come to the public Divine
Service celebrated in the Church of England, (being so evidently grounded upon
the sacred and infallible word of God, that the Bishop of Winchester in his
answer to Tortus, page 42, is not afraid to affirm positively that the Pope
Paulus quartus [which is misprinted, for it should have been Pius quartus] if
the Queen would have acknowledged his authority, would have been so kind as
to have established all the Rites and Ceremonies now used in the Church) until
the Bull published against the Queen by Pius the Fifth, whereby he
excommunicated her, and deprived her of her Kingdom, and forbad all her
Subjects, upon like penalties, to be so hardy as to obey her Admonitions, Laws
or Commandments, and did absolve all men, who had upon any occasion taken
their oath to her, of all fealty and service due unto her by reason of her
Government; which Bull produced no other effect then the severe Statute made
the thirteenth year of the Queen, against all men, who should endeavor to put
it or any such in ure or execution, or should receive or take any absolution or
reconciliation from the Church of Rome. But afterward these Parliament Laws,
for the conforming to Divine Service established, became as much disobeyed by
another generation of men called Puritans; and therefore the Statute of the
thirty fifth of Elizabeth cap. 1. was made expressly against them; yet would they
never be restrained, until they upon pretense of Reformation, brought a
desolation upon both Church and State.

She was truly pious, who daily as soon as she rose, set a part some time Of
the virtues of Queen Eliz.
for the worship and service of God, afterward at set hours retired her self
into her private Closet, frequented the Chapel duly upon Sundaies and
holydaies; nor was there ever any Prince that with greater devotion was present
at divine Service: In black array, and after the manner of the former ages, she
heard attentively Lenten Sermons, although she would often say what she had
read of Hen. 3. her predecessor, That she had rather devoutly speak to God in
Prayer, then hear others discourse eloquently of God in their Sermons; and of
the Cross, the blessed Virgin, and of the Saints, she thought reverently, nor
did she ever speak of them without a certain reverence, nor patiently hear
others speak of them without the like; * to these may justly Camb. Eliz. Reg.
14.
be added a wisdom and prudence in Government so far above her sex, that
certainly she, in that kind is not to be paralleled by any of her masculine
predecessors: and these virtues were crowned with that felicity, that all along
her long Reign she was most passionately and obsequiously hononred by her
Subjects, (a rare thing among Islanders, and not to be found in any time before
her, in any of her Predecessors.) Yet sure she was rather careful to conserve
peace at home then to maintain it abroad, and was more mindful of the present
age, then of posterity: and sure that King that succeeded her, might justly
expect to find a hard task so to Govern as to preserve the love and obedience
she had; for besides her prudence and frugality in Government and expenses,
she was single and had not any kindred in the Nation which were any charge to
her; whereas the King succeeding, not only having a Queen, but also Posterity
must multiply expense, whereby he shall lose the affections of his Subjects,
from whom it must be raised, or abate of the magnificennce, which is necessary
for the reputation and Regality, and which every Monarch ought especially to be
careful of; for, Where Majesty or Power is contemptible, the exercise of them
is never permanent.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by King James.
THis Statute does Enact, That all Statutes made by Queen Elizabeth Anno 1.
Jac. cap. 4.
against all Jesuits, Priests and Seminaries, made in the Church of Rome, and
all those Statutes made against all manner of Recusants be put in due and exact
execution.

Every Recusant that shall conform himself to the Laws and Ordinances of the
Church of England, and repair to Church and continue there during the time of
divine Service and Sermon, according to the true intent of the statute in that
case made in the time of Queen Elizabeth, shall be discharged from all
penalties of Recusancy, so long as he continues in such obedience and
conformity.

The heir of any Recusant, who is no Recusant, shall not incur any penalty for
the Recusancy of his ancestor; if at the death of any Recusant the heir of the
Recusant be a Recusant, and after become conformable to the Laws and
Ordinances of the Church, and take the oath of Supremacy made in the first
year of Q. Eliz, before the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese, then every
such heir shall be discharged of all penalty happening in respect of the
Recusancy of his Ancestor.

If the Heir of any Recusant be within the age of sixteen years at the
death of his Ancestor, and after become, or be a Recusant, that then he shall
not be discharged from the penalty of Recusancy, until he submit to the
Laws and Ordinances of the Church, and take the said oath of Supremacy in
manner and form expressed. 23 Eliz. cap. 1.


Where any seizure shall be had of the 2 parts of any Lands or Tenements, etc.
for the not payment of the 20. l. due and payable for each month, according to
the Statute in that case lately made, * in such case two third parts shall go
to the payment of the said twenty pound a month, the third part shall not be
extended by the King, nor forfeited by the Recusant; where any seizure has
been made by the King, and the debt or duty by reason of Recusancy not paid,
then the King may continue the seizure until the residue of the debt be fully
satisfied and discharged. The King and his Heirs shall not seize nor extend any
third part descending to any such heirs, or any part thereof, either by reason
of the Recusancy of such heir, or the Recusancy of his Ancestor.

Every person under the Kings obedience, which at any time (after the end of
the session of that Parliament) shall send any child, or other person under
his Government, into any parts beyond the Seas, out of the Kings obedience, to
be resident in any College, or house of any popish Order or Profession
whatsoever, or repair to the same to be instructed in the popish Religion, or
in any sort to profess the same, shall for every such offense forfeit to the
King the sum of one hundred pounds, and every person, so passing or sent
beyond the Seas, in respect of himself or her self only, and not in respect
of his or her posterity, be made incapable to inherit or purchase in any of the
Kings Dominions.

If any person borne in any of the Kings Dominions, at the making of this Act,
were in any such house or College, to be instructed in the popish Religion, and
should not return into some of his Majesty's Dominions within one year next
after the session of that Parliament, and submit himself as is aforesaid, shall
be in respect of himself only, and not in respect of his heirs and posterity,
utterly incapable of inheriting or purchasing within any of the Kings
Dominions. Provided that if any such person shall afterward become obedient and
conformable to the laws and ordinances of the Church of England, and repair
to Church, according to the true intent of the said statutes and ordinances,
and continue so to do; that then every such person shall be discharged of such
disability.

No woman, nor any child under the age of twenty one years (except Saylors
and Ship-boyes, or the Apprentice or Factor of some Merchant in trade of
Merchandise) shall be permitted to pass over the Seas (without License from
the King, or six or more of the privy Council under their hands) upon pain
that the officers of the Port that wilfully or negligently did suffer any such
to pass, and did not enter the names of such passengers so licensed, shall
forfeit their office, and all their goods and chattels and that every owner of
any ship or vessel that shall wilfully carry over seas any such person
without license, shall forfeit his ship or vessel and all the tackle: and
every Mr. or Mariner, of or in any such ship offending as aforesaid shall
forfeit all their goods, and suffer imprisonment by the space of 12 months,
without bail or mainprize.

No person shall keep any School, or be a Schoolmasters, out of any of the
Universities or Colleges of this Realm, except it be in some public or free
Grammer-Schoole, or in some such Noblemans or Noblewomans, Gentleman's or
Gentlewomans house, as are not Recusants, or where the said same Schoolmasters
shall not be licensed by the Archbishop, Bishop, or Guardian of the
Spiritualties of that Diocese, upon pain that as well the schoolmasters, as
the party that entertains him, shall forfeit for every day so offending the sum
of forty shillings, the one half to the King, the other to him who shall sue
for the same, in any of the Kings Courts of Record in Westminster, by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in which no Essoine, Protection or wager of
Law shall be allowed.

Because some popishly affected did repair to Church monthly, whereby Stat.
Anno. 3. Jac. cap. 4.
they did evade the penalties imposed by precedent Parliaments, as is alleged;
It was therefore Enacted That if any Recusant so conformed, shall not once a
year at least after the Session of Parliament receive the Sacrament, in the
Church of that parish where he or she usually abides, or if there be no Church,
then in the Church next adjoining, shall forfeit for the first year the sum
of twenty pounds, for the second year forty pounds, and for every year after
the sum of sixty pounds, until he or she shall receive the Sacrament as
aforesaid; and if he or she, who has received the Sacrament as aforesaid,
shall after offend in not receiving the Sacrament as aforesaid, by the space of
one whole year, that then he shall forfeit for every such offense the sum of
sixty pounds, the one moity to the King, the other to him who will sue for the
same in any of the Courts of Record in Westminster, or before any Justices of
Assize, or before Justices of Peace at their general Quarter Sessions, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoyne, Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed.

The Churchwardens and Constables of every Town, Parish or Chapel for the
time being, or some one of them, or if there be none, then the chief Constables
of the Hundred where such Town, Parish or Chapel is, or one of them, as well
in places exempt as not exempt, shall once every year, present the monthly
absence from Church of all popish Recusants, within such Towns and parishes,
and shall present the names of every of the children of the said Recusants,
being above the age of nine years, and (as near as they can) the age of the
said children, as also the names of the Servants of the said Recusants, at the
next general or Quarter Sessions of that shire, limit, division or liberty.

All such Presentiments shall be Recorded in the said Sessions, by the Clerk
of the Peace, or Towne-clarke for the time being, without any Fee; and for
default of every, such Presentment, the said Churchwardens, Constables, or
High-constables shall forfeit twenty shillings, and for default of recording
such presentment without a Fee, the Clerk of the Peace, or Town-clerke shall
forfeit 40. s.

Every Presenement made by any Churchwarden, constable or High-constable as
aforesaid, whereby any Recusant shall happen to be convicted, shall be rewarded
by having 40. s. to be levied out of such Recusants goods and estate, in such
manner as by the more part of the Justices shall be ordered by warrant under
their hands and seals.

The Justices of Assiize, and Justices of Quarter Sessions have power to hear
and determine of all Recusants, as well for not receiving the Sacrament as for
not coming to Church; and have also power to make Proclamation, that the body
of every such offender shall be rendered to the Sheriff of the county, or the
Baylif or keeper of the Goal of the liberty, before the next Assizes, General
or Quarter Sessions; and if then the offender shall not make his appearance
upon Record, that every such default shall be deemed as a sufficient conviction
by verdict of 12 men.

This Statute recites the penalties imposed by the 29 Eliz. 6. upon a Recusant
convict, and that every conviction shall be certified into the Exchequer, as is
in the statute of 23 El. 1. concerning Recusants monthly forfeitures; yet by
this statute the King may refuse the 20 l. a month, and take the 2 parts of
the Recusants lands, yet the King shall not take into his two parts the Mansion
house, nor shall demise, nor lease over the 2 third parts, or any part thereof
to any Recusant, nor to the use of any Recusant: and whosoever shall take any
lease of the King, of such lands, shall give such security as the Court of
Exchequer shall allow, not to suffer any waste to be committed upon the
Premises.

For the better trial how the Kings subjects stand affected in point of
loyalty and due Obedience, it is Enacted, That after the end of the session of
Parliament, any Bishop of the Diocese, or any two Justices of peace, whereof
one of the Quorum, within the jurisdiction of their sessions, may require any
person of the age of 18 years or above, being or which shall be convict or
indicted for any Recusancy (except noblemen and noble women) for not repairing
to Divine service according to law, or have not received the Sacrament twice
within the year next past, or any person passing through the County or Liberty
and unknown, (except as is before excepted) that being examined by them upon
oath shall confess or not deny himself to be a Recusant, or shall confess or
not deny that he has not taken the Sacrament twice within the year to take
this Oath hereafter upon the holy Evangelists, which said Bishop or two
Justices shall certify in writing subscribed with his or their hands, at the
next general or Quarter Sessions, the Christian name, Surname and place of
abode of every person which shall take the said Oath; which Certificate shall
be there Recorded and kept among Records of the said sessions.

If any person (other then noblemen and noble women) shall refuse to answer
upon Oath to such Bishop or Justices of Peace, or take the said Oath duly
tendered, then the said Bishops or Justices of Peace shall commit the same
person to the common Goal without Bail or Mainprize, until the next Assizes
or quarter Sessions, where the said Oath shall be again tendered unto them by
the Justices of Affize or Justices of Peace, or the greater part of them; and
if such person shall then refuse to take the Oath, he shall incur the penalty
of a praemunire, except women Covert, who upon refusal shall only be committed
to the common Goal there to remain without bail or mainprize, until they take
the said Oath.

The Tenor of the Oath.

I A. B, Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King James is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries, and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to
invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of
their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to
any of them to bear Arms or raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to
his Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also, I swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence
of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted by
the Pope or his Successors, or by any authority derived, or pretended to be
derived from him or his See against the said King, his Heirs and Suceessors,
or any absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience: I will bear faith
and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them
will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts
whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and
Dignity, by reason or color of any such Declaration or Sentence, or otherwise,
and will do my endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty his Heirs
and Successors, all Treasons and Traitrous Conspiracies, which I shall know or
hear of, to be against him or any of them.

I do farther swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as
impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in my Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And
all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according
to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common
sense and understanding of the same Words, without any Equivocation or mental
Evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever, And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the Faith of a Christan.

So help me God.

Unto which Oath, so taken, the said Person shall subscribe his or her name or
mark.

No Indictment to be had or found for not repairing to Church, or for not
receiving the Sacrament according to Law, nor any Proclamation, Outlawry or
other proceeding thereupon shall be avoided, discharged, reversed for default
of form (other then by direct Travers to the point of not coming to Church, or
not receiving the said Sacrament.)

If any Person so Indicted, afterward submit and conform himself, and become
obedient to the Laws of the Church of England, and hear Divine Service
according to the Statute in that case made, and publicly receive the
Sacrament, according to the Laws of this Realm, that then every such person
may reverse and discharge the said Indictment.

Every subject of this Realm, that shall pass out of this Realm, and
voluntarily serve any foreign Prince, State or Potentate, not having taken
this Oath, as aforesaid, shall be a felon.

If any Gentleman, or person of higher degree, or any person or persons which
has born, or shall bear any office of Captain, Lieutenant or any other Office
in Camp, Army or Company of Soldiers, shall after voluntarily serve any
foreign Prince, State, or Potentate, before he shall become bound by
obligation, with two such sureties as shall be allowed by the Officers, which
by this Act are limited to take such bond unto the King in the sum of 20 l.
at least, with condition to the effect following, shall be a Felon.

The Tenor of the Condition follows, viz.
That if the within bounden, etc. shall not at any time then after be
reconciled to the Pope or Sea of Rome, nor shall enter into, or consent unto
any practice, plot, or conspiracy whatsoever against the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, or any of his or their Estate or Estates, Realms, or
Dominions: but shall within convenient time after knowledge thereof had, reveal
and disclose to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or some of the
Lords of his or their honorable Privy Council, all such practices, plots and
conspiracies; That then this obligation to be void.

The Customer and Controller of every Port, Haven, or Creek, or one of them and
their Deputies, and none other, may receive such Bond to the uses aforesaid,
and minister the Oath aforesaid (taking for such bond six pence and no more,
and for such oath nothing) which said Customer and Controller shall Register
and certify such Bond and Oath so taken, into the Exchequer at Westminster
once every year, upon penalty of 5 l. for every Bond not so certified, and 20
s. for every Oath not so certified.

If any person put in practice to absolve or persuade any of the Kings Subjects
from their natural obedience to his Majesty, either within or without the
Dominions, or upon the Sea, etc. or to reconcile them to the Pope or Sea of
Rome, or any other Prince, State or Potentate; that then every such person,
their Aiders, Counselors and Abettors shall be adjudged Traitors; and every
person which shall willingly be absolved or reconciled as aforesaid, shall be
adjudged a Traitor.

The last branch shall not extend to any person which shall be only reconciled
to the Pope or See of Rome, and shall return into this Realm, and within six
days after, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of Peace jointly
or severally, submit himself to his Majesty's Laws, and take the Oath of
Supremacy made in the first year of the Queen, * and also the Cap. 1.
Oath mentioned in this Statute. Where Oaths are so taken the Bishop and
Justices shall at the next General or Quarter Sessions certify, upon the
penalty of forty pound.

All persons who offend against this branch of the Statute shall be indicted
and tried by the Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery of that County for the
time being, or before the Justices of the Kings Bench, and there be proceeded
against according to the Laws, against Traitors, as if the offense had been
committed in the same County.

If any Peer of the Realm shall happen to be indicted of any offense made
Treason by this Act, he shall be tried by his Peers.

If any person shall not resort weekly to some usual place of Divine Service,
any Justice of Peace in the Limit, Division or Liberty, where such person shall
dwell, may give a Warrant to the Churchwarden of the Parish, upon proof or
confession made before him, to levy twelve pence for every such default, by
distress, and sale of the Goods of the offender; and for default of such
distress the said Justice may commit the offender to prison until payment be
made.

No man shall be impeached upon this clause, except it be within one month
after such default made.

No man being punished according to this branch, shall for the same offense be
punished by forfeiture of twelve pence, upon the Law made in the first year of
Queen Eliz.

This Statute repeals the two branches of 35 Eliz. 1. the first beginning, [and
for that every person having house or family, is in bounden duty to have
special regard of the Goal governance and ordering of the same] and so forth
to the next clause, beginning thus [provided nevertheless that this Act shall
not in any wise extend to punish or impeach any persons for relieving, etc.]
ending with these words [any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.]

In lieu whereof every person which shall willingly maintain, relieve, or keep
in his house any servant, sojourner or stranger, which shall not repair to some
usual place of Divine service according to Law, by the space of one month,
not having a reasonable excuse, shall forfeit ten shillings for every such
month.

Every person which shall retain in service, see, or livery any person, which
shall forbear to go to some usual place of Divine service by the space of a
month, shall forfeit for every such month, he knowing the same, the sum of
ten pounds.

This Act shall not extend to punish any person for maintaining, relieving or
harboring his Father or Mother, wanting without fraud any other habitation, or
sufficient maintenance, or the ward of any person committed by authority to the
custody of any by whom they shall be so relieved, maintained or kept.

The Sheriff, or other Officer upon lawful Writ, Warrant or Process to him
awarded to take or apprehend any Popish Recusant, standing excommunicated for
recusancy, may break open the house where any such person excommunicated shall
be, or raise the power of the County for apprehending such person.

Every offense committed against this Act may be heard and determined before
the Justices of the Kings Bench, and Justices of Assize: And all offenses other
than Treason shall be enquired, heard and determined before the Justices of
Peace in their next General and Quarter Sessions.

No attainder of Felony by this Act shall extend to forfeiture of Dower or
corruption of blood.

The Defendant in any action commenced or brought against him by virtue of any
thing in this Act, may plead to the general Issue, by an Evidence that shall
prove his doings or proceedings warrantable by this Law.

This Act nor any thing contained therein is said not to extend to take away or
abridge any authority or jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical censures.

No person shall be charged in any penalty by force of this Act, which shall
happen for the wifes offense in not receiving the Sacrament during her
Marriage, nor any woman shall be charged with any penalty for not receiving,
during Marriage.

In all cases where the Bishop or Justices of Peace by virtue of this Act may
take of any Subject (not a Nobleman) this oath above mentioned. The Lords of
the Privy Council, or any 6 of them, where of the Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, or principle Secretary to be one, have authority to require the same
at any time of any Nobleman or Noble-woman (being above the age of 18. years)
and if such Nobleman or Noble-woman (other then the woman married) refuse the
same, they shall incur the penalty of a Praemunire.

Where any person shall pass out of the Cinque Ports, or any member thereof, to
any parts beyond the seas, to serve any foreign Prince, State, or Potentate,
the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports for the time being, or any person by him
appointed, have power to take bond, and minister this oath to such passengers.

If any man discover any Recusant or other person which shall entertain or
Stat. Annn. 3 Jac. cap. 5.
relieve any Jesuit, Seminary or Popish Priest, or shall discover any Mass to
have been said, and the persons which were present, and the Priest, or any that
were present within three days, shall not only be freed from any penalty, but
shall have the third part of the forfeiture of all such sums of money, goods
and chattels, which shall be forfeited for such offense, (if the forfeiture
exceed not 150 l. if it does exceed 150 l. then the discoverer to have 50 l.)
and the discoverer after conviction of the offender, shall have a certificate
from the Judges or Justices of Peace before whom such conviction shall happen
to be, directed to the Sheriff, or other Officer that shall seize the goods,
commanding him to pay the same accordingly.

No Popish Recusant shall come into the house where the King, or the Heir
apparent shall be, unless commanded by the King, or by Warrant from the Lords
of the privy Council, upon penalty of one hundred pound, the one moity to the
King, the other to the discoverer, who will sue for the same in any Court of
Record, where no Essoine, Protection or Law Gager shall be allowed.

All convicted Popish Recusants dwelling in London, or within five miles within
three months after the Session of Parliament, shall depart out of it, and not
dwell within ten miles, and deliver up their names to the Lord Major if they
dwell in London; and if such Recusant shall dwell within ten miles of London,
to deliver up his name to the next Justice of Peace within forty days after
the Session of Parliament, upon the penalty of one hundred pounds, the one
half to the King, the other to him who will sue as aforesaid.

All Recusants which shall dwell or remain in London, or within ten miles
thereof, shall within ten days after indictment or conviction depart out of
the said compass, and deliver up their names to the Lord Mayor. In case the
said Recusant shall dwell in any County within ten miles of London, then within
ten days after conviction or indictment, shall give up his name to the next
Justice of peace, the person offending shall forfeit one hundred pounds, the
one half to the King, the other to the Informer as aforesaid.

Tradesmen Recusants who have no other habitation, may continue within London,
and the compass of ten miles.

This Act repeals that branch of the 35 Eliz. cap. 2. touching license of
Recusants to remove or pass above five miles from their place of abode.

The King or three or more of the Privy Council under their hands may license
a Recusant to travel out of the compass of five miles. So may four Justices of
Peace of the County, with the privity of the Bishop of the Diocese in writing,
or of the Lieutenant, or any of the Deputy Lieutenants, the party taking his
corporal oath that he truly informs them of the cause of his journey, and
making no causless stays.

No convict Recusant shall practice the Common Law as a Councellor, Clerk,
Attorney or Solicitor; nor shall practice the Civil Law as Advocate or
Proctor; nor practice Physic, nor be an Apothecary, nor shall be Judge,
Minister, Clerk or Steward of any Court, nor keep any Court, nor shall be
Register or Town Clerk, or other Minister or Officer in any Court, nor shall
bear Office, as Captain, Lieutenant, Corporal, Sergeant, Auncient-bearer, or
other Office in Camp, Troop, Band or Company of Soldiers; nor bear any office
in any Ship, Castle or Fortress of the Kings, upon penalty of one hundred
pounds to be forfeited as aforesaid.

No popish Recusant convict, or having a Wife convict, shall bear any public
office in the Commonwealth.

Every married woman being a Recusant convict (her husband not being convict)
shall forfeit 2. third parts of her Jointure and Dower during her life, and be
made incapable of being Executrix, or Administratrix to her husband.

Every Popish Recusant convict shall be deemed as a person excommunicated so
long as he continues not conformable, and not come to Divine service, and
receive the Sacrament, and take the oath appointed by this Parliament in the
first chap.

Yet such Recusant may sue for such of his Lands, Tenements, etc. and for the
profits thereof, which are not seized into the Kings hands for his Recusancy or
any part thereof.

Every covicted Popish Recusant not married in some open Church or Chapel, or
otherwise then according to the Church of England, by a Minister lawfully
authorized, shall be disabled to have any estate of Freehold by Courtesy of
England. And every woman being a popish Recusant convict, which shall be
married in other form then as aforesaid, shall be disabled not only to claim
any Dower or Jointure, but also the Widows Estate and Frankbanck in any
customary Lands whereof her Husband died seized, and likewise from having part
of her husbands goods by virtue of any custom of any County, City, or Place.
And if a man be married contrary to the true intent of this Statute to a woman
who has no Lands or Tenements whereby he may become Tenant by Courtesy, he
shall forfeit 100 l. to be paid as aforesaid.

Every Popish Recusant, which shall have a child born, and shall not within a
month after cause it to be baptized by a lawful Minister, according to the
Laws of the Realm in some usual place of Baptism: or if by infirmity the
child cannot be brought to such place, then to be baptized by some Minister
within the month, if he beliving by the space of a month, or if he be dead,
then Mother of such Child shall for every such offense forfeit one hundred
pound, one third part to the King, the other to the Informer who will sue for
it, the other third part to the poor of the said Parish, to be recovered in any
of the Kings Courts, wherein no Essoine, etc. shall be allowed.

If any Popish Recusant not being excommunicated shall be buried in any place
other then the Church or Churchyard, or not according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws of the Realm: That the Executors or Administrators of every such person
so buried, knowing the same, or the party that so burieth him shall forfeit
twenty pounds to be paid as aforesaid.

If the children of any of the Subjects within this Realm (the said children
not being Soldiers, Mariners, Merchants, or their Apprentices or Factors)
shall be sent, or go beyond seas without license of the King, or six of the
Privy Council (whereof the principal Secretary to be one) under their hands
and seals, that very such child shall take no benefit by any gift, conveyance,
descent, devise or otherwise, until he being above the age of eighteen years
take the oath mentioned in an Act made that Session, entitled An Act for the
better discovery and repressing Popish Recusants, etc. before some Justice of
Peace of the County where such Parents of such Children as shall be sent, did
or shall inhabit: In the mean time the next of kin, who is no popish Recusant,
shall enjoy all the said Lands, etc. until the person so sent shall conform
himself and take the said oath, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
and then he who has received any profit as aforesaid, shall restore the goods
or value to him, who shall so conform himself: He that shall so send his child
beyond seas, shall forfeit one hundred pounds to be recovered as aforesaid.

No convict popish Recusant shall present to a Benefice with Cure, Prebend, or
grant an Advowson, or collate or nominate to any Free School, or Donative
whatsoever.

The Chancellor and Scholars of the University of Oxford, when any such become
void, shall have the nomination, presentation, collation and Donation of any
such Benefice, Prebend, or Ecclesiastical Living, School, Hospital and
Donative, in the Counties of Oxford, Kent, Middlesex, Sussex, Surrey,
Hampshire, Barkshire, Buckinghamshire, Gloucestershire, Worcestershire,
Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Devonshire, Cornwall,
Dorcetshire, Herefordshire, Northamptonshire, Pembrokeshire, Carmarthenshire,
Brecknock-shire, Monmothshire, Cardiganshire Montgomeryshire, and the City of
London, so long as the Patron shall remain a Recusant convict.

The Chancellor and Scholars of the University of Cambridge shall have
presentation, etc. to all such Benefices aforesaid being in the Counties of
Essex, Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Cambridgshire, Huntingtonshire, Suffolk,
Northfolk, Lincolnshire, Rutlandshire, Leicestershire, Derbishire,
Notinghamshire, Shropshire, Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, the County of
Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Radnorshire, Denbyshire,
Flintshire, Carnarvonshire, Angleseyshire, Merionethshire, Glamorganshire, so
long as the Patron shall continue a Recusant convict.

If the Chancellor and Shollars of either University shall nominate or present
Quaere who shall have the next presentation and nomination.
to any such Benefice, etc. any person who has any other Benefice with cure of
souls, every such nomination and presentation shall be void.

A convicted Recusant shall neither be Executor, or Administrator, nor Gaurdian
in Chivalry or Socage.

The next of kin of the children of Recusants convict, to whom the Estate
cannot descend, who shall usually resort to Divine Service according to the
Laws, and receive the Sacrament, shall have the Guard and education of the
children, and of the Lands and Tenements holden in Knights-service, until the
full age of 21 years; and of the Lands in Socage, as Guardian in Socage; and of
Customary Lands by copy of Court Roll, so long as the custom shall permit the
same, and in every of the said places shall yield an account of the profits to
the Ward.

All Grants of Wards either of the King or any other, to any Popish Recusant
shall be void.

No person shall bring from beyond Sea, print, sell, or buy any Popish Primers,
Ladies Psalters, Manuels, Rosaries, popish Catechisms, Missals, Breviaries,
Portals, Legends and lives of Saints, containing superstitious matter, upon
penalty of forty shillings to be forfeited as aforesaid, viz. one third part
to the King, an other to the Informer who will sue, the other to the poor of
the Parish where such book shall be found.

Justices of peace in their Limits, Mayors, Bailiffs and chief Officers in
Corporations, may search the house of every popish Recusant convict, and the
house and lodging of every person whose wife is a popish Recusant convict, for
popish books, and Relics of Popery. And if any Altar, Pix, Beads, Pictures, or
such like popish Relics, or any popish books shall be found, as in the
opinion of such Officers shall be thought unmeet for such Recusants, they shall
presently be defaced and burnt, if meet to be burnt.

All Armor, Gunpowder and Munition whatsoever any popish Recusant convict has
or shall have, in his own house, or in the hands of others, shall be taken from
them by warrant of four Justices of peace at their General or Quarter Sessions
(other then such necessary weapons as the four Justices shall think meet for
defense of the said Recusants in defense of their houses) and the said Armor
and Munition so taken shall be kept at the costs of the said Recusants, in such
places as the four Justices shall appoint.

If any such Recusant which has such armor, etc. or any person who has any
such armor, etc. for the use of such Recusant, shall refuse to declare unto
the said Justices of peace or any of them, or shall hinder or disturb any such
Justices, or any person authorized by them to seize the same, shall forfeit all
such armor and ammunition to the King, and beimprisoned by warrant from any of
the Justices of the County, during the space of three months, without bayl or
mainprize.

This Act, nor any thing therein shall not abridge the authority and
jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical censures.

See Statute 6 anno 7 Jacobi, who shall take the oath of obedience to the King,
and by whom it shall be ministered, and within what time.

If any married woman, being lawfully convict as a popish Recusant, for not
coming to Church, shall not within three months after such conviction conform
her self, and repair to Church and receive the Sacrament according to Law, then
shall she be committed to prison by one of the Kings Privy Council, if she be
a Baroness; or if she be under that degree, by two of the Justices of the peace
of the County, whereof one of the Quorum, without Bail or Mainprise, until she
conform her self to come to Church, and receive the Sacrament, unless the
Husband shall pay to the King ten pounds a month, or the third part of his
Lands and Tenements, so long as the Wife remaining out of prison shall continue
a convicted Recusant, during which time (and no longer) she shall have her
liberty.

If the giving of the temporal powers cognizance of crimes merely spiritual
Annot.
be objected to Edw. 6. Queen Elizabeth and King James. I think no man will
undertake to answer for all things done by men; yet thus much may be answered
that it was no new thing, for the Statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 7. gives Justices of
peace and Justices of assise full power and authority to enquire of these, who
hold Errors, Heresies and Lollardy, and of their maintainers; and that the
Sheriff and other Officers may arrest and apprehend Anno 1. Sess. 2. cap. 2.
them: and that this was done by Queen Mary. See Mary.

Of King James:
AS there was never any Prince who had a more clear and undoubted King James
his Title and Reception.
right and title to the English Diadem then King James (for besides that he was
Heir to both Houses of York and Lancaster, as is most truly acknowledged by
both Houses of Parliament Anno 1. cap. 1. Jac.) he was derived by a long
descent of Royal Ancestors from Malcolm Conmor or Cammore King of the Scots,
and the Lady Margaret (being the name of her from whom the united Title of both
Houses of York and Lancaster descended upon him) Sister and sole Heir of Edgar
Atheling, Son and Heir of Edward, eldest son of Edmond surnamed Ironside; so
that all titles as well of right of blood, as of conquest, might so truly be
ultimately resolved into him, that in the whole world no just exception could
be taken against them: so never was any Prince received with so little
opposition and contradiction, by all sorts of his Subjects both in England and
Ireland; where all those long rebellions and commotions, did expire with Queen
Elizabeth; and in both Kingdoms all became so pacate and calm, that during
all his Reign in neither Nation was any sword drawn in opposition to him.

There was such havoc made in the Reign of H. 8. and Ed. 6. of all Church His
care of the Church.
Lands, upon pretense (forsooth) of Reformation, that to stay it there was a
Law made in the first of Queen Eliz. cap. 19. that all Gifts, Grants,
Feofments, Fines and other Conveyances, made by any Archbishop or Bishop of
any Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, being
parcel of the possession of his Archbishopric, or Bishopric, or united, or
appertaining or belonging to any of the same, to any person (other then the
Queen her Heirs and Successors) whereby any Estate should or might pass from
the Archbishop, or Bishop other then for the term of 21 years, or three lives,
reserving the old Rent or more, shall be utterly void. Cambden Eliz. Reg. page
36. takes notice of the great abuse made by the Courtiers of that clause, or
exception of the Queen, etc. And indeed William of Burley had by the Queens
permission so gelt the Bishopric of Ely by virtue of this clause, that it lay
void above twenty years before any man of abilities or honesty would take it so
pol'd and maimed, although some were conunitted to prison for refusing of it.
But King James as his first and chiefest care by an Act of Parliament in the
first year of his Reign cap. 3. made a Law that all assurances afterward made
to the King of any of the Lands of Archbishops or Bishops should be void; so
that the rapine and prey made upon the Church was first restrained totally by
him.

King James was not only a devout observor of the Government, Rites His care of
Religion.
and Ceremonies of the Church of England, but made it one of his chiefest cares
to have brought an Uniformity as well in Scotland as in England; and proceeded
so far as to settle Episcopacy among them, naming thirteen new Bishops for so
many Episcopal Sees as had been anciently in that Church; three of which
received consecration from the Bishops of England, and conferred it on the rest
of their Brethren at their coming home: Which Bishops he armed also with the
power of an High Commission, the better to keep down the insolent and
domineering spirit of the Presbyterians. In order to the other, he procured an
Act to be passed in the Assembly at Aberdeen 1616. for composing a Liturgy, and
extracting a new book of Canons out of the scattered Acts of their old
Assemblies. At the Assembly held at Perth anno 1618. he obtained an Order for
the receiving the Communion kneeling, for the administering Baptism, and the
Lords Supper in private houses in cases of extreme necessity, for Episcopal
confirmation; and finally for the celebrating the Anniversaries of our Saviors
birth, his Passion, Resurrection and Ascension, and the coming down of the Holy
Ghost: all which he got confirmed in the following Parliament. So far did this
wise King advance the work of Uniformity before his engaging in the cause of
the Palatinate; his breach with Spain, and the war which issued thereupon did
divert his thoughts.

To his peaceful disposition, and his care of the Church and Religion, His
great learning and clemency.
in the next place may be truly added his great abilities in learning, so far
transcending, not only the Kings of the present age his contemporaries, but all
his predecessors, and surely scarcely to be paralled by any of his time, as his
many learned works testify. To these other virtues may be added a mind no
ways vindicative, although sometimes transported with present passion; yet of
some small continuance that in person or estate he was never noted to punish
any man rashly, or extrajudicially. And although he was no great lover of the
Commons Laws of this Land, yet a great assertor of them, and in disgrace with
him, would oftentimes affirm, that there was no time whenever he could speak
reason, but the King would hear him. With the reputation of these virtues he
governed these Islands in greater peace, then posbly, in the ordinary nature of
things, could be expected.

In the 3. year of his Reign, viz. Anno Dom. 1605. was a most heinous and The
cause of the many Laws made against Popish Recusants.
vile attempt, intended not only against the very Person of the King, but even
of his Posterity, which had not advanced the design of the conspirators, and
the Church, and all the Nobility, (not of their faction) with the Commons in
Parliament assembled. And the conspirators had proceeded so far, that they had
not only made provision to have effected their purpose; and intended the fifth
of November (being the day for the convention of the Parliament after their
Proroguement, and therefore probably expecting not only a more then usual
convention both of the Lords and Gentry, but even of the King himself) to have
blown up the Parliament House. But the design being as foolish as desperate,
was discovered the night before it should have been executed (although it is
thought, that it was known even to the King himself, and the Earl of Salisbury
before) as by accident; and so had no other effect, then what the conspirators
might reasonably have expected, had it succeeded, viz. ruin to themselves (for
their faction being so very few in proportion to the rest of the Nation, and
without either money, Forts, or Army, in reason they could not have done any
thing considerable in order to their further designs) and severe Laws against
all which might be suspected to be of their faction, to prevent any such
further attempts.

It is true where Tacitus observes, that the conspiracies of Subjects where His
defects and frailties.
they succeed not, do advance the Sovereignty, and verefied in this attempt of
the Gunpowder-Treason: for how many Laws were that Parliament, and afterward
enacted against all Popish Recusants, we have before showed; yet so it happened
(and so usually happens, when not carefully minded by Princes) that another
faction, far more formidable both to King and Church, openly pretending
assistance to the King and Church in persecuting this faction, secretly
acquired strength to themselves in so doing. Nor was this unseen by this wise
King, (being naturally a greater enemy to the Faction persecuting the
persecuted) but either not having that magnanimity, which is so requisite in a
Sovereign, or apprehending he had not means sufficient to go through, he
neglected to apply such medicines, as were necessary to the curing of this
Gangrene so dilating it self both in Church, Court and State; but desiring
Peace, (especially at home) although almost upon any terms, he rather sought
to repel the breaking out of Puritanisme during his Reign, then to eradicate
it for the future. Add hereunto that being excessively addicted to Hunting; and
not greatly loving the Common Laws, and finding it impossible to govern this
Nation otherwise; and minding controversies in Divinity more than the
management of his temporal affairs: and though free from Sacrilege and
Corruption in his person, yet careless of it in his Favorites and Countrymen:
and nothing so prudent a Manager of the Revenues of the Crown as his
Predecessor, whereby being forced to recede from many of his Regalities, the
Reins of Government both in Church and State, became so loose that (in the
ordinary nature of things) it was very difficult they should be reassumed by
his Successor.

Ecclesiastical Laws made by King Charles.
THere were some few Laws made against Interludes, etc. on the Lords day, and
10. groats penalty for offense, to be levied by Justices and Constables, which
a man may read in the first Car. 1. and 3 Car. 1.

There had never in any time been before this Kings Reign so long Peace The
state of the Church and State in the beginning of K. Charles his Reign.
(viz. for near 80 years) in this Nation as in the beginning of his Reign; but
neither does peace make men's minds peaceable, nor were things otherwise well
disposed for the continuance of it: for not only the zealous and obsequious
duty which the Subjects paid to the Royal name in the person of Queen
Elizabeth was quite dead, and almost forgotten; the great wisdom and learning
of his Father not to be hoped for in the tender years of the Son; the Exchequer
without money; and yet the King engaged in a War against the Spaniard for
recovery of the Palatinate: but the Puritan Faction (which Queen Elizabeth
desired so much to suppress, and so much hated by his Father) was grown so
far up in Church, State and Court, that in all they were far more numerous
both in England and Scotland, and all foreign Plantations, then all his other
Subjects. Nor was the condition of Ireland better, for not only the Protestant
party were jarring among themselves, but the Popish intent upon their
destruction, which after they did execute in a terrible manner. To these may be
added the government both in Church and State so neglected, that the exercise
of any Laws to reduce them to conformity, would be imputed to have been
Innovations and Tyranny. The Kings Council either incapable of giving
counsel, or not faithful to their Prince. Nor was there any thing left to
oppose all these growing calamities, but the hopeful virtues of a young Prince
(unacquainted in Temporal affairs, and a stranger to all worldly calamities)
which are of no more power to protect him against seditious and rebellious
Subjects, then the Laws of God, and all which may be called sacred, will
retain men in obedience, where they are not restrained by a present coercive
power. But these storms (which after brought this Saintlike Prince, and this
woeful Church and State to so lamentable a condition as they lately lay under)
did not break out in the very beginning of his Reign, but in all three Nations
did gather into such black clouds in all his reign, that almost at once
breaking forth in such a terrible Tempest, as, upon the matter, it so
overwhelmed King, Church and Government, that there was scarce any footsteps of
them left.

I had here designed to have inserted a short History of the chief occurrences
of his Reign, and by what degrees this saint-like Prince became a victim to
the rage and lust of his seditious subjects, and have the papers now by me; but
in regard it must needs rub soars, which may rather in their tenderness anger
then ease them, and also because the History of his life has been by others
more fully written, but most of all, because it is his Majesty's pleasure to
have the memory of things rather buried in oblivion then renewed, I shall
forbear, and do no more then give the description of him, and show the
consequence of his calamities.

The Description of King CHARLES.
IT is a thing very worthy of great consideration, To think how the singular
virtues and eminent qualities of so good and pious a Prince should come to so
cruel, so unfortunate an end; for in him was all those amiable qualities,
which in another age would have rendered him reverenced and admired: So singular
Piety, That the Portracture of King CHARLES in his sufferings, will be a
Character of it beyond all expression but his own; so ardent a zeal in
Religion, that not any Regular in Religion was a more devout observer of his
Order, then the King was of the Rites and Liturgy of the Church; So free from
Simony that the suspicion of it in any man, (how deserving soever otherwise)
was sufficient bar from any advancement in the Church; So just, that though he
every day saw the Puritan-faction budding out more formidably, both in Church
or State, yet did he never proceed illegally or in an extrajudiciall manner
against any man, before the storms of his Adversaries broke out upon him on
every side; So merciful, that the Scottish Lord Balmerino An. 1634. being
legally convict of Treason, was pardoned by him; Nor was Louden proceeded
against for holding correspondency with the King of France, without the Kings
privity, and giving him the Title of Du Roy: nor in all his Reign (how
formidable soever the faction grew did he, before the war brake out against
him, put any to death, except one in the Lambeth conspiracy, for fomenting and
contriving the conspiracy against him: To these may be added a profound
Judgment in the affairs both of Church and State, how much it appeared in the
former, appears in the intercourse between him and Master Hinderson; nor was
his Piety to his Parents less conspicuous, being truly the principal Mourner
at his Mothers funeral, and chose rather to express the Piety he owed to his
Father, in attending his dead body to his grave, although contrary to the
custom of his predecessors, then to insist upon nicities of State; So singular
was his conjugall love and chastity to his Queen, that a little before his
death he commanded the Princess Elizabeth, his daughter, to tell her Mother,
that his thoughts had never strayed from her, and that his love should be the
same to the last: Jealous he was of the honor of the English Church and
Nation, and well understanding that where men's minds are not well knit in
Religion, nothing will long keep their affections cemented: He had a great
desire to have finished King James his design of uniting the Kirk of Scotland
in an Uniformity with the Church of England, who had made some progress in an
Assembly held at Aberdeen 1616. and afterward in another at Perth 1618. which
King Charles got passed in Parliament of Scotland 1633. In him was a perpetual
love to the good, and an infinite desire of doing good to all.

These noble virtues and graces toward God, his Parents, Wife and Subjects,
were adorned with most eminent and singular personal virtues, and graces, as
moderation in prosperity, magnanimity in adversity; so wonderful patience,
that after the fight of Cropredy-bridge, in his march after the Earl of Essex,
it chanced that one of his Carriages brake in a narrow long Lane, where his
Majesty was to pass, and gave a stop to him at a time when a great shower of
rain happened to fall: some of them who were near about him offered to hew out
a way through the hedges with their swords, that he might get some shelter in
the Villages adjoining; but he resolved not to forsake the Canon upon any
occasion; at which some seeming to admire his patience, his Majesty lifting up
his hat, said, That as God had given him afflictions to exercise his patience,
so he had given him patience to bear his afflictions. So severe an observer of
his words and actions, that he was never observed to say any thing lightly or
rashly, or in his personal actions did any thing which might render his person
or authority contemptible: So temperate, that in all his life he was never
observed disorderly to exceed in eating or drinking; affable, yet conserving
the dignity of his Majesty to all men; free and open in his conversation,
little practicing the only lesson which Lewis the eleventh would learn his Son,
Charles the ninth, Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare: So frugall, that
though he had a Queen and plentiful Issue, and expended much more in repairing
the Navy for recovering the Sovereignty of the narrow seas, then he received of
his Subjects; and the Exchequer left empty by his Father; yet he increased it
before the first Scottish expedition to a greater mass then was ever found since
it was exhausted by Henry the Eighth: So elegant and pure a style he had in
writing, that I expect to live to see it as much imitated by Englishmen, as
Caesar's was among the Romans. Neither (which is no less remarkable) were any
of these virtues stained with any suspected vice.

To the qualities of his mind were joined Ornaments of his body every way
answerable; a venerable and gracious aspect, yet best when he did not speak;
agility of members so disposed, that in riding the great Horse, running the
ring, vaulting, shooting in the Crosbow, Musket, and sometime the great
Ordinance, He was thought to be the best Marksman and comliest manager of the
great Horse of any man in the three Nations; nor was less judicious in
choosing a Winter Dear (which is one of the hardest taskes of a Woodman) then
excellent in shooting a Dear. Dr. Harvey Genesis Anim. exerc. 64. page 422.
propt. med. affirms him to be delighted in observations the Dr. made of the
causes of Generation, from his dissection and Anatomies of the Dear in
Hampton Court, etc. but (whether wanting that magnanimity of looking dangers in
the face upon their first budding, which is so necessary to the conservation of
Regality; or whether not having sufficiently understood, that benefits
conferred upon seditious men, never begot any obligation of gratitude upon
them; but on the contrary they always make advantage of them to get more,
until (not having more to expect, grow jealous least their benefactors might
by some means better reassume them, then they extort them) they hate them,
which usually ends in the murder of Princes: but thinking to overcome his
adversaries by his benefits, example and clemency; or to give satisfaction to
all Factions of his Subjects,) he preferred all Factions in his Court and
Council (though he excluded them out of the Church) whereby he gave vent to
all the Factions, so as the veneration of the Royal name became every day more
contemptible, the Factions increased daily more formidable, his counsels became
distracted and betrayed, and all the treasure he had gathered, consumed in the
first Northern expedition against the Scots; where having many advantages to
have subdued them, he made a dishonorable peace with them, io the increase of
their reputation, and loss of his own; being destitute of treasure and the
Scots no whit edified by his concessions, the next year upon no cause, given by
the King, they not only arm, but enter the Nation in open hostility; from his
granting them their concessions the English Faction urge his granting all
things how dishonorable soever, even to the shedding of humane blood; nor
would they have stayed there, had not the Kings utmost necessities put him upon
other resolutions of seeking his preservation otherways then by granting all
the exercise of the Militia and Regalities to those men, who made so bad use of
his precedent benefits and favors.

Machivel in the 26. chap. lib. 1. de repub. advises every new Prince, that The
Kings cause was most prudent, as well as just.
unjustly possesses the City or Region of another, that by how much he
understands himself more weak to conserve his Empire, either by lawful ruling,
or by instituting a free Commonwealth; by so much the more he intends this
only, that as he is a new Prince, so in his Principality he does innovate all
things: that he create new Magistrates marked by new names, and to them he
choose new men; that he distribute the goods of the rich to poor men, and make
them rich: And as it is reported of King David, so it may be said of him, He
has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away,
etc. and the reason he gives, is, that no man in his Region that holds any
thing, but must confess he obtained it of the Prince. But if he be so great at
policy in Princes, who unjustly possess another right, to innovate all
things; then in reason, besides the justness of it, there can be no greater
prudence in Princes who reign by inherent birthright, and to the wrong and
prejudice of no man, to rule and govern by the old received and established
Laws of the Nation; to innovate nothing (where there is no apparent necessity)
neither in Church or State, in Laws or Religion; yet who has not seen the
most Saintlike and Glorious Monarch of the Western World (whose right was
derived from innumerable ancestors, nor was there upon the face of the earth
any one that could make any colorable pretense of right to his Crown)
prosecuted, arraigned, condemned and executed by his own natural Subjects, and
his Queen and Posterity banished, for no other reason but because he did
endeavor to have governed and protected them by the known and established
Laws of the Nation? So little avails the skilfulness of the Pilot how good,
great, or just soever, if the wind of divine favor, wherewith eternal
providence governs mortal affairs, help not to bring our actions to their
desired Port,

Sir Edward Coke in the Pleas of the Crown, Cap. Petty Treason prop. sin. A
short view upon the 3. Nations since they cast off their obedience
observes, that in perusal of all books, Histories and Records, it was never
found that Treason did ever attain the desired end, but did always prove
fatal and destructive to the undertakers: Let any man but see Gods judgments
upon the Kirkmen of Scotland, and the Roman Catholics of Ireland, if they be
not either vagabonds abroad, or the most miserable slaves in the world at home;
for although it so pleased the divine providence, that their iniquities
prevailed against the King, yet did the divine vengeance overtake them by a
third faction so new, contemptible and obscure, that it was not only in their
undertaking not feared, but in the beginning never heard of in the world. It is
true indeed the English Presbyterians (who had most basely accepted a canting
thing called the Covenant from the Kirkmen of Scotland, and as injuriously
imposed it upon their fellow Subjects) have not been so highly chastised in the
general by them, as they in Scotland, and the Roman Catholics in Ireland
have; yet were they so far from attaining their ends, that since all this
Nation abounded with factions, that was the most hated and despised by all
other: Nor were the other Factions much more reconciled and true to one another
then to the Presbyterians; for the Army, commanded by Oliver Cromwell, turned
out the Rump of the Long Parliament which headed the Independent party; and
after Cromwells death the Army receives the Rump, and displaces his posterity;
and surely in this world is not to be found in any family so many and so great
distractions and dissentions, as were in the late Protectors; nor did the Rump
of the late Long Parliament maintain their long fought for and new restored
Dominions, but were rejected by those creatures that did restore them, with
very small hopes of ever attaining to it again. Yet did the Rump after reassume
their supremacy (and proceeded as high and arrogantly as if they had never done
wrong, but suffered all injustice and wrong by their interruption) when not
only the Treasure of this Nation was exhausted, and all Crown, Church, and
Delinquents Lands and Compositions converted and consumed; but the whole
traffic of the Nation interrupted and destroyed. And if it were so dangerous
a thing to a Nation for one Faction to be formidable in Church or State, how
dangerous was it where there is no visible Church, and nothing but Factions in
all the State?

Although man by nature be a sociable creature, and men do and ever did, since
there were any records of time, live in society by right or usurpation to
something superior, to either the Fathers or Masters Power; yet since the
exercise of all power is politic, humane or voluntary, and therefore diverse
Princes govern by diverse Laws, as they sort with the natures and dispositions
of their Subjects; and not only so, but all Princes govern their own Subjects
by differing Laws, according to their site and nature of their Subjects: for
it were a most unreasonable thing that the same Laws should be imposed upon
Mediterrane places, where are observed in Maritime; or that the Laws and Usages
of the City of London should be required to be observed in every Country
Village, etc. And since that some Nations do almost without contradiction,
upon all occasions obey the Laws of their Princes with out dispute, as the
Muscovites, Armenians, Persian, Indians, etc. others scarce ever, unless they
be governed by their ancient received Laws ordinarily, and in extraordinary
cases by Laws passed in some public Assemblies, as the Germans, Swedes,
Polanders and Danes; others are governed peaceably by their ancient received
Laws in the usual administration of Justice, and in extraordinary cases do
admit of new ones, having them rarely passed in public Conventions; such are
the Italians, Spaniards and French; and this does not proceed from any abject,
baseness or meanness of spirit; for in the world are no where found men more
generous and valiant. And some are rarely governed long in peace, although
governed by old Laws ordinarily, and the consent of the major part of the
Freeholders (as they conceive) by their representatives in passing new ones, as
are the English and Scottish. And also since the corruption of the best thing
is worst, it will not be amiss before we conclude this Chapter and Book, to
discourse this Problem, whether upon all occasions it be the only and
necessary way to cure all distempers of State by a full convention in
Parliament, according to the usual constitution: And first we will see what
may be said for it.

That the passing of Laws in Parliament, where the major part of the

That when Laws are so passed, it confirms and strengthens the Prince

That Parliaments have been of that antiquity, and the Nation so habituated

That the grievances of the Nation can never be so well represented and

That men will less dare to abuse their Prince or Country by any sinister

The frequent use of Parliaments takes away all strangeness between the

That since it is necessary that every Prince in governing must necessarily
Egypt before Sclymus conquered them; or as the King of France now does in the
hands of Switz and Scots; or he must betake himself to the protection of a
mercinary Army made up of his Subjects and Foreiners, as the Turks Janissaries
and Spahi are: or establish his security and refuge upthe affection of his
subjects, and entrust them with the Militia in such manner as has been used
heretofore in England, and that this agrees better with the nature and
constitution of Englishmen then any of the other, as being established as well
by Common Law, as many Acts of Parliament. To this I subscribe.

To these may be added, that Tacitus in the life of Agricola, makes it one
great cause of the Romans conquering our Ancestors. That they consulted not in
common. Nec aliud adversus validissimas Gentes pro nobis utilius, quam quod in
commune non consultant. Rarus ad Propulsandum commune periculum conventus: It a
dum singuli pugnant, aniversi vincuntur.

Quaere Yet quaere whether Rising-Chase in Norfolk, and old Sarum in Wilts,
where are no Inhabitants but a few mean Tenants, sending twice the numbers to
the Parliament with the county of York; and whether the County and City of
Durham, sending none at all; and whether Cornwall's sending ten times as many
as either Warwickshire or Leicestershire, and yet either of them bigger and
far more rich Counties; Or whether Cities and Boroughs not only sending a like
number of Citizens and Burgesses with the County, having alike Vote with them
of the County, be an equal representative of the Freeholders? Or whether the
ways used in the Elections do not animate the Electors, and those that stand
in Competition against one another, and that to such a height, That many of the
Electors and those who stand, are never after reconciled?

Answer. It is true indeed, that if God had determined all things in this
inferior Orb without any variation, and that this thing were always to be
attained only by some one means, and that this in governing were by council in
Parliament, then could there be neither reason or discourse upon variation and
alteration of things, and no difference between the wisest of Princes, and the
most foolish; but this is so far from truth that there is nothing sublunary not
only variable, but does vary every moment; neither is there any thing in
Reason, Physic or State alike to all men; nay in all of them, the same thing,
may be at one time good and profitable, at another time bad and hurtful: What
man sees not that in health, nature is not repaired by any man, without a
proportionable measure of diet, which when he is indisposed may surcharge
nature, to the overthrow of it, in him? Strong physic may be proper to a man
at one time, and kill him at another. Parliaments, although ordinarily are the
Kings surest refuge, yet by how much they are more excellent, by so much the
worse are they corrupted. Times are and will be bad when they are not made so
by any cause in the Prince, and so bad that in such conjuncture it may prove
the utmost evil, if the Houses, or either of them shall assume the title of
Parliament, or give head to such Factions and distempers. And no question when
the Scots invaded England in 1640, it was unsafe Council that advised the King
to summon a Parliament, and worst of all to convene it at London, as things
then stood. For that saying of Tacitus it is rather Rhetorical, and makes
against the Antiquity of Parliaments, then any way proves necessity of them
upon all occasions, unless he could make consulere and pugnare the same thing:
nor could Agricola ever have obtained such victory against our Ancestors, if he
had fought with no more then had councelled him.

Epilogue.
WHen I look back and consider the unstable condition of mankind, especially
among Islanders, and that often times the fate of good, religious and just men,
is, in this World more calamitous, then of bad and vicious men; I did then
conclude with my self, that Religion, Justice and Piety cannot of themselves
procure peace and society to mankind: nay what is yet more lamentable, that
first sublunary cause from whence all Subjects derive and expect their
protection, is more subject to calamity, then the condition of the meanest of
mortal men. Let a man take a survey of all the Kings in Britain since there
were any Records of time, and see whether near one half of them did attain a
natural death; nor is this confined within the Seas which encompass our Isle,
or a new thing in other parts of the world, for,

Adgenerum Cereris sine caede, and sanguine pauci Juvenal Sat. 10.

Descendunt Reges. --
I shall therefore before I conclude, endeavor to show whether any peace and
happiness may be reasonably expected in this World, and if that may, then by
what means it is to be attained; but that I might by degrees accomplish my end,
I begin with man in his first Cause and being.

Man then in his first being is to be considered, either as created or
begotten; as created, sure no man in his wits will deny but that God was the
prime and only efficient cause of his creation, who without any ordinary
concurrence of natural causes did so create him: and that this was not from a
confluence of natural causes, is evident; for otherwise it had been a
Generation, not a Creation; and necessarily something must be Created before
any thing can be Generated of it.

Nor is God (if a man rightly considers it) less the prime and efficient cause
of man in his Generation then in his Creation: for it must needs be evident to
every man, That male and female are not the first cause of Generation, because
then they would alike of themselves, without the influence of a superior cause
be apted for Generation, and so every Creature of it self in a like power of
Generating, one as much as another; the contrary of which every one daily sees.
Nor are all Creatures at all times alike disposed to Generation, but apted and
disposed thereunto from some exterior cause; as we see in Foxes about the
Brumall solstice, and Ravens in January, other creatures generally about the
Vernal Equinox, and Dear about the Autumnall; which without all doubt does
proceed from the influence of the Sun, which in those seasons disposes them
thereunto: but that the Sun is not the prime and efficient cause of Generation
is confessed by Aristotle, where he faith * That in omni creature divinum quid
reperiri, respondens Elemento stellarum, Lib. 2. cap. 3. de Genesis Anim.
esseque omnipotentis creatoris vicarium, It is not therefore the Sun, nor male
and female, which can be the first cause of a man, or any other creature; but
that mind or Soul which governs the innumerable and vast bodies of the
Univers, and by a perpetual motion of the Earth from West to East, according
to the new Hypotheses in Astronomy, or of the Sun from East to West, after the
former Hypotheses, through the diverse Regions of the Earth, does apt and
dispose all things therein to their production and dissolution. So that God is
the prime and efficient cause, as well in the generation, as creation of man and
other creatures, the manner only is different, God in generation from the
confluence of necessary and contingent causes, does Generate Man and other
creatures, and originally did create them without any confluence of causes. Nor
is God less the prime preserver of all Creatures, then the first cause of the
Creation and Generation of them: for not all the sublunary means of eating,
drinking, sleeping, exercise, physic, etc. can preserve any creature thus
Generated or Created, but some internal cause, whether it be called anima? or
pars animae? or quid animae? or aliquid habens animam; aut intellectus? aut
denique numen? and this is it in every Creature which does work toward its
end, and orders all these things with unimitable and incomprehensible art and
providence, and always procures what is best, as well for its being, as
well-being, as well for defense as ornament.

Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus,
Men's agitat molem. -- Virg Aenei.

And though all these outward things, however necessary for the preservation of
every Creature, are accidental and may be more or less acquired and
communicated by every creature; yet this internal cause, this numen, this Lar
familiare, or anima, which disposes and orders all these outward causes, is not
to be acquired or communicated by any Creature; So that a man must needs
confess That in all Creatures, as well as Man, there is some particle of
divine Air, which does order and dispose of all sublunary means in a
wonderful and diverse manner toward their preservation, until by a propense
natural disposition, they all resolve into their first Principles.

But these outward means are acquired and communicated, by several Creatures,
diverse and several ways. Some do acquire these outward means from an innate
impulse, never with understanding or reason moving them; others rarely without
their understanding or reason, and this latter only is Man.

Yet how frail a man's reason and understanding is, even to the acquiring of
things necessary for his preservation, is evidenly seen almost in all men; for
there is no man in this world who can by his understanding and reason so govern
his actions, that those things so directed by him, have always a like event;
nay often times the same thing propounded by the same man, upon the same
grounds and reasons has so contrary an event, that at this time it ruins him,
which other while was of much advantage to him. And this is daily seen among
all sorts of men, so that it is most manifest that a man's understanding or
reason cannot preserve him, as he is an intellectual and rational Creature,
nor Justice, Religion, and Piety as a sociable, but something superior to these.

What then shall we say to these things? Is Religion, Justice and Piety, and a
man's understanding and reason of no account, because they cannot procure peace
and preservation? Nothing less; for God having first created man and other
creatures without the confluence of natural causes, did ever after their first
creation cease to make any other, but the species of all things have ever since
been renewed by Generation: but in Generation God does not renew the species of
all creatures, from an absolute act of his own, but from the coition of male
and female disposed thereunto, in perfect creatures: and oftentimes from matter
disposed, many creatures are aequivocally generated, without the coition of
male and female, which thing is evidently seen from the yearly renewing of of
frogs, caterpillars, etc. The ancient Egyptians from the observation of the
very many creatures thus generated, in the River Nile, did believe that all
perfect creatures were originally, not from creation, but from aequivocal
generation. Yet though these spurious and imperfect creatures are thus
generated, yet do they all generate their like; Aristotle Hist. Anim.
only excepts the Eele; and I could never yet see either Row or Milt in any of
them. But though God be the prime and efficient cause of the generation all
creatures and therefore absolutely necessary to the production of every
creature; and though the conditions which he has ordained be absolutely
necessary to the generation of every creature, yet are not these conditions
always performed from any absolute necessity of the part of God, but
oftentimes from contingent causes and the will of the creature: For example, it
is necessary that the influence of the Sun from matter disposed in standing
pools; should produce Frogs, yet are not always those Pooles necessary to be,
but are often made, and often filled up, from voluntary and contingent causes
of man; so contactus naturalis in bodies apted and disposed does necessarily
generate; yet is there no necessity that this contactus should be, but it
might not have been, etc. Universal causes in nature produce nothing of
themselves but as meeting with particular and material causes disposed to
production, the universal causes are always prime and necessary, but their
meeting with particular causes are not always so, but often times contingent
and voluntary.

As God, by the confluence of natural causes, is always the first cause of
all creatures by Generation, so is he the first cause of the preservation of
all Creatures; yet does not he preserve them by any absolute necessity of his
part alone, but by such means as he has ordained for every Creature; I say
this means does not always come to pass from inevitable necessity of the
part of God, but often times from the will of men, and contingent causes; for
example, no man lives but as he daily repaires nature by eating and drinking,
yet there is no necessity that he should eat or drink, but he may choose
whether he will or not.

Nor is God less the prime preserver of intellectual and rational creatures;
yet does he not preserve them as other creatures void of understanding, but
thus using the intellectual and rational faculty of their Soul, yet there is
no man but may choose whether he will use his understanding and reason in his
actions and that man who does not use his understanding in his actions but only
his affections and passions, how great soever he be, will live to see misery
enough.

And though Religion and Justice cannot of themselves preserve men in Peace and
Happiness, but some superior cause which must order and dispose them
thereunto, yet so necessary are they for the preservation of peace and
happiness, that whersoever they are neglected, men did ever degenerate into
straction, confusion and profaneness; this superior cause which dignifies men
above all other creatures, as well intellectual as sociable, is God, who is
the prime, efficient and necessary cause of peace and happiness among sociable
Creatures; and Religion and Justice are the necessary means which he has
ordained therefore. But though Religion and Justice be necessary for the peace
and happiness of any Nation, yet is it not always necessary on Gods part men
should be Religious and Just, but men may choose whether they will do religious
and just acts or not; God therefore is the first and necessary cause of peace
and happiness among men, and Religion and Justice the necessary means which
he has ordained thereunto, and this to be performed by man; and let no man
think that God will save any man in this world, or bless him in the world to
come against his Will, when men will not endeavor these things by such means
as he has ordained; Man therefore by Religion and Justice ought to endeavor,
through God's blessing to attain to Peace and Happiness as well in this
World, as in the next, without which he cannot reasonably hope for either.

Having thus far treated of the causes of all society, and vindicated the
Government and Laws of my native Country, and Mother Church of England; It
will not be amiss before I conclude to add a word or two in vindication of Sir
Edward Coke, my most honored Ancestor, since by words and writing he is so
traduced, (as indeed Quis ille a tergo quem nulla aconia pinsit?) by men so
maliciously or ignorantly, or both. Among the rest one (a late writer of a
Pamphlet, I will not call it because of the subject, being the life of our late
Sovereign, yet it is without name, although I think few men but are
sufficiently assured of the Author) upon a seditious and reproachful speech,
he says tending to the dishonor of his Majesty's Government, made by Mr.
Coke, after the wonted rate of his lavish pen, without any more ado makes him
a Chip of the old Block. But of all men I am content he next after one of our
Mercuries should say it, since if he be not traduced unjustly he can asperse
the Nobility upon the faith of a Mercury; and so many others upon none at all:
and his Quotations upon his Geography, So falls that upon search made by a
Reader, and scarce any to be found to be true, upon the reprinting he blotted
out the pages, and only quoted the Authors, and left the Reader to find them
where he could: If these be true, then certainly his ipse dixit is of small
account; if false then let him deny them.

But I can tell our Historian news of his Soldier, whom he page 156. made
openly to be shot to death in Saint Paul's Church yard, for as is confidently
reported and believed he was apprehended about Whitehall, June 17. and is at
this time in fair election of being hanged. And being no less a more famous
Geographer then Historian (though his second Edition suffers much for want of
his expunged pages to find out his quotations) he page 123. makes the Town
and Castle of Conway a place of principal command on that narrow channel
which runs between the County of Carnarvan and the Isle of Anglesey: whereas
the Town and Castle of Conway stand upon the River Conway, which parts
Denbighshire from Carnarvanshire, a little below the mouth of the River Gessen:
nay, let any man see whether the River Conway falls not into the Irish or
Virgivium Sea; but whether it falls into the Irish or Virgivium Sea or not: yet
certainly it cannot fall into the narrow Channel which parts Carnarvanshire
from Anglesey, which begins at Abermenay ferry, and ends at Porthathir ferry,
whereas the mouth of Conway is little less distant from Porthathir ferry, then
that is from Abermenay, Porthathir ferry being upon the matter equidistant from
either. What heed then is to be taken to the ipse dixit of such a Geographer
and Historian let any man Judge; Sure he had more need mend his own Errors,
then be so rash and lavish a Censurer of other men's.

Although I take not this man's tongue to be any slander, and so not worth an
answering, or at most a bare denial of what he says were sufficient, which I
do, since it is but gratis dictum; yet since other men have assumed to
themselves such license of aspersing him, it will not ill become me to show
how unjustly he is aspersed in those things whereof they traduce him; as first
this man makes him a seditious man, certainly it is very strange that in the
living of 83 years, the many of his writings, and his many employments, does
not produce so much as any suspicion thereof, that I ever heard of. One thing
yet pleases me, that in all these seditious commotions, Judge Jenkins and
almost all the assertors of the Kings Cause, have next after Divine Laws,
maintained it principally out of his writings: nor do I remember that any of
the adverse part (I am sure not truly) have ever made use of any thing in his
writings to their advantage: certainly therefore in his writings he was no
seditious man: but it may be our reverend Historian, though blind, yet sees
more then any body else.

It is true indeed that he lived in disfavour with two Kings, yet as it
becomes not subjects to dispute the actions of Prince, so is no man therefore
to be censured because in disfavour; often times the best of Princes have not
things and men truly represented to them. This I am sure of having so powerful
opponents at Court, if any crime, much less then that of sedition, could have
been found against him, it would have been improved to the utmost advantage;
nor did he neglect to be reconciled to his chiefest adversary, and to that
purpose married his youngest daughter to his brother, being in person and
fortune little inferior to any Subject of her time, which did him no good.

Othermen (though little versed in the things they lay to his charge) doesay in
the general, That in his writings he was no friend to either King or Church.

This is so general a charge as no particular answer can be given to it; yet
thus much may be said, that being a Lawyer by profession, I hope it is not to
be a crime in any Subject, much less in him, to be a lover and honourer of the
Laws: but being a Subject, and no Legislator, and commenting upon the Laws, he
must comment upon the Laws as they were made, he could not make them better
nor worse; if Laws made were derogatory to either Crown or Church, it was the
vice of the times, and no fault of his.

Yet I have often heard that he was the first Grantor; and a great favourer of
Prohibitions, to the utter ruin of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

How unjust the first charge is, there is no man any way versed in our Laws
but must needs understand; and for the latter, if any one can show wherein he
so far favored them, that he ever granted any not warrantable by the Law, and
they say something.

For his care of the Church, it sufficiently appears in his endeavoring the
passing of a Law, that every Patron should be sworn, as well as the incumbent
against Simony; and also that Patron who should Symonically promote any Clerk,
should not only forfeit that avoydance, but the advowson to the King; as also
when upon pretense of concealment the Deane and Chapters Lands of Northwich
were begged of the King, he did not only freely proffer the Chapter to have
defended their cause, in person, though then very aged, but stated it and gave
it them in writing, to be kept for the future, in case any after that pretense
might be made, which was preserved by the Deane and Chapter among their
Archives until the general deluge of our late dissension swallowed up this
among their other things: and so grateful an acknowledgment did the Society
make, that upon his next Progress into Norfolk, they desired that he would
lay his bones in that Cathedral, whose right he had so defended.

So devout a Son he was of the Church of England, in the observation of the
Rites and Liturgy thereof, that I am confident that in near forty years before
his death, if sickness or public employment, or something extraordidinardy not
divert him; scarce one day passed wherein he was not twice a devout assistant
in the offering up of the public Service of the Church: nor was he less
severe to himself in his person, then just to his public employments, being
never so much as suspected of any notorious or scandalous vice. These virtues
and his learned labors; (wherein he has as well deserved of his Country as any
man before him) shall erect him a monument of same to posterity, when as the
malice and ignorance of his adversaries shall be forgotten.

For mine own part, it is true, that I have ultimately resolved my subjection
as a man, and my faith as a Christian into two principles, the one into the Law
of Nature, the other into the Scriptures; Dominium fundatur in natura, at no
time or place did ever men live out of Society, and Dominion is necessary to
Society; but faith is divinely revealed in the Scripture, and this happened in
succession of time, neither is it yet received by near one tenth part of
mankind, nor will I ever hope to mend what God has made: It is therefore an
idle thing to object Imperium in Imperio against it, neither is the objection
to any purpose or understood by the objectors, for it is the same God which
has engraven laws of Nature in the minds of men, and who has divinely
revealed himself in the Scriptures: not is there any thing in either, which is
repugnant on contrary, but rather the one does confirm and support the other;
there is no better plea for men's subjection to either Kings, Fathers or Masters
then is contained in the Scriptures: nor does Christianity any ways repugne
the Regality of Princes, but it is as entire over the persons of all men, in
all Cases, as where men are not Christian. Were not those the best Christians
who in the primitive times lived under heathen Emperors and persecutors without
any civil disturbance on their parts? and cannot Christians be as good under
Christian Kings; or is the case of Kings worse for their being Christian. Let
any one show me any thing in all the Scriptures which does countenance sedition
and I will abjure my Christianity; yet I will show him almost infinite places,
which without all contradiction commands obedience to higher Powers. They are
therefore Wolves in Sheeps clothing, who abuse that ghostly Power left us by
our Savior for the benefit of man's salvation into licentiousness against their
temporal obedience, due as well by the Law of Nature, as those by divine
positive institution (as if men being qualified to perform the acts of Ghostly
power, were free from natural subjection, which as Priests they ought to
preach as Gods Ordinance, R. 13.) and deserve rather to persecuted to death,
then obeyed when they do so: and by consequence Master Hobbs understands not
himself when he makes his convenient argument against Christianity, upon
supposition, Cap. 6. Art. 11. de cive.
that if one man may command the same thing upon the penalty of temporal
death, and another forbid it upon pain of eternal, the whole structure of his
civitas might be dissolved, which is no great matter if it were.

But, I pray, what do those men do which resolve all subjection into the
civitas, and the civitas into the civil part, and the civil part into the wills
of men, into do or dedi, and not dabo or faciam; which make the Laws of Nature
voluntary and depending upon the wills of men; which make this civitas made by
the wills of men superior to the Law of Nature, and impossible to command any
thing contrary to it, and yet (as ridiculously as blaspemously) make tyranny to
be only ab exercitio; which make not only all Laws of Nature but the Ghostly
power ordained by Christ, in the Scriptures, isntrumental and subservient to
it, and by consequence all Laws of Nature and Divine Institution in the
Scriptures to be subservient to this voluntary creature of a creature; this do
or dedi, not dabo or faciam, from whence it must necessarily follow that not
only every man who has not entered into the civil part, is neither subject to
the Law of Nature, or what God commands in the Scriptures, but every man who
has, may make himself free from them, when he will, if that rule be true, as
it is cujus est velle, ejus est nolle, and unumquodque dissolvi potest eo
ligamine quo ligatum est. And these are the excellent foundations upon which
the body de cive is builded, or if they be not Master Hobbs may deny any of
them if he please.

Reader, these observations and Elements were designed to have come forth some
months sooner then now, which in regard of the slownesse of the press I could
not accomplish; and many of the sheets were printed off before the restoration
of his Majesty, wherein the calamity of this Nation are mentioned, and wherein
I have endeavored to demonstrate that there was no visible means under heaven
to cure them but his Majesty's restitution. If in endeavoring to show that the
original causes of our distempers were as unjust as the continuance of them, I
have rubbed some sores which are not convenient to be touched at this time: I
say that it is impossible for any man to cure any malady, who first does not
inquire into the causes; and those were printed off in our distractions and
discomposures. If any thing herein may conduce to the glory of God, the good
and Peace of my native Country, as either advancing the Christian Religion, or
the Peace and Prosperity of it, I shall give God the glory, and thus far
account my self a happy man, that I have not only lived to my self but
employed my time in some measure to the benefit of other men:

Et Pergrata Deus nobis haec otia fecit,
Optimus est Patriae jura refer labor.
I Have made no Index conceiving the Contents of the Chapters and Heads of the
Paragraphs, to be sufficient for a Treatise of this nature; but in regard of
the ordinary failures of the press, which increased by my absence in the
Country, the Reader is desired to correct these faults before he begin.

ERRATA so correct; other smaller faults of literal errors and pointing the
Readers candor may pass over.

PReface ob. line 15. for equally moderately, read equally and moderately. By
what means, etc. Parag. 25. l. 3. dele to. Obser. page 5. ground 3. for ground,
read belief. Obser. page 20. last line but 3. chief govenment, read. chief men
government. p. 30. l. 28. for any Bishops. r. any other Bishops. p. 47. l. 8.
for Legal, r. Regal. p. 52. margin. for 512. place 768. Appa. page 3. l. 20.
for brood, r. breed p. 4. l. 10. for to direct, r. so direct. Ele. p. 34. l. 7.
for the essential, r. and the essential. p. 16. l. 22. for (...), r. (...).
p. 31. para. 14 l. 4. for to them r. to it. Para. 19. p. 41. l. penult, dele
Henry 4. Title Para. 15. p. 49. dele, and read wherein consists the perfection
of Government. page 57. para. 3. l. 5. for Silus r. Silius. P. 58. margin for
(...). r. (...). page 60. para. 10. l. 2. for cap. r. cap 2. pap. 106 l. 2.
for. all r. are. page 35. dele of fact.

FINIS.

