A Full and Exact COLLECTION OF All the Considerable Addresses, Memorials,
Petitions, Answers, Proclamations, Declarations, Letters and other Public
Papers, Relating to the Company of SCOTLAND Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES,
since the passing of the Act of Parliament, by which the said Company was
established in June 1695, till November 1700.

Together with a short Preface (including the Act it self) as also a Table of
the whole Contents.

- Forsan and haee olim meminisse Juvabit.
Virg. Grata superveniet, quae non ^^perabitur hora.
Hor. Printed in the Year 1700,

The Preface.
THe Endeavors of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies in
establishing a Colony and Settlement in so important a place as that Isthmus,
or narrow neck of Land (commonly called Darien) situated upon the hight of the
World, between the spacious South and North Seas, and consequently a fit Center
for so extended and universal a Trade as seems to have been intended by the Act
of Parliament establishing that Company, having not only been the
Subject Matter of a great deal of Discourse and Speculation, both Abroad and at
Home, but also raised the Jealousy of some, and the Envy of others of the most
considerable Courts in Europe; That, together with the continued course of
Opposition which the Company met with, in all its Designs and Undertakings,
gave occasion to the Writing of several very Ingenious Books concerning it. But
these Books referring very often to several public Papers contained in this
Collection, it is humbly presumed that of all that has been written upon that
Subject, nothing can be more acceptable to the Public, nor of more real use,
in giving a juct View to indifferent Persons, of positive Matters of Fact,
without any artificial Embellishments or Reflections thereupon, than the
following Collection, taken as near as possible from the very Original Papers
themselves.

It Is true there was a small Collection of this kind Printed formerly, under
the Title of Original Papers, etc. But the haste in which, it seems, that
Collection was done, giving probably occasion to its being very imperfect in
many respects, and it containing scarcely the Third Part of what this does, it
was thought fit for the General Satisfaction of all contending Parties and
others, to make this Collection with more deliberation, and as complete as
possible, to the end that there may be no occasion for any further Additions to
it, unless future events afford matter for a Second Volume:

And that the Reader may likewise see how far the measures taken by the Company
are warranted by the Act of Parliament by which it was established, an exact
Copy of the Act of Parliament it self, is hereunto subjoyned.

ACT FOR A COMPANY Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES.
June 26. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking into His consideration; That by an Act past in this
present Parliament, Entitled, Act for Encouraging of Foreign Trade; His
Majesty for the Improvement thereof, did with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament Statute and Declare, that Merchants more or fewer may Contract
and enter into such Societies and Companies for carrying on of Trade, as to any
Subject of Goods or Merchandise to whatsomever Kingdoms, Countries, or Parts of
the World not being in War with His Majesty, where Trade is in use to be, or
may be followed, and particularly beside the Kingdoms and Countries of Europe,
to the East and West Indies, the Streights and to Trade in the Mediterranean.
or upon the Coast of Africa, or in the Northern Parts, or else where as above:
Which Societies and Companies being contracted and entered into, upon the terms,
and in the usual manner as such Companies are set up, and in use in other
parts, consistent always with the Laws of this Kingdom: His Majesty with
consent foresaid, did allow and Ap, prove, giving and granting to them, and
each of them, all Powers, Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons, Rules
and Orders that by the Laws are given to Companies allowed to be Erected for
Manufactories; And His Majesty for their greater Encouragement, did promise to
give to these Companies, and each of them, His Letters patent under the Great
Seal, confirming to them the whole foresaid Powers and Privileges, with what
other Encouragement His Majesty should judge needful, as the foresaid Act of
Parliament at more length bears. And His Majesty understanding that several
Persons, as well Foreigners as Natives of this Kingdom, are willing to engage
themselves with great Sums of Money in an American; African, and Indian Trade,
to be exercised in and from this Kingdom, if Enabled and Encouraged thereunto
by the Concessions, Powers and Privileges needful and usual in such Cases.
Therefore and in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament; Does hereby make and
constitute John Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun Lord Justice Clerk,
Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robert
Chiesly present Provost of Edinburgh, John Swinton of that Ilk, George Clerk
late Baillie of Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blackwood, and James Balfour Merchants in
Edinburgh, and John Corss Merchant in Glasgow. William Paterson Esquire, James
Foulis, David Nairn Esquire, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Chiesly; James Smith,
Thomas Couts, Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohen D' Azevedo, and Walter Steuart
Merchants in London, with such others as shall join with them within the space
of twelve Months after the first of August next, and all others, whom the
foresaid persons and these joined with them, or major part of them being
assembled, shall admit and join into their Joint Stock and Trade, who shall all
be Repute, as if herein originally insert to be one Body Incorporate, and a
free Incorporation, with perpetual Succession, by the Name of the CGMPANY of
SCOTLAND Trading to Africa and the Indies: Providing always, Likeas, It is
hereby in the first place provided, that of the Fond or Capital Stock that
shall be agreed to be Advanced and Employed by the foresaid Undertakers and
their Copartners, The Half at least shall be Appointed and Allotted for Scots
Men within this Kingdom, who shall enter and Subscribe to the said Company,
before the first day of August, One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety Six Years:
And if it shall happen, that Scots Men living within this Kingdom, shall not
betwixt and the foresaid Term, subscribe for, and make up the equal half of the
said Fond or Capital Stock; Then and in that case allennarly it shall be, and
is hereby allowed to Scots Men residing abroad, or to Foreigners, to come in,
Subscribe, and to be assumed for the Superplus of the said half, and no
otherways: Likeas, the Quota of every Man's part of the said Stock, whereupon he
shall be capable to enter into the said Company, whether he be Native or
Forreigner, shall be for the least, one Hundred lib. sterling. And for the Highest
or Greatest, Three Thousand lib. Sterling. and no more directly nor indirectly in
any sort; With power to the said Company to have a common Seal, and to alter
and Renew the same at their pleasure; with Advice always of the Lion King at
Arms, As also to plead and Sue, and be Sued, and to purchase, Acquire, Possess,
and enjoy Lordships, Lands, Tenements or other Estate Real or Personal, of
whatsoever Nature or Quality, and to dispose upon and alienate the same, or any
part thereof at their pleasure, and that by Transfers and Assignments made and
entered in their Books and Records, without any other Formality of Law:
Providing always, that such Shares as are first subscribed for, by Scots Men
within this Kingdom shall not be alienable to any other than Scots Men living
within this Kingdom; That the foresaid Transfers and Conveyances as to Lands
and other real Estate (when made of these only and a part) be perfected
according to the Laws of this Kingdom anent the Conveyance of Lands and
Real-Rights, with power likeways to the foresaid Company, by Subscriptions or
otherways, as they shall think fit to raise a Joynt-Stock or Capital Fond of
such a Sum or Sums of Money, and under, and subject unto such Rules, Conditions
and Qualifications, as by the foresaid Company, or major part of them when
assembled shall be Limited and Appointed to begin, carry on and support their
intended Trade of Navigation, and whatever may contribute to the Advancement
thereof. And it is hereby Declared, that the said Joynt-Stock or Capital Fond,
or any part thereof, or any Estate Real or Personal, Ships, Goods, or other
Effects of and belonging to the said Company shall not be liable unto any manner
of Confiscation, Seizure, Forfaulture, Attachment, Arrest or Restraint, for and
by Reason of any Embargo, breach of Peace, Letters of Mark or Reprisal,
Declaration of War with any Foreign Prince, Potentate or State, or upon any
other account or pretense whatsoever; But shall only be Transferable,
Assignable, or Alienable in such way and manner, and in suc^ Parts and
Portions, and under such Restrictions, Rules and Conditions, as the said
Company shall by Writing in, and upon their Books, Records and Registers direct
and appoint, and these Transfers and Assignments only, and no other shall
convey the Right and Property, in and to the said Joynt-Stock, and Capital Fond
and Effects thereof abovementioned, or any part of the samen, excepting always
as is above excepted, and that the Creditors of any particular Member of the
Company may by their real Diligence affect the share of the Profit falling and
pertaining to the Debtor, without having any further Right or Power of the
Debitors Part and Interest in the Stock or Capital Fond, otherways than as
above appointed, and with this express Provision, that whatever Charges the
Company may be put to by the contending of any of their Members deceased, or of
their Assigneys Creditors, or any other persons in their Rights, The Company
shall have Retention of their Charges and Ezpenses in the first place. And the
Books Records and Registers of the said Company, or Authentic Abstracts or
Extracts out of the same, are hereby declared to be good and sufficient for
Evidents in all Courts of Indicature, and else where, And His Majesty with
Advice foresaid, further Statutes, and Declares, that the said John Lord
Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun; Lord Justice Clerk, Mr. Francis
Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robert Chiesly present
Provost of Edinburgh, John Swinton of that Ilk, George Clerk late Baillie of
Edinburgh, Mr, Robert Blackwood, and James Balfour Merchants in Edinburgh, and
John Corss, Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson Esquire, James Foulis, David
Nairn Esquire, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Cheisly, James Smith, Thomas Couts,
Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohen D' Azevedo, and Walter Stuart Merchants in London,
and others to be joined with, or assumed by them in manner abovementioned, and
their Successors, or major part of them assembled in the said Company, shall
and may in all time coming by Plurality of Votes, Agree Make, Constitute and
Ordain all such other Rules Ordinances and Constitutions as may be needful for
the better Government and improvement of their Joynt-Stock, or Capital Fond in
all Matters and things relating thereunto; to which Rules, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, all persons belonging to the said Company, as well Directors as
Members thereof, Governors, or other Officers Civil or Military, or or others
whatsoever shall be subject, and hereby concluded: As also to Administrate and
take Oaths de fideli, and others requisite to the Management of the foresaid
Stock and Company. And the said Company is hereby empowered to Equipp, Fit, set
Out, Fraught, and Navigat their own, or hired Ships in any manner as they shall
think fit, and that for the space of ten years from the date hereof,
notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred and sixty one
years. Intitituled. Act for Encouraging Shipping and Navigation, wherewith His
Majesty with Consent foresaid dispenses for the said time allena^ly, in favors
of the said Company, and that from any of the Ports or Places of this Kingdom,
(or, fromany other parts or places in Amity, or not in Hostility with His
Majesty) in Warlike or other manner, to any Islands Countries, or places in
Asia, Africa, or America; And there to Plant Colonies, build Cities, Towns or
Forts, in or upon the places not Inhabited, or in or upon any other place, by
consent of the Natives and Inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European
Sovereign, Potentate Prince or State. And to provide and furnish the foresaid
Places, Cities; Towns, or Forts, with Magazins, Ordinances, Arms, Weapons,
Ammunition, and stores of War, and by Force of Arms to defend their Trade and
Navigation, Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, and other their
effects whatsoever; As also to make Reprisals, and to seek and take Reparation
of Damage done by Sea, or by Land, and to make and conclude Treaties of Peace
and Commerce, with the Sovereigns, Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governors, or
Proprietors of the foresaid Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places, in ASIA,
AFRICA or AMERICA. Providing always, Likeas, It is hereby specially provided,
that all Ships employed by them shall return to this Kingdom with their
Effects, under the pain of Confiscation, Forfaulture and Seizure of the Ship
and Goods, in case of breaking of Bulk before their return, excepting the case
of Necessity, for preserving the Ship, Company, and Loadning allenarly. And His
Majesty with Consent foresaid; does further Statute and Ordain, that none of
the Leidges of this Kingdom shall or may Trade or Navigat to any Lands,
Islands, Countries or places in ASIA, or AFRICA, in any time hereafter, or in
AMERICA, for, and during the space of Thirty One Years, to be counted from the
passing of this present Act, without License and Permission in writing from the
said Company: Certifying all such as shall do in the contrair hereof, that they
shall Forfault and Amit the third part of the Ship or Ships, and of the Cargo
or Cargoes therein employed, or the value thereof, the one half to His Majesty
as Escheat, and the other half to the use and benefit of the said Company: For
the effectual Execution whereof, it shall be lawful to the said Company, or
any employed by them, to seize the said Ships and Goods in any place of ASIA or
AFRICA, or at Sea upon the Coasts of ASIA or AFRICA, upon the trangression
foresaid, by force of Arms, and at their own hand, and that without the hazard
of incurring any Crime or Delinquencie whatsomever on account of the said
Seizure, or any thing necessarly done in prosecution thereof; Excepting always,
and without prejudice to any of the Subjects of this Kingdom to Trade and
Navigat, during the said space to any part of America, where the Colonies,
Plantations, or Possessions of the said Company shall not be settled-And it is
further hereby enacted, that the said Company shall have the free and absolute
Right and Property, only relieving and holding of his Majesty and his
Successors in Sovereignty, for the only acknowledgement of their Alledgiance,
and paying yearly a Hogshead of Tobacco, in Name of Blench-dury, if required
allenarly, in, and to all such Lands, Islands, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts,
and Plantations that they shall come to Establish and Possess in manner
forsaid; As also to all manner of Treasures, Wealth; Riches, Profits, Mines,
Minerals, Fishings, with the whole product and benefit thereof, as well under
as above the Ground, and as well in Rivers and Seas, as in the Lands thereto
belonging, or from or by reason of the same in any sort, together with the
Right of Government, and Admirality thereof; And that the said Company may by
virtue hereof, grant and delegat such Rights, Properties, Powers, and
Immunities, and permit and allow such sort of Trade, Commerce, and Navigation
into their Plantations, Colonies, Cities, Towns, or Places of their Possession,
as the said Company, from time to time, shall jugde fit and convenient, With
power to them to impose and exact such Customs, and other Duties upon and from
themselves, and others Trading with, and coming to the said Plantations,
Cities, Towns, places and ports, and Harbors thereof, as the company shall
think needful for the mantainance and other public uses of the same. Holding
always, and to hold the whole Premises of His Majesty, and His Successors
Kings of Scotland, as Sovereigns thereof, and paying only for the same their
Acknowledgement and Alledgiance with a Hogshead of Tobacco yearly, in name of
Blench-duty if required for all other Duty, Service, Claim or demand
whatsoever: with power and Liberty to the said Company to Treat for, and to
procure and purchase such Rights, Liberties, Privileges Exemptions and other
grants as may be convenient for supporting, promoting and enlarging their trade
and Navigation from any foreign Potentate or Prince whatsoever in amity with
His Majesty; for which the general Treaties of Peace and Commerce betwixt His
Majesty and such Potentates, Princes, or States shall serve ^^sufficient
security, Warrant and Authority; and if contrair the said Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, Exemptions, Grants or Agreements, any of the Ships, Goods,
Merchandise, persons orther effects whatsoever, belonging to the said Company,
shall be stopped, detained, embezled, or away taken, or in any sort prejudged or
damnified, His Majesty promises to interpose his Authority to have Restitution,
reparation and satisfaction made for the Damage done, and that upon the
public Charge, which His Majesty shall cause depurse and lay out for that
effect. And further it is hereby Statute, that all Ships, Vessels, Merchandise,
Goods and other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said Company, shall be free
of all manner of Restraints, or Prohibitions, and of all Customs Taxes, Cesses,
Supplies, or other Duties Imposed or to be imposed by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise, for and during the space of twenty one years, excepting always the
whole Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, that are not of the Growth of the
Plantations of the said Company. And further it is Enacted, that the said
Company by Commission under their common Seal, or otherwise as they shall
appoint, may make, constitute all and every their Directors, Governors, and
Commanders in Chief, and other Officers Civil or Militery by Sea, or by Land;
as likewise that the said Company may Inlist, Inroll, Agree, and Retain all
such persons Subjects of this Kingdom, or others whatsoever, as shall be
willing and consent to enter in their Service or Pay, providing always that
they Up lift or Levy none within this Kingdom to be Soldiers, without leave or
Warrant first obtained from his Majesty, or the Lords of his Privy Council;
over which Directors, Governors, Commanders in Chief, or other Officers Civil
or Military, and others whatsoever in their Service and Pay, the Company shall
have the Power Command and Disposition both by Sea and Land. And it is further
Statute, That no Officer Civil or Military, or other Person whatsoever within
this Kingdom, shall Impress, Entertain, Stop or Detain any of the Members,
Officers, Servants, or others whatsoever, of, or belonging to the said Company;
And in Case the said Company, their Officers or Agents, shall find or
understand any of their Members, Officers, Servants, or others aforesaid, to be
Impressed, Stopped or Detained, they are hereby Authorized and allowed to take
hold of, and Release the foresaid person Impressed, or Stoped in any part of
this Kingdom either by Land or Water; and all Magistrates and others, His
Majesty's Officers Civil and Military. and all others are hereby required in
their respective Stations, to be Aiding and Assisting to the said Company under
the pain of being liable to all the Loss, Damage, and Dettiment of the said
Company, by reason of the foresaid persons their neglect. And further that the
said company, whole Members, Officers, Servants, or others belonging thereto,
shall be free both in their Persons, Estates, and and Goods employed in the
said Stock and Trade from all manner of Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, Excises,
Quartering of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Levying of Soldiers, or other
Impositions whatsoever, and that for and during the space of twenty one years.
And lastly, All Persons Concerned or to be Concerned in this Company, are
hereby Declared to be free Denizons of this Kingdom, and that they with all
that shall Settle to Inhabit, or be Born in any of the foresaid Plantations,
Colonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, and other Places that shall be purehast and
Possessed by the said Company, shall be Repute, as Natives of this Kingdom, and
have the Privileges thereof. And generally without prejudice of the
Specialities foresaid, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Gives and Grants to
the said Company, all Power, Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons,
Rules, Orders, Estates, Goods and Effects whatsoever, that by the Laws are
given to Companies allowed to be Erected for Manufactories, or that are usually
given in any other Civil Kingdom, or Commonwealth, to any Company there
Erected for trade and Commerce. And for the better Establishment and greater
Solemnity of this Act and Gift in Favors of the said Company; His Majesty does
further Ordain Letters Patent to be expede hereupon containing the whole
Premises under the great Seal of this Kingdom, for doing whereof Per Saltum,
Their presents shall be sufficient warrant both to the Director and chancellor,
or Keeper of the Great Seal, as use is (...) like cases.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT Cls. Regist.

THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
Die Veneris, 13. Decembris, 1695.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
having taken into our Consideration the State of the Trade of this Kingdom, Do
find, That besides many other Disadvantages and Difficulties it now lies under,
An Act of Parliament, that has lately Received Your Majesty's Royal Assent in
Your Kingdom of Scotland, for Erecting a Company Trading to Africa and the
Indies, is likely to bring many great Prejudices and Mischiefs to all Your
Majesty's Subjects, that are concerned in the Wealth or Trade of this Nation;
And therefore in all Duty to Your Majesty, and the Care we ought to have of
this Kingdom, We do humbly Represent to Your Majesty, that the said Act does
provide, That all Ships Vessels, Merchandise, Goods, and other Effects
whatsoever, belonging to that Company, shall be free from all manner of
Restraints, or Prohibitions, and of all Customs, Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, or
other Duties Imposed or to be Imposed by Act of Parliament, or otherways, for
the space of One and Twenty Years: And further, That the said Company, Whole
Members, Officers, Servants, or others belonging thereto, shall be free both in
their Persons, Estates and Goods Employed in the said Stock and Trade, from all
manner of Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, Excises, Quartring of Soldiers Transient or
Local, or Levying of Soldiers, or other Impositions, during the space of One
and Twenty Years.

By reason of which great Advantages granted to the Scots East India Company,
and the Duties and Difficulties that lie upon that Trade in England, a great
part of the Stock and Shipping of this Nation will be carried thither; and by
this Means Scotland be made a free Port for all East India Commodities; and
consequently those several Places in Europe, which were Supplied from England,
will be Furnished from thence, much Cheaper than can be done by the English:
And therefore this Nation will lose the Benefit of Supplying Foreign Parts with
those Commodities, which has always been a great Article in the Balance of
our Foreign Trade: Moreover, the said Commodities will unavoidably be brought
by the Scots into England by Stealth, both by Sea and Land, to the vast
Prejudice of the English Trade and Navigation, and to the great Detriment of
Your Majesty in Your Customs. And when once that Nation shall have settled
themselves in Plantations in America, our Commerce in Tobacco, Sugar, Cotton,
Wool, Skins, Masts, etc. will be utterly lost, because the Privileges of that
Nation, granted to them by this Act, are such, That that Kingdom must be the
Magazine for all those Commodities, and the English Plantations, and the
Traffic thereof lost to us, and Exportation of our own Manufactures Yearly
Decreased.

Besides these, and many other Obstructions that this Act will unavoidably
bring to the General Trade of this Nation, Another Clause in the said Act,
whereby your Majesty Promises to Interpose your Authority, to have Restitution,
Reparation, and Satisfaction made, for any Damage that may be done to any of
the Ships, Goods, Merchandise, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever belonging
to the said Company, and that upon the Public Charge, Does seem to Engage your
Majesty to Employ the Shipping and Strength at Sea of this Nation, to Support
this New Company, to the great Detriment, even of this Kingdom.

All which great Prejudices, Inconveniences, and Mischiefs arising by the said
Act, We in all Duty and Faithfulness lay before Your Majesty.

MATTHEW. JOHNSON. Cleric' Parliamentor.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
I Have been ill served in Scotland, but I hope some Remedies may be found, to
prevent the Inconveniences which may arise from this Act.

A MEMORIAL Given in to the Senate of the City of Hamburgh in French,
faithfully Translated into English.
To their Magnificences the Burgo-Masters, and to the Gentlemen-Councellors of
this City of Hamburgh,
WE, the Subscribers, Ministers of His Majesty, The King of Great Britain,
have, upon the Arrival of Commissioners from an Indian-Company in SCOTLAND,
Represented, at two several Times, to your Magnificences and Lordships, from
the King our Master, That His Majesty understanding, that the said
Commissioners Endeavored to open to themselves a Commerce and Trade in these
Parts, by making some Convention or Treaty with this City, had Commanded us
most expressly, to Notify to your Magnificences and Lordships, That if you enter
into such Conventions with private Men His Subjects, who have neither Credential
Letters, nor are any other ways Authorized by His Majesty; That His Majesty
would Regard such Proceedings, as an Affront to His Royal Authority; And that
He would not fail to Resent it. Your Magnificences and Lordships had the
Goodness to Answer us thereto by your Deputy, that you would no way enter into
Commerce with the aforementioned Commissioners, nor Encourage them in any
sort. Notwithstanding whereof, We the Subscribers do see with Displeasure,
That, without any Regard to the Remonstrances made by us in the Name of His
Majesty, the Inhabitants of this City forbear not to make Conventions and
Treaties with the said Commissioners, who dare even Erect a Publick-Office to
receive Subscriptions, as appears by the annexed Print. And it is not very
Credible, That Strangers could so openly Enterprise Matters of such Importance,
without being Supported by this Government: Wherefore, We make our Just
Complaints thereof to your Magnificences and Lordships; Beseeching you, in the
Name of the King our Master, to remedy in time that which is begun, and to do
it so Effectually, as to prevent any Consequences it may have, capable to
disturb the Friendship and good Correspondence, which we would Cultivat between
England and the City of Hamburgh. We wait your Magnificences and Lordships
Answer in Writing, to be transmitted to His Majesty our Master. And we are,

Done at Hamburgh the 7th. of April 1697. Your Magnificences and Lordships most
humble Servants, CRESSET His Britannick Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary at the
Courts of Lunenburgh, and his Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Pinenberg.
The Knight RYCAUT Resident for His Majesty the King of Great Britain in the
City of Hamburgh.
Which Memorial was immediately transmitted by the Senate to the Commercii, (or
Body of Merchants of that City) who happening to be then met in their own Hall,
did, upon Perusal thereof, give the following Answer:

WE look upon it as a very strange thing, That the King of Britain should offer
to hinder us, who are a Free People, to Trade with whom we please; But are
amazed to think, That he would hinder us from Joining with his own Subjects in
Scotland, to whom he had lately given such large Privileges, by so Solemn an
Act of Parliament.

Upon Notice of all which, the Company's Deputees went immediately to the
Senate, and gave in a short Memorial in French, which, being faithfully
Translated, is as follows:



Noble and Venerable Lords,
WE the Subscribers, Deputees and Directors of the Indian and African Company
of the Kingdom of Scotland, Understanding that the Gentlemen, His Majesty of
Great Britain's Ministers here, have presented a Memorial to your Lordships, in
which they seem to quarrel the Powers which have been granted to us by His
Majesty, and the Parliament of Scotland, to make Treaties of Commerce with any
Foreign Potentate, Prince or State, not in War with His Majesty the King our
Sovereign, for Enlarging the Trade, and for the better Establishment of our
said Company;

We pray your Lordships, That you would be pleased to Communicate the said
Memorial to us, that we may take Measures accordingly.

Hamburgh the 9th. day of April 1697. Your Lordships most humble and obedient
Servants, Jo. Erskine., Jo. Haldan., Will. Paterson.
The Senate thereupon recommended the Deputees above-named to the Commercii,
(in whose Hands the Memorial lay) who gave them a Copy thereof; Doubles of
which were, by the said Deputees, dispatched to both the Secretaries of State
for Scotland, and to the Court of Directors of the Company. And in the mean
time, the Merchants, to assert their own Freedom and Privileges, Signed for
considerable Sums in the Company's Books; But with a Condition to be void, if
the Company did not procure some Declaration from the King, that might render
them secure from the Threatenings, and other Insinuations contained in the said
Memorial.



To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the Council-General
of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies.
May it please Your Majesty,
WHereas, By the 32d. Act of the 4th. Session, and by the 8th. Act of the 5th.
Session of Your Majesty's current Parliament, as well as by Your Majesty's
Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, this Company is Established with
such Ample Privileges, as were thought most proper, for encouraging both
Natives and Foreigners, to Join in the Carrying on, Supporting and Advancement
of our Trade; The most Considerable of the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and
whole Body of the Royal Burrows have, upon the Inducement and Public Faith of
Your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, contributed as
Adventurers, in raising a far more considerable Joynt-Stock, than any was ever
before raised in this Kingdom, for any Public Undertaking or Project of Trade
whatsoever, which makes it now of so much the more Universal a Concern to the
Nation.

And for the better Enabling us to Accomplish the Ends of Your Majesty's said
Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, we have, in Pursuance thereunto,
appointed certain Deputees of our own Number, to Transact and Negotiat our
necessary Affairs beyond Sea. And at the same time, to Treat with such
Foreigners of any Nation in Amity with Your Majesty, as might be inclinable to
Join with us for the Purposes aforesaid.

In the Prosecution of which Commission to our said Deputees, (Vested with full
Power and Authority according to Law) we are not a little surpised to find, to
the great Hindrance and Obstruction of our Affairs, That Your Majesty's Envoy
to the Courts of Lunenburgh, and Resident at Hamburgh, have, under Pretense of
special Warrant from Your Majesty, given in a Joint-Subscribed Memorial to the
Senate of Hamburgh, expressly Invading the Privileges granted to our Company,
by your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament and Letsers Patent, as by the
herewith transmitted Copy may appear.

By the which Memorial we sustain great and manifest Prejudices, fince both the
Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburgh are thereby (contrary to
the Law of Nations) expressly threatened with your Majesty's high Displeasure, if
they, or either of them, should countenance or join with us, in any Treaty of
Trade or Commerce whatsoever, which deprives us of the Assistance which we had
reason to expect from several Inhabitants of that City.

For Redress whereof, we do in all Duty and Humility Apply to your Majesty, not
only for the Protection and Mantenance of our Privileges and Freedom of Trade;
but also for Reparation of Damnages, conform to your Majesty's said Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent: And do further beg leave to Represent to your
Majesty, That tho by the said Act of Parliament and Letters Patent, we conceive
our selves legally and sufficiently Authorized to Treat even with any
Sovereign, Potentate or Estate in Amity with your Majesty, for the Support and
Advancement of our Trade; yet we by our said Deputees have only treated with
particular and private Merchants of the said City of Hamburgh, without ever
making any the least Proposal to the Senate thereof. And this we humbly conceiv
to be the natural Right and Privilege of all Merchants whatsoever, even tho we
had wanted the Sanction of so Solemn Laws. And without some speedy Redress be
had therein, not only this Company, but also all other individual Merchants of
this Kingdom, must from hence forward conclude, That all our Rights and Freedom
of Trade are and may be further, by our Neighbors, violently wrested out of
our Hands.

We therefore, to prevent the further evil Consequences of the said Memorial to
our Company in particular, do make our most Humble and Earnest Request to your
Majesty, that you would be Graciously pleased to grant us such Declaration, as
in your Royal Wisdom you shall think fit, to render the Senate and Inhabitants
of the said City of Hamburgh, and all others that are or may be concerned,
secure from the Threatings and other Suggestions contained in the said
Memorial, as well as to render us secure under your Majesty's Protection, in
the full prosecution of our Trade, and free enjoyment of our lawful Rights,
Privileges and Immunities, contained in your Majesty's Acts of Parliament and
Letters Patent abovementioned.

Signed at Edinburgh the Twenty Eight Day of June 1697, in Name, Presence, and
by Order of the said Council-General, by May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, YESTER. P.
Memorandum, That the Council-General of the Company, did at the same time come
to a Resolution of Representing the Premises likewise to His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, but were afterward prevailed upon to supersede that
Resolution, at the Secretaries of State's earnest Desire (they being both then
here) and upon their joint Engagement to procure a speedy Answer from his
Majesty.



The King's Answer to the said Address.
By the Right Honorable, John Earl of Tullibardin, etc. and Sir James Ogilvy
Knight, Principal Secretaries of State.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE are empowered by the King to signify unto you, That as soon as His Majesty
shall Return to England, he will take into Consideration what you have
Represented unto him; And that in the mean time His Majesty will give Orders to
his Envoy at the Courts of Lunenburgh, and his Resident at Hamburgh, not to
make use of his Majesty's Name or Authority for obstructing your Company in the
prosecution of your Trade with the Inhabitants of that City.

Signed at Edbinurgh the second Day of August 1697. To the Council-General of
the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies. Tullibardin. Ja:
Ogilvy.

A Letter from the Directors of the Company to the Right Honorable, the Earl
of Tullibardin, etc. Principal Secretary of State.
Edinburgh, 28. September, 1697.
May it please your Lordship.
IT is not unknown to your Lordship in what Humor the Council-General of our
Company, and most part of the Nation were in, with relation to the Memorial
given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, against our Company by the English
Ministers there; Upon which ensued the said Council-Generals late Address,
transmitted to His Majesty by your Lordship. And your Lordship very well knows,
that at your Request and Desire only, upon Promises of using your best
Endeavors to procure a Speedy and Satisfactory Answer from His Majesty, the
said Council-General was prevailed upon, to suspend representing that Matter
further to the Government, till the 2d day of August last past; On which day
your Lordship did signify His Majesty's Answer to the said Address; Upon
Receipt whereof, the said Council-General did resolve to Supersede any further
proceeding therein, till His Majesty's arrival in England, as not in the least
doubting but His Majesty would have in the mean time, pursuant to His said
Answer, given Orders to his Resident at Hamburgh with relation to the subject
Matter of the said Memorial: But we are extremely surpised to find by Letters
of the 31 ultimo, from our Company's Agent in that City, That he had, according
to our Order, been to wait on the English Resident there, and with all the
Respect due to his Character, intimated to him the Contents the said Address
and Answer: Upon which the said Resident declared, That he was Ready and
Willing to obey his Masters Orders, but that as yet he had got none in that
Matter. We cannot imagine what should be the occasion of this new
Dis-appointment, since we cannot suffer our selves to believe, but that His
Majesty has, according to His Letter to your Lordship, given Orders as
aforesaid, which makes us admire the more where the Neglect of that Matter does
now stand; Yet we must needs say, we are in some measure afraid to acquaint the
said Council-General with it, lest they be more uneasy thereupon than we could
wish, till first we have your Lordships Answer. For which cause we the several
Subscribing Directors of the said Company (who are now in Town) have thought
fit in as quiet a manner as possible to give your Lordship an Account thereof,
to the end you may in your Wisdom and Prudence advise His Majesty with relation
thereunto, and doubt not but your Lordship will take such care herein, as may
prevent our calling another Council-General with relation to the Premises,
which we are bound unavoidably to do, if we have not your Lordships timely
Answer. We are

May it please your Lordship, Your Lordships most Obedient and humble Servants.
Ad: Cockburn. Fran: Montgomery. Arch: Mure. Geo: Clark: Rob: Blackwood. Ja:
Balfour. William: Paterson.

Mem: A Signed Duplicate hereof was likewise sent at the same time to the Right
Honor able Sir James Ogilvy Knight, etc.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Majesty,
BY a former Address of the 28th of June last, we have humbly represented to
your Majesty, how that your Majesty's Envoy to the Courts of Lunenburg, and
Resident at Hamburgh, did under Pretense of Special Warrant from Your Majesty,
give in a Memorial to the Senate of the said City of Hamburgh, contrary to the
Law of Nations, and expressly invading the Privileges contained in the Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent, by which our Company is established: Copies of
which Address and Memorial we have, for Your Majesty's better Information,
hereto annexed. In answer to which, Your MAJESTY was then graciously pleased to
signify by Your Royal Letter, That upon Your MAJESTY's arrival in England, You
would take the Contents of our said Address into Consideration: And that in the
mean time, You would give Orders to Your said Ministers not to make use of Your
Majesty's Name or Authority for obstructing our Company in the Prosecution of
our Trade, with the Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburgh.

In the full Assurance of which we rested secure, and took our Measures
accordingly, till to our further Surprise and great Disappointment, we find, by
repeated Advices from Hamburgh, That Your Majesty's said Resident continues
still Contumacious, and is so far from giving due Obedience to Your Majesty's
said Order, that upon Application made to him for that Effect, with all the
Respect due to his Character, he pretended that he had never as yet got any
such Order on our Behalf, which we thought fit in all. Duty and Humility, to
lay before Your Majesty, renewing withal our most humble and earnest Request,
That Your Majesty would be now graciously pleased to take the Contents of this,
and our said former Address into Consideration, and in Your Royal Wisdom order
some speedy and Effectual Redress of our Grievances therein-mentioned, and a
just Reparation of the manifest Damages, which our Company has already
sustained, by reason of the said Memorial. And grant us a Declaration under
Your Royal hand, to render the Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of
Hamburg, and all others with whom we have occasion to enter in Commerce, secure
from the Threatenings and other false Suggestions, mentioned in the said
Memorial, as well as to render us secure under Your Majesty's Protection in the
free Enjoyment of our Lawful Rights and Privileges contained in Your Majesty's
Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent abovementioned.

Signed at Edinburgh, the 22d Day of December. 1697, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please Your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subjest
and Servant, Fr. Scott. Fr.

To the Right Honorable, The Lord High Chancellor, and remanent Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
The humble Representation of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland,
Trading to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Lordships,
It Is not unknown to your Lordships how that in several successive Sessions of
this Current Parliament, His Majesty's Instructions to His respective High
Commissioners, and their several Speeches pursuant thereunto, have been full of
repeated Assurance of His Majesty's good Inclinations for encouraging the Trade
and Manufactures of this Nation. And whereas accordingly, by the 32d. Act of
the 4th. Session, and the 8th. Act of the 5th Session of the said Parliament,
together with His Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom, our Company is established with such ample Privileges and Immunities
as were thought most proper for encouraging both Natives and Foreigners to join
in the carrying on, supporting and advancement of our Trade. We have in
pursuance and upon the public Faith thereof, not only contributed at home a
far more considerable Joint Stock than was ever before raised in this Nation,
for any public Undertaking or Project of Trade whatsoever; but have also had
all the promising Hopes and Prospect of Foreign Aid that our Hearts could wish,
till, to our great Surprise, the English Ministers at Hamburgh have, under
Pretense of Special Warrant from his Majesty, put a stop thereto, by giving in
a Memorial to the Senate of that City, threatening both Senate and Inhabitants
with the King's utmost Displeasure, if they should countenance or join with us
in any Treaty of Trade or Commerce: As by the annexed Copy thereof may appear.

Upon due Consideration whereof, we have, in all Duty and Humility, addressed
His Majesty in June last for Redress thereof.

In answer to which Address His Majesty was then graciously pleased to signify
by his Royal Letter, That upon His return into England, He would take into
Consideration the Contents of our said Address. And that in the mean time He
would give Orders to His said Ministers at Hamburgh, not to make use of His
Royal Name or Authorty for obstructing the Trade of our Company with the
Inhabitants of that City.

In the full Assurance of which we rested secure, and took our Measures
accordingly, till to our further Surprise and unspeakable Prejudice, we found
by repeated Advices from Hamburgh, that the said Resident continues still
Contumacious, and is so far from giving due obedience to His Majesty's said
Order, that upon Application made to him by our Agent in that City, with all
the Respect due to his Character, he declared, That as yet he had got no such
Order on our behalf Which, by a further Address we are now to lay: before His
Majesty.

But whereas we humbly conceive your Lordships to be more immediately, under His
Majesty, the Guardians of the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, we think it
our Duty to represent to your Lordships the Consequences of the said Memorial,
both with relation to our Company in particular, and the Privileges, Interest,
Honor, Dignity and Reputation of the Nation in general.

Your Lordships very well know of what Concern the Success of this Company is
to the whole Kingdom, and that scarce any particular Society or Corporation
within the same can justly boast of so unanimous a Suffrage or Sanction, as the
Acts of Parliament, by which this Company is established: So that if effectual
measures be not taken for putting an early stop to such an open and violent
Infringement of, and Encroachment upon the Privileges of so solemn a
Constitution, it is hard to guess how far it may in after Ages, be made use of
as a Precedent for invading and overturning even the very Fundamental Rights,
Natural Liberties, and indisputable Independency of this Kingdom; which, by the
now open and frequent Practices of our unkind Neighbors, seem to be too
shreudly pointed at. And should this Company (wherein the most considerable of
the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and whole Body of the Royal Boroughs are
concerned) be so unhappy (which God forbid) as to have its Designs rendered
unsuccessful, through the unaccountable evil Treatments of our said Neighbors;
most certain it is, that no Consideration whatever, can thereafter induce this
Nation to join in any such other Public, though never so advantageous
Undertaking, as not doubting but to meet with the like or greater
Discouragements from those who give such frequent and manifest Indications of
their Designs, to wrest our Right and Freedom of Trade out of our Hands.

For which cause we humbly offer the Premises to your Lordship's serious
Consideration, not doubting but you will (in your profound Wisdom and Prudence)
take such effectual Measures for Redress thereof at present, and to prevent the
like. Encroachments for the future, as may be capable to remove those
Apprehensions and Jealousies which the barefaced and avowed Methods of the
English do now suggest, not only to our Company in particular, but even to the
whole Body of this Nation in general.

Signed at Edinburgh, the 22d day of December 1697, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please your Lordships, Your
Lordships most Obedient, and most humble Servant, Fran. Scott, Pr.

A Letter from the Council-General of the Company, to His Grace the Duke of
Queensberry.
Edinb. the 25th. of December. 1697.
May it please your Grace,
THis is by Order of the Council-General of the Indian and African Company of
Scotland, to acquaint your Grace, that by this Post, there is a Second Address
from the said Council-General transmitted to the Secretaries of State, to be by
them presented to His Majesty. And the Subject Matter thereof being of so high
a concern, not only to the Company, but also to the whole Nation; It is not
doubted but that your Grace both as a Patriot and a Party Interested in the
Company's Stock, will employ your Interest to second the same, refering your
Grace to the Bearer for particular Information of the whole Matter, and what
has been already done therein. I am,

May it please your Grace, Your Graces most Obedient, and most humble Servant,
Fran: Scot, Pr.
Mem: That Letters to this purpose, were at the same time written to such
others of the Scots Nobility, and most considerable Gentry, as happened to be
then at London.
A Letter from both the Secretaries of State, in Answer to the Council-General
of the Company's second Address to His Majesty.
Kensingtoun, Jan. 17. School.
SIR,
WE presented this Day to the King the Address of the African Company: We
could not have Opportunity to do it sooner, His Majesty being so much taken up
at this time The King said, That he had already given Orders to his Resident at
Hamburg in that Matter, conform to his Lettter he wrote from Flanders in July
last, which was communicated to the Company. We are,

SIR, Your humble Servants, Tullibardin, Ja. Ogilvy.
To Sir Fran: Scott of Thirlestane.

To His Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
Shows,
THat whereas the Wisdom of the King, and this present Parliament, has thought
fit by two several solemn Acts, and Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom, to establish our COMPANY, with such Power, Privileges, and
Immunities, as were thought needful, to encourage any such New Undertaking in
this Nation, and particulary to raise a Joynt-Stock in such manner as we should
think fit. And for that End, to enfranchise such Foreigners, as would become
Partners with us, and to enter into Treaties of Commerce with any in Amity with
His Majesty for that effect, etc. Those of our Number who were then entrusted
with the Management thereof, did think it most Natural to make the first Offer
of sharing our said Privileges, with our Countrymen and other Neighbors in
England, as living under the same Monarchy. And they not only readily embraced
the Offer, but in Nine Days time subscribed 300000 l. Sterling. as the one half of
the Capital-Stock then proposed, and Actually paid in the first fourth part
thereof, part in Specie, part in Bank-Notes, and the rest in Notes payable upon
demand.

That both Houses of the Parliament of England, taking Umbrage at those
Proceedings, did not only jointly Address His Majesty, for frustrating the ends
of the said Acts, but the House of Commons did also appoint a Committee to
Examine what Methods were taken, for obtaining the said Acts of Parliament here
for establishing our Company, who were the Subscribers thereto, and who were
the Promoters and Advisers thereof; with Power to send for Persons, Papers, and
Records: Pursuant to which, the said Committee gave Orders to Summon not only
the English Subscribers, but even some Persons then Residing in Scotland, as by
the said Address, Votes of the House of Commons, and Copy of the said Summons
may appear; By all which, together with some other Measures then taken, our
Friends in England were, to our great Loss, Disappointment, and Retardment,
forced to relinquish, etc.

That notwithstanding of that Discouragement, not only most of the Nobility,
Gentry, Merchants, and the whole Body of the Royal Borrows, have upon the
Inducement, and Public Faith of the said Acts of Parliament, and Letters
Patent, Contributed as Adventurers, in raising a far more considerable
Joynt-Stock, than any was ever before raised in this Kingdom for any Public
Undertaking, or Project of Trade whatsoever, (which makes it now of so much the
more Universal a Concern to the Nation) but we have also had all the Promising
Hopes of Foreign Aid, that our Hearts could wish, especially at Hamburgh, where
the Merchants of that City entered into Contract with our Deputees, to join at
least 200000 l. Sterling: with us, till, to our gaeat Surprise and Loss, the
English Ministers there, did, under Pretense of Special warrant from His
Majesty, put a Stop thereto, by giving in a Memorial to the Senate of that
City, not only disowning the Authority of the said Acts of Parliament, and
Letters Patent, but also Threatening both Senate and Inhabitants, with the
King's outmost Displeasure, if they should Countenance, or Join with us in any
Treaty of Trade, or Commerce, as by the annexed Copies thereof, in French and
English, may appear, which Memorial we humbly pray, may for the better
Information of Your Grace, and Right Honorable Estates, be also Read in
Parliament.

That after the said Memorial was by the Senate transmitted to the Commercij or
Body of Merchants of that City, They to assert their own Freedom, did Advise
and Prevail upon our Deputees and Agent, who were there for the time, to open
Books in the said Merchants Hall, where for some days they signed considerable
Sums pursuant to their said Contract, though under Condition to be void, if we
should not procure some Declararation from the King, that might render them
secure from the Threatenings, and other insinuations contained in the said
Memorial: And to our great Disappointment, thus the Case stands in Suspense,
between them and us to this Day.

That as the reasonable (nay and unquestionable) Prospect which we had of a
powerful Assistance from Hamburgh, and several other places (if not obstructed
as aforesaid) induced us to propose a far greater Equipage at first, than
otherwise we would have done; So the rendering of these Measures abortive, has
not only weakn'd our Stock, lessened our Credit, retarded our first Expedition,
and disheartened many of our Partners at home, but even also shackled our
Resolutions and Power from prosecuting at present several other Branches of
Foreign and Domestic Trades and Improvements which we had in veiw, if we had
not met with such Obstructions and Discouragements from Time to Time.

That though our Company is more immediately and sensibly touched in many Respects
by such Proceedings, than any other; Yet we humbly conceiving also, that the
Honor and Independency of the Nation, as well as the Authority and Credit of
the Parliament is struck at through our sides; We could not as Countrymen, and
in Duty to that Collective Power, which gave our Company first a Being, but
inform His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament of the Premises, to the End, that the Great Council of
the Nation, now assembled (whom GOD Almighty Direct) may do therein as they in
their profound Wisdom and Discretion, shall think fit.

That as to what thereof concerns our Company in Particular, we shall humbly
beg leave to to Suggest further, That our Ships being now at Sea, on their
intended Voyage, the former Treatment which our Company met with in England and
else where, may give us too just grounds to suspect, that if either through
Multiplicity of public Affairs, or otherways howsoever; Your Grace and Right
Honorable Estates of Parliament, should neglect the taking present Notice of
such Usage, the Enemies of our Company would be thereby encouraged, either
directly or indirectly to pursue their former designs of Ruining (if possible)
all our Measures.

May it therefore please Your Grace, and the Right Honorable the Estates of
Parliament, to take the Premises into your most serious Consideration, to
vindicat our Company's Reputation Abroad, by supporting the Credit of the Acts
of Parliament, and Letters Patent, by which the same is Established, and
wherein the Honor of the Nation is so much concerned, to take effectual
Measures (as the said Act provides) for repairing the great Loss and Damages,
which we have already sustained, through the unwarantable Treatment
abovementioned, as well as for preventing the like for the future; and withal,
to continue to us the Privileges and Exemptions, mentioned in the said Acts of
Parliament, and Letters Patent, for some longer time, in consideration of the
time already elapsed without Execution, and our Stock lying dead, without
Improvement, by reason of the Obstructions aforesaid.

Signed at Edinburgh the 22 day of July School. in Name and Presence of the said
Council-General, by, Basil Hamitlton, I.P.C.G.

The Parliament's Address to His Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Faithful Subjects, The Noblemen, Barons, and
Burgesses conveened in Parliament, humbly represent to your Majesty, That
having considered a Representation made to us by the Council-General of the
Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, making mention of several
Obstructions they have met with in the Prosecution of their Trade, particularly
by a Memorial presented to the Senate of Hamburgh, by your Majesty's Residents
in that City, tending to lessen the Credit of the Rights and Privileges
granted to the said Company, by an Act of this present Parliament.

We therefore in all humble Duty lay before your Majesty the whole Nation's
Concern in this Matter, and we do most earnestly entreat, and most assuredly
expect, That your Majesty will in your Royal Wisdom, take such Measures as may
effectually vindicat the undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said Company,
and support the Credit and Interest thereof.

And as we are in Duty bound to return your Majesty most hearty Thanks, for the
gracious Assurance your Majesty has been pleased to give us of all due
Encouragement for promoting the Trade of this Kingdom; So we are thereby
Encouraged at present, humbly to recommend to more special Marks of your Royal
Favor, the Concern of the said Company, as that Branch of our Trade, in which
we, and the Nation we represent, have a more peculiar Interest.

Subscribed at Edinburgh, the 5th of August School. in Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the Estates of Parliament. Seafield, I. P. D. P.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Court of Directors of the Company of Scotland,
Trading to Africa and the Indies.
Shows,
THAT whereas the Estates of Parliament have by their Address of the 5th of
August instant, been pleased to recommend the Concerns of the said Company to
some Marks of your Royal Favor, for supporting the Credit and Interest
thereof, which has already suffered in a great measure, by reason of the
several Obstructions which they have met with in the prosecution of their
Trade; particularly by a Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, by your
Majesty's Ministers there. We are thereby encouraged in all humility to lay
before your Majesty,

That as the said Memorial was given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, in a most
solemn and public manner; so your Petitioners humbly conceive, that the
Effects thereof cannot be taken away, but by some Intimation made to the said
Senate, that they may enter into Commerce with your Petitioners, as freely and
securely in all respects, as they might have done before the giving in of the
said Memorial.

That in consideration of the Damages sustained by the Company as aforesaid,
Your Majesty would be pleased for their Encouragement at present, as a Gracious
Mark of your Royal Favor, to bestow upon them the two smallest of the Frigots,
now lying useless in Bruntisland Harbor.

That in regard of the time already lost, by reason of the Obstructions
aforesaid, Your Majesty would be graciously pleased to continue the Privileges
granted by Act of Parliament to the said Company, of being Custom-free, for
such longer time as your Majesty shall, in your Royal Wisdom, think fit.

In respect of all which, may it please your Majesty to take the whole
Premises into your Royal Consideration, and give such Orders and Directions
with relation thereunto, as to your Majesty, in your Royal Wisdom, shall seem
meet and expedient.

Signed at Ediburgh the 16th day of August School. in Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the said Court of Directors, by, May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and
Servant, Geo. Clark. I. P. C. D.

Letters from Mr. Stevenson, the Company Agent at Hamburgh, to the Court of
Directors of the Company.
Hamburgh the 4th. of October, School.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen;
I Wrote to you on the 26th past, advising you of my going post to Hamburgh, in
pursuance of your Orders, where I arrived the 2d instant. And the Day following
I waited upon the English Resident, and in the Company's Name desired to know
if he had yet received his Master's Pleasure, ordering him no more to oppose
the Transactions of the Indian and African Company of Scotland in this City;
which I pressing hard, answered by his Character and Honor, he never received
any Orders from his Master that mentions the said Company, since his giving in
the Memorial against them: So I have no further to add, but that I am,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most faithful Servant to power, Alexander
Stevenson.

This was under Cover which contained what follows.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen;
BY this within-closed, you have a full Answer as to what may be expected here
for ever. Since my parture from this, I am informed that the English here did
constantly assert that the Company would never be redressed, and the Delay of
the same, after all your means, has made an Impression upon the Minds of
People, that it will never be, at least such as they might trust to.

Hamburgh the 18th of October, School.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen;
I Wrote to you of the 4th current, wherein I advised you of Sir Paul Rycaut
English Resident at Hamburgh's Answer given me anent your Affairs, to which
refers: Mr. Cresset Envoy at the Courts of Lunenburgh, being returned from
waiting upon his Majesty there; I thought it my Duty to wait upon him, and
demanded in your Names to know if his Majesty had signified his Royal Pleasure,
anent removing of the stop put to the Company's Affairs in this City, through
the Memorial given in to the Senate against them: To which Answered he received
no such Orders, and was of the Judgment, If the Memorial were yet to be given
in, it would be done. I shall not enlarge what farther past, but assure you he
seems to insinuate, that his private Orders from the Government of England, was
to act quite contrary to your Expectations. This is all from,

To the Right Honorable the Court of Directors, etc.
My Lords and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, Alex. Stevenson.

This was under Cover, which contained what follows.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen.
BY the within-closed you have an account of what relates to your Affairs with
respect to have the Merchants in this City concerned: I cannot offer to speak
to the Commercij about the same, but those Merchants here that are Signers in
the Books of Subscriptions, are as cordial as ever, were the Stop removed, they
doubt not things here would take the desired effect.

A Letter from the Court of Directors of the Company, to the Lord Seafield
Secretary of State, upon receipt of Mr. Stevenson's Letters.
Edinburgh, November. 29. School.
My Lord,
THis is by order of the Council-General of the Indian and African Company of
Scotland, to cover the enclosed Copies of two Letters lately received from our
Company's Agent at Hamburgh. Upon reading whereof yesterday at a meeting of the
said Council-General, they were not a little surpised at the Contents thereof,
considering the many repeated Assurances given them formerly by Letters, word
of Mouth, and even in Parliament, that the King had already given Orders to his
Ministers at Hamburgh, with relation to the Memorial given in to the Senate of
that City against our Company. But after some reasoning thereupon, and
considering how far your I ordships frank Undertaking, when last in Scotland,
as well as the Station you are in, does engage your best Endeavors to procure
the Company Justice, and vindicate the Kingdom's Rights in this matter. They
have ordered us, the Court of Directors, to transmit the said Copies to your
Lordship, and expect your Lordships Answer to this and our late Petition to his
Majesty, before they remonstrate any further with relation thereunto. This is
in presence, and by Warrant of the said Court of Directors, from,

To the Right Honorable the Viscount of Seafield, Secretary of State for the
Kingdom of Scotland.
My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, John Schaw, P.

The Secretary's Answer.
Whitehall, December. 13. School.
SIR,
I Received a Letter from you as President of a Committee of the East India
Company, which relates to Accounts they have had from their Correspondent at
Hamburgh. with the Copys of two Letters they have received: I shall take the
first convenient Opportunity I can have to represent this Matter to the King,
but I cannot as yet expect to have it; For his Majesty is very much employed in
the Affairs of his Parliament here. This is all the Answer I can give at
present, and which you may signify to those concerned: I am,

To Sir John Schaw of Greenock, etc.
SIR, Your most faithful and humble Servant. SEAFIELD.

A Letter from the Court of Directors, in Answe to the Secretary.
Edinburgh, Jan. 13. 1699.
My Lord,
SIR John Schaw of Greenock, having some time ago signified to the Court of
Directors of our Company, the Contents of a Letter, which he received from your
Lordship, bearing date at Whitehall, the 13th of December last intimating that
your Lordship would take the first convenient opportunity of representing to
his Majesty the Company's Petition, with relation to the Parliament's Address;
as also the Contents of the Company's Letter to your Lordship, bearing date the
24th of November last. But in respect we have not all this time heard any
further from your Lordship concerning that Matter, this is by order of the said
Court of Directors to put your Lordship in mind of the Premises, not doubting
but you have had before this time a convenient opportunity to represent the
same to his Majesty; and in expectation of your Lordships speedy and
satisfactory Answer, I remain,

To the Right Honorable the Viscount of Seafield Secretary of State.
My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Archbald Mure. Pr.

The Secretary's Answer.
Whitehall, Febr. 7 1699.
SIR,
I Have presented to his Majesty the Petition of the African Company; and I am
commanded by him to let you know, That there being accounts that the Ships
belonging to the Company are arrived upon the Coast of America; And the
particular Design not being communicated to his Majesty, he therefore does
delay to give any Answer until he receive certain Information of their
Settlement. This you may signifiy to the Council or Directors of the Company,
as being by his Majesty's Command: I am

To Sir Archibald Mure of Thornton, etc.
SIR, Your most humble Servant, Seafield.

A Letter from the Council-General of the Company to his Majesty, giving an
Account of their Colony's arrival and settlement at Darien: etc.
May it please you Majesty;
WE your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects the Council-General of the
Company of Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies, having by express
received an Account from the Council of our Companys Colony in America, that
they arrived safe at their intended Port within a League of Golden Island on
the Coast of Darien; and after having treated on board of our Ships with the
Natives, who were always ownd to ^e the only Proprietors of that part of the
Coast, our Men did, at the request, and with the consent of the said Natives,
land on the 4th of November last, and take possession of an uninhabited Place,
never before possessed by any European whatsoever; and that in pursuance of the
said Treaty, the chief Men and Leaders of the said Natives have joined with,
and taken Commission from the said Council. We thought it our Duty at our very
first Meeting to give your Majesty an account thereof; and likewise that by
Letters from our said Council bearing date at New Edinburgh in Caledonia (being
the Name given to our present Settlement) the 28th day of December last, we are
positively informed that the French have a Design upon all that Coast, or at
least to make a Settlement somewhere thereabouts. And we humbly conceive, that
the firm Settlement of our Colony in those Parts may be the means of
preventing, or at least lessening the evil Consequences that may arise to your
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions every where, by the Settlement of any powerful
foreign Neighbor in, upon, or near any part of that Coast. And as we are
always bound thankfully to acknowledge your Majesty's Goodness for granting us
these Privileges mentioned in the Acts of Parliament, and your Majesty's
Letters Patent by which our Company is established: So we do now in all
humility confidently expect your Majesty's Royal Favor and Protection, as
having in all the Steps of our Conduct through the whole Course of this Affair,
strictly observed the Conditions required by the said Acts of Parliament and
Letters Patent: And referring this together with the Contents of our last
Petition to your Majesty's Royal Consideration, to give such Directions therein
as to your Royal Wisdom shall seem meet and expedient This is in Name,
Presence, and by Warrant of the said Council-General: Signed by,

Edinburgh, the 31st day of March 1699. May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most faithful, most dutiful, most humble, and most obedient, Subject
and Servant, TWEEDDALE.

A Letter from the Court of Directors to the Lord Carmichael Secretary of
State, then in waiting.
My Lord,
THis being the first Opportunity that we have had to Address your Lordship,
since your Advancement to that eminent Station and Place of Trust wherein you
are; We must account it a Happiness that upon Receipt of the late welcome News
from our Colony's Company in America, we can transmit an Account thereof to his
Majesty by the hands of one so much devouted to the Honor and Interest of our
Country and Company, as your Lordship has upon all Occasions shown your self;
and who being often Witness to our Company's Proceedings from time to time; can
give a juster account thereof than any other that has no Interest in our Stock,
nor has ever been amongst us. Enclosed you have our Council-General's sealed
Letter to his Majesty, which we doubt not your Lordships will carefully
deliver, together with an exact Copy thereof for your Lordships better
Information, to which we refer, but shall for your further Information enlarge
a little upon the several Heads therein mentioned: As to our place of
Settlement it is so far from having ever been possessed by any European
whatsoever, that by all the Accounts that we could ever yet get, not only at
this time from the Council of our Colony, but even by such Letters as we have
seen and heard of from Curacao, and other American Islands, no European did
before our Settlement so much as once set a foot upon that Plot of Ground
wherein our Colony is now fixed: And tho the same was altogether uninhabited,
when our People came there, the chief Men and Leaders of the Natives of that
part of the Coast nearest adjoining to Golden Island Eastward and Westward,
have not only treated with the Council of our Colony before Landing, but have
also in pursuance of that Treaty in a most kind and friendly manner admitted
our said Colony into such Places of their Neighborhood as are not yet
possessed, and taken Commissions from the said Council in a very solemn manner,
and joined with our People; And that in consideration of our Colony's admiting
them and their followers to participate of the Liberties and Privileges
granted to our Company by his Majesty of Great Britain OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with
Advice and consent of his Parliament of Scotland, entreating to be protected
accordingly: We repeat these Words, as being the express Words of the first
Commission which the said Council granted. As to the French Designs of settling
thereabouts, it is a Point not to be doubted of: For in order thereunto they
have already been tampering with several of the Natives, some of whom they
endeavored to have carried into France; and we have very good reason to
believe that a further Progress had been made in that matter before now, were
it not the daily Expectations which that Court had of the King of Spains Death,
which we humbly conceive is a Matter worthy of his Majesty's consideration, and
of no small concern to the interest of his whole Dominions, tho this Nation and
our Company may seem to be more immediately interested, at present.

Your Lordship sees we have in the enclosed Letter to the King made mention of
our last Petition, and hope your Lordship will take a convenient Opportunity to
back the same: For as your Lordship knows, we have already suffered
considerably by encroaching upon our Privileges, so we ought to be very
careful, as much as in us lies, not to admit of any dangerous Precedents. And
really we must say, We were very much surpised the other day, when we
understood by Letters from the Council of our Colony, that Capt. Long Commander
of the Rupert Prize, who carries his Majesty's Commission for finding out and
fishing of Wrecks, should under the color of that Commission, wherever he
went, traduce our Undertaking and Colony to all sorts of People upon that
Coast, whether Natives or others, declaring that our said Colony was no other
than a pack of Rogues, Vagabounds, Robbers, and broken Officers, without any
Commission, and that the King would not own them; nay further, he himself came
into our Harbor, where he was very courteously and respectfully treated by all
our People there; in recompense of which, he very ingratefully made it his
study all the while to seduce our Men, and did carry off one of our chief
Carpenters, which is a very considerable Loss in that part of the World, and in
the Infancy of our Settlement, considering how necessary a Man he was, and the
Difficulty of supplying his Place so quickly as they may have occasion for him.
This kind of Usage is really so provocking, that we cannot suppose but that the
King may be graciously pleased to interpose his Royal Authority for preventing
the like Usage in time to come, if his Majesty were duly informed thereof. So
in the confidence of his Majesty's gracious Countenance and Protection, and
your Lordship's hearty Endeavors to procure the same; this is by Order of the
Council-General, and in Name, Presence, and by Warrant of the Court of
Directors of our Company, Signed by,

Edinburgh 1st day of April, 1699. To the right Honorable, the Lord
Carmichael, Secretary of State. My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, J. Haldane. P.
Memorandum, There was another Letter to the same purpose, written to the
Viscount of Seafield, with an enclosed Copy of the said Letter to the King.



A Memorial given in to the King of Great Britain by the Ambassador
Extraordinary of Spain; against the Scots Settlement at Darien.
THe Subscriber, Ambassador Extraordinary from His Catholic Majesty, finds
himself obliged, by express orders, to represent to your Majesty, that the King
his Master having receivyed Information from different places, and last of all
from the Governor of Havana, of the Insult and attempt of some Scots Ships,
equipt with Men and other things requisite, who design to settle themselves in
His Majesty's Sovereign. Demains in America, and particularly the Province of
Darien. His Majesty received those Advices with very much discontent, and looks
upon the same as a token of small friendship, and as a rupture of the Alliance
between the two Crowns (which His Majesty has observed hitherto, and always
observes very religiously, and from which so many Advantages and Profits have
resulted both to your Majesty and your Subjects); As a consequence of which
correspondence His Majesty did not expect such sudden insults and attempts by
your Majesty's Subjects, and that too in a time of Peace, (without pretext or
any cause) in the very heart of his Demains.

All that the King desires, is, that this may be represented to your Majesty,
and that your Majesty may he acquainted, that he is very sensible of such
Hostilities and unjust procedures, against which His Majesty will take such
measures as he thinks convenient.

Given at London the 13/^ day of May 1699.
The Three following Memorials were presented to His Majesty in May 1699. by
the Lord President of the Session, and Lord Advocat, on behalf of the Company
of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, asserting the Legality of their
Settlement in Darien.
1st. MEMORIAL.
THe Establishment of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the
Indies, was first prepared by an Act of Parliament 1693. Inviting and
Encouraging Persons in General, to enter into Societies, and Companies, for
carrying on a Trade to whatsoever Kingdoms, Country or parts of the World, not
being in War with His Majesty, and thereafter perfected by the Act of
Parliament 1695, and a Charter thereon under the Great Seal, whereby the said
Company was fully Settled with all the Powers, Privileges, and Immunities in
use to be granted in such cases, and particularly with Power to plant Colonies,
and build Cities, Towns, and Forts in Asia, Africa, or America, upon Places not
Inhabited, or upon any other Place, by Consent of the Natives, and Inhabitants
thereof, and not possessed by any European Prince or State.

The Settling of this Company was so acceptable to the whole Kingdom, abounding
always with Men, and of late Years, very desirous to enlarge Trade and
Commerce, That the Company's Books being once opened, Subscriptions for a vast
Sum were completed long before the Day prefixed by the Act of Parliament, and
there were few Persons or Families of any Account within the Kingdom, who were
not therein particularly concerned.

But though the Subscriptions were soon completed, and the Advances made, as
readily as proposed; yet the Directors and Managers, did proceed with great
Deliberation, not being more Cautious to Conceal the Place where they were
designed for, than Careful to make such a Choice, as might be exactly in the
Terms of their Act and Patent, To wit. Either not Inhabited, or freely
Consented to, by the Natives, and not possessed by any European Prince or
State, and so liable to no Exception.

In pursuance of these Resolutions, The Company prepared Men, and Provisions,
and set out their Ships, and in the Month of November School, arrived on the
Noth-side of the Isthmus of Darien in America, they pitched upon a Place never
before possessed by the Spaniards; and after formal and distinct Treaties,
obtained the Consent and Good Will of all the Neighboring Natives and People.

The Spaniards and French raise a Clamor against the Settlement, as an
Invasion of the Spanish Possessions and Dominions, in as much as the Place
where the Company has fixed, lies as it were in the Middle and Bosom of the
Spanish Countries, having Carthagena on the East, and Porto-Bello on the West,
and Panama on the South, which is also alleged to be contrary to the Treaties
betwixt the King of Great Britain and the King of Spain, whereby all these
Countrie's are yielded and conformed to the Spaniards

If these parts of America had been wholly Void and Uninhabited, when the
Spaniards made their first Discoveries, and Plantations there, the Question had
certainly proceeded upon the head of Occupation, the only Ground acknowledged
by all Lawyers to determine the Property of all Waste and Uninhabited
Countries, where a formal Division has not Interveened, as Grotius in
particular, in his Second Book de jure Belli does abundantly clear, and then
the Spaniards must have further Subsumed, That as they found these Countries
Waste, so they were the Occupiers and Possessors thereof; and in Special, that
they were the first Occupiers and Possessors of the Isthmus of Darien, and the
Place where the Company has Settled, it being most certain, that Occupation
gives no Right, save in so far as the Real and Actual Possession extends.

But seeing on the other hand, it is Nottour, and by all Acknowledged, That the
Spaniards did not find these Parts Waste, and Uninhabited, this Argument must
necessarily fall; and all that the Spaniards can now Plead, is either present
Possession, which the Company's Patent owns to be a sufficient Right to any
European Prince or State, or the abovementioned Treaties, as exclusive of the
King of Great Brittain's Subjects.

For clearing then the Claim and Point of Possession, The Company denies that
ever the Spaniard had any Possession of the Place where they have Planted; and
its obviously Incumbent to the Spaniard, if they allege Possession, to prove
and instruct their Alledgance for the Company's Argument being Negative, viz.
That the Spaniards did never Possess the Country where the Company has
Settled, it Undeniably proves it self, as all Lawiers affirm, unless the
contrary, to wit, The Spaniards Possession, be evidently made out and proved,
which is impossible; Nor do the Spaniards pretend to prove the same; But their
Alledgance is, That in these large Countries of America, it were plainly
Capricious to require the Actual Possession of every particular Place; But
since they have the Uncontraverted Right and Possession of Carthagena,
Porto-Bello, and Panama, which are the Extremities that in a manner environ the
Isthmus of Darien, their Possession of these Places, must infer a Possession of
the Interjacent Country in which the Company has Settled, and consequently,
that the Company has Encroached upon, and Invaded their Right: And further,
its said, That the Spaniards have actually possessed Gold and Silver Mines in
Darien, much nearer to the Company's Settlement than Carthgena, or these other
Places, and have constantly been in use to Seize and make Prize of all Ships
coming upon the Coast, betwixt Porto Bello and Carthagena, as Invaders of their
Possessions, though these Ships did really pertain to Friends and Allies.

To all which, It is answered, 1mo. That the abovementioned Places belonging
to the Spaniard, are very far distant from the Settlement of the Company,
Carthagena above Fifty, and Porto-bello and Panama above Thirty Leagues, which
Distances are more then sufficient to render Countries distinct, both as to
Right and Possession. 2do. It Is certain, that Carthagena, Porto-bello or
Panama, cannot be understood to have unlimited Territories; if then their
Territories be limited, it belongs to the makers of the Objection to show, that
the Limits of these places do reach to, and comprehend the Place possessed by
the Company, which neither the Spaniards, nor any for them, will ever be able
to prove, by the Law of Nations, or any known Rule, or Custom in such Cases.

It has already been Notic'd, That though these Countries had been wholly Void,
when the Spaniards begun to Plant there, they could only by their Possession
have appropriat as far as they did possess, and that what was not possessed,
would have remained free, to be appropriated by the Occupation, and possession
of any other People, a Rule Uncontraverted amongst all Nations on the Face of
the Earth.

But the Case of America being, That before any Plantations were Settled there,
by the Spaniards, the Natives were undoubtedly the Possessors and Proprietors.
It follows necessarly, That Colonies coming to Settle among them, must derive
Right from them, and that either by Consent, Surrender, or Conquest, it being
impossible in the case of Countries inhabited, there can be any other Manner or
Mean of Acquisition; But so it is, That the Spaniards acquiring after this
manner, neither could, nor can pretend to have Right to more than did pertain
to the People where they Settled, whether by Consent, Surrender or Conquest.

Whence it necessarly follows, That since Darien was a distinct Country, and
the Inhabitants thereof a distinct People, from those Countries and Nations,
where the Spaniards have hitherto Settled whether by Consent, Surrender, or
Conquest; The Spaniards cannot pretend to extend their Right beyond that of
their Predecessors, and the People and Country of Darien must still be as free
from the Spaniards, as they were from their Predecessors; and consequently,
that the Company coming to possess with the Dariens Consent, and by their
Right, must be in the like Condition, and noways liable to either the Claim, or
Complaint of the Spaniards, That the Country and Natives of Darien did never
submit to, or were conquered by the Spaniards, must stand as a sure Position,
unless the contrary be proven: But further, it is also certain, That the
Dariens were never Repute to have any Dependency even on the great Empires of
Mexico and Peru, much less upon the little places of Carthagena, Porto-bello,
or Panama: Besides, The Dariens have been in frequent War with the Spaniards,
since their first arrival into these Parts, and were never to this day
Conquered: All which being attested by the English, and other Travelers, who
have Written on this Subject; It appears to be beyond Controversy, That the
Company having Settled with the Consent of these Dariens, must have the same
Right, with the same Privileges and Freedom of Trade which the Dariens had,
and that both are equally free from all the Spanish Pretensions,

It is a known Case that an English Man one Sharp, having joined with the
Dariens against the Spaniards, invaded their Territories; he was accused by the
Spaniards in England, as guilty of Robbery and Piracy, but was acquitted,
because he acted by Commission from one of the Darien Princes, which is an
undeniable Evidence, that this Prince and his Country were judged to be
independent on the Spaniards.

The Spaniards may also have wrought Mines of Gold and Silver within the
Isthmus; but no such possession can support their Complaint: The nearest
possession of Mines that they can pretend was in Captain Diego's Country, on
the Gulf of Darien, more than 15 Leagues distant from the Company's Settlement;
Neither did the Spaniard get these Mines by Conquest, or Purchase, but by a
plain stipulate Permission from Captain Diego, and his people, which changed
not the Property; And upon Breach of Conditions, the Spaniards were quickly
cast out, so that when the Company came to settle on the Isthmus, it was fully
cleared of the Spaniards and all their pretenses.

Carthagena, Portobello and Panama, are adjacent to, and do in a manner environ
the Isthmus of Darien; But that this Vicinity gives to the Spaniards no Claim
of Right, is evident from many Instances; Tangier, Cheuta and Mamora, ly in the
Bosom of the Empire of Moroceo, and yet belong to European Princes; The English
and French have Neighboring Settlements upon the River Gambo in Africa, and
all along the Coast of Africa the English and other European Princes have their
Settlements intermixed and contiguous, where they Trade with all Freedom,
without any mutual Impeachment. The English and French have both Plantations
upon the Island of Newfoundland, and the Dutch in time of Peace settled upon
Long Island, and the adjacent Country environed on all hands by the English
Plantations, and yet no War ensued, but the Dutch continued their possession
till the Exchange was made for Suranam.

The Spanish Fleets do necessarly pass betwixt the Cape of Florida belonging to
the Spaniards, and the Bahama Islands, yet the English possess themselves of
the said Islands, and have also several times settled at Port Royal in the
bottom of the Bay of Campiechy in the Gulf of Mexico, for cutting of Logwood,
and have thence removed and settled again at their pleasure. The French have
also endeavored to settle in the Bay of Mexico, and lately and more closely in
the Samblas Islands on the Coast of Darien; They likewise settled a Colony in
Petitguavis in Hispaniola, and in Guiana on the Continent, notwithstanding of
the Vicinity of the Spaniards. The Dutch and Portuguese have their Respective
Plantations on the Coast of Brasil, to which the Spaniards pretend Right as
well as to the Isthmus of Darien, such as the Islands of Curasao, and Bowane,
near to Carthagena on the East, and Suranam and others upon the Continent, and
yet never quarrelled. It is granted that the Spaniards in their excessive
Jealousy, and upon the Pretext that by Treaties, none were to Trade in their
Ports or Harbors, such as Carthagena, and Porto-bello without their License,
have seized and made prize of the Ships that they have found upon the Coast
betwixt the said Places; But first, they did this upon pretext of the said
Treaties. Secondly, Injury and Violence make no Right.

And thirdly, it is most certain when the Spaniards have been overcomeand beat
off in such Attempts, and forced to suffer both Dutch and English to cut
Logwood on that Coast, yet the Spaniards did never complain of any Violation of
Right, as knowing perfectly they had none, as may be seen in Dampier, Water,
and other writers.

The Spaniards at first endeavored to amuse the World, with the Popes Gift of
the West Indies, and after the King of Spain's becoming King of Portugal, and
in the Right of that Crown, claiming the Benefit of the Popes Gift of the
East Indies, he assumed the Magnifick Title of Indiarum Rex: Yet he was never
able to make good his Right, or exclude others by these empty Names; but in all
Competitions the Pretentions of Spain, did either resolve in Occupation of what
was void or surrendered, or conquest of what was possessed by Natives; and that
Title was never much regarded, either by Spain, Portugal, or any other Prince
Popish or Protestant.

The second Head which may be pleaded for the Spaniard, is, the Treaties that
have been betwixt the Crowns of England and Spain. But 1mo. Granting that the
Kingdom of Scotland will never disown any Treaty betwixt their King (whom GOD
long preserve and prosper) may be concerned, where are these Treaties that
exclude either the Scots or English, from possessing Darien? if not inhabited,
or where Inhabited, with consent of the Inhabitants? If the Spaniard propone
upon these Treaties, they must produce them. 2do. All to be found in the latter
Treaties betwixt the said Crowns, such as the Treaty 1667, and the Treaty
1670, which may be understood to be the only Regulating Treaties in this
Matter, is that in the former, The King of Spain obliges himself not to molest
the King of England, or his Subjects in their Plantations in America, these
particulars enumerated not by way of Exception, but because some of them had
been contraverted. And that in the other Treaty 1670, It is agreed in the 7th.
Article, That the King of Great Britain, and His Heirs and Successors, shall
have, hold, and possess, with full Right of Empire, Property, and Possession,
all Lands, Regions, Isles, Colonies, and Lordships, situated in the
West Indies, or any part of America, which his said Majesty, or his Subjects,
did then hold or possess, So that no contraversie on any pretense, was
thereafter to be moved on that Subject. And in the eight Article, That the
Subjects of the said King should abstain from all Commerce and Navigation, in
the Ports and Places, having Forts, Castles, or Staples for Merchandise,
possessed by either of them. To wit, That the Subjects of Great Britain should
not Trade, nor Sail to the Ports nor Places, which the King of Spain has in
the West Indies, nor the Subjects of the King of Spain, Trade nor Sail to the
Places, which the King of Great Britain there possesses, without License given
hincinde, in the Terms therein set down. By which it plainly appears, that all
agreed to, was, and is, That the Kings and their Subjects respectively, should
forbear Injuries, as likewise to Trade and Navigate without License in the
Ports, Castles, and Staples, to either of them belonging, which can no ways
exclude the King of Great Britain and his Subjects from Trading, or making new
Plantations in to such Places in America, as either are not inhabited, or where
the King of Spain has no Right. The Spaniard may positively pretend, that the
Treaties provided to the King of England, and his Subjects of certain
particular Places, and generally what they then possessed in the West Indies,
may be construed an Exception, and import (as it were) an Acknowledgement, that
the rest of the West Indies did belong to the Crown of Spain. But, 1mo, The
Places provided to the King of England and his Subjects are only enumerate for
the greater Caution and Security, because some of them had been taken from the
King of Spain, and thereupon contraverted. And, 2do, It is evident by the
foresaid eight Articles, the Reserve of Trade is equally and mutually provided,
and restricted to the King of Great Britain and the King of Spain, their
respective Possessions; so that nothing can be elicite from these Treaties, to
give the King of Spain the Right to the whole West Indies, excepting the
foresaid places possessed by the King of England, nor to ty up the King of
Britain and his Subjects, from making new lawful Acquisitions in these Parts.
But it is agreed to, That they should secure the one, the other in their
respective Possessions; And thus these Treaties have been always understood,
nor have they hindered the English to enlarge their Possessions inthe West
Indies upon just Occasions, which certainly belongs as much, if not more to the
Scots.

2d. MEMORIAL, By the same.
THe Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, having by the other
Memorial, endeavored to clear the Justice of their Proceedings, as to their
Settling a Plantation in the Isthmus of Darien in America, do further in all
Humility Represent,

1mo, That there was never any Enterprise of a more National Concern, than the
foresaid Plantation is to the Kingdom of Scotland, the Erecting and
Establishing of the said Company, was the Unanimous Desire and Satisfaction of
the Nation, all Persons almost, and Families of any Consideration, did readily
subscribe for, and advance considerable Sums, for carrying on the Designs of
the Company, much above what could have been expected. The Success the Company
has had, in overcoming Difficulties, and fixing upon a Place that appears so
advantageous to Trade and Commerce, has likewise raised the Expectation and
Desire of its Continuance and Prosperity, to a far higher Degree than ever was
known in any Business of this Nature: And, Lastly, it is most certain, That
nothing could be more Grievous and Afflicting to the whole Nation, without
Exception, than that this Undertaking, so far and so happily advanced, should
meet with the least Discouragement, especially from such, whose Countenance and
Assistance is so earnestly craved.

2do, It appears from the whole Circumstances of this Affair, That the English
Nation can have no Prejudice, but rather Advantage by the foresaid Undertaking:
For, First, If it shall be profitable, the Profit evidently redounds to their
Fellow Subjects and good Neighbors. Secondly, The English have free Access, to
come in and partake of the Profit, when they please. Thirdly, The Product of
the Place is probably like to consist neither of Tobacco nor Suggars, the great
Commodities of the English Plantations, but of such Goods and Commodities, as
the English do not afford. Fourthly, It is true, That by the Act of Parliament,
and Patent of the Company, all Ships employed by the Company, are to return to
the Kingdom of Scotland with their Effects: But it is as true, That the said
Act and Patent did bear the Liberty and Privilege of a Free Port, and Market
for all Strangers that shall be pleased to Trade with them, who are not under
the foresaid Obligation, but may come and go with their Return whether they
please, which cannot but be of Advantage to the whole English Plantations, as
to a Free Course of Trade. Fifthly, It is likeways granted, That by the
foresaid Act of Parliament, the Ships, Goods and Effects whatsoever belonging
to the said Company, are declared free of all Customs and other Duties, for the
space of 21 Years, but then four of the said Years are already run, and this
small Encouragement was needful to begin so great a Work, whereof probably the
Profit can little more than equal the Expenses for all that space; And besides,
the Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, not of the Growth of the said Plantation, are
excepted, and not discharged: And also it is evident, That if the Plantation
prosper, the foresaid short Discharge of Customs, and other Duties, will be
richly compensed by the great Increase of Trade, and consequently of His
Majesty's Customs, that may for thereafter be thence expected. And, Sixthly,
The Company and Plantation cannot reasonably threaten any Diminution of His
Majesty's Customs in England; but on the contrary, this Plantation promising a
new Trade, far different from the Trade of all the English Plantations, and
offering to all, the Liberty of a Free Port, must rather increase the Trade of
England, both to the King and Subjects Advantage.

As for the Objection, That the Company, by the Immunity they have from Customs
and Duties, may Import, and then as freely Export, and so undersell any other
Nation, during that Immunity: Its Answered, That the Company in England have
almost the same Privilege, since, if they please to Export after their Return
from the Plantations, they are allowed to do it freely with a full Draw-back,
excepting only 3 or 4 per Cent.

3tio, It is with Submission Represented, That in all Appearance, if the
Company of Scotland had not seized the foresaid Post in Darien, the French had
certainly taken it: And now, that it is discovered to be so advantageous for
Trade, it is not to be doubted, but that the French, who show such Earnestness
to have the Scots excluded, will certainly, if any such thing should happen,
possess themselves of it, not only to the Hurt of the English Plantations, but
to the far greater Prejudice, if not the Ruin of the Spaniards Interest in the
Indies.

And therefore, All things truly and justly considered, it is hoped, that not
only the English will become more and more favorable to so good a Design, but
that even the Spanish will the more easily acquiesce to Reason and Justice,
that they see a more Powerful Competitor ready to catch hold of an Advantage,
that cannot be so safe for them in the Hands of any other Nation, as in the
Possession of the foresaid Company.

3d. MEMORIAL, By the same.
THe Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, being endued with
very ample Privileges, has settled a Colony at Darien, a Country very fit
and proper for that purpose, not only for the Richness of the Soil and Mines,
but likeways by its Situation for Trade.

The Spaniards have the most considerable Interest and Plantations in America,
and are not willing, that any other Nation, or People should have share of the
Advantages and Benefits they draw from thence, which is not Singular in the
present Case, because they have ever withstood all Planters, either upon the
Continent, or American Islands, by Acts of Violence and Hostility, as if every
Settlement in America were an Encroachment upon the Right of Spain.

There is lately a Memorial offered in behalf of the King of Spain, to one of
the Secretaries of State of the Kingdom of England, to the Effect following.

My Lord Ambassador of Spain finding himself obliged, by express Order, to
represent to His Majesty of Britain what follows, Prays Mr. Vernon to
represent to his said Majesty, That the King his Master, being informed from
several parts, and last of all, by the Governor of Havana, of the Insult and
Attempt of some Scots Ships, equipt with Men and Ammunition necessary, who
endeavors to post themselves in the Soverign Dominions of His Majesty in
America, and particularly in the Province of Darien.

His Majesty received this Information with Dissatisfaction, as a Mark of
little Amity, and a Rupture of the Alliance which is betwixt the two Crowns,
which His Majesty has always observed very Religiously, and from which so much
Advantage and Profit has resulted, both to His Majesty and his Subjects, after
which good Correspondence, His Majesty did not exspect such sudden Attempts and
Insults from His Majestys Subjects, and that in time of Peace, without any
Pretext or Cause, in the most inward part of his Dominions.

All that the King desires, That this be presented to His Majesty of Britain,
and that His Majesty is very sensible of such Hostilities and Unjust
Procedures, against which, His Majesty will take such Measures as are
convenient. London, May 3d. 1699.

THe Charge is great, and if it can be made appear, that the King of Spain is
Invaded, as is pretended, it is but Reason there should be just Reparation.

It must be acknowledged, That it is a fair way of dealing, that the Spanish
Rights and Pretensions are thus asserted by Memorial, and an Opportunity
afforded, and that the whole World may be satisfied, that His Sacred Majesty,
the King of Great Britain, has granted no Patent to His Subjects in Scotland
disagreeable to Treaties with Spain, and that the Scots Company have not
exceeded the Limits of their Patent, to the prejudice of Spain.

There may be many Reasons offered to satisfy Spain, and all other Nations of
Europe, except the French, that if the Scots had not settled in that Isthmus,
or if they were now to remove from it, the same would be possessed by another
People, more dangerous to the Interest of Spain, and in due time it may be made
appear, that the Scots Settlement is for the Honor of the King, and the
Interest of England, but the present design is only to satisfy the World, that
the Patent granted by His Majesty, was agreeable to the Treaty with Spain, and
that the Scots Company have not exceeded the Terms of their Patent, and that
they have Right to what they possess in the Isthmus of Darien, according to the
Law of Nations, and that most part of the Nations in Europe have settled
Plantations in the American Islands, or Continent, upon no other Foundation
than the Scots.

It is the Interest and Policy of all Governments, to improve the Natural
Product of a Country, and to encourage Foreign Trade.

The Experience of all Nations makes appear, That nothing contributes so
effectually to these ends, as Foreign Plantations.

Scotland is amongst the last of the Nations of Europe, in settling Foreign
Plantations, though there be few that can propose more Advantage that way,
because the Nation affords many Subjects of Manufacture, and abounds in Men,
which is the greatest Riches, as well as the Strength of a Nation; Yet for want
of Foreign Plantations, many have been useless and burdensome to their Native
Country, and have been constrained to serve Abroad in Foreign Wars, or into
Plantations of other Countries: And it is to be observed, that wherever they
have planted, they have increased and multiplied, as particularly in Ireland,
but no part of the Benefit does accrue to their Native Country.

The Nation has very long desired Foreign Settlements of their own, and did
make some Attempts that way, which proved ineffectual for want of due
Encouragement, but His Sacred Majesty, as Father of his Country, regarding the
Welfare of it, did endue the same with suitable Encouragements by the 32d. Act,
Par. 1693. and by the 8th. Act, Par. 1695. Yet both these Laws were granted
with a due regard to all former Planters; And did only allow them to plant
Colonies, build Cities, Towns, and Forts in Asia, Africa, and America, upon
Places not inhabited, or in, or upon any other Place, by Consent of the
Natives, or Inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European Sovereign,
Potentate, Prince or State.

By these Acts of Parliament, and Patent conform, His Majesty did sufficiently
provide, that the Possession of no European Prince should be invaded or
molested: And if Spain be injured, the Company must acknowledge, that the
Injury flows from them, by exceeding the Limits of their Patent.

It remains to be cleared in behalf of the Company, that they have strictly
observed the Rules prescribed by the said Acts and Patent.

The King of Spain's Title to America by the Pope's Bull, is rejected by the
common Consent of all the Princes and States in Europe, who could not have
settled there without Injury to Spain, if the Pope's Bull had been a sufficient
Title; and neither Spain or Portugal has relied upon that Title, the one
having planted in the East Indies, and the other in the West, without regard to
it: And this Title is sufficiently discussed by Grotius in his Mare Liberum,
Cap. 3. and will never be insisted on any where, and least of all in Britain.

America being inhabited by Natives, before Spain or any European People
settled there, it is most certain, that the Right and Property did originally
belong to these Natives, because the Earth was created for; and freely given by
the Creator to the Children of Men, and the most Ancient and Uncontraverted
Right of Property of the Earth is by Occupation and Possession, which is an
outward Act of the Body quasi positio pedis, and not an inward Act of the Mind,
which cannot be known to others, beside many Men's wills might concur in wishing
and liking the same thing, but their Bodies cannot concur in possessing it, and
an outward Act of Possession warns others to abstain.

The Property that originally belonged to the Natives, could only be
transferred from them to Spain by Conquest or Consent, and Spain can pretend
neither of these Titles to the Isthmus where the Scots have settled.

It is alleged for Spain, That they do possess the Isthmus of Darien, in as
far as they are undoubted Masters of the Bay of Panama, and the whole Coast of
the Isthmus upon the South Sea: They have likewise Carthagena and Portobello on
the North Sea, and they are Masters of the whole Country betwixt Carthagena
and Portobello, and so must be reckoned Possessors of all, because Possession
does not require the particular Occupation of every part of a Country, but
Occupation of one part is a sufficient Act to demonstrate the Will and
Intention to possess the whole Pertinents: And the Spaniards having possessed
these two Extremes, the middle Space belongs to them, especially seeing they
have also settled in other Places betwixt these two, as their Convenience did
require, though they did afterward quite these Possessions, as particularly they
once possessed Nombre de Dios, and did also plant within the River Darien, and
though they did quite these Possessions, they did not relinquish or repudiate
their Right, but being better informed, they choosed more convenient Seats, but
still reckoned themselves Proprietors of the whole Isthmus, and divided the
same in several Jurisdictions. And the Natives upon that Isthmus were a mean
inconsiderable People not to be regarded, who could not be thought to retain
any Right or Property in Opposition to the Power of Spain.

They further add, That Spain has been considered as undoubted Proprietors of
the Bay of Mexico, and of that Isthmus, by other Nations in Christendom, and
most particularly by the English, as is well known, and will clearly appear in
two remarkable Instances.

Several English Merchants having advanced their Stock, for settling a
Plantation at Port Royal in the Bottom of the Bay of Campechay, for cutting of
Logwood, they desired the Countenance and Protection of the Government, for
carrying on this profitable Trade: The Case was considered by the Council of
England, and it was not found just, to allow the Protection of the Government,
but were only left in a Permissive State, to manage their Trade upon their
Peril.

The Second Case, which comes closer to the present Question, was a Proposal by
certain English Undertakers to settle in Darien, as the Scots have done, which
being brought to the Council of Trade of England, and by them laid before the
Lords Justices in His Majesty's Absence, and transmitted to the King himself;
Upon a full Consideration of the Case, that Project was thought to be an
Encroachment upon Spain, and let fall.

The King himself, and Council of England, being satisfied of the Right of
Spain, in these particular Cases of English Undertakers, the same Judgment
ought to follow, in relation to the Scots Company.

To all that is alleged, it is shortly and clearly Answered, That Spain has
neither Right by Treaties nor Possession to the Country now possessed by the
Scots: And, 1st. Though it be acknowledged, that the Spaniards have more
Strength, and larger Possessions on the South, than upon the North Sea, yet no
Possession there can be extended to the North-side of the Isthmus, being
possessed by a People Independent, who never received the Spaniards, or became
subject to them: The Spaniards indeed have made great Settlements upon the
South Sea, and in so far as they have possessed, have restricted the Natives to
narrower Bounds; but the Indians still continuing to possess what remains,
Possession on the Coast, or the Mouths of Rivers on the South Sea, can never be
extended to the North Coast: And the Spaniard can condescend upon no Ground in
Law or Reason for such an Extension, nor can they make appear, that what the
Scots possess is Part and Pertinent of their Plantation, especially considering
that the Isthmus of Darien is naturally divided by a Ridge of high Hills
running from East to West.

Neither does the possession of Carthagena and Porto-bello, give Right to the
interveening Country, which is above 80 Leagues or 240 English Miles, and
these particular Forts, as well as the whole Spanish Plantations on the South
Sea, being fixed without consent of the Natives, who continue their Possession
in the interveening Country, without any Subjection to, or acknowledgment of
the Spaniard: It lies upon the Spaniards to condescend by what Rule the Limits
of these Possessions can be so far extended.

As to what is alleged, That the Spaniards have other Plantations nearer to
the Scots Settlement from which they removed, but still retain Possession and
Jurisdiction.

It is Answered, Admitting the matter of Fact. as alleged, it comes to
nothing; For still it is to be remembered, That the Spaniard will not pretend to
have planted with the consent of the Natives: Nor, that the Darien Indians have
ever acknowledged Subjection; but they planted by Force and Violence: And
therefore, whatever Forts they made in the Isthmus of Darien, the moment that
these Plantations were left, the Right and Possession of the Natives did return.

It is freely acknowledged, That Possession lawfully obtained by an outward Act
of the Body, is retained by Acts of the Mind, if no other possess; but when
Possession is taken by way of Fact, and not actually detained, the Right and
Possession returns to the lawful Proprietor.

2. This alleged Possession of Nombre de Dios, and in the River of Darien, is
only pretended to have been at their first Settlement in America, before they
possessed Carthagena and Porto-bello.

3. None of these pretended Settlements are within 20 Leagues of the Scots
Colony; And tho Spain had yet Plantations there, the Limits could as little be
extended to 20 Leagues beyond the actual Possession as to a Thousand: Neither
can the Spaniards prove any Act of Jurisdiction over the Darien Indians,
whatever Title they may think fit to give to Governors or Viceroy's in
America, the Scots do neither know, nor are obliged to notice the same: If
Titles were enough, the King of Spain assumes a Glorious Title of Indiarum Rex,
but he has no more Jurisdiction over the Darien Indians, than in the
Plantations of any other European Prince.

As to what is alleged upon the Opinions given by the King and Council of
England, in relation to His Majesty's English Subjects projecting Settlements
in America, The Circumstances of the Projects, and the Motives of any
Resolution taken in them, are wholly unknown to the Scots, and nothing can be
founded on such Matters of Fact, unless the whole Circumstances were
Authentically instructed or acknowledged, but whatever was thought proper in
these Cases, nothing can be inferred from thence to determine this.

A Project is to be regulated either by Law or by Convenience; And it is very
ordinary and suitable, That his Majesty and the Government may discourage the
Project of an Undertaking, if not Convenient, tho lawful: But when a Project is
Undertaken, Carried on, and a Settlement made in pursuance of express Acts of
Parliament, and conform to a Patent, there is no more place to Deliberate what
is fit, but what is Lawful.

If the whole Circumstances were known, many Disparities might also appear, and
from the bare relation of the Case of the intended Settlement in the Bay of
Campechay a manifest Disparity is evident.

The Bay of Campechay is in the Province of Nicaragua, in the Diocese of
Chiapo, which Province and Bishopric, are part of the Ancient Empire of
Mexico, which was conquered by Spain.

By the Conquest of Mexico, the King of Spain as Conqueror, had Right of
Sovereignty as far as the Dominions of Mexico did extend, and the Right and
Possession of the Conquered People may reasonably be reckoned to become the
Possession of the Conqueror; And therefore a Settlement in Nicaragua or Bay of
Campechay might be reckoned a down Right Encroachment upon Spain, which cannot
be drawn in Consequence to a Settlement upon Darien, because the Spaniards can
condescend upon no Title or Right beyond their actual Possession; for the
Dariens were never subdued, nor did they ever depend upon Mexico or Peru, or
any Prince or People subdued by the Spanirds.

And further, whatever be urged from these Cases, yet it can be made appear,
That the Undertaking to settle in Campechay was effectual, and the Cart is
marked Port Royal English-Colony; and it is known that the English cut Logwood
at Cape-Catach in Jucatan till the Charge of Carriage rendered it unprofitable,
and thereafter Settled at Port Royal for the same Effect, where there is plenty
of Logwood appropriated to the English.

It is also acknowledged, That the Darien-Indians are no powerful People, or
able by themselves to resist the Impressions of Spain, but the point of Right
and Property is the same in Rich and Poor, Strong and Weak, and they might
lawfully transfer their Right, and assume the Scots or any other Nation to
support or maintain the Right and Possession of that Isthmus, in as far as it
was free from the Spanish Dominions.

Yet the Dariens were not wholly neglected by the Spaniards as inconsiderable,
for there have been frequent and almost constant Wars between them and Spain,
in which the several Captains and Carriques have joined together, and there is
a famous Case of Barth: Sharp, who being accused in England as guilty of Piracy
and Robbery committed upon the Indians, he defended himself as acting by
Commission from Independent Native Indians then at War with Spain, and was
acquitted.

The Right of the Scots Colony, as flowing from the Native Indians, is already
sufficiently cleared, according to the most Ancient and Authentic Laws of
Property, acknowledged by all Nations: And for a further Evidence and
Demonstration of what has been asserted, and already sufficient-proven the
Settlement of the English, French, Danes, Portugueses, and Dutch, will all be
found to be Bottomed on the same Ground.

The Spanish are the most Ancient Planters, and if Spain pretend to any
Universal Title, either by Occupation of a part, or by the Popes Gift, or any
other Right, he thereby excludes the Claim of all Posterior Planters, either in
the Continent, or American Islands, which could not be thought to be separate
and indifferent Dominions: And if Spain recede from any Universal Title to the
whole, it will not be possible to extend his Claim beyond his proper
Possession, or the Possessions of these that are Subduced and Conquered by
Spain: And if this be called in Question, it is expected, That some other Title
will be condescended upon, that may clear the Limits and Extent of the Spanish
Colonies, so as to make a Difference betwixt the Scots Settlement in Darien,
and the Settlement of other Princes in the American Islands or Continent.

The Empires of Mexico and Peru are known, and may be yielded to Spain, but the
remainder of that vast Country was anciently possessed by little Princes, or
rather Captains or Heads of Families or Cariques, who have no Dependence upon
each other, nor upon any Prince or Potentate, but by Leagues and Agreement for
mutual Defense. Thus it is known, That the Land of the Amazons was possessed by
the Natives; And it is remarkable, That upon the Banks of Amazon, there are
Fifty different Nations: So it is in Brasil, in Chili, Paragua, Florida,
Carolina, Virginia, and generally over all the Continent, as well as in the
Islands of America, and likewise in Asia and Africa: And therefore, European
Princes have planted promiscuously, as they found Convenience, without Injury
or Encroachment upon former Planters.

The English possess the Continent from New England to Carolina, without the
Interposition of Colonies belonging to any European Prince, yet the Dutch, in
time of Peace, set down upon Long Island, and the Country now called New York,
betwixt New England and Pensilvania, and continued to possess till the end of
the War 1667: At which time, New York was exchanged for Suranam.

The Spanish Plate-Fleet do necessarly pass betwixt Cape-Florida and the
Bahaman-Islands, yet the English possess these Islands, which the Spaniards did
mightily resent, and used the English very barbarously upon it, yet Spain not
being able to justify any unlawful Title, the English did maintain their
Possession.

Whatever be alleged, That the Government did not interpose for establishing a
Logwood-Trade, yet it is certain, that the English did appropriate the Logwood
at Cape-Catch in Jucatan, till it was exhausted, and they afterward settled at
Port Royal in the Bay of Campechay, for carrying on the same Trade, which was
never questioned by the Spaniards,

The French have several times endeavored to settle in the River de Spiritu
Sancto in the Bay of Mexico, and also the Samballo-Islands upon the Coast of
Darien, and have actually settled a Colony in Petit-Guavis in Hispaniola, the
rest of that Island being possessed by the Spaniards: The French have also a
Settlement in Guiana in the Terra-Firma, and several Forts upon the Coast of
Caribana, and above twelve or thirteen American Islands.

The Dutch have also the City of Coro in the North of Terra-Firma, and Suranam,
and certain Forts upon the Coast of Guiana and Curasao, and several American
Islands.

The Portuguese have the Coast of Brasil divided into many Captainships. The
Interest of Spain was ever opposite to all these Settlements in America, and
wherever they were strong enough, they attempted to expel the Planters, without
regard to Peace or War, whereof the Scots did formerly feel the Effects, in
their Plantation at Carolina holden of the Crown of England, from whence they
were expelled: These things were done by way of Fact, but it is the first time
that ever Spain did openly pretend a Right beyond actual Possession, which was
never sustained by any European Prince. And it is desired and expected, that
there may be a further Condescendance of the Right and Title of Spain, to
exclude other Planters by the Consent of the Natives, where Spain has no
actual Possession, or Exercise of any Jurisdiction.

It is further alleged for Spain, That all the Business in America was settled
by the Pacification 1670, betwixt the Kings of Britain and Spain, which did
confirm all the Plantations possessed by English Colonies, and left the
Remainder of America to Spain, and whatever happened before that General
Treaty, could be no Rule thereafter, because there was almost perpetual War
with Spain in America, which were never settled or composed till the Treaty
1670, which did presuppose and establish the Right of Spain to all that was not
possessed by the King of Brittain's Subjects.

As to the Instance of Sharp, it is not denied that he was acquitted, and
amongst others did propone that Defense, That he Acted by Commission from an
Indian Prince; but that Defense was looked upon as a Jest, and it was not for
that Reason that he was acquitted.

It is Answered, There was indeed a Treaty in the Year 1670, concerning America
in particular, whereby it was provided, That the King of Britain should have,
hold and enjoy for ever, with full Right of Sovereignty, Dominion and Property,
all those Lands, Regions, Islands, Colonies, and Places whatsoever situated in
the West-Indics, or any part of America, which the said King and his Subjects
did then hold and possess; From which Article the Spaniards would infer, that
all the rest of America was lost by the King of Britain, as a Right and
Dominion of Spain, because that Spain ratifies the Possession obtained by the
King of Britain, and there is not a mutual Ratification of the Possession of
the King of Spain.

This Article can bear no such Inference, for,

1. The King of Britain and his Subjects did not then, nor do they now in the
least question the Possessions of the King of Spain and his Subjects, but the
King of Spain did very much question the Right of the King of Britain to
several of his American Plantations, not only upon the general Ground of an
Universal Title to all the West Indies, which no European Prince will bear, but
likewise upon particular Claims, that the English had beat out the Spaniards,
and enjoyed what had been once possessed by them in several places: And the
former Treaties with Spain especialy that in the Year 1667, were only general,
establshing a perpetual Peace betwixt the Dominions and Teritories of Britain
and these of Spain: But the Question remaining anent the Right and Dominion of
these American Settlements to which the King of Spain did lay still a Claim,
The Treaty 1670, did renounce his Claim to the Colonies in the English
Possession, but did determine nothing as to those parts of America, which were
never Possessed by the Spaniard or British, and if it had been intended, that
the Right of Spain to all America that was not possessed by some other European
Prince should be asserted, and declared the same would not have been left to
such remote conjectures, but would have been specially expressed.

2. The whole Tenor of that Treaty does sufficiently clear, that no such thing
was intended as to presuppose, much less to assert the Right of Spain beyond
actual possession. For by the Second Article of the Treaty, it is provided,
That there be an Universal Peace in America, as in other parts of the World
between the Kings of Great Britain and Spain, and between the Kingdoms,
States, Plantations, Colonies, Forts, Cities, Islands and Dominions belonging
to either of them; and between the People and Inhabitants under their
respective Obedience.

This Article in the Treaty relating to America, only does clearly demonstrate,
that both Kings were set upon an equal foot, and did Treat for themselves and
the People and Inhabitants under their respective Obedience, and no further; so
that all matters were left untouched that did concern parts not Inhabited or
possessed by Natives, who were never under obedience to either Prince, nor
would the Treaty have been for Plantations, Colonies, Forts, etc. equally and
mutually, if either King had pretended an universal Title or Right beyond
Possession.

3. The Eight Article does yet further clear, that the King of Spain had no
Universal Claim, but according to his Possession, which Article provides, that
the Subjects, Inhabitants and Mariners of the Dominions of each Confederate,
shall forbear to Sail to, or Trade in the Ports and Havens which are fortified
with Castles, Magazines or Warehouses, and in all other Places whatsoever,
possessed by the other Party in the West Indies. To wit, the Subjects of
Britain shall not Sail into, and Trade in the Havens and Places, which the
Catholic King holds in the Indies, nor in like manner shall the Subjects of
the King of Spain Sail into, etc.

This Clause is plainly restrictive upon the King of Spain, That the Subjects
of the King of Britain shall not Trade into these places of the Indies which
belong to Spain; for thereby it presupposes that Spain has no Universal Title,
and its left free to the King of Britains Subjects to Sail into, and Trade in
all Ports and Havens which have no Fortifications, Castles, Magazines; or
Warehouses Possessed by the King of Spain, and consequently it was lawful to
have Sailed to, and Traded with the Darien Indians where the King of Spain had
no Fortifications, Castles, Magazines or Warehouses, nor can clear any manner
of Possession, and if they might Trade with the Indians it must be acknowledged
they might Settle among them.

It Is also provided by the Tenth Article, that in case the Ships of either
Party be forced by stress of Weather, or otherwise into the Rivers, Creeks,
Bays or Ports belonging to the other in America, they shall be treated there
with all Humanity and Kindness; Which Article states both Kings again upon an
equal foot, and mentions the Right of both as restrictive to particular Rivers,
Creeks, Bays, etc. in America as if neither Party claimed Universal Title over
all.

The 15th. Article of the said Treaty provides, that the same shall in nothing
derogate from any preheminency, Right or Dominion of any Confederate in the
American Seas, Channels or Waters, but that they have and retain the same in as
full and ample manner as may of right belong unto them, providing always that
the Liberty of Navigation ought in no manner to be disturbed.

This Artiele relates to certain Preheminencies and Privileges claimed by
Spain in the American Sea, which by the Treaty was not yielded, but left in the
same state as formerly; and if the King of Spain had pretended to an Universal
Right over all America, in so far as is not possessed by other European
Princes, why was he more careful to preserve his Claim of Sovereignty in the
Seas, and forgot his Dominion upon the main Land? There can be no other reason
for it, but because there was no such thing in prospect, as appears by the
whole Tenor of the Treaty.

Nothing has been alleged in behalf of Spain to make any disparity betwixt
all the Settlements that have been made in America by the Subjects of the King
of Britain or other Princes, except the Treaty 1670: Which when duly
considered, makes no disparity at all. For albeit the Possession of the King of
Britains Subjects be thereby confirmed; yet it will not be acknowledged by the
King of Great Britain, or any other Prince that the Settlements made by their
Subjects were illegal or violent, until confirmed by the King of Spain, and
all Nations who have Planted there must sustain and justify the Scots
Settlement, or acknowledge that the Settlement of their own Subjects were
injurious to the Right of Spain.

It is not, nor can be denied, that the Dariens have been at frequent War with
Spain, although they pretend, that the Dariens were rather Rebels than Enemies.
That is only for to beg the Question, for the Natives having the Ancient
undoubted Right, it must be instructed, that they became Subjects before they
could be Rebels.

And though it be alleged, that what was done in Sharp's Case was reckoned a
Jest, and that he was not acquitted upon that ground, as acting by Commission
from the Dariens; yet the matter of Fact is certain and known, and was indeed
remarked by all England, that Sharp joined with the Dariens, did commit acts of
Hostility and carried away great booty from the Spaniards, and was pursued for
Restitution in England, and did propone a Defense. That he acted by Commission
from an Independent People, and was acquitted by a competent Judicature in
England.

These matters of Fact being all acknowledged, it must be thought that a
Decision in the way of Justice was no Jest, but according to the Law of the
Nation.

To Conclude and Sum up the whole Matter, The Scots did not move one foot,
until they obtained two Acts of Parliament, and a Patent in their favors.
These Acts (though very ample) were framed with a just regard to former Planters,
who by the express Tenor of the said Laws were not to be invaded or molested in
their Possession; even the just Right and Property of the Infidel Natives was
considered, and the Undertakers not allowed to dispossess them by Force and
Violence, but to Plant with their consent: Upon the faith of these Laws, a
greater Stock was advanced in Scotland than ever was raised by any other
Nation, upon the first project of a Foreign Plantation; the Directors of the
Company did very narrowly and exactly consider all the Treaties with Spain, and
pitched upon a place, that the whole World considers to be of a great value for
founding and raising a profitable Trade to the Honor of the King who (as the
Father of the Country) did endue them with ample and just Privileges, to the
increase of the Strength and Riches of the Isle of Britain, which is all under
the Government of one Monarch, of one Religion and Interest, and can have no
different Friends or Enemies without endangering the whole. In one word, The
Scots Company have acted deliberatly, for advantage to themselves, the Nation,
and the Isle of Britain; they have only used their own Right and have wronged
no Nation or People, nor exceeded the Limits of their Patent in any
circumstance. And if any will stand up for the Interest of Spain, and call in
question the matters of Fact and principles of Law above asserted, which are
generally known and need not to be confirmed by particular Citations. they may
assuredly expect that what has been affirmed shall be made further clear and
evident beyond contradiction, and whatever Obstacles or Difficulties have, or
may fall in, Ardua quae Pulchra, the undertaking was deliberate, just for the
interest of the Nation, and with more regard to the Right of former Planters
and Natives than any former Project of that Nature.

Memorandum, That about this time, it was given out that the Spanish Ambassador
had presented a Second Memorial concerning the Scots Settlement at Darien; and
that the French Ambassador had likewise given in a Memorial to the Court of
England concerning the French Ship which was cast away near Caledonia Harbor:
But whether so or not, the Company could never procure a Copy of either.

The Council of Caledonia's Address
To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracions Sovereign;
WE your Loyal and Obedient Subjects, the Council of your Colony of Caledonia,
being settled pursuant to Powers and Immunities proceeding from your Royal
Favor and Goodness; where, upon our arrival, the Natives on all hands in
compliance with former Agreements, received and entertained us with all
possible demonstration of joy and satisfaction, there being no Possession, nor
so much as pretended possession, for any Prince or State in Europe upon this
whole Coast, extending it self considerably more than one hundred Leagues
together. We found the Indians on all sides in open War with the Spaniards,
their nearest Neighbors: Against whom they besought our Assistance, which we
could by no means comply with, by reason of the present Peace and good
Understanding between your Majesty and the King of Spain.

Yet notwithstanding this our just and peaceable deportment and inclination,
and our certifying the same by Letters to the two neighboring Governors of
Panama and Carthagena; We have, to our no small surprise, received certain
Information, that several great and warlike Designs and Preparations are on
foot, and carrying on by the Spaniards against this Colony; and that contrary
to all Justice and Humanity, as well as the Treaties of Peace between your
Majesty and the Catholic King, they now unjustly detain, and refuse to deliver
up the Persons and Goods. that were saved of a Ship belonging to this Colony,
called the Dolphin, which by misfortune of springing a Leak, was not long since
oblg'd to run ashore and suffer Shipwreck near the City of Carthagena All which
have been no small inducement for us to have improved the frequent
opportunities we have had of taking Measures greatly disadvantagious to the
Crown of Spain: Yet in order to avoid, as much as possible, any thing that
might look like a public Breach, until the same were laid before your
Majesty, and your Royal pleasure known therein: We have hitherto proceeded no
further, than the granting of Letters of Reprisals for the People and Effects
unjustly detained from us.

Great Sir, The Indies as well as Europe, do at this time implore your
Protection: And as the effectual opening the Door of Commerce to the trading
World, and of more easy access to and correspondence with the ends of the
Earth, has been hitherto hidden and reserved by the Divine Hand, for one of
the singular Glories of your Majesty's Reign. So it is with no small
satisfaction to be any way concerned in so hopeful an Accession to the
Dominions and Greatness of your Majesty, and Wealth of your People; That we
presume to lay ourselves, our Case, and this valuable Opportunity at your Royal
Feet, most humbly beseeching, that as it had its beginning, so it may continue
to have its Being and Support from the happy Influences of your peculiar Bounty
and Grace.

So with our earnest Prayers to Almighty God for the long and happy
preservation of your Royal Person, and continuance of your Glorious, Reign, and
most humble tender of our Lives and Fortunes to your Majesty's Service and
Disposition. We beg leave to Subscribe our selves,

This Address was delivered to the Secretaries of State about the middle of
September, together with a Memorial concerning the French Ship commanded by
Cap. Duvivier Thomas, which was Shipwrack'd near Caledonia, Harbor on the 24th
of December School.

Most Gracious Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most
Obedient Subjects and Servants, Daniel Mackay, Robert Pennicuik. William
Paterson, Colin Campbell, Samuel Vetch, Charles Forbes, Thomas Drummond.


By the Honorable Sir William Beeston Knight. His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor
and Commander in Chief, in, and over this his Island of Jamaica, and other the
Territories depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas I have received Commands from his Majesty, by the Right Honorable
James Vernon Esquire one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
signifying to me, that his Majesty is unacquainted with the Intensions and
Designs of the Scots settling at Darien: And that it is contrary to the Peace
entered into with his Majesty's Allies; and therefore has commanded me, that no
Assistance be given them. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, and by
Command, strictly to command his Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, that they do
not presume, on any pretense whatsoever, to hold any Correspondence with the
said Scots, nor to give them any Assistance of Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, or
any other Necessaries whatsoever, either by themselves or any other for them;
or by any of their Vessels, or of the English Nation, as they will answer the
Contempt of his Majesty's Command to the contrary, at their utmost peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal of Arms this 8th. day of April 1699. And in the
11th. Year of our Sovereign Lord William the Third of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland King, and of Jamaica Lord, Defender of the Faith, etc. WILLIAM
BEESTON.

Barbados. By his EXCELLENCY, A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas his Majesty has been pleased to signify his pleasure to me by Mr.
Secretary Vernon, that he has been advertised, that several Ships of Force,
fitted out of Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas with an
Intention (as they declared) to settle themselves in some part of America:
Their Design being unknown to his Majesty, and least the same should derogate
from the Treaties his Majesty has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be
otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in the West Indies.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Council, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects, inhabiting
within this Island that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving
any Assistance to any of the said Persons: And that no Provisions, Arms, or
other Necessaries whatsoever be carried to them, as they shall answer the same
at their peril.

Given under my Hand this 13th of April 1699, and in the Eleventh Year of his
Majesty's Reign. R. GRAY.

By his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS his most excellent Majesty has received Advice, That several Ships of
Force fitted out of Scotland, were designed to settle themselves in some parts
of America, and lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty
has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of
his Majesty's Colonies in America, his Majesty has been pleased to signify his
Royal pleasure to me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's Subjects,
or others, inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, that they forbear
holding any Correspondence with, or giving any Assistance to any of the said
Persons, while they are engaged in the aforesaid Enterprise; and that no
Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried from
hence to them, nor be permitted to be carried, either in their own Vessels, or
any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. In pursuance of his Majesty's said
Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by and with the Advice of his
Majesty's Council of this Province, to publish and declare his Majesty's
Pleasure, and by these presents do strictly charge and command all and every
one of his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and Territories
depending thereon in America, That they forbear holding any Correspondence
with, or giving any Assistance to such Person or Persons, who have been fitted
out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, and are said to have settled in a certain
place, which they have called Caledonia, That no Provision, Arms, Ammunition,
or other necessaries whatsoever, be carried either in their own Vessels, or in
any other Ship or Vessel for their use, from this Province, or any part
thereof. And his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, and all other
Officers of his Majesty's Custom-House, are hereby required to take notice
hereof accordingly.

And I do further strictly charge, command, and forbid (by and with the consent
of his Majesty's Council, as aforesaid (all his Majesty's said Subjects, and
others within this Province, that they neither by themselves, nor by any other
Persons authorized by them, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce with such persons as are said to be settled in Caledonia
aforesaid. And if any Person or Persons within this Province, by themselves,
their Factors or Agents, shall contrary to, and against the true intent and
meaning of this his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure signified unto me, as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce, in manner aforesaid, then all such Person or Persons so
acting, as aforesaid, shall incurr such Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as
by Law in such Cases are provided. And all his Majesty's Subjects, and others
within this Province, are hereby required to take due notice hereof, and to
observe his Majesty's said Royal Will and pleasure in all and every of the
Premises as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Given at Fort William Henry in New York, the 15th day of May, 1699. and in the
Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order, B. Cole. Cl. Concilii.
Bellomont.
God save the King.

Printed by W. Bradford Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty in
New York. 1699.



By his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellamont, Captain General, and Governor in
chief of his Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay, New York, etc. in
America, and of the Territories thereon depending, and Vice Admiral of the same.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS his most Excellent Majesty having received Advice, that several Ships
of Force fitted out in Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas, with
an Intention (as they declared) to settle themselves in some parts of America:
Lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty has entered into
with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's
Colonies in the West Indies his Majesty has been pleased to signify his Royal
Pleasure to me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's Subjects, or
others inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, that they forbear
holding any Correspondence with, or giving any Assistance to any of the said
Persons, while they are engaged in the foresaid Enterprise; and that no
Provision, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried to
them from thence, nor be carried either in their own Vessels, or any other
Ships or Vessels for their use.

In observance therefore of his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have
thought fit, by and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province,
to charge and command, and do hereby charge and command all and every of his
Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and Territories thereon
depending, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any
Assistance to any Person or Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in
manner aforesaid, and are said to have settled in a certain place in the
West Indies by 'em called Caledonia, or to enter into any Traffic or Commerce
with them, or any of them. And that no Provisions. Arms, Ammunition, or other
Necessaries whatsoever be transported or carried unto them from this Province,
or any part thereof, either in their own Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel
for their Use. Of which all his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this
Province, are hereby required to take due notice, and conform themselves
accordingly, as they will answer their acting hereunto under the outmost Pains,
Penalties, and Forfeitures, as are by Law in such cases provided. And the
Officers of his Majesty's Customs, and all other his Majesty's Officers, are
hereby also required to take effectual care that his Majesty's said Royal Will
and Pleasure in all and every of the Premises be duly observed and kept, as
they will answer the contrary at their Peril,

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the third of June 1699, in the
Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order of his Excellency, and Council,
I. Addington Secr. BELLOMONT.
God save the King.
Boston, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to his
Excellency the Governor and Council.

A second Proclamation published in Barbados against the Scots Company and
Colony.
Barbados. By his EXCELLENCY.
WHEREAS his Majesty has been pleased to signify his pleasure to me by Mr.
Secretary Vernon, That he has been Advised, that several Ships of force are
arrived at the Island of Cairat near Darien from Scotland, with an intention to
settle themselves, their Design being unknown to his Majesty; and least the
same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty has entered into with the
Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in
the West Indies.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Council, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects inhabiting
within this Island, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or
giving any Assistance to the said Persons; and that no Provision, Arms,
Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever be carried to them, as they shall
answer the same at their peril.

Given under my hand the 5th. day of September 1699. and in the Eleventh Year
of his Majesty's Reign. R. Gray.

The Council General of the Indian and African Company's Petition to his
Majesty.
May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, The Council-General of the Company of
Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, do in all humble duty beg leave to
lay before your Majesty the present Condition of our Affairs.

Your Majesty from an earnest desire of the flourishing of your Ancient
Kingdom, having been graciously pleased by the 32d. Act of the 4th. Session,
and by the 8th. Act of the 5th. Session of this current Parliament, and your
Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom following
thereupon, to authorize the settling of Plantations and Colonies in Asia,
Africa or America by the Natives of this Kingdom; and and such others as should
join with them; as in the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent is more
particularly expressed.

We and our Constituents, your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects did, upon the
faith and encouragment of the said Acts, and Letters Patent, enter into a
Society, erect a Company of Trade, and with great Charge, and after many
Difficulties settled a Plantation on the North side of the Isthumus of Darien,
a place precisely in the terms of the said Acts of Parliament and Letters
Patent.

And being sensible, That as our Company had its Birth from your Majesty's most
Gracious Favor, so it could not subsist but by your Royal Protection; We did
therefore in all humble manner Petition your Majesty's High Commissioner and the
Estates of Parliament assembled the 19th. of July School.

Upon which the Estates of Parliament did with great unanimity Address your
Majesty, That you would in your Royal Wisdom be pleased to take such measures
as might effectually vindicate the undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said
Company, and support the Credit and Interest thereof.

That Session of Parliament ending before any Return could be had from your
Majesty, Reports have been spread by the Enemies of our Settlement, as if our
Company had not your Majesty's Protection: And as an evidence thereof; That
Proclamations have been issued out in your Majesty's Name by your Governors in
all the American Plantations, not only to deprive our said Company and Colony
of the friendly Assistance, that might have reasonably been expected from our
Neighbor Nation, but also strictly forbiding all your Majesty's Subjects or
others within these Plantations to enter into any Traffic or Commerce with the
said Colony; and that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries
whatsoever should be transported, or carried to them either in their own
Vessels or any other Ship or Vessel for their use, and that under the utmost
Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures mentioned in the said Proclamations.

Which Proceedings we have but too much reason to believe have been of fatal
consequence to our Company and Colony, and consequently to the interest of all
your Majesty's good Subjects in this Kingdom. And we being fully persuaded,
that nothing could be so conducible for the support of our said Company and
Colony in our present Circumstances, as some special Testimonies and Evidences
of your Royal Protection.

We do therefore in all humility and earnestness beg of your Majesty's fatherly
care of our said Company in particular, and of the Nation in general, That your
Majesty would be graciously pleased to take off the force and effect of these
Proclamations which have been so prejudicial to us, and to signify your Royal
Pleasure to the Governors of these your Plantations, that we may be supplied
in the common and ordinary way of Commerce. As also that your Majesty may allow
your Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November next, or as soon as
possibly can be, that your Majesty may have the Advice and Assistance of the
Great Council of this Nation in such a weighty and general Concern, which we
hope God will bless with an happy issue to his Glory, the Honor of your
Majesty, the Credit of your Parliament, the Interest of the Nation, and the
Good of our Company and Colony.

Signed at Edinburgh the 19th. day of October 1699. in Name, presence, and by
Order of the said Council General by, May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, Belhaven, I. P. C. G.

To which his Majesty was pleased to give the following Answer.
WILLIAM R.
RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well:
Your Petition has been presented to us by our Secretaries, and we do very much
regret the Loss which that our Ancient Kingdom and the Company has lately
sustained: We will upon all Occasions protect and encourage the Trade of the
Nation: And we will also take care, that the Subjects of that our Kingdom shall
have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce with our English Plantations as
ever they had formerly.

Our current Parliament is adjourned to the 5th. day of March next, and we will
order that the Parliament shall meet when we judge that the Good of the Nation
does require it.

And so we bid you heartily farewell. Given at our Court at Kensington the 2d.
day of November 1699, and of our Reign the 11th. Year. By his Majesty's
Command, Seafield.

To our Right Trusty and well-beloved, The Council General of the Company of
our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies.
To the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, and remanent Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Lordships,
WE think it needless to trouble your Lordships with a repetition of the many
Steps, Difficulties and Discouragements that we met with all along both abroad
and at home, since the beginning of this Undertaking, the most considerable of
them being already particularly known to your Lordships But maugre all those
Difficulties, we have with a great deal of Trouble and vast Expenses, settled a
Plantation in one of the most valuable and impregnable Places in all America,
situated on the North-side of the Istumus of Darien called by us Caledonia.

As no Nation in Europe ever begun any such Settlement with so considerable a
Strength of Men, Ships, and other Necessaries, as we did: So no instance can be
given of any Settlement ever heretofore made, that had so hopeful an Aspect in
so short a time as our Plantation aforesaid.

But to our and the Nation's inestimable Loss, we have very surprising Advices
of our Peoples having deserted the said Settlement by reason of Proclamations
issued forth in all his Majesty's Plantations of America, strictly forbidding
all his Majesty's Subjects to hold any manner of Correspondence with our said
Colony, and that no manner of Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other
necessaries whatsoever, should be transported or carried to them, either in
their own Vessels or any other Ship or Vessel for their use; and that under the
outmost Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures mentioned in the said Proclamations.
The certain notice whereof could not but have put them in a desperate
Condition, especially none of our Advices having come to their hands, tho we
wrote to them at several times, by the several ways of Jamaica, Barbados,
Antegoa, New England, etc. and sent them likewise an illimited Credit for
buying of Provisions, till our own Ships and Recruits should come up to them.

We have taken such further measures, as seemed most reasonable to us upon this
unexpected Emergency, but have too good ground to fear, that not only what we
have already done, but even all that we are able to do, must prove ineffectual,
if the King and his Parliament of this Kingdom, do not give some encouraging
Marks of their Favor and Protection to our said Company and Colony: Wherefore
we have in all humble Duty Petitioned his Majesty that he would be graciously
pleased to take off the Force of the said Proclamations, and allow his said
Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November next, or as soon as
possibly may be, to give their Advice and Assistance in such a weighty and
general concern.

Your Lordships may very well know the great Losses, both of Men and Treasure,
that we have already suffered by the unaccountable Proceedings of the Enemies
of our Company and Colony: Nor can we tell when to expect an end to such
Methods against us, unless his Majesty and the Great Council of the Nation fall
upon proper and effctual Means for supporting so valuable an Undertaking.

May it the refore please your Lordships, to take the whole Premises into your
most serious consideration, and do us all the good Offices with his Majesty
that, in your profound Wisdom, you shall think most expedient for supporting
our Company and Colony's Interest, and give him an account of our present
Circumstances, and how much the Honor and Interest of the Nation stands
concerned.

Signed at Edinburgh the 20th. day of October 1699, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General. By, May it please your Lordships, Your
Lordships most humble Servant, Basil Hamilton, J. P. C. G.

A Letter from the Company
To the Right Honorable, The Viscount of Seafield, one of the Secretaries of
State for the Kingdom of Scotland.
My Lord,
THis is by Order of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to
Africa and the Indies, to acquaint your Lordship, That we have prevailed upon
Lord Basil Hamilton to be at the trouble of going up with an Address to His
Majesty from our said Council-General on behalf of Captain Robert Pinkarton and
Thirty more, who were wrongfully detained Prisoners at Carthagena since the
beginning of February last, and (as we are informed) are most inhumanely
treated.

We are daily importuned by their Relations (who are very considerable) for
their Relief; and it is of great concern to our Company, that something
material be speedily done therein, not only for the sake of the said Prisoners,
but also that others may thereby see, we do not abandon the Interest of such as
engage themselves in our Company's Service.

Lord Basil Hamilton is fully instructed in all matters relating to the said
Address, and other Affairs relating to our Company, of which he will inform your
Lordships. Wherefore we entreat that your Lordship will be pleased to introduce
him to His Majesty, in presenting of the said Address; and to assist him in
procuring a gracious return from his Majesty; in the considence whereof, I
remain,

Edinbr. 4th. Decr. 1699. My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Yester,
I. P. C. G.
Memorandum, Such another Letter was at the same time written to the Lord
Carmichael, the other Secretary of State.



The Company's Address to His Majesty.
May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, the Council-General of the Company of
Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, having formerly, in most humble
manner, represented to your Majesty, how that we have, with much Trouble, great
Expense, and after many unexpected Stops and Difficulties, settled a Plantation
and Colony on the North-side of the Isthmus of Darien, on the Continent of
America, precisely in the Terms of your Majesty's Acts of Parliament and
Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom.

We now, in all Duty and Humility, beg leave to represent further to your
Majesty, That whereas in the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent, there
is a special Clause, by which your Majesty is graciously pleased to promise,
That if contrary to the Rights and Privileges thereinmention'd, or contrary to
the General Treaties of Peace and Commerce between your Majesty and any
Potentate, Prince or State in Amity with your Majesty, the Ships, Goods,
Merchandise, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever, belonging to the said
Company, should happen to be stopped, detained, embezell'd, or taken away, or
in any sort prejudiced or damnified, That your Majesty would interpose your
Royal Authority, to have Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made for the
damage done; and that upon the public Charge.

And whereas likewise by the X and XI Articles of the Treaty concluded between
the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain, at Madrid the 8/18 day of July 1670. It
is specially stipulated, That in case any of the Subjects of either the
Confederates with their Shipping be forced at any time, through stress of
Weather, pursuit of Pirates, or Shipwreck to retreat and enter for shelter, and
harbor into any of the Rivers, Creeks, Bays, Havens, Roads and Ports belonging
to the other in America, That the Persons so Shipwrack'd or forced a Shore,
shall in no sort be detained Prisoners, but that on the contrary; all friendly
Assistance and Relief shall be administered to their Distress, both for the
Sustenance of their Persons and reparation of their Ships, and convenience of
their Vovage, and that Letters of safe Conduct shall be given them, for their
free and quiet passage thence.

Yet notwithstanding thereof, a Ship called the Dolphin, belonging to our
Company, being sent from our said Colony to some of the Leeward Islands, with a
Cargo for buying Provisions, and the said Ship in a few days time after her
going to Sea and plying to windward, for the speedier passage, stricking
unfortunately upon a Rock, sprung a Leak, and being forced to run a shore,
under the very Walls of Carthagena, to escape Shipwreck, not only the said Ship
and Goods were violently seized and disposed of as prize, but also the Men to
the number of thirty and a Boy (whose Names are here subjoyned) were detained
and made close Prisoners, contrary to the express Terms of the said Treaty.

Upon notice whereof, the Council of the said Colony sent, in your Majesty's
and said Company's Name, a Messenger with a very civil Letter, to the Governor
of Carthagena, to demand your said Subjects, who were wrongfully detained
Prisoners, as aforesaid; and likewise Restitution of the said Ship and Goods,
pursuant to the Treaty above-recited; and sent also Copies of the Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent above mentioned, in English, Latin, and Spanish,
for the Governor's Information: but instead of any compliance to those just and
reasonable Demands, the Messenger was threatened to be put in Chains, and not so
much as allowed to see any of the said Prisoners.

And being lately assured, that (notwithstanding of all endeavors hitherto
used for their Liberation) they are contrary to the Rules of Christianity,
Humanity, and the Law of Nations, still detained Prisoners under very severe
Treatments, we think our selves in Duty and Conscience bound to lay their
deplorable Case before your Majesty; and for that effect have commissioned Lord
Basil Hamilton, one of our number, to present this our humble Address on their
behalf to your Majesty, and to give your Majesty a further account of our
Company's other Affairs, as he is particularly instructed therein; not doubting
but that your Majesty will, in your Royal Wisdom, take speedy and effectual
Measures for the redress of those Damages, and the freedom of those distressed
Prisoners, in the number of which there are some young Gentlemen of good
Quality, and related to the best Families in this Kingdom.

Signed at Edinburgh the 4th. Day of December, 1699; in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, Yester, I. P. C. G.

The Chancellours Letter to the Directors of the Company.
Holyrood-house, the 9th. of January 1700.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty's Secretaries of State have acquainted me, That the King will not
allow my Lord Basil Hamilton access to him, Because he did not wait on his
Majesty when he was formerly in London. And that he has never since given any
public Evidence of his Loyalty, nor has hitherto owned and acknowledged His
Majesty's Government. But his Majesty will not refuse to hear what my Lord
Basil's Instructions are; and has declared his willingness to be informed of
what the Company desires. And if my Lord Basil will give in Writing to His
Majesty's Secretaries, what he had to represent, His Majesty will receive
Information from their hands of what is demanded, and will give his Answer to
the Company; His Majesty does not refuse to Receive the Petition, though he will
not allow my Lord Basil to be the Presenter of it. This from

To the Right Honorable, The Court of Directors of the Company of Scotland,
Trading to Africa and the Indies. Right Honorable, Your very humble Servant,
Marchmont Chancellor.

A Letter from the Directors of the Company, to each of the Secretaries for
Scotland.
My Lord,
THE Council-General of our Company, having lately a very frequent Meeting
thought fit to send up one of their own Number, with an Address to his Majesty,
and with Instructions concerning the Contents of our Company's former
Petitions; they thought that none could be more Capable to Discharge that
Trust, than Lord Basil Hamilton. as being thoroughly Versed in the course of the
Company's Affairs, nor more acceptable to His Majesty, as having had no
objection made against him when he was appointed; several Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council Being then present. And the Council-General having
signified so much to your Lordship by a Letter, wherein they entreated, that
you would be pleased to introduce him to the King, and give your Concurrence in
procuring a Gracious Return to what he had in Commission, and which he was to
Communicate to your Lordship. We are surpised to find this day by a Letter
from the Lord Chancellor; that the King will not allow Lord Basil Hamilton to
have Access, because he did not wait upon his Majesty when he was formerly at
London. But his Lordship being sent by, and having his Instructions from the
Council-General, We the Court of Directors can say nothing to it, other than to
entreat your Lordship that you would use your Interest with his Majesty, to allow
Lord Basil Hamilton, to have Access to His Royal Person, lest the Refusal
thereof be not only a great Discouragement to the Company and all its
well-wishers, under its present Difficulties and repeated Misfortunes, but give
also ground to the World to believe that his not being allowed Access to His
Majesty, is upon the Account of his carrying an Address from this Company,
which every Body knows stands in great need of, and has a just Right to His
Majesty's Royal Favor and Protection,, And which being the General Concern of
the whole Nation, is confidently expected and signified to your Lordship, by
Order and in name of the Court of Directors by,

Edinbur. the 9th. day of January, 1700. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble
Servant, Pat. Scot. I. P: C. D.

A Letter from the Company, to my Lord Basil Hamilton.
My Lord,
WE have your Lordships Letter, of the 2d. Instant, by yesterdays Post; in
relation to to the Contents of which, we send you herewith the Copy of a
Letter, which we have written by this Nights Post, to both the Secretaries of
State, and likewise the Copy of another Letter, which we had this morning from
the Lord Chancellor upon the same head.

As our Company cannot but have a just sense of your Lordships generous
condescension, to the Council-Generals request, in undertaking a troublesome
Journey to London, this time of the Year, to wait upon and Solicit his Majesty
about our Company's Affairs, with no other view but frankly to serve the
Interest of your Country, to the manifest neglect of your own, So we cannot but
heartily regret that the carrying of the Company's Commission, should be the
occasion of putting such a distinguishing Mark upon a Person of your Lordships
Quality and merit, as to be denied access to His Majesty's Person, because you
did not wait upon His Majesty when you were formerly at London. No body can be
so blind as not to see through this. And whereas we never could hear, that your
Lordship did ever any thing unworthy of your. Quality, or inconsistent with the
duty of a Loyal and Peaceable Subject. So we are still hopeful, that by your
own prudent management, His Majesty may be undeceived of any mis-representation
he might have had of you, and that he will yet condescend to grant your
Lordship access to his Royal Person, with the Company's said Address, and give
you a Gracious Answer to the Contents thereof, and to the other particulars
mentioned in your instructions; An account whereof would be very welcome News,
in the midst of our misfortunes, to the Company in general, and particularly to
the Court of Directors in whose Name, and by whose Order this is from,

Edinburgh the 9th. day of January. 1700. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble
Servant, Pat. Scot. I. P. C. D

His Majesty's Letter to His Council of Scotland.
William R.

RIght Trusty and Right well beloved Cousin and Councellor, Right Trusty and
Entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins
and Councillors, Right Trusty and well Beloved Councillors, and Trusty and
well Beloved Councillors, We greet you well, WHEREAS The Council-General of
the Company of that our Kingdom, Trading to Africa and the Indies, by their
Letter to our Secretaries of the Fourth day of December last; did desire, That
they might give their concurrence to procure a Gracious Return from Us, to the
Petition which they had sent with Lord Basil Hamilton. And the said Lord Basil
having communicated to Our Secretaries both the foresaid Petition and His
Instructions; And they having represented to us, what is desired in behalf of
the said Company, and we having refused the said Lord Basil Hamilton. Access,
to present the the foresaid Petition to Us, for the Reasons We did Order our
Secretaries to Comunicate to Our Chancellor; Yet We being willing to give an
Answer to what the said Company does desire. You are therefore to call for some
of the Council-General, and acquaint them that We are resolved in the terms of
our Treaties, to demand from the King of Spain, that Captain (...) Pinkarton
and these of his Crew, who are detained Prisoners at Carthagena be Released and
set at Liberty. And you may also acquaint them, that our Subjects of that our
Kingdom shall be allowed the same Liberty of Trade that others enjoy with the
English Plantations; And in general, you may signify to them, Our Resolution
to promote and advance the Trade of the Kingdom, And the three Friggots they
demand having been given by Parliament for guarding the Trade of the Coasts; We
are not resolved to dispose of them till we have the Advice of our Parliament.
And so we bid you heartily Farewell. Given at our Court at Kensingtoun, the
Tenth day of January 1700, and of our Reign the Eleventh Year, By his Majesty's
Command Sic Sub. Seafield Directed thus, To Our Right Trusty and Right well
Beloved Cousin and Councellor, Our Right Trusty and Entirely Beloved Cousin and
Councellor, Our Right Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Councillors, Our
Right Trusty and well Beloved Councillors, and to our Trusty and well Beloved
Councillors, Patrick Earl of Marchmont our Chancellor, and the rest of the
Lords and others of our Privy. Council, of our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.

This is a true Copy taken from the principal and Subscribed by,

Gilb, Eilot Cls. Sti. Con.



An other Letter from the Council General of the Company to my Lord Basil
Hamilton.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships Letters to the Court of Directors, having been by them
Communicated to us, We cannot but acknowledge, that as you have at our request
frankly undertaken a troublesome Journey and Task to serve the Interest of your
Country and our Company; So we are fully satisfied, that you have acquitted
your self with a great deal of Prudence and Discretion in the execution of that
Charge, for which we render you most hearty Thanks: But finding by a Letter of
the 10th. instant from His Majesty to the Lords of his Privy Council, and by a
former from the Secretaries of State to the Lord Chancellor (Copies of both
which are herewith enclosed) That his Majesty has determined not to to allow
your Lordship access to present our Address, nor to impart to His Majesty what
other things we gave you in charge by your Instructions: We are heartily Sorry
that your Lordships carrying of our Address, should bring you you under any
such disagreeable circumstances with His Majesty: But the matter being so, we
cannot think it just to detain your Lordship any longer at London to the
neglect of your own affairs at home, and do therefore hereby signify that your
Lordship may use your own Freedom, to take Journey homeward as soon as you
think fit, and as may suit best with your convenience. This is in Name,
presence and by order of the Council-General of our Company, from

Edinburgh the 29th. of January 1700. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble
Servant, John Home P.

Upon the first notice that was given of a National Address or Petition to His
Majesty for the fltting of the Parliament, the following Proclamation was
emitted.

PROCLAMATION Anent Petitioning.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Macers of Our Privy Council Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part
Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute Greeting;
Forasmuch, as We, by our Letter under our Royal hand, dated at Kensingtoun,
the Twelfth of December instant, have signified to the Lords of Our Privy
Council, That whereas we are informed, that notwithstanding of Our Answer to
the late Petition of the Council-General of the Company of that our Kingdom,
Trading to Africa and the Indies, which we think ought to have given entire
Satisfaction to all our Good Subjects; Yet there is on foot a Design of
Addressing Us of New, on the same heads, carried on after such a manner, and
with so little respect to our Government, gives us too just Grounds to
apprehend the Consequences, that We have never hitherto denied Our Subjects
their Privileges, nor will We discourage the Liberty of Petitioning, when the
same is done in an Orderly manner, but that we having fully declared our Mind,
as to the Subject of the last Address, We cannot but take particular Notice of
that unusual Method that is taken to procure Subscriptions to a new one, and
that some Persons, who signalize themselves in carrying on the same, have given
no Evidence of their Affection to Our Government. And make it their Endeavor
to lodge the late misfortune of the Company, on Proclamations emitted in the
West Indies, tho they cannot but be sensible, that the same did proceed from
other Causes. And being convinced, that such Practices may tend to Alienate
from Us the Hearts of our good Subjects, and that it is necessary, for the
Support of Our Government, and preserving the public Peace of the Nation, that
they be discouraged and prevented. We did therefore Recommend to the said
Lords of Our Privy Council, to signify and and make known our Displeasure, and
Dis-satisfaction with such proceedings, and to take the most effectual Methods
consistent with Law, for Discouraging the same, and for preventing these that
are well inclined to Our Government from Joining with them. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, And We Charge you strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and Remanent Market
Crosses of the whole head Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and thereat in our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make
Intimation of the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance, and ordains Our
Solicitor to transmitt Coppies to the Sheriffs, Stewarts and their Clerks for
that effect and Ordanis these presents to be Printed.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the Eighteenth day of December, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh Tear, 1699. Ex deliheratione Dominorum Secreti Concilii.
GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
God save the King.
Here follows the first National Address or Petition mentioned in the
foregoing Proclamation.
May it please your Majesty,
WE the several Subscribing Nohlemen, Barons and Gentlemen of this Your
Majesty's Kingdom of SCOTLAND, being deeply Affected with the present hard
Circumstances of the Indian and African Company, both Abroad and at Home, as
being of Universal Concern to the whole Nation. And your Majesty having been
pleased, by your Royal Answer to the Council-General of the said Company's late
Petition, to signify, That your Majesty does very much Regret the Loss which
this Kingdom and the Company has late-sustained; That upon all occasions Your
Majesty will Protect and Encourage the Trade of the Nation; and that Your
Majesty will order the Parliament to Meet when you judge that the Good of the
Nation does require it.

We are thereby Encouraged in most Dutiful and Humble manner, to represent to
your Majesty, That as the Estates of Parliament, and this Nation, which they
Represent, have a Peculiar Interest in the Concerns of the said Company, as is
particularly manifested in their Unanimous Address of the 5th. of August School.
to Your Majesty: So we humbly conceive nothing can be so Conducible to support
the Interest and Credit of the said Company, under its present Misfortunes, as
a Meeting of the said Estates in Parliament, and that the Good of the Nation
can at no time require their Metting more than at present: As not doubting, but
that under the Influences of Your Majesty's Favor and Protection, together
with the Assistance which may be reasonably expected from your said Parliament,
The said Company may be enabled to prosecute their Undertakings with greater
Assurance, and better Success than hither to they could have done, under the
many Stops and Difficulties which they met with from time to time.

We do therefore in all Humble Duty; most earnestly Entreat, and most assuredly
Expect, that Your Majesty will, in Your Royal Wisdom, and Fatherly Care, for
the Good of this Nation, be Graciously pleased, to order your said Parliament
to Meet, as soon as possible, which We doubt not, will tend to the Honor of
your Majest, and the General Good and Satisfaction of the Nation, and
particularly of

May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty 's most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most
humble Subjects and Servants.
This Address was presented to His Majesty at Kensington the 25th. day of March
1700. By the Right Honorable the Marquis of Tweeddale, Sir John Home of
Blakader Baronet, John Haldan of Gleneagles and Patrick Murray of Livingston
Barons, Commissiners appointed for that end:

Upon the presenting of this Address one of the abovenamed Commissioners
signified to the King, that it was hoped His Majesty would be pleased to look
upon it not only as a Petition for allowing the Parliament to sit, but likewise
as a Testimony of the Nations concern for the interest of the Indian and
African Company. To which His Majesty was Graciously pleased to Answer, That
that would be best known in Parliament, and that the Parliament could not sit
before the 14th. of May then next ensuing, hut that it would sit then: Or in
Words to that effect.



To His Grace His Majesty's High Commismisioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.
The Humble Representation and Petition of the Council-General of the Company
of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Grace, and Right Honorable Estates,
IT is evident by the whole Strain of Three several Acts of Parliament,
together with His Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom, in favors of the said Company, That the Wisdom of the King and Right
Honorable Estates did intend, that all such Advantages as might arise by the
establishing of such a Company, should be of as universally a National Concern
as possible; And in order thereunto, were pleased to endow it with large
Privileges and Immunities, suitable to the Circumstances of an Infant-Company,
and the Greatness of its Designs: And lest that it should fail in the
Execution, for want of a sufficient Stock to carry on such an Undertaking, all
imaginable Parliamentary Encouragement was given to Persons of all Ranks, Ages
and Sexes, both within and without the Kingdom, whether Natives or Foreigners,
to become Partners and Adventurers in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, as
is singularly manifest by the 42d. Act of the 5th Session of this current
Parliament, especially calculated for that end only.

Upon the public Faith of having due Protection in the enjoyment of these
unquestionable Privileges and Immunities, as having received their Sanction
from His Majesty. and the unanimous Suffrage of the great Council of the Nation
as aforesaid, many Persons of all Ranks and Degrees were thereby induced to
become Adventurers in the Joynt-Stock of our said Company, in in so much that
in a very short time, a much more considerable Stock was subscribed for within
this Kingdom, than was ever before so much as proposed here upon any project
whatsoever, since we were a Nation:

Being thus entered into a Society, We and our Constituents have pursuant to the
intentions of the Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent abovementioned, with
much care and trouble, and a great Expense of Treasure, after having struggled
with many unexpected Obstructions and Difficulties settled a Plantation by the
Name of Caledonia, in one of the most Healthful, Fruitful, naturally
impregnable, and every way valuable Places in all America, as is universally
acknowledged by all Per'ons of Experience in such Matters as well as by the
General Consent of such as have been there: And as a manifest proof thereof tho
our said Plantation be settled most strictly in the terms of the Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent abovementioned, yet it has raised the Jealousy of
some, and Envy of others, of the most knowing and considerable Trading Nations
in Europe.

But to our and the Nations great Surprise, and inestimable Loss, while we were
using all ordinary means, and big with the hopes of riveting that Settlement
upon a lasting Foundation, such was the further continued Chain of unexpected
Obstructions and most unaccountable Mal-treatments that we met with, by
Proclamations of a very strange Nature, and otherwise, that the repeated
Misfortunes following thereupon, put us under an indispensible Necessity of
humbly petitioning His Majesty for allowing the Parliament to meet at the day
appointed in November last; in full confidence and Expectation of having the
most natural and cordial Assistance from those who have first established our
Company, and promised it Protection; especially since all our other
Applications have hitherto proved ineffectual: But a meeting of the Estates of
Parliament at that time not quadrating (it would seem) with His Majesty's other
Affairs, a very considerable Body of the Nobility, Gentry and Burgesses of this
Kingdom, thought fit, in a most dutiful and humble manner, by their late
Address, to represent to His Majesty, how deeply they were affected with the
Nations concern in our Company's repeated Misfortunes, and therefore humbly
Petitioned for the sitting of this Parliament as soon as conveniently might be.
And the King having been most graciously pleased to order the Meeting of the
Right Honorable Estates now in Parliament, We think our selves in all duty
bound to give His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner and the Right
Honorable the Estates, a short and naked Narrative of the several Obstructions
and Misfortunes that we have been all along forced to grapple with, in the
prosecution of our Company's Designs, to the end that the great Council of the
Nation, having a perfect View and full Knowledge of these Difficulties which we
now Labor under, may be the better able to judge how to apply a Remedy.

The first attempt for strengthening our Company's Interest and Stock was at
London, where a Subscription of 300000 sterling. was procured in Nine days time,
without so much as a public Advertisement, and many knowing Merchants were so
far convinced of the many Advantages that might probably arise from such a
Constitution, that they signified their willingness to be concerned for Triple
the Sum, if allowed: But not only did the Parliament of England by their
Address to His Majesty of the 13th. of December 1695. and otherways, render
that Subscription ineffectual, but the House of Commons did also appoint a
Committee, to examine what Methods were taken for obtaining the Act of
Parliament, by which our said Company is established who were the Promoters and
Advisers thereof; and did afterward impeach the Nominees in the said Act of
Parliament; notwithstanding the absolute Independency of this Kingdom.

Yet after all this Discouragement, we went on with our Subscriptions at home,
and made our next Effort for strengthening thereof beyond Sea, both in Holland
and Hamburgh: In the first of which places many eminent Merchants declared
their positive inclinations to be very considerably interested with us, and
gave some signal Proofs thereof, till they were made to understand by
Threatenings and other Insinuations, that a Higher Power would make them at
least very uneasy, if they persisted any further in their Resolutions of being
concerned with our Company,

And at Hamburgh where we had the most promising Hopes of foreign Assistance,
the Comercii or Merchant Company, entered into Contract with our Company's
Deputees, to join at least 200000 l.Sterling. to our Company's Stock; but to our
great Astonishment, His Majesty of Great Britains Ministers there, did under
pretense of special Warrant from the King, put a full stop thereto, by giving
in A Memorial to the Burgo-Masters and Gentlemen-Councellors of that City
wholly dis-owning the Authority of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent
abovementioned, and intimating that His Majesty would regard their entering into
Treaties with our Company as an Affront to his Royal Authority, and that he
would not fail to resent it, as having neither Credential Letters, nor being
any otherways Authorized by His Majrsty.

Upon notice whereof, we did in all humble Duty Address His Majesty in June
1997, for Redress of that open and bold Encroachment, upon not only our, but
also the Nations Rights, in its most fundamental Constitution, by endeavoring
to subvert the Independency of its Parliamentary Laws, expressly contrary to the
Law of Nations: All which His Majesty by his Royal Letter from Flanders in July
1697, Promised to take into Consideration, as soon as he would return into
England, and that in the mean time, His Majesty would give Orders to his
Ministers at Hamburgh, not to obstruct our Company in the prosecution of its
Trade with the Inhabitants of that City.

In the full Confidence of His Majesty's Royal Promise, we thought our selves
secure and took our Measures accordingly, till to our further surprise, we
found by several Instances, that His Majesty's said Ministers were as wickedly
bent against us as ever, and still denying that they had got any such Orders
from His Majesty: Whereupon the Directors of our Company, did, by their Letter
of the 28 of September 1697, expostulate in the first place, with both the then
Secretaries of State, about that further Dis-appointment, but having still no
Redress therein, we did in most humble and dutiful Manner, by our second
Address of the 22d. day of December 1697. lay the whole Matter again before His
Majesty; And did likewise, at the same time, not only humbly Represent the
Premises to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, together with the
train of ill Consequences that must necessarly attend such Treatment, if not
prevented by an early Redress; but wrote also separately to both the
Secretaries of State, and such other Noble Persons of the Government, as
happened to be then at London, To use their Joint Interest, for procuring
Justice, in a Matter of such Universal Concern to the Honor, Interest, and
Independency of the whole Kingdom.

All the Answer we obtained, was by a Letter of the 17th. of January School, from
both the Secretaries of State. That the King said, He had already given Orders
to His Resident at Hamburgh in that Matter, conform to his Royal Letter from
Flanders, in July 1697, which was then communicated to the Company.

By which Answer, together with what repeated Advices we had at the same time
from Hamburgh, that the English Ministers there, had still positively disowned
their having got any such Orders, we were put out of all Hopes of having any
Redress, until we should have an Opportunity of laying the whole Matter before
a Meeting of the Estates of Parliament.

But in the mean time we proceeded, with all the Strength we had (though
extremely weak'ned by the Treatment above-narrated) to make the best
Preparations we could (considering the Scarcity of these Years) for sitting out
an Equipage of Ships, Men, Provisions, and other Necessaries, for settling a
Plantation in America, in the Terms of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters
Patent abovementioned: And its evident by the very Constitutions of the
Colony, that they were calculated more for the general Advantage of the Nation
and Posterity, than for the particular and immediate Benefit of the
Adventurers.

And the Parliament happening to meet the very next Day after our Ships had
sailed, we did by our Humble Petition of the 22d. of July School, Represent to
his Grace, His Majesty's then High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable
Estates then assembled in Parliament, the Treatment which our Company met with
at London and Hamhurgh as aforesaid, the great Prejudices which we had
sustained thereby, and the many further Inconveniences and evil Consequences
that must necessarly have followed thereupon, if, upon any Account whatsoever,
the Parliament should happen to neglect the taking immediate Cognizance of such
Usage.

And the Parliament having thereupon, by their Unanimous Address of the 5th. of
August School, to His Majesty, thought fit to manifest their own and the whole
Nations Concern in that Matter, earnestly entreating, and most assuredly
expecting, That His Majesty would in His Royal Wisdom, take such Measures, as
might effectually vindicate the Undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said
Company, and support the Credit and interest thereof; And the Parliament
likewise, by the same Address, recommending the Concerns of the said Company to
some special Marks of His Majesty's Royal Favor, as that Branch of the Trade
of this Kingdom, in which they, and the Nation they represented, had a more
peculiar Interest; The Court of Directors of our Company were thereby
encouraged to renew their Application to His Majesty, with relation to the
Memorial given in by His Ministers to the Senate of Hamburgh, (the same being
specially mentioned in the Parliaments Address:) And in Consideration of the
Damages sustained by the Company, through Means of that Memorial, the
Directors humbly Petitioned, That His Majesty would be pleased, for their
Encouragement at that time, as a Gracious Mark of His Royal Favor, to bestow
upon them the two smallest of the Frigots, then (and to this Hour) lying
useless in Bruntisland Harbor.

But our Company having no manner of Answer to either of these, and being
assured by several Letters from Hamburgh, That both the English Ministers
there, had positively denied their having received any such Orders, as were
long before promised, and declared to have been given, with Relation to that
Memorial, the Court of Directors of our Company did, by their Letter of the
29th of November School, transmit Copies of the said Letters to the Viscount of
Seafield, then sole Secretary of State, and entreated his Lordship, to procure
some speedy and effectual Answer from His Majesty to the Contents of both that
Letter. and their former Petition.

The Secretary, by his Letter of the 13th. of December School, returned for
Answet, That he would take the first convenient Opportunity he could have, to
represent that Matter to the King, but that he could not expect to have it for
some time, because His Majesty was then very much employed in the Affairs of
his English Parliament.

We thereupon waited a full Month in expectation of some further Answer, but
getting none, our Court of Directors did, by a Letter of the 13th of January
1699, put the Secretary again in mind of our said Petition of the preceding
August, and Letter of the 29th of November.

The Secretary by his Letter of the 7th. of February 1699, signified, That he
had presented our Company's Petition to His Majesty, and was commanded to let
us know, that there being Accounts, that the Ships belonging to the Company
were arrived upon the Coast of America, and the particular Design not being
communicated to His Majesty, He therefore delayed to give any Answer, until he
should receive certain Information of their Settlement.

Though we could not but be surpised to find all our former Addresses and
Petitions, about Matters of such weighty Concern, as are above narrated,
Answered, after so long delay, only with a seeming Charge, for not having
communicated to His Majesty a thing that was never in the least demanded of us,
by either the King, Parliament, Privy Council, or Ministers of State, we being
limited to settle in the Terms of the Acts of Parliament, as we should be
Answerable: Yet upon the very first Advice we had of our Colony's Settlement in
Caledonia, we by our Letters of the 31st. of March, and 1st. of April 1699,
gave a very full and dutiful Account thereof to His Majesty, and to both the
Secretaries of State, together with an Account of the French Designs
thereabouts and of what Import our said Settlement (if duly protected) might
prove to the Interest and Security of all His Majesty's Dominions, and referred
the same, together with the Contents of our former Petitions, to His Majesty's
Royal Consideration.

About this time it was, That His Majesty was pleased to call the President of
the Session, and the Advocat to Court, to the end (as we understood) that they,
jointly with both the Secretaries of State, might in a Conference with several
of the English Ministers, satisfy His Majesty, as to the Legality of our
Company's Settlement: Which (by all that ever we could learn) was then (and
otherways since that time) made clear beyond all manner of Dispute.

But while in the mean time, we were pawning even our own particular Credits,
for sending the needful Supplies of Ships, Men, Provisions, Arms, Ammunition,
and other Necessaries, for securing so valuable a Settlement to this Nation, we
were astonished to have Advice. That by Orders from England in January 1699,
Proclamations had been emitted, in the Months of April and May, over all His
Majesty's Plantations and Territories in America, strictly Intercommuning our
Colony, under very severe Penalties to be inflicted on the Contraveeners of
these Proclamations, in regard His Majesty (as these Proclamations narrate) was
unacquainted with the Intentions and Designs of the Scots settling at Darien.

As we humbly considered these Proclamations to be such, as were never before
published in those parts against any other People upon Earth, and of so
Barbarous a Nature, as we thought, no Good Christians would put in Execution,
even against Infidels; So finding ourselves unquestionably warranted by all
Laws Humane and Divine, we persisted in our Endeavors for mantaining that
Settlement, as hoping, that, through means thereof, this Nation might in time,
have an Opportunity of raising it self above the open Contempt, Reproach and
Insults of its unkind Neighbors, and of propagating the Gospel amongst the
Ignorant good Natured Indians of those parts.

But before our Recruits could possibly arrive at Caledonia, our Colony got
certain Accounts of these Proclamations, and finding at the same time; the sad
effects thereof, by being denied any the least help, either for Goods or Money,
at Jamaica, from whence they had formerly Supplies; and that in the
Proclamation issued by Sir William Beston, Governor of that Island, he had
positively declared. That by their Settlement in Darien, they had actually
broken the Peace entered into with His Majesty's Allies (which they believed he
durst not veuture to have done without a sufficient Warrant) And finding
themselves thereby to be of consequence declared Pirates, without any previous
Summons or Hearing, contrary to the Customs and common Usage of all Nations,
even in the case of real Piracy, and founding a Belief, at the same time, on
the Treatment which they knew our Company had formerly met with in Europe,
without being Redressed therein, that we were not in a Condition either to
supply or protect them, they unhappily took the Alarm, under such a General
Consternation, as divested them not only of all manner of patience to struggle
with any Inconveniences they lay under at the time, but also of all manner of
prudence, in taking any reasonable Measures either for their own Security, or
for our Company's interest. In the midst of which Consusion those of them who
had any bad Designs (as we could not well suppose such a Number to be free of
some) made use of these Proclamations as handies, by which to perpetrate their
own several ends, and easily persuaded all the rest to leave the Settlement:
Which they unadvisedly did the 20th of June last; And by that means not only
have the Ships, Men and Goods, which were there at that time, been exposed to
the Arbitrary will of those to whom the Execution of those Proclamations was
given in Charge, but even all our subsequent Measures brought into inevitable
disorder.

Upon Information of all which, we did, by our humble Petition to His Majesty
of the 19th. of October 1699, in all humility and earnestness, beg, That His
Majesty would in His Fatherly care for the good of our Company in particular,
and of the Nation in General, be graciously pleased to give special Testimonies
of his Majesty's Royal Protection to our Company at that Juncture, and
particularly to take off the Force and effect of those Proclamations which have
been so prejudicial to us, and to signify his Royal pleasure to the Governors
of his Plantations in America, that our Colony might be supplied in the common
and ordinary way of Commerce, as those of other Nations are; And that in the
mean time His Majesty would be graciously pleased to allow the Estates of
Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November last, or as soon as
conveniently may be, to the end that their Advice and Assistance might be had
in such a weighty and General Concern.

We likewise by our humble Address to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council of the 20th of October 1699. Represented what we thought in duty and
prudence necessary, with relation to the Contents of our said Petition to his
Majesty, Humbly referring the whole to their Lordships most serious
consideration, and praying that they would be pleased to do us all the good
Offices with his Majesty that they would think most expedient for supporting our
Company and Colonys Interest; and to give him an account of our Company's hard
Circumstances, and how much the Honor and Interest of the Nation stood
concerned therein.

His Majesty was graciously pleased, by His Royal Letter to us of the 2d. of
November 1699, to declare that He did very much regret the Loss which the
Kingdom and the Company had lately sustained, That he would upon all occasions
protect and encourage the Trade of the Nation. That he would take care that His
Subjects of this Kingdom should have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce
with his English Plantations that ever they had formerly, and that he would
order the Parliament to meet, when he would judge that the Good of the Nation would
require it.

But, in some short time thereafter, while we were solacing our selves with the
hopes of having his Majesty's protection, not only as a Company established by
his Royal Authority, with the Advice and Consent of Parliament; but also as
Subjects, making all the Preparations we could to send the needful Supplies and
Advices to those who were last sent for Repossessing the same Settlement: We
were further astonished to have Advices, that, by second Orders from England,
another Fleece of Proclamations had been emitted, over all the English
Plantations in America, particularly on the 5th. of September last, in
Barhados, etc. And that in compliance with the intent of these Proclamations,
Our People that went along with the Rising-Sun, were in November last,
positively denied Wood and Water at Monserat, a Privilege never before denied
to any other Nation: And by a Letter of the 29th of January last from the
Commander of another of our Company's Ships, we are assured that they were
positively denied Anchoring at St: Christophers by the Governor, Colonel
Norton, who out of his own Mouth declared to the Commander of our said Ship,
That he did it by new Orders which he had received about a Month before; although,
at the same time, two Dutch Ships were then Watering there; which we have since
confirmed to us by Letters from Mr. Daniel Mackay one of the Councillors of
our Colony, dated at Port Royal in Jamaica the 13th. of February last: By which
Letters, he informs us likewise, That when he waited upon the Governor of that
Island, concerning our Company's Ship the St. Andrew lying in that Harbor, The
Governor declared to him, That tho the said Ship were fitted for going to Sea,
he would not suffer her to go, without a special Order from England for that
Effect.

We likewise humbly beg leave to inform Your Grace, and Right Honorable
Estates, that amongst our Company's many other Losses and Misfortunes, a Ship
called the Dolphin loadned with a valuable Cargo, belonging to our Company,
struck unfortunately on a Rock, by which she sprung a Leak, and being forced to
run a shore under the Walls of Carthagena, to escape Shipwreck, the said Ship
and Goods were by the Spaniards (His Majesty's Allies) violently seized and
disposed of as Prize, and the Men also to the Number of 30 and a Boy, detained
and made close Prisoners, not only contrary to the Law of Nations, (we being
then in profound Peace with them) but also contrary to the express Terms of the
10. and 11. Articles of the Treaty concluded at Madrid the 2/18 Day of July
1670, between the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain.

By our Dutiful Address of the 4th. of December 1699, we humbly Petitioned His
Majesty, That He would be graciously pleased to take those Proceedings of the
Spaniards into His Royal Consideration, so as that speedy and effectual
Measures might be taken for the Redress of those Damages, and the freedom of
these distressed Prisoners.

In Answer to which, His Majesty was graciously pleased, by his Royal Letter of
the 10th. of January last, to signify, That He was resolved in the Terms of the
Treaties to demand from the King of Spain, that these Prisoners should be set
at Liberty.

Yet some of the most considerable of these Prisoners being transported above
half a Year ago to Old Spain, We have frequent Advices from them by Letters,
dated in Cadiz-Prison, That they and all the Crew have been most Barbarously
used, and that they themselves are still kept close Prisoners, under very
severe Treatment; Copies of which Letters we have some Months ago transmitted
to the Secretaries of State.

By all which, it cannot but evidently appear to Your Grace and Right
Honorable Estates, that though we have all along used our best Endeavors to
wrestle through these almost unsurmountable Difficulties, and exerted even our
outmost efforts for retrieving our Losses, as much as possible by endeavoring
to repossess and mantain so valuable a Settlement; And though we have certain
Advices of its being Repossess'd by our People, and that we have taken all
imaginable Measures for their present Supply: Yet we have too just ground to be
fully persuaded, That unless the King and High Court of Parliament, do speedily
Support, Protect, and Assist us, in the Prosecution of our Company's lawful
Designs, that all our Past, Present, and Future Endeavors must, to the
Nation's indelible Reproach and Dishonor, as well as to its and the Company's
unspeakable and irreparable Loss, prove unavoidably abortive.

May it therefore please Your Grace and Right Honorable Estates, to take the
several Matters of Fact abovementioned, into your most serious Consideration;
To Vindicate, Support, and Protect us in the Enjoyment of our lawful
Privileges, both as a Company, and as Subjects of this free and independent
Kingdom, to take such Measures, as You (in Your profound Wisdom) may judge most
Effectual, for repairing the many Damages we have already sustained, and for
assisting us in the further Prosecution of our Company's lawful Designs; but
more especially, for the maintenance of our just Right and Title to the
Settlement of CALEDONIA. and the Enjoyment of such Advantages as (if duly
Protected) may probably arise thereby.

Signed at Edinburgh the 16th. Day of May 1700. In Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the said Council-General by, MARISCHALL. I. P. C. G,

To His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner and the Right Honorable Estates
of Parliament,
The Humble Address and Petition of the Heretors of the Shire of Haddingtoun.
THat whereas, after a long and Expensive War, we expected to have enjoyed the
blessings of a happily concluded Peace, by the Re-establishing of our Foreign
Trade, Encouragement of Home-Manufactures, employing of the Poor, in the
improvement of our Native product, and the lessening of our public burdens:

But instead thereof, to the unspeakable Loss and almost Ruin of the Nation, we
find our Trade abroad sensibly decayed, and our Coin carried out, by the
Importation of Commodities from places where ours are prohibited, our Woollen
and other Manufactories at home, by the same means and the Remisness of
Magistrates, in putting the Laws in due Execution, receive not that
Encouragement which the Interest of the Country requires; whereby our Poor are
neither mantain'd nor employed, as they otherways might be, and more especially
our Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, meets with so much opposition
from abroad, and gets so little support at home, that after so great a Loss of
Men and Expense of Treasure, their Sttlement in Caledonia may now too probably,
a second time, fall under the same unlucky Circumstances as at first if not
prevented.

And yet after all these hardships that the Nation groans under, numerous
Forces are still kept on foot, which occasions now in time of Peace, heavy and
unnecessary Taxes, while our much wealthier Neighbors are Disbanding theirs.

All which Misfortunes and other Calamities, which have of late befallen us, we
cannot but look upon as the Effects of the displeasure of Almighty GOD for the
Immoralities that every where abound amongst all Ranks and Degrees of Men, to
the Dishonor of GOD and our Holy Religion, the debauching the Spirits, and
corrupting the manners of the People.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Right Honorable Estates of
Parliament, to take some effectual Course for curbing of Vice, and putting in
Execution the many laudable Laws for mantaining and employing the Poor, that
they may be useful and not burdensome to the Kingdom; and for the Encouraging
our Manufactories at home, and carrying on our Trade abroad with Advantage, to
lay on such Impositions on the Branches of our Import, as may overballance our
Export, and particularly that of France; and to assert the Indian and African
Company's Right to the Colony of Caledonia, which has been and still unjustly
is called in question, and to give such support to it as may Encourage the
Adventurers to go on with an undertaking which, if vigorously pursued, may tend
so much in the future to the Wealth, Honor and interest of the Nation, and to
relieve our Country of a great Number of Forces, every way so uneasy to the
People, and in lieu thereof to fall upon such other Methods for security of the
Peace and support of the Government, as may be more for the Interest of the
Kingdom, and more consistent with the Liberty of the Subject. Memorandum, There
were likewise at the same time, several other Addresses and Petitions, both
from Shires and Burrows, presented and read in Parliament, needless to take up
room here as being much after the same strain with that of the Heretors of the
Shire of Haddingtoun, complaining of many general and particular Grievances,
and more especially of those relating to the Indian and African Company, and
its Colony of Caledonia; Praying for Redress thereof, and that the Parliament
would be pleased to Vindicate and Assert its just Rights and Privileges, etc.
After reading of all which, a Motion being made and pressed that the Parliament
should make a Resolve in the following Words, viz. Resolved, That our Colony of
Caledonia in Darien is a Legal and Rightful Settlement, in the Terms of the Act
of Parliament 1695, and that the Parliament will mantain and support the same.
His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner was pleased immediately to Adjourn the
Parliament for three days, and at their next Meeting, without so much as
reading the Minutes of the former diet, Adjourned it further for full Twenty
Days. Whereupon the Plurality of the Members of Parliament, then present, met
that very evening, and signed the following Address.

May it please your Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Subscribing Noblemen,
Barons, and Burgesses of this Your Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND, Members of the
same Parliament which happily Settled Your Majesty's Government over Us, and
has ever since given continued Proofs of Zeal and Affection to Your Majesty's
Service in the several Sessions thereof: Do humbly Represent to Your Majesty,
that having according to your Majesty's Royal Appointment, met together in
Parliament, with full Resolution to have proceeded in the like good Intentions,
for the Honor and Interest of your Majesty and People.

It is to Our unspeakable Grief and Disappointment, that not only there has
been no Return given to the Unanimous Address of the last Session of
Parliament, Expressing the whole Nation's Concern in the INDIAN and AFRICAN
Company: But also after a Motion made in this Session of Parliament for a
Resolve, That Our Colony of CALEDONIA in DARIEN, is a Legal and Rightful
Settlement, in the Terms of the Act of Parliament 1695. And that the Parliament
would Mantain and Support the same. Members beginning to Reason thereupon, were
interrupted by an Adjournment, which We Humbly Conceive is not agreeable to the
40 Act of the 11th, Parliament of King James the 6. Where it is promitted, That
nothing shall be done or Commanded, which might Directly or Indirestly Prejudge
the Liberty of free Voting, and Reasoning of the Estates of Parliament, or any
of them in all time coming.

And thereafter, by a Subsequent Adjournment, from the Thirtieth day of May
instant, to the Twentieth day of June next, the Parliament was not permitted to
come to any Resolution, in the pressing Concerns of the Nation; which we cannot
think consistent with that Article of Our Claim of Right. Whereby it is
Declared. That for the Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending,
Strengthening, and Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be frequently
called and allowed to Sit, and the Freedom of Speech and Debate secured to the
Members.

We do therefore in all Humility and Earnestness, Entreat, That Your Majesty
will be graciously pleased to allow your Parliament to Meet at the Day to which
it is now Adjourned; and to sit as long as may be Necessary, for Redressing the
Grievances of the Nation, Asserting its just Rights and Privileges, as well at
Home as Abroad, in its Colony of CALEDONIA, and for Enacting such Lawsas may be
for the Advancement and Security of Religion, the Honor of your Majesty, and
the true Interest of this Nation. We are

May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Dutiful, most Loyal and most
Obedient Subjects and Servants.


This Address was presented to His Majesty at Kensington the 11th. day of June
1700. By the Right Honorable the Lord Ross for the Subscribing Noblemen, James
Pringle of Torwoodlie and William Bennet younger of Grubbet for the Barons, and
Patrick Murray of Dollory for the Burgesses, Commissioners appointed for that
end: To whom His Majesty, upon hearing the same read, was graciously pleased to
say, That He would consider of it. And, at a second Audience, the Lord Ross, in
Name of the other Commissioners, Addressing the King thus.

May it please your Majesty,
We are come here by Your Appointment to receive your Answer to the Address
which we presented from the Loyal Members of your Parliament of Scotland.


His Majesty was Graciously pleased to give the following Answer.
Gentlemen,
I Can give no Answer now to the Petition which you presented, but you shall
know my intentions in Scotland.

These Parliamentary Addressers finding that the Parliament was yet further
Adjourned by Proclamation, and not knowing, it seems, how soon it might be
allowed to Sit, They framed the draught of a Second National Address to be
Signed by the several Shires and Burrows throughout the Kingdom; but while the
same was carried on, His Majesty was graciously pleased to signify His mind in
a Declaration, by way of Letter, directed to His Grace James Duke of
Queensberry His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Privy Council of Scotland:
Which Letter was published after the manner of Proclamations; and is as
follows:

William R.
RIght Trusty and Entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right Trusty and
Right well Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right Trusty and well Beloved Cousins
and Counselors, Right Trusty and well Beloved Counselors, and Trusty and well
Beloved Counselors, We Greet you well. We heartily wish that the last Meeting
of Parliament had proceeded, so as that the Kingdom might have been made
partakers of these Advantages for which Our Commissioner was so fully
Instructed: If it had been possible for Us to have agreed to the Resolve
offered to Assert the Right of the African Company's Colony in America, tho
that Method had appeared to Us more unnecessary, yet we had from the beginning
readily done it, at the earnest Desire of Our Ministers, and for Our Peoples
Satisfaction, all other Considerations set apart. But now that Things are much
changed, (wherein We are truly Sorry for the Nation's Loss) And We being most
willing to grant what may be needful for the Relief and Ease of the Kingdom,
and the Advancement of its Welfare in all its Concerns; We have thought fit to
Declare this Our good Mind to be made known to all Our loving Subjects. And for
the Company's Concerns, We Assure you, that we will be so ready to concur with
Our Parliament in every thing that can be reasonably ex-expected of Us, for
Aiding and Supporting their Interests, and Repairing their Losses, that Our
good Subjects shall have just grounds to be sensible of our hearty
Inclinations to advance the Wealth and Prosperity of that our Ancient Kingdom.
And as for Captain Pinkerton and the other Prisoners in Spain, We have already,
and We hope Effectually Interposed for their Liberation. In the next place, As
We did fully struct our Commissioner, So we are still Resolved, to pass all
such Laws as shall be offered for the better Establishing the true Protestant
Religion and the Presbyterian Government of the Church which you at present
Enjoy; For the more effectual preventing the growth of Popery justly feared,
for the Repressing of Vice and Immorality, for the Preserving and Securing the
Liberty of Men's Persons, for the Encouraging and Advancement of Trade and
Manfactories, and generally to give Our Assent to such other Laws as shall be
brought in for further clearing and securing Men's civil Rights and Properties,
promoting the Administration of Justice, and settling the Peace and Quiet of the
Kingdom, demanding nothing on our part, save what shall be necessary to mantain
that our ancient Kingdom in so happy a Settlement against our and their
Enemies. And this Declaration, We are confident will be satisfying to all good
Men, who will certainly be careful both of their own Preservation, and of the
Interest and Honor of the Government, and not to suffer themselves to be
Misled, nor to give any Advantage to Enemies and ill designing Persons, ready
to catch hold of every Opportunity, as their Practices do too manifestly
witness.

Our necessary Absence has occasioned the late Adjournments, but as soon as
God shall bring Us back, We are firmly Resolved Our Parliament shall Meet,
where We do again Assure all Our good Subjects, nothing shall be Wanting on Our
part, that may contribute to their Welfare and Happiness. And this Our
Resolution and Declaration, We Allow you to Publish for the Satiffaction of all
concerned.

So We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at Our Court at Loo, the 26th. day of
July 1700. And of Our Reign the 12th year. By His Majesty's Command TO. PRINGLE


Here follows the last National Address formerly mentioned.
May it please your Majesty,
WE Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and other Subscribers, your
Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects of this your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
having formerly from an unfeigned Zeal to your Majesty's Service, and to the
Good and Welfare of our Country Petitioned your Majesty for a Meeting of the
Estates in Parliament, in order to Support, and Assist our Company Trading to
Africa and the Indies, which the Parliament had, by their Unanimous Address to
your Majesty of the 5th. of August School, declared to be their own and the whole
Nation's peculiar Concern; And your Majesty having been graciously pleased to
allow the Parliament to Meet on the 21th. of May last, whereby all your good
Subjects could not but conceive suitable hopes of its happy issue, for the
Honor and Interest of your Majesty and People, Do now beg leave to express our
deep Concern and Sorrow for the unexpected Adjournment thereof, without being
permitted to do any thing toward the wished for end of its Meeting; And do in
all humble manner concur with the dutiful Address lately presented to your
Majesty, from the Plurality of the Members of Parliament, Representing the
Inconveniences and prejudices arising to the pressing Concerns of the Nation,
from that Adjournment, and to the Rights and Liberties of Parliament, from the
manner of it: And it is our Unexpressible Regret, that your Majesty does seem
to have been prevailed upon by the Mis representations of evil Councillors to
issue out Proclamations, further Adjourning the Parliament, from time to time,
whilst not only did our said Company stand extremely in need of the Countenance
Support and Protection promised to it by your Majesty in Parliament, and more
especially upon the Misfortunes that have of late befallen it by the success of
Enemies against its Colony of Caledonia, but whilst also even the Nation it
self did, and still does, remain under the pressure of such Grievances as can
only be Redressed in Parliament.

And to the end that your Majesty may have a just view thereof, we humbly beg
leave to represent to your Majesty how indispensibly necessary it is, THAT the
Protestant Religon be secured against the growth of Popery, Immorality and
Profaneness; THAT the Freedom and Independency of this Ancient Kingdom, and the
Nation's Right and Title to Caledonia, as holding of your Majesty's Crown of
Scotland, be Asserted and Supported; THAT the good inclinations of your Majesty
and Successors Kings of Scotland be preserved from Foreign Influence, as well
as from the Mis-representations and Pernicious Counsels of Unnatural
Contrymen; THAT the frequency and sitting of Parliaments be secured and
ascertained, pursuant to the Claim of Right; THAT dangerous Influences upon the
freedom of Parliaments, either by Gratuities, Pensions, or Farms of any branch
of the Revenue and the disposing of any part of the Revenue or annexed Property
of the Crown, otherways than according to Law, for the necessary support of the
Government, be prevented; THAT the publick-Credit be restored, and an enquiry
made into the Application of the Funds laid on, and appropriated by Parliament,
for support of the Government and payment of the Army; THAT the Security of the
Nation, and Government, be settled in a duly regulated National Force, in stead
of a standing Army, so burdensome to the Country, and dangerous to its
Liberties; THAT the manner of applying the Security, which we have by our Claim
of Right, for the Personal freedom of the Subject, against long and Arbitrary
Imprisonment, as well as against Pursutes upon old and obsolete Laws, be
specially declared; THAT the Trade of this Nation be Encouraged and Advanced,
by duly regulating its Export and Import, by discharging prejudicial Branches
thereof, by fixing the value of our cur-Money, by encouraging Manufactories, by
employing the Poor, and more especially by Countenancing and Assisting our said
Company, in the Prosecution of its lawful Undertakings; And THAT all such
Articles of Grievances presented to your Majesty by the Estates of this Kingdom
in the Year 1689 as have not yet been Redressed, together with such other
Grievances as the Parliament shall, at the Meeting thereof, find the Nation
aggrieved with, be Redressed in Parliament.

And your Majesty having by your Royal Letter, of the 24 of May 1689, been
graciously pleased to declare, and give full assurance to our Representatives
in that meeting of the Estates, which settled the Crown and Royal Dignity of
this Realm on your Majesty, That we should always find your Majesty ready to
Protect us, and to Assist the Estates in making such Laws, as might secure our
Religion, Liberties and Properties, and prevent or Redress whatsoever might be
justly grievous to us; That your Majesty would never believe that the true
interest of your People and the Crown could be opposite; and that your Majesty
would always account it your greatest Prerogative to assent to such Laws as
might promote Truth, Peace, and Wealth in Your Kingdom. We do therefore reckon
it our duty, humbly to desire and assuredly expect, that your Majesty will be
graciously pleased to satisfy the longing desires, and earnest Expectations of
your People, by allowing your Parliament to meet, as soon as possible; and when
met, to sit till they fully deliberate upon, and come to solid Resolutions in
the great and weighty Concerns of the Nation, and grant such Instructions to
your Commissioner, as may empower him to pass such Acts, as the great Council
of the Nation shall think most conducive to the true Honor of your Majesty and
Government, the welfare of this Realm, both as to its Religious and Civil
Interest, and to the full quieting the Minds of all your Majesty's good People.

This Address was presented to His Majesty at Hampton Court. the 16th. day of
November 1700. By the Right Honorable the Lord Yester, Sir John Pringle of
Stitchell, and Sir Peter Wedderburn of Gosford Baronets, Commissioners
appointed for that end. And upon presenting thereof, the Lord Yester, in Name
of the rest, Addressed the King thus,

Sir,
We are come here to present an Address to your Majesty Signed by a great
Number of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects in Scotland, who have no other design
in it, but your Majesty's true Honor, and the welfare of their Native
Country; which we desire your Majesty would be pleased to hear read.


His Majesty, after having heard the Address read, was Graciously pleased to
give the following Answer.
Gentlemen,
I Can not take further notice of this Address, seeing the Parliament is now
met, and I have made a Declaration of my Mind for the good of my People,
wherewith I hope all my faithful Subjects will be satisfied.

Here I must beg pardon, for having omitted the late Address of the House of
Lords in England, concerning the Endeavors of the Scots for having settled a
Colony at Darien, and His Majesty's Answer thereunto; both which ought,
according to order of time, to have been placed at Page 105 but rather than rob
the Reader of having the benefit thereof, it was thought fit to insert them
here, and they are as follows,

The Humble Address of the Lords, etc. presented to His Majesty the 12th. day
of February 1700.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, being according
to our duty solicitous for the preservation and Increase of the Trade of this
Kingdom, on which the Support of your Majesty's Greatness and Honor so much
depends, as well as the Security and Defense of your People, have been very
apprehensive, that the steps lately made toward a Settlement of your Subjects
of the Kingdom of Scotland at Darien, may tend to the great prejudice of this
Nation, and possibly to the disturbance of that Peace and good Correspondence
with the Crown of Spain, which we conceive is very Advantageous to us all: We
have therefore taken the same into our serious consideration, as a matter of
the greatest Importance, and proper to be laid before your Majesty, as the
common Father of both Countries. And as we are truly sensible of great Losses
our Neighbor Kingdom has sustained, both by Men and Treasure, in their
Expeditions to that place, which we very heartily lament, so we should not
endeavor by any Interposition of Ours, to defeat the Hopes they may still
entertain of recovering these Losses by their further engaging in that design,
but that we judge such a Prosecution on their parts must end not only in far
greater Disappointments to themselves, but at the same time prove very
inconvenient to the Trade, and quiet of this Kingdom.

On this occasion we humbly presume to put your Majesty in mind of the Address
of both Houses of Parliament, presented to your Majesty on the 17th. of
December 1695. In the close of which Address your Majesty will see the
Unanimous Sense of this Kingdom in relation to any Settlement the SCOTS might
make in the West Indies, by virtue of an Act of Parliament past about that time
in the Kingdom of Scotland, which was the occasion of the Address.

And we humbly represent to your Majesty, that having received Information of
some Orders your Majesty had sent to the Governors of the Plantations on this
Subject, the House did, on the 18th. of January last, come this Resolution,
That your Majesty's pleasure signified to the Governors of the Plantations, in
Relation to the Scots Settlement at DARIEN, was agreeable to the Address of
both Houses of Parliament, presented to your Majesty on the 17th. of December
1695.

And on the 18th. of this instant February, this House came to this further
Resolution, That the Settlement of the Scots Colony at DARIEN is inconsistent
with the good of the Plantation Trade of this Kingdom.

All which we humbly hope your Majesty will take into your Royal Consideration,
and we are confident that your Majesty cannot be thought too partial to the
Address of this House, if your Majesty shall in the first place consider the
Advantage and Good of the Trade of this Kingdom, by the Preservation and
Improvement of which, both these Kingdoms, and all your other Dominions, must
on all occasions principally be defended.

It is remarkable that this Address was carried only by Four or Five Votes, and
that the House of Commons absolutely refused to concur with it, and that about
Sixteen Peers entered their Protests against it.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address was to this effect, Viz.
HIS Majesty having received a very dutiful Address from the House of Peers,
in relation to the Endeavors lately used by some of His Majesty's Subjects of
the Kingdom of Scotland toward making a Settlement at DARIEN, in which they
humbly represent to him their Opinion, That such a Settlement is inconsistent
with the good of the Plantation-Trade of this Kingdom: Is pleased to let the
House know, That he will always have a very great regard to their Opinion; And
to assure them, that he will never be wanting, by all proper means, to promote
the Advantage and Good of the Trade of England. At the same time His Majesty is
pleased to declare, that he cannot but have a great Concern and Tenderness for
his Kingdom of Scotland, and a desire to advance their Welfare and
Prosperity, and is very sensibly touched with the loss His Subjects of that
Kingdom have sustained by their late unhappy Expeditions, in order to a
Settlement at DARIEN. His Majesty does apprehend that Difficulties may too
often arise, with respect to the different Interest of Trade, between his two
Kingdoms, unless some way be found out to unite them more nearly and
completely: And therefore His Majesty takes this opportunity of putting the
House of Peers in mind of what he recommended to his Parliament, soon after his
Accession to the Throne, That they would consider of an Union between the two
Kingdoms. His Majesty is of opinion, That nothing would more contribute to the
security and happiness of both Kingdoms; and is inclined to hope, that after
they have lived near 100 years under the same Head, some happy Expediment may
be found for making them one people, in case a Treaty were set on Foot for that
purpose; And therefore he does very earnestly recommend this Matter to the
Consideration of the House.

It is likeways remarkable that when the House of Lords framed and past a Bill
of Union pursuant to His Majesty's said Answer, The House of Commons rejected
the same from Motives which I shall not presume to mention, the same being
already very well known to all those who know any thing of that Matter.

To His Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.
The humble Representation and Petition of the Council-General of the Company
of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Grace and Right Honorable Estates,
WHEREAS, By our former Petition, of the 16th of May last, we laid a
Representation of the then Circumstances of our Company's Affairs, before your
Grace and Right Honorable Estates: Which being once read, and nothing done
thereupon, we now humbly entreat, that the same, still lying in the Clerks
Hands, may, at this time, be again read and considered in Parliament: And do
further Represent, That, since that time, we have the Melancholy Assurance of
what we then feared from the constant Course of our Discouragements, that the
Governor of Carthagena, for the King of Spain, His Majesty's Ally, has, from
the Unneighbourly Instignation of those, from whom we ought more reasonably to
have expected Assistance, been encouraged to make an Attempt for dispossessing
our Colony of Caledonia; And in order thereunto, Blockaded them up by Sea, and
attacked them by Land, in the time of profound peace, and that some of our said
Colony being too easily frightened, by their Apprehensions of those evil
Consequences that they thought must necessarly have attended the many
Discouragements, and want of Protection which we labored under all along, have
unwarrantably taken upon them the Power to surrender our Company's said
Settlement to the Spaniards, to the unspeakable Loss and great Dishonor of the
Nation, and that the West India Proclamations, mentioned in our former
Petition, being still as much in force and rigorously executed, as ever,
against us, we could not all this time, nor cannot as yet, expect the Liberty
even of carrying off our Ships, that are lying perishing at Port Royal in
Jamaica, and Amboy-Perth in East-Jersey without your Interposition on our
Company's behalf, for procuring to us Warrants from His Majesty, directed to
the respective Governors of those Parts for that effect; especially since the
Governor of Jamaica has, at several times, and to several Persons, declared,
That he will not part with our Company's Ship the Saint-Andrew, without a
special warrant from England, and that all our Solicitations to the Secretaries
of State for that end, have hitherto proved ineffectual. And we cannot but
likewise Represent to your Grace and Right Honorable Estates, how that the
want of due Protection to our Company all along, and the continued Tract of
Encroachments upon its Privileges Abroad, without any Redress therein, has
encouraged some Persons to break in upon the Privileges of our Company even at
Home.

MAY it therefore Please Your Grace and Right Honorable Estates, to take the
Contents of this, and our former Petition abovementioned into your most
serious Consideration, to take such effectual Measures, as in your Profound
Wisdom, you shall think fit, for Asserting and Vindicating our Company's
Rights, both abroad and at home, for enabling it to prosecute its lawful
Undertakings, for procuring Reparation from the Spaniards and others, for the
Damages sustained, and for preventing the like Encroachments for the future.

Signed at Edinburgh the 28th day of October 1700, in Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the said Council-General, By JOHN SCHAW. I.P.C.G.

FINIS. Non solum ferit uncis cornibus hostem,
Verum etiam instanti laesa repugnat ovis. Prop.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Act of Parliament establishing a Company Trading to Africa and the Indies.
the 26th. of June 1695. The Parliament of England's Address to His Majesty
concerning the said Act the 13th. of December and presented the 17th. Ditto.
1695, p. 1. His Majesty's most gracious Answer to that Address. p, 3. A
Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh by Sir Paul Rycaut Resident for his
Majesty in that City, and Mr. Cresset His Majesty's Envoy extraordinary at the
Courts of Lunenburgh, against the Company. the 7th. of April 1697. p. 4. The
Answer. p. 6. A Memorial given in thereupon to the Senate of that City by the
Company's Deputees the 9th. of April 1697. Ibid. What was done thereupon. p. 7.
The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to
Africa and the Indies, to His Majesty upon that occasion. the 28th of June
1697. Ibid. His Majesty's Answer to that Address. the 2d. of August 1697. p. 11
A Letter of Expostulation from the Directors of the Company to the Secretaries
of State. the 28th. of September 1697. Ibid. The humble Address of the
Council-General of the Company to His Majesty. the 22d. day of December 1697.
p. 14. The humble Representation of the Council-General of the Company to His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. the 22d. day of December 1697. p. 16.
A Letter from the Council-General of the Company to His Grace the Duke of
Queensberry. the 25th. day of December 1697. p. 19. A Letter from both the
Secretaries of State, in Answer to the Council-General of the Company's Second
Address to His Majesty. January the 17th. School. p. 20, The humble Petition of
the Council-General of the Company to His Grace His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament. the 22th. of
July School. p. 21. The Parliament of Scotland's Address to His Majesty in
relation to the Hamburgh-Memorial and the other Contents of that Petition. The
28th. of August School. p. 26. The humble Petition of the Court of Directors of
the Company to His Majesty, the 16th. day of August School, in pursuance of the
Parliament's, Address. p. 27. A Letter from Mr. Stevenson the Company's Agent
at Hamburgh to the Court of Directors of the Company the 4th. of October School,
concerning the Hamburgh-Memorial, etc. p. 29. A Letter from Ditto, the 18th. of
October School. p. 30. A Letter from the Court of Directors of the Company to the
Right Honorable the Viscount of Seafield Secretary of State, the 29th. of
November School, relative to the former Letters. p. 31. The Secretaries Answer,
the 13th. of December School. p. 32. A Letter from the Court of Directors of the
Company in Answer to the Secretary of State January 13th. 1699. p. 33. A Letter
from the Secretary of State the 17th. of February 1699, in Answer to the
Company's Petition of the 16th of the preceding August. p. 34 A Letter from
the Council-General of the Company to His Majesty, giving an Account of the
Colony's Arrival and Settlement at Darien, and of the French Designs upon that
Coast. the 31th. of March 1699. Ibid. A Letter from the Court of Directors to
the Secretaries of State, the 1st. of April 1699, enlarging on the Contents of
the preceding Letter to the King. p. 36. A Memorial presented to the King of
Great Britain by the Ambassador Extraordinary of Spain against the Scots
Settlement at Darien, the 3d. of May 1699. p. 40 The first Memorial presented
to his Majesty, by the Lord President of the Session and Lord Advocat, on
behalf of the Company, and asserting the legality of their Settlement in Darien
the of May. 1699. p. 41. A Second Memorial by Ditto. p. 51 A Third Memorial by
Ditto. p. 54. A Memorandum concerning the Spanish and French Ambassadors at
the Court of England, in September 1699. p. 74. The Council of Caledonia's
Address to His Majesty, delivered to the Secretaries of State the of September
1699. Ibid. A Proclamation by the Governor of Jamaica against the Company and
Colony. the 8th. of April 1699. p. 77. A Proclamation by the Governor of
Barbados against Ditto. the 13th. of April 1699. p 78. A Proclamation by the
Governor of New York against Ditto the 15th. of May 1699. p. 79. A
Proclamation by Ditto as Governor of New England against Ditto. the 3d. of
June 1699. p. 81. A Second Proclamation by the Governor of Barbados against
Ditto the 5th. of September 1699. p. 83. The Council-General of the Company's
Petition to His Majesty concerning those Proclamations, etc. the 19th. of
October 1699. p. 84 His Majesty's Answer. The 2d. of November 1699. p. 87, The
humble Address of the Council-General of the Company to His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, upon that occasion. The 20th. of October 1699. p. 88.
A Letter from the Council-General of the Company to the Secretaries of State,
concerning their humble Address to the King, with relation to Captain
Pinkerton, etc. the 4th. of December 1699. p. 91. The humble Address of the
Council-General of the Company to his Majesty concerning Captain Robert
Pinkarton etc. The 4th. of December 1699. p. 92. A Letter from my Lord
Chancellor to the Directors of the Company the 4th. of January 1700. p. 96 A
Letter from the Directors to each of the Secretaries of State, the 9th. of
January 1700. concerning the Lord Chancellours said Letter. p. 97. A Letter
from the Directors of the Company to Lord Basil Hamilton concerning the
Premises, the 9th. of January, 1700. p. 98. His Majesty's Answer to the
Company's Address by a Letter to His Privy Council of Scotland, the 10th. of
January 1700. p. 100 Another Letter from the Council-General of the Company to
Lord Basil Hamilton the 29th. of January 1700. p. 102 A Proclamation anent
Petitioning. The 18th. of December 1699. p. 103. The humble Address of the
English House of Lords against the Company's Settling a Colony at Darien
presented to His Majesty, the 12th. of February 1700. p. 138. His Majesty's
most gracious Answer to that Address. p. 140 The first National Address
Petitioning that His Majesty would be graciously pleased to allow the
Parliament of Scotland to meet, etc. presented to His Majesty, the 25th. of
March 1700. p. 105 His Majesty's most Gracious Answer. p. 107. The humble
Representation and Petition of the Company to His Grace His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and the Right Honorable Estates of Parliament, the 16th. of May
1700. p. 108 The humble Address and Petition of the Heretors of the Shire of
Haddingtoun presented and read in Parliament the 27th. of May 1700. p. 124 The
heads of several Addresses from other Shires and Burghs, which were likewise
read in Parliament at the same time. p. 126. An humble Address to His Majesty,
from the Plurality of the Members of Parliament, then present, concerning the
manner of Adjourning the Parliament, presented to His Majesty the 11th. of June
1700. p. 127. His Majesty's most Gracious Answer. His Majesty's most Gracious
Declaration, by way of Letter, directed to His Grace the King's High
Commissioner, and the Privy Council of Scotland. Given at Loo the 26th of July
1700, and published after the manner of Proclamations. Ibid. The last National
Address presented to His Majesty, the 16th. of November 1700. p. 133 His
Majesty's most Gracious Answer. p. 137 The humble Representation and Petition
of the Council-General of the Company to His Grace His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and the Right Honorable Estates of Parliament. the 28th. of
October 1700. p. 142.
FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of the several Books and Pamphlets that have been hitherto
Published, concerning the Indian and African Company of Scotland, set down
according to Order of time, for the Information of the Curious.
1. A Letter from a Member of the Parliament of Scotland to his Friend at
London, showing the reasonableness of that Act by which the Company is
established. Printed 1695:

2. Some seasonable and modest Thoughts, etc. humbly offered to R. H. a Member
of the House of Commons of England. 1696.

3. A Letter from a Gentleman in the Country to his Friend at Edinburgh. 1696.

4. A Letter from a Merchant in Amsterdam to his Friend at Hamburgh concerning
the Designs of the Scot Indian Company, 1697.

5. Some Observations on it, in a Letter from Hamburgh by way of Answer to it.
1697.

6. A Letter from the Commission of the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, to the Council and Colony of Caledonia. 1699.

7. A Defense of the Scots Settlement at Darien, etc. 1699.

8. A short and impartial view of the manner and occasion of the Scots Colony's
coming away from Darien. 1699.

9. A Defense of the Scots Abdicating Darien, etc. Written by Herostratus
Junior, alias Harris. 1700.

10. A just and modest Vindication of the Scots design for the having
established a Coloney at Darien, etc. with a Prefatory confutation of Harris.

11. An Enquiry into the Causes of the Miscarriage of the Scots Colony at
Darien, containing a full Answer to Harris 's Libel. 1700.

12. A short Vindication of the Defense of the Scots Abdicating Darien, etc.
1700.

13. Scotland 's present Duty: Or a Call to the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry,
etc. 1700.

14. Scotland 's Grievances with relation to Darien, etc. humbly offered to the
consideration of the Parliament. 1700.

15. A full and exact Collection of all the considerable Addresses, Memorials,
Petitions, Answers, Proclamations, Declarations, Letters and other public
Papers, relating to the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies,
since the passing of the Act of Parliament, by which it was established in June
1695, till November 1700

Nota, The 4th. 9th. and 12th. Pamphlets of this Catalogue are written against
the Company, and all the rest for it, except the last, which consists of a
Collection of several public Papers of different kinds upon the same Subject,
promiscuously gathered by an impartial hand.

Contraria juxta se posita clarius elucescunt.


