English Presbytery: OR, AN ACCOUNT OF THE Main Opinions OF THOSE Ministers and
People in ENGLAND, Who go under the Name of PRESBYTERIANS.

PUBLISHED For the Vindication of diverse Noble and Worthy Persons, who by
Papists and their Adherents are without any ground aspersed with that Name.

And also of those who indeed do hold those Principles; appealing to the
Judgment of all sober Christians, what there is of Falsehood or Unpeaceableness
in them.

John 5. 4. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me. Carpere vel noli nostra, vel Ede tua.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader.
THE Presbyterians being (as the Jews said of the Christians, Acts 28. 22.) a
Sect every where spoken against, and that by many who are so far from
understanding what the Presbyterians are, that they can hardly understand or
speak common sense: I thought it might be worth the while in a sheet of paper
to do as much for Presbytery, as Dr. Ames did long since for Puritanism, to
which Presbytery is at least a piece of a Successor. That I might vindicate
those worthy Noble men and Gentlemen who are thus aspersed, (though wholly of
another mind) and also vindicate those who indeed are so from the Obloquy and
Reproach they lie under, with many upon that account. We are come to that
height of madness that if a man will not drink healths, he is a Presbyterian;
though our Sons of the Church as often as they do it, violate the Canons (I am
sure of one,) I think of two Councils (never yet nulled by any law of the
Nation,) if men will not be drunk and Profane they are again Presbyterians. It
is not enough for men to own Episcopacy, to hear Common Prayer constantly, to
receive the Sacraments according to our Church. Unless he will say in every
thing and do in every thing as his Pragmatical Neighbor will have him, he is a
Presbyterian. I have heard that in a late Election of Parliament Men, a
Clergyman of some note usherd in a company of Electors, crying out, No Popery,
No Presbytery. The sober Hearers wondered what he meant, none looking toward
Presbytery, being in any nomination or under any pretensions to the Election.
That therefore men may be no longer abused with empty noises and clamours; Thou
shall from this Paper judge who are Presbyterians, and have an occasion offered
thee to judge of them what they hold deserving such a clamor, as a company of
ignorant persons make. I have sometimes been in company (though unknown) where
I have heard some begin to clamor at this rate. But making this Reply; That I
had often heard Presbyterians reviled, etc. but could never understand, from
any who used their tongues at that rate, what those persons were or what they
held: desiring them to inform me: But could never yet meet with any person
would favor me with their notion of them. So that it is a perfect Non amo te
Sabidi, etc. Reader I have here told thee what a Presbyterian is. If thou be
not a Papist, I doubt not but upon deliberation, thou will say, such a one may
be a much honester man then some of those who reproach them; and a tolerable
Christian, though in some things thou, and he are not of a mind. I would have a
Presbyterian to be one that is able, and ready to give account of his faith
clearly to every one that asks him. And if all those of other persuasions were
so too, I think the world of all such as own the Scriptures to be the word of
God, and their rule, will quickly be agreed. If some have a latitude to give to
men a further power in the things of God, than others can: they have no reason
to be angry with those that are more straightened; for we have no reason all to
cry out against the Pope for his claim to infallibility if we will not allow
that we or any Church may be mistaken. Farewell good Reader! and do but talk
of, use and treat Presbyterians as thou have them here described to thee, and
speak and do thy worst; and if thou speak otherwise thou do but abuse thy
self by lying or speaking Evil of the things thou do not know. Presbyterians
are not concerned in thy Railleries.

English Presbytery. Concerning the Fundamental Principles of Difference
BETWEEN Non-Conformists, Especially such as are called Presbyterians, And
Others.
THere are three fundamental Principles held by Non-Conformists (and those
especially of them which are called Presbyterians) wherein they differ from
others.

1. That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are a perfect Rule for
Christians, directing them not only what to believe in the things of God, but
also what to do in all matters relating to the Worship of God, and the
Government of the Church; so as in these things they may not either believe or
do what is not there expressly, or by immediate consequence revealed. In Civil
matters they believe the Scripture to be only a general Rule, or rather as to
them, to contain some General Rules only, by which all men's actions are to be
directed; but in Sacred things, they believe the Scriptures to be a particular
Rule, both as to Acts, and Means, and Modes; so as it is the Will of God, that
in them nothing should be done but what is there directed; and what is
necessary to such actions, considered as humane acts, and common to them, with
all other humane acts, ought to be left at liberty, or so commanded, as they
may be done without offense to the General Rules of holy Writ, by which all
humane acts are to be guided, viz. so as God may be most glorified, others most
edified, and least* scandalized. Thus they differ from Papists, who will not
allow the Scriptures to be a Perfect Rule as to matters of Faith; and from
those, who although they allow them in matters of Faith a Perfect Rule, yet
deny them to be so in the matters of Worship, or Government of the Church; and
as to the first, say, That the Scriptures are only a perfect Rule as to Acts of
Worship, not as to Means, and Modes, or Religious Rites used in, and about the
Worship of God; but that these may be directed by Superiors for Spiritual
Edification; or who say, That the Scripture has only directed, That the Church
should be governed, but has left to Superiors to determine by what Officers,
Acts and Rules that Government should be exercised: So as the first and main
Question is* Whether the Scriptures be a perfect and sufficient Rule for
Christians in matters of Worship, and Church Government, as well as matters of
Faith? which those called Presbyterians believe it is; because they find
sufficient Directions in it for the decent and orderly performance of all Acts
of Worship, without any humane* supplements; and such Church Officers directed
by it, such acts of Jurisdiction and Censures prescribed in it, as are
sufficient to preserve the Unity, Peace and Purity of the Church; which are the
great ends of that Government.

2. Secondly, That the Ultimate Judgment of the Will of God revealed in
Scripture, as to any persons particular practice, is his own practical Judgment
or Conscience, after a due Enquiry into Scripture, and comparing Scripture with
Scripture, and hearing and weighing the Judgments of others, as to things, the
believing or not believing, doing or not doing of which, may render his soul
guilty before God. And that although a man's Conscience may err (as any other
creature may) yet no Christian ought to act contrary to the dictate of it,
whether it dictateth upon probable, or demonstrative Arguments in obedience to
any man, but ought rather patiently to suffer any thing shall be imposed on him
for not doing.

3. That where any things in the Worship of God are of necessary use, though
they have been abused to the Worship of Idols, yet the use of them is to be
retained, and the abuse only taken away; but where the use of any thing in the
Worship of God is not necessary, if it has been ordinarily used in an
Idolatrous Worship, it ought to be wholly disused, especially if it gives an
offense to any considerable number of Christians; nor can the commands of any
Superiors legitimate the use of any such Rites, Figures, Habits or Actions;
Superiors being obliged in the first place by the will of God not to command
them; and being as much under the Royal Law of Love, as private persons. These
are the Fundamental Principles of all those truly called Presbyterians, from
which flow all their different Apprehensions, relating to the Worship of God,
the Church, the Ministers of it, and the Ministrations in it. The Censures and
Power of the Keys, which I shall now more particularly declare.

Concerning Divine Worship.
1. DIvine Worship (so far as it concerns the outward man) being nothing else
but the homage of the creature paid to his Creator, with respect to his
excellency, and as an indication of the more internal homage of his soul, they
can allow nothing as an Act, or Mean, or Mode of True Worship, under the
Gospel, but what Christ has prescribed, or exemplified, by himself, or his
Apostles, or is justified by some Precepts or Examples in the New Testament;
Christ having abolished both the Typical and Carnal Ordinances, by which it
pleased God to command his peoples expression of their homage to him under the
Old Testament. And the New Testament mentioning only Prayer and Praise,
Reading, Preaching, and Hearing of the Word, Administering and Receiving Baptism
and the Lord's Supper; they can allow these, and these alone to be the Acts of
Worship, unless others can be shown there.

2. The Word of God directing the Form and Manner of Receiving and Administering
both Sacraments, they believe they ought to be administered and received
according to those Forms, and no other; adding only the Word and Prayer, and
Praise, which are general acts of Worship, applicable in the use of any
creatures. The Word of God also directing the matter both of Prayer and
Preaching, and prescribing no Forms of words for either, but requiring
Ministers to study to stir up their gifts; and, as they have received them, so
to minister the same. They believe that Ministers are both to preach and pray
in the exercises of those gifts, which God has given them for that end: and to
administer the holy Sacraments according to his direction, without any
unnecessary variation. In keeping close to Christ and his Apostles Precepts and
Practice they know they cannot err: But they believe, that varying from it,
they must err: Not allowing God the prerogative, which every creature
challenges, to prescribe his own homage, and reflecting upon the Wisdom of
Christ, as if he had not known his Father's will, or not faithfully revealed
it; and the Apostles, as worshipping God in an imperfect manner, in the most
pure and primitive times.

3. They believe that nothing in the Worship of God which is idle, and
superfluous, is lawful, it being too solemn an action to trifle in: And that
nothing can be added by man for Edification, (the Spirit of God alone being
authorized to direct means in order to that end;) and that no Action, Rite,
Figure, Habit, or any thing of that nature can be religiously used, by virtue
of any Civil command. Nor can they understand how actions can be done in the
solemn Worship of God merely in obedience to man, without confounding of things
Civil and Sacred, and setting up Man's posts by God's posts, and Man's
thresholds by God's thresholds; and endangering peoples superstitious
apprehensions in a short time (as is abundantly proved by the Popish Worship)
that these things are indeed acts of Worship, and upon that account acceptable
unto God: So that they have no small apprehension that they less err, who
(through ignorance) establish such things as parts and acts of Worship, than
those who require them to be mixed with true acts of Worship, but require them
only under the notion of acts of homage and obedience to men.

4. More particularly, they do not think any gestures, forms, actions, figures,
habits, or any such thing not necessary from the light of nature, or a Divine
Precept, if they have been ordinarily used in the Idolatrous Worship of the
Papists, are lawful to be used by them in the Worship of God; because they
believe Papists most gross Idolaters, and find themselves confessing it, upon
supposition that there is no Transubstantiation. And as God severely forbad the
Jews all Idolatrous usages in his Worship; so the Apostle determines the
unlawfulness of Idolothytes; and in this they have the Judgment of Tertullian
very copiously. But they otherwise judge of what is of Divine Institution,
though so abused by Idolaters, and of what has been used by them as
conveniences for Religious actions, though no more proper to them, than to
such as are civil, such as capacious buildings, etc.

5. They do believe Preaching to be the Explication and Application of the holy
Scriptures, in order to Faith and Holiness, and that it ought to be by
comparing Scripture with Scripture; and Reason working upon Scripture
Principles; and that those who only discourse moral propositions, proving them
from mere natural Principles, and the Opinions of Heathen Philosophers, and the
Testimonies of Men, are very far from discharging the duty of Ministers in
Preaching of the Gospel, as those also who deliver their discourses in a style
and phrase not understood by their hearers, and serving only to please and
tickle the Ears.

Concerning the Church.
1. THey believe that the term Church, in a Religious sense, is to be
interpreted only by the Scriptures, and applied only to a number of people,
whom the holy Scriptures dignifie by that Title; and that we had not known the
term, but for the Scriptures, as appropriated to a Religious Society.

2. They believe, that according to the Scriptures, the Church (most strictly
and properly) signifies that number of people of whom Christ is the Head, and
who are his Members, to whom belong the promises of all spiritual things, and
of Eternal Life and Salvation; and this is the Church Invisible (for the Lord
alone knows who are his) part of whom are in Patria, their souls being
already with Christ in glory (who are therefore called the Church Triumphant)
having conquered all their Spiritual Enemies; part of them yet in Via, in the
way toward Heaven; or being chosen of God, are daily coming into that way, in
which they have, and shall have the certain conduct of the Spirit of God, until
they come to their Journeys end; but, till that time, will be fighting the good
fight, with the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and are therefore called, The
Church Militant.

3. God alone knowing these, they believe that all those who have given up
their names to Christ, and are baptized in his name, making an outward
profession of Faith, in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Obedience to the
Precepts of it, make up the Visible Church, and are in Scripture called, the
Church, and Churches; and herein they agree with the ninteenth Article of the
Church of England, which truly says, That the visible Church of Christ, is the
Congregation of the Faithful, in which the pure Word of God is Preached, and
the Sacraments duly administered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those
things that are of necessity requisite to the same. That the whole number of
these scattered over the whole world, make the Universal Visible Church, and
that the number of these, in any Nation, make up the National Church of this or
that Nation.

4. They believe, that Christ has appointed Ministers of the Gospel for
Officers to this Visible Church, who may Preach the Gospel, and Baptize in any
parts of it; but can only exercise an ordinary jurisdiction, in those
particular parts of it over which God has given them a particular Oversight as
Pastors and Teachers; the exercise of Acts of Jurisdiction, requiring a
particular knowledge of persons Opinions, Knowledge and Conversation, which no
single person can have as to all the Members of the Visible Church.

5. They believe, that Ministers ought to be made by those that are Ministers
ordinarily; first proving those that desire that Office, whether God has
called them to it, by fitting them with his gifts and graces, for the
performance of the several acts of that Office: Then solemnly setting them
apart to it by Fasting, and Prayer, and Imposition of Hands; not as a token of
their then receiving the Holy Ghost (as the Apostles used it) but as a token of
their separation to the work of the Ministry. In a total corruption of the
Ministry, or a want of Ministers, they believe that a faithful people may prove
and set apart persons to the Ministry; that no Ordinance of God may be lost
which he has given to his Church; so that none to prove their Ministry need
run to an Apostolical Succession impossible to be satisfactorily made out by
the greatest pretenders to it (which are the Papists) or pleaders for it.

6. They believe persons thus set apart to the Ministry, are fully authorized
to Preach the Gospel, and to baptize in any place where they are called to it,
and to administer the Lord's Supper, when they shall be fixed in any
Congregation, that they may administer it knowingly to persons that are able to
discern the Lord's body; and whose conversations are such as they may
charitably judge them* members of Christ, who shall not eat and drink
unworthily; as also authorized to join with other Ministers in setting apart of
Persons to the Ministry, and to exercise Acts of jurisdiction in their fixed
congregation, admonishing the erroneous, ignorant, and scandalous, withholding
the Lords Supper from them till they give some evidence of their Reformation,
and casting them out of the Communion of the Church if after admonitions,
instructions, and patient waiting they shall at last appear contumacious.

7. They believe that Ministers of the Gospel are bound to pray and to preach
in the exercise of those abilities, which God has given them for the work of
the Ministry; and to administer the Sacraments, and acts of Jurisdiction,
according to the rule God has set them in his Word, and no otherwise; for they
are Ministers of Christ, not of men, and Stewards of the mysteries of God of
whom it is required that they should be faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2.

8. They believe any number of Christians living in the same City, (so
agreeing,) or in the same Parish, or Neighborhood, may call or choose any
persons to be their Pastor and Teacher, or Pastors and Teachers, who may either
singly, or jointly take the care of such a flock; and perform all Ministerial
acts toward them, either meeting in one, or more places for worship,
ordinarily; provided such persons be either Ministers before proved, and set
apart to the Ministry, or so set apart before they take upon them that Pastoral
charge of such People; but we believe no Person can be so called and set apart,
according to the rule of Scripture, but he who is sound in the faith, of an
unblameable life, apt to teach, and furnished with abilities both to pray and
to preach, and that all callings of other persons ought to be reversed and
adjudged Nullities.

9. Our Savior having determined Ministers to be the Salt of the Earth, and
that if the Salt has lost its savor, it is good for nothing, but to be thrown
upon the dunghill: They do believe that he has left a power, both in the
Church, (if there be no Christian Magistrate) and with the Christian Magistrate
(who is to be a nursing Father to the Church) if any called to or placed in the
Ministry, appear to be Unsound in the Faith, scandalous in his life;
Insufficient for his work; Or negligent in the performance of it; to admonish
such persons, and in case he reformeth not to remove him from the Ministry, who
may for no other cause be removed from it, either by the Magistrate or the
Church.

10. They believe That no Minister can be over more places, than he can
discharge his Duty to, and he can reside amongst; and that all Ministers ought
ordinarily to reside with their People, or so near to them, that they may
perform the several acts of his Ministry to them, and that he can delegate that
trust to no others: Being himself but a delegate from Christ.

11. They do believe by the Law of Christ, no Minister of the Gospel is
Superior to, or has further power than another, but all are equally obliged
and authorized to Pray and Preach, and Baptize, and to give the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper in that due order, which the Scriptures have prescribed, etc.

12. But in regard, That the Judgment of persons fitness or unfitness for the
receiving the Supper of the Lord, is a matter of great moment, they cannot
judge it the will of God that it should be left to the passions and Infirmities
of any single persons. It being therefore apparently the will of God, that
ignorant persons, and such as are scandalous should be secluded, and so
adjudged by all Reformed Churches: They do think that the Judgment in this case
ought to be by more than one. Whether (if there be several Ministers in the
same congregation) it be done by more Ministers, or by the Pastor, or Pastors,
with some of the ablest members chosen by the rest to assist in that Judgment,
they do not think so clear in Scripture, as to contend for; only they
generally judge these two things of Divine right in the case, 1. That a
judgment be made to separate the unworthy from the worthy. 2. That it be not
the Judgment of any single person but of more, whether Ministers or People.

13. Because both the turning out of unfitting Ministers, and the admitting
persons into the Ministry, and the casting out of any persons, by
Excommunication, and the hearing of the complaints of those who shall judge
themselves injured by any act of jurisdiction, be all of them matters of High
consequence; They cannot think them fit to be done and finally determined by
the Officers of any particular congregation, but by the Officers of several
Churches. And if, for order sake, the Civil Magistrate (being a Christian)
shall please; Or the Officers of several Congregations with the Consent of the
Civil Magistrate, shall please in several Precincts to appoint a number of the
most grave and pious Ministers to judge as to the casting out of any Ministers,
and to prove and ordain such as shall be received into the Ministry, and to
hear the complaints of any such as judge themselves injured; and if the
Magistrate will please to ordain, that one person (as his Commissioner)
dignified under what title he please, shall attend such acts in such or such
Precincts, and with others judge in the case: The Presbyterians have nothing to
oppose to it, provided things be fairly transacted, and adjudged, according to
the Rules of God's Word in the cause; but judge it a prudential act, consonant
to reason, and the will of God: But they can allow no single person by any
Divine Right, to have any such power more than other.

14. These being all the things that are purely Ecclesiastical, the
Presbyterians take not themselves to be concerned, whom the Civil Magistrate
pleases to appoint to take care of Temples, Glebes, and Houses or Tithes, or
other Revenues given to maintain the Ministry, or giving legal investitures in
them, or hearing causes or questions about them; they being all Civil things
within the Magistrates sphere; as also what Titles of Honor and Dignity he
will please to bestow upon his Substitutes in such trusts. They judge these
things of no religious nature, but such as the Church has been without in the
best times, and may again be without, and yet exist the Spouse of Christ: Nor
are they at all concerned whom the Magistrate will entrust, and under what
Titles to license Physicians, Midwives, Schoolmasters, Marriages, or to take
any profits relating to such things; they are Civil things, and in the
Magistrates own disposal, he may do with them what he pleases; and Titles of
Honor are his creatures; he may make what he pleases, and distribute them to
whom he pleases.

15. They do judge there is an Officer of the Church also called a Deacon, and
though the term in the Greek be of larger significancy, yet they conceive the
work of this Officer sufficiently described and limited Acts 6. to take care of
the poor; whose work it is to take care (by the voluntary alms of Christians)
to provide for the poor of his particular Church; they do not disapprove, but
highly applaud the care of the Magistrate in appointing civil Officers and
giving them a legal power to make equal rates for this end: but they say this
Law was made for the hardiness of men's hearts, for would people do their duty
the poor of every congregation might (and that more acceptably to God) be
provided for by the due care of the Officers of Churches, and the free
contributions of people; when ever they meet together to worship God, and the
Civil Magistrate eased of the great burden he has upon him in that particular.

Of the Censures of the Church.
1. THey know no Censures of the Church, but Admonition, Suspension and
Excommunication or Rejection: or as some delight rather to speak. Admonition,
and the greater and lesser Excommunication.

2. For Admonition they say there is a Brotherly Admonition, which is a
charitable act whereby one Private Christian reproves his Brother, not
suffering sin upon him. 2. A Pastoral Admonition which is the Act of the
Minister, admonishing any under his charge, of any errors; which has more
authority in it than the other. 3. An Admonition, which is a Church censure,
and is the Act of the whole Congregation, or the Officers of it as well in the
name of Christ, as in their names, showing a person, offending, his error from
the word of God, and exhorting, and warning him to reform it. This they say may
be often repeated.

3. They say a person under this censure ought not to be allowed all the
privileges of the Church, but to forbear the Holy Supper till he has given
some evidence of his repentance, and reformation satisfactory to the
Congregation.

4. Excommunication being the highest censure, they believe ought not be
denounced by any persons, but those whom Gods Word has appointed thereunto,
nor for any crimes, but what the Word of God directs, nor in any other manner
than it directs. The persons decreeing it must be the Church, by it is Officer
or Officers, (they agreeing thereunto; for in vain is that person attempted to
be cast out of the communion of a Church, with whom the members of that Church
will have a communion) The crimes expressed in Scripture are pertinacious
continuance in heresy, and scandalous living after reiterated admonitions and
patient expectation of Reformation. As to the manner, the Scripture directs it
to be done in meekness, after much waiting, and all due means used in order to
Reformation. They do believe that all other Excommunications are but abuses,
and like the Mad-man's throwing about Fire and Darts.

5. Hearing the Word and Prayers, being Religious Acts, to which Heathens and
Publicans may be admitted, as designed for the conversion or Reformation of
Sinners, they do believe that Persons Excommunicated ought by the Divine rule
to be admitted unto them, being persons, who by the Apostles rule ought still
to be admonished as Brethren, not accounted as enemies. 1 These. 3. 15, 16.

6. When Persons are Excommunicated, the Church can proceed no further, and
have nothing to do, but to pray for them, and the particular members privately
to admonish them, but they are still as Men and Subjects under the power of the
Civil Magistrate if they commit, or persist in any crimes under his cognizance.

Concerning the Civil Magistrate.
1. THey do with all thankfulness to God, own and Revere his Ordinance of Civil
Magistracy, and are so far from encroaching upon it. That they believe no
Minister of the Gospel ought to employ himself in it. But to give up himself to
Meditation and Prayer, and the mere spiritual oversight of the flock of Christ
committed to him.

2. For the due form of Government, or power of Governors in any Nation, they
believe Gods word has fixed no universal Rule, only confirming the just Laws
of Kingdoms and Polities, and they believe it their duty to be obedient to such
Governors in all places, as the laws in that place have established, and in
the exercise of such power as those laws have given them. From the obedience to
which no person upon the account of Religion can pretend to an immunity; and in
the exercise of which no Magistrate ought by any to be resisted.

3. But they believe it their duty, only actively to obey Magistrates in such
things, which are not contrary to the Law of God; and whether they be contrary
or no, (as to their own practice) they conceive their own consciences must be
judges; and as to such things they conceive themselves only obliged to suffer
the penalties for such disobedience peaceably. In short they acknowledge
themselves bound to obey the Magistrate legally commanding in all things,
wherein (so far as they are able to Judge) the word of God says to all. Do it
not.

Concerning Matters of Faith.
IN all matters of Faith. The Presbyterians believe whatsoever is in the
Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, the Confessions of Faith of the Churches of
God in Switzerland, Holland, France, Geneva; The Articles of Ireland, our own
39 Articles (with exception only to the Articles concerning the Ceremonies and
Discipline: And defy the Doctrines of Papists, Socinians, Pelagians,
Semi-Pelagians and all others erring from the Faith.

From this paper we trust our Countrymen will understand: That the Principles
of those called Presbyterians (in the strictest notion of the term) are no such
things, but very good, and honest men may own, and the briskest tongues and
pens of their Adversaries will not be very forward to evince either to be
unscriptural, or Irrational.

FINIS.

