A DISCOURSE Concerning EXCOMMUNICATION.

By THOMAS COMBER DD. Precentor of York.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the West end of St.
Paul's Church.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE notorious increase of Atheism, Faction, and Debauchery in this and the
last Age, is too evident to be denied, and too mischievous to be mentioned
without sad reflections: But while many express their Piety in bewailing the
Matter of Fact, few do exercise their Consideration, either in searching after
the Causes of this deplorable Evil, or enquiring into the proper Remedies for
it. It Is true, there may be many Causes of so complicated and spreading a
Contagion, and diverse Methods contrived for its Cure: But there is one great
and eminent occasion of this universal Corruption that seems to be peculiar to
our Times, and the Mother or the Nurse to most of those Vices and Errors which
are the Reproach of this Age, viz. The contempt of Excommunication: For this
being the only means that the Church has to punish these Crimes (which the
Secular Tribunals seldom or never take Cognizance of) If Men by Ignorance or
Evil Principles can arrive at Impudence enough to despise this Sacred and
Salutary Penalty, they have nothing left to restrain them from committing and
openly abetting these Offenses, which by this means are grown so general, and
so daring, that they are the Scandal of our Reformation, the Ruin of many
thousand poor Souls, and cry to Heaven for that Judgment which upon Earth they
never meet withal. It is manifest that the Schismatics and the Profane, the
Atheistical and those who are of most profligate Conversations, do all conspire
to make the Churches Discipline contemptible, weak and ineffectual, and all
strive to deprive her of that Power which they know she would use for the Cure
of those Vices, which they indulge and resolve to continue in. But it is a
mighty Charity to these our Enemies to undeceive them, and let them see that
Excommunication is not really less dreadful, because some men for vile ends do
falsely represent it as Brutum Fulmen: And it may be a happy means of reforming
the Age, to manifest the Divine Original, the Sacred Authority, and the Fatal
Efficacy of these Church Censures, which if they were rightly understood,
reverenced as they deserve, and prudently dispensed, would contribute extremely
toward the rooting out of evil Principles and wicked Practices, and prevent the
Damnation of many great Offenders, who dye in their Sins, because they despise
their Remedy, and trample on the means of their Reformation. If men truly
discerned the terrible Consequences of living and dying under a deserved
Excommunication, they would carefully avoid those Sins which pull it on their
guilty Heads; or if unwarily they did offend, and fall under this Censure, they
would (as of old in the Primitive Church) never rest till by Prayers and
Fasting, Charity and Mortification, they had made their Peace with God, and by
a due Submission to some Salutary Penance, obtained the Absolution of their
Spiritual Governor; and how far this would go toward the preventing or healing
these damnable and destructive Offenses, every man may discern: Impunity is the
great incentive to Sin; and while the Punishments of the next World are
invisible and distant, and those which Christ Authorized the Church to inflict
in this, are falsely thought insignificant, Faction and Impiety must grow and
increase without remedy or redress, and the multitude of Offenders and
frequency of the Crimes will harden the bad, and infect the better sort, to the
utter ruin of Religion it self. If indeed these bold and merry Sinners, who are
under the Church Censures for their real Crimes, were as safe as they are
secure, it would be less necessary to give them the trouble of Conviction; but
alas, the Sentence is as weighty, and more fatal when it is despised, as when
it is revered, and shall finally fall more heavy on these arrogant Wretches,
because the Contempt of a Divine Institution is added to all their other
Iniquities, and the slighting of that Remedy which God himself appointed for
their Cure, comes in as well for a Reason as an Occasion of their Condemnation.
I am sure all Ages and Places, all Religions and Countries, have reverenced
this Sacred Rite, and why we alone should trample on it, no Reason can be
given, but what will import us to be worse than Jews, Turks, or Pagans: Nor can
any man in his Wits imagine that there is more liberty left to Sin, or that the
Penalties inflicted for it, are of less weight to Christians, than under those
exploded and false Religions; and therefore if Excommunication be dreaded
there, and all the Crimes which cause it, is it fit that either the Faults or
the Punishment should be lightly regarded here? Whoever is of this temper, has
taken his Measures from false Guides, whose Interest it was to disparage this
Holy Institution, because they had done some Crimes to deserve it, and it is
their Duty, and for their Souls health, to rectify this dangerous Mistake; in
order whereunto we will clearly, plainly, and impartially show, First, The
Divine Original of it: Secondly, The Universal Practice of it: Thirdly, The
Ends for which it was Instituted: which will give all unprejudiced Persons a
right Notion of this useful and weighty matter.

A DISCOURSE Concerning EXCOMMUNICATION.
CHAP. I. Of the Original of Excommunication.
. I. ALthough we consider Excommunication as it is now used in the Christian
Church, yet because it was not first practiced there, we must dig deeper to
discover the Foundation thereof; and it will add much to the Veneration of it,
to show, That it was ever reverenced, as well by the Jews as the Gentiles,
before it was adopted into Christianity by our blessed Savior: Wherefore we
will demonstrate, that this Sacred Rite has its Original from these three
things.

First, From the Light of Natural Reason, and the Practice of the Gentiles, who
had no other Guide. Secondly, From the Custom of the Jews before our Lord's
Incarnation. Thirdly, From the express Institution of Christ in the New
Testament.
First, The Light of Natural Reason shows us, That no Society ever did, or can
subsist without Governors; nor can those Governors do their duty, or preserve
the Society committed to their Care, without a Power to punish such as break
the Rules of this Society, and commit Offenses tending to the Subversion of it;
for otherwise the Society it self must be precarious, and would soon come to
ruin, as wanting sufficient Means to preserve it self: Now since it is certain
that Jesus has instituted a Society which is called the Church, and which is
really distinct from the Civil State, being appointed for other Ends, and
governed by other Measures, ruled by distinct Officers, and guided by peculiar
Laws; a Society which did subsist when the Civil State opposed it, and must
continue (whatever changes Human Governments suffer) unto the end of the World:
Therefore the Rulers of this Society, the Church, must have some Power to
punish all those who do disturb the good Order thereof by a false Faith or
corrupt Worship, or by dissolute Manners; and if our Lord had not entrusted the
Church with such a Power, Reason and Necessity would have compelled the Rulers
of the Church to have assumed it, because the Church cannot subsist without it.
No man can so much as govern one Family in the Capacity of a Father or Master,
unless he be invested with power to let in and turn out of his Family, such as
he sees fit, and to dispense or withhold the Benefits belonging to his Family
as he sees Occasion; much less can a larger Society be maintained in Peace and
Safety without the exercise of such a Power. And as the Father or Master may
and does exercise this Authority within his own Family, though it be a part of
the Commonwealth, without damage to the Prince's Power: So in this Society of
the Church, since the ends of it are different from that of the Civil
Government, the Ecclesiastical Governors may exercise their Power and
Authority without incroachment upon the Prince's Sovereignty. The ends of
Temporal Princes being to preserve their People in outward Peace and Plenty, in
the enjoyment of their Temporal Rights and Privileges while they live upon
Earth: But the ends of the Spiritual Governors are to make Christians holy
here and happy hereafter, and their Rules and Punishments are both suited to
this end. The Rules are Precepts of Piety and Charity, and the Penalties are
proportionable, viz. not Corporal Nullum ibi discrimen sanguinis sub incruenta
disciplina timebatur. Aug. ad Maced. ep. 54.
, but Spiritual; that is, the depriving them of all the comfort and benefit of
Church Communion at present, and the declaring them to be worthy of Divine
vengeance, unless they repent. So that the Rulers of the World need have no
jealousy for their Authority, on the account of this Spiritual Jurisdiction
from his Servants, who declares His Kingdom is not of this World Joh. xviii.
36. Audite Judaei and Gente^ -- non impediam dominationem vestram in hoc mundo.
Aug. in loc.
. They are to watch for men's Souls, to make them inwardly good, to reform their
Manners, and fit them for a blessed Eternity: And they govern as Fathers, by
Arguments and Persuasion, by Spiritual Promises and Threatenings, by the Rod of
Church Censures, not by the Sword, as the Civil Magistrate does. Yet as the
Prince takes care of the Lives and worldly concerns of his Subjects, and
punishes those who injure them in either of these; so does the Spiritual
Governor in his proper way punish those who act contrary to the welfare of
their own or others Souls, whether by teaching false Doctrine, or setting a bad
Example. And as there are three ends of outward and civil Punishments, First,
(...), Instruction to the Offender to repent and amend: Secondly, (...),
Warning to others not to follow so bad an Example: and Thirdly, (...),
Vindication of the Society from the Scandal which might be cast upon it for
suffering evil Acts to be done Vidend. Aul. Gellius noct. Attie. lib. 6. c. 14.
Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 4.
: So also the Spiritual Penalties aim at the same ends, viz. To reform the
Offender; To warn others not to follow the ill Example; And to clear the Church
from that Scandal which the acts of evil Men, professing themselves Christians,
may bring on it, if they be not punished: All which ends are obtained by this
Spiritual Penalty of Excommunication duly inflicted by the Church, and humbly
submitted to by the Offender; which does clearly show that it is necessary to
the being and the well-being of this Spiritual Society, the Church, even upon
Principles of Natural Reason, that its Governors should have this Power. And
that none may doubt whether Natural Reason does teach this, we will show that
the very Gentiles (who had no other Guide but the Light of Natural Reason) did
frequently use this kind of excluding all those from their Society, especially
from joining in their Sacrifices, who were unfit and unworthy. And though there
were no Law to turn such Persons out by violence, yet their Order was obeyed by
all, to the shame of those pretended Christians who despise the Commands and
deride the Authority of our Lords Ministers in the like Case.

. II. Among the Grecians, Draco was one of their most ancient Lawgivers, and he
decreed, That Murderers should be excluded from the Drink Offerings and
Festivals, from the Temples and Public Assemblies Demosth. Orat. in Leptin.
. And the Scholiast on Aristophanes speaks of this as of an old Custom, That no
Manslayer should partake of their Sacrifices. (...). Schol. Aristoph.
. And agreeable to this is that Edict of Oedipus in Sophocles, concerning a
Parricide, That none of his Subjects should receive him into their House, nor
speak to him, nor communicate with him in Prayers or Sacrifices to the Gods,
nor wash their hands with him (...). Sophoc. in Oedip.
. Whence it appears, That both Civil and Sacred Commerce was forbid to these
Criminals; and though those who had slain their Mother in Euripides, mention
only their being excluded at Argis from all Men's houses and conversations:
(...). Eurip. Oreste.
Yet we may infer they were much more incapable of coming to the Sacrifices.
Plato also ordains that such as strike their Parents should be expelled from
their Cities and their Temples; and that whoever had any conversation with them
should be excluded from the Assemblies and Sacrifices till they were purged
(...). Plato de leg. 9. fol. 881.
. And if it be enquired whose office it was to do this, we may learn that from
Julius Pollux, who tells us there was one at Athens called the King of the
Sacrifices, whose office was To proclaim that the contumacious (or rather, the
unholy who were of contrary disposition to the holy Rites) should abstain from
the Mysteries and other established Rites (...) Poll. Onomastic. lib. 8. cap.
9. page 397.
. And Alcibiades, for having revealed the Mysteries of Ceres which ought to
have been kept secret, was devoted to Divine Vengeance by the Priests in all
their several ways of Religion Se D^is per omnium Sacerdetum religiones devotum
cognovit. Justin. Hist. lib. 5.
. Where note, that this sort of Excommunication was attended with solemn
Curses; which was a delivering them to the Divine Justice: and we may further
observe, that this penalty was not inflicted only for Murder, but for any
great offense either against Religion (as here) or against good manners. As in
that remark concerning the Cercetae, now called the Circassians, who used to
forbid all that did any injustice, to come into their Temples (...) Stobae.
Sermon. 165.
. And that Example in Herodotus where five Cities of Ionia did exclude the
sixth City from all Communion in their Sacrifices; because one of their
Citizens called Agasicles, took away a Brazen Tripod which was dedicated to
Apollo Herodot. lib. 1. Clio. page 69.
. And we may find instances wherein Men were also excommunicated for other
crimes; such as unlawful Lusts -- discedite ab aris Queis tulit hesterna gaudia
nocte Venus. Tibul. lib. 2. eleg. 1.
, a crime so odious, that if we may believe Aelian, the very Dogs that were
kept in Vulcan's Temple near Mount Aetna which fawned on all pure Worshippers,
would have found out those which were so polluted, and driven them out of the
Holy place Aelian de animal. lib. xi. c. 3.
. We need not instance in any more particulars, for Plutarch reports That
Apollo did command Murderers and all wicked Persons to go out of his Temple
(...) Plut. de sera number. vind. -- Paean solitus templis arcere nocentes. Lucan.
lib. 5.
; not that the Deity did this in Person, but by the Priests, who in the name of
the Gods were wont to proclaim before the Sacrifices began, That no Unhallowed,
nor Profane person, none that were polluted with Blood or other crimes should
dare to stay there, or come near the place -- procul, o, procul este profani,
Conclamat vates, totoque absistite luco. Virgil. Aen. 6.
, as Virgil declares in the Sacrifice of Proserpina, using the very same words,
as Brissonius notes Brisson. de sormul. lib. 1. page 2.
, which of old were used by the Greeks on the same account (...) Callim. him.
2. (...). him. Apol. and apud Orph. -- (...) --
; and no doubt these were the Solemn Form of denouncing all such unworthy of
the Sacrifices: For the forementioned Brissonius has cited many Testimonies to
prove that this Proclamation was always made, not in the Sacrifices of any one
Deity, but of all the several Gods. So Medea when she acts as Priestess of
Hecate, uses the like form Hinc procul Aesonidem, procul hinc jubet ire
ministros, Et monet arcanis oculos removere profanos. Ovid. Metam. l. 7. p. 227.
: As does also the Principal of those who were employed in the Sacrifices of
Cybele Et procul hinc moneo, procul hinc ^u^ecunque prof^nae. Sil. Ital. lib.
17.
. And for those who knew themselves guilty, they did so reverence these words,
that they presently withdrew, taking them as spoken from the Deity; and
believing the Divine Vengeance would seize them if they should presume to stay;
as we more fully learn from Suidas, who thus describes this matter, Those who
were to offer cried out (...), that is, who is here? Then the people charitably
answered, (...), many and Good Persons: And this the Sacrificers did, that they
whose Consciences accused them of any impurity, might withdraw themselves from
the Holy Rites Suidas verbo (...);
. And we need not with the Learned Seldom so nicely distinguish between this
Monitory Excommunication, and that which was more solemnly denounced against
particular persons; Since the Heathens did esteem this Monition to be so
Sacred, that even Nero himself, though an Emperor for his Quality, and
irreligious enough in other things, durst not come to the Eleusinian Rites
after the Sacred Officer had proclaimed, That no impious or unclean Person
should be present there, as Suetonius relates: And the Historian mentions it as
a demonstration of the Purity and Innocence of the excellent Emperor Antoninus,
that he went to these Sacrifices in the Temple of Ceres at Athens Cereris
templum adit ut se innocentem probaret. Capitolin. vit. M. Antonin. Philos. p.
213.
; which custom was of longer continuance, it seems: For Lampridius notes that
Alexander Severus (who did refuse those undue divine honors to which some of
his Predecessors pretended) in this worthily imitated the Gods, That he
proclaimed, None should enter his presence (as they say in the Eleusinian
Sacrifices) who did not know himself innocent Jussitque quemadmodum in
Eleusiniis sacris dicitur, ut nemo ingrediatur nisi qui se innocentem novit.
Lamprid. vit. Alex. Sever. page 525.
. Yea, as long as Paganism was retained, this usuage was kept: For Julian the
Apostate had banished and excluded the Christians from all public Assemblies
Julian. Epist. 42. Nazianz. Invect. in Julian. orat. 1.
: And in those times the Criers was wont to proclaim according to the Athenian
manner, That if any Atheist, Christian, or Epicurean were come to see the
Sacrifice, they should be turned out Vide Luciani Pseudomant. page 489.
; for they falsely took the Christians then for Impious Persons. But withal we
may note, that the Christian Bishops did not suffer their People to be present
at any of these Sacrifices; for when an Hymn was to be sung to Bacchus, and in
the Preface to it Proclamation was made, that such as were not initiated, and
such as were unclean should go out of the doors; Apollinaris and his Father
(who were both of the Clergy) with some of the Laity, stayed to hear it;
whereupon the Laity were admonished, and these two of the Clergy were
excommunicated by Theodotus Bishop of Laodicea, and not received in again till
they were reconciled by a solemn Repentance Sozomen hist. lib. 6. cap. 25. page
389.
. But to return to the Gentiles; Tertullian informs us, That all Heathen
mysteries did drive away the Profane Semper impiae initiationes arceant
profanos. Tertul. Apolog.
. And yet this was no where done with more Authority or more Solemnity than
among the ancient barbarous Gauls; among whom the Druids were their Chief
Priests, and had in so very great Veneration, that Caesar who lived in Gallia,
and must needs know their Laws, says, If any private or public Person stand
not to their Decrees, they forbid him their Sacrifices, which is the highest
punishment among them; for they who are thus interdicted, are reckoned in the
number of the impious and wicked; all men turn away from them, and will not
meet them, nor speak with them, lest they should be infected by coming near
them; nor can they have any benefit of the Law, nor receive any kind of honor
Caesar de bello Gal. lib. 6. page
. And Tacitus has informed us, That the Germans, who had the same Rites of
Religion, use to punish Cowards, and such as lost their Shields (who were great
Offenders among that warlike People) with excluding them from their Sacrifices
and their Councils Tacit. Annal. lib. 14.
. Whence we may observe, That the Priests were the Inflictors of these
Censures, and when any one was judged contumacious to the Priests Laws, he was
first cut off from all communion in Sacred things; and then as a consequent to
that, the People also denied him all common Civilities, as one odious to God
and Men. And we ought not, with Mr. Seldom, to think this a mere Civil
Punishment; because the deprivation of Civil conversation did follow upon the
Excommunication from Sacred Offices, as Caesar clearly expresses it. And though
it be true that it was a custom at Rome for private Persons sometimes Majores
quoties dirimerent amicitias, solent interdicere Domo. Tacit. Annal. lib. 6. p.
595.
, even for private Injuries, to forbid Men their House; and for the
Magistrates, for Crimes against the State only, to Interdict all Men the
accommodating Criminals with Fire or Water Appian. de Bell. Givil. lib. 1.
Livius passim and Dion. Halicarn.
; yet it does not follow that the same Interdict of Civil commerce might not be
observed upon the Priests excommunicating Men from Sacred Offices, since it
seems very natural for the People to infer, That those whom the Sacred Officers
declared to be unworthy to converse with the Gods, were also unworthy to have
any conversation with them; and when the greater Privilege was taken away, the
less would follow of it self: So that we may conclude, That the Druides and
German Priests did principally use this as a religious punishment on the most
notorious Offenders; and that this exclusion from their Sacrifices was esteemed
the worst and most grievous Penalty that could be inflicted; though they had
other kinds of Panishments from all Antiquity: For Aventinus says, Tuisco the
first Lawgiver of the Germans, allowed none but the Priests to execute, bind,
or chastise Malefactors, that so Men might not only take it for a Corporal
Penalty by the Princes command, but as due Vengeance from the Gods Aventin.
Annal. l. 1. p. 12.
. Wherefore Excommunication was then thought a sadder Penalty than Stripes,
Imprisonment, or Death it self. Which Opinion of these poor Barbarians, will
rise up in Judgment one day against those wretched pretenders to Christianity,
who slight the Censures of the Church of Christ, and value not their just
exclusion from those Divine Ordinances which he has appointed. Finally, This
general Consent of all Nations (thus explained) does declare, That Natural
Reason did teach the very Heathens, who wanted the Revealed will of God, that
it was necessary to the Being and the Honor of Religion, to give their Priests
a power to cast out all notorious, infamous, and scandalous Criminals from
their Temples, and to exclude them from all communion in their Sacrifices;
which proves my first Assertion, That Excommunication is partly founded on
Natural Reason. But whereas some (especially those who belong to the Civil
Courts, and for their Interest would decry Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) would
persuade us there is no other Foundation of Church Censures, but only this
light of Natural Reason, and the Practice of the Greeks and Romans Vid. Seldom
de Synedriis, l. 1. c. 10. p. 224.
, I shall now proceed to show the evidence we have to prove it is of Divine
Institution.

. III. The second ground of excommunication is the practice of the Jews, by
which I do not mean the conceits of those Rabbis who lived long after the
destruction of the Jewish Polity, who have discoursed frivolously about this
Rite, and loaded it with many superstitious if not ridiculous adherencies,
which while some learned Men industriously hunt after, they lose the substance,
and that which is principally considerable to us Christians; that is, The
grounds we have in Scripture to prove that something analogous to our
Excommunication was in use before the Destruction of Jerusalem. And we must
begin this account with the Infancy of the World, because what God did in the
Patriarchal times, was written to guide the Jews when they came to be the only
Church and People of the most High. And first, it is plain that Adam upon his
Transgression was cast out of Paradise by the Ministry of an Angel, which was a
sort of excommunicating him from the place where he enjoyed the Divine Presence
in the most immediate manner, Genes. iii. 24. and some of the Ancients make
this the first pattern of this Sacred Rite. Again, This Discipline was more
plainly exercised upon Cain, who had been instructed in the way of worshipping
God, Genesis iv. 3. and making Solemn Offerings with his Father and the rest of
that Family. But when he wilfully murdered his pious Brother Abel, God
pronounces the Sentence of Excommunication upon him, which Cain professes was
an intolerable Punisnment, ver. 13. For hereby first he was to be turned out of
the Assemblies for Religion, which he calls being hid from Gods face. Secondly
he was declared unworthy to converse with the Innocent, which is expressed by
his being a Fugitive and a Vagabond in the Earth. Thirdly he was devoted to
destruction, so that it would have been no Crime to kill him, as he complains
when he says, That every one who found him would slay him, ver. 14. Which is
so express a place, that some learned Men find all the kinds of Excommunication
asterwards used among the Jews, in this Divine Censure. 1. The Niddui or
Separation; 2. The Cherem, Anathema or Curse; And 3ly, the Schamatha, or
exposing him to Divine Vengeance; For God set a Mark on him to reserve the
Judgment upon Cain solely to his own inflicting: However, this plainly declares
that the Lord would have all wilful and obstinate Offenders separated and
excluded from the founder part of the Church. And since Noah was the great
High Priest after the Flood, it is not improbable that the Curse he pronounced
upon Cham for despising his Father, was a sort of Cherem, since he takes Japhet
into the Tents of Sem, the designed High Priest of the true God, and leaves
Cham and his Race out of that blessed Privilege, Genes. viii. 27. The like
Curse old Jacob pronounces upon those two cruel and treacherous Sons of his who
had murdered the poor Sechemites, viz. Simeon and Levi, Genesis xlix. 6. where he
seems to renounce their Communion in those words, O my Soul, come not thou into
their secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united. Which shows
that such as were accursed for their notorious Crimes, were not worthy of the
Society of pure and holy Persons. Under Moses Law there was a new way of
worship instituted, consisting of diverse carnal Ordinances, suited to the
genius of the Jewish People, and to those Ages and Parts of the World, and
these outward Rites were typical of more spiritual and moral Observances which
were to succeed them in Gospel times (...) Hebr^^. 1.
. And while this Economy lasted, it is no great wonder if the most visible
exercise of Excommunication was upon the persons who had some legal impurity
upon them: For all who were so polluted the Priest excluded from Sacred and
Civil conversation, for so long a time as the uncleanness remained, and until
the Rites for purifying had been performed according to the Priests direction,
and then they were admitted in again, and restored to their former Privileges
(see Levit. xiii, xiv, xv.) by the Priests consent and permission. Now these
persons who were thus legally unclean, being unfit for that legal Worship, were
justly excluded from it, and were to all intents and purposes in the state of
Excommunicate persons during this their Separation, as far as concerned the
loss of their External Privileges; and if in a more Spiritual Religion the
Spiritual Sword cut deeper, when it is used on greater Offenders, it is no
wonder: But still this treatment of the legally unclean by Divine Institution,
was a Type and Forerunner of the Gospel Censures: And these natural Diseases
and External Pollutions were plain Emblems of those moral Impurities, which
were to exclude those who were Jesus his professed Disciples, from the
Assemblies which were to meet in his Name: And the Type was so clear an
indication of this, that the learned Grotius thinks even the Jews could not but
make the inference themselves, viz. That if a leprous person was turned out of
the Assembly, lest he should infect others with his Disease, so much at least
ought to be inflicted on wicked and lewd Men (whose Examples were contagious,
and their actions a reproach to the whole Society) that their Crimes should be
marked with a public detestation Grot. Comunent. in Luc. vi. 22.
. And on this account some think David did abstain from the Public Worship for
some time after he had committed his great Sin, and therefore he prays in his
Penitential Psalm li. verse. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, etc. Yet if
any make it still matter of admiration, How it comes to pass there are so few
Instances in the Old Testament of any that were Excommunicated for real Sins
and immoral or impious Actions? There being but one clear Example of this kind,
viz. that of the Tribe of Benjamin, which was publicly denounced accursed in a
Religious Assembly, Jud. xx. 12. and all conversation with them renounced by a
solemn Oath, Chap. xxi. 1. for abetting the lust and cruelty of the men of
Gibeah: I say if this be strange to any, we can give some satisfactory Reasons,
Why the Instances were so few under the Ceremonial Law: For first, it must be
noted that in those days, Almighty God for the conviction of a stubborn and
unbelieving Nation, did very usually strike those who committed great and
scandalous Offenses, either with sudden death, as Corah and his Accomplices,
Numb. xvi. 32. the Bethshemites, 1 Samuel vi. 19. Uzzah, 2 Samuel vi. 7. and many
others, and so executed the highest and heaviest sort of Excommunication, the
Schammatha, upon them to terrify others from the like Crimes: Or at least, he
did lay such loathsome Diseases upon the Offenders against his Laws, as did even
by the Rules of the Ceremonial Law sufficiently expose them to a necessary
Exclusion out of the Congregation, and cut them off from both civil and
religious Conversation, as may be particularly seen in the case of Leprosy;
with this Miriam was smitten for speaking evil of Moses the Ruler of the
People, and thereupon by the Priest she was declared unclean, and by the
express command of God excluded out of the Camp, and so consequently from the
Tabernacle and Public Worship seven days; which was so plain a Declaration of
God's Will, as to the turning out open Offenders from the Congregation, that we
may justly believe Excommunication took its rise from this and the like
instances Number. xii. 14. LXX. (...) Ad hoc exemplum instituti (...) a Synagoga,
and inter Christianos ab Ecclesia. Grot. in loc.
. And we may note, That while Miriam stayed before the Tabernacle, the Schecina
removed, to show that if Offenders were not excluded, his Presence should not
stay with them, ver. 10. And further we may observe, God did this as a mark of
public Disgrace, to shame her into Repentance, and warn others; whence that
phrase, If her Father had spit in her face, ver. 14. Another Example of this
kind, and more plain, we have in King Uzziah, who would in the pride of his
heart Officiate as a Priest: But the High Priest and his Brethren interdicted
him from coming into the Sanctuary, as one that had Apostatized from God's Law
2 Paral. xxvi. 18. LXX. (...).
; and he not valuing the Interdict, was immediately smitten by the Lord with
Leprosy, and so forced to go hastily out of the Temple, and he remained
separated from all Civil Society, and from the Public Worship also until the
day of his death Ver. 21. (...).
: For the Text expressly mentions his dwelling in a several house, and his being
cut off from the House of the Lord; which is a clear sign it was a divinely
inflicted Excommunication, and it was most fit to be only done by God's hand,
since it was executed on a King. To this I might add the like Plague inflicted
upon Gehazi for the Sin of Lying, by Elisha, who was God's special Messenger,
and therefore to be cast out of his Presence, signifies an exclusion from the
true Worship of God, as well as from the Society of Men, 2 Kings v. 27. and
Chap. vii. ver. 3. The Jewish Doctors also affirm, That David was smitten with
Leprosy for his great Sin, and that he was thereby incapable of coming into
the Congregation, which occasioned that Prayer, Cast me not away from thy
presence -- and restore me to the joy of thy Salvation Psalm. li. ver. 11, 12.
Munster.
. And thence he prays to be purged with hyssop Ver. 7. see Levit. xiv. 6.
. And that this is not a mere Rabbinical fancy, may appear from those
Complaints in the other Penitential Psalm, where he says, He was weak, and
desired God to heal him, Psalm. vi. 2. and speaks of God's hand lying heavy on
him day and night, till all his moisture was dried up, Psalm. xxxii. 4. Yea
expressly, Psalm. xxxviii. he declares there was no soundness in his flesh, ver.
3. and that his wounds stank, and were corrupt, ver. 5. so that his lovers and
friends stood aloof from his sore, and his kinsmen would not come near him,
ver. 11. And that he was excluded from the Public Worship also, seems plain
from Psalm. xlii. ver. 2, 4. etc. Again, This may be further confirmed from that
general Notion among the Jews, That all Sickness and Diseases were laid on Men
by God for some notorious Sin, which is plain from the Disciples asking, Who
had sinned, the blind Man or his Parents, Jolin ix. 2. and from our Savior's
reckoning it was all one for him, to bid the Paralytick take up his Bed and
walk, and to say to him his Sins were forgiven him, Matthew. ix. 4. because the
Disease being inflicted for some Crime, the remitting the Crime was also a
removal of the Punishment; and Jesus by these miraculous Cures on Men's Bodies,
evidently proved to the Jews (who were all of this Opinion) that he had power
to forgive Sins, and consequently was the Messiah. Now if the Original of this
Opinion of theirs be enquired into, we may conclude it came first from God's
threatening Diseases to those who transgressed his Law, Deuter. xxviii. 27, 28,
35, etc. and secondly from the frequent Examples they had seen, of the
miraculous smiting of evil Men with sudden and sad Distempers, in the very act
of their Sin. Now while this extraordinary way of punishing and disgracing
Sinners (suitable to the hardness of this Peoples hearts) was made use of by
God, there was not so much need nor occasion for the Priests to excommunicate
Men for Immoralities, since God took the matter into his own hands: and no
doubt these apparent Judgments were so terrible, that such as had done any
grievous Sin durst not come to God's House till he was attoned. And it may be
noted, That in the infancy of the Christian Church the Lord proceeded the same
way with the Corinthians who profaned the Holy Communion, striking many of them
with sickness and weakness, and some with death, 1 Cor. xi. 30. to warn the
rest, and to provide for the keeping his Sacred Ordinances from profanation,
in a Church where, as S. Chrysostom notes, by reason of the Schism, there was
no exercise of Discipline at that time: Now these Methods sufficiently showed
it was the will of God that notorious Sinners should be excluded; they did the
work, and served to the ends of Excommunication; they bound up the Parties, so
that they wanted, if not commerce with men, yet however converse with God; for
they could not go to the Temple till both the Sin was pardoned and the Sickness
removed together: And that restoration was their Absolution Isa. xxxviii. ver.
22.
, and also a warning not to offend again John. v. 14.
. These Methods therefore of miraculous smiting Sinners, might well occasion
the seldom use of any Excommunication for Immoralities, which is the first
Answer to that Query, Why there are so few Instances of that Discipline under
the Law of Moses, exercised by the Priests upon scandalous Offenders. A second
Reason may be taken from the Jewish form of Government, which was a Theocracy;
God himself was their Supreme Ruler and Lawgiver, and they had not two Laws,
one Sacred and the other Civil; nor two Tribunals, as there are in other
Nations: The Priests there had the chief Authority in the Sanhedrim, and in all
other Councils, and the power of Temporal Punishments, 2 Chronicles. xix. 8. The
High Priest was the first Person in the Sanhedrim, ibid. ver. 11. And the
determining of all Controversies, and punishing all Offenses was principally in
them Deuteronomy. xvii. 9, 12.
; so that the King himself was to advise with the Priest in all matters (...)
Joseph. in App. lib. 2. Vide Phil. de vita Mosis. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8.
; and it was Capital to any of the People to disobey their order. Now while the
Priests had this power, and the Nation was governed by God's Law, and its own
Magistrates of Divine appointment; all Moral Evils and Impieties were (if
small) expiated by chargeable Sacrifices, and so the Offender was reconciled by
the Priest to God and the Congregation: But if the Crimes were great, or done
presumptuously, Deuteronomy. xvii. 12. they were to be punished with death, as in the
case of Murder, Exodus xxi. 14. abusing their Parents, and Men-stealing, ver.
15, 16, 17. Witchcraft and unlawful Lust, Exodus xxii. 18, 19. Idolatry, ver.
20. The sin of Fornication in a Woman before Marriage, and of Adultery in both
Men and Women, and the sin of a Rape committed on a betroathed Woman, Deuteronomy.
xxii. 21, 22, 23, etc. These, and many other Crimes, were in that Law punished
with death by the Sentence of the Priest, and so there was no need of any
solemn Excommunication, as Mr. Seldom himself confesses, even there where he
is magnifying this Objection of the want of Instances in the Old Testament for
the exercise of Excommunication Neque necessarium eis visum est, ut adhiberetur
excommunicatio quamdiu sui erant juris. Seld. de Synedriis lib. 1. c. 7. p. 77.
. This stiff-necked and rebellious People were not to be reformed by so gentle
a Method as Separation from the Assemblies, or the disgrace of Ecclesiastical
Censure, Duro nodo, durus cuneus: Almighty God therefore was forced to use a
harder wedge to so knotty a piece, and to invest his Priests with a power to
cut them off with the material Sword, which under the Spiritual Economy and
Paternal Regiment of the Gospel, is now (as S. Augustine observes) changed into
Reproofs and Excommunication Hoc nunc agit in Ecclesia excommunicatio, quod
agebat tunc interfectio. Aug. Quaest. in Deuteronomy. lib. 5. c. 38. Phinees Sacerdos
adulteros simul inventos far ultore transfixit, quod utique degradationibus
and excommunicationibus significatum est esse faciendum hoc tempore. Idem de
Fid. and Oper. cap. 6.
, as more suitable to the Gospel Spirit, Luke ix. 55. and to the gracious
design of making Men virtuous out of love to God, and not (as under the Law)
merely for fear of bodily punishment, which was inflicted without mercy on
those who by two or three Witnesses were proved to have despised Moses's Law,
Hebr. x. 28. Yet as the Apostle there notes, those who despise this gentle
Method shall have a sorer punishment, even a dreadful Judgment executed on them
by God at last, ver. 27, 29, 30, etc. Wherefore there being so apparent
difference between the state of things under the Law, and under the Gospel, it
is not to be wondered at, if those Priests who had so much Secular Authority,
did not so often exercise this power of Excommunication, as the Gospel Priests
do, who have nothing to do with Corporal Punishments: And yet still it is clear
there was a Method then to separate the notorious Criminals from the
Congregation, and that by God's own appointment; yea, there was something like
Excommunication in these Legal capital Punishments: For it seems the Cherem or
Curse of God was supposed to be upon that Man who thus suffered, as Moses
shows, saying, He that is hanged is accursed of God, Deuteronomy. xxi. 22. and thus
Christ is said to be made a Curse for us, Gal. iii. 13. And the impious
Canaanites, who were destroyed by Joshua, were thus accursed: yea the very
Phrase for killing those who had deserved Death for their Treachery in the Book
of Maccabees, is Anathematizing, or Cursing them (...) 1 Maccab. v. 5.
. So Jezabel being executed, is called A cursed Woman 2 Kings ix. 34.
. And when Saul had pronounced this Cherem upon all that eat that day, Jonathan
falling under that Curse, must have dyed if the People had not rescued him 1 Samuel xiv. 45.
. Which makes it not unlikely, that before the Malefactor was put to death,
some Curse was solemnly denounced on him, by which he was cut off from the
Privileges of God's People. If it be objected to this, That we Christians have
Civil Magistrates who do thus punish Malefactors with Death, and so we need not
Ecclesiastical Censures now, any more than the Jews did: I shall reply with the
most Judicious and Learned Grotius, whose words are, This Argument taken from
the Jews, is of no force: For their Law for Penalties was wholly accommodated
to a Carnal People, and all were equally obliged by it, so that the
Commonwealth and Church there, was all one: But the Laws of Christ do require
more, than either is or can be required of the Subjects of any worldly Empire.
The most men mind evil things, and the Civil Laws do their Office if they
restrain great Crimes, and such as most hurt the Public State: But things done
against the Laws of Charity, Meekness, and Patience, which are not within the
Civil Laws, are within the Rules of the Gospel, by which his Church, chosen out
of the World, ought to judge: Wherefore Constantine and the following Emperors,
did rightly leave the Church its proper Judicatory, and confirmed it by their
Laws Grot. in Luc. vi. 22.
. Which apposite place I could not but transcribe at large, to show the
weakness of those, who (not considering the different circumstances of the
Jews) do impose their Methods upon the Christian Church. And this may show how
necessary it is, that there should always be in the Church some way and means
to exclude scandalous Offenders; and if there be diverse Methods under different
Dispensations, that does not take off from the usefulness, or from the
necessity of the present way of proceeding, which is as agreeable to the ends
and designs of the Gospel, as the other was to those of the Law: yea, this
variety shows it must always be done in some way or other, and makes it
manifest that the Church cannot subsist without it. I have been the larger in
these Reasons, because the Learned Seldom, and many of his far loss Learned
Followers, triumph extremely in this difference, between the proceeding of the
Ancient Jews and the Modern Christians, and use this variety, as an Artifice to
persuade the World that our Censures are not of Divine Institution, and to
wrest all Authority out of the Churches hands, that their Schism and some other
Crimes (which no other Judicatory with us does take cognizance of) may go
wholly unpunished: But as their evil design makes their Argument suspicious, so
I hope this fair account will show it to be Fallacious; and that even while the
Jewish Polity stood, there were Evidences enough to convince any unprejudiced
Man, that it was always God's will, scandalous Offenders should be punished by
those who had the ordering of Religion.

But thirdly, After the Jewish Commonwealth was subverted, and their Government
altered by the Babylonian Captivity, and afterward when they were in
subjection to the Romans, and had lost the power of the Temporal Sword, then
they were obliged to make a frequenter use of Excommunication, and came nearer
to the Form of the Christian Church, as we shall now show. There was (says
Grotius) a greater necessity of this Rite after the People became Captive, and
with their Liberty lost the Power of Civil Judicatures; for Natural Reason
compelled them to have recourse unto those Methods of Coercion, which they
could use without usurping on the Supreme Powers Idem in Luc. vi. 22.
. So that though it be not true (which Mr. Seldom affirms) that there were no
Instances of this Rite (for we have showed in Miriam, Uzziah, and Benjamin
there were some Examples) yet there were indeed far more Instances afterward:
For Ezra the Priest, on the Return from the Captivity, does denounce an
Excommunication against all that should not appear within three days to put
away the strange Wives they had taken, (...).
and the Penalty agreed upon between him and the Princes, was, That he who did
not come up to Jerusalem, all his Goods should be forfeited (which seems to be
the Civil Sanction) and himself should be separated from the Congregation of
the Captivity (which was the Ecclesiastical Censure) Ezra 10.8. where we see
the Commonwealth and the Church agreed in this matter. And the Interpreter of
Josephus, in this Story has kept the very word, he shall be Excommunicated Ut
excommunicetur, bonaque ejus sacro aerario addicantur. Joseph. Ant. l. xi. c.
5. ex interp. Gelen. page 29.
, which is the sense of the Greek word (...), he shall be made a Stranger; that
is, cut off from the Communion of the Church, and be treated as an Heathen,
according to our Savior's description of the Excommunicate under the Gospel,
whom we are to account as Heathens or Publicans, if they fall under the
Censures of the Church for their Contumacy. Nehemiah also, who was the chief
Ruler of the returning Jews in a General Assembly, wherein there were many of
the Priests, did make the Congregation enter into a Curse and an Oath to walk
in the Law of God; that is, says Mr. Seldom; They denounced an Excommunication
against the breakers thereof, Nehem. x. 29. Aben Ezra also understands that
Curse pronounced against those who had married strange Wives, Chap. xiii. 25.
and the Expulsion of the Highpriests Grandchild, ver. 28. to have been the
two sorts of Excommunication, Cherem and Niddui, executed by Nehemiah,
according to the Decree made by Ezra, Chap. x. 8. which is also mentioned in
the Jerusalem Targum. And Rabbi Benjamin Ben Moses affirms, That if any fall
into great Crimes, for which in the time of the Captivity no judgment could be
executed on them, they ought to repent and undertake to live better; but if the
fear of God will not engage them to do this, we put them under an Anathema, and
separate them from our Company according to that of Ezra x. 8. Rab. Benjamin.
ap. Seld. de Synedr. lib. 1. c. 7.
. And Josephus mentions such a kind of Excommunication against the Jews of
Delos Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 17. page 250.
in the time of Julius Caesar: But we shall not need collect these Examples,
since it is more to our purpose to consider how the Matter stood in the time of
our Savior Christ, while the Romans had Supreme power over them: We read that
the Rulers had decreed, That whosoever should confess Christ (...), John ix.
22. he should be excommunicated. The fear of which punishment kept the Parents
of the blind Man from owning their Faith in Jesus: And the same fear restrained
diverse of the Sanhedrin it self from Confessing our Lord, lest they should be
cast out of the Synagogue, John xii. 42. where Vatablus has in the Margin, Ne
excommunicarentur; and our old English Version uses the word Excommunicated in
both places: Which Decree was actually put in execution, and the Penalty
inflicted upon the poor blind Man whom our Savior had restored to sight, John
ix. 34. They cast him out; that is, they excommunicated him; and when Jesus
heard of it, ver. 35. He receives him into the number of those that believed in
him, declaring to him that he was the Son of God. And a little before our
Savior's Passion, he foretells his Disciples that the Jews would Cast them out
of their Synagogues, John xvi. 2. where Vatablus again in the Margin has
Excommunicabunt vos, they will excommunicate you: of which he had also warned
them before, and armed them against the fear of this Censure, by assuring them
They should be blessed by God, when they were thus ill treated by Men; saying,
Blessed are you when Men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their Company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil for the
Son of Man's sake, Luke vi. 22. Which is a plain description of Excommunication:
For this Separation is plainly Niddui Niddui, est remotio ab aliorum congressu
tam Sacro quam politico and domestico ad quatuor passus. Instit. ep. Hebr. page
55.
, the lesser sort of Excommunication, by which they excluded the Offenders from
any near converse with them, either in Civil or Sacred Actions, the Person thus
separated being not to come within four Paces of any other Jew, either in any
Religious or Common place, as Buxtorfius does inform us: So that these were not
quite excluded from the Temple, but only made to come in at a Gate peculiar to
themselves, and to worship at a distance, and separated from the rest of the
Jews, which Gate was called the Gate of Mourners (said to be built by Solomon;)
and this I suppose was the reason why the Publican (who may well be thought to
be under this Sentence of Separation) is said to worship standing afar off,
Luke xviii. 13. But the whole Rite is fully described by R. Juda in the Book of
Musar; When Solomon built the House of the Sanctuary, he built two Gates, one
for the Rejoycers, and the other for the Mourners and the Excommunicate -- If
any came in by this Gate with his upper lip veiled, they knew he was a Mourner,
and said to him, He that dwells in this House cheer and comfort thee. If his
upper lip were not covered, they knew him to be under Niddui, and said unto
him, He that dwells in this House put it into thy heart to hear the words of
thy Brethren, that they may receive thee R. Juda, lib. Musar, fol. 95. col. 1.
. Which Custom may well be thought very ancient, if we observe how early the
Primitive Christians placed their Penitents in this manner at the Church door,
and how they there begged the Prayers of the Faithful who went near and
worshipped. But to return to the place of S. Luke, Dr. Hammond thinks that
reproaching them, and casting out their name as evil, is a description of
Cherem, the higher kind of Excommunication, wherein they did proclaim the
Person Accursed, and devoted him to suffer the highest and heaviest Judgment,
as a most vile and desperately wicked Man. Which severe sort of proceeding,
Grotius thinks was not used toward the Christians, till some time after our
Savior's Resurrection: So that the Learned Seldom need not wonder why Christ
and his Apostles did appear in the Jewish Temple and Synagogues, since he
supposes them excommunicated: For first we have no Evidence that they were
actually under this Censure, while mention is made of their coming to the
Temple, nor is it likely they would have lost the opportunity of doing good to
so many as met in those places, for any such unjust Sentence, if it had been
executed on them by malicious Men, since they had an express Commission from
Heaven to Convert the Jews; and in order to that, it was necessary they should
meet in the Public Assemblies; yea, though the Jewish Rulers threatened them
never so severely, it is plain they omitted not their Duty. And lastly, if it
were only Niddui, or the Separation which was inflicted on them, it seems they
might come to the Religious Assemblies notwithstanding that Sentence: though
Drusius thinks that Niddui only excluded from the Synagogue, and not from the
Temple and its Service Drusij Prae^erit. lib. 4. in Johan. ix. 22.
. But in this Case of our Savior and his Apostles, I rather think that the
Jewish Rulers were not content with so gentle a Penalty as this Separation for
the Leaders of this new Society, and rather fought to suppress them by
Imprisonment, Scourging, and Death it self: For it seems evident to me that
there was such a Punishment then in use as Excluding Men from Sacred as well as
Civil Commerce, signified by that word Casting them out of their Synagogue.
Which though Mr. Seldom labors to expound only of Exclusion from Civil
Commerce, merely designing to make this a Penalty belonging to the Civil
Magistrate; yet there are many Evidences that it must be expounded of
interdicting Men from Religious Assemblies also: For the prime notion of a
Synagogue is a place set apart principally for Acts of Religion; and because
there was but One Temple in all Judaea for the most Solemn Worship, to which
all the Nation did resort, at some set times in the year, as well within the
Borders of Canaan as without; it was very necessary for those in the remoter
parts of Canaan, and especially for those of the dispersion to have some places
appropriate to Religion for their ordinary Duties at less Solemn Times: Such
were those Schools of the Prophets in the Old Testament, 1 Samuel x. 5. and Chap.
xix. 23. And those called Synagogues in the New, which in our Savior's time
were undoubtedly Schools for Learning the Law, and Houses of Prayer or
Proseucha's; Hence that of our Savior, who notes that the Pharisees loved to
stand praying in the Synagogues, Matthew. vi. 5. and there also the Law was
expounded, as is clear from many places of the New Testament, Matthew. iv. 23.
Luke iv. 16. Acts xiii. 15. especially every Sabbath Day, Acts xv. 21.
Wherefore Philo calls these Synagogues The Houses of Prayer in every City (...)
Philo legate. ad Cajum
, and says, They were Schools of Wisdom and Fortitude, of Modesty and
Righteousness, of Piety, of Holiness, and of all Virtue. Nor is any thing more
frequent in the Talmud, and those that expound it, than to mention Prayers made
in the Synagogues Glos. in Baeb. Beracoth. fol. 2. col. 1.
; So Maimonides tells us, Wherever there are Ten of Israel live together,
there they must huild a House of Prayer to meet in at the hours for Prayer, and
this House is called a Synagogue Maimon. Tephil. cap. ii.
. And he says it is forbidden for Men to pass by a Synagogue at the hours of
Prayer Idem ibid. cap. 6.
. And again, Let every man go Morning and Evening to the Synagogue, and if any
Man who has a Synagogue in his City, prays not in it with the Congregation, he
is an evil Neighbor Maim. Tephil. cap. 8. Et Baeb. Berac. fol. 8.
. And about our Savior's time we are told there were 480 in Jerusalem; yea
unto this day the Jews have Synagogues for Prayer and Religious Worship in all
Cities where they are tolerated; for of these Buxtorf says, They have
Synagogues or Schools; so they call their Churches Synagogas aut Scholas (ita
nimirum vocant Templa ipsorum) habent. Buxt. Synag. c. 5.
where they always meet (says he) at the appointed hours of Prayer, and there
they perform their Prayers according to the directions of their Books Idem ibid.
. Which constant use of the Jews in calling the Places for their Religious
Assemblies Synagogues, gave occasion to Christians also to call their Churches
by the very same name; so S. James speaks of one coming into the Christian
Synagogue James ii. 2. (...). Theoph. adv. Not. lib. 2.
; and some of the Ancients say the Holy Churches are called Synagogues. All
which sufficiently proves that the main end of Synagogues was for Prayer and
other Religious Meetings: yet we confess that when once the Nation was brought
under the Romans, so that the Jews had no Prince of their own, nor no great
Coercive Power: Then, and not before, it appears they had a Session of three
eminent Men in every Synagogue, to hear and determine such Causes as were left
to them, and were not sit to be complained of to the Roman Governor, and
because for more privacy they sometimes executed the Sentence as far as
Scourging the Malefactor in their Synagogues, Matthew. x. 17. Therefore some
Learned Men have fancied the Synagogues to be places for administering Civil
Justice: And hence Mr. Seldom would infer the Civil Magistrates Power in
Excommunication, and that this holy Interdict it self was chiefly, yea only a
Civil Punishment, and a denying to keep them Company in the Affairs of common
Life; but all unprejudiced Men must grant, That Excommunication or Turning out
of the Synagogue, necessarily implied a Separation from all Acts done in the
Synagogue, that is, First and chiefly from Prayers and Sermons; and Secondly
from the benefit of these private Tribunals; and Lastly from their Civil
Conversation also: Nor can it be improbable that they must both go together;
for if a Man be so wicked as to be judged unworthy to talk or eat with his
Brethren, he is much more unworthy to pray with them; and he who might not come
into the Synagogue when a Court was kept there, ought much more to be excluded
when Religious Offices were performing. And that Offenders were then excluded
from Religious Assemblies, may be sufficiently proved from the best Authors;
Josephus affirms, That if any of the Priests did offend, he was interdicted
from coming to the Altar, and from meddling with any Holy Office, In Ap. lib. 1.
page 632. and he says, The Essenes did not Sacrifice in the Temple, because
they had some Rites of their own which they counted more holy; for which Cause
being excluded from the Public Temple, they sacrificed in private by
themselves (...). Antiq. l 18. c. 2.
. Yea, the Custom of these Essenes among those of their own Sect, shows that
the Excommunication then in use among them, was an Exclusion from both
Religious and Civil Commerce; For if any of them were taken in any great Fault,
they cast him out of their Society (...). Jos. Bell. Jud. lib. 2. cap. 7.
; and none of them would ever come near him after this Censure, under which he
commonly dyed miserably. Athanasius also relates how the chief Priests and
Elders at Berytus did excommunicate that Jew, and cast him out of their
Synagogue, with whom an Image of our Savior was found Athanas. Tom. 2. p. 628.
. And not to search for more Examples, the usage of the Modern Jews derived
from their Fathers, does abundantly prove that Excommunication was a
deprivation of Communion in Sacred Offices; For when any is disobedient, They
curse him, and declare him openly to be excommunicated, and in this Case it is
not lawful for any to speak to him, or to come within four yards of him,
neither may he come into the Synagogue or School, but he is to sit upon the
Ground with his shoes off, as if he mourned for some of his dead Kindred; and
this he must do till he be absolved by the Rabbis, and shall have received
their Benediction. And if it be the solemn and grand Excommunication, then do
all the People repair to the School, lighting black Torches and sounding Horns,
they Curse him that shall do, or has done such a thing: and all the Children
and the People answer Amen; Leo Moden. History of the present Jews, Chap. 3.
page 70. Which last Passage minds me of the second degree of Excommunication,
called Cherem, which was not only a separating the Person from Religious and
Civil Commerce, but declaring him Accursed; yea, they did actually Curse him,
and wish dreadful Evils might befall him: Which kind of Anathema the Jews in
their Synagogues uttered against Christ and all Christians, as Justin Martyr at
large relates in diverse places Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 323, 335, and
363.
; yea, Epiphanius says that the Jews in their Synagogue, twice a Day, at Noon
and at Evening, did Curse and Anathematize the Christians, saying, O God, Curse
these Nazarites Epiphan. Panar. Sect. 29. p. 55. S. Hierom says they did it
thrice a day. Com. in Isai. v. 18.
. And the like Anathema's they pronounced against all those who read their Law
in the Greek Tongue, till Justinian did forbid this by a particular
Constitution yet extant in the Books of the Civil Law Justin. Auth. Collat. ix.
Tit. 29. Nov. 146 page 202.
. To this may be added a third sort of Excommunication sometimes used among the
Jews, called Schammatha, which was a solemn delivering a desperate and
incurable Criminal to the Divine Vengeance, which sometimes did terribly seize
on the accursed Person; and of this the name it self gives us intimation, which
some expound Ibi Mors, There is Death: Others, The Name comes, that is, God
comes; Jehovah (whose Name is not to be pronounced, especially in a Form of
Cursing) comes to take vengeance, which S. Paul gives us in the Syriac form,
Maran-atha, 1 Cor. xvi. 22. For Maran signifies a Lord in that Language, and
thence they call our Savior Marani, from which Appellation the Syrian
Christians are yet called Maronites. And some think S. Paul alludes to this,
where he speaks of wilful Apostates, and says, nothing remains for them but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, Hebr. x. 27. Yea some Learned Men
suppose that Enoch did thus excommunicate the wicked Wretches of his
Generation, when he could not convert them by his Preaching; for his Prophecy
begins with Maran-atha Jude ver. 14. vide Bertram de R. P. Juda. cap. 2. and
Molinaei, Vates.
. From all that has been said, we may now conclude, That from the Divine
Precedents, and from the most early Examples, the Jews did exercise this Power
of Excommunication, as a Spiritual Punishment upon scandalous Offenders; the
Power residing commonly in the Sacerdotal College of old, and of later times
in the Rabbi, who is the Master of the Synagogue, and that such as were under
this Censure were believed to be out of the Divine Favor, and unworthy of
Human Conversation, till they were restored by those who had sentenced them.
And the general dread the Jews had of this Censure, together with their
Aversation to those who were under it, plainly declares they did believe it was
of Divine Original, and was of great Efficacy: Which being the general Notion
of the Jewish Nation in our Savior's time, this Opinion did make way for the
receiving of this Institution, as Christ was to set it up in the Christian
Church, of which we are next to treat.

. IV. The third ground of Excommunication, and to us the principal, is, Our
blessed Savior's positive Institution of it; for which we have diverse clear
places of Holy Scripture: And yet the Learned Grotius thinks, if there were no
express Precept for it, it must be supposed, since when the Society of the
Church is once constituted by Christ, all those things must be supposed to be
commanded, without which that Society cannot preserve it self pure Grot. in
Luc. vi. 22. p. 379.
. But we need not fly to that refuge, for none can deny but that our Lord
appointed his Apostles to call and convert a Society out of the World, and that
he made them the Governors of this Society, giving them Rules to govern it by,
and promising to be with them and their Successors to the end of the World,
Matthew. xxviii. 20. And since he conferred this Office on them, we must enquire
what Power he communicated to them to enable them to perform it. First
therefore, When Peter had in the name of all the Apostles confessed Christ to
be the Son of God, Matthew. xvi. 15, 16. our Lord declares that he had made good
his Name of Peter (signifying a Rock) in laying this sure Foundation, and
assures him he would build his Church upon this Rock, that is, this Confession
of Faith in Christ the Rock of Ages Super hanc Petram firmae fidei. Epiphan.
haer. Cathar. p. 224. Super hanc Confessionis Petram. Hilarious. vid. Aug.
Retract. lib. 1. cap. 21. and Isidor. Peleus. l. 1. ep. 235.
. So that it should stand for ever in despite of all the opposition Hell could
make against it, ver. 18. And since so well-grounded and durable a House ought
to have some to Rule it, our Lord shows in the next verse who shall have the
Government of it, saying, And I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, ver. 19. Here
the Metaphor is continued, and the Church being compared to a House (its usual
emblem, 1 Timothy iii. 15. Ephesians. ii. 20.) the power of ruling this House is set
forth by giving the Keys, which are given to those who are chief Stewards and
Managers of the Family: So when God would express his committing the Government
of the House of David to Eltakim, he says, And the Key of the House of David
will I lay upon his shoulder, Isai. xxii. 21, 22. And our Lord's having the
Keys of Death and Hell, Revel. i. 18. is to manifest his Power to Condemn
thither, or to Save from thence: And these Keys here granted, are called The
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, as well because the Church and Kingdom of Grace
on Earth is called by that Name, Matthew. iii. 2. as because the Church is the
Gate to the Kingdom of Glory; and we cannot regularly come into the Kingdom of
Heaven above, but by and through this Gate of the Church on Earth, and so by
Consequence the Power of the Keys of the Church contain in them the right to
admit Men into this household of God by Baptism, and so making them Heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and to exclude men out of this household by Excommunication
for notorious and scandalous Offenses, and consequently to deprive them of the
Privileges which belonged to them while they were regular Members of God's
Family. And as a Prince, when he makes a Deputy or Viceroy, usually declares
in his Commission, That what he does in such a Province in his Name, and by his
Power, the Prince will ratify and confirm: So our Savior here tells Peter,
and in him the rest of the Apostles, that whatever he binds or looses on Earth
shall be bound or loosed in Heaven; meaning, that he will hold their Judicial
Acts for good and valid, so long as they keep to the Laws and Rules which he
has left them to govern by: And if any think the change of the Metaphor (from
Keys which are to open and shut, to binding and loosing) be somewhat harsh, the
Exposition of S. Chrysostom does well reconcile that difference; for he
supposes the Power of a Viceroy to be here signified (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
; and as he can Lock up Men in Prison, or Release them according as they
deserve, and has the Power of the Keys committed to him, to separate the
Innocent from the mischievous: So Christ here gives his Apostles like Authority
in order to the well governing of his Church; only this is no Temporal Coercive
Power, as many other Texts of the New Testament do declare, but a Spiritual
Power suitable to the nature and ends of this Sacred Society. This being
therefore the plain and natural Sense of the place, it is clear that our Lord
did here give his Apostles a Commission, as well to exclude notorious Criminals
out of his Church by Excommunication, as to readmit them upon their Repentance,
promising to confirm their Acts so long as they judged by his Rules; and this
may well be reckoned a proof that Excommunication is of Divine Institution. I
confess this Text has been strained too high by the Romanists, who though they
cannot easily prove themselves Peter's Successors, yet would gladly ground
their unjust claim to a Universal Monarchy over the whole Church upon this weak
pretense, That Peter himself is the Rock on which Christ was to build his
Church, and that this Privilege of the Keys is granted only to him and his
Successors at Rome; which others have largely and learnedly confuted. And I
need only say, That some of their own Communion, a few Ages since, did confess
This Power was given not to Peter only, but to all the Apostles, yea to all the
Clergy and the whole Church Haec autem ligandi and solvendi potestas quamvis
soli Petro data videatur, a Domino tamen and caeteris Apostolis datur, necnon
etiam in Episcopis and Presbyteris toti Ecclesiae. Raban. Maurus.
. And our Savior himself (to anticipate this unjust Claim) does afterward
twice grant the same Power to all the Apostles, which here he seems only to
give to S. Peter, Matthew. xviii. 18. John xx. 21, 22. Yet this false Gloss of
the Romanists, with the wild and extravagant Inferences deduced from thence,
has put some Learned Protestants into the other extreme, that is, into denying
there is any Power granted to the Apostles here more than the Power of a Doctor
or Teacher; and they will have the Key to be only the Key of Knowledge, Luke
xi. 52. and out of the Talmud they go about to prove that binding and loosing
signify nothing else but determining what things are lawful, and these are said
to be loosed; and what things are unlawful, which are said to be bound Gamero
in loc item Lightfoot horae Hebr. in Matthew.
. But we must not let the Sense of the Fathers, and the Power of the Keys to be
at once wrested out of our hands by this Novel fancy: For first, the place
cannot bear this Sense, since it is ridiculous to affirm that Christ gave his
Apostles such a Power, That whatever they declared or taught to be unlawful on
Earth, should be unlawful in Heaven, and whatever they taught was lawful, God
would make that lawful; this were to give them a power which God himself never
did assume, viz. to change the eternal and unalterable Rules of Good and Evil:
And besides, in the parallel place where these words are repeated by Christ,
Matthew. xviii. 18. they are applied to Offenders refusing to Repent upon the
Churches admonition; which obstinate sinners are to be avoided as Heathens and
Publicans by private Christians; and if they value not this, as being an Act
only of their Equals, Christ supposes his Apostles will then bind them by
Excommunication, and to show the weight of that Censure, he says, Whatsoever
they bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, ver. 18. which being spoken of the
validity of the Punishment inflicted on evil Men, can never be drawn to
signify only Teaching; yea, after our Lords Resurrection, he (who is the best
expounder of his own meaning) declares that binding and loosing signifies
remitting or retaining of sins, John xx. 21. and turns the Whatsoever ye shall
bind, etc. into Whosesoever sins ye remit, etc. Again, since the Misna, which
is the oldest part of the Talmud, was written 150 years after the destruction
of Jerusalem, which is later than any Canonical part of the New Testament Sixth.
Senens. Biblioth. lib. 2. page 148.
, those Learned Men above mentioned ought not to expound the more ancient
Phrases of the Gospel by these Talmudical expressions, yet even in the Talmud,
Binding and Loosing is often used for Excommunicating and Absolving R. Samuel
status cornu ligat, et flatus cornu solvit. Talm. Bab. Moed Katon c. 3. fol.
16. Os quod solvit, est, os quod ligat. Tract. Demai. cap. 6.. 11.
, which is the more obvious and natural Sense of the Words; and because the
doing things forbidden by the Rabbis caused Men to be Excommunicated or Bound
by this Censure, Therefore by a Trope the things themselves were said to be
Bound: So that we may conclude, That our Savior does actually here give
Authority to his Apostles, and to their lawful Successors, to shut Men, who are
scandalously wicked, out of his Church, and to let them in again upon their
Repentance, declaring their Sentence shall be ratified in Heaven. And thus the
Ancients generally expound this place; and from thence they frequently speak of
the Power of the Keys given by Christ to the Church, in order to the
Excommunicating and Absolving of Sinners: Of which, because there are
innumerable Instances, one or two shall suffice Ecclesia quae fundatur in
Christo claves ab eo regni coelorum accepit in Petro, i. e. potestatem ligandi
solvendique peccata. Aug. Tract. 124 in Johan. Cum excommunicat Ecclesia,
ligatur in Coelo excommunicatus. Aug. in Psalm. 108. Vid. Ambros. de poenit. l.
1. c. 6.
, that so Reason and Authority both may show our Exposition of this Place is
true and certain; which will be further confirmed by considering the second
place where this Power is mentioned, viz. Matthew. xviii. 18. Verily I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever
ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven; the very same words with
those spoken to Peter, Chap. xvi. 19. But if we look back to the occasion of
them here, it will appear they can be meant of nothing but of Ecclesiastical
Discipline: For in this xviiith Chapter, Our Lord first labors to prevent the
doing Injuries and Offenses to the meanest of his Disciples, ver. 1. to ver.
14. But secondly, in case Injuries be done, or any Scandal or Offense given,
Christ teaches the offended Person what method to take, viz. First privately to
admonish the Offender, ver. 15. If that prevail not, the grieved party must
rebuke him before witness, ver. 16. And if this also prove unsuccessful, and
the Offender remain obstinate, then he must complain to the Church, which is
supposed to rebuke, and if need be, to Censure the stubborn Criminal; and if he
do not hear the Church (that is, submit to its Sentence, and make reparation)
then Private Christians are to renounce all Communion and Commerce with that
Man, and carry themselves toward him as the Jews did to a Heathen or Publican,
with whom they would not discourse nor eat, Matthew. ix. 11. Galat. ii. 12. nor
yet suffer them to come into that Court of the Temple where they were wont to
pray, Acts xxi. 28. for on the Gate was written, Let no Stranger go into the
Holy Place Joseph. Bell. Jud. lib. 6. cap. 14.
. That is, they must no longer count this Man a Member of the Christian Church,
nor call him a Brother, but esteem him as a Pagan, and one who never yet was
admitted; or a Publican, who for living in open Sins was cast out, and with
such a Man, the rest of the sound Christians were not to have any Commerce in
Civil or Religious Matters. But if all this will neither shame nor terrify the
wicked Wretch, so as to bring him to Repentance, because he may think this
Sentence inflicted by the Church is but an Human Act, and pronounced only by
Mortal Men, Our Lord declares That this Sentence is of Divine Authority; and
though it be pronounced only by Men, yet it shall be confirmed in Heaven: For
says he, Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. ver. 18. And
because Christ was to be in Heaven, he assures them ver. 19. and 20. That
whatever Public Acts of Discipline they did when they were assembled, and
desired his Confirmation of them, he would grant it to them; yea, when they met
together in his Name, and by his Authority committed to them, did proceed to
Censure Offenders, he declares he was present there virtually and effectually,
ver. 20. Now here seems to be no room for evasion; yet those who love to find
knots in the Bulrush, do object to this plain Exposition: First, That this is
meant of private Injuries when the Believers had no Judicatures to right them
but Jewish or Heathen, and though in that Case they were to use this Method,
yet now Christians have Magistrates and Laws of their own, this order is void
of it self. To which Grotius replys, That Christian Tribunals do not take away
the power of judging from the Church, because the Civil Laws do only punish the
grosser Crimes, and such as are most contrary to Civil Societies, but there are
many Offenses against Charity, Meekness and Patience, not forbid by the Civil
Laws, but only by Christ's Laws, by which the Church judges; so that
Constantine and his Successors did well to leave this power of Judging to the
Church, and to confirm it by their Laws, as may be seen in the Acts of the
Councils, and in the Code Grot. Com. in Luc. vi. 22.
. To which I shall add, That Christ here speaks not only of Injuries, but of
all kinds of Sins which are called Scandals or Offenses, because they may be an
occasion of our Brethrens falling into Apostasy or evil Practices if these go
unpunished; and many Sins must be unpunished, if none be taken notice of, but
those which the Civil Laws forbid Romans xiv. 13. 1 Cor. viii. 10.
, and therefore Scandals and Trespasses are used promiscuously (...), Matthew.
xviii. 7. but ver. 21. (...). So also 1 Cor. viii. 12.
: So that many evil things which are scandalous, and offend weak Christians,
are still to be punished by the Church; and since the ends of Church Censures
are to bring the Offender to Repentance, to clear the Church from the blot
contracted by this Crime, and to warn others not to follow so ill an Example,
and the nature of them is more gentle and more spiritual than the Civil
Punishments, doubtless they may well subsist together in the same Nation,
without subverting one another. Secondly, The Learned Mr. Seldom seeks many
Glosses for those words, Tell the Church, which he sometimes expounds of the
Jewish Magistrates in the Synagogue, and sometimes of the whole Assembly,
manifestly designing to take this Power out of the Bishops hands: But for his
first Notion, how improbable is it that Christ should allow his Disciples (who
were not to sue for their very Cloaks, Matthew. v. 40.) to go to their mortal
Foes the unbelieving Jews to complain of Injuries; and according to Mr.
Selden's Notion of a Synagogue for a Court of Justice, they were more like to
be scourged, or receive new Injuries, than to get right there; and Christ would
rather have said, Tell it to the Synagogue, than tell the Church: But an easy
Prolepsis will solve this seeming difficulty; for it was usual with our Lord
(whose words were to be writ for after times) to allude to things not then
instituted, as he does to Baptism, John iii. 5. and to the Eucharist, John vi.
51. so we may reasonably believe he gave this Rule with respect to those
Assemblies of Christians which he foresaw would soon after grow into a distinct
Society, and be ruled by his Apostles and their Successors, to whom these
Complaints were then to be made: For I must venture to prefer S. Chrysostom's
Exposition before that which Mr. Seldom writ under a Rebellious Democracy; and
that holy Father tells us expressly, that by the Church here, is meant the
Governors of the Church (...) Hom. 69. in Matthew. Tom. II. p. 385.

(...). Theoph.


, whom Theophilact agrees with: And St. Augustine expressly affirms, That it is
the Governors of the Church which have received this power from Christ, in
this place of St. Matthew xviii. 17, 18. Augustine. de Civ. Dei lib. 20. c. 9.
p. 213.
. And common Speech confirms this explication of the Fathers; for we say, He
complains to the City, who complains to the Governors of it. But our Savior
puts it past all dispute, that he intended this Power only for his Apostles and
their Successors, because to them, and no other, he grants a Commission to
remit and retain sins, John xx. 23. It Is true, the Apostles and Primitive
Bishops were wont to exercise this Discipline in the Presence of the People,
and with their Approbation, but the Authority was wholly in the Governor, and
the Judicial Act was solely his; St. Peter and S. Paul did pass the Censure,
and the Bishops their Successors: But they did this in and before the Assembly,
for greater Solemnity, and because the People were to know and avoid these
Offenders; as also that the openness of the shame might make the Criminals
sooner repent, and be a more effectual warning to others not to follow so bad
an Example: But from this presence of the whole Assembly, to infer their
joining in the Authoritative part, is a very weak Consequence, and confuted
both by Scripture and Antiquity, as we shall see in the sequel: For this shall
suffice here to prove, that in this second place our Lord Jesus has left Power
with the Governors of his Church to receive Complaints concerning scandalous
Offenders, and to bind them with the Bond of Excommunication till they do
repent, and that he has commanded the People to refuse all Communion with
these in Sacred Civil Actions while they remain obstinate; yea, and declared
that they who remain obdurate and impenitent under this Sentence, shall not
only be excluded from Communion with the Church on Earth, but be bound in
Heaven also, and excluded from thence if they do not submit and repent.
Thirdly, these two places being only promises of a future Privilege, we may
read the fulfilling of them, when Christ ordained the Apostles for Governors
of his Church after his Resurrection; for he sent them with Authority as his
Father sent him, John xx. 21. and to give them inward ability to exercise this
high and holy Office he gives them the Holy Ghost by the Ceremony of breathing
on them, ver. 22. Finally to oblige all the Society to revere and obey them, he
grants them the power of binding and loosing without a Metaphor, saying,
Whosesoever Sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye
retain they are retained, ver. 23. Which place evidently makes them Judges
under Christ concerning such Offenses as are committed by those in the Church,
so that if they should find any Man obstinate in his evil ways, they might
retain his Sins, that is, declare him unsit for, and unworthy of pardon, and
consequently of the Churches Communion, wherein forgiveness is to be obtained;
and while the Offender remains impenitent Christ declares his Guilt remains on
him, and his Sin shall not be pardoned: But if the party submit and repent, so
that the Governors of the Church judge him sincere, and take off this
Sentence, by declaring him penitent, then his Sin shall be forgiven in Heaven,
as well as his Censure is reversed on Earth: Which promise no doubt our Savior
makes good as often as these his Stewards do judge by the Rules and Measures he
has given them: And since Christ gave his Apostles and their Successors no
Temporal Power, nor any other way to punish Offenders but this, they who would
rob them of this Power, do what they can to strip them of all Authority, and
bring the Church by Anarchy into Confusion. It Is true, these words are repeated
to every Priest in his Ordination, and the Power is committed to him so far as
may enable him to serve the necessities of single Persons whose faults are made
known to him by private complaint or voluntary confession: But for orders sake,
where the Offense is public, and the Scandal evident, there the Bishop only
exercises this Power of remitting and retaining; and it is this latter Power
which only concerns Excommunication, and which was given originally to the
Apostles as Governors of the Church: And while there are Offenses and
Offenders in the Church (as there will be to the Worlds end) this Power must
remain in the Church Governors for the preservation of this holy Society,
which as Jesus did found, so he has (we see) taken care to endue those he set
over it with such kind of Coercive Power as is necessary for the good ordering
thereof.

CHAP. II. Of the Practice of Excommunication.
. I. SInce our blessed Savior had thus, in as clear words as could be spoken,
given his Apostles this Power of Excluding Offenders out of that Christian
Church which they were to plant and rule, it is plain they had Authority to
exercise this Discipline by Divine Right, and therefore it must be a gross
Error in the Learned Mr. Seldom to affirm their Right was derived partly from
the Jews and partly from the Roman Emperors Edicts, which allowed the Jews
liberty to observe their own Rites Seldom. Syned. c. 8. p. 120.
. For though we grant that the Christians did for some few years after our
Lord's Resurrection observe some of the Jewish Ceremonies, and were by the
Gentile Writers grossly mistaken for a Sect of the same Religion many years
after, yet they had a distinct Name within Ten years after Christ's
Resurrection Baron. Annal. Eccles. An. 43.
, and were long before that Excommunicated and persecuted by the Jews, Acts
viii. 1. Chap. ix. 2. and the Synod at Jerusalem had declared that the Gentile
Converts need not observe the Ceremonial Law; So that the Christians were a
distinct Society, and had Officers of their own, and Assemblies proper to
themselves; and these Officers did exercise a Jurisdiction over them, and
openly declared they derived their Power, not from the Jews, but from Christ, 2
Cor. x. 8. 1 Cor. v. 4. So that it is ridiculous to assert, That the right of
Apostolical Excommunication was from the Jews, and there is a vast difference
between their imitating some of the Jewish Forms or Customs in the exercise of
these Censures, and their deriving a right from them, even as the Church of
England does imitate some of the Forms of the Roman Church in her
Excommunications; but it does not follow therefore that she derives her Right
to excommunicate from the Pope or the Church of Rome. And for the Edicts of the
Emperors which were made in favor of the Jews, there is no proof that ever
the Christians claimed any benefit by them, yet if they did, these Edicts gave
them no right to Govern a Society set up on purpose to abrogate the whole
Worship and Ceremonies peculiar to the Jews; and though they might give them a
liberty (from Secular Compulsion) in the exercise of that right which Christ
had given them, yet they did not convey that right to them. So that these are
mere Subterfuges contrived to escape the force and strong evidence of a Divine
Right, which is so clear, not only from our Savior's Institution, but the
Apostolic practice grounded thereon, to which we shall now proceed. The
Apostles principal work was to bring Converts into the Church, and yet when
need required, they also exercised that other Power of Casting notorious
Offenders out of it. S. Peter, to whom Christ directed his first promise of
this Authority, was the first who exercised it; and the first Sin which he
retained was the Sacrilege of Ananias and Saphira, which was joined with a
hope to deceive the Holy Ghost which dwelt in the blessed Apostle, and that our
Lord might make his Officers Rebukes more dreadful, an immediate Judgment
followed the Censure, for Ananias and his Wife were struck with sudden death;
and the effect of this was, That great fear came upon all the Church, Acts v.
11. And though Christ had given no Secular Power to his Apostles, this great
Example did make the Christians reverence the Persons, and fear the just
Reproofs of those he had set over them. The next Instance was that of Simon
Magus, who had pretended to believe and was baptized, Acts viii. 13. but it
seems he had dissembled with God and Men, and only designed to make a gain of
the Power of Miracles, which he vilely offered Money for, as if it had been
only an Art which might be bought and sold; whereupon S. Peter declares him
accursed, ver. 20. saying, His Money and he should perish together: By which
Phrase he intimates, he was (as the Jews speak) under Cherem, and that he might
separate him from the Church, he declares ver. 21. Thou have neither part nor
lot with us in this matter: which are the very words of the Tribes beyond
Jordan, who express their fear of their Posterity's being rejected from
Communion with the other Tribes because of their distance, by this very Phrase,
They will say unto them, Ye have no part in the Lord Josh. xxii. 5. Call. Par.
Non estis inter quos est verbi divini Communitas. LXX. (...).
. And in the like form of Speech, the Bond of Society in Civil Matters was
declared void, 2 Samuel xix. 1. 1 Kings xii. 16. Yea, our Lord thus threatens to
reject S. Peter if he would not admit his washing, saying, If I wash thee not,
thou have no part in me, John xiii. 8. And further, as a Reason of this
destruction denounced, and this Separation inflicted on Simon Magus the Apostle
shows, he is still (...) under the Bond of his Sin, which by this Declaration
was retained according to the Power given by Christ; yet he does not cut off
this Sinner, but to show he did this for his Amendment, he still exhorts him to
Repentance, ver. 22. and 23. Upon which the Offender immediately submits, and
fearing some Judgment would follow this Apostolical Excommunication, desires
the Apostles (as the Primitive Penitents did the Faithful afterward) to, pray
for him, ver. 24. which is a plain description of this Rite Vide Apostol. Can.
29.
. And Mr. Seldom mentions some ancient Arabic Manuscripts, which in the Form
of Excommunication say, Let him be accursed and excommunicated, as Peter
excommunicated Simon Magus Seld Synedr. l. 1. c. 8. p. 119.
. The next Example is that of the Incestuous Corinthian, 1 Corinthians. v. 1, 2.
who had scandalously married his Fathers Wife, yet the Church of Corinth
connived at this notorious Crime, and had high thoughts of themselves, though
this gross Scandal had been done among them, whereas they ought rather to have
lamented the deplorable condition of the Sinner, and cast him out of their
Church by Excommunication; for (...) here and ver. 13. does not signify to
take him away by death, but to drive or take him away from assembling with
them: Only because this was a kind of Spiritual death, therefore the Ancient
Church use to inflict this Censure with weeping and lamenting over the
Offender, as if he had been really dead (...). Clem. constit. lib. 2. -- (...).
Orig. in Cells. lib. 3. p. 142.
, which was not unlike the Custom of the Pythagoreans, who set a Coffin in the
place of him that had forsaken their School. And if the Corinthians had been
thus truly sensible of the sad estate of this vile Wretch, they would no doubt
have cut him off from their Body as a common Annoyance, (as (...). Theophilact.
Theophilact speaks) or as a gangrened Limb. But since the Schism there had
loosened the Discipline, our Apostle though absent in Body, yet as present by
his Authority, decrees he shall be Excommunicated, ver. 3. and directs them how
to proceed, ver. 4. When they were assembled for Public Worship in Christ's
Name (for these Censures, as we noted before, were inflicted in Public to
produce the greater shame and terror in the Offender) then according to the
Sentence which S. Paul had pronounced by the Spirit, and by virtue of that
Power which our Lord Jesus had committed to him, and which he now delegates to
the Rulers of the Corinthian Church, he charge them, ver. 5. to deliver this
incestuous Man over to Satan, that he might inflict some bodily pains and
diseases on him, to bring him to a sense of his Sin, that so his Soul might be
saved at the last and dreadful day of Judgment. As to which Phrase of
delivering to Satan, it is certainly meant of Excommunication, both here and 1
Timoth. i. 20. for as by Baptism Men were delivered from the power of Satan,
Acts xxvi. 18. whence those Primitive Exorcisms and solemn Renunciations of the
Devil: So when Apostates and Evil men broke this Covenant, and were cast out of
the Church again, they were as it were delivered back to Satan, they became as
Heathens, Matthew. xviii. 17. and were under the Dominion of the Prince of
Darkness: Yet to show this Discipline was not to destruction but to
edification, the Apostle declares this delivering to Satan was not for the
damnation of their Souls, but that Satan (by God's permission, and as God's
Executioner) might torment their Bodies by some grievous Disease, whereby they
might be humbled and brought to Repentance in order to their final Salvation.
It is well known that the Jews generally did believe Satan was the Inflicter of
all Diseases, Joh. ii. 4, 5, 6, 7. Luke xiii. 16. Mark ix. 17. And in the
Infancy of the Church God was pleased (to give greater credit to his Apostles,
and instead of Temporal Power) to second their Censures with Diseases, and so
to confirm their Sentence in that Age of Miracles; and though now the Gospel is
sufficiently attested, these miraculous Attestations as needless are withdrawn,
yet still those who are cast out of the Church, are really exposed to Satan's
malice until they submit, and by repentance be received in again. But the
Apostle proceeds, ver. 6. that they must not glory of their Purity while such
contagious and spreading Vices remained uncensured, but ver. 7. must clear
themselves from these vicious Persons, that they might be fit to communicate
with Christ their Passoever. He also adds, That in a former Epistle (now not
extant) he had enjoined them to avoid the company and conversation of
Fornicators; that is, that the Church should Censure them, and the People have
no Conversation with them; but he now explains himself, that he means not this
should be extended to the Jews or Pagans, who were no professed Christians, and
so not liable to its Discipline, and by whose Faults no Scandal could fall on
the Church; but he now tells them who are to be Excommunicated and avoided,
viz. those who pretend they are Christians, and yet are Fornicators, Covetous,
Idolaters, Railers, Drunkards and Extortioners Habes hic praecipuas
excommunicationiz causas. Grot. in locum.
, with these (though through the Schisms at Corinth, the Bishop could not so
well Excommunicate them) the faithful People must not so much as eat a common
Meal, and sure much more not admit them to their Religious Worship, and eat
with them at the Lords Table, ver. 11. Now if any say S. Paul is partial in
being more severe against Christians than Strangers, for the same Crimes; he
answers, ver. 12. That his Commission extended not to them that were without,
they were to be left to God's Judgment; but he and they (by Authority delegated
from him) had power to judge and sentence those who were Members of their own
Society; and so he concludes, ver. 13. That leaving the Unconverted to God's
Judicature, they must proceed to Excommunicate, and take away by
Excommunication this and other evil Persons, and so by the severity of these
Divine Censures they might in time obtain that end of punishment in all
Societies (even the taking away of Evil from among them) so often mentioned in
Moses's Law, and by the LXX. often rendered in the Masculine Gender (...), LXX.
Deuteronomy. xvii. 17. xxi. 21. xxiv. 7. Haec itaque est vera lectio hujus loci non
(...) quod D. Seldeno placet.
, yet sometimes in the Neuter Deuteronomy. xix. 19. and xxii. 21.
. To conclude, This Chapter contains full and clear directions for this holy
Discipline, and an Example which admits of no evasion: For if this were to be
executed by S. Paul's Order, and by the Power of Christ on all notorious and
scandalous Offenders, and if the Church were to cast out such from their
Society, and the People to refrain from conversing with them, if the Church was
to judge them, and its Members were to avoid them, then Excommunication was
practiced (as it is now, in the main) even in the Apostles days, and their
Rules and Actions are our Warrant for it. But since Christ gave his Apostles
not only a power to retain, but also to remit Sins, we have a further account
in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, That this Incestuous Person (for of
him the Fathers generally agree S. Paul speaks 2 Corinthians. ii. 6. Origin in
Psalm. xxxvii. Ambros. Hieron. Theoph. in loc.
) who had grieved the Church of Corinth, was exceedingly grieved himself, and
in danger to be swallowed up of too much sorrow; wherefore S. Paul desires his
Censure may be taken off, declaring that this public Reproof and severe
Sentence (...) 2 Cor. ii. 6. (...) vocantur Poenae Canonicae in Act.
Consiliorum, and ap. Chrysostom. de Sacerd. Grot.
in the presence of the whole Congregation, having brought him to Repentance
was a sufficient Penalty; and now he requires them to forgive him, and grant
him Absolution, ver. 7. expecting they should obey him in all his Orders, as
well the former for censuring, as these for absolving, ver. 9. First, Because
in all his Orders he had respect unto their good: And secondly, Because he
commanded them by the Authority, and as the Ambassador of Christ, who (in all
these Judicial Acts of Excommunicating and Absolving) did represent the Person
of Christ himself (...) ver. 10. Non in mea persona sed Christi qui dixit,
Quaecunque solveritis in terra erant soluta in Coelo. Hieron. Ut factum
Apostoli factum sit Christi. Ambros. (...) Theoph.
, who had given this Commission to his Apostles, That whatsoever they should
bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven: So the Fathers expound this Phrase in
the Person of Christ: And we may observe, That as S. Paul did Cast him out of
the Church, not by their common Suffrages, (as S. Ambrose speaks) but with the
Power of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, by his Authority and Sentence, whose
Ambassador on Earth the Apostle was Ambros. Comment. in 1 Cor. v. p. 358.
; So he restores him again (upon his Repentance) not by any Suffrage of the
Church Members, but by Christ's Authority, and as his Representative, which
shows that the People are merely witnesses in this Case, but the Governors of
the Church only act by Authority: The Peoples presence tends to the Solemnity,
not to the validity of Excommunication or Absolution, which in this Instance
are both plainly founded by S. Paul upon a Divine Authority, and deduced from
that Commission granted by Christ to his Apostles, and consequently to their
Successors. I have been the larger on this, because it is a fair Precedent
drawn by the Hand of an Apostle, of the Practice of these two great Points of
Jurisdiction, and a clear Commentary upon our Savior's Commission, as well as
a strong Proof that Church Censures are of Divine Right. Many other Expressions
there are in these Epistles relating to this Matter (which we will only briefly
remark) viz. all those which speak of S. Paul's coming to them in sorrow 2 Cor.
ii. 1, 2, 3, etc. (...) Theoph.
, and making them sorry; that is, by ordering Offenders to be censured, which
Act was always done with sorrow, as the receiving them in again was with joy. So
he says, He fears when he comes again God will humble him among them, and that
he shall bewail many who have sinned already, and have not repented 2 Cor. xii.
21. (...). Teoph. Eugere, dicitur, pro excommunicare. Grot. in 3 Cor. v. 2.
; which the Ancients expound of Excommunicating them. And in that sense we are
to understand those places where S. Paul speaks of making them sorry with an
Epistle, 2 Cor. vii. 8. and of the godly sorrow which works Repentance to
Salvation, not to be repented of, ver. 10. Again, To this belongs that
Authority which made him ready to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. x. 6. which
he calls The Authority which the Lord had given him for edification, and not
for destruction, ver. 8. For whereas the Temporal Sword destroys the Criminals,
these Spiritual Censures are designed to bring Offenders to Repentance and
Salvation; and therefore the Apostle uses this Phrase again, Chap. xiii. 10.
where having (as our Savior directed, Matthew. xviii. 15, 16.) admonished them
twice by his Epistles, he assures them, that when he comes (which would be the
third Application made to them.) He will not spare the Impenitent, 1 Cor. xiii.
2. but would use sharpness or severity, ver. 10. (...). vid Tit. i. 13. (...).
Theoph.
that is, proceed immediately to Excommunicate them, according to that Power
wherewith Christ had invested him, for edification and not for destruction: For
which cause they ought not to think much at this Power which Christ had given
the Governors of his Church, because the end of it was, not the destruction,
but the reformation of Offenders: And if they would amend without it, our
Spiritual Fathers, would be much better pleased. Further, we may note, That not
only for wicked practices, but for Heretical Opinions and false Doctrines also,
the Apostles used Excommunication; as in that place, If we or an Angel from
Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto
you, let him be Anathema, or Accursed, Galat. i. 8. And to show this was no
rash, but a deliberate Judicial Act, he repeats it ver. 9. And here it will be
seasonable to enquire into the Sense of this word Anathema, so often used
concerning Excommunication (...), page 87. (...). Theoph^e Chrysostom.
Abominabilis sit. Hieron. Condemnatus, devotus and detestabilis. Aug.
. The Ancients explain it Accursed, Excommunicated, Separated, Alienated,
Abominable, Detestable and Devoted; all which respect Persons Excommunicated:
And the LXX. do generally thus translate the Hebrew Cherem Josh. vii. 1. Deuteronomy.
vii. 26. and alibi.
, the name of one Species of Excommunication among the Jews. It Is true, it
sometimes signifies a thing dedicated to God. The reason of which different
Senses S. Chrysostom thus gives; As no man dares touch a Gift offered and
devoted to God, so no man dares touch one that is Anathematized; but this is
done for different reasons: None will come near the holy Gift, because it is
Consecrated to God; but all men separate from the Excommunicated, as being
unholy and alienated from God ap. Theoph. in Romans ix. 3. and ipse Chrysostom.
hom. 16. in 9. Romans ita etiam Theodor. in loc.
. And Theodoret notes that Anathema signifies not only that which is offered to
God, but that which is alienated from him; and in the latter Sense he applies
it to Excommunication, which Alienates men from the Common Body of the Church;
and as S. Chrysostom speaks, Separates them from all, and alienates them from
all, in Romans 9. And in this Sense those who Apostatized from the Faith, did
call Jesus Anathema, 1 Cor. xii. 3. that is, renounce all Communion with him,
and agree to that Sentence of Cherem, which the Jews had pronounced against him
as an Accursed Person. And S. Paul, in the height of his Charity to his
Countrymen, wishes himself Anathema from Christ, so they might be saved, Romans
ix. 3. that is, he could be content to be cut off and excommunicated from the
Church and Body of Christ, so they were all united to it. Upon the whole Matter
we may conclude, That this Anathema in the Galatians, is a Formal and Solemn
Excommunication denounced against all who preach false Doctrines instead of the
true Gospel; and such another Sentence is thundered forth against all That love
not the Lord Jesus, Let them be Anathema Maran-atha, 1 Cor. xvi. 22. only there
is added an intimation, That the Lord will come and take Vengeance on those who
are thus Accursed deservedly by the Church for corrupting the Faith: But of
this Maran-atha we spoke before. However, it may be proper here to observe,
That from this Apostolical practice, the Primitive Church was wont in her
Canons which concerned Matters of Faith, or were levelled against notorious
Crimes, to annex an Anathema to them, intimating those Doctrines and Practices
were accursed, and deserved Excommunication. So in the end of the Nicene Creed,
the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church Anathematizes the Arrians: And the
first Council at Constantinople pronounces an Anathema against every Heresy
Conc. Constant. Can. I. Bever. Tom. I. p. 85.
: So does the Council of Gangra close every Canon with this Anathema Conc.
Gangrens. ibid. p. 415.
; which Balsamon explains to be for the subversion of those Heresies, being a
Declaration that for such Opinions and Practices they shall be Excommunicated:
And it is very certain that the Apostles themselves did actually excommunicate
Men for Heresy: For Hymenaeus was an Heretic, 2 Timothy ii. 17. denying the
Futurity of the Resurrection; and Alexander had made Shipwreck of his Faith
too; yea both of them were void of good Conscience: wherefore S. Paul
excommunicates these two, 1 Timothy i. 19, 20. delivering them to Satan, that they
might learn not to blaspheme. And that the same thing is meant by delivering to
Satan and Anathematizing, we may learn from Balsamon and Zonaras, who say that
an Anathema is nothing else but a kind of dedicating one to Satan Anathema
dicitur (...). Praef. ad Council. Gangr.
. And more largely, Such an one is an Anathema, that is separated from God: For
as that which is offered to God is called an Anathema, and is separated from
common uses; so he who is Anathematized, is torn off and cast out from the
Society of the Faithful, who belong to God, and from God himself, and is set
apart for the Devil, or rather sets himself apart for him Zonar. in Can. 3.
Goncil. Constant. Bever. Tom. I. p. 363. and Balsamon ibid.
. And for this Exposition they cite the Apostle S. Paul in the places before
produced. But because some late Authors would have this delivering to Satan,
peculiar to the Apostles times; I shall grant, that the being seized with
Diseases, which was the miraculous effect of it, was peculiar to those first
Ages, while these wonderful and supernatural Penalties were necessary for
confirming the New-planted Gospel; but the Title which Satan has to such as
are deservedly Excommunicated for Heresy or gross Crimes, is as real, though
not so visible now; as we may learn from Theophylact: How (says he) did he
deliver them to Satan? He cast them out of the Church, he turned them out of
the Sheepfold, and exposed them naked to the Wolf; for as once the Cloud
overshadowed the Tabernacle, so does the Spirit the Church of Christ: Therefore
if any be out of the Church, he is deserted by the Spirit, and so becomes
miserable and an easy Prey to Satan: Such is the Punishment of Excommunication
Theophylact. in 1 Timothy i. 20.
. For the Devil is always ready to take those into his Power who are alienated
from God, says S. Ambrose Ambros. Com. in eundem loc.
. And so dreadful a thing was it accounted in the Primitive Times to be thus
Anathematized and delivered to Satan, That they generally used these Anathema's
rather against Opinions and Practices at large, than against Persons,
contenting themselves with (...), a bare Separation of those from the
Communion, whose Repentance they could possibly hope for: Which perhaps those
charitable Bishops might learn from the Apostles, who though they did
Anathematize the most notorious Criminals, and the Ringleaders of Heresy, and
deliver them to Satan, by the worst sort of Excommunication, like the Jewish
Cherem, yet they were content only to warn the Faithful, to avoid the Society
of other Sinners, agreeable to the lower sort of Jewish Excommunication by
Niddui: For as to the Authors of Schism, the Apostle bids them mark and avoid
them, Romans xvi. 17. which being to be done by all the Christians of that
Church, it must amount to an excluding them from their Religious Assemblies and
Civil Conversation also: Though Grotius thinks there was yet no fixed
Government of the Church at Rome; if there had, S. Paul had ordered these to be
Excommunicated, which not being in the Peoples power, all they could do was to
avoid them. The like Rules the Apostle gives to the Thessalonians, whom he
commands in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ to withdraw themselves from every
Brother who walks disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6. which being pronounced so
solemnly in Christ's Name, and by his Authority, is a kind of general Sentence
of Excommunication, upon which they were to avoid such Men's Company. So again,
ver. 14. He who obeyed not the Apostles Orders, they were to signify his name
to S. Paul in an Epistle (...), ver. 14.
of Complaint, and by forbearing to hold any Communion with him, shame him into
amendment: Yet not to hate him during this his Separation and Exclusion, but to
admonish him, that if possible he might be reduced before he was utterly cut
off from being a Brother. For these Admonitions did regularly precede the
Solemn Excommunication, as we learn from S. Paul's directions to Timothy Bishop
of Ephesus, where the Bishop was openly before all the Congregation, to rebuke
notorious Offenders for a terror to others, 1 Timothy v. 20. And if this would not
prevail, but he was forced to Excommunicate them, he then enjoins him, as in
the Presence of God and Christ, and his holy Angels (who were present in the
Church where these Consures were laid on) to proceed impartially, ver. 21. and
not hastily to Absolve them again (by the Ceremony of Laying on of Hands, Cypr.
Epist. ad Pleb. number. xii.) before they had repented, lest he should make
himself liable to other Men's sins, ver. 22. In like manner S. Paul advises
Titus his Vicegerent and Successor in Crete, concerning those Jewish Seducers
who subverted many, and concerning those Cretians who were seduced by them, To
rebuke them sharply (...). Titus i. 13. See 1 Cor. xiii. 10.
, that they might be sound in the Faith: And more plainly, Chap. iii. 10. he
commands him, After the first and second Admonition, to reject a Man that is an
Heretic: which is a direction for depriving him of the Communion of the
Church, since whomsoever the Bishop did reject, he was necessarily excluded
from Divine Offices, and all the Faithful, who cleaved always to their Bishop,
renounced such a Man's Consersation, for in so doing they observed our
Savior's Order, that when any would not hear the Church, they should count him
as an Heathen man and a Publican, Matthew. xviii. 17. which was the Case of an
obstinate Heretic that would not hear the Bishop's Admonitions. And as the
more Religious Jews would not eat with Publicans or Sinners ( i.e. Gentiles) so
the Faithful were enjoined (by the Apostles) with notorious Criminals no not to
eat, 1 Cor. v. 11. that is, not to eat a common Meal with them, as the Jews
would not eat with one Excommunicated by Niddui; and indeed eating was a sign
of Friendship, which Orthodox Christians were not to have with these, who were
an abomination to them, Genes. xliii. 32. and Galat. ii. 12. Now it is, in my
Opinion, a very weak Enquiry to ask here, Whether this eating be meant of the
Lord's Supper, or no? Because it is certain a minori ad majus, that if a
Christian might not eat an ordinary Meal with an excommunicate Person in a
private House, much more ought he to avoid his Company in so high an Act of
Religion as eating the Lord's Supper: For no doubt, whosoever was under
Censure, so as to be shut out of the Houses of Christians, were not admitted to
their Religious Assemblies: For these Disturbers of Christian Unity, like dead
Branches or gangrened Members, were to be wholly cut off from the Body of
Christ's Church, as S. Paul speaks, Galat. v. 12. in so much that S. John
expressly forbids the Faithful to show any kindness by way of common Civility to
those who hold not the right Faith, saying, If any come to you, and bring not
this Doctrine, do not receive him into your House, nor bid him God speed, 2
Epist. S. John, ver. 10. Which aversation and utter disclaiming all Testimonies
of Friendship, were grounded on those Anathema's pronounced by the Apostles
against all such notorious Heretics, who were by all to be esteemed as
excommunicated ipso facto: And hence arose that usage in the Ancient Church,
not to salute any that was excommunicated, as we see in Synesius's Epistles
Synesij Epist. 58. p. 503.
, and in the Capitulars Capitul. Francor. lib. 5. cap. 42. p. 96.
, and we may be sure, if they would not pray for them in way of usual Civility,
they would not endure them in their Houses of Prayer; it being recorded of this
S. John, That he leapt out of the Bath unwashed, when he saw Cerinthus the
Heretic come in thither Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3.
. And truly it was useful and safe for the Orthodox Christians thus totally to
renounce all Conversation with these Seducers, whose words might easily infect
them if once they held communication with them. But if any Scruple yet remain
concerning the excluding the excommunicated from Religious Assemblies, and
consequently from Prayers and Sacraments in the time of the Apostles, the
Instance of Diotrephes will sufficiently remove it; for he bearing himself as a
Bishop, would not communicate with those who came from S. John, and if any did
hold Communion with them, he Cast them out of the Church, 3 Epist. S. John,
ver. 10. or Excommunicated them, by forbidding them to come into the Christian
Assemblies, and denying to them the participation of Divine Offices, which was
the principal part of the Penalty in that Exclusion: And his doing this to such
as he counted false-Teachers, and Men walking disorderly, shows it was
frequently practiced in that time. Thus we have seen how the Apostles exercised
that Authority which our Lord Jesus gave them, as often as there was Occasion:
And by what has been said we may observe, That they made Christ Jesus the
Author of this holy Discipline, and the Apostles with their Successors the sole
Ministers thereof: That they inflicted this Censure for Heresy, Schism, and
for gross Impieties and Immoralities, and counted the Person who was thus
Censured in a very deplorable and damnable Condition, and one who was no Member
of the Church, and so would have no Communion with him in Civil or Religious
Actions; yet in all this they aimed only at his Repentance, and upon unfeigned
signs of that, the Church Governors were ready to Absolve him, and take him in
again: which being the Pattern of our Excommunication, proves it to be of
Divine Right.

. II. By what is Recorded in S. Paul's Epistle to Timothy and Titus, it does
appear, That the Apostles communicated that Power of hearing Complaints, and of
rebuking and censuring Offenders, which they had received from Christ, unto
those Persons whom they fixed as Bishops in the Churches they had planted. And
it was necessary they should do so, because otherwise they had not invested
them with sufficient Power to discharge their Duty, nor to keep the Churches
committed to them in good order. And as an undoubted Proof that the Primitive
Bishops, who succeeded the Apostles, had this Authority vested in them, we
shall now show, That they did exercise this Power of the Keys in the purest
Ages of the Church, and declared they did it by Commission from Christ and his
Apostles; which (considering the Charity and Integrity of those Ages) none can
imagine they would have pretended, if it had not been really so. The first
Instance we shall remark, is that famous Excommunication of Aquila of Pontus,
who had translated the Old Testament into the Greek Tongue, and who was
Converted and Baptized by the Disciples of the Apostles at Jerusalem, yet
continuing his former vain belief of Astrology, and also drawing Schemes of his
own Nativity, he was admonished and rebuked by all the Doctors of the Church
for this; and not amending, but rather opposing them, and contentiously
disputing with them about Fate, they cast him out of the Church, as one
unlikely to be saved, says Epiphanius (...) Epiph. de ponder. and mensuris.
. This happened about the year of Christ 120. in the Reign of Adrian, and about
twenty years after S. John's death. In which Relation we note, First, That this
Censure was inflicted by the Doctors of the Church, that is, the Bishops met
(perhaps in a Synod) at Jerusalem. Secondly, That it was after two Admonitions,
as Christ advised, Matthew. xviii. Thirdly, That hereby he was thrust back into
that same estate he was in before his Baptism. About thirty years after Cerdon
the Heretic came to Rome in the time of Hyginus, An. 153. and at first
confessed his Error in the Church, and lived orderly, but being found out to
have taught it in secret often, and often to have recanted it again, he was at
last admonished, and turned out of the Assembly of the Faithful Iren. lib. 3.
cap. 4. and ex eo Eusebius. l. 4. c. 11.
. Soon after came Marcion to Rome also, whose Father being Bishop of Sinope in
Pontus, had Excommunicated this Son of his for the Crime of Fornication, and
refused to receive him in again: Nor would the Presbyters of the Roman Church
(who had conversed with the Apostles) receive him into Communion, though he had
offered 200 Sesterces to their Church Epiph. Panar. l. 3. Tom. I. haeres. 42.
p. 135. Tertul. de praescript. haeret. c. 30. p. 212. semel atque iterum ejecti
-- novissime in perpetuum dissidium relegati. Tertul. ibid.
, but rejected him and his Offering also; which was in the time when Hyginus
their Bishop was dead, An. 155. And Tertullian adds, That Valentinus and
Marcion having been once and again cast out, at lest they were for ever
Excommunicated by that Church, which he says was in the time of Eleutherius:
whose next Successor Victor, about the year 192. excommunicated Theodotus the
Heretic then living at Rome, for denying the Divinity of our Savior Eusebius.
Hist. l. 5. c. 27. p. 145. (...).
, as Eusebius relates: And had he exercised this Power only upon those of his
own Church, he had not met with so much opposition; but he (about the year
198.) Excommunicated the Bishops of Asia, for not agreeing with him in the time
of keeping the Feast of Easter Eusebius. ibid. l. 5. c. 23. p. 142.
, which rash act of his displeased many even of the Western Bishops; and
Irenaeus particularly, who sharply rebukes him for it, showing that none of his
Predecessors had ever done such a thing to Excommunicate Foreign Churches for a
difference only in a Matter of Ceremony: yet still this shows the practice of
Excommunication was frequent in these early times. And the manner of inflicting
these Censures is soon after ( An. 200.) described by Tertullian, who speaking
of the Religious Assemblies of the Christians, says, There are Exhortations,
Rebukes, and the Divine Censure; for they judge with great Authority, as being
assured of God's Presence among them; so that if any so offend as to be
excluded from communicating in Prayers, from the Assemblies, and from all
Sacred Commerce, it is a strong presumption of their Condemnation in the last
Judgment: The Presidents of these Assemblies are diverse ancient and approved
Persons Tertul. Apol. c. 39. p. 31.
. In which eminent Testimony we see there were Admonitions first, and then
sharper Rebukes preceding the Censure, according to our Savior's Method: And
for the Authority of these Censures, it is expressly said to be Divine, and upon
Christ's Promise to be with those who met together on this occasion in his
Name, Matthew. xviii. 20. Tertullian affirms they are certain of God's Presence
with them in this Act; yea, since our Lord had said, What they bound on Earth
should be bound in Heaven, he reckons that the last dreadful Judgment will go
according to this Ecclesiastical Sentence. And as to the Effect of this
Excommunication on Earth, the Party under it is neither to come into the
Church, nor to pray or have any commerce with the Faithful. Finally, The Bishop
and his Clergy are the Dispensers of this Discipline, and the Governors of
Christian Assemblies; and if any doubt of this last particular, the same
Tertullian speaking of what was (in the Apostles days and his own too) in the
Bishops Power, expressly says It was in his power to Excommunicate Ut extra
Ecclesiam quis detur -- erat in Praesidentis officio. Tert. de pudicit. c. 14.
p. 556.
; which are so clear Confutations of all our Innovators in this Matter, that
these places alone might silence them: Yet there are more passages in this
Father to this purpose: As where he says, Whoredom and Murder are interdicted,
and the Gladiators are driven out of the Church Tertul. de Idololat. c. 11. p.
91.
. And where he affirms, That Christians marrying with Heathens are counted
guilty of Whoredom, and are to be excluded from all Communion with the
Faithful, according to the Orders of the Apostle, who says, With such no not
to eat Arcendos ab omni communicatione fraternitatis. Tert. ad uxor. l. 2. c. 3.
. And for other unlawful Lusts, he says, They did not only exclude them from
the Church Porch, but allowed them not to come near that holy place, being not
barely Vices, but monstrous Crimes Non modo limine verum omni Ecclesiae tecto
submove^nus. Tert. de pudicit. c. 4. p. 557.
. And Albaspinaeus has observed, That in the first Ages of the Church,
Murderers, Adulterers, Apostates, and such like notorious Offenders, were
irreversibly Excommunicated; and if they were admitted to remain among the
Penitents, yet they would not Absolve them, nor restore them to the Communion
of the Church so long as they lived; till by degrees the Discipline of the
Church slackened Albaspin. observe. l. 2. c. 8. etc.
, and then certain years of Penance were enjoined those Offenders; and if they
gave signs of great Sorrow and hearty Repentance after that time, they were by
certain steps restored to the Communion of the Church. And now we have
mentioned that Learned Author, it may not be amiss to hear his description of
the state of Excommunicate Persons in these times of which we now speak, They
were not only driven from Religious Assemblies, but all despised, abhorred, and
fled from them as putrid Members, fit to be cut off: It was counted a sin to
treat or make bargains with them; none would salute them, or call them
Brethren; none would look on them, speak to them, or invite them to a Meal;
yea, so strict were they, that none would join with them in Prayers, to God
Albaspin. l. 1. obs. 1. p. 2.
. Which Character is the more to be esteemed, because he there proves all this
by the Canons of very ancient Councils, which Excommunicate those who pray with
these Persons Apost. Can. 10. Laodic. Can. 33. Antioch. 1. Can. 2. Carthag. 4.
Can. 73.
, and those who have any Conversation with them, or be in the same House, or
Feast with them, or speak to them Antioch. 1. Can. 2. Arelat. 2. Can. 30.
Antissiod. Can. 39.
, as may be seen more at large in that Author. All which abundantly proves,
That the Christians of that Time did look upon the Excommunicate to be in a
damnable Condition, and that they were odious to God and Men: and though this
may seem severe, yet many good ends were gained by this Discipline; for this
tended exceedingly to the Honor of the Christian Church, which thus showed its
detestation of all wickedness; and it was an excellent means to bring the
Sinners to a Sense of their Transgressions, and a Purpose to amend, as well as
to preserve and warn the Faithful that they did not fall into the like Crimes,
lest they suffered in the like kind. Soon after this, the famous Origin
flourished ( An. 230), Who is very clear as to the exercise of this Discipline;
Affirming, That among the Christians some were ordained to enquire into the
Lives and Actions of those who were admitted, and such as did unlawful things,
were by these forbidden to come to their Common Assemblies (...) and p p.
. And their discipline was very severe toward all Sinners, especially those
who were defiled with Lust, whom they drove out of their Communion, and like
the Pythagoreans, lamented them as dead to God (...). Orig. in Cells l. 3. p.
142.
. Where these ordained Censors of Manners are, no doubt the Bishops and Clergy,
and the Criminals are not only deprived of Sacred but Civil commerce also, yea
and esteemed as quite out of Gods favor, and dead to all hopes of Salvation,
while they remain in that estate. The same Author also, in his Homilies
frequently mentions this Rite, telling us, That every unclean person is cast
out of the Assembly of the Pious Orig. hom. 8. in Lev. 12.
. And though he should be concealed from the Bishop, or escape being cast out
by partiality, yet he is condemned by his own Conscience Idem hom. 12. in Lev.
21.
. And elsewhere he says, The Bishop casts one out of the Church that many may
be preserved sound Idem hom. 9. in Jesai. 13.
. Yea he expressly interprets the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven of this very
Discipline. He that judges uprightly has the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and opens to them that are absolved on Earth, so that they are loosed in
Heaven. Again, he shuts to them who by right Judgment are bound on Earth, so
that they are as it were bound and judged in Heaven Idem hom. 1 in Matthew. 16.
. Finally, to this matter also he applies the phrase of delivering to Satan
Idem hom. 12. in Matthew. 20.
; saying, The Bishop ought sometimes to use his power and deliver Sinners to
Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved. In all
which places this learned Father plainly shows, That the Excommunications in
his time were laid on by the Bishops, and were derived from the Power left by
Christ, and exercised by his Apostles; so that no doubt he thought them of
Divine right. Not long after him followed that Excommunication of the Heretic
Noetius, Author of the Patripassian Blasphemy, who was cited before the
Presbyters of Ephesus (they having then no Bishop, Ann. 240), and after two
Admonitions, he and his Companions persisting in their Heresy, were expelled
out of the Church, and he and his Brother continuing obstinate to their death,
were denied Christian burial Epiphan. Panar. lib. 2. Tom. I. haeres. 57. p. 213.
. Which was another Ceremony attending these Primitive Excommunications, to
show the detestation they had of them; and this continues among us to this day;
But none is more full of instances and clear in the Divine original of this
holy Discipline than S. Cyprian, that blessed Martyr, who lived about the Year
250. in his Epistle to Cornelius Bp. of Rome, he expresses his joy That
Cornelius had Excommunicated Felicissimus the Novatian, and cast him out of the
Church there, who in Africa long before had been cast out of it by the Majesty
of God, and the severity of Christ the great Judge. So S. Cyprian calls the
Censure which he and his fellow Bishops had inflicted on him; for as he there
observes, The Bp. is for the present a Judge in Christ's stead, to whom if all
Christians were obedient, none would presume (after his Consecration) to make
themselves Judges, not of the Bishop, but of God -- Pulsum de Ecclesia esse, de
qua jampridem Dei majestate and Christi domini judicis nostri severitate
depulsus est -- Sacerdos ad tempus juden vice Christi, etc. vide Cypr. ad
Cornel. l. I. ep. 3.
. And a little after he mentions Fortunatus, Maximus, Privatus, Foelix, and
Jovinus (Novatian Heretics all) which he had Excommunicated and cast out of
the Church at Carthage; and though they did (as he speaks) despise the Majesty
and Censure of God, yet he desires Cornelius not to receive them into his
Communion; but to warn all his People to avoid their Company and Discourse, to
have no Commerce with them, no nor so much as to eat with them; and for this he
cites those places of Scripture which we have quoted before, viz. If he hear
not the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen man, and a Publican, Matthew.
xviii. 17. and Withdraw from every Brother which walks disorderly, 2 Thessalonians.
iii. 6. And a Man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition
reject, Titus iii. 10. So that we are not the first who have applied these
places to Excommunication, but S. Cyprian did it above 1400 years ago, and his
Exposition may well be more authentic than our yesterdays Critics, who would
extort some other meaning from them. And since he is so clear for the Divine
Right upon which Excommunication is founded, we shall not much value what
interest and design has since persuaded some to say to the Contrary. But to
proceed; In his Epistle to Pomponius, the same S. Cyprian commends him for
Excommunicating a Deacon and others for Fornication, telling him, That if they
were obstinate, they could not on good grounds hope for Salvation; for if under
the old Law, those who obeyed not the Priest were to be slain with the material
Sword, doubtless by parity of reason, the Proud and Contumacious are slain with
the Spiritual Sword when they are cast out of the Church; for there is no life
out of it; since the House of God is but one, and there is no Salvation but in
the Church Spirituali gladio superbi and contumaces necantur, dum de Ecclesia
ejiciuntur. Cypr. ad Pompon. l. 1. ep. 11.
. Again, In his Epistle to Rogatianus, who had complained to him of one of his
Deacons who had reproached and abused him, he bids him use the power of his
Honorable Office against him, and either Depose him, or Excommunicate him,
together with his Companion in that Crime Fungaris circa cum potestate honoris
tui, et cum vel deponas vel abstineas, etc. Cypr. ad Rogat. l. 3. ep. 9.
. Another instance there is of Novatian the Heretic, who was Excommunicated by
S. Cyprian and the African Bishops; and not only so, but also rebuked and
confuted, yea Excommunicated by all the holy Bishops of the whole World
Novatiano nuper retuso and refutato, and per totum orbem a Sacerdotibus Dei
abstento. Cypr. Stephan. lib. 3. Ep. 13.
. And he advises Stephen Bishop of Rome, to send Letters into France, to
declare Marcion Bishop of Arles (one of Novatus his followers) Excommunicate,
and that another might be put in his place Idem, ibid.
. Which passage about Novatian or Novatus (as he is sometimes called) is also
in Eusebius, who says, By a Roman Council of Sixty Bishops, and more than so
many Priests, and by the Bishops of diverse other Provinces in their Synods, he
was declared Excommunicate (...). Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 35. page 178.
; And he also mentions his Excommunication by the African Bishops, as before:
Which Zonaras expresses by his being Cast out and Anathematized (...). Zonar.
in 8. Can. Council. 1. Niceen.
, words of the same import with the former, and implying his being declared
Accursed, as well as cast out of the Church. To this we might add more out of
the same Father; as where he calls Papianus his judging of his Bishop, making
himself a Judge of God, and of Christ, who says to his Apostles, and so to all
Bishops that succeed them in that Office, He that hears you hears me Te
judicem Dei constituas, and Christi qui dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hoc ad omnes
Praepositos qui Apostolis Vicaria Ordinatione succedunt, etc. Cypr. Epist. lib.
4. Ep. 9.
. And where he says, No Man can have God for his Father, who has not the
Church for his Mother; and if any could escape out of Noah's Ark, then they may
escape who are out of the Church Cypr. lib. de simply. Praelat.
. But these are sufficient to show that S. Cyprian believed the Bishops were
the Apostles Successors, and Christ's Vicegerents, and had their power from him
to Censure the disorderly, who by that Sentence were put out of the Church, in
which alone Salvation could be had. About the year 270 that numerous Council of
Bishops and Clergy assembled at Antioch, and deposed Paulus Samosatenus from
the Bishopric of that City for Heresy, and other heinous Crimes; yea, they
deprived him of the Communion of the whole Catholic Church under Heaven (...)
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 23. page 205.
; and when he would not yield up his Possession to that Successor which the
Council had placed in his stead, they entreated Aurelian, who was then Emperor,
to compel him thereunto, who decreed the Possession should be granted to him
whom the Bishops had chosen Idem ibid. cap. 24.
; for he (though an Idolater) thought it just, that he who would not obey the
Sentence of those of his own Faith, should be deprived of having any part with
them (...). Haeret. sab. 8.
; Where (...) signifies a Dividend, or Share of the Profits of the Church. So
that Mr. Seldom might have spared that note Seld. Synedr. l. 1. cap. 13. page
274. De voce (...) vid. Jul. Polluc. l. 15. c. 13.
, That this looked not like an Opinion of Divine Right, for the Bishops to
desire an Heathen Emperor to do that which they could not effect: For they had
first rejected this Heretic according to the Power given them by Christ, and
if he yet kept possession of the Church and the profits, it was no diminution
of their Spiritual Power, to call in the Secular Magistrate to compel him to
quit the place and temporal advantages; which is all that is meant by Eusebius
his saying, That he was with extreme disgrace driven out of the Church by the
Secular Power (...). Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24.
: But his being Excommunicated by the Council, and by the Judgment of all the
Bishops, is mentioned also by Theodoret, who further observes, That Lucian, who
was Paulus his Scholar in this Error, remained a long time Excommunicated for
the same, viz. during the time of three Bishops (...). Apost. Can. 10.
. I will not trouble my self to produce any more instances of the practice of
this Discipline during the time that the Empire was in the hands of Heathens,
only I shall note what those famous Apostolical Canons (which were undoubtedly
made in this Period by the Primitive Bishops) say with respect to this matter.
And first, the tenth Canon is remarkable, which says, He that prays with an
Excommunicate Person, though it be in a private House, shall be Excommunicated
himself (...). Can. 5. etc. (...). Can. 28. (...) Can. 29 (...), Can. 51. (...)
Can. 73. (...) Can. 79.
: By which we see that (whatever the Jewish Custom were) the Christians
renounced all Communion with the Excommunicate in Religious Offices. In the
rest of those Canons there is frequent mention made of Excommunication under
diverse Phrases, yet to the same purpose, viz. Of being separated, being wholly
cut off from the Church, and wholly cut off from the Communion; being cast out
of the Church, being punished with separation, not being allowed to pray with
the Faithful. And in all those Canons the penalty for the greatest Crimes in
the Clergy is to be deposed, in the Laity to be Excommunicated: And
particularly, He that receives one that is Excommunicated in one City, when he
comes to another City without commendatory Letters, is to be Excommunicated
himself Apostol. Can. xii. xiii.
. In the Case of Simony, perpetual Excommunication is decreed Ibid. Can. xxix.
: In the Case of Schism, three Admonitions must precede the Censure Ibid. Can.
xxxi.
. And none must absolve but the same Bishop who Excommunicated Ibid. Can. xxxii.
. To enter into a Synagogue of the Jews, or a Meeting of Heretics, to pray
with them, is Excommunication Ibid. Can. Lxiv.
. Which, with many other Canons, do show that the Discipline of the Church was
then strictly observed, when the Bishops had no Authority from Secular Powers,
and when it was only the belief of a Divine Commission granted to them, which
prevailed upon the People to submit to it. To these Canons we will add the
Council of Elliberis, which was held before Constantine began to Reign, Anno
305. And in this Council there are many plain Evidences concerning the use of
this Rite; For there it is Decreed, That Apostates to Idolatry, Murderers,
Adulterers, and such like heinous Offenders, should be Excommunicated, and
never received into the Church again, Can. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, etc. Parents that
marry their Daughters to Jews or Heretics, were to be Excommunicated for five
years, Can. 16. To be absent from Church for three Sundays together, was
punished with Excommunication, Can. 21. A Convert from Heresy was to repent
three years before he were received to the Churches Communion, Can. 22. To keep
Idols in their Houses was punished with Exclusion from the Church, Can. 41. And
no Bishop must receive any Criminal into the Church, but he which cast him out,
Can. 53. These, with many other Rules there prescribed, show that
Excommunication was the proper Ecclesiastical Penalty for all Crimes, and that
it was laid on for longer or shorter time, according to the nature of the
Offense. And since the Bishops who used these Censures, were Men of so great
Integrity and Piety, and many of them Martyrs for the Faith, we cannot suspect
they would have falsely assumed a Power (as of Divine Right) which Christ never
gave them: Nor would the Faithful have submitted to the severities of those
Primitive Penances, nor have esteemed Excommunication so dreadful, or desired
Absolution so Earnestly, if they had not firmly believed that their Bishops
Acted by Authority from Christ and his Holy Apostles. And indeed the Evidence
for this Opinion in this Age is so clear, that Mr. Seldom confesses it, saying,
Excommunication was even then believed to rely upon Divine Right, and express
command of God Jure etiam divino eoque praeceptivo eam niti existimatum jam
est. Seld. Synedr. lib. 1. cap. 9. page 139.
: Which Testimony is the more to be valued, because it comes from a Man who
with more Learning than Success, most industriously labors to prove the
Primitive Christians mistaken in this Notion: In which dispute, I must briefly
note, there are many Evidences of his partiality: For first, when he professes
to write of the use of Excommunication before Constantine, he spends not two
Pages on that Copious Subject, viz. Lib. 1. Chap. 9. page 139, 140. and says,
this is enough and too much; and so indeed it is; enough to confute his Novel
Fancy, and too much to be answered by those slight Evasions there made use of:
For he spends all the rest of that Chapter to show the Error of the Primitive
Doctors in this point. Secondly, He would gladly persuade us that Christian
Excommunication was a Branch of the Jewish, derived from it, and standing on
the same grounds with it, being the very Transcript of it: Yet he grants two
essential differences; First, That the Jews did not deny Communion in holy
things to such as were Excommunicated; but he owns that the Christians did
exclude them from Religious assemblies and Offices, before the times of Origin,
Tertullian, and Irenaeus also, Ibid. page 141. That is, as early as we have any
Records to instruct us, and consequently the Christian and Jewish
Excommunication (if his supposition as to the Jews be true) differed in the
main point from the beginning. Secondly, He says every Private person among
the Jews could Excommunicate, and has not given one instance of any such thing
among Christians, as any private Man's assuming this Power; yet he pretends he
knows not when this Custom ceased in the Christian Church, which doubtless
never began there: For he confesses, That it is plain in Irenaeus, Origin, and
Tertullians time, none but the Governors of the Church could rightly
Excommunicate; Seld. Synedr. page 143. yea, it is plain, That Tertullian says,
it was only in the Presidents power to Excommunicate in the Apostles days. As
for that African Custom of the Martyrs Absolving some in Prison, S. Cyprian,
who mentions the practice, condemns it as irregular, and it proceeded only from
a Superstitious conceit of the interest the Martyrs would have in Heaven, after
their decease, to obtain remission for the lapsed: And therefore Albaspinaeus
observes, their Absolution was not thought good till after their Martyrdom: But
this usage quickly ceased, and was nothing like the Jewish Custom. We conclude
therefore, that Christian Censures were not grounded upon the practice of the
Synagogue. Thirdly, We must observe how unseasonably he labors to pervert
those places of holy Scripture, which the Fathers brought to prove the Divine
Right: That of Deuteronomy. xvii. 12. of putting him to death that disobeyed the
Priest, is alleged by S. Cyprian Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 11.
, by S. Hierom, and S. Augustine also, only by way of allusion; and they argue
only by parity of reason, That if the Legal Priests had Temporal, the
Evangelical ought to have Spiritual coercive Power. The next place, viz. Math.
xvi. 19. about the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he would evade, by pretending
the Key is not an Instrument of Excluding, etc. whereas all know it is the
Instrument of Opening and Shutting; and he himself cites Artemidorus to prove
it is (...), page 148. yea, he grants the Key is an Emblem of great Power and
Authority among the Eastern Nations; and he quotes for this Isai. 22.22. page
147. whence it follows, That our Lord made the Apostles his Vicegerents and
Stewards, and gave them this Power to lock Men up in the Bonds of their Sins,
and keep them out of the Church on Earth, yea, and out of the Kingdom of Heaven
too, if they did not repent. Nor will Mr. Seldom easily persuade the World,
that all those holy Fathers, who thus explained this place, spoke that which
was not good Sense. Again, That other Text, Math. xviii. 17. Tell the Church,
he would have to signify, Tell it to the Jewish Consistory; as if our Savior
would send his injured Disciples to complain to their Mortal Foes, who would
injure them much more: And though he use a gross Prolepsis in explaining (...)
in the Gospel, by the Talmudical Phrases of later date, and by Modern
Translations, yet he will not allow an easy Prolepsis to the Fathers, who think
Christ spoke with respect to the Christian Church shortly to be instituted, and
which was to continue to the end of the World; Nor a Common Trope, by which the
name of the Society is put for the Governing part. In the same verse, He
labors to prove that Heathens and Publicans were not interdicted the Jewish
Worship; now by Heathens, is not meant Proselytes, but Idolaters, the
Proselytes being called by a gentler Name: And these Idolatrous Heathens were
denied access to all parts of the Temple which were accounted Holy, as we
showed before; and the pious Jews would neither eat nor willingly converse with
them nor Publicans, often blaming our Savior for doing this, though only in
order to their Conversion: So that our Lord means that they must have no
Conversation with those who would not repent upon the Churches Admonition. So
for binding and loosing, Matthew. xviii. 18. (which the Ancients make one main
ground of Excommunication) he forgets Christ's own Exposition of it, by
remitting and retaining Sins, and runs out into the later Rabinical Notion of
Permitting and prohibiting as a Teacher; which cannot be applied to this place
of S. Matthew, where Christ is not speaking of his Apostles determining in the
Schools, or solving Cases of Conscience, but of the power they should have to
punish contumacious Offenders and injurious Persons. And though Mr. Seldom
objects, it is not Whosoever ye shall bind, but Whatsoever; yet he answers
himself, saying, That it is true, Persons may be signified by the Neuter
Gender: page 159. Finally, For his Fancy that the force of Excommunication
depended on private Pacts among the Christians; it is not to be imagined that
Murderers and Adulterers, perjured Persons and Apostates, would have scrupled
breaking these parts, or have been so terrified and dejected by an
Excommunication, if it had only relied on their own promise to obey it. I grant
indeed, the Christians did vow in Baptism and the Eucharist, to observe Christ's
Commands, and submit to his Injunctions, among which doubtless they reckoned
this so much reverenced Discipline, to which they were subject, for that they
believed it to be exercised in Christ's Name, and by virtue of his Authority: We
conclude therefore, That Mr. Seldom has gained nothing by this prolix
Excursion, but only to convince us that he wished Excommunication were not of
Divine Right, though he be not able to prove it; And no question we are much
safer in believing with those Holy Primitive Bishops, who might know the mind
of Christ, and the practice of the Apostles much better than our Modern
Critics, and who are more likely to tell us the Truth, than those who espouse
a Party, and serve Ends of Revenge, for Censures not undeservedly laid upon
them.

. III. Our next Enquiry as to practice is, Whether this Rite of Excommunication
was used and believed of Divine Right after the Empire became Christian: And
this we must do the more largely to confute the Error of Erastus (espoused also
by Mr. Seldom) who attempts to prove, That in a Christian State there is no
need of any such thing as a power of Excommunication in the Churchmen, because
the Magistrate now may punish all Crimes; and that it was only for Want of this
blessing of Christian Magistrates which forced the Primitive Bishops to use
Excommunication. To which Mr. Seldom adds, That after the Empire became
Christian, the Bishops derived their Power to Excommunicate from the Princes
Grant. There is no better way to find out the truth herein, than to consult the
Records of those Ages, and to enquire into the Opinion of the most eminent
Fathers after Constantines time, and into the practice of those Ages which
retained the Primitive purity. And though we cannot bring in all things of this
kind between the years 300. and 500. (for that would be to write a Church
History, not a Discourse upon one single point) Yet we will remark that which
is sufficient to baffle this modern and ill grounded Conceit. And first,
Whereas it is most certain that the Bishops did Excommunicate in Constantine's
time, yet no Writer of that Age does affirm they did it by any Power from the
Emperor; and Mr. Seldom out of his vast stock of reading (at this dead lift)
could not bring one single Memorial of the Emperors giving the Bishops a Power
to Excommunicate in all this Period of time. It Is true, these first Christian
Emperors, and Constantine particularly, did Ordain, That if any Litigants
desired to have their causes tried before the Bishops, they might leave the
Secular Tribunal, and that the Bishops Sentences should be firm, and of more
Authority than those of other Judges, yea, as valid as if they were delivered
by the Emperor himself. As also, that the Magistrates and their Officers should
execute their Sentences, and that the Decrees of their Councils should be Valid
Sozomen. hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 206. Circa An. 314. Vide Cod.
Theodos. l. 16. Tit. 2. in fine.
. Which Law does indeed give them a New Power not granted by Christ, but never
mentions Excommunication; Yea, it ordains that these Sentences should be
executed by another method, even by the Civil Magistrate and his Officers. Mr.
Seldom indeed produces another Law (as if it were a Repeal of this) in the time
of Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian, Ann. 376. above 60. years after. But that
Law seems to except only Criminal Actions from the Bishops Cognizance Vid.
Seld. Synedr. l. 1. cap. 10. p. 187.
. And if we consider the complaints of the good Bishops in that Age, who were
burdened with diverse Civil Causes, or look upon those Laws of Arcadius and
Honorius Cod. Justin. lib. 1. Tit. 4. de Epist. And. L. 7. An. 398. and L. 8.
An. 408.
, and of Honorius and Theodosius, which allow Men to choose Bishops for deciding
their Civil Causes, and declare their Sentence to be firm and Valid, We shall
easily perceive that Constantines Law was never repealed, nor this practice
difused. But this does not at all belong to Excommunication, which Power the
Bishops exercised by the virtue of Christ's Commission in cases of Heresy and
Scandal, and that not by consent of the Parties, as they did this Power of
decision of Civil Causes. So that Mr. Seldom ought not to make Excommunication
depend. on these grants: For the Emperors Authority did not precede, but follow
the Bishops Act in Excommunication; so that if the person Censured proved
obstinate or troublesome, he was Banished or Imprisoned by the Imperial Power.
As we see in the Case of the Arians, who were Excommunicated by the first
General Council of Nice; and the Emperor Constantine did Ordain, That those who
submitted not to the Decree of the Council, should be banished Sozom Eccles.
hist. lib. 1. cap. 19. p. 221.
. And that the Bishops did exercise this Power in their own right, as derived
from Christ, is manifest from the whole History of that Age; Arius himself, and
all his Associates, were Excommunicated at Alexandria, first by Peter, and then
by Alexander the Bishops of that City Idem ibid. Cap. 14. p. 215.
, before any application was made to the Emperors, and before the Nicene
Council was Called: And that most famous Council, in almost every Canon,
supposes the Bishop to be the Judge of such as are to be kept out, and such as
are to be let into the Church. And those Holy Fathers do decree concerning
Penitents and lapsed Persons, according to the ancient usage of Ecclesiastical
Discipline under Heathen Emperors, without any alteration made upon the account
of Constantine's being a Christian; Making the Bishop the sole Judge of the
time of Excluding these Offenders from Communion in Sacred Offices. To this we
may add that Accurate Scheme of the admirable Discipline of these Primitive
Ages, which is described in the Canonical Epistles of Gregory Thaumaturgus, S.
Basil, and others of the Primitive Bishops: By which we see, that such as were
first Excommunicated by the Bishops for Fornication, Adultery, Murder, Perjury,
Apostasy, and other Crimes Vid. Leonem Allatium de Narthece Vet. Eccl.. 19. p.
94. Et Bevereg. Not. ad. Can. xi. Council. Nicaen. Tom. 2. p. 72.
, were by various steps and Degrees admitted to the peace of the Church, and
the participation of Holy Offices again, although they did begin to be sensible
of their Crimes. For they made four Orders of these Penitents. First, The
Mourners, who stood without the Church, Lamenting their Sins in Sackcloth and
Ashes, kneeling down to the Priests and Faithful, who went in, and begging
their Prayers for them. When they had continued under this severe Discipline
one or more years, according to the nature of their offense, they were then let
in to the Church-Door, and stood there below among the Catechumens, and heard
the Scriptures read and Preached (whence they were called, Hearers); and then
these were excluded out of the Church for some Years. After this they were
admitted into the lower part of the inner Temple, where the Faithful stood, but
so as that they were to fall down prostrate to beg Pardon of the Bishop (and
therefore they were called the Prostrate) and these also were sent away after
the Prayer for Penitents was said over them. Lastly, The Bishop admitted them
to stand up among the Faithful, and stay all the time of Prayers among them;
Yet so as they were still excluded from the Participation of the holy
Sacrament, and these were called The Standers up: In which state having
continued a while, they were Absolved, and admitted to full Communion, by
partaking of the blessed Eucharist. Now this whole description of these Orders
of Penitents, which is so frequently mentioned in all the Authors of this Age,
that we cannot understand any of them without the knowledge of it; I say, all
this was determined only by Ecclesiastical Canons, and by the Bishops
Authority, without any Grant from the Emperors, yet it was freely submitted to
by all good Christians; and is an unanswerable proof, That the whole Church did
then believe Bishops had Power from God to expel Offenders from Sacred
Assemblies and Offices, and that they only could bind and loose: This shows
they doubted not, but that such as were Excommunicated by the Bishop, were in
danger of damnation, and till they became Penitent, were as Heathens and
Publicans, and in a worse Estate than the new Converts not yet Baptized. And
since this Discipline began before the Empire was Christian, and continued long
after it, without any Grant from the Secular Powers, it follows, That it was
Founded Originally on a Divine Right, which great Truth we will now further
confirm from the Practice and Opinion of the most eminent Holy Bishops of these
Ages. St. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Excommunicated one of the Emperors
Prefects, who did much oppress the Churches of Libya, and certified S. Basil of
it by his Letter; whereupon S. Basil also excommunicated the same Person in his
Church Baron. Annal. An. Dom. 370.
. Where we may observe the Custom of Bishops sending Epistles to other
Churches, that they also might avoid the Communion of such as they had
Excommunicated; Of which we have a memorable instance in S. Augustine, who
Excommunicated Primianus the Donatist, and sent his Tractatorian Letter to all
his fellow Bishops to avoid him Conducibile existimavimus omnes Sanctos
consacerdotes, etc. -- hac nostra Tractatoria commonere ut omnes Primiani
Communionem -- diligenti cura horreant. Aug. Conc. 2. in Psalm. 36. Vide item
Epist. 162.
. For he that was censured and excluded in one Church, was so in all, and not
to be admitted into Communion again, without the consent of him that first cast
him out. About this time lived that famous Bishop Gregory Nyssen, who is very
clear for the Divine Right of Excommunication, saying, Do not believe that
Excommunication is a piece of Episcopal presumption, for it is a Law of our
Fathers, an ancient Order of the Church, beginning from the Law of Moses, and
was Established in the Gospel (...). Greg. Nyssen. Orat. de Castigat.
. Where we see it is evidently affirmed, That though it had been Practiced
under the Law, yet it was Established under the dispensation of Grace, and on
that ground always used in the Church before his time. And here we cannot but
note Mr. Selden's partiality, who designing to make this a proof that Christian
Excommunications were derived from the Jews, translates the last words [(...)]
quae a lege traxit originem, et in gratia obtinuit Seld. Synedr. l. 1. cap. 10.
p. 226.
, contrary to the plain Sense of the phrases, and the meaning of that Father;
who does not say it had its Original from the Law, and obtained under the
Gospel, but only that it began under the Law, and was confirmed or established
in the Gospel. S. Ambrose lived not long after, viz. An. 380. And he speaking
of the Power of absolving Penitents, says, Christ granted this to his
Apostles, which from the Apostles is transmitted to the Episcopal Office
Ambros. de poenit. l. 2. cap. 2. Tom. 4. p. 403.
. And adds, The Prodigal which went into a far Country, is he that is separated
from the Holy Altar, for he is removed from Hierusalen that is in Heaven, and
from being a Fellow-Citizen with the Saints, and of the Household of God Ibid.
Cap. 3. p. 404.
. Again he notes, That it is the part of a good Bishop to labor to heal the
weak, and to take away spreading Ulcers; to scorch some, rather than take them
wholly away; Yet finally, what cannot be healed, to cut it off with grief de
Officijs l. 2. cap. 27. Tom. 4. p. 61.
. So that he reckons this properly and only the Bishops Office. Yea, to show
how little he thought this Power was derived from the Emperors, it is well
known that he did interdict the Emperor Theodosius from the Communion for some
time, telling him, That after the bloody slaughter of so many Men, He ought to
submit to that Bond, which by the Sentence of God above, was laid upon him,
being a Bond that was medicinal, and designed for his Cure: Which advice the
good Emperor submitted to, and returned very penitent to his Palace; for he had
been brought up in the knowledge of Gods Word, and understood what was properly
the Office of a Bishop, and what was the Office of a King (...) Theodoret.
Histor. lib. 5. cap. 17. page 158.
. They are the words of Theodoret, and show, that Excommunication was then
known to be no part of the Princes Office, but only of the Priests, and that by
Authority given them from God; whence the same Historian says, That the
Emperor a while after lamented, because he was not only excluded from the
Church, but from Heaven it self, since Christ had declared, What they bound on
Earth should be bound in Heaven Idem ibidem.
: So that no doubt, the Emperor who believed this, did think Excommunication
was of Divine Right, and founded upon the same Text we now allege for it. Yet
that none may think this Instance favors the bold Fact of later Popes in
Excommunicating Sovereign Princes, and then Absolving their Subjects from their
Allegiance to them; We must observe that S. Ambrose did then offer to suffer
quietly if the Emperor would oppose his Sentence; nor did he pretend either to
use force against him, or allow any to do so: But went in a way of persuasion,
and advised him to submit to this, which was only a Spiritual Penalty for his
Souls health: And he was only under the least kind of Excommunication, and
barely suspended from receiving the Sacrament. So also Pope Innocent dealt with
Arcadius and Eudoxia for the injuries they had done to S. Chrysostom,
Interdicting them in this Gentle Form, I the meanest of all, and a Sinful Man,
to whom the Throne of S. Peter is now given, do separate and reject you and
your Empress from partaking of the Immaculate Mysteries of our Lord Christ
Michael Glycas Annal. par. 3. An. 407.
. This was all: And this is far from giving countenance to that impious usage
of the later Popes, who have Anathematized Sovereign Princes, and stirred up
Foreign Force against them, as well as incited their own Subjects to Perjury
and Rebellion; yea, to Murder them, and take their Kingdoms from them; Which is
to turn the Spiritual into a Carnal Sword, and prostitute a Divine Institution
to serve the ends of Avarice, Injustice, and Ambition; Yea, to use it to quite
contrary purposes than Christ intended it for, viz. to make it to serve for
Destruction, and not for Edification. But though this accursed practice receive
no advantage from these Instances, yet they do abundantly prove That Bishops in
this Age did not (as Mr. Seldom would persuade us) derive their Power to
Excommunicate from the Emperors being Pontifices maximi, and so from their
Grants. To proceed, S. Chrysostom flourished about this time, An. 390. and we
are to enquire into his Opinion, the rather because some have pretended he was
against the use of Excommunication. It Is true he has an Oration with this
Title, Concerning the unfitness of Anathematizing the living or the dead
Chrysostom. Tom. 6. hom. 37. page 439.
; In which he severely inveighs against the rash use of this dreadful Curse,
which he thinks the Apostles used not against Persons, but Opinions: And indeed
in the best Ages of the Church, the accursing particular Persons was very rare,
and this highest sort of Excommunitating by Anathema's (so much used by the
Roman Church) against particular Men, is seldom to be met with, and accordingly
it is totally disused by the Church of England, as not well agreeing with the
Spirit of Christianity, Luke ix. 55. nor with the Primitive Practice: It
suffices us, as it did generally satisfy the Ancient Christians, to exclude
notorious Offenders from Sacred Offices and Assemblies, till they repent. And
against this sort of Excommunication S. Chrysostom had no Objection, for he
himself practiced it in diverse Cases, as the History of his Life shows, and
particularly in the Case of Eudoxia the Empress, to whom he denied access to
the Church, because being admonished to restore a Widows Vineyard unjustly
taken away, she refused it Baron. Annal. An. 401.. 9.
. And for his Opinion Mr. Seldom says, That S. Chrysostom, as well as the other
Fathers of this Age, does often own and admit the use of Excommunication Seld.
de Synedr. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 212.
; Yea he reckons it of Divine Right, for he says, concerning Binding and
loosing, Matthew. xviii. What greater honor can be given to the Church than
this, when Heaven it self takes the beginning of its Judgment from Earth? The
Judge sits on Earth, the Master follows the Servant, and what he judges below,
his Lord ratifies above Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Jesaiam, Tom. V. page 152.
. Again, he explains the Leaven, which S. Paul orders the Church of Corinth to
purge out, to be an Advice to Bishops, who suffer much of the old Leaven to
remain within, when they do not cast out of their Borders, that is, out of the
Church, the Covetous and Extortioners, and such as shall be excluded out of the
Kingdom of God Idem Tom. III. hom. 15. in 1 Cor. page 337.
: Which, by the way, gives the reason of his strict proceeding against Eudoxia.
And elsewhere speaking of the Discipline and Worship used in his time, he
says, They expelled those out of the holy Place, who could not partake of the
Lords Table Chrysostom. Tom. III. hom. 18. in 2 Cor. page 647.
. Again, he threatens those who gave scandal to Infidels by their excessive
mourning for the dead (making them think the Christians did not believe the
Resurrection) that he would proceed against them by Ecclesiastical Censures, if
they did not amend upon his Admonitions; citing that method of proceeding which
Christ prescribes, Matthew. xviii. 15, 16, 17. for his Commission, bidding them
remember the power of binding and loosing which Christ had granted to him, ver.
18. and not dare to despise the Bonds of Church Censures; For, (says he) it is
not a Man which binds, but Christ which gave us this power, and entrusted Men
with this Privilege; even as (says he a little after) when a Prince orders
his Officer to bind a Criminal, it is not the Officer, but the Prince which
truly binds the Offender Idem hom. 4. in Epist. ad Hebr. Tom. IV. page 455.
. This is so direct and full to our purpose, that we need not seek any further
to assure us That S. Chrysostom did believe the power of Excommunication was
from Christ, and that it was granted only to the Bishops and was of great use
in the Church. Many more passages in him do confirm these Truths; but omitting
them, we go on to his Contemporary S. Hierom, who fully agrees with him in this
Opinion: For speaking of the Clergy, as they are distinct from the Laity, he
says, God forbid I should speak evil of these who succeed the Apostles, and
consecrate the Body of Christ with their Mouths, who make us Christians, and
having received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, do in a sort judge before
the day of Judgment. And soon after he says, They have power to deliver a man
to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus Hieron. ad. Heliodor. ep. 1. Tom. l. page 5.
. Where we may note, That though some fancy the delivering to Satan proper to
the Apostles time, yet even when the miraculous Penalty on the Offenders Body
was ceased, the Fathers still called Excommunication by this Name, as S. Hierom
does here. And so Origin before him says, A man is delivered into the power of
the Devil when his fault is manifest, and the Bishop drives him out of the
Church, that being observed by all, he may be ashamed and converted, so that at
length his Soul may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Origin. hom. 2. in
libr. Judic.
. And we may also here remark, That all those places which we produced before
out of Scripture to prove the Divine Right of Excommunication, are so expounded
and applied by the Fathers. But to proceed with S. Hierom, He having declared
Vigilantius an Heretic, wonders very much, Why he was not Excommunicated by
his own Bishop Hieron. ep. 53. advers. Vigil. Tom. II. page 154.
. And speaking of John Bishop of Jerusalem, who had undeservedly censured (as
he thought) some who held the right Faith, he there informs us wherein the
Censure did consist: For he says, that this Bishop had prohibited them to
enter into the Church, and forbid any to receive them into their Houses while
they lived, or to bury them when they were dead Hieron. adv. error. Joan. Hi.
Tom. II. page 258.
. In another place he reckons this Censure to be from the Lord, saying, If we
be cast out of the Congregation of our Brethren, and out of the House of God
for any Sin, we ought not to resist, but to bear the Sentence patiently, and to
say with the Prophet, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, Mich. vii. 9.
Idem in Ezekiel. lib. 5. Tom. IV. page 844.
. And in another place he tells us, That it was the Custom in his Time for the
Bishops to expel out of the Church, Fornicators, Adulterers, Murderers, and
other vicious persons Idem Com. in Tit. cap. 3. Tom. VI. p. 466.
. These, with many more places in this Father, do still confirm our Opinion of
the practice and the Original of Excommunication. To him we may add S.
Augustine, who grew Eminent for his Learning and Piety about the year 410. And
he interdicted his friend Bonifacius, a Count of the Empire, from the
Communion, for taking a Criminal by force from the Altar, before the Bishop had
seen him; and the Count owns his fault with sorrow, and sending the Man to S.
Augustine, begs his Pardon, and entreats he may not be shut out of the Church,
nor his Oblation rejected which he had made Augustine. Epist. 187, and 188. Tom.
II. page 166. (b).
. In another place he says, It was usual for offenders in the Church, to be
removed from the Sacrament of the Altar by Ecclesiastical Discipline Idem de
Genes. ad literam lib. 11. cap. 40. Tom. III. page 152. (b).
. And again, to show the Custom was universal, he tells us, Men must repent of
Sins after Baptism, that if they be Excommunicated they may be received again;
as they which are properly called Penitents do in all the Churches Id. ep. 108.
Tom. II. page 105. (a):
. Yea, he grounds the right of Excommunication upon the express commands of
Christ, and of his holy Apostles, affirming, That as Phineas under the Law slew
the Adulterers, so now the visible Sword is ceased from the Church, we do the
same thing by Excommunication Idem de fide and oper. cap. 2. Tom. IV. page 13.
; which in another place, he says, does the same under the Gospel, as putting
to death did under the Law Id. quaest. in Deuteronomy. lib. 5. Tom. IV. page 62.
. Again, he reckons up three deadly Sins which are especially to be punished
with Excommunication, Uncleanness, Apostasy and Murder Idem de fide and oper.
cap. 19.
. And for his Sense of the efficacy of this Divine Sentence, he teaches, That
When the Church does Excommunicate, the person is bound in Heaven; and when he
is restored by the Church, this reconciliation makes him loosed in Heaven Idem
Tract. in Johan. 50. Tom. IX. page 80. (b).
. Which he proves by Christ's promise to S. Peter, and in him to the whole
Church, as S. Augustine there observes, And to the same purpose in another
place, The Church which is founded on Christ, did from him, in Peter, receive
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the power of binding and loosing
Sins Idem Tract. 124. ibid. p. 123.
. And it is observable, that this Eminent Father always grounds Excommunication
upon the power of Binding and Loosing, which Christ gave the Church: As in that
Epistle where he reproves a young Bishop, Auxilius, for Excommunicating a whole
Family for the Masters fault, by which means (as S. Augustine notes) if a Child
should be born in that House, it could not be baptized, no not though it were
in danger of Death; such was the force of this Sentence; which he there calls A
Spiritual Penalty binding the Soul, according to that of our Savior;
Whatsoever ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven Aug. Epist. 75. Tom. II.
page 71. (a).
. So that we see this was the constant and current Opinion of the whole Church,
and thus the most eminent Fathers did expound holy Scripture: Here therefore we
might conclude, but only we must not omit that solemn Instance of Synesius
Bishop of Ptolemais his Excommunicating Andronicus the Prefect of Pentapolis in
Egypt under Theodosius, An. 411. for horrible Impieties and Cruelties which he
and his Companions had been guilty of; the Form of which is contained in the
Tractatorian Epistle, which the Bishop sent in the name of the Church of
Ptolemais to all her Sister Churches throughout the World, in these Words; Let
no Church of God be open to Andronicus and his Companions, to Thoas and his
Associates, let every holy place, Chapel and Churchyard be shut against them:
The Devil has no part in Paradise, and if he privily creep in, he would be
cast out again: I therefore admonish all private persons and Rulers, that they
neither dwell in the same House, nor eat at the same Table with them; And
especially, I charge all Priests neither to speak to them while they live, nor
attend them to their Graves when they dye: And if any despise this as the
Church of a little City, and Communicate with these Excommunicate Persons, as
if he need not obey so poor a Place, he makes a Schism in the Church, which
Christ would have to be but one: And if he be a Deacon, Priest, or Bishop, we
will account him in the same state with Andronicus, and will never shake hands
or eat with such a Man, much less will we Communicate with them- in the holy
Mysteries, who take part with Thoas and Andronicus Synesij Epist. 58. page 203.
An. 411.
. Where we see how strictly Excommunicate Persons were to be avoided, and how
perfectly they were excluded from all Civil and Religious Converse and
Communion: Yea Synesius says, No man ought to call or count Andronicus for a
Christian Idem ibid. page 201.
; for this put him into the state of a Heathen, and wholly cut him off from the
Body of Christ's Church. Afterward writing to his Metropolitan, Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria, he informs him that he had separated Lamponianus a
Priest, from the Communion of the Church, for several injurious practices, and
would not absolve him (no not at the Peoples request) leaving that to
Theophilus: Only he had empowered those Presbyters which should be present when
he should be nigh unto death, to restore him to the Communion; for (says he)
None shall dye under this Bond laid on by me Synesij Ep. 67. Theophil. page 215.
; Which manifestly shows that he esteemed it a dreadful thing for any to dye
under this Sentence, and that it might make their Estate very hazardous in
another World: and therefore it is wonderful how Mr. Seldom could infer, That
this looks as if he thought this Bond not of Divine Institution, but of Humane
Invention Seld. Synedr. 1. cap. 13. p. 285.
; For it proves the contrary: since if it were only a Humane Invention, it is
no matter whether it were taken off or no, from one who is bidding adieu to
Mankind; nor could it be any prejudice to a Man at Gods Tribunal, if it were
not laid on by his Authority: Therefore it was this belief which made the Old
Canons so careful to restore those who had not fully gone through the Degrees
of Penitence, unto the Communion of the Church, in case of mortal Sickness,
lest if they died bound on Earth, they should be bound in Heaven. Soon after
lived Prosper, An. 433. who says, The greater Sinners must be sharply rebuked,
and if this will not bring them to amendment, as rotten Members of the Body,
they are to be cut off by Excommunication, lest like to dead Flesh not taken
away, they corrupt the sound parts Prosper de vit. contempl. lib. 2. cap. 7.
. It would be tiresome to my self and the Reader to search any further in so
undeniable and clear a Matter, and therefore without enquiring any further into
the declining Ages of the Church, We will here conclude, That it was the Sense
of the Primitive Catholic Fathers, That Excommunication was exercised by
Divine Right, and by Authority derived from Christ himself.

. IV. We will now go on to consider the Sense of the Councils in this Period
concerning Excommunication. And out of innumerable instances there, of the use
of this Rite, we will only select the most material. And first upon that
Principle, That the Whole Catholic Church was but one, and that whosoever was
cast out by any one Bishop was cut off from the Body of Christ; The Nicene
Council decreed according to an Ancient Canon (meaning the 32 Canon
Apostolical) That whosoever was cast out by one Bishop, should not be received
into the Church again by another An. 326. Council. Nicen. I. Can. 5. Bev. Tom.
I. p. 64.
. By which they declared that they believed Christ had given the power of
judging to every Bishop, as to all those under his Charge; and yet since
Bishops were but Men, and might chance to vary from those rules which Christ
had left them to judge by, through Passion, or Partiality, this Great Council
provides, That if any be unjustly Excommunicated, the matter shall upon Appeal
be tried in a Synod of neighboring Bishops, to be held twice in each year, and
there the Case is to be tried finally. And the like Order of not receiving
those into one Church, who were cast out of another, without the Sentence of a
Synod of Bishops, is renewed in all succeeding Councils An. 341. Council.
Antioch. Can. 6. An. 314. Council. I. Arelat. can. 16. An. 305. Council. Ellib.
Can. 53. An. 347. Council Sardic. Can. 13. An. 397. Council. Tamin. Can. 4. An.
559. Council. 3. Paris. Can. 7. An. 570. Council. I. Lugdun. Can. 4. An. 789.
Capitul. I. p. 213.
; Which shows this was the Opinion of all Ages. There is no mention of any
Appeal to the Emperors. And though they were then Christian, and had the Title
of Pontifices Max. yet the Councils believing this Power wholly in the Bishops,
make the highest and last Appeal to be unto a Synod of them. And this gave
ground to that Custom mentioned before, of the giving notice to the neighboring
Bishops concerning Persons Excommunicated in any Church; after which notice
they were either to Excommunicate them over again, or at least to avoid them as
the Canons do show An. 441. Council. I. Araus. Can. 11. An. 587. Council. II.
Turon. Can. 8. Iv^ Carnot. ep. 76.
. Yea, the Popes themselves, for many hundred years, were content to agree to
these Rules as their fellow Bishops did: So that Benedict the Ninth did revoke
an Absolution granted to a certain Count, without the knowledge and consent of
the Bishop of Auvergne who had Excommunicated the said Count An. 1034. Epist.
Penedict. 9. in Council. Lemov.
. By which discipline, the Men who fell under these Censures justly, had no
remedy but to repent and seek Absolution from that Bishop, who best knew the
nature of their Crime. And for a further proof, that no aid was to be expected
from the secular Power, but only from the College of Bishops, The famous
Council of Sardis Ordains, That if a Bishop in his anger do cast any man out of
the Church, he may go to another Bishop, and entreat him to intercede for him
with that Bishop who had laid the Censure on, which Bishop ought to be willing
to have this matter examined by his fellow Bishops; but the person censured was
to be in the same case till the matter was determined An. 347. Council. Sardic.
Can. 14.
. Yea, the second Council of Carthage Decrees, That if any who were
Excommunicated for their Crimes, fled to the Court, or to the Civil
Judicatures, those Bishops or Clergymen who received them should be
Excommunicated themselves An. 397. Council. II. Carthag. Ca. 7.
: So little did the Fathers of that Age dream of any Power in the Christian
Emperors, as to Binding and loosing, or of their own having it by any Grant
from the Imperial Authority. And here I cannot but digress a little, to relate
a most remarkable instance of God's approving the Bishops acts in censuring
evil Men, if it be true what is related by Faustinus and Marcellinus, two
Presbyters of the Luciferian Schism, who wrote while the person most concerned
was yet alive. The story this: Faust. and Marcel. Libell. prec. p. 26, 27.
When the Arrians, by their interest in Constantius the Emperor had violently
thrust out Maximus the Catholic and Orthodox Bishop of Naples from his See,
and got him sent into Banishment, Maximus Excommunicated Zosimus, whom the
Arrians had unjustly put in his place: and when Zosimus went into the Church to
do his Office, before all the Congregation, his Tongue did swell and hang out
of his mouth, so that he could not speak one word; and when he went out of the
Church, he was restored to his speech, but going in again, he fell into the
same calamity; and this so often, that at last he resolved to quit the
Bishopric An. 359.
: Which memorable Judgment, in a Case where the Bishops Divine Right to
Excommunicate was despised, and the Imperial Authority so often made use of as a
Shield against it, does manifestly show, that God himself had put this power
into the Bishops hands, and that no External Force could wrest it from them or
hinder its due effects. To proceed, the Canons of diverse Councils do declare,
That those who were Excommunicate, were not worthy of the Privileges which
other Christians enjoyed; and therefore as Jews and Pagans Testimonies were not
to be received against the Bishops and Clergy; so the second General Council at
Constantinople forbid those who were cast out of the Church or Excommunicated
to be admitted to accuse a Bishop An. 381. Council. 2. Constantinop. Can. 6.
. Where we may note the distinction between the greater and the lesser
Excommunication, Those who are cast out, being such as were for ever cut off
from the Church, and the Excommunicate such as are separated for a time Zonaras
in loc. ap. Bever. Tom. I. p. 95. de signif. verb. (...).
, as Zonaras expounds the Phrases. But neither of these were admitted to bear
witness against a Bishop, as being supposed unworthy of credit, and inclinable
to be revenged on their Censurers; Which Law was revived in diverse other
succeeding Councils Cod. Can. Eccl. African. Can. 128. Capit. Tom. I. l. 7.
cap. 181. p. 1063.
. And as they did take away their External Privileges, so they also deprived
them of all the comfort and benefit of Religious Offices, which is not only
signified by the Phrases before mentioned, but expressly decreed: For first, the
Council of Antioch declares, That it is not lawful to Communicate with those
who are Excommunicate; and if these Persons, after their exclusion from the
Churches Prayers, went into any House or other Church to pray, whoever prays
with them, especially if he be of the Clergy, shall be Excommunicated An. 341.
Council. Antiochen. Can. 2.
; which Canon is renewed in the fourth Council of Carthage An. 398. Council. 4.
Carthag. Can. 73.
. And as it was grounded on former Canons, and a constant usage of the Church
from the Apostles time, so it is repeated in almost every succeeding Council,
so that the particulars need not to be cited. Now can any have so hard an
opinion of these Holy Fathers, who lived so near the Apostles, to imagine they
arbitrarily assumed this power of excluding Criminals from holy Offices, and
retained it even after the Emperors were Christians, and had made secular Laws
to punish them; or that they pretended Christ the Author of it, if he left them
no such power? The first Council of Toledo Ordains, That if any Layman be
Excommunicated, none of the Clergy or Religious shall converse with him, or
come at his House; and a Clerk deprived, shall be avoided by the Clergy; and if
any be found to discourse or to Eat with them, they shall be also
Excommunicated, if they know them to be under the Censure An. 400. Conc. 1.
Tolet. Can. 15.
. The same Council Decrees, That a professed Virgin offending, shall not be
received into the Church till she have done ten years Penance, and none may
pray or eat with her till she be admitted into the Church Ibid. Can. 16.
. Not long after this we meet with the accustomed Form of Excommunication used
in that Age, which shows both the Original and Effects of this Sentence; and
the words are these, Following the Canonical Sanctions, and the Examples of our
holy Fathers, We Excommunicate...... by the Authority of God, and the Judgment
of the Holy Spirit, from the Bosom of our Holy Mother the Church, and from the
Conversation of all Christians, until they repent and make satisfaction to the
Church of God An. 441. Council. 1. Araus. apud Gratian.
: Which Form shows, That they believed their Authority was from God, and their
direction from the Spirit in laying on this Censure, and that the persons so,
censured were cut off from all Civil and Religious Commerce with other
Christians. And that this Opinion prevailed even in these remoter parts of the
Christian World, may be seen by those Ancient Synods held in these Islands
under S. Patrick, where it was declared, That none who was Excommunicated
should come into the Church till he had received his Penance An. 456. Synod.
Patric. Can. 18. Spelm. Tom. I. p. 53.
. And if a Clergyman were Excommunicate, he must Pray alone, and neither
presume to offer or Consecrate Ibid. Can. 28.
. And again, Hear the Lord saying, If he hear thee not, let him be to thee as a
Heathen and a Publican; do not Curse the Excommunicate, but repel him from the
Communion, from the Table, from the Prayers and from the Blessing Alter. Syn.
ejus Can. 4. item ap. Spelm.
: Where grounding the Censure upon our Saviors words, they Charitably Condemn
all dreadful Anathematizing, and allow only the Separation, which is more
Primitive, and more agreeing to the Gospel Spirit: For in this Age they
considered the dreadful Effects of Excommunication, even of the mildest sort,
and were not forward to proceed that way in light Causes: For it was about this
time that Pope Leo I. in one of his Decretal Epistles, says, Let not the
Communion lightly be denied to any Christian, neither let that Sentence be
uttered by any Priest in Anger, which ought to be laid on unwillingly, and with
grief, as a punishment for the greatest Crimes: For we know some, who for
little Offenses or slight words have been deprived of the Comfort of the
Communion; So that the Soul for which Christ's Blood was shed, by the inflicting
of this dreadful punishment, is exposed naked, disabled, and without any
defense to the Devils Assaults, so that he may take it at his pleasure An. 450.
Leon. Decret. Epist. 89. ad omnes Episc. Provenc. page 469.
. Where we see he supposes the Excommunicate to be delivered into Satan's
power, and in extreme danger of Eternal Damnation. And upon this account it
was, that those holy Bishops were so loath to inflict this dreadful Sentence,
till nothing else would do. About the beginning of this Age lived the Author of
the Apostolical Constitutions, as they confess, who dispute against that
pretended Antiquity which the Romanists attribute to this Work, and all do
grant it contains a true Scheme of the Church Discipline about the end of the
fourth Century. And in this Book we find diverse passages to confirm this
Opinion: As where it is ordered that the Bishop shall sit down when he
Preaches, as having power to judge Sinners; for to you, O Bishops, it is said,
Whatever ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatever ye loose on
Earth shall be loosed in Heaven An. 400. Constable. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 11.
. Again, the Bishop is commanded when he knows any one to have Sinned, to order
him to be turned out of the Church with Indignation: And when the Deacons have
turned him out, they are to return and beg of the Bishop to admit him to
Repentance Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 19.
. And a little after it is said, If they do not separate a Wicked Man from the
Church, they make Gods House a Den of Thieves Idem ibid.
. In the next Chapter, The Bishop ought to remember his Dignity, because he
has received power both to bind and to loose Idem lib. 2. cap. 20.
. Afterward the Bishop is directed to admonish him twice (according to Christ's
precept) who has offended: and if he be still obdurate, then he is to declare
his Obstinacy to the Church, and after that to account him as a Heathen and a
Publican, and not to admit him into the Church as a Christian, but to avoid him
as a Heathen Idem lib. 2. cap. 41. and cap. 42.
. Finally, There is reckoned up the several sorts of Offenders who are to be
Excommunicated, or to be utterly rejected Idem lib. 8. cap. 38.
: Adulterers, and all that minister to unlawful Lusts; such as make Idols, and
live by the Stage; those that use Divination, and follow the Jewish or Gentile
Superstitions; all these are to be Excommunicated till they forsake their evil
ways: But upon their repentance to be received. Which evidently proves, That
Excommunication was then believed to be the Bishops Office, and that this power
was derived from Christ, and founded upon those Words of the Gospel which we
have cited before. It were endless to cite all the Councils which mention this
Sacred punishment, because it is mentioned in every one: But it may be worth
observing, That in the famous General Council of Chalcedon, which was confirmed
by the Emperors Authority, there are Decrees for Excommunicating some
Offenders, and for Anathematizing others An. 450. Council. Chalced. Can. 2, 4,
7, 8, 15, 16, 20. and 27.
. And this Canonical punishment is particularly ordered to be inflicted on any
belonging to the Church, who forsake the Judgment of their own Bishop and fly
to secular Tribunals Ibid. Can. 9.
: So that the Bishops did determine what Offenses were thus to be punished; and
the Emperors were so far from hindering them, that they confirmed all their
Determinations; so that such as were obstinate durst not but submit to them, in
regard the Civil Powers gave them the force of Laws, and by Temporal Penalties
compelled Men to obey the Canons; which is one great end of Christian
Magistrates, as Mr. Seldom confesses out of Isidore: The Magistrates would not
be necessary in the Church, but only that what the Priest cannot effect by the
Word and Doctrine, the Magistrate may cause to be done by the Terror of his
Discipline Isidor. Hispal. Sent. l. 3. cap. 53.
. But to proceed; It was a manifest Sign that these Ages did believe
Excommunication had its effect upon Men's Souls, and not only excluded them out
of the Society of Christians upon Earth, but also put them into extreme danger
of Damnation in the next World; because in all the Old Councils such care is
taken, that none who had submitted to Penitence should dye without being
absolved and admitted to the Holy Communion; for their restoring to the
Communion of the Visible Church could signify little to them, who were never
like to walk abroad again, or to come to the Church any more; wherefore this
was intended to prevent the sad effects which this Sentence unreversed might
have upon them in another World, as being laid on by the Authority of Christ.
The old Canons which take this care, may be seen together in Albaspinaeus: But
the same Proviso was made in the Councils of this Age also, viz. That such as
were Excommunicated, and fell into Mortal Sickness, should have the Sacrament
before they died An. 524. Council. Ilerd. can. 2. Can. 5. Item An. 540. Council.
3. Aurel. Can. 6. and Can. 16. Cum multis alijs.
. And here also I must note, That about this time there was a Custom Annually
to Excommunicate some kind of Notorious Offenders, which is mentioned in the
third Council of Orleance An. 540. Council. 3. Aurel. Can. 13. and Can. 30.
, though some would pretend it to be a Custom of later times only. As to the
Condition of Persons Excommunicate, the Ancient Discipline was still observed,
They were to put on the habit of Mourners An. 506. Council. Agathens. Can. 15.
, none were to eat with them An. 507. Council. I. Aurel. Can. 13.
; For which the Apostles words are quoted An. 524. Council. Ilerd. Can. 4.
. They were to be deprived of all Conversation and discourse with the Faithful
An. 531. Council. 2. Tole. tan. Can. 3.
: And finally, whosoever did either Pray with these, or Eat or Converse with
them, were also to be Excommunicated Council. Bracar. l. Can. 33. An. 563. An.
590. Council. Antissid. Can. 38, 39.
. So that we may see the Ancient Discipline was still in force, until the year
600 after Christ, and that with little or no Variation, unless in the dealing
more gently with Penitents, because the World could scarce bear those ancient
severities so many years together. After this, we may observe out of Gregory
the Great, that it was then the General Opinion, That Bishops held the place of
the Apostles, and they who had obtained this Degreee for Government, had
received the power of Binding and Loosing: -- Yea, that whether the Pastor laid
on this Bond justly or no, it was to be dreaded by those of his Flock An. 600.
Greg. M. hom. 26. in Evang. Tom. II. page 129.
. And in his Epistles, which passed for Law through diverse Ages, there are many
Instances of the exercise of this Power, which S. Gregory would not have any
Bishop use rashly, nor to revenge his private wrongs, because it was designed
for more Spiritual ends Greg. M. Epist. lib. 2. ind. XI. ep. 45. Item ibid.
ind. c. X. Ep. 34.
. And it seems the Pope did not then pretend a General Commission to Absolve
all that other Bishops Excommunicated; for he gives this reason why he Absolves
one of Milan, because the Bishop who censured him, was dead, and no Successor
chosen Ibid. ind. XI. epist. 65.
. And in the Instructions he gives to Augustine the Monk, for the right
Governing the newly Converted English Saxons, he does allow him in some Cases
to Excommunicate Greg. resp. ad interrog. August. Cap. 7. Spelm. p. 98.
, though since it was a new planted Church, he advises him to proceed gently.
However, it is certain, that the use of this Censure came into this Nation with
their Christianity: And that Almighty God did show his Judgments upon those who
despised this Sentence, which was pronounced in his Name, may be seen in that
memorable Example related by Beda, who tells us, That S. Chad Bishop of the
East Saxons, Excommunicated one of King Sigebert's Earls for an unlawful
Marriage, Warning all not to come into his House till he did repent: But the
King would not forbear visiting this Earl; whereupon the Bishop foretold the
King that if he persisted to converse with this Excommunicate Person, he would
be slain in that very house, which accordingly came to pass; for that very Earl
and his Accomplices slew Sigebert there An. 638. vel An. 660. Bedae histor. lib.
3. cap. 22.
: Which remarkable Judgment no doubt made the Sentence of our Venerable Bishops
to be much dreaded in those days: And for that reason our old Canons decreed,
That a Bishop should not rashly Excommunicate any Man, no, not though there
were never so just a Cause An. 750. Egber. Excerpta Can. 48. Spelm. page 263.
; because of the dreadful consequences then believed to follow upon this
Censure. But to return to Foreign Countries: In this Age were made those
Ancient Laws of the Almains, wherein, besides the Temporal Penalties for
Sacrilege, it is declared, the person so offending shall incur the Judgment
of God, and the Excommunication of holy Church An. 630. Leges Alem. Cap. 1.
Capital. Tom. I. page 57.
: So that they did not think Secular Penalties made this useless in a Christian
Commonwealth, but on the contrary, the Temporal Laws now began to decree severe
punishments to be inflicted by the Civil Magistrate upon those who despised the
Authority of Church Censures. A memorable proof of which we have in the
Constitutions made by King Pepin (Father to Charles the Great) with the advice
of his Bishops and Barons; Wherein they Ordain, That whoever wittingly
Communicates with an Excommunicate person, he shall be Excommunicated also: And
that all may know the Nature of this Excommunication, they declare, He who is
thus under Censure must not come into the Church, nor eat or drink with any
Christian; none may receive any gift from him, or give him a kiss, or join in
prayer with him, nor salute him, till he be reconciled to his own Bishop. And
if any think that he is Excommunicated unjustly, he may complain to the
Metropolitan, and have his Cause tried by the Canons; but in the mean time, he
must lie under his Sentence: And if any despise all this, so that the Bishop
cannot amend him, then he shall be Condemned to Banishment by the King's
Judgment An. 753. Pipin. cap. 9. Capitul. Tom. I. page 172.
: Which Law is repeated again by some of the Successors of this Pious Prince
Capitul. lib. 5. cap. 62. page 836.
. And indeed, in those Capitulars of the Ancient Kings and Emperors of France,
there are many excellent Canons of Old Councils revived and established by the
Royal Authority, which Canons the Bishops first made and Decreed in their
Synods; and then to make the People more strictly obey them, the King, with his
Bishops and Barons, confirmed them, and put them among their Laws: Which was
not any Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor done with any intent to
take the Government of the Church, and the power of Censures out of the Bishops
hands (as Mr. Seldom pretends) but rather to strengthen their Divine Right by a
Civil Sanction: For these very Capitulars do still own, That the Bishops have
Authority from God to Excommunicate: Which one instance out of very many (there
to be found) shall suffice to prove, The Laity must know that the power of
Binding and Loosing is by the Lord conferred on the Priest, and therefore they
ought to obey their Admonitions, and humbly to submit to their Excommunications
Addit. 3. Lud. cap. 23. Capit. Tom. I. page 1161.
. I cite this the rather, because Mr. Seldom has the confidence to quote this
very place in his Margin, as a proof that the French Princes did take upon
them, to Order the Matters of Excommunications and Penances Seld. de Synedrijs
Lib. 1. cap. 10. p. 192.
; whereas this, as well as his other proofs, do only show that those Princes
believed the Bishops had a Divine Right to Excommunicate, and therefore that it
was their duty to compel the Refractory to submit to their Censures: Nor did
those Princes ever take this power out of the Bishops hands, but rather fix it
there where God had placed it. Whence it was that they made these Laws, If any
Layman, of higher or lower Degree, has Sinned, and being called by his
Bishops Authority, refuses to submit to Penitence and Amendment, he shall be
so long Banished from the Church, and separated from the company of all good
Christians, as he forbeareth to amend Capitul. lib. 6. cap. 88. Tom. I. p. 936.
. And again, He that is Excommunicated shall be excluded, not only from Eating
and Discoursing with the Clergy, but also from Eating or Talking with any of
the People Capitul. l. 6. cap. 142. page 946.
. Also it is Ordained, That the Christians shall not lightly esteem the
Excommunications of their Clergy, for even this Contempt is a just Cause of
Excommunication Ibid. cap. 248. page 964.
. And in another place, That no Excommunicate Person shall be a Godfather; for
those who by Gods Law, and the Authority of the Canons, are turned out of the
Church, and out of the Camp, lest they bring a Curse on the People, these are
much more to be kept off from these Sacred Duties Capitul. Additam. II. cap. 1.
p. 1135.
. Where, besides the express and plain affirmation, That Excommunicate Persons
are by Gods Law to be excluded the Church; we see, That from the History of
Achan's bringing a Curse on the Army of Israel, they would not suffer the
Excommunicate to bear Arms in their Camp: Which is also intimated in those Laws
which cite that place of Joshuah, There is an Anathema in the midst of thee,
therefore thou can not stand before thy Enemies An. 869. Car. Calv cap. 20.
Tom. II. page 213.
. And it is most clear by these Capitulars, that the Kings Authority did follow
the Bishops Act, and the Temporal Justice did punish him that was stubborn and
refractory, and would not obey the Bishops Sentence, nor be brought to
Repentance by his Spiritual Censures. Thus Lhotharius ordains, That an
obstinate Person who is Excommunicated shall be Imprisoned by the High Sheriff
or the Count An. 824. Capit. Lhothar. cap. 15. Tom. II. page 323.
: And he that infringes the Liberties of a Church, is to be Excommunicated by
the Bishop, and notice to be given of it to other Bishops, and the High Sheriff
is to make him pay his Fine; and if he despise all this, being judged by Law,
he is to be Beheaded, and his Goods Confiscated An. 367. Capit. Lud. 2. cap. 8.
ibid. page 363.
: Yea those who were Excommunicate for Fornication, and did not submit, were to
be Banished the Kingdom, and such as retained them were thought to offend
against God and the sacred Authority, yea, and against the Common Interest of
Christianity An. 862. Capit. Car. Calv. cap. 4, 5.
. So that still the Bishop exercised his Spiritual Jurisdiction by the Power he
had received from God; and lest any should despise this, as being a Spiritual
Penalty, the Secular Laws of these Pious Princes did inflict outward
Punishments on such, Imprisonment, Banishment, Confiscation of their Goods, and
Death it self: And now when by these Secular Penalties annexed, Excommunication
was become so terrible and so grievous, not only to the Souls by Christ's
Ordinance, but to Men's outward Condition by the Laws of the Kingdom; it is no
wonder that these Princes did revive those Old Canons which forbid the Bishops
rashly to Excommunicate. For it was so great a temporal damage to their
Subjects, that they were now concerned to see that the Bishops did use their
Power only in just and weighty Causes: and hence we find those Laws made, That
Excommunications shall not be issued out rashly and without cause An. 803. cap.
2. and Capit. lib. 1. cap. 136.
. And that no Bishop or Priest should Excommunicate any, till the Cause were
proved sufficient by the Canons, and till the Offender either confessed or were
convicted, and according to the Gospel precept had been warned to repent and
amend -- But if after all this he despise the Church Censures, the Bishop shall
then desire the Royal Power to compel him to submit, etc. An. 858. Capit. Tom.
II. page 115. and ibidem Anno 869. cap. 10. page 213.
. And again, No Bishop shall Excommunicate any person without a certain and
manifest cause; But the Anathema shall not be pronounced without the consent of
his Archbishop and Fellow Bishops, after the Evangelical Admonition, and for
some Cause allowed by the Canons; because the Anathema is a condemning to
eternal Death, and ought not to be inflicted but for mortal Sin, and on
incorrigible Offenders An. 846. cap. Carol. Calv. cap. 46. Tom. II. page 36.
. In which Laws those Princes do not take upon them arbitrarily to limit,
restrain, or direct the power of Excommunication, as if their Bishops had that
power from them, and not from Christ: Only they take care that they shall not
use that power which Christ had trusted them with, otherwise than according to
the directions which Scripture, and the old Canons, had given for the more
orderly exercise thereof: and that they should not abuse their power now
amplified by Temporal Accessions to the damage of private Subjects, or to the
disturbance of the Public Peace. And this these Christian Princes were obliged
to do by their office; and they did it without infringing the Bishops Divine
Right at all: For though a Parent by Divine Right have power over his Children,
yet without taking away that Right the State may direct Parents how to manage
that power. And besides it may be observed, That none of the Princes did ever
pretend, either to grant the Bishops this power or wholly to forbid them to
exercise it; only they direct them to manage it warily and wisely, and as they
ought to have managed it, if no such Rules had been given them. And thus Mr.
Seldens great Argument taken from these Laws, as if they proved the Power of
Excommunication to be in the Civil magistrate, falls to the grounds.

. V. Against this full and clear evidence I know none that have raised any
considerable objections, but only the learned Seldom, who has turned over all
his Authors and Records with great diligence to pick up something to oppose
this ancient and almost Universal Opinion, whose Instances when I have examined
and answered, I need not fear any great matter out of Antiquity, because he had
a personal quarrel to the Position I maintain, and a vast stock of Learning to
enable him to manage it to the best advantage: His objections are not put into
any Method, but I shall collect them into the best order I can, and with all
due respect to so great an Antiquary (unfortunate only in the cause he
undertakes) I shall consider them: First he pretends that Constantine did
absolve Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nice, two Arrian Bishops whom the
Council of Nice had Excommunicated, and this he would prove by the Phrase of an
Arabic Historian who lived long after this time Seld Syned. l. I. cap. 10. p.
187, 188.
. But Sozomen a more Authentic Author gives us a Copy of their Petition or
Recantation offered to the Bishops, in the end of which they desire upon their
repentance That these Bishops will put the Emperor in mind of them, and let him
know their intentions, and that they will please speedily to determine what
they shall think expedient concerning them Sozem. histor. lib. 2. Cap. 15. p.
242.
. So that it was the Bishops alone who could absolve them from the
Excommunication, only since they were banished by the Emperors Authority, he
was to be requested to take off that Penalty which he laid on, and to let, them
return to their Churches, when the Bishops had accepted their repentance and
taken off the Ecclesastical censure. Secondly, He takes much Pains to prove the
Christian Emperors from Constantines time till Gratians, viz. for about 60
years, had the Title and office of Pontifices Maximi, and the supreme Power in
matters relating to Religion; and consequently he supposes the Bishops must
Excommunicate by delegation from the Emperors Seld. ibid. p. 178. ad p. 188.
. For the Title, I shall easily grant that they bore it; But his inference from
it I must utterly deny, since there is not (in all Mr. Seldens reading) One
line produced out of Antiquity to show That the Emperors did delegate this
power to the Bishops; no Edict, no Law, nor Rescript, no Historian ever
mentioned such a thing; no Council, no Bishops were ever so grateful as to own
this great favor; so that it is a mere Chimaera. The Bishops did Excommunicate
before Constantines Government, and under it, and after it in the same manner,
and (as has been showed) even then declared their power was from God: It Is
true, the admitting them to sit as Judges in Temporal Causes was by delegate
power from the Emperors, and therefore Mr. Seldom has produced many Rescripts
to grant them that power, but not one can he (or any man ^^se) find wherein the
Emperors give them power to Excommunicate; wherefore they had that Power by a
Commission from Christ. Thirdly, he mentions those Phrases in the Imperial
Laws, wherein the Heretics, who deny the Nicene Faith, are to be driven and
removed from the thresholds of all Churches, and not to be permitted to meet in
any Church, to be forbid the Communion of Saints, and excluded the public
meetings, etc. Seld. Synedr. L. I. cap. 10. p. 172.
which he would have to signify an Imperial Excommunication; but the
intelligent Reader knows, that the Bishops in Council had first decreed this
Excommunication, and that by virtue of an express divine Precept, Titus iii.
10. but the Arrians and other Heretics were then so numerous and so bold, as
to hold their Churches, in despite of the Ecclesiastical censures. Whereupon
the Orthodox Emperors strengthened the Bishops Sentences with Secular Laws, and
by temporal penalties enjoined the same things which the Bishops had decreed by
Divine Authority, and writ to their Prefects and great Officers to see the
insolence of the Heretics restrained, and that they should turn them out of
the Churches by force, from whence the Bishops had excluded them by their
Spiritual sentence: Now is this to take the Bishops office and power from them?
Yea, is not this the plainest evidence the Emperors could give, that they
believed the Bishops had this Power from God, when they make themselves
executioners of their Sentence upon the stubborn and refractory? Again, the
eldest of these rescripts bears date An. 381. and Mr. Seldom supposes that this
power was delegated to the Bishops by the Emperors long before, and if so, how
came they now first personally to exercise it? or when did they reassume this
Power, or take it from the Bishops again? Did not the Bishops at Constantinople
in the second general Council this very year, exercise this same power? Why
then should this confirmation of their Sentence, this following their decision
by a Temporal Law, be supposed a taking away their power? If we examine the
date of that Council, it is plain that the Council was begun in May, and
continued to November. An. 381, as the learned Dr. Beverege computes Bever.
Annot. Tom. 2. p. 89.
. But this Law bears date the 4th. of the Ides of January following, and under
the same Consuls Justin. Cod. l. 1. tit. I. L. 2. p. 1.
. So that the Bishops had first Excommunicated every Heresy contrary to the
Nicene Faith in the first Canon of that Council, and then some Months after,
the Emperor orders his Prefects to see their Sentence executed. Fourthly, Mr.
Seldom brings in those Imperial Laws that did allow the Bishops to be the
Judges in all causes, if the contending parties consented, and also those which
only permit them to judge causes concerning matters of Religion, or matters
between Clergymen; and he supposes the Emperors permitting, enlarging and
tempering or restraining this sort of jurisdiction arbitrarily, will prove,
that they did the same as to Excommunication, which is the principal instrument
serving to this Jurisdiction Seld. Synedr. L. I. cap. 10. p. 187, 188, 189, 190.
. To which I reply, that the Bishops had a power of Excommunication long before
they had this Jurisdiction; and the one no ways depends on the other; nor do
these Edicts at all mention the power of Excommunication; Nor was that Power
ever limited to be used only against the Clergy, as this Jurisdiction sometimes
seems to have been: And again, if it were only a power to judge causes where
both Parties were willing, as is clearly expressed in the Laws of Arcadius,
Honorius and Theodosius, They who will try their causes, before them by consent
Justin. Co^. L. I. tit. 4. L. VII.
, and they who have chosen the Priests to hear their cause Ibid. L. 8. p. 25
and 26.
, then Excommunication was not needful, nor could it be any instrument serving
to this kind of Jurisdiction: Wherefore the Emperors enlarging or restraining
this Jurisdiction did no way enlarge or restrain their power of Excommunication
which they exercised against Heretics, and such as were guilty of impieties or
immoralities, not against those who contended about their Civil Rights. So that
all these Laws are nothing to the purpose; Only we may observe, That
Constantines first Law giving them a general power of hearing all sorts of
Civil causes, bears date An. 314 Seldom Syned. L. I. cap. 10. p. 177.
, and remained in force above Sixty years; and if it were narrowed An. 376
Ibid. p. 187
(of which if it were to our purpose some question might be made) yet it was
soon after enlarged again, viz. An. 398 Ibid. p. 190.
; and the great Bishops at that time exercised all manner of Jurisdiction
Socrates hist. l. 7. cap. 7.
. Now I refer it to any indifferent judge, whether it be likely that those
Emperors who gave them more Power than Christ had appointed, should take from
them an ancient piece of Authority, which these Bishops openly declared they
derived from Christ, and which they and their Predecessors had always enjoyed?
Fifthly, He alleges that Justinian does very often in his own name pronounce
Anathema's against Heretics Seld. ibid. p. 172.
: But this is easily answered out of the places cited by Mr. Seldom: For
Justinian declares there That herein he followed the Apostles and the holy
Bishops who succeeded them Justin. Cod. L. l. tit. 1. L. V. praef.
; And that he followed the holy Priests herein Ibid. L. VI. praefat.
, and did Anathematize all them that had been Anathematized in the four General
Councils Ibid. L. VII.. 3, 4 and 5.
; Yea, he says that all the Bishops which were present had subscribed these
Anathema's Ibid. L. VII.. 3. p. 4.
. Wherefore this is only a declaration of that Emperors Faith, and an evidence
that he held the true Catholic Religion; nor was his putting these Anathema's
into his Edict any exercise of the power of Excommunication: For besides that
they are levelled at opinions, and not at any particular persons, This general
Anathema was not properly a Censure, but an high act of detestation, declaring
the Person using it abhorred those Opinions, and thought such as held them
deserved to be accursed, that is, by those who had the Power to pronounce them
so judicially. And Mr. Seldom knew this very well; for in the next Page, (Page
173.) he observes, that some learned Men do distinguish concerning these
Anathema's used by Laymen, either in Donations or Laws, and those pronounced
by the Clergy; for these are effectual, but those of the Laity only signify,
those that use them wish such a sentence might be issued out effectually by the
Ecclesiastical Orders against these Heretics; or that they give their assent
to some such sentence formerly pronounced by these Orders; or that they highly
detest and abhor such persons and their Opinions; Even as the reconciled
Quartadecimani, who were Laymen, did Anathematize that, and all Heresies in
the Council of Ephesus Seld. Synedr. l. I. cap. 10. p. 173. Item Binius Tom. I.
par. 2. page 260.
. Now it would be a very weak assertion, to say these Laymen did in this
renouncing Heresy with Anathema's exercise the office of Bishops; and yet that
is as true and reasonable as to think or affirm, that Justinian did take upon
him by his own Imperial Authority to Excommunicate these Heretics by
Anathema's: For when the Anathema was a formal Sentence, it was always
pronounced by a Bishop. Sixthly, his most specious Argument is that Novel
Constitution of Justinians, which Mr. Seldom says, was a Law made by him as
the supreme Arbiter of Excommunication Seld. de Syned. p. 172.
: And a little after he cites it at large, and speaks very great things of it
Ibid. p. 191.
; as if the Bishops by this Law might not Excommunicate otherwise than by the
rules he prescribed. And lest we should seem to fear this terrible Law, we will
transcribe it also; the words are these, We forbid all Bishops and Priests to
exclude any person from the holy Communion, before the cause be showed for
which the Ecclesiastical Canons command it to be done. And if any do exclude
any one from the holy Communion on other accounts, he that is unjustly
Excommunicated shall be absolved and admitted to the Communion by a greater
Priest; And he that presumed to Excommunicate him shall by his superior Priest
be deprived of the Communion, so as his Superior sees fit; that what he has
done unjustly he may suffer Justin. Authent. Collat. 9. tit. 6. Nov. 123. Cap.
xi. p. 171. Et Basilic. Tit. 9. cap. 9. p. 124. Et Photij Nomocan. p. 124, 125.
. Now for answer to this Objection, I might reply, that this Law comes too late
to wrest this Divine Right out of the Bishops hands; for if Justinian had
attempted to take this power from them after 550 years Possession, and an
Original title from Christ and the Apostles, it had signified no great matter.
But if we review the Law, we shall find no such thing was designed by it: For
we see he does not hinder Bishops to Excommunicate for any offenses which the
Canons had made liable to that Penalty: And that was all Heresies and all sorts
of Impiety and Immorality, as might easily be proved if need were. And these
Canons were made by the Bishops in all Ages: So that this was no abridging of
their Liberty; nor were they tied to any other rules than those of their own
and their Predecessors making; By which rules Heretics, Schismatics,
Murderers, Adulterers, perjured Persons, the malicious, the profane, and all
sorts of scandalous offenders were to be Excommunicated; and to say they must
censure none but these is to give them all the liberty Christ had allowed them,
or their Predecessors used. And though it be said, the cause must be first
showed; This does not mean it must be showed to the Emperor or any Secular
Magistrate, only the Bishop must proceed regularly, and first warn the Criminal
(as Christ himself directs, Matthew. xviii) and then convict him of the offense.
So that the Person Excommunicated may know what fault he is punished for; which
is so just and reasonable a temperament, that he deserves not to be trusted
with any power of judging by God or Man who will not observe this. Nor can
Excommunication attain the end which Christ appointed it for (even the
conversion of the Sinner) unless the Bishop do thus proceed; so that Christ as
well as the Emperor requires this, which implies no more, than that this
weighty Censure ought not to be rashly and unjustly laid on, contrary to the
rules of Christ, who was the Author of it, and to the practice of the Ancient
Church. And for the Emperor to make such a Law does no more disprove the
Clergies Divine Right to Excommunicate, than our English Laws (That the Clergy
shall Pray at such times and in such Gestures and Habits, and by such a Form
agreeable to Gods Word; And that they shall Preach in such certain places or on
such days, and not vent any Heresy or Sedition in their Sermons) do prove that
our Clergy have not Authority from God to Pray and Preach; and the like may be
said of the Sacraments. No doubt the Supreme Powers ought to see that all Men
of all ranks do that duty which God requires of them, orderly, uniformly, and
so as may be for the common benefit, and in so doing they do not invade any
Persons Right. It Is true, if that Emperor had forbid the Bishops to
Excommunicate any Man for any Cause, (as he that gives may take away a
Delegated Power) or if our Laws should wholly forbid the Clergy to Pray, Preach
or Administer the Sacraments, then the Divine Right would be invaded; but not
when they only direct us to exercise our Power wisely, orderly, and profitably:
This is no more than for the Civil Magistrate to make a Hedge for Gods Law, as
Mr. Seldom observes, and indeed argues very well against this false inference
of his own Seld: lib. 1. cap. 10. page 277 and page 288.
. Besides after all this flourish, Mr. Seldom well knew, that this Law is no
other than what the Canons of the Church had decreed before Justinians time;
For the Famous Canons of Carthage do Ordain, That no Bishop shall rashly or
lightly deprive any one of the Communion, nor for any fault only known to him
by the private Confession of the parties (...). Council. Carthag. Can. 134. vid.
Can. 133. Bever. Tom. I. p. 668.
; Which former Canon being the same with this Law, is repeated in following
Canons and Councils of later times An. 552. Council. 5. Aurel. can. 2. An. 750.
Excerp. Egbertican. 48. Spelm. page 263. Et in Capitular.
. So that Justinian laid no restraint upon them, but what the Clergy had before
agreed to lay upon themselves; and this Law is but a Confirmation of a Former
Canon; Yea, if the making such a Decree demonstrate a Supreme Arbiter of Church
Censures, then the Clergy were Supreme Arbiters of them long before, and many
years after. We may now leave this Objection, when we have observed, that this
Novel does not make the Emperor Judge, or punisher of this rashness, but the
Metropolitan, he is to Excommunicate the unjust Excommunicator, not the
Emperor; which shows, that the offending Bishop did not act by a Delegate
Power, for if he had, the Emperor would have been the punisher; and if ever any
Emperor should have Excommunicated, this had been a fit occasion when the
Bishops abused the power they gave them; but Lo, here is none mentioned to
execute this Sentence, but the offenders own Metropolitan, one of his own
Order: And therefore this Novel Constitution plainly supposes, none but one of
the Clergy could Excommunicate; and this added to what we noted before
concerning the French Capitular, forbidding rash Excommunications, is a full
reply to this seemingly formidable Objection. There are some other slight
Objections relating to these times, which we will briefly here set down. First,
he would prove the Christian Excommunication to be the same with the Jewish,
from the word (...), cast out of the Synagogue, which some Christian Writers
use for Excommunication Seld. Synedr. lib. 1. cap. 13. page 272 and 276.
, but who knows not, that very many words which had been used by the Jews, were
taken up by the Christians, and used in a different sense from that which they
Originally signified? So the Fathers use the Word Passover, not for the Jewish
Feast upon their Paschal Lamb, but for the Christian Festival in Memory of
Christ's Resurrection; So also they use the word Sacrifice, for the
Commemoration of Christ's one Oblation in the Eucharist, not for a real Bloody
Sacrifice. The like might be observed of many other Words, viz. Apostle,
Baptism, Presbyter, etc. which were Jewish Phrases, but used by the Christians
in a quite different sense. Wherefore supposing (...) did signify only an
excluding from Civil Rights among the Jews (which is not true as was showed
before) it does not follow that it must signify no more among the Christians.
Again, He objects that a certain Monk did Excommunicate the younger Theodosius,
who would not be satisfied till the same Monk had absolved him Idem lib. 1.
cap. 10. page 171. e Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 36.
; And hence he infers, that others besides Bishops may Excommunicate without
any formal process, as the Custom was among the latter Jews. I reply, this bold
Fact being a single Instance, is no Argument that such a thing might lawfully
be done; yea, the Patriarchs Opinion was, that the Emperor needed no Absolution
from so rash a Sentence. And it was in Compliance with the Emperors fears, that
this absolution was procured; yet it is not improbable this Monk was in Priests
Orders, because Theodosius desires the Patriarch, to give him License to loose
the Bond who had laid it on; However if the Monks zeal transported him beyond
the bounds of his Duty, that is no ground of Argument nor Precedent for us to
follow. He also objects the saying of S. Hierom, upon that place of S. Matthew
xvi. 19. concerning the power of Binding and loosing; Which words (S. Hierom
says) some Bishops and Priests not understanding, Pharisaically thought they
could condemn the Innocent, or absolve the Guilty; whereas before God the Life
of the Criminal is considered, rather than the Sentence of the Priest. And he
goes on to compare this with the Office of the Levitical Priests, who did not
make the Leprous clean or unclean, but discern and declare who were so; and
says, in like manner the Priests and Bishops now, do not by Binding or Loosing
make Men Guilty or Innocent, but by virtue of their Office discern and declare
who are really so Seld. Syn. lib. 1. cap. 13. page 285. ex Hieron. Com. in
Matthew. 16.
. And Mr. Seldom thinks this argues that S. Hierom did not think Christ had
given the Clergy such a Jurisdiction as they claim from these words. I Answer,
that we do not pretend to any such Power, as to condemn the Innocent or clear
the Guilty; but Grant that God does not always follow the Judgment of the
Church, which may be imposed on sometimes Petr. Lomb. sent. lib. 4.
. And that the power of Loosing is not granted absolutely, but upon Condition
of the parties Repentance D. Basil. reg. brev. qu. 15.
. But we do affirm that when the party is really Guilty, and the Priest
deelares him to be so, he is not only to be excluded out of the Christian
Assembly, but as S. Hierom (cited before) says, He is in a sort judged before
the day of Judgment. And we have proved above, that S. Hierom did hold the
Clergy had this power from Christ, but it is no wonder, if the Servants who Act
by Commission be obliged to those Conditions which their Master binds himself
to: Neither Angel nor Archangel, nor the Lord himself will Pardon any (says S.
Ambrose) but the Penitent Ambros. Ep. 28. ad Theodos. August.
. We do not vindicate the abuse of this power, nor defend any that use it
amiss; but only we affirm it is a very dreadful^-thing for the Guilty to be
Excommunicated, and a very comfortable thing for the Penitent to be absolved,
by him who has the power of judging granted by Christ himself; and a Man ought
to fear his own Estate, when the Ambassador and substitute of Christ does judge
him unworthy of the Christian Communion, lest, as S. Chrysostom speaks, Heaven
should follow Earth, and lest the Lord should ratify above, what the Servant
has done below. I am sure this great Truth firmly believed and well
considered, would be a powerful means to bring Sinners to Repentance; whereas
the teaching Men to despise this Sentence, not only deceives men, but hardens
them to their destruction. I find no more Objections relating to Ancient times,
and Mr. Seldom proceeds from thence to affirm, That the French Emperors in the
West did order, limit, permit or restrain Excommunication as those in the East
had done; but we have fully answered all those quotations, by which he pretends
to prove this, in our Account of the Capitulars before, where we have showed
there is nothing to make out Mr. Seldens Opinion. There remain only two
particulars not considered before, the First is that Article of Peace between
the French and German Princes, An. 860. Whereby it is agreed with the consent
of diverse Bishops, That no Offenders shall be Excommunicated till the Bishop,
according to the Gospel Precept have admonished him to repent; and if he refuse
this Admonition, complaint is to be made to the King or his Officers, to compel
him to submit to penance, and to amend; and if this will not prevail, then the
Offender is to be Excommunicated for his Souls health Seld. Synedr. lib. 1.
cap. 10. page 192.
. Which Law does suppose the Bishops power of Excommunication grounded on S.
Math. xviii. And since Christ there directs all possible means to be used to
bring the Sinner to Repentance, before he be put into the State of a Heathen
and Publican; I do not see but this Law proceeds upon the same ground; and no
doubt in that Age they did believe Excommunication to be a dreadful thing,
since it was the highest penalty and last remedy to be used: So that this does
not prove the Power of Excommunication was not Originally in the Bishops by the
Grant of Christ; but only that it was so dreadful in its effects, that all
other ways were first to be tried toward Offenders: Yet withal, if we consider
the Law well, we shall see the Civil Authority is complained unto, only to
bring the Offender to submit to Ecclesiastical Discipline, not to take the
cause out of the Bishops hands. The second particular is that place cited by
Ivo Catnotensis out of the Capitulars, That if the King receive any of the
Offenders to his Favor, or admit them to his Table, The Priests and Christian
Assemblies ought to receive these into Ecclesiastical Communion; that he who is
reconciled to the Prince, may not be kept at a distance from the Priests of God
Seld. ut sup. cap. 10. page 193, 194.
. Where Mr. Seldom wonders that Kings should have such a power of Absolving in
an Age, when the Bishop of Rome dared to Excommunicate them: And it were a
greater wonder, if this Custom should prove that Bishops had not the power of
Binding and Loosing by Divine Right, since it was so generally believed they
had this right in that Age, wherein it is said this Custom was in use:
Wherefore it must be observed, first that Mr. Seldom Confesses, it was a Pagan
rite (mentioned in Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus) for Kings to give a sort of
Absolution to involuntary Slayers of Men, by admitting them to their Table; And
this Custom was in France before the Kings became Christian, as seems probable
by that example of King Guntram's receiving a Bishop to his Favor, that had
been. Excommunicated for suspicion of Treason; upon which he was (without any
Judgment of a Synod) restored to his Bishopric Circa An. 580. Greg. Turon.
lib. 5. cap. 19. and lib. 7. cap. 16.
; soon after those Kings had forsaken Paganism. So that it is probable enough,
those Princes after their Conversion might retain this Barbarous Custom, and
that whether the Bishops would or no; in which case there can no good Argument
be drawn from a Heathen Custom, obstinately retained by a People lately
Barbarous, to invalidate the Law of Christ: But we need not fly to that refuge;
For these (Culpati) Offenders, here mentioned, are not all Excommunicate
Persons, but only such as were Excommunicated for Treason: To prove which we
must observe, that in the fourth Council of Toledo the Bishops began to
pronounce most dreadful Anathema's against such as broke their Oath of
Allegiance, and Rebelled against their King An. 633. Council. 4. Tolet. Can. 75.
Bin. Tom. II. par. 2. page 357.
; Which kind of Anathema or Sentence of Greater Excommunication was also used
afterward in the Eastern Empire An. 1026. vid. Seld. page 212.
against Rebels and Seditious, these therefore were the (Culpati) Offenders,
whom the Bishops were to absolve, if the King forgave them, who was the party
principally offended: And to prove this we need go no further than the third
Canon of the Twelfth Council of Toledo (out of which this Law of the Capitulars
is verbatim transcribed, and of which it is an Abbreviation) the words of which
are; We see with grief some of the offenders (Ex numero Culpatorum) received
into the Princes favor, but remaining Banished by the College of Priests,
which evil is caused by the liberty Princes take to oblige others to what
themselves will not observe, so that they will eat and converse with those
which they have caused to be separated from the Church; But because the
remission of those things they do against the King and Country is by the former
Canons An. 636. Council. 5. Tolet. Can. 8. Bin. Tom. II. par. 2. page 336.
reserved to the Prince alone, against whom they have offended; therefore
hereafter in this Case no Priest shall forbear Communion with them, but those
whom the King receives to his favor or admits to his Table, etc. just in the
words of the Capitular cited above An. 681. Council. XII. Tolet. Can. 3. Bin.
Tom. III. par. 1. page 272.
. Whence we may observe that these offenders were only Rebels, and if the King
would pardon these, there was no reason the Church should keep them
Excommunicated, when they had satisfied the party offended; this being no more
than what is granted to a private Person, whose complaint causes any Man to be
Censured by the Church; to whom if the offender make satisfaction, the Church
will withdraw the Sentence. And one thing more is plain by this Canon, that the
Bishops by a Canon of a former Council had granted the Kings this privilege to
acquit such as offended against their Crown; so that the power in the Prince
was by Delegation from the Bishops at first, and therefore this can never prove
the Bishops acted by Delegation from the King, in the Case of Excommunicating
and Absolving; And if any do wonder the Bishops should give the King this
Privilege, they must consider, that every Excommunicate Person ought to be
absolved when he gives good Evidence of his Repentance; and because a Rebel can
give no greater Testimony of his Repentance, than so to carry himself as to get
the Kings Pardon, therefore on this Evidence the Offender was to be absolved,
yet so as (by this Canon it appears) the Bishops Absolution was to follow the
Kings Pardon, before the Criminal could enjoy the liberty of Ecclesiastical
Communion. These are all the Objections which Mr. Seldom can meet with in
Antiquity, to oppose our Assertion, all which we have fully considered; and now
we should also examine those which he brings for later times out of the Laws,
Statutes, and Usages of Modern Kingdoms within the last 500 or 600 years: But
before we answer these Allegations, we will premise a few things: First, That
if Christ granted and the Church enjoyed this power for above 1000 years
together, the Laws and Usages of particular Countries afterward, cannot
deprive the Clergy of this right, though they should expressly decree it.
Secondly, That the Roman Church in these later times did so abuse this Sacred
Censure, prostituting it to serve the ends of Avarice and Ambition, and making
it a Secular Engine to advance themselves into Temporal Power and Possessions;
yea, and disturbing the Governments of all Nations with their ill management of
this once Divine Sentence, that it is no wonder if Princes did use all means to
remedy this evil, and for their own safety and the quiet of their Kingdoms
committed to them by God, did frequently prohibit these proceedings. Thirdly,
that in so doing they did not oppose Christ's Institution, but only the gross
abuse of it to ends for which our Lord never did design it; So that they did
not meddle with that part of Excommunication, which purely aimed at the
Conversion of Criminals, and the Reformation of Manners; they did not oppose or
check the Bishops in the Spiritual part of their Office, in doing as the
Primitive Pastors did; but only when they used their power for Secular ends;
And commonly all the difference between the Empire and the Priesthood was
concerning some outward Appendixes to Excommunication annexed by the favor of
devout Princes, which being abused by the Ecclesiastics, Princes would have
taken away again, or limited so as they might not be a grievance to them and
their Subjects: But the power it self as Christ gave it, no King ever attempted
to take away; and therefore these instances will not much concern my Opinion
who am pleading only for the Primitive sort of Excommunication, attended with
those modern circumstances as it is exercised in the reformed Church of
England, where it never did disturb the Government, but is rather very useful
to it. De Marca has well observed, there is a deep silence among the Ancients,
about the Churches invading the jurisdiction of the Prince, for the ancient
Bishops only minded to keep up the Canonical discipline De Marca de concordia.
Tom. I. l. 4. cap. 11.. 1.
: And so do our Reformed Bishops. Wherefore I am not concerned how the Papal
encroachments were tolerated or restrained, because Excommunication was rightly
managed before they were in being, and is now after they are cast out: And now
a brief review of these objections will suffice^y wherefore we will here
represent them all together. He alleges many particulars to this purpose, viz.
That Eadmerus says concerning William the Conqueror, That he would not suffer
any of his Barons or Ministers to be prosecuted or Excommunicated for Incest,
Adultery, or any other Capital Crime Seld. de Synedr. lib. I. Cap. 10. page 197.
: Which seems to be an odious representation of a Monk, who was concerned in
the controversy between Anselm and the Crown; for Eadmerus Author of this
Charge, was one of Anselms Monks: The truth therefore (I suppose) was, that
King William expected to have notice before any of his Court were
Excommunicated, for that is one of the Customs of their Fathers, which the
English Nobility got to be enacted for a Law in the Statutes of Clarendon
Statut. Clarend. Matthew. Paris. An. 1164. p. 100.
: But it is not credible that any Christian King should presume to forbid
Discipline to be exercised in such Cases, wherein the Law of God and the
example of the Apostles required it should be used; and if King William had
forbid any such thing, his prohibition had been impious and unjust, as being
against the express Law of God. But for that custom of the Bishops acquainting
the King first, before any such Sentence were issued out against his chief
Officers, there seems to be some reason for it: First, Because the King is
supposed to be able to bring these to amendment, without any severity.
Secondly, in that age many things were annexed to Excommunication by Princes
bounty to the Church; so that if this Person were one of whom the King had
great need in his Affairs, he might thus have become useless to him on the
sudden, to the great damage of his Government. Thirdly, The Prince himself
might thus unwarily become liable to Excommunication, by conversing with the
Excommunicate: So that this Custom requires notice be given to the Prince
first, and with his leave the Offender may be Excommunicated. Nor ought we to
suppose that any Christian Prince, who saw a good Bishop only designing
reformation of some scandalous Officer or Servant of his, would deny his leave
for the Bishop to censure him; and if he did, I dare venture to say, Might
overcomes Right. For I am not of Mr. Seldens Opinion, That Secular Laws and
Customs are always just; but I believe pious Bishops have often for peace sake
submitted to unjust Laws and Customs both, rather than disturb their Country,
or raise Sedition against their Prince. Again, He objects diverse Sentences of
Excommunication denounced in Parliament against the infringers of Magna Charta,
and other Liberties of the Church and People. I reply, Mr. Seldom grants this
is not properly Excommunicating, but only a Threatening of this Sentence in
general, and a declaration that they all believe the Person so offending
deserves to be Accursed and Excommunicated by the Bishops: and since so many
Bishops were present in Parliament, the Sentence was theirs properly, and the
rest only expressed their agreement to it: And withal, Excommunication was by
the consequents attending it, even as to a Man's outward condition, become one
of the most grievous Penalties of all others in this Age; and so it is no
wonder if Princes, who had annexed these Consequences to it, did oblige the
Clergy to pronounce it with general assent on solemn occasions, to make their
Laws the better to be observed: Though I am apt to question, whether it were
well done to use it to such Secular purposes. We have indeed one Statute since
the Reformation (objected also by Mr. Seldom) Stat. 5 and 6 Edvard. 6. Cap. 4.
Vide Seld. ut supr. page 173.
which decrees Excommunication for striking in the Church or Churchyard; but
this is not only a Law made by the Bishops consent, but also it relates to a
matter of the Church, and is no more but a confirmation of diverse ancient
Canons, which they supposed would be better observed, if the whole Parliament
did assent to them, and pass them into a Secular Law, as was often done by the
Primitive Emperors in the Civil Law, and by the French Kings in the Capitulars;
but neither they, nor our Parliament, ever intended hereby to take the matter
out of the Clergies power, or to assume this power into their own hands; Yea,
the Statute cited, expressly says, The Ordinary shall issue out the Sentence.
Again, Mr. Seldom says, The Kings of France, Spain and England, etc. do allow
Appeals from the Bishops Consistory in many cases. I reply, That many cases are
tried in that Court by the pious favor of Christian Princes, who truly
believed Bishops fittest to judge in causes concerning Testaments, Legacies,
Guardianship, Divorce, etc. Now in these matters, which are judged by Bishops,
not by any express Law of God, but by favor of the Prince, he may see that
Bishops judge rightly, and therefore the King did of old grant Prohibitions on
great occasions, and call some of these matters into his Temporal Courts, where
anciently he sat himself; which Custom being confirmed by time, is practiced to
this day; but this no way concerns the Bishops Authority which Christ gave him;
and if the Sentence be for Heresy, or any other Scandalous Offense, for which
of old Excommunication was inflicted; or if it only tend to reformation of
Manners, and to the Salvation of the Criminals Soul, no Appeal lies. So that
our opinion of the Divine Right of Excommunication is not disproved by these
proceedings. But he argues further, That the Kings of England have some times
sent out their Writs to command Bishops to revoke their Excommunications, of
which he gives some instances Seld. Synedr. lib. I. cap. 10. page 201. etc.
. To this I reply, That all the cases he specifies, are notorious violations of
that power which Christ had entrusted the Bishops with, tending to the hindering
the King Precepts from being executed, and to the oppression of his Loyal
Subjects. Now since the King is, and ought to be Supreme in all Causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, no doubt it is his Office and Duty to see that all
Persons do rightly use the power they have, and if they abuse it, he may hinder
them or punish them for it; and in so doing he does not take away the Power it
self from those who use it well, nor deny it to come Originally from Christ: As
if a King do imprison or banish a Priest for preaching Sedition, none will say
that he thereby denies any Priest to have a power from Christ to preach good
Doctrine. And truly, if the Clergy do abuse their power, they ought to be
corrected for it; for our Savior, who set up Kings as well as Priests, and
made Princes the Supreme, never intended to give his Ministers any power to
disturb the Public Peace, or oppose the good Government of the World: And if
Princes had not power to hinder such unjust Sentences, they could not govern
their Kingdoms, nor do their duty. And when the Pope and his Clergy strove with
Kings for the Supremacy, it was high time for them to check these dangerous
attempts, or else they would not have sitten any longer in their Thrones than
the Pope pleased: But all this is now out of doors, and therefore the objection
signifies nothing as to our Protestant Bishops exercising this Authority,
because they yield the King the Supremacy in all Causes, as the Primitive
Bishops did. And even in Popish times, though the Kings did prohibit the abuse
of this power, yet at the same time they owned the Right to be solely in the
Bishops: For Edward the third, (whom Mr. Seldom instances in) did by his
Letters request John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the
Bishops of his Kingdom, to Excommunicate all notorious Malefactors and
Disturbers of the Peace of Church and State; which request they granted in a
Council at London An. 1342. ap. Spelm. Council. Tom. II. p. 581.
. And whatever other objections Mr. Seldom has raised relating to the times
before the Reformation, they cannot imply what he intends, because it was the
General Opinion, That the Clergy (who he confesses consented to many of these
limitations) had a Right from God to Excommunicate and absolve. Hence in the
Charter of William the Conqueror, He that is prosecuted for an Offense
according to the Bishops Laws, shall come and give satisfaction according to
the Canons to God and his Bishop An. 1085. ap. Spelm. Tom. II. page 14.
. And Matthew. Paris affirms, Robert de Marmiun, who died Excommunicate, to be in
the State of Damnation An. 1143. Matthew. Paris page 80.
. And the forms of Excommunication used about this time, were generally
prefaced thus; We in the Name, and by the Authority of Almighty God, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by the Authorty of St. Peter and St. Paul, etc.
-- do Excommunicate An. 1215. Matthew. Paris p. 270 An. 1217. Constit. Ric.
Sarum. Spelm. Tom. II. p. 158.
; Of which there are very many Forms, An. 1222. Council. Oxon. Spelm. Tom. II.
p. 181. Item Anno 1276. Constit. Dunelm. Spelm. ib. p. 319. Et An. 1308. ibid.
p. 456.
which do manifestly prove that the Bishops did openly claim this as a Divine
Right; which appears also from their public Declaration: One of which shall
suffice here; The Prelates of the Church, who carry Saint Peter's Keys, must
consider how great the power of Binding and Loosing is which Christ has
committed to them; as S. Chrysostom says, Man Binds, but the power was given
by Christ; the Lord gave Men this Honor: And since Excommunication is a
Condemning to eternal Death, it ought not to be inflicted but for Mortal
Crimes, etc. An. 1287. Syn. Exon. cap. 43. Spelm. Tom. II. page 383.
. Which with very many evidences of like kind, does show. That whatever consent
the Clergy gave to any limitations of this Power, it could only be meant of the
abuse of it in unjust causes or manners of proceeding; but cannot be expounded
of their intending to divest themselves of this Divine Right, which they always
claimed, and openly declared as the ground of their Excommunications. And that
our Ancient Kings did not pretend to prohibit the Bishops from exercising this
power in any just Causes, which by the Law of Christ or the practice of the
Primitive Church, belonged to them, may appear from King Edward the Seconds
Charter of Prohibitions; which were Answers, to certain grievances of the
Clergy Presented to that King and his Parliament: Wherein it is declared, That
if a Prelate impose Corporal Penances only for Sin committed, and the Offender
would commute it, the Kings Prohibition in that Case has no place: And whereas
some had gotten the Kings Letters to require the Ordinary to absolve such as he
had Excommunicated by a certain day, or else to appear, and show cause why they
had Excommunicated such a Person; it is declared, Such Letters should never be
granted hereafter, but where the Excommunication was found to hurt the Kings
Prerogative. And whereas, when those who held of the King, were cited before
the Ordinary out of their Parish, and Excommunicated for their Contumacy, the
Kings Writ to Arrest them after 40 days, was sometimes denied: The King
declares, such a Writ never was denied; nor never should be denied hereafter
An. 1316. ap. Spelm. Tom. II. page 484.
. All which are printed in our Statute Books for Law An. 9. Edvard. 2. An.
1315. page 98.
. And before that time it was enacted in Parliament, That Excommunicate persons
imprisoned at the Bishops request, should not be repleviseable by the Common
Writ, nor without Writ An. 3 Edv. primi. An. 1275. cap. 15. page 27.
. Soon after was the Statute of Circumspecte Agatis made, which charges the
Temporal Judges, not to punish the Clergy for holding Plea in the Court
Christian of such things as be mere Spiritual, viz. of Penance enjoined by
Prelates for deadly Sin, as Fornication, Adultery, and such like. And in diverse
cases there related, the King declares his Prohibition shall not lie An. 13 Ed.
prim. An. 1285. page 70.
. These I think are manifest proofs of the Clergies having a Divine Right to
Excommunicate for Impieties and Immoralities; and all that Mr. Seldom has
heaped up to intimate the contrary for these times, is sufficiently answered
hereby. And as to all his Objections relating to the times since our
Reformation, without going out of my own profession, or meddling with his Law
Cases, I can prove that the best reformed Churches abroad and our own at home,
have held and maintained, that the Clergy have power by the Word of God to
Excommunicate scandalous Offenders. The Helvetian Confession cites the places
of Matthew. xvi. about the Power of the Keys, and John xx. of the remission of
Sins, and declares the Ministers Authority to admit or to exclude out of the
Church is grounded thereon Confess. poster. Helv. Art. 18.
. The Bohemian Confession is very large in professing their Belief, That Christ
has given his Ministers power to sever Sinners from the fellowship of Christ,
and from the participation of the Sacraments, to cast them out of the Christian
Church, to shut the Kingdom of Heaven upon them, and finally to deliver them to
Satan Confess. Bohem. cap. 14.
. The Belgic Confession also does affirm, that they retain Excommunication and
other Appendixes of Ecclesiastical Discipline, as necessary by the Precept of
Gods Word Confess. Belg. Art. 32.
; and when they Corrected this Article, as Mr. Seldom pretends Seld. de Syned.
lib. 1. cap. 10. page 233.
, they still say, that Excommunication is especially requisite to be retained
according to the Word of God. He grants also, that the Gallican Confession
declares the same thing, and that Beza and Calvin both, have written for the
Divine Right of Excommunication Idem ibid. page 176.
. And for the Church of England; the Form of Excommunicating since the
Reformation, agreed upon in a Synod under Queen Elizabeth, An. 1571. does fully
declare the same Opinion, for the Bishop is appointed in the Name and by the
Authority of Almighty God to Excommunicate such an one from all fellowship with
Gods Church; and as a dead limb to cut him off from the Body of Christ Canones
Anni. 1571. ap. Spar. Collec. p.
. And that admirable Apology of Bishop Juel (which is owned by all to contain
the pure Doctrine of the Church of England) says in the name of this Church,
We say that Christ has given to Ministers the power of Binding and loosing,
shutting and opening -- and this power of Binding and Shutting we say they
exercise, when they shut the Kingdom of Heaven against the unbelieving and
contumacious, and denounce the wrath of God, and eternal punishments on them,
or when they publicly Excommunicate them out of the Bosom of the Church: and
the Sentence which the Ministers of God thus inflict, God himself does so
approve, that whatsoever by their means is Loosed or Bound on Earth, he will
Bind or Loose and make valid in Heaven Juelli Apol. Eccles. Angl.. 5. p. 30,
etc.
. The Canons of King James also declare, That such as offend their Brethren by
Adultery, Whoredom, Incest, Drunkenness, Swearing, Ribaldry, Usury, or by any
other Uncleanness or Wickedness of Life, shall be presented to the Ordinaries
to be punished, -- and that they shall not be admitted to the Communion till
they be Reformed Can. An. 1603. Can. 109.
. I could give many other clear proofs, that this is, and always was the
Doctrine of the Reformed Church of England; but this is enough to satisfy all
impartial Persons, that the Opinion we maintain, has been owned for truth in
all Ages, as well in Ancient as later times; And we may now conclude, That the
Bishops have a Right to Excommunicate, by Arguments drawn from the Light of
Nature, and the practice of the Jews, by the Express Institution of Christ, and
by the practice of the Holy Apostles recorded in Scripture: Which power they
have claimed as belonging to them of Divine Right in all Ages, and upon that
Principle have used it, in Censuring notorious Offenders, by excluding them
from Civil and Sacred Commerce, to bring them to shame, and so to Repentance
and Amendment of Life: And their Sentence, when pronounced according to the
Rules of the Gospel on the Sinful and Contumacious, has been feared by all
orderly Christians as a Sentence which God will ratify, and which without
Repentance will deliver over the Criminal to his Eternal Vengeance.

. VI. The third particular proposed concerning the ends for which
Excommunication was instituted, having been often touched at already, may now
serve for a Conclusion: And there are three Principal ends of this holy Rite,
as may be gathered from the Scripture. First, it was instituted for the honor
of Christ and his Church, and the Credit of Christian Religion: Our Lord
himself was pure from all Sin, his Religion obliges all that profess it to
depart from all Iniquity 2 Timothy ii. 19. Professio fidei Christianae, (...).
Zosim. hist. l. 4. p. 779.
, and he designs his Church shall be without Spot or Wrinkle, Ephesians. v. 27. a
holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1 Peter ii. 6. free from the leaven of Malice
and Wickedness, 1 Cor. v. 7. And therefore he has left power with his Church
to cast out all Workers of Iniquity, Revel. xxii. 15. There will be offenders
and offenses, but if the Church do admonish the Criminals, and Censure them
publicly, that clears her from all suspicion of Guilt, and from all just
ground of Calumny, and preserves not only her purity, but her Reputation. It
was the great Honor of Sparta, as a Senator there said, That none could be
Wicked in that City and be unpunished: And this Discipline kept up the Credit
of the Ancient Church for many Ages, so that its very Enemies did admire it,
and Millions of Proselytes came over to it; But when this Primitive Discipline
did abate, the Church evidently decayed in its esteem as well as its Manners.
And this is but too plainly verified in our days, for since these Censures have
been brought into Contempt, we are almost overwhelmed with a Flood of those
Wickednesses which the Secular Laws seldom Punish; Adultery, Fornication and
Incest, Drunkenness, Blasphemy and Swearing, Sacrilege, Faction and Malice
Canon. 109. Can. 4, 6, 7. Rubric. before the Commun.
, which are properly of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, are grown so common and so
daring, that they have brought an infinite disgrace and a deplorable Scandal on
our most holy Religion: This drives some from the Church, hardens other in
their Sinful Separation, and opens the Mouths of all our Adversaries, as if
they justly left that Church where such Wickedness goes unpunished. It Is true,
their Argument is as ill grounded as their Separation: For they may be as
virtuous as they please in a Church wherein many are vicious, and while
wickedness displeases them, it cannot hurt them; for Lot was innocent in Sodom
so long as he was vexed at the Conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. ii. 7, 8. And
besides it is not the Churches fault that these Crimes are not amended, and
therefore it ought to be as free of the blame as it is of the Guilt of this
Impunity: The Priests lament it and complain of it, The Bishops do all they can
to suppress these growing Evils, but being Judges they must not be Informers;
And one Cause of this mischief, is the neglect of presenting such Offenders to
the Ecclesiastical Tribunals. Those whose Office it is, though solemnly sworn
to do it, yet for fear of the Rich and in favor to the Poor, neglect this
useful duty, choosing rather to offend God by Perjury, and to offend the Church
by being the cause of this Scandal, than to disoblige their vicious Neighbors:
But if they would Present them, then if they be not either amended or cast out
of the Society, the fault would lie at the Churches door. I know these Officers
excuse their negligence and Perjury by pretending, that sometimes the Criminals
get off by Money or Friends, and then they are exposed to their revenge for
being Instrumental to their Conviction. But our Bishops do enquire after, and
punish this Maladministration whenever they discover it; and I know it is
their desire and endeavor that no Scandalous offender shall get loose from
this salutary Bond, till they have given good evidence of their sorrow for
their fault, their purposes of amendment, and their Charity to such as were
instrumental to their Reformation. Indeed the long disuse of open Penance, to
which of Old the greatest Personages were forced to submit Vid. exempl. in vita
Henric. Chicheley page 21.
, has made it unhappily necessary to accept Commutations in many Cases, and
the charge makes many forsake the Sin: But I dare affirm this course is taken,
not because of the easiness of the Clergy, but because of the stubbornness of
the Laity, who will not submit to a Penance, which only declares what they
really are, and what they are known to be; who hate not to be Wicked, but only
to be thought so; and who refuse to take a little Temporal shame, though it
would rescue them from Eternal shame: And I fear if our zealous Bishops should
attempt a vigorous Reformation, there would be some employed to study Evasions,
and to encourage the Offenders to despise the Methods of their cure; Others who
reckon it their highest Privilege to be wicked without control, would exclaim
against this as a Violation of their Liberties: As the Vicious Monks and
Laymen of Old, when that Pious and Zealous Bishop of Lincoln Robert Grosthead
conscientiously set upon visiting and reforming his Diocese, Openly reviled him
for making so strict an enquiry by his Archdeacons and Rural Deans through his
Bishopric, into the Chastity and manners of both Noble and Ignoble; they
called it Tyrannizing over his People, and bringing a grievous Scandal upon
many, to the Detriment of their good Name, which ought not to be done An. 1246.
Matthew. Paris, page 716.
. And at last they procured a Prohibition to hinder that good Bishop in his
proceedings, on pretense it tended to the disgrace of many; As if the Plaster,
and not the Sword which made the wound, must be blamed for the painfulness of
the Cure; and as if it were not more disgrace to be really wicked, than to be
censured for it in order to our amendment. To conclude, the Church must either
be allowed freely to use her Discipline, or excused from the Scandal she
suffers by the increase of notorious Sins: But she will never regain her
Primitive Honor till this Divine Rite be restored to its ancient vigor, for
our Lord did institute it for the Credit and Reputation of his pure and holy
Religion, and if it were duly used, it would certainly have that blessed effect.

The second end of Excommunication is the Reformation of the Offender here, and
his Eternal Salvation hereafter, as S. Paul in many places does declare 1 Timothy
i. 20. 2 Cor. xiii. 10. 1 Cor. v. 5. 2. Thessal. iii. 14.
; if the event be the Sinners Eternal Condemnation, that is not from the
intention of the inflicter, nor the natural effect of the Medicine, but from
obstinacy of the Patient: For this Censure works properly by the two powerful
Motives of Shame and Fear upon the Consciences of Evil Men, and by one or both
of these means would always bring them to Repentance, if they did not wilfully
obstruct it. For first, Shame is not only the desert but the natural
Consequence of Sin; All good and Wise Men, who are the best Judges, count the
vicious, vile and base, foolish and wretched persons, and so long as Men have
any sense of Honor loft, the apprehension of this disgrace will make deep
impressions on them (...). Aul. Gel. lib. 19. cap. 6.
, and make them careful to redeem their credit by acting more wisely and
virtuously for the future. Now while evil Men can hope they are concealed, they
are apt to go on in their Wickedness: But when this holy Censure pulls by the
Vail, and publishes their Sin and Shame to all the Congregation, their
impudence can no longer protect them; when all others do condemn them, they
then begin to condemn themselves: For none but those of desperate obstinacy,
and hopeless impenitence Ego quidem illum peri^sse puto, cui perijt puder.
Plautus.
, can endure to think of being generally infamous and detested, He that can
thus boldly despise Fame, will soon come to despise all Virtue Tacit. Annal.
lib. 4. p. 478.
. But few have arrived at this height of Impiety, wherefore this Method will
work upon all that have any spark of goodness left. For doubtless it is a most
shameful thing for a Christian so to behave himself, as by Christ's Law and by
those who judge in his stead, to be openly Sentenced as unworthy to remain in
the Church, or to have any Conversation with the Faithful People; yet this
shame is most just, they have shamed the Church by their Vices, and ought to be
put to shame before the whole Congregation, 2 Cor. ii. 6. and it is a blessed
shame if it bring the Offender to a sorrow for his Sin, and to amendment of
Life. Secondly, if the Sinner be not wrought on by Shame, perhaps Fear may
bring him to Repentance, and this Fear is apt to be produced by this Censure
rightly understood: There is nothing hardens Evil Men more than the forgetting
that eternal Vengeance which their Sins deserve; But this dreadful Sentence is
an Emblem and a forerunner of the terrible Judgment at the last day: It sets
Hell and Damnation naked before their Eyes; This casting out of the Church
clearly represents their being cast out of Heaven; and the delivering them to
Satan, foreshews to whose power they are like to be doomed by God and his Holy
Angels. It may be they have supported themselves with vain hopes hitherto, but
for the Physician to declare us mortally sick, or the Lawyer to assure us our
cause is desperate, will stagger the most daring confidence; Much more ought it
to make us tremble, when he that judges in Christ's Name and by his Authority,
he whose Sentence on Earth is confirmed by his great Master in Heaven, shall
pronounce us worthy of Everlasting Burnings, and deliver us over to them,
unless we repent immediately. This prospect does often terrify the most
obdurate and presumptuous Sinners; and it would more constantly have this
Blessed effect, if the Sentence were pronounced with the same gravity as it was
wont to be of old; and if all the Congregation out of a deep sense of the woeful
Estate of the Excommunicate Person would express their pity for him by tears
and a visible Sorrow. And since this Holy Censure is so sit an Instrument to
convert obstinate Sinners, we ought highly to esteem it, and to take care that
by our ill-management of it it do not lose its desired effect.

The third end of Excommunication is to preserve the sound from being corrupted
by the example and the Conversation of Scandalous Sinners; Which we learn from
S. Paul's comparisons of the leaven to be purged out, lest it spread over the
whole mass, 1 Cor. v. 6, 7. and the gangrened Limb which is to be cut off lest
it corrupt the sound parts, 1 Timothy ii. 7. And hence by express command of holy
Scripture, 1 Cor. v. II. 2 These. iii. 6. we are to forbear all sorts of
Conversation with the Excommunicate, which was religiously observed in former
Ages, and is strictly required not only by the Old Canons, but (which weighs
more with some) by our own Ancient Laws; for Bracton says, None may pray or
talk with the Excommunicate openly or privately, none may eat with them except
some persons Bracton lib. 5. de except. cap. 23.. 1.
; that is, those of their own Family, and such as go to excite them to repent.
Now it is very strange, that neither the Laws of God, the Practice nor Canons
of the Primitive Church, nor the Laws of our own Country, can restrain us in
this most Licentious Age, from freely conversing with such Offenders; By which
we do not only obstruct one of those ends, for which Christ instituted this
Holy Rite, but harden the Sinners in their Impenitence, and expose our selves
to the danger of being corrupted by the Conversation of these Impious and
abandoned Wretches. For as those who have the Plague are said to be desirous to
infect others, so Evil Men by their Discourse and Example propagate their
Errors and their Vices, and labor to make others as wicked as themselves Malus
bonum vult esse malum, ut sit sui similis. Plaut. Trinum. II. 2.
. But our Spiritual Pastors by their Censures do all they can to separate the
infected from the sound, and by observing this Order and flying their Company
we shall be safe. If they should suffer notorious Sinners to pass without a
Mark set on them, we might have some excuse; but when they are condemned, our
ruin is wilful if we associate with them. However it is just and necessary the
Church should sentence open and Notorious Sinners, lest their impunity should
embolden others to commit the like Crimes, till the number of Offenders made
them insolent and incorrigible; He that punishes one (says the Italian
Proverb) threatens an hundred: And some examples of exemplary justice done upon
some of the most noted and public Offenders, will be a means to check these
growing Evils, and be a warning to others not to fall into those Sins, for
which Christ and his Church has appointed so severe and dreadful a penalty.

Finally, since Excommunication was so certainly instituted by Christ for these
excellent ends, Let all Christians in their places labor that it may obtain
them: Let the Magistrates (according as the Law requires) compel the obstinate
to submit to this Medicine for their Souls. Let the Bishops, to whom this
Discipline is committed, use it only on great and just occasions; and with such
deliberation and solemnity that it may make a due impression upon such as fall
under it. Let such as suffer it, be angry at nothing but the Sin which brought
it on them, and submit to a little shame here, to rescue them from Eternal
shame hereafter; let them with Tears, Fasting and Prayers, seek the Peace of
God and his Church, looking on themselves to be (as really they are) in a
damnable condition till they be absolved. And let all others fly those Sins
which will bring this Curse on them; and while they avoid the company of the
Excommunicate, let them pity and pray for them, and encourage them to a speedy
Repentance: And let none dare to vilify or despise this Divine Institution,
for this is to despise Christ himself, and to harden Sinners to their Eternal
Damnation; yea, it is to hinder the effect of one of the most powerful means to
convert Sinners, and to curb those Wickednesses which are the shame of our
Religion, and the ruin of many Souls. The poor Greeks believe from very many
credible Examples, that such as dye Excommunicate are accursed by God; and that
their Bodies grow black in the Grave, and swelled like a Drum, so that they
cannot rot till they be absolved Leo Allat. Epist. de quorund. Graec. opin..
14. Eucholog. Jac. Goar. page 689.
; And it is not improbable, God may by Miracle keep up the reputation of that
poor oppressed Religion; but whether the matter of Fact be true or no, the
Opinion has an excellent effect upon those Christians, making them Venerate
their Clergy, and fly notorious Sins, for fear of Excommunication and this
Curse which follows it. From whence we may learn how evil Instruments they are,
who by false arguings and manifest mistakes do go about to teach Men to despise
this sacred Discipline; And since the restoring it to its Primitive esteem is
so excellent a means to convert Sinners, and extirpate all notorious Vices, to
repair the honor of God and Religion, and to wipe off the Scandals which this
Church has suffered by the Wickedness of its Members, and the Malice of its
Enemies; I hope this will be thought a useful and seasonable discourse; for I
have therein proved this great Truth, That Excommunication is undoubtedly
grounded upon the Institution of Christ, and express Precepts of Holy Scripture.

FINIS.

