Articles and Orders, made and agreed upon the 9th. Day of July, 1647. and in
the three and twentieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the
Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland; Defender of the
Faith, etc. By the Company of ADVENTURERS for the PLANTATION of the Islands of
ELEUTHERIA, formerly called BUHAMA in AMERICA, and the adjacent Islands to be
observed and performed by all and singular ADVENTURERS, to PLANTERS and
dwellers upon, and all Resiants at the same ISLANDS.
WHereas experience has showed us the great inconveniences that have
happened, both in this Kingdom of England, and other places, by a rigid
imposing upon all an uniformity and conformity in matters of judgment and
practice in the things of Religion, whereby divisions have been made, factions
fomented, persecutions induced, and the public peace endangered. And for that
we well know, that in this state of darkness (...) ^mperfection, we know but in
part, That there are bothbabes and strongmen in Christ: And that every Member
who holds the head, and is of the body of Jesus Christ, has not the same place
and office, nor the same measure of light, who yet desire and endeavor daily
to increase in knowledge. And in the mean time walk according to what they have
received, in all godliness, justice and sobriety. And whereas experience has
also showed us, That the peace and happy progress of all Plantations, does much
depend upon the good government thereof, the equal distribution of justice, and
respect to all persons, without faction or distinction, the certain knowledge
and manifestation of every ones right and proprieties, and careful provisions
for common defense and safety.

It is therefore ordered, That all such person and persons, who are so as
aforesaid qualified, shall be received and accepted as Members of the said
Company of Adventurers, and into the said Plantation, notwithstanding any other
difference of judgment, under whatsoever other names conveyed, walking with
justice and sobriety, in their particular conversations, and living peaceably
and quietly as Members of the Re-publick.

That there shall be no names of distinction or reproach, as Independent,
Antinomian, Anabaptist, or any other cast upon any such for their difference in
judgment, neither yet shall any person or persons, assume or acknowledge any
such distinguishing names, under the penalty of being accounted (in both cases,
either of imposing or accepting or assuming any such name or names) as enemies
of the public peace: nor shall any man speak reproachfully of any person for
his opinion, or of the opinion it self, otherwise then in the Scripture
Language.

That no Magistracy or Officers of the Republike, nor any power derived from
them, shall take notice of any man for his difference in judgment in matter of
Religion, or have cognizance of any cause whatsoever of that nature: But that
their jurisdiction shall reach only to men as men, and shall take care that
justice, peace, and sobriety, may be maintained among them. And that the
flourishing state of the re-publick may be by all just means promoted.

That the present Adventurers, and all other persons, who within the space of
one year now next ensuing, shall bring into the public sto^k, the sum of 100
l. shall be admitted and reckoned into the number of the first Adventurers,
their number not exceeding one hundred persons.

That every one of the number of the first Adventurers, shall have three
hundred Acres of Land, laid out for him and his Heirs for ever, in the first
convenient place which shall be chosen, by those persons of the number of first
Adventurers, who go to the said Plantation, in the present expedition and
shipping. And that the said quantity of three hundred Acres for each first
Adventurer; shall at the end of the first three years, or sooner, if the major
part of the said number or Company of first Adventurers shall require the same,
shall be divided and set out by lot, unto every particular person. And that in
the mean time, all the same Land shall be employed and improved for the joint
advantage of the said Company. And that for the further and better
encouragement of the said first Adventurers, every one of the said Company of
first Adventurers shall have two thousand Acres more of Land, to be laid out
for him and his Heirs for ever, in such place or places as shall be most
convenient and satisfactory unto him, and least prejudicial or disadvantagious
to the public. And that this shall be effected with as much convenient speed,
as the occasions of the Plantation will permit. And that all the adjacent
Islands shall be reserved to, and laid out and had for the use of the said
Company of first Adventurers.

That as well every one of the Adventurers aforesaid, as also every other
person, who shall at any time or times, within three years transport, at his
own charge, unto the said Plantation, any person or persons, shall have and
enjoy to him the said Transporter and his Heirs for ever, the quantity of
thirty five Acres of Land per person, for every person which he shall so
transport; the same Land to be set out and appointed for him, by such as shall
be hereafter authorized for that purpose by the first Adventurers upon the
place. And that if any Servants or Children, or other persons who shall be
shipped to be transported to the said Plantation, shall after their shipping
miscarry, or die by the way: yet nevertheless, the person at whose charge any
such miscarrying or dying person, Child or Servant, was shipped shall have and
enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever in the said Plantation, and to be set out
and appointed as aforesaid, the quantity of thirty five Acres for or in respect
of each one person so dying or miscarrying, in as ample manner, as if he had
been safely transported, and come into the said Plantation. And that every
other person and persons, that shall adventure, after three years shall have
five and twenty Acres.

That every Servant being a Christian, which shall be transported to the said
Plantation, and shall serve out his time agreed upon, to the use of him who
transported ^im, or of his Assigns, shall at the end of his said time of
service, have and enjoy to him the said Servant and his Heirs for ever, the
quantity of twenty and five Acres of Land, to be allowed and set out for him by
such as shall be authorized by the Governor and Council. And for the better
fortifying of the said Plantations, and for the encouragement of the first
Adventurers in a work of that hazard; and also for the exciting and awakeing
the industry of all: It is further ordered and agreed;

That whatsoever Ordinance can be recovered of any wraks, shall be wholly
employed for the use of the public, and serve for the fortification of the
Plantation.

That all other wraks which shall be recovered upon, or near the Islands, or
upon or near any the adjacent Islands: And also all Mines of Gold, Silver,
Copper, Brass or Lead, Ambergreise, salt; and all rich woods, either for
tincture or medicament, which shall be had or found upon or near the Islands or
territories aforesaid, in any Land not divided, or set over to any particular
proprietor, shall be delivered into the Custody of two such persons, Merchants
or Agents for the said Company, as shall be yearly chosen by the said Company
for that purpose, and the same Mines, Wracks, Ambergreise, Metalles, Salts, and
Woods, shall be by the said two Agents, made fit for sale, and be by them
withal convenient speed, sold for the best price and advantage, and the whole
price and value thereof (the Charges and wages for the procuring and fitting of
them for sale, being first deducted and discharged) shall be divided into three
equal parts and shates; and the first of the same three parts, shall be unto
him or them, who shall be the undertaker or finder thereof: the second part
shall be paid and distributed unto, and among the first Adventurers, their
Heirs, Executors and assigns, equally: and the other third part shall be paid
and delivered into the public Treasury of the said Plantation, to be employed
and laid out for the use of the public, by order and warrant from the Governor
and Council there, for the time being. But if the same shall be found in any of
the Lands appropriated, the first third part shall be to the owner or
proprietor of the same Lands, and the other two thirds as aforesaid: That when
the Plantation shall sufficiently be fortifyed, and all necessary public works
finished, and the general Magazines sufficiently stored, then what shall be
spared of the public third in the wracks and Commodities aforesaid, shall be
employed in works of mercy and charity, and for the transporting from England
and other places such godly people as shall be willing to go unto the said
Plan^^^ns, and are not able to bear the charge of their transportation and
settling there.

That no person shall pretend unto, or claim any Wracks, Mines, Ambergreise,
Salt, or rich woods, as aforesaid; for, or by reason of their growing, or being
in or upon his lot or share of ground, which shall be appointed to him as above
said; but all the said particulars shall be disposed and employed, as before is
expressed. That none of the said rich Woods growing upon Lands not
appropriated, shall be cut down by any person, but by warrant first had and
obtained from the Governor and Council for that purpose; and if any shall do
otherwise, then he that shall cut, or cause to be cut, any of the said Woods
without such warrant, shall loose and forfeit all that share which he might
under any qualification whatsoever, pretend unto in the said Woods; and the
same forfeiture shall be to the use of the said Colonie. That if any places
shall appear fit for making salt, which yet makes it not naturally, then the
salt-works shall be perfected at the public charge, and the provenue thereof
to come into the public Treasury, and be employed for ever for the public
service, as aforesaid. That no Inhabitant of these Plantations, shall in their
converse with any of the Natives of any of those parts, offer them any wrong,
violence, or incivility whatsoever; but shall deal with them with all justice
and sweetness, so far as may stand with their own safety, thereby to work in
them a good opinion of love, unto the ways and knowledge of God, which every
one shall endeavor to hold forth, and communicate unto them in the best manner
that they can. And whereas the Company is informed, that there are some Indians
have been taken and sold at some of the Caribe Islands: It is therefore agreed
and ordered, that the Indians shall be sought out and redeemed: And after they
have some time continued in those Plantations, for their instructions, and make
them sensible of the benefit. They shall be then returned to the places from
which they were taken, that every Planter shall himself provide Arms and
Ammunition sufficient, for his own persons (going to the said Plantations) and
for every Male that he shall transport thither, who is or shall be from time to
time able to bear Arms, and that such adventurer shall not have his share of
Land set out unto him for any Male person, unless he be as aforesaid, provided
of sufficient Arms and Ammunition for them. That all in the said Plantations
from the age of sixteen to sixty years, shall be ready to come to the several
^andevous appointed them, upon any Alarm, ready and armed for the cesence of
the Plantations; That none shall be compelled to take Arms, or go to war out of
the Country unless it be for the necessary defense thereof, and to expel or
divert an eminent invasion, neither shall any be suffered to take any
depredations or invasions upon any, either by Sea or Land, unless upon a War
first begun by them and open War by the said Plantations, first denounced
against them. That the Government of the said Islands and Plantations, shall be
continued in a Senate of the number of one hundred persons; and that the
Company of the first Adventurers aforesaid, shall at present be the same
Senate. And whenever any of them shall die or sell away his Interest in the
said Plantations; then there shall be another elected in his room from time to
time, by the Major part of the said Senate, out of the other Adventurers and
Planters Resiant in the said I^ands. And the same election shall be made in
this manner, (viz.) First, 20. fit persons shall be nominated. Then those 20.
reduced to the number of 4. by scrutiny, and out of those 4. one to be chosen
by Ballotines. And so from time to time, as often as any Member of the said
Senate, shall decease or shall allien or discontinue his interest in the said
Plantations, or shall be amoved by the said Senate, upon just cause or
complaint. And that the same Senate shall from time to time make election o^
all Officers, for doing of justice, and distribution and setting out of Lands,
and for the care and oversight of all public works, and shall have the
ordering and disposing of all public moneys. That after the first three years
expired, there shall be yearly a Governor and 12. Councellers chosen out of
the said number, of 100. Senators, who shall take the daily care of all things
necessary for the prosperity of the Plantation; and that it in nothing suffer
detriment or decay. And that the public peace be maintained between man and
man, and speedy justice done unto every man that shall seek it at their hands.
And that the said Governor and Council, shall have power to call together upon
any emergency, to the said Senate or so many of them, as shall then be upon the
said Islands, and to act and execute what shall be by the said convention of
Senators, ordered and referred, or committed unto them. That the first Governor
and Council shall be elected by the first Adventurers in England, when the
number of Adventurers who will transport themselves is once known. And that the
same first Governor and Council shall continue in their Office three whole
years from the first day of their arrival at the said Islands or Plantation.
That all succeeding Governors and Council shall after the aforementioned term
expired, be yearly chosen on the first Tuesday in December, for one whole year
to come, beginning the first day of January following, by all the freemen of
the said Plantations, by way of scrutiny and Ballotines, in such manner as is
before expressed. That every person that shall transport himself to the said
Plantations, or desire to become a Member of the same Plantation, shall before
his admittance thereunto, acknowledge his allowance, and consent unto all and
every one of these Articles; and by subscribing the same, bind himself to
conformity thereunto for the future. And this to be done before he be admitted
into the said Company, and before he has any share or proportion of Land set
out and assigned to him according to these Articles.

FINIS.

