THE BISHOP OF LONDON's EIGHTH LETTER To his CLERGY, Upon a CONFERENCE How they
ought to behave themselves UNDER THE TOLERATION.

LONDON: Printed by BENJ. MOTTE, 1692.

THE Bishop of LONDON'S EIGHTH LETTER TO HIS CLERGY, etc.
Good BROTHER,
IT is now Three Years since I first begun this Conference in my Diocese; and
therefore it can be no wonder, if many of you should have forgot what Discourse
passed upon this occasion: For I begun in 1689. and concluded not till the last
Summer 1691.

But besides this, and my constant Custom of communicating to you from time to
time the substance of what had been the entertainment of our Conference: I find
my self obliged to publish the Heads of this Conference, and in what manner we
pursued it, that I may take off the Edge of some unadvised and false
Representations that have been made, as if I designed signed to disturb and
interrupt that Repose which the Laws have given to Dissenters. Whereas, God is
my Witness, I had no such Thoughts; but as much the contrary as possible. Which
will best appear by what follows.

I. It was enquired, What Discipline we had left for the support of our Church,
since the Act of Toleration. And this we did, by considering what Statutes were
suspended, upon that account: and what Conditions were to be observed by such,
as should have the benefit of that Suspension. For it is a very reasonable
Proverb, Even Reckonings make long Friends. Should we break in upon one
another Boundaries, and not keep every one within his own Line; it would cause
such continual Strife and Debate, as would inevitably bring in Confusion and
every evil Work. But if we will be limited by those Rules, which the Law has
set, and be careful not to entrench upon one another Privileges: This will be
the only means to create a Confidence and good Understanding among us for the
conservation of the public Peace. For such Behavior will naturally allay the
Bitterness of Dissension, and quench the Coals of Schism: It will render
Charity triumphant over Division; and, if it were possible, make us one Spirit,
tho of different Minds. A care not to offend, carries so many Charms with it,
that it tames the wildest Beasts: it gives that security of Peace and Repose,
that it persuades or shames the worst of Tempers into an acquiescence.

And here I presume to lay one Argument before you; which I should think, if
discretely handled, would very much work upon those, that differ from us. There
is a great noise made, about the Church enjoining the Observation of things in
themselves indifferent. And yet I question not, but that the severest Opposers
of this will confess, that the secular Power may determine the use of such
things. For otherwise there would be an end of all Government, Societies, good
Order and Peace in the World: The Conservation of which consists mostly in such
Laws as are taken up about things indifferent, or such indifferent
Circumstances of Time, Place, Manner or the like, as would render all
ineffectual, if not prescribed. But if it shall be said, This must not be done,
but where there is sufficient Reason for it: this sets all to Sea again, and
whilst the infinite Varieties of man's Reasonings are afloat, no Law can live in
such a Storm as they will raise. And we do not find, that God has given any
other Method for establishing the outward Decency and Order of the Church, than
what is common to all other Societies of Men, Civil or Military. Nay the state
of the Church is declared to be a Spiritual Warfare. And we know nothing is
more rigorous, than Military Discipline, even in the minutest things.

We may therefore certainly conclude, that things indifferent in themselves do
not hang so loose to the world: but that for the good of mankind they may be
restrained from their neutrality. No Body of men in the world can carry on any
common purpose, without this power over things indifferent. Should they not
deny their Private Liberty, by agreeing to Time and Place, and by tying
themselves up to some Rules: it would be like the Confusion of Babel, or like
an Army armed at all adventures, where there might possibly be found more
weapons to offend every one his next man, than to annoy his enemy. So that I do
not think I wronged any religious Sect of men in the world: if I should say,
there is none but what finds it self obliged in some measure to retrench
Private Liberty for the sake of Common Convenience.

The true Difference then betwixt the Necessity that lies upon things necessary
in their own nature, and that which lies upon things indifferent is; that the
one is always so, and the other only upon occasion. Which agrees with the just
and wise Declaration of our Church. The Ceremonies retained are for a
Discipline and Order, which for a just cause may be altered and changed: and
therefore are not to be esteemed equal with God's Law. The case being thus, I
would gladly know, whether we that obey the Laws made about things indifferent,
do not come nearer up to the Precept, Submit to every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake, than they that insist upon an unconfined Liberty.

I must confess by the Principles of some, and the Practice of others, one
would think there were no Power of God in Rulers, but what were controlable by
the will of the Subject: and that Laws were no longer in force, than men had a
mind to keep them. But what would be the fate of such a precarious Government,
our present unhappy and self-destroying Divisions give but too broad an
intimation. Not but that there are times and seasons to do things beyond common
allowance. But it is neither convenient to prescribe particulars in such cases
beforehand, nor possible to come to an end of them. And therefore it has been
the wisdom of all Governments to let alone such Decisions, till the exigency of
affairs call for them. And if at any time some upstart scoundrel pretense of a
Government has done otherwise, it proved one of the things that most exposed
their folly. There may be indeed general Rules, such as our Savior's for
dispensing with positive Laws, tho of Gods own making, Man was not made for the
sabbath, but the sabbath for man, and that which surmounts all, Necessity has
no Law: but the Laws; as I may call them, for such particular occasions, must
arise out of the exigencies themselves, and either stand or fall by the
Judgment of Mankind.

II. The thing we next confidered, was how to prevent the Abuses, ill men might
make of this Liberty: who, we might easily perceive, would be apt to pervert
the easiness of the Government, which was intended to favor weak Consciences,
into an occasion of Profaness and Disorderliness. For we find already how much
forwarder wicked men are to abuse this Indulgence, than others to be thankful
for it. There are numbers of late, who have forsaken the Church, not to go to a
Meeting; but either to the Alehouse, or to loyter in the fields, or to stay at
home, and that sometimes to follow worldly Business.

1. To suppress these grievous Disorders, as much as may be; we thought the
first step to be made, was to call upon the Civil Magistrate. For the Laws are
many and strict against Tippling, Swearing, and the like. So that if the
Justices would but seriously and conscientiously set themselves to the
execution of them: it could not miss of having a very good effect. Especially
if they would distinguish the profane withdrawers from those that are
protected by the Act of Toleration, by making them to pay twelve pence a Sunday
according to the Statute of Queen Elizabeth.

For the Secular Powers are not less concerned in their Province to discourage
Idleness and Debauchery upon a Temporal account; than we are to do it upon a
Religious one. Let them but consider what mortal wounds such Licentiousness
gives to the Commonwealth. It takes off the Strength and Vigor of men; it
mightily abates their Care and Industry: And that brings them to Want and
Necessity. And what is the consequence of all this? They will not be so able to
follow their own business in time of Peace, nor so stout to serve their Country
in the Wars. Land will be impoverished for want of due Cultivating, and fall in
value. Trade will decay. And this will make Taxes more uneasy every day than
other: till Discontent with their present condition makes the people murmur and
fond of any Change, and so ripe for Sedition and Rebellion. If then Security be
the greatest Blessing to any Nation, when all sorts of people are content and
at their ease: what a Curse is it always to be unsafe, and under the continual
apprehension of Disturbance! And therefore certainly it does in the highest
degree behove the Government to watch against such Disorders, as draw after
them so pernicious consequences.

2. The next thing to be done for reforming the Manners of this sort of people,
was reasonably judged to be the duty incumbent upon our selves; out of a
Spiritual consideration to endeavor by all ways to reduce them to a sober
mind, that they might seriously reflect upon those things that belong to their
eternal peace. For if we could once make men good Christians, they would
infallibly become good Subjects, good Neighbors, and whatever else might
conduce to public or private convenience. For the effecting of this, we could
not think of a better course, nor I believe can we, than to lay that Letter of
the Kings before us, which is directed to me to be communicated to the two
Provinces of Canterbury and York, dated the 13th. day of February 1689/1690. I
mean that part of it which directs the Preaching against such Disorderliness,
as is taken notice of in the several Acts of Parliament against Blasphemy,
Swearing, Perjury, Drunkenness and Profaning of the Lords day. In the
prosecution of which, care ought to be had in the first place to time the
several Discourses to the most suitable and proper seasons. (...), etc. says
Demosthenes, Whoever neglects the right season of doing his business; must
remember, that the Gods bless no such endeavors. The meaning of which is, That
Providence has set Rules and Measures, and Times and Seasons for all things:
and if we will not be directed by them, we put ourselves out of the Conduct and
Protection of Providence so far, as not reasonably to expect the favor of it.
And therefore the Prophet boasts of his wisdom in this particular, The Lord God
has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word
in season. Isa. 50.4.

So that the first thing to be done, is to consider what may be the properest
time to Preach upon any of these Subjects above mentioned. For however there
may be too much reason to make all times seasonable for such Discourses: yet
there are some seasons more proper for it perchance than others. As before the
Lent and Midsummer Assizes, to make the people understand the horrid guilt of
the sin of Perjury, so pernicious to particular persons, so destructive to
Societies, and so highly offensive to Almighty God. To warn your Flocks in the
time of Advent against the beastly sin of Drunkenness, and that which is the
constant Fruit of it, Blaspheming and Swearing: that, if possible, the shameful
abuse of Christmas Holydaies may, in some measure at least, be prevented; when
instead of spiritual Rejoicing and giving of Thanks, nothing but Luxury,
Intemperance and the most idle Recreations are indulged. And in my opinion, to
take the time betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide for preaching against the
profanation of the Lords day: Both because Easter is the Original of all the
rest of the Lords days: and because it is in the midst of those Primitive Holy
days Goodfriday, Easter, Ascension and Whitsunday, whose observation seems to
be as early as the time of the Apostles.

When we are resolved of the Times: it will be fit to take up a courage
suitable to the Cause we undertake. It is Gods Cause: we are Advocates for his
Truth. And if God be for us, we ought not to stand in awe of any man. Frowns
and threats, nay and ill usage to boot, are but Grimaces, in comparison of his
Rewards. And therefore we ought to do our Duty without respect of persons,
applying the words of St. Paul to ourselves, These things speak and exhort, and
rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee. Tit. 2.15.

3. Lastly, We should endeavor to prevail with our dissenting Brethren, who
Teach in Meetings, to join heartily with us in discouraging loose and profane
persons, by keeping them at a distance, and exposing them to the Law. For God
knows, it is but too natural for any Society of men to embrace those with all
their faults, who will quit another Party to come over to them. But if we could
once weather this point: it might be a means to remove many Scandals, which are
now given with impunity.

To be sure such a friendly compliance would wonderfully contribute to the
reviving that so much decayed and forgotten virtue among us of Christian
Charity. St. Austin in his Treatise against the Donatists concerning Baptism,
observes frequently, throughout that Discourse, the great difference there was
between the behavior of St. Cyprian, whose authority was urged against him,
and that of the Donatists; and what different effects they had. Particularly l.
1. c. 18. having taken notice that this Opinion of St. Cyprian and his Council
of Bishops was declared before any General Council had determined the Point,
whether they that had been Baptized by Heretics or Schismatics, should be
Baptized again, when they returned into the bosom of the Church: He marks
further, that the Peace of the Church was preserved in the main, because the
Communion was not broken. And therefore he willingly closes with them in their
Appeal to this holy Martyr, thus expressing himself, Ut ad illum jam veniam, de
cujus sibi authoritate isti carnaliter blandiuntur, cum ejus charitate
spiritualiter perimantur. He cheerfully concurs with them in comparing his Case
with theirs, since, whilst they so much flattered themselves after a carnal
manner with his Authority, they were spiritually confounded by his eminent
Charity.

Now tho we are not so happy, as to be able to persuade those that differ from
us to hold Church Communion with us: Yet a familiar and friendly Conversation
would go a great way to prevent those many Mischiefs and Scandals, which the
irreconcilable and extravagant Separation of the Donatists brought upon the
Church. It would by degrees discover many Mistakes, and remove many Prejudices.
The Difficulties would not seem near so insuperable, our Breaches half so wide,
nor the Points in Controversy of near that consequence. Honest, plain,
well-meaning Hearts would by this means soon find out one another, and leave
the malicious and perverse Designers naked, and destitute of a Cloak for their
Knavery. Which might be a means through the help of God's Grace to reclaim even
these also at the last, by making them ashamed of the Evil of their ways, when
they find themselves so laid open. And thus might we hope once, at the last, to
see Truth and Sincerity triumph over Error and Hypocrisy, in this our now
unfortunately divided and distracted Nation.

III. In the third place we found it absolutely necessary to lay carefully the
first Principles of Religion, by frequent Catechizing. For it is certain, the
root of all our bitterness proceeds from the want of a timely Institution in
the true grounds of Piety and Virtue. But especially ought we to press the
Doctrine of Obedience to Parents and Masters, with due and modest Respect and
Behavior toward Superiors. For the neglect of this first Obedience and
Submission through want of early Instruction, has been the chief Cause of all
that Refractoriness and insolent Disobedience to Governors and Magistrates. He
that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen: how can he love God, says S.
John, whom he has not seen? So it is in the point of Obedience and Submission;
he that obeys not his Parents, whom he sees daily, how shall he obey his Prince
whom he neither has, nor it may be ever will see? Therefore God's Law
appointed, that a stubborn Son should be put to death, Deuteronomy. 20. thereby to let
us understand, that a disobedient Son would never make a good Subject. For when
he is once grown beadstrong, he makes no distinction, let who will hold the
Reins. If he will not obey his Parents or Master, it is because he is proud,
obstinate, and selfwill'd: and what is a Magistrate to expect from such a
Temper? I wish I could say, that all this empty noise, that we make about
Religion and Liberty, were not the Blind to this unhappy Disposition, which has
so overspread the Nation with Malice and Contention.

We ought therefore earnestly to set our Hearts upon it. And if we will pull up
Dissension by the root, we must possess the Hearts of the People with a just
sense of their Duty, at least in that part of Humility, which teaches
Submission and studying to be quiet. Let it be the Subject of our Sermons and
the Entertainment of our Discourse, as well as the Instruction of our
Catechism. Let no opportunity escape the Improvement of this Duty, without
which the Watchman waketh but in vain. In short, Hinc illae lachrymae; and till
this bleating of Rebellion be sacrifie'd upon the Altar of Obedience, we must
expect no Peace in Israel. But if this Virtue once prevail, it will carry along
with it that godly Awe and Fear, as cannot fail to work a Reformation of
Manners. And for this reason the Psalmist makes it the forerunner of
Repentance, Stand in awe and sin not; and the original of that Wisdom which is
from above, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. For it is a
Quality that so seasons the Heart, that it blesses the increase of all other
Christian Virtues. God gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. v.

But after all, our Instructions will be very lame, without the Concurrence of
Parents and Masters of Families. Tho we urge never so powerfully, be our
Reasons never so strong, and tho we should speak with the Tongue of Men and
Angels, without something of the Bit and Bridle, we shall do but little good.
The generality of Youth are not capable of reasoning, and they that are,
through the giddiness and folly of their childish Age, cannot attend to it.
Alas! We see in those of riper Years, to whom the Excellence of Reason makes a
fair show, whilst it is exercised in the Theory; if you come to attacque their
Lusts, by pressing the Rule home to their Practice, it is immediately repulsed
with Violence, and overwhelmed oftentimes with a torrent of corrupt Affections.
The Vapors of Concupiscence fly up and turn the Brains and dim the Sight, that
Men can neither understand what is for their real good, nor see the Mischief
into which they are running. The generality of Men have nothing prevalent left
them for their preservation, but that which is common to them with Beasts, fear
of present danger, and that hardly breaks through the encumbrance of some
Passions. For this cause it is, that the Awe of Parents and Masters must first
make an impression, and break the sturdiness of Nature at the first entrance
upon the days of Youth; if we will expect to do any good afterward. Withold
not correction from the child, for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall
not die. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from
hell. Prove. 23.13, 14. The Frown of a Parent speaks present Inconvenience; the
young Man's present Maintenance is at his Will, as well as his future Hopes.
The Displeasure of a Master threatens immediate Mischief; he may turn out of
Doors, and make it difficult to get Bread. These are the means to bow the stiff
Neck, and make the Refractoriness of Youth comply with Instruction. For this
cause then ought the Duty of Parents and Masters to their Families to be as
home pressed, as the Reciprocal: And the rather, for that it is generally
forgot in this Age. It is not considered, as it should be, what a Charge lies
upon those, that have Families: The Blood of the meanest of which, if they
miscarry by the ill Example or Neglect of the other, will be required at their
hands.

IV. In the last place we can have no reason to expect a Blessing upon our
Endeavors, unless they be done with Sincerity. We must not only preach to
others the Word of Life; but so behave our selves, as they that would partake
with them in the same Blessedness: That by seeing our good Works, they may
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. God indeed may prosper good
Instructions to the profit of others; tho they that delivered them, should
prove Reprobates: But there is no Thanks due to such a Person, who takes the
readiest way to overthrow his good Doctrine by his ill Example.

It may be imagined, that Hypocrisy might supply the defect of a sincere Mind
in promoting Godliness. But when the Nature and Designs of Hypocrisy are well
considered, and Experience examined upon it, we shall soon be convinced to the
contrary. For no Hypocrisy can be laid on so thick, but that the Stains of
Vice will in a little time work through it so, that every sincere Eye may
perceive it. And therefore we find by sad Experience, that they who lie long
under the direction of Hypocrisy, either become Hypocrites themselves, or
through Weakness are deluded into the Doctrines of Balaam, and ignorantly
profess that Evil, which Hypocrites have represented to them for good.

After all, It will not suffice that we avoid giving Scandal in our Lives and
Conversation, or forbear the endeavoring to cover it with Hypocrisy: unless
we detest doing the work of the Lord negligently. God has declared, that he
will spew out those that are lukewarm. If we will be Laborers worthy our hire,
we must put on a Spirit suitable to the High Calling we are employed about. We
have not only to consider the object, which is no less than Eternal Happiness,
but the part we have in the pursuit of it. We are to be Lights to others, as
well as to our selves. A double diligence is required at our hands; as having
taken upon us to watch for others, as well as for our selves. Which will by no
means consist with a supine or indifferent behavior either through laziness of
temper, or too much addiction to the world. All works go on, just as they are
prosecuted. Where people are intent and vigilant, their undertakings go on
prosperously: but where they are remiss and careless, nothing succeeds. There
are some Attempts indeed that may be frustrated by reason of insuperable
difficulties, or given ^er as not worth the toil and labor: but neither of
these Discouragements can justly take place in our case. For the reward is more
than sufficient to countervail all that we can undergo, I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Phil. 3.8.
and we must never pretend that any Difficulties can be too great for us, when
the Holy Ghost has taught every one of us to say, I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me. Phil. 4.13. I am persuaded you cannot but have
reflected upon these things over and over: since we have almost fresh instances
daily to stir up our minds and awaken us to our Duty. But the Flesh is weak,
and will incline us to avoid all hardships, if we will hearken to it. Continual
opposition and contradiction is uneasy to flesh and blood: and when it comes
from those we seek and take pains to inform better, it must needs be very
grievous. But this can be no surprise to those that have heard the words of him
that has undergone the contradiction of sinners for us, In the world ye shall
have tribulation. Therefore in the words of St. Peter, Think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as tho some strange thing
happened unto you: but rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy. And The God of all grace who has called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you. Which is the daily Prayer of

Mar. 29. 1692. Your most Affectionate Friend and Brother, H. London.

FINIS.

