THE MANY SUFFERINGS of an undone Gentleman, and his Family, here truly
remonstrated to public commiseration.
I Thomas Conningsby of North-myms in the County of Hartford Esquire, having in
the whole course of my life endeavored the enjoyment of my Interest in this
Commonwealth, always in the rules of the known Laws and duties by me to be
performed in a peaceable way, without any the least meddling in the unhappiness
of these times, or giving cause of so many deep sufferings to my utter ruin;
and not conscious to my self of any crime deserving such proceeding against me,
by my malicious Enemies countenanced in the highest degree, being acts and
proceedings against me, and the extremest of unjust and hard usages by
several Committees in the Country for Sequestrations, and the Committees of
Examinations and Indempnitie here above, exceeding and abusing the Power and
Au^ ^f Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament, and causelessly (...) me in my
birthright, my Inheritance, property and Freeh^ ^ucting me by their power,
and too much presuming there being too hard for me to bring my hard measure
from them, and the true user its of my cause to a right understanding; having
no other means, I here publish to all men of modest minds, and of right
understanding, who are in a capacity to relieve me, if possibly I could bring
my just Complaints and Grievances to be received and heard before them: but by
continued, many deep, and long injuries, so powerful are the parties concerned
over me (as in the sequel will appear) that all my just ways in endeavoring
my lawful remedy, and submitting likewise to the judgment by Ordinances, or
Orders of Parliament, instead of relief, the additionall outrage (to that low
and miserable condition they have brought me into) intages them to proceed
farther in their malicious ends toward me.

And a word concerning all the cause of my miseries, was that I was Sheriff of
my County by his Majesty's Commission, 1642. under the great Seal and Authority
then unquestioned, (a^^ the same that gave being to the Parliament it self,) by
Writ and Commission in January 1642. commanded to publish certain his Majesty's
Proclamations, which by unavoidable Law, bound duty, and the tie of a strict
Oath I was bound to obey, no Ordinance or Prohibition then to the contrary, nor
the Ordinance for Sequestrations till the third Month following, the 13. of
that Jan: at St. Albons causing a Proclamation to be read, peaceably, and out
of no interest of my own, but that duty and tie aforesaid; was seized by a
troop of Horse, brought prisoner to London, not examined or heard, sent
prisoner to London-House Jail: Now because punishments of so high a nature are
a brand to posterity of some foul crime and miscarriage, I offer this for my
vindication to all the world, in the judgment of rational men, where was the
offense deserving the punishment by a total sequestration, the office of
Sheriffweek continued under the same Commission till April 1644. that I receive
discharge by Writ under the then new great Seal, whether the omission of what
is all my offense, in like kind commanded from the Authority of this Seal,
would not be counted a contempt of an high nature.

And first by a mis-guiding and false report made to the House by Miles Corbet,
a Member of the House, in these words: Mr. Corbet reports from the Committee of
Examinations the bold and unbefitting carriage of the Sheriff of
Hartfordshire, who is committed prisoner to London-House by Order of this
House, not assigning wherein: and to this day the Remonstrate altogether both
guiltless, and unknowing any cause.

Whereupon it is Ordered this day, Die Lune, 13. Martii, 1642. That the said
Sheriff of Hartfordshire, shall be forthwith committed prisoner to the Tower,
there to remain close prisoner, till the further pleasure of this House be
known.

Where I continued at my own great charges, and in no better then close
restraint, from the said 13. of March till 14. of October. 1647. five years and
seven months, and then removed to Peterhouse Goal, where with inhumane
insolence, and several assaults of one Simball the Jailer to the great danger
of my life, I continued till 8. of April 1648. my son then obtained for my
health sake, (being grown into great weakness) liberty for to go into the
Country, upon what terms I know not to this day; but as to my imprisonment,
being it was by Order of the House of Commons is not the thing I any way
question, but so far as so deep a displeasure toward me brought upon me the
opinion of some notorious miscarriage even from some Members of the House to
whom I was not known, and others who though knowing my conversation stood
doubtful of a right understanding of me, thus branded by so heavy punishment,
and from so high Authority, to the sensure even of my best friends, and
advantage of malicious enemies, who thus contrived to ruin me as aforesaid;
and yet in that space of time from my imprisonment till May 1644. that they had
fully ripened their intentions upon me, my wife and now most distressed family
living in my house in sufficient sorrow, and peaceably paid for me and for that
part of my estate in our own occupation, for the service of the Parliament, for
3. months for the Lord Generals Army the Earl of Essex, one rate 12 li. an
other rate 19 li. another rate 3 li. toward raising a scout horse and cart and
fortifications at St. Albons 5 li. 10 s. for 5th and 20th part 83 li. 10 s. for
an horse and Arms 19 li. compelled by Dostor King, though excused by the other
Committees, after all our horses and Arms at several times plundered from us,
to the value of 120 li. for a seasement without Warrant 7 li. for three other
Seasements 17 li. 2 s. the sums paid to the Parliament service 143 li. 12 s.
this was not to be reckoned Delinquency and cause of Sequestration.

Till the year 1644. Die Martis, 26: one Sir William Brereton in an Ordinance
thus:

And be it further Ordained by the Lords and Commons, that the personal
estates of all such Delinquents and Papists within the City of London and
Westminster, and within 20. miles of the same, not sequestered nor discovered,
and which shall be discovered by the said Sir W. Brereton, or such person or
persons, as he shall authorize, under his hand and seal for that purpose,
within two months next after the publishing in Print of the Ordinance, shall be
allowed to the said Sir W: Brereton, for the farther advancement of the said
service. Provided, the said concealed estates exceed not the sum of 5000 li.
And that the said Sir Will: Brereton, or any person authorized by him as
aforesaid, nor any of them, shall possess themselves of the said Papists and
Delinquents estates, before he or they acquaint the Committee of Lords and
Commons for Sequestrations therewith, to the end they may judge the delinquency
of the persons before his or their estates be taken away. The 8. of April
following, Brereton procures an Order from the House of Commons of reference to
the Committee thus.

Die Lune, 8 Aprilis, 1644.
It is ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that it be referred to
the Committee of Examinations, (where Mr. Corbet has the Chair) to inquire
into, and secure such Papists and Delinquents estates as Sir W. Brereton shall
discover, and report the state of the business to the House.

Hen: Elsing, Cler: Parl: Dom: Com.

4 May 1644. In pursuance of an Order of the House, dated 8 April 1644. Sir
William Brereton brought in an Information against Mr. Thomas Conningsby.

Ordered that Mr. Conningsbies estate be secured, and that Mr Conningsby and
his Wife to have notice, and required to come or send on Tuesday next, to show
cause why his estate should not be sequestered, that the Tennants forbear to
pay any rents to or for his use; and that such persons as Sir W. Brereton shall
appoint, take care to put this in execution. Mark here I beseech you, for the
Cause of Truth and Right, and it is an old and true saying, Liars had need of
good memories, and Iuglers to be wary in false practices: and here you shall
find that the special reference to the Committee (where Mr. Corbet has the
Chair) is not in vain to Breretons purpose, he and his man Kirk the Clark then
of that Committee, entering and omitting as might best conduce to the advantage
of Breretons, for neither the Information of the 4 of May, nor order from my
wife and my self to appear was ever served on any of us; but an Order of the 1
of May upon Breretons information against my Wife and Mr. Williams, for sending
Horse and Arms to Ox^n, and sending intelligence thither, and upon this ordered
she and Mr. Williams are summoned to appear served on them 3 May, and that
same day all their Goods within doors and without Inventoried and security,
forced to be given for them, none of which is certified; she appearing on the 8
day, all that laid aside and the proceeding of the Committee, thus certified.

8 May 1644. Upon the information against Mr. Conningsby: That he put in
execution the Commission of Array.

Mr. Henry Coxon examined says, That Mr. Conningsby did read and put in
execution the Commission of Array at St. Albons, that he bought 26 Muskets, and
what he did with them they desire to know.

Henry Price says, That he knows that Mr. Conningsby did in the beginning of
these troubles buy 26 Muskets in London, and brought them to his house at Myms,
and he has seen them in his Kitchen, he knows not what use he made of them,
nor to what end they were bought, he had Rests, Bandeleers, and Match to them.

Ordered that Mr. Conningsby be brought to morrow by the Leiutenant of the
Tower, and no seizure to be made of the goods in Mr. Conningsbies house, till
further ordered.

9 May 1644. Mr. Conningsby appeared, being brought from the Tower; Mr. Coxon
and Mr. Price their information appears no more but the publishing of the
Proclamation of Jan. 7. 1642. was all the Charge against me. Mr. Iuory then
Mayor of St. Albons being examined says, That Mr. Conningsby then Sheriff,
came to St. Albons, and sent for this Examinate being Mayor, and diverse others
of the Town, and desires their assistance in publishing the Proclamation now
produced, and it was published by his Bailieffe, and Mr. Conningsby and many
more were present, this Examinate being also present at the time the
Proclamation was read, which was done openly in the Market.

Mr. Conningsby says, That he had the Proclamation, and did send for the Mayor
to assist him, and the Bailiffe read it, and it was done by his command.

Says further, That he received the Writ, and he was Sheriff and knew of no
Ordinance, nor ever heard of any Order to prohibit Declaration or Proclamation.

Something was urged to me about a Letter to the Lord Cranborne, nothing to
purpose and point of Sequestration.

Upon the whole business: This Committee declare their opinion, that Mr.
Conningsby is within the Ordinance of Sequestration, and that his estate be
secured till it be reported, and the House give further order, the falacy is
(upon the whole business) as proved in all, and yet without report and further
order.

20 May 1644. Ordered that Sir Will Brereton have power to compound for, and
sell the goods and other estate of Mr. Conningsby, seized by order of this
Committee, giving account for the same to this Committee.

Vera Copia ext. per Ste: Kirk, Clerk of the said Committee.

Likewise the Proclamation written at large in the Certificate.

Upon this Order of 20 May, Breretons Agents entered my House by force, and not
by his Ordinance, for he did not acquaint the Committee of Lords and Commons,
nor had not their Judgment of any Delinquency rendering me liable to
Sequestration, and that day and other days within doors, and without, took
away all my goods and personal estate, to the value of 1600 li.

So that besides the irregularity used in taking away my goods for the manner
of it against the Ordinances of Parliament will manifestly appear upon reading
the Causes thereof, in the proceedings as aforesaid.

And this is certified by the Country Committee, as the whole matter whereon
they have pretended the sequestration of my real estate, so that I was not
sequestered at all, but my estate irregularly and violently by them taken from
me, for as they certify their concurring in Judgment with the Committee of
Examinations, that Committee nor the House it self had no power to seize the
estate or judge of the delinquency, but the Committee of Lords and Commons,
both by Breretons Ordinance and the several Ordinance for sequesterations,
declaring the Causes of sequestration.

The House of Commons gives power to that Committee only to enquire into,
secure, and report, which power that Committee did exceed; for by order of that
Committee, Brereton did first seize and secure my estate before any enquiry,
(and guided by unsconcionable covetousnes, was loath to let go his hold right
or wrong) which was not till 9 May that I appeared, was brought thither a
Prisoner, and examined as aforesaid, and then without hearing Counsel, or
other hearing then as aforesaid; they voted me within Ordinance, my estate to
be secured, till reported to the House, and further order of the House.

That Committee had no power to judge of the Delinquency by that order of
reference, but they do not only exceed that order, but violate their own order
of 9 May, which was not to sequester or dispose of my estate, but to secure it
till reported to the House, and further order of the House; and yet by their
order of 20 May, that Committee gives Brereton power to comp^nd for, and sell
my goods and other estate.

By color of which, he sold and had away all my goods, which is apparent
against his Ordinance, the order of the House of Commons, and the settled order
of the Committee if self of 9 May, and so it could be no sequestration for my
goods by the Committee of Examinations.

And then the Committee of the Country for sequestrations, having no other
ground to warrant their pretense of sequestration of my real estate, then the
directions of the said proceedings of the Committee of Examinations transacted
unto them, as they in their Certificate express, the sequestration of my real
estate as is pretended, can be no due sequestration, otherwise then of the
personal estate, having an unjust rise and ground, (the said proceedings only
of the Committee of Examinations) which is all the cause of sequestration
certified.

Thus Brereton has compassed his ends upon my personal estate, something with
favor give me leave concerning his Instruments that acted, they were all
strangers, except one Andrews that was newly come to be Vicar of the Parish,
they were appraisers and buyers themselves of all but the Cows and some Sheep
that stockt the Lady at Cashobury, whither they were driven; their assistance
were a pack of Women Inhabinants in Tu^n-ball-street and Charter house-lane,
whither the purchersers brought diverse Carts loads of our goods, and in there
actings so uncivil to my wife in that distress that they took her by neck and
shoulders and turned her our from her Closet, and with reproachful language,
but for desiring her Trunks might be opened and the goods valued, which they
bought at a rate set on the whole room, and she having an old Coach which was
some convenience for her self and children, with two of her own horses, such
mean ones, as she could provide after several plunders of her horses to keep
her husbandry a foot, and to draw her Coach sometimes these Goships had
amongst their bargains to bring them to London, the other Merchants and
Breretons AGents, as they called themselves, so totally rifled my house, that
they did not spare the Cubberds out of the walls settled with the building, but
tore them out, and the B^ns in my Buttery, and Beer-stalls in the Sellers,
because too unwildie to go out of doors, they beat to pieces, and made them
useless for any thing but the fire: The Beer in the Soller they turned off of
the stands, threatening to let it about the house, to take away the barrels, and
thus compelled her to buy at their rates to save the drink, and in all those
proceedings will not suffer her to know the valuation of her goods thus rent
from her, or to have Inventory of particulars which she required of them.

1 Aprilis 1643. Ordinance. After these come the Committees and Sequestrators
of the Country to act their parts for my real estate, and as before, not
regarding to proceed upon causes in the Ordinance expressed of Sequestration,
whether my estate were liable, or that their proceedings may be justifiable,
having no right to act but by the direction of the Ordinance, and their doings
in execution and performance of the Ordinances, and instruction upon the
Ordinance where doubt is, whether comprehended within Ordinance to certify the
same to the Committee of the Lords and Commons for farther directions. Thus in
the 3d. Instruction, and reitterated in the 13. Instruction.

19 August 1643. Ordinanee of Explanation.
Within compass of Sequestration, to sue and molest for doing in performance
of the Ordinance, the Committee and Sequestrators to deliver an exact Inventory
to the owner, subscribed under all their hands, of all estate whatsoever. To
make due appraisement by two skillful appraisers, men of quality, and known
integrity.

The Committee of Lords and Commons to receive no Information against the
Committee of the Country, till the matter certified under the hands of two or
more of themselves, or refuse to certify the special matter, or Certificate
cannot be had, Indemnity and protection for doing in pursuance of this or the
former Order for Sequestrations.

By color of Sequestration these Committees enter injuriously on my real
estate and Rents at Northmyms, from the time of Breretons his agents taking
away all my goods, May 1644. full five year and an half, most part of this time
I continue in Goales, cannot, nor have not the means to act in my own
business, and to acquit my self from these heavy and long continued injuries;
cannot get my wife to endeavor the means of my relief, but content with that
poor pittance, a fifth part meanly performed to her; My son notwithstanding my
often and earnest desire to seek to bring my Cause to a right understanding:
Answers, he dares not meddle in it for fear of hazarding to bring himself into
troubles; and rather though against my mind, and desiring him not to meddle
with my estate, becomes Tenant to them, and so becomes a countenance to the
injuries and unjust actings against me, my estate going through his hand into
theirs, and for reason pretends regard to his own Interest to the Reversion, to
preserve the estate from waste to be committed, and the rather because of my
sickness and infirmity, contracted by my long imprisonment, and the weakness
of a wasted body, ever since May 1645. and my son, as is aforesaid, procuring
liberty for me to go into the Country, and that I was at so much freedom to
consider my own hard condition, and the way I conceived best to seek relief. I
sent often to the Committee to require an Inventory of my estate they had
received according to the Ordinance, and likewise to demand Certificate of the
special matter of their so pretended sequestration, to be directed to the
Committee above, that so I might use my best endeavor for remedy, which they
denied me in both, and so delayed my proceedings to keep my estate still in
their power: and my son before my coming down having contracted with them for a
year to hold the moitie of my estate at a Rent, for the other moitie was in
extent upon a Recognizance of 1000 li. which I did enter into long since to one
Silverlocke, and the Committee of Lords and Commons, as by their Order may
appear, Ordered that in case the Committee did not satisfy him his principal
and Interest, to the discharge of the full debt, to permit him to take his
benefit of the Recognizance upon the Lands under Sequestration liable thereto;
whereupon Mr. Ja: Cambell and my son who married Mr. Cambels sister, in May
1646. paying Silverlock 860: li. and to prevent some inconvenience that might
fall among us upon Agreements and Covenants upon my sons marrying, being after
the time of the Recognizance entered into by me, had the Recognizance and extent
by Silverlock assigned to them. Of this more anon.

Out of my sons agreement with them to hold the first moitie at a rent, with so
much abated of the Rent as was computed a fifth part, his mother and he agree
upon such a quantity of the said Land, to keep that little stock of Cows she
had, the best subsistence to her self and family: my son in the mean time pays
at Lady day half the Rent, and some other part after, and requires an abatement
for Free quarter, amounting to as much or more then remained, and that not due
till Michaelmas day; yet one Lattimer, and one Ireland, by Warrant from King
and Robottome, come on the 22. of September. and drive out of a pasture called
Innings, being part of the Land agreed on betwixt my son and his mother, seven
milch Cows, and four yeerling Bullocks, six of the seven being my wives own
Cows, and 3. of the 4. and drive them to St. Albons.

The same day I went to St. Albons, demanded the goods to be restored; it is
denied by King: I took out a Repleve, which King would not have obeyed.
Hereupon I meeting the Cattle in the highway, did drive them back again: and
by the provision in the Ordinance, upon pretense of Rent, the Sequestrators
remedy is but the same with a Landlord, against whom a Replieve by Law lies.

Next day the 23. of September. a Foot Company of Soldiers of the Army, King
hiring them, are sent without any Officer, but brought by Latemer and Ireland
early in the morning, pretending the Lord Generals Warrant, with Muskets shoot
and break open the doors of my house before any demand, or showing any
Warrant, break open Chambers, rob them of money and other goods, enter my wives
Chamber, affright her and her trembling daughters, ( Ireland being Officer in
chief for the house service) rob the Stables of Horses, Bridles and Saddles,
and other goods; and without any resistance yet lay violent hands on me, and
with all disgraceful usage that malice could direct, carried me prisoner to
St. Albons.

Lattemer commanded in chief that party, that out of the same Field they took
them the day before, take the Cattle again, and drive them to St. Albons.

My wife comes to St. Albons, acquaints the Committee of the wrong done her in
her fifth part, could have no relief, but by procuring Bond to be given to one
Hickman, that her son should come to an account for the Rent pretended, which
she procures to be done: and so the Cattle were delivered for this time.

Saturday 14. of October. I repaired to the Committee, required as by the
Ordinance a Certificate, and an Inventory; the Inventory is denied by King, for
he mannages the bag, the Certificate by some of the Committee less
malicious, promise it ready against Wednesday, I sent for it, and did receive
it the 18. of October. and upon the 20. I came to London, endeavoring by
Petition to the Committee of Lords and Commons, with Certificate annexed, to be
relieved upon hearing my just Complaint, could not have my Petition read, till
November. 1. and then referred to Mr. Bradshoe to peruse, examine, and report the
state of the Case to the Committee on Friday seven-night.

King and Robottome, so restless is their malice, that though they knew I was
upon prosecution of an Appeal upon the Certificate, on Friday 3. of November. the
said Lattemer and Ireland by King and Robottomes Warrant, out of the Orchard of
my house, took and drove away six milch Cows, three Yeerlings, two Geldings,
two Mares, and one Colt, in truth our all we had, did drive them to St. Albons:
My wife and son repaired to them, justifies his agreement with his mother for
her fifth part those Lands, offers if his account be not satisfactory, to
account, and pay all Rent agreed on with the Committee, desires that the
Cattle may be restored to his mother, they deny it them; and cause Lattemer
and Ireland next Market day to sell them at Hempsteed, the reasonable value of
the Cattle 80 li.

For this being my wives proper goods by the rule of Sequestration it self, and
not my own goods, but in that notion of allowance by Ordinance, and not acting
as by the Ordinance, actions at Law, are prosecuted in my name for the same,
being likewise by them done since my Appeal depending, they Petition the
Committee of Indempnitie, I am summoned to appear July 25. the matter not
coming to hearing that day, I attended the 26. day; no call of the Cause that
day, I attended the 27. day till after 4. in the afternoon, when it was given
out the Committee would not sit that day, and the Officers confirmed it, and I
went away; and after there came a Committee and sa^e, heard this and another
cause of Complaint against my son and Mr. Cambell by a Tenant of those Lands,
under the extent that will not pay his Rent, and is run into great Arrears, and
for taking their legal course.

And first let me, I beseech you, be unblamed to write, and set down the
greatest grievance that ever was heard of in this Kingdom for obstructing the
Subjects liberty and the Laws, if this Committee hold on in their way, and
strain the Ordinance so far beyond a right intention, as they presume to do.

And first take the Ordinance it self to judge of, and let all men that have
reason to judge, consider the lamentable condition that some men, and causes,
fall into by judgment at the will and discretion of such a Judicature as they
do proceed in those highest points concerned in the Laws, that meum and tuum,
men's birthright, their property in Freehold: O tempora, O mores, whither, to
what, are we upon this precepise, are we going headlong into wilful slavery?

Die Veneris, 21 of May, 1647.
For indempnifying all those that have acted, or done any thing by Sea or Land
by Authority of Parliament, this the Title.
The Ordinance. The Lords and Commons taking notice that diverse well affected
persons have been sued, indicted, prosecuted, or molested, for such acts and
things which they have acted and done by Authority of this present Parliament,
or for the service or benefit thereof, during these late Ware and troubles, do
hereby Ordain, and declare, And be it by Authority of Parliament ordained and
declared, that no person or persons whatsoever, who have since the beginning of
this present Parliament, acted or done, or commanded to be acted, or done any
act or thing whatsoever by Authority of this present Parliament, or for the
service or benefit thereof, by Sea or by Land, ought to be sued, indicted,
prosecuted or molested for the same; and that every such person or persons
whatsoever, are, and shall be hereby fully acquitted and discharged, of all
Actions, Suits, Indictments, Informations, Prosecutions, Judgments,
Executions, and Molestations whatsoever concerning the same; and all Judges,
Justices, Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurors, Officers, Ministers of justice
whatsoever, are hereby required to take notice thereof, and duly to observe the
same.

And for the ease of all such persons, who are or shall be sued, indicted,
prosecuted, or molested for any such act or thing as aforesaid, It is hereby
declared and Ordained, That in every Action, Suit, Indictment, Information, or
Prosecution, whatsoever, wherein, or whereby they shall be so sued, indicted,
prosecuted, or molested as is aforesaid, contrary to this Ordinance, It shall
be lawful to, and for all persons aforesaid, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to plead the general Issue that they are not
guilty; or any other general Issue, as the case shall require: and shall and
may give in evidence to the Jury that shall try the same, that the matter in
question was an act or thing done, or commanded to be acted or done by
Authority of this present Parliament, or for the service or benefit thereof;
which Evidence being proved, shall be admitted and allowed by the respective
Judges, Justices, and Jury, before whom it shall be tried, as sufficient to
maintain the said general Issue: And if the Verdict shall pass with the
Defendant, or Defendants in any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit, as is aforesaid,
or the Plaintiff, or Plaintiffs shall be nonsuit therein, or suffer any
discontinuance thereof, the respective Judges and Justices shall award to the
Defendant, or Defendants treble Costs, for which the said Defendant, or
Defendants shall have the like remedy as in the like cases they ought to have
by the Laws of this Land: And what any Judges, Justices, or Sheriffs, Mayors,
Bailiffs, Juror, Officers and Ministers of Justice shall do according to this
Ordinance, or in pursuance thereof, they shall be justified and saved harmless
by Authority of Parliament, for and concerning the same.

And because such persons who have acted, or commanded to be acted or done any
such actor thing as is aforesaid, may be poor and not able to defend a Suit at
Common Law, or may find themselves agrieved in the proceedings thereof, now for
a further relief of such persons it is hereby Ordained and Declared by the
authority aforesaid; That any such persons so sued, indicted, prosecuted, or
molested as is aforesaid, may at any time hereafter when and as often as they
shall be sued, indicted, prosecuted, or molested, for any such act or thing as
is aforesaid, either before or after a trial, make their complaint to.

Thus far the Ordinance as to the material parts, and lawdable as in the true
intention to determine such things as in the exigence and heat of the late Wars
have from the beginning of the Parliament, till (this Ordinance made in calmer
times, in 1647) acted or done, to any modest man's judgment be otherwise
understood, but only for the time past, and merely to acts concerning the Wars
and service for the Parliament in matters of War, for as in other power by
Ordinances.

As in Sequestrations my case and such like, there are particular Ordinances to
guide causes of that nature, and those are by Committes empowered to hear, and if
upon a just cause to clear the party presumed to have incurred a Sequestration
if there be cause, upon the reasons and causes in that Ordinance, for what
sequestrable or not sequestrable; and if Committees or others by their
authority and commands, shall act things unwarrantable by the Ordinance, they
are not to be protected, and the party injured is no less a Son of the
Commonwealth lineally descended from Magna Charta to all liberty and benefit
of the Laws, and may most properly seek his remedy by appeal heretofore to the
Committee of Lords and Commons, and now renewed by act to the Honorable Barons
of the Exchequer, to receive and determine upon all appeals, where my appeal
now depends under publication; and all persons who shall be employed and do in
pursuance of the Ordinance, the Acts, and Services warranted to be done by
authority of that Ordinance to be indempnified, and therefore those Ordinances
to the end the parties authorized that they may go safe on in the true
intention of the Ordinance, and not to be injurious to men that are not
comprehended in the intention and marks plainly set down in the Ordinance, it
is twice set down in the third and thirteenth Instruction, entitled,
Instructions for the Committees for sequestration of Delinquents estates, that
wherein they conceive any doubt to be guided by the directions of the Committee
of Lords and Commons for that service: but for Committees to act without the
rule and guide of that Ordinance, do dis-service and dis-honour to the
Parliament, and presume upon the power of Committee Men, to act their own wills
and malice, presuming to be born out. And if actions are brought against
Committee Men, it is tanta mount to an Appeal, and those Committee Men have
the advantage, and may complain to the proper Authority to hear and determine,
and send for parties to attend and make their defense, which is the style of
that one-eared Committee of Indemnity, who are to indempnifie because
complained to, and have not another ear to judge upon reason, and indeed not
power by their Ordinance to do otherwise, and though the Ordinance in its plain
English intend not causes original to this Committee, but to trials at Law,
and upon pleading the general issue, and the Ordinance for evidence upon a
just and legal trial by 12. of the neighborhood trials, will have a fair and
right understanding, and at second hand be better fitted for Indempnitie if
there be cause, (and the Ordinance cannot intend but as is set down in cause of
being poor) But that upon all Complaints, Orders to fly out into all
Countries, and in all Causes to fetch up men to a slavish attendance, and
merely to bring grists to the Clerks mill, who to all men's deserning has too
sawsie an influence on his Masters of that Committee, even to a busy
forwardness, as taking himself the wisest man in the company, I mentioned two
causes before as they were not proper for that Judicature for the reasons
aforesaid; and the parties were not poor, but better able to defend the Suits
then my self. And I see a Warrant to take away the Hay of my ground, and
Ireland to reserve a third part of the moneys to bear the charges of these very
Suits; and they have carried off my grounds 100 loads of Hay; And whiles I have
been here to attend this business (so enraged they are in villainies) that they
have carried a great quantity of Timber off my grounds, prepared for repairs,
and all presuming on the countenance of that Committee, who by their Orders in
the two Suits have awarded them 55 li. Costs; And one Allen a Goldsmith, a
Member of that Committee, a fierce stickler, to incline the moderate of that
Committee to retain the Causes, and make such unjust Orders.

The reasons in chief for giving those Cost and superceding proceedings at Law,
upon both several Suits at Law thus expressed by the Committee man Allen, we
must indempnifie our servants. There is likewise one Mr. Lemman a Member, I
know not whether a Committee-man of this Committee, but the promoter of these
men's complaints to the Committee, who in some degree knows (if they be not
birds of a feather) that it is a doubtful measure, or a measuring cast,
whether King his ignorance or insolence lies nearest the Jack; But no question,
if weighed in Allens Scales, his malice would hold weight to both. And I wonder
what is Lemmons reason, being grown a man of fortune and estate, and might
consider the best preservative to give it continuance to his posterity, is the
protection of the Laws, that in this case against my no other but lawful
Application to be judged by the Laws, he should thus far countenance such
sheep biters, for men in the trust of such actings, and so well able to
justify themselves against Suits at Law, and upon so great advantage as they
presume the Ordinance is to them, to seek superfuge, at the best provided for a
remedy for the poor, renders them no better then in the nature of sheep
biters, that hang tails between their legs upon fear of a discovery; such
servants best become Allens skill in his reason and honesty, to be a Judge in
their causes. But these two put me in mind of an observation, that wise man
Lord Egerton, Lord Chancellor of England had upon the Laws, and trials by
Juries, that the Laws were the just ballast of doing every man right, that
trials by Juries when and where men's consciences were bounded with fear to
offend God, and not to be opened so large as for friendship, or any other ends
to be exercised as a serveturn.

But as trials were mostlie in his time carried, was, that two knaves pack in
to ten fools was sufficient to destroy any man that unhappily might meet with
such a Jury either of life, Freehold, or whatsoever came under such trial,
and in some cases in all, I do verily believe, that both Allen and Lemmon, in
their times and callings, have been Jury men, and have experienced something
toward truth in this matter: I cannot yet so easily go off of this Committee
of Indempnitie, where I have in obedience to their Orders so slavishly waited,
and been bitten in my self, and in my concern now four several times by
Orders; and it shall be of the manner of proceeding to hear Causes, for the
matter as Allen says, they must indempnifie their servants who complain, and
prove the matter complained on, and de facto prove it, for it is chiefly for
being sued at Law, this is record; and that it is so, is cause that must be
indempnified, by the Ordinance, as they themselves are Judges of it: so here is
short and sure work for Allens skill in Laws, and rules in honesty.

The Committee sit at a Table, five is a sufficient number: the Complaint and
proofs are first read by Kirk the Clerk, say what can be said in right or
reason, but to give a seeming of a full hearing you must withdraw: A word never
heard of in Courts entrusted with the Judicature of Causes, till this
Committee; The Committee are then turned into a Jury to consider costs and it
may be you called in to hear your doom; but howsoever you shall hear of it in
their Order: this is all is to be expected. Whereas in Courts of upright
judgment, the face of the Judge is always open (without any withdraw) if in
Arbitrary Courts the Judgment given in open Court, in hearing of both the
parties on both sides, and Counsel and Testimony of all hearers of the whole
proceedings. In trials by Juries sometimes as there is cause, some light to
Juries in point of Law is openly given by the Judge or Judges; the Verdict
received and entered to be a Record (...) them in open Court sitting. Now Mr.
Allen, it would better become you to refine gold, the precious jewel of your
profession, then to meddle with precious jewels so far above your understanding
(and more precious than gold) for you to be a Judge of the deseising men of
their properties, the Inheritance descended to me from my great Grandfather,
and to him by his Mother the Heir in successions to Ancestors for 400 years.
But this is gold in a Swines snout, and so I leave you.

Thomas Conningsby.

FINIS.

