A Short ACCOUNT OF THE Unjust proceedings OF THE Court of Kingstone upon
Thames, IN A TRIAL between Richard Mayo, Priest, and E. Borough, the 31. of
the fifth Month, 1658.
RIchard Mayo Priest of Kingston, sent for Edward Burough out of a Meeting in
the Town, to come to the Steeple-house; and R. Mayo, diverse times challenged E.
B. that what he had against him and his Doctrine, there he might speak it, and
E. B. went to the Steeple-house, and heard R. Mayo's Doctrine, who did Preach
and affirm,

1. That Paul as a Minister of Christ, exhorted Saints (the Corinthians) to
follow and obey a light, which was not Christ, nor the light of the Gospel.

2. He did exhort the People of Kingston, as a Minister of Christ, in his
Preaching to them, to follow and obey a light which (said he) is not Christ,
nor the light of the Gospel.

3. He said that a man may be a righteous man, and not a godly man, without
distinction.

4. Also at another time before that, R. Mayo affirmed, that the light of
Christ, which every man is lightened withal, Joh. 1.9. is Carnal, and darkness.

5. He did affirm under his own hand, that Christ was not the word, that David
walked by.

But these Doctrines he could not prove by the Scriptures, being put upon it,
and then E. B. said that they were damnable Doctrines, and errors, and not
sound, nor according to the truth; for which saying, an Action was entered, and
E. B. was arrested and imprisoned, and about a year after was brought to trial
in the Court at Kingston, and being called to his Answer in the Court, he
lawfully proved by evident Witnesses, all the particulars aforementioned, and
the Priest confessed to the things that he did affirm and preach them; And E.
B. still confessed and said that these Doctrines were not sound, but damnable
and error, which were the words charged against him to be a slander: A Jury
being called to hear and determine the matter E. B. desired to be heard, and
would have proved according to the Scriptures to the Jury and whole Court, that
the Doctrines aforesaid were damnable and unfound, and errors: But the Judge,
Jury and Court would not suffer him to be heard to manifest the truth: But the
Judge told the Jury before they went out, they might find good damage for the
Priest; and the Jury went forth, and brought in E. B. guilty, and gave the
Priest 100. l. damage for slandering him, and yet would not suffer E. B. to
clear himself before they condemned him, but dealt unjustly against him. Now
the light of Christ that lights every man that comes into the world, which is
the life of men which was in the beginning with God, which John came to bear
witness of, that all might believe in him, and have eternal life: For all that
received him that lighteneth every one that came into the world with the true
light, he gave them power to become the sons of God, John 1. chap. Now this
light which every man is lightened withal by Christ (says R. Mayo) is carnal
and darkness; and that which is carnal and darkness is of the flesh and of
the Devil. And the Judges and Jury has justified the Priest in so saying, and
falsely damnified E. B. for saying this Doctrine is unsound and damnable: And
this Priest, Jury and Court have gone about to prove that John came to bear
witness of that which is carnal and darkness, who says, he came for a
witness to bear witness unto the true light, and that is the true light
[saith Iohn] that lights every one that comes into the world: And this was
John's Record; and this is the light which the Priest of Kingston says is
carnal and darkness, and the Jury and court has justified him in it, and
damnified E. B. for witnessing to the contrary, and saying this is damnable
Doctrine. Now that that is carnal and darkness, is earthly, fleshly and
devilish; but Christ nor his light is not earthly, fleshly and devilish, but
is from Heaven, and of the Spirit: And all that which is carnal and darkness,
is of the Devil and Devilish, and so is the light of Christ that lighteneth
every man, by Rich. Mayo's Doctrine; and the Judge and Jury has justified that
it is so, carnal and darkness, of the flesh and of the Devil; but in Christ
there is no darkness, for the Father and the Son are one, and God is light, and
in him is no darkness at all, the first Epistle of Ioh. 1. chap. but this
Priests Doctrine is quite contrary to John's Doctrine, and contrary to the
Scriptures, who has held forth that the light of Christ is of the flesh, and
of the Devil, and therefore his Doctrine is damnable and error in the highest
degree, and Christ said, the Devil had nothing in him, Joh. 14.30. but Rich.
Mayo says, the light that Christ lights every one withal, which comes from
Christ, is carnal and darkness (to wit) of the flesh and of the devil, and so
would make appear that the Devil and darkness had something in Christ; and the
Apostle said, Darkness had no fellowshhip with light, nor Christ with Belial, 2
Cor. 6.14. but R. Mayo holds forth that darkness is in Christ, and would make
Light and darkness one; for he says, the light of Christ which lightens every
one, is darkness and carnal; but in this the Priest and Rulers of Kingston has
showed to all the world what Spirit they are of, and what they believe
concerning Christ, even that his light which is pure and eternal, is of the
flesh and of the devil, carnal and darkness, and its manifest they are
incapable of judging Doctrines; for to say and justify as the Priest and Court
of Kingston has done, that the light of Christ which lightneth every man,
which John came for a witness of, that all men through him should believe, is
carnal and darkness: It is blasphemy, it is false, it is a lie, it is of the
Devil, and damnable Doctrine, and he that affirms so is not fit to be a
Teacher: and you that justify him in it, and condemns him that reproves it,
are not fit to be Judges of Christ's Cause, nor of the things of God and Christ
that are spiritual. And if the Judge and Jury say they do not own and believe
that the light of Christ is carnal and darkness, then they have judged against
their consciences, and against their oaths, in condemning a man for denying
this doctrine, and saying it is damnable; for is not carnal and darkness of the
flesh and of the devil, and out of the truth, and from below? And is not Christ
from above, and from heaven? And is not his light so? You have judged like
heathens, and like men without any understanding, and you have showed your
selves to be like the unbelieving Jews: Their Priests and Courts and Counsels,
judged Christ to be a deceiver, and the Prince of Devils: And you say and do
justify it in your judgment, that Christ's light which every man is lightened
withal, is of the flesh and of the devil; and so is carnal and darkness: and
have damnified a man for saying the contrary: and you have showed your selves
to be against Christ as much as ever the Jews were, and to be of the very same
spirit: for you say and justify That Christ's Light is carnal and darkness: And
they said he was the Prince of Devils and Darkness: And do you not herefully
agree with the Jews? The Apostle said the Devil was the power of darkness, and
the Saints were translated from the power of darkness Col. 1.13. But how does
Rich. Maoy's Doctrine agree with this? Is the Devil the power of the light of
Christ that lightneth every man? Is not this damnable Doctrine? But hereby the
Priest and court of Kingston have showed themselves to be in darkness and
carnal, which is a damnable state: and it is damnable to say and judge of
Christ as they have done, that darkness is in him, and that his light which
lighteneth the World, is of the flesh and of the Devil: But with the light
which every man is lightened withal, which is pure and eternal of God, are they
judged that so jugde: and with the light shall they be condemned: that is the
word of the Lord God to you all: And God will make you ashamed of your
judgment who know not Christ, and therefore have you falsely judged him, and
judged quite contrary to John's words, who said that was the true light that
lightneth every man; but you have said and judged it is carnal and darkness;
and will you say that that which is carnal and darkness is a true light? And if
you say so, that is damnable Dotrine, and so you are in a snare, and has
brought a snate upon your your souls and have left your Names and Judgments a
stink to all the Saints upon Earth.

And the Judge, and Jury, and Court of Kingstone have also judged it to be
sound Doctrine, to say, Paul exhorted the Saints te follow, and obey a light
which is not Christ, nor the light of the Gospel, which the Priest affirmed:
Now here you have slandered the Apostle, and belyed him, and given a false
judgment against him, as well as against E.B. for the Apostle did not exhort
the Saints to follow any Light but what is Christ, and the light of the Gospel;
for he says often, that he preached the Gospel and Christ the power of God,
throughout all his writings, 2 Cor. 4.5. for he was sent To turn people from
darkness to the light of the Gospel, and from Satan's power, (uhich is
darkness) to God, (who is light) Acts 26.18. and he turned people to Christ
within them, who is the power of God, and the Gospel is the power of God, Romans
1.16. And says he, if any preach another Gospel then what he had preached,
let him be accursed, Gal. 1.7.8. And he preached Christ unto the Saints, and
the Gospel only, and desired not to know any thing among them but Christ, and
him crucified, and that their Faith might stand in the power of God, the
Gospel; and evary where he preached the Gospel, Acts 16.10. Romans 15.19. 1 Cor.
9.16. 1 These. 2.9. and I affirm he preached nothing else, but Christ, the power
of God, the Gospel, to be obeyed and followed; for it is that which convertcd
to God, and it is that he exhorted the Saints to walk by: Walk in the Spirit,
and live in the Spirit, says he, and obey the Spirit; and so shall you not
fulfill the works of the flesh; And as many as were the Sons of God, walked by
the Spirit, and were led by the Spirit, Romans 8. and the Spirit, and the Gospel,
and Christ are one, and not many, nor divided. But this Priest, and Court of
Kingston have judged contraiy, even that Paul did Preach to be followed and
obeyed, and believed in something that is not the Light of the Gospel, nor the
Power of God, nor Christ, and so have slandered and belyed the servant of the
Lord the Apostle Paul: And is not this damnable to belly the Apostle? And is not
this of the Devil, and Devilish doctrine, that slanders the servant of the
Lord that is dead? but his spirit and words are a witness against them; it is
out of the truth, and contrary to truth to belie and slander the Apostle; and
that is of the Devil, and Damnable and Error: for every lie is out of the
truth, and so of the Devil, and that which is of the Devil is Damnable, and
must be cast into the Lake with the Devil: And such is R. Mayo's doctrine.

And R. Mayo in his Sermon, held forth as good doctrine, That the people of
Kingstone might follow and obey, and walk by a light which (he said) was not
the light of the Gospel, and exhorted them to it, and pressed them upon it, and
yet he said, It would not lead to Christ, nor reveal him to them, yet pressed
them to follow that Light: And this doctrine has the Judge and Jury and Court
justified to be sound, and not false Doctrine, and have damnified E. B. for a
Slanderer, for denying his doctrine, and saying, it is damnable. Now there is
but Light and Darkness, God and Belial, Christ and Antichrist; and if it be not
the light of the power of God which is the Gospel, which they are to follow,
then it is darkness, and of the Devil which he exhorted them to follow; and if
it be not Christ, nor God, nor the Spirit, which he pressed them to obey, then
it is Antichrist, and that which is of the flesh which they are exhorted to
follow; and this is damnable: and if it be not the true Gospel, the power of
God, nor the light of it, nor Christ (as he says it is not) then it is another
Gospel that he has preached in the Pulpet in Kingstone, and he is accursed
that does so, and accursed Doctrine is danmable Doctrine, and a man that is
accursed is in a damnable state, and they that follow and obey any other thing
besides Christ and the light of the Gospel, they cannot be saved; for this is
saving doctrine, to preach Christ and his Gospel only, For there is no other
name given under heaven to be saved by but Christ, Acts 4 12. Who is the power
of God, the Gospel, who is the light of life, the truth, to be obeyed and
followed; and that doctrine that is otherwise and contrary to this, is
damnable; and Richard Mayo has preached another Doctrine, and has preached
that people should follow and obey something that is not Christ, nor the light
of his Gospel; and so his doctrine is not saving; for he has preached another
Name and another Light then Christ and his Gospel and the Judge and Jury have
justified him in it, and judged E. B. for a slanderer, because he said this was
unsound Doctrine, and Error, because it is not the Doctrine of Christ nor his
Gospel, but another Doctrine, of another light, and of another way: But come
Friends, is this Priest a Minister of Christ? And is this Court and Jury
righteous Judges? let all the Saints that fear God upon Earth judge: Is not he
a Deceiver who has preached another Gospel then Paul preached? Is he not one
of Satan's Messengers? and the Court has upheld him in it; for there is no
sound Doctrine held forth by any of Christ's Ministers, but the Doctrine of
Christ and of the Gospel: This we all affirm with E.B. And all that owns not
this Doctrine, and comes not to it, are in a damnable state; And all Doctrine
that is not justly according to this, is damnable, and they that hold it forth
are deceivers and Satan's Messengers: And E.B. denies the judgment of all such
that does not follow Christ, and walk in the light of the Gospel, but believes
that some other thing is to be obeyed and followed; and God will confound their
judgment, and bring the innocent to rejoice over all such Doctrines and Judges.

And R. Mayo the Priest affirms (and the Jury justifies it) That the Word that
David walked by was not Christ, and has judged E. B. guilty of slander for
saying this Doctrine is Error, and to be condemned: Now David was of the seed,
the flesh of Christ, and Christ is the word, and David followed Christ, and
Christ is the covenant of God, Isa. 42.6. And David was in the covenant, and
followed Gods covenant, and said the Lord was his light, Psalm. 27.1, and walked
in Christ the word, the everlasting covenant: And David was a follower of
Christ the word, for David called Christ Lord, Psalm. 10.1. And Christ was his
Lord and his Shepherd, and fed him, and he led him into green pastures, Psalm.
23. And David walked in the light of Christ, and said, In thy Light we see
Light, Psalm. 36.9. And he did walk by Christ the Word; And the Apostle often
brings David's words that were spoken of Christ; and Christ's Name is the Word of
God. And David and Abraham, and all the Fathers saw the day of Christ, and eat
and drank of the Rock that followed them; which Rock was Christ, and him they
believed in, and obeyed. And David saw his resurrection and what should betray
him: And does not Christ say, It is written in your Law, I said you are Gods;
if David were but only in the Law? but he saw Christ the end of their
offerings, and he was of the flesh of Christ, the seed; but these things are
out of your understandings; ye are rather of that generation that mocked David:
And to say David did not follow Christ, and was not a follower of Christ, that
is error and damnable Doctrine. But the Priest and court of Kingston have said
and judged that David did not walk by the word Christ, which is false and a
lie, and that is damnable, and of the Devil, and they have judged they know not
what, they have put light for darkness, and darkness for light, and called good
evil, and evil good; and have said and judged contrary to the Scriptures: Shall
not God plead with them, and seven Vials of plagues shall be poured on the
unjust, and all the Saints shall see their shame.

And these with many other things which R. Mayo has affirmed for Doctrine,
does E.B. charge to be false Doctrine, and not according to the Scriptures, and
can prove theut to be false by the Scripture: But as if you were afraid to
hear the truth, and durst not stand to the trial, you would not suffer E.B. to
prove these things in open Court, which he would have done according to the
Scriptures. So this is written that all may see, and he may prove it over and
over again, and publish it to all people to your shame; for God will make you
ashamed, and tear you to pieces, ye that have forgetten God, and neglected
just judgment; ye gnaw not the bones till the morrow; ye think ye have gotten
a great deal of prey to devour, a hundred pounds, them that did so were like
evening wolves, Zeph. 3.3. for this is the part of an evening wolf, to leave
the bones till the morrow. Think ye the Lord is blind like your selves, and
that he sees you not? And think ye E.B. has spoken that which he is not able
to make good? yes greater things then those he may justly charge upon you, and
among you, if you go on in injustice, may not he say ye pervert Justice and
true Judgment? Is it a slander to speak the truth, to say the Devil is a
liar? though you would not hear him in the court, he may make the Nation hear
him after this. Was Paul a slanderer that called one a child of the Devil,
that perverted the way of God, who was so? Was Isaiah a slanderer that called
the Shepherds greedy dumb dogs, end said the people were like sed Horses, that
neighed after their neighbors wives? the Prophet told the people they were fat
Kine of Basban, and people were like wild bulls in a net: But was the Prophets
slanderers who told the salse Prophets that they spoke a divination of their
own brain, as R. Mayo has done, and not from the mouth of the Lord? And the
Prophets testified that the Judges judged for gifts and rewards, and were like
Foxes in the deserts, and were like evening wolves: but the Prophets were no
slanderers, for they spoke the truth: Nor Christ was no slanderer, who called
them that stood praying in the Synagogues, and were called of men Master,
Serpents and Vipers, Matt. 23. and compared men to dogs and swine, and cried woe
against them, they were blind leaders of the blind. And what if you your selves
be proved to be such that brings forth fruit not meet for repentance, but are
full of envy, bitterness and poison. Will it be a slander when a man calls you
Vipers, and proves it that you are in that nature the Apostle called them Evil
Beasts, and slow bellies, that minded earthly things, and taught for filthy
luere and love of money? And he was no slanderer who also said they were
accursed that brought another Gospel. And was the Apostle Peter a slanderer who
said there were some that brought in damnable heresies, for they denied the
Lord that bought them: And this was a less transgression as men may account, to
deny Christ, then to say his light is carnal and darkness, of the flesh and of
the devil, as the Priest and unrighteous Jury Kingston have done; for they did
but deny him, but you slander him, and justifies that his light is carnal, and
darkness of the flesh, and of the devil, this is worse then if you denied him,
and said nothing at all of him, and it is more damnable to slander him, that
his light is carnal and darkness. Consider of this, and be not so rash; for
shame in this life will come upon you, and judgment in the life to come, what
ever become of E. B. in this life: You have showed much folly and wickedness,
both Priest, Judges and Jury, who has damnified a man an hundred pounds for
speaking the truth, and you have given a bad example to many others, but they
that follow you in your works shall partake in the same judgment when the Lord
gives you a just reward.

And these are but few of the particulars which is proved damnable Doctrine and
Error. And E. B. has many more particular sayings and affirmations of R.
Mayo's, which to all the world may be proved the same with these; and if you go
on, and will not revoke your works, he may lay them open, and all men may know
what spirit R. Mayo is of: What will you think when he proves by many Witnesses
that R Mayo affirmed, That the Devil is the power of God; yea, even as the
Gospel is the power of God, said he; and said Christ was manifest to destroy
the power of God, and him that is the power of God said he; and denied the
Gospel to be the power of God? These things with many more may be testified by
many witnesses before any Court in England: If you were quiet and did Justice,
his shame and yours might be covered; but the more you stir and meddle among
this filth, the more it will appear to shame you. And what need E.B. be
afraid, or any man, what you can do? for truth is of his side, in comparison
of which his life is not dear, not liberty; and truth will shame you and pierce
you to the hearts, and break you to pieces, though you may boast a while over
it in your evil ways, yet your day will the night of darkness shut up in
misery, and the blessing shall depart from you in this life, and in the life tO
come: The Lord has said it, and ye that are froward the Lord will deal
frowardly with you. Wherefore come to consideration of this matter, and repent
ye unrighteous men, and forsake this evil, and come to the light of God in your
consciences, that will let you see your envy and prejudice against the
innocent, and if you go in your evil course I am clear, it shall lie upon your
own selves unto damnation.

Hereafter a more full and large account of this matter you may expect from
such as has a more perfect knowledge thereof, if the Court continue their
injustice against the innocent.

By one that was a Witness of that day's proceedings, and a Witness against the
injustice of it unto death, Edw. Cook.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1658.


