THE CASE OF The JEWS is Altered, AND Their Synagogue Shut To all Evil-WALKERS.
OR, A VINDICATION OF THE JEWS From the false IMPUTATIONS laid upon them in a
scurrilous PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The CASE of the JEWS Stated, OR, The JEWS
SYNAGOGVE Opened.

By Joseph Copley, Gent.

LONDON, printed for the AUTHOR, 1656.

The Case of the JEWS, etc.
THere came lately to my view, a Libel which did penance in a sheet, (as I am
informed its Author did once, doubtless for some of his good qualities upon the
pillory) entitled, The Case of the Jews stated, or their Synagogues opened. A
man would admire to find so much venom in the body of so little a Spider; but
what can be more poisonous than the blood of a red haired man? This Scriblers
pen was once filled with malice and slander as black as his ink; yet God sends
curse Cows short Horns, and it is in vain for such Wolves to bark against the
Moon. As this Fellows heart is filled with envy and malice; so his noddle is as
well gifted with a goodly talent of beastly ignorance, which he betrays at the
first dash, when he would needs have the Archi-Synagogues to be Levites and
Prophets; whereas the Levites are one certain Tribe, and the Archi-Synagogue
neither were always chosen out of that Tribe, nor constantly Prophets. In the
next place he picks out a ridiculous fable out of Matthew Paris, which relates
the crucifixion of some children by the Jews: it is a likely matter, that the
Jews should first circumcise a Child to make him a Jew, and then murder him;
or, that in such their enterprises, they should cause one to represent Pilate,
when none of them that I ever spoke with, believe there was any such person;
besides this Hebraeo-Mastix should (if he would have had his story credited)
have bestowed some Hebrew name on his child, rather than Jurnin. We do not
deny, but some such things were fathered upon the Jews, as also poisoning of
Wells about the time they were expelled, but who I beseech you were the actors
of these crimes? none but the Monks and Friars, men, who besides their practice
of Necromancy and other unlawful Arts, did frequently murder children in their
Monasteries, to keep their unclean conversation from the knowledge of the
world, they moved by envy at the prosperity of the Jews, crucified Children,
and poisoned Wells that laying the blame upon the Jews, they ^^ght provoke the
hatred of the common people toward them, and also to have matter where-with^^
^^r which to compl^in of them to the King that they might pr^^^^e from him
their B^nishment, for which they h d l^^g time before very earnestly, though in
vain, solicited ^im, as Mr. Daniel shows, whose excellent pen has set forth
very much of the injurious dealing and cruelties used toward the Jews; from
the guilt of which, I bes^^ch the Lord to absolve this Generation, and give us
good hearts toward his poor afflicted people, who are therefore dispersed
amongst us, that we may have occasion for the exercise of mercy and
hospitality; and because Almighty God will try whether we will like savage
Canibals devour strangers, or with good Abraham and Lot, receive them kindly
into our houses. This fellow says moreover (for though Jupiters brain could
produce but one Minerva his whimsical noddle can hatch a thousand Chymaeraes of
folly) that the Jews were enjoyed by a Statute to wear a piece of woollen
Cloth upon their breasts* that they might be thereby distinguished, but he
tells us not in what time this Statute was enacted; so that we must let it
remain Apocripha till we have leisure to search, and then I doubt it will be
canonized, nemine contra dicente, amongst the rest of his lies. But that which
I most blame in this Companion, is, that he goes about by a secret way to
instruct (sic sus Minervam docet) the supreme Authority what is to be done; for
his presumption intends this Patch as a president for them, and flatters
himself that it may prove a Remora to their favorable proceedings in the
Jewish affairs. But admit the Jews were commanded to wear such a badge of
distinction formerly in England, as now they are at Rome, caused to wear Hats
of a different color from others: must the same measure be used toward these
Jews in these times, and under this most excellent Government? must we imitate
Papists in using strangers to whom we give harbor despitefully? does this man
find it in the Gospel, that we must do good to those who persecute us, and
will he persecute those who do him no hurt? is this to assert the Kingdom of
Christ? truly it is rather the mystery of iniquity, and the voice of an
Antichrist: there is no reason for this pretense, against it there is; for
should the Jews have Re-admittance here, it would behove many of them, and some
very eminent persons, who have been forced to dissemble their Religion among
the Papists, to keep themselves still in some sort secret (which they cannot do
if they may be known by their Garments, lest the Jesuitical spies, which are
here, should send intelligence of them beyond Sea, and upon their account cause
their Friends in Spain and Portugal, and in some parts of Italy, where the
Inquisition is, as in Millain, to be called in question.

In the next place, it would grieve one to see how the pitiful thing does
stretch his slender wits upon the tentor-books to muster up the Jews
Ceremonies, Prayers, and Benedictions used in their Synagogues, which he has
borrowed ou^ of Purchases Pilgrimage, or Rosse his View of Religions, (who took
them upon trust themselves) but if he had met with Leo Modena's Book of the
Manners and Customs of the Jews* translated by Mr. Edmund Chilmead, he might
have been better informed, however we must take it at his hand, as men buy
wares at the third and fourth Mart, with all the sophistications; so that it
may he said of him in respect of his Pamphlet, as one said of Homer in regard
of his Iliades.

And thus he lies, thus mingle false with true. It Is true that many of those
Blessings and Ceremonies are indeed used by the Jews, for which they are not to
be blamed by him or any other: but when he would persuade people by the opening
and shutting of Heavens Gates, that the Jews believe God has need of rest or
sleep, or shunneth importunities, risum teneatis amici? And since I read the
story of his Cock, I profess I never saw a Cock, but I thought of him for a
Coxcomb when he comes to the privy he paddles to the very throat in stinking
lies, and there we will leave him to play the Gold-finder, for it is a place
much fitter for him, than the Pulpit: only we must take some notice of his
malicious assertion, That the Jews constantly curse the Christians in their
Assemblies, cujus contrarium verum est: for in their daily prayers they beseech
God for the peace of those Nations among whom they live, and for the honor,
safty, and increase of the power of the Prince under whose protection they are;
as may more largly appear in a Declaration set forth lately by that learned
Jewish Doctor Menasseh ben Israel, which might have stopped this Fellows mouth,
and prevented his ugly, mishap'd, abortive, unlick'd Cub from creeping into the
view of the world, if his brutish Sire had not been wholly made up of folly
and impudence.

Whereas he mentions lascivious Motto's (as he calls them) placed in the houses
of the Jews, it is utterly false; or should any lewd persons of them (and it
seem, his acquaintance was only of that sort, if he knew any Jews at all) set
up any such Ribauldry in their rooms, the graver sort, who do frequently visit
the houses of the rest, would tear it down; and for my own particular, I have
been in the houses of many Jews, but never saw any such thing: the only
Ornaments they use for their walls are Pictures representing Bible-Histories.
Suppose he had seen some such Motto's in the houses of some idely disposed
person amongst the Jews, is it not a madness in him to chargethe whole nation
with it? some of all nations and religions are bad, must therefore all the men
in the world be so? if men did not consider the time when his paper came out,
they would think Mid-summer Moon did operate in this Fellow's Pate. In the rear
of all he brings up that of the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. cap. ult. v. 22. If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Marinatha. But he
should have remembered, that the Apostle speaks here neither of, nor to the
Jews, but concerning such as Alexander, and Hymeneus, Simon Magus, and his
Followers, who were apostatized Christians; for Paul does elsewhere expound
himself, and affirm, That the Church has no power to punish by Excommunication
or Anathematization, such as always were out of the pale, but such only as
having been once within the pale, have departed out of it. To this all the
Fathers and Doctors of the primitive Church assent; for none can have due
voc^tion to punish, but those to whom the offender owes subjection. In this
respect the renowned Republik of Venice, together with all the most learned
Civilians of Christendom, have judged it unfit that the secular Magistrate
should take any notice of any ecclesiastical censures denounced against such as
never were subject to the Church, as may be seen more fully in the History of
the Inquisition, compiled by that able Statesman and judicious Lawyer, Paul
Serveta, an Italian Friar.

Thus (gentle Reader) have I vindicated the honorable Nation of the Jews from
the fowl aspersions of a black-mouthed slanderer; which, if I have done with
some sharpness, it is but what his folly has merited. In the mean time, I hope
no ingenious Person will think a rod ill bestowed upon a Fools back: but if
ever he display his folly again upon the same subject, (as I look he will, for
a fool will be never the wiser, though brayed in a mortar) instead of a Rod, I
will send him

A rope, with which the silly elf
Shall make a noose, and hang himself.
I could have enlarged, in sh^wing the many commodities the Jews would bring to
this Commonwealth, their adherency formerly to the Parliament of England, and
their great affection to the present Government, and particularly to his
Highness the Lord Protector, (whose Patronage they do more desire than that of
any other Prince in Christendom) but that it has been done already
sufficiently by an abler Pen, I mean that of Menass^h ben Israel, the Hebrew
Doctor. Therefore I shall conclude, beseeching Almighty God to give to all
those that are right in heart, the fruition of those good things promised under
the reign of the Prince of peace, whose coming is daily expected and hope to be
at hand by many good Christians.

O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion: when the Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad, Psalm. 14.7. FINIS.

