A LETTER OF Mr. JOHN COTTONS Teacher of the Church in Boston, IN NEW ENGLAND,
TO Mr. WILLIAMS a Preacher there.

Wherein is showed, That those ought to be received into the Church who are
Godly though they do not see, nor expressly bewail all the pollutions in
Church Fellowship, Ministry, Worship, Government.

Imprimatur,

John Bachiler.

Printed at London for Benjamin Allen. 1643.

A Letter of Mr. John Cottons, Teacher of the Church in Boston, in New England.
Beloved in Christ,
THough I have little hope (when I consider the uncircumcision of mine own
lips, Exodus 6.12.) that you will hearken to my voice, who has not hearkened to
the body of the whole Church of Christ with you, and the testimony, and
judgment of so many Elders and Brethren of other Churches, yet I trust my
labor will be accepted of the Lord; and who can tell but that he may bless it
to you also, if (by his help) I endeavor to show you the sandinesse of those
grounds, out of which you have banished yours from the fellowship of all the
Churches in these Countries* Let not any pr^judice against my person (I beseech
you) forestall either your affection or judgment, as if I had hastened forward
the sentence of your civil banishment; for what was done by the Magistrates,
in that kind, was neither done by my counsel nor consent, although I dare not
deny the sentence passed to be righteous in the eyes of God, who has said that
he that withholds the Corn (which is the staff of life) from the people,
the multitude shall curse him, Prove. 11.26. how much more shall they separate
such from them as do withold and separate them from the Ordinances, or the
Ordinances from them (which are in Christ the bread of life.) And yet it may be
they passed that sentence against you not upon that ground, but for ought I
know, upon your other corrupt doctrines, which tend to the disturbance both of
civil and holy peace, as may appear by that answer which was sent to the
Brethren of the Church of Salem, and to your self. And to sp^ake freely what I
think, were in soul in your souls stead, I should think it a work of mercy
of God to banish me from the civil society of such a Common wealth, when I
could not enjoy holy fellowship with any Church of God amongst them without
sin. What should the Daughter of Zion do in Babell? why should she not hasten
to flee from thence? Zach. 2.6, 7.

I speak not these things (the God of Truth is my witness) to add affliction
to your affliction, but (if it were the holy will of God) to move you to a more
serious sight of your sin, and of the justice of Gods hand against it. Against
your corrupt Doctrines, it pleased the Lord Jesus to fight against you with the
sword of his mouth (as himself speaks, Rev. 2.16.) in the mouths and
testimonies of the Churches and Brethren. Against whom, when you overheated
your self in reasoning and disputing against the light of his truth, it
pleased him to stop your mouth by a sudden disease, and to threaten to take
your breath from you. But you in stead of recoyling (as even Balaam offered to
do in the like case) you chose rather to persist in your way, and to protest
against all the Churches and Brethren that stood in your way: and thus the good
hand of Christ that should have bumbled you, to see and turn from the error
of your way, has rather hardened you therein, and quickened you only to see
failings (yea intolerable errors) in all the Churches and brethren, rather
then in your self. In which course though you say you do not remember an
hour wherein the countenance of the Lord was darkened to you, yet be not
deceived, it is no new thing with Satan to transform himself into an Angel
of light, and to cheer the soul with false peace, and with flashes of
counterfeit consolation. Sad and woeful is the memory of Master Smiths strong
consolations on his deathbed, which are set as a Seal to the gross and
damnable Arminianisme and Enthusiasmes delivered in the confession of his
faith, prefixed to the story of his life and death. The countenance of God is
upon his people when they fear him, not when they presume of their own
strength; and his consolations are found not in the way of presidence in
error, but in the ways of humility and truth.

Two stumbling blocks (I perceive by your letter) have turned you off from
fellowship with us. First, the want of fit matter of our Church. Secondly,
disrespect of the separate Churches in England under afflictions, who do
ourselves practice separation in peace.

For the first, you acknowledge (as you say) with joy that godly persons are
the visible matter of these Churches, but yet you see not that godly persons
are matter fitted to constitute a Church, no more then trees or Quarries are
fit matter proportioned to the building.

Answ. This exception seems to me to imply a contradiction to it self, for
if the matter of our Churches be as you say godly persons, they are not then as
trees unfelled, or stones unhewen. Godliness cutteth men down from the former
root, and heweth them out of the pit of corrupt nature, and fitteth them for
fellowship with Christ and with his people.

You object, first, a necessity lying upon godly men before they can be fit
matter for Church fellowship, to see, bewail, repent, and come out of the
false Churches ministry, worship and government, according to Scripturs Isa.
52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 18.4. And those this to be done not by a local
remoovall or contrary practice, etc. but by a deliverance of the soul,
understanding, mind, conscience, judgment, will and affections.

Answ. 1. We grant it is not local remoovall from former pollutions, or
contrary practice, that fitteth us for fellowship with Christ and his Church,
but that it is necessary also that we do repent of such former pollutions
wherein we have been defiled and inthralled.

We grant further that it is likewise necessary to Church Fellowship, we
should see and discern all such pollutions as do so far enthrall us to
Antichrist, to separate us from Christ.

But this we profess unto you, that wherein we have reformed our practice,
therein have we endeavored unfainedly to humble our souls for our former
contrary walking. If any through hypocrisy are wanting herein, the hidden
hypocrisy of some will not prejudice the sincerity and faithfulness of
others, not the Church estate of all.

And that we do (by the grace of Christ) see and discern all such pollutions
as do so far enthrall us to Antichrist as to separate us from Christ; your
self does acknowledge in acknowledging the visible members of these Churches
to be godly persons; for godly persons are not so enthralled to Antichrist, as
to separate them from Christ, else they could not be godly persons.

Answ. 2. We deny that it is necessary to Church Fellowship (to wit, so
necessary as that without it, a Church cannot be) that the members admitted
thereunto should all of them see, expressly bewail all the pollutions which
they have been defiled with in the former Church Fellowship, ministry,
worship, government. If they see and bewail so much of their former pollutions
as did enthrall them to Antichrist, as to separate them from Christ, and be
ready in preparation of heart, as they shall see more light, so to hate more
and more every false way, we conceive it is as much as is necessarily required
to separation from Antichrist, and to fellowship with Christ and his Churches.
The Churches of Judea admitted many thousand Jews that believed on the name of
Christ, although they were still zealous of the Law, and saw not the beggetly
emptiness of Moses his ceremonies, Act. 21.20. And the Apostle Paul directs
the Romans to receive such unto them as are weak in the faith, and see not
their liberty from the servile difference of meats and days, but still lie
under the bondage of the Law, yea he wishes them to receive such upon this
ground, because Christ has received them, Romans 14.1. to 6.

Say not, there is not the like danger of lying under bondage to Moses as to
Antichrist, for even the bondage under Moses was such, as if they continued in
after instruction and conviction, would separate them from Christ, Gal. 5.2.
And bondage under Antichrist could do no more.

Answ. 3. To the places of Scripture which you object, Isa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
Revel. 18.4. we answer, two of them make nothing to your purpose, for that of
Esaias and the other of the Revelation, speak of local separation, which your
self knows we have made, and yet you say you do not apprehend that to be
sufficient. As for that place of the Corinths, it only requires coming out
from Idolaters in the fellowship of their Idolatry. No marriages were they to
make with them: no feasts were they to hold with them in the Idols Temple: no
intimate familiarity were they to maintain with them: nor any fellowship were
they to keep with them in the unfruitful works of darkness; and this is
all which that place requires. But what makes all this to prove that we may
not receive such persons to Church Fellowship as our selves confess to be
godly, and who do professedly renounce and bewail all known sin, and would
renounce more if they knew more, although it may be they do not yet see the
utmost skirts of all that pollution they have sometimes been defiled with; as
the Patriarchs saw not the pollution of their Polygamie? But that you may
plainly see this place is wrested besides the Apostles scope, when you argue
from it that such persons are not fit matter of Church Fellowship, as are
defiled with any remnants of Antichristian pollution; nor such Churches any
more to be accounted Churches, as do receive such amongst them; Consider I
pray you, were there not at that time in the Church of Corinth such as partaked
with Idolaters in their Idols Temples? and was not this the touching of an
unclean thing? and did this sin reject these members from Church fellowship
before conviction? or did it evacuate their Church estate for not casting out
of such members?

2. Your second objection is taken from the confession of sins made by John's
Disciples, and the proselyte Gentiles before admission into Church Fellowship,
Matthew. 3.6. Act. 19.18. whence you gather that Christian Churches are
constituted of such members as make open and plain confession of their sins;
and if any sins be to be confessed and lamented, (Jewish, or Paganish) then
Antichristian drunkenness, and whoredom much more, of all such as have drunk
of the whores cup, or but sipt of it. And therefore as persons, though godly,
are not made fit for the Church, if open drunkenness or whoredom lie upon
them, yea or but one act of either, until conviction, true repentance,
confession, and renunciation of their ways be discerned: so here.

And yet as if you had grasped more then you could hold, you let fall some part
of what you had assumed, and do grant, that

Such a confession and renunciation is not absolute necessary to the admission
of members, (though the want of it be a grievous offense) if the substance of
true repentance be discerned.

Answ. 1. If such a confession and renunciation be not of absolute necessity to
the admission of members when the substance of true repentance is discerned,
then such Congregations may be true Churches (by your own confession) who do
admit for their members such godly persons as do profess and hold forth the
substance of true repentance; for such persons professing their repentance for
all their known and open sins, do withal profess their readiness to
repent of and forsake whatsoever further sins shall be discovered to them.

Ans. 2. When you judge that godly persons are not matter fitted for the
Church, until first they be illuminated and convinced of the sinfulness of
every sipping of the whores cup; you take away with the one hand what you
granted with the other, and withal you impose a burden upon the Church of
Christ, which Christ never required at their hands nor yours.

For we deny that it is necessary to the admission of members that every one
should be convinced of the sinfulness of every sipping of the Whores cup, for
every sipping of a drunkards cup is not sinful; and though the cup of the
whore do more intoxicate the mind then the drunkards cup does the body, yet
you know bodily drunkenness and whoredom are such notorions and gross sins
that no man that has any true repentance in him, cannot but be convinced of
the sinfulness of them, and of the necessity of repentance of them in
particular. But the Whores cup being a mystery of iniquity, the sinfulness of
it, is nothing so evident and notorious as that every true repentant soul does
at first discern the filthiness of it: and therefore as those three thousand
Jews and Proselytes were admitted into the fellowship of the first Christian
Church, when they repented of their murder of Christ, although they never saw
nor confessed all the superstitious leavenings wherewith the Pharisees had
bewitched them, Act. 2. 37 to 47. so doubtless may such godly persons be
admitted into the fellowship of our Churches, who do truly repent and
confess their greatest and most notorious sins, although they be not yet
convinced of every passage of Antichristian superstition, wherewith they have
been defiled in their former walkings.

The Disciples of John (whom you instance in) did indeed confess their sins,
the Publicans their sins, the Soldiers theirs, the People theirs, but yet it
does not appear that they confessed their Pharisaicall pollutions, but rather
the notorious sins, incident to their callings, as did also those Gentiles of
whom you speak, Act. 19.18, 19. Conjurers confessed their curious Arts, and
others their deeds, but whether all their deeds, is not expressed.

Answ. 3. But to satisfy you more fully (and the Lord make you willing in true
meekness of Spirit to receive satisfaction) the body of the members whom we
receive, do in general profess, the reason of their coming over to us was,
that they might be freed from the bondage of such humane inventions and
ordinances as their souls groaned under, for which also they profess their
hearty sorrow, so far as through ignorance or infirmity they have been
defiled. Besides, in our daily meetings, and especially in times of our solemn
humiliations, we generally all of us bewail all our former pollutions,
wherewith we have defiled our selves, and the holy things of God, in our former
Administrations and Communions, but we rather choose to do it, than to talk
of it, and we cannot but wonder how you can so boldly and resolutely renounce
the Churches of Christ, for neglect of that, which you know not whether they
have neglected or no, and before you have admonished us of our sinfulness in
such neglect, if it be found amongst us.

Object. 3. Your third Objection is taken from Hag. 2.13, 14, 15. a place which
you desire may be thoroughly weighed, and that the Lord would hold the scales
himself. The Prophet there tells the Church of the Jews, that if a person
unclean by a dead body, touch holy things, those holy things become unclean
unto him, and so, says he, is this Nation, and so is every work of their
hands, and that which they offer there is unclean. And this (as you conceive)
argues that even Church Covenants made, and Ordinances practiced by persons
polluted through spiritual deadness and filthiness of Communion, they become
unclean unto them, and are profaned by them.

Answ. Now surely if your self had hearkened to your own desire, and had
thoroughly weighed the Scripture, and had suffered the Lord to have held the
scales himself, you would never have alleged this place to your purpose. Your
purpose was to prove that Churches connot be constituted by such persons as are
unclean by antichristian pollutions, or if they be so constituted, they are
not to be communicated with, but separated from: To prove this you allege this
place; when the Prophet acknowledges the whole Church of the Jews to be
unclean, and yet neither denies them to be a Church truly constituted, nor
stirs up himself or others to separate from them.

If you say, why but they were unclean? I Answer, be it so, but were they
therefore no Church truly constituted, or to be separated from? yea did not
Haggai and Zachary themselves communicate with them, and call others also to
come out of Babell to communicate with them, even whilst Joshua the High
Priest was still polluted with his unclean garments Zac. 2.6, 7. with 6.3.8.3.
But if indeed you desire to know, what upon due weighing of the place, I
conceive to be the meaning of it, you shall find it to be this; The occasion
of the words arise from a worldly distemper, which the time grew upon, all
sorts of the members of that Church, who were so far carried away with care
of their own outward accommodations, that while every man looked to his own
house, and the seiling of it, the Temple of the Lord and the building thereof
was generally neglected of them all, Prince, Priest, and People, whence it was
that God neither delighted in their spiritual services, nor in their bodily
labors, but left them without a blessing in both, Hagg. 1.6. to 11. Now to
clear the justice of Gods proceeding against them in that case, he alleges a
secondable law for it, out of Moses; The former is written in Levit. 6.27.
where the Law says, that a garment touching any holy flesh of the sin offering
should be holy. But if the garment which touches holy flesh shall touch other
things, as the person that wears it, or any pottage, or Bread, or wine, or
any touch of other common thing, the thing touched is not thereby hallowed by
the touch of such a garment.

Again, there was another Law, that whosoever touched any unclean body,
should be unclean seven days, and if in that time he touched the Tabernacle,
or the holy things thereof, they shall be unclean, Numb. 19.13. Now (to apply
these Laws to the scope of the Prophet) the touch of a dead body did type out
either fellowship with dead works, as Ephesians. 5.11. or dead persons, 2 Cor.
6.14, 15, 16, 17. or dead world, Gal. 6.14. but of these three, it was the dead
world wherewith Priest and Prince and all the people were at that time
generally defiled, in that they took more care and pains for worldly
conveniences, then for the Lords holy Ordinances. Whereupon according to the
answer of the Priest, agreeable to the Law, the Prophet pronounces them, in
the sight of the Lord, all to be unclean.

From both these Laws, and the Interpretation of them by the Priest, and the
application of them by the Prophet, it appears that there were two sorts of
these people, and both unclean. Some that did not touch the holy flesh, or
offerings, but on the outside of their garments only, to wit, in bodily
presence (and the body is but the garment of the Soul) 1 Cor. 5.4. and such
were all the Hypocrites amongst them: Others were sincere, as worshipping God
in firm Truth, as Zorobabell, Jehoshua, and many more, but yet now defiled
with touching a dead body, that is, with laying hold on a dead world, their
worldly accommodations, which made their hearts and hands slow or dead to set
forward the Temple work, and in this condition both sorts, their persons,
their oblations, their bodily labors, were all unclean, and found neither
acceptance nor blessing from the Lord, till the Lord stirred up the Spirits of
them all to address themselves more seriously to the Temple work, Hag. 1.12,
13, 14.

This I take to be the true and genuine meaning of the place, which if you
apply to the point in hand, will reach nothing near to your purpose.
Hypocrites in the Church, and godly Christians themselves, whilst they attend
to the world more then to the things of God, their persons, their labors,
their civil oblations are all unclean in the sight of God; therefore the
Church of Christ cannot be constituted of such, or if it do consist of such,
the people of God must separate from them. You might well have gathered,
therefore, the Church of Christ and the members thereof must separate
themselves from their hypocrisy, and inordinate love of this world, or else
they and their duties will still be unclean in the sight of God,
notwithstanding their Church estate. This collection tends to edification,
the other to dissipation and destruction of the Church, and of them that wrest
blood in stead of milk from the breasts of holy Scripture.

The second stumbling block or offense which you take at the way of these
Churches is, that you conceive us to walk betwixt Christ and Antichrist.

First, in practicing separation here, and not repenting of our preaching and
printing against it in our own country.

Secondly, in reproaching your self at Salem and others for separation.

Thirdly, in particular, that my self have conceived and spoken, that
separation is a way that God has not prospered as if (say you) the truth of
the Churches way depended upon countenance of men, or upon outward peace and
liberty.

Answ. 1. In stead of halting betwixt Christ and Antichrist, we conceive the
Lord has guided us to walk with an even foot between two extremes; so that
we neither defile our selves with the remnant of pollutions in other Churches,
nor do we for the remnant of pollutions renounce the Churches themselves, nor
the holy ordinances of God amongst them, which our selves have found powerful
to our salvation. This moderation, so far as we have kept it in preaching or
printing, we see no cause to repent of, but if you show us cause why we should
repent of it, we shall desire to repent that we repented no sooner.

2. I know no man that reproacheth Salem for their separation, nor do I
believe that they do separate. Howsoever if any do reproach them for it, I
think it a sin meet to be censured, but not with so deep a censure as to
excommunicate all the Churches, or to separate from them before it do appear
that they do tolerate their members in such their causeless reproachings. We
confess the errors of men are to be contended against, not with reproaches,
but the sword of the Spirit; but on the other side, the failings of the
Churches (if any be found) are not forth with to be healed by separation. It is
not Surgery, but Butchery, to heal every sore in a member with no other
medicine but abscission from the body.

3. For my self, I acknowledge the words which you mention, that the way of
separation is not a way that God has prospered. But you much mistake, when you
think I speak it for want of their outward countenance, peace and liberty.
The truth is, they find more favor in our native country then the way of
reformation wherein we walk, which is commonly reproached by the name of
Puritanisme. The meetings of the Separatists may be known to the Officers in
the Courts and winked at when the Conventicles of the puritans (as they call
them) shall be hunted out with all diligence, and pursued with more violence
then any law will justify. But I said that God had not prospered the way of
separation, because he has not blessed it either with peace amongst
themselves, or with growth of grace; such as erring through simplicity and
tenderness of conscience have grown in grace, have grown also to discern
their lawful liberty to return to the hearing of the word from English
Preachers.

Object. But this (you fear) is to condemn the witnesses of Jesus (the
separate Churches in London and elsewhere) and our jealous God will visit us
for such arrerages, yea the curse of his Angel from Meroz will fall upon us,
because we come not forth to help Jehovah against the mighty, we pray not for
them, we come not at them, (but at Parishes frequently) yea we reproach and
censure them.

Answ. The Lord Jesus never delivered that way of separation to which they
bear witness, nor any of his Apostles after him, nor of his Prophets before
him. So far as in that way they hold or practice any holy truths, we bear
witness to them both in our profession and practice. The Angels curse in this
case (we bless God) we do not fear, because we do come forth (according to
the measure of grace given us) to help the Lord against the mighty, although
we do not come forth to help them against Jehovah. It is not to help
Jehovah, but Satan against him, to withdraw the people of God from hearing the
voice of Christ which is preached in the evidence, and simplicity, and power of
his Spirit in sundry Congregations (though they be Parishes) in our native
Country. In which respect, though our people that go over into England, choose
rather to hear in some of the Parishes where the voice of Christ is lifted up
like a trumpet, then in the separated Churches (where some of us may speak by
experience we have not found the like presence of Christ, or evidence of his
Spirit) do not you marvel, or stumble at it: Christ's sheep hear his voice.
If any carelessely hear at random, making no difference betwixt the voice of
Christ and the voice of strangers, or if they shall stoop to any defilements
of themselves, that so they may hear a good Preacher; as I know none such, so
neither do any of us approve them in so doing.

That we do not pray for the separate Churches by name, it is because we
cannot pray in faith for a blessing upon their separation, which we see not to
be of God nor to be led to him. If any reproach them, I will not go about to
excuse it, only they may do well to consider, whether they also have not
reproached others.

If there be so many separate Churches in London and in other parts of the
Kingdom (as you write) it is little comfort to the true servants of Christ to
hear that either such inventions of men are multiplied, as like stumbling
blocks do turn any well minded men out of the way, or that such men being
desirous of reformation, should stumble, not only at the inventions of men,
but for their sakes at the ordinances of the Lord; which appears the more
evidently, because they separate not only from hearing the word in all the
Parishes, but also from fellowship (as your self say) both of the Church of
Plymouth, and of that whereof Master Lathorpe was Pastor, and yet they refuse
all the inventions of men, and choose to serve the Lord in his own Ordinances
only. Now truly Sir, (to use your own words) I fear this news pleases not
the Lord Jesus, and therefore the more inwardly sorry I am, that it pleases
you rather to return to them, not to help the Lord against the mighty, to
wit, either against the high Prelates, or against the inventions of men, as you
suppose, for that you might have done here, or in Plymouth, or in Master
Lathorpes Congregation; but to help erring though zealous souls against the
mighty Ordinances of the Lord, which whosoever stumble at shall be broken; for
whosoever will not kiss the Sun, (that is, will not hear and embrace the
words of his mouth) shall perish in their way, Psalm. 2.12.

FINIS.

