THE CONDUCT OF FRANCE Since the PEACE AT NIMEGUEN.

Written lately in French by a Person of Quality, made English.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for William Cademan, at the Sign of the
Pope's Head, in the New-Exchange in the Strand. 1684.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
I Cannot well tell of all Mankind, how I come to be giving to the Public what I
now present them with; was neither by my Birth, nor Profession, cut out for an
Author, and without vanity could much better draw up a Regiment, than write a
Book: Have made one however before I was aware, heard by some Friends of mine
to discourse pertinently enough, or as they thought I did, of the present
conjuncture of Affairs, engaged me insensibly to couch it them in a Memoire to
the End, as I suppose, they not all speaking so good French, as I perhaps might
do, not having been the time I was in the Country, should by the means be
better understood by that Nation, as they happened to have converse together.
But as it is observable plurality of words steals from a Man's Mouth when Tongue
is once upon the Wheel, fluency of Ink too is generally occasioned, when once
People take their Pen in hand: The remembrance of one thing brings another into
Mind, and when one thinks to be drawing to conclusion, wonders to see we again
are to begin afresh.

A Book then it is I have writ, as I told you, when I thought nothing less, and
more, have let the Book appear in Print; vast Field I had for subject, and
could still have had something yet to say, would I say all I knew: But I
conceived this sufficiently enough to let the designs of a Crown be understood,
whose Ambition reaches at more then it can grasp: Now as I make no manner of
Question, Ocean of Faults will be found in this small Tract, I beg the Reader
will forgive, considering as I have all my days profess't Arms, may be better
at my Sword than Pen.

THE CONDUCT OF FRANCE Since the Peace of NIMEGUEN.
THere is not any tho but little verst in Public affairs ignorant, what 'twas
some years since induced France to make a Peace; She then saw the better Part
of Germany United against Her, and Spain with Holland agreed to the same
purpose, And though till then their Arms had all along met with favorable
Success, being more then they could promise the continuance of, was glad to
prevent with caution those Possible misfortunes, which might have happened in
case once their Good Fortune should begin to leave them: But what most
powerfully obliged to the taking of those measures, was, finding ^er self
loudly threatne'd from England, whose Weighty Arms in Conjunction with so many
others, were capable of Sinking Her to as low a Pitch, as She then seemed
Flourishing in a topping Condition.

It had been Remonstrated by more then one hand to the Kingdom of England, that
of all Things they should lay hold of the Fair Occasion to invade France, where
they had formerly been the Masters of many Fair and Rich Provinces, that whilst
France had her Forces employed without, and her hands full abroad, those of
England would meet with no resistance, means not only to an accession of
Dominion, but also of Glory.

These Considerations, or the Jealousies rather that people had of the Growing
Greatness of the French, swayed with them to resolve to do something more, then
the bent of some Private Interests had a mind they should: There being then a
good understanding between the Court of France, and that of England, a Rupture
of this Kind went much against the hair: The French no sooner sensible how far
those reasons I now touched upon were prevailing, presently satisfied England
they not only were ready to lay down their arms, but even to submit to Terms.
Store of good Guineys cleverly bestowed in the right place, and amongst those
most violent for a War with France, rebated immediately the passion, and
rendered their propositions for a Peace the most reasonable imaginable; upon the
point of declaring, England was now become a Solicitous Mediator of an
accommodation. Proposals were accordingly made on either side, and whilst each
insisted upon the matter of their right, which was long in debate without
Redressing of the mischief in matter of Fact, France, whose Aim it was to take
Holland off from her other Allies, handsomely in the mean while insinuated by
her Agents thither express sent amongst the Common Sort of People, How their
State was not to be Retrieved in Nature, but by the means of a Peace, that
their only Shoulders had hitherto born the burden of the War, and must expect
to bear on so long as War continued: That trade never flourisht in a time of
desolation and misery, and since in Trading their chiefest welfare, as that of
their State it self did absolutely consist in, the regaining of their Peace
again, which had made that State once so flourishing, ought now to be the scope
of their utmost endeavors.

The strength of these reasons carried a poison not to every Eye perceivable,
for though a truth it was the United Provinces did really stand in need of a
Peace, they should however have had regard to the proper Interest of their
respective Allys, who for their only preservation had engaged in the War. But
as reflections of that kind went not with the Grain of the People, who longed
for nothing so much as the return of their dear Trade, they made no impression.
They were besides extremely harrast now, and weary of War, for as the French
had right enough observed to them, that State of theirs was forced to pay a
good part of the Emperor's Brandenburg's, and other of their Allys Forces,
which occasioned of necessity an Augmentation of Subsidies, and Subsidies so
extraordinary heavy that the whole thing it was raised out of, did not answer:
And indeed a Man of Four hundred Pound a Year Rent was obliged to pay the State
Five hundred, and to see himself undone, and mouldred to nothing, without the
possibility of a remedy: Every Body then sensible of their particular
inconveniences, thought of nothing but present redress, without the least
concerning for what might be hereafter: Of the whole Body of that
Commonwealth, none but his Highness the Prince of Orange truly penetrated the
consequences of the Peace, which in that present face of things must of
necessity to all the Allys in general prove very disadvantageous; since without
lending hand to deceive our selves, we could not flatter with the hopes of
Restitution from France, high, and haughty, in the glories of her Conquests;
and common sense might tell us, we first ought to have obliged it to one by
force of Arms, before so much as the proposal of any thing like it could be
proper. Now to leave France in the actual possession of so many important
places, bordering upon Germany and Flanders so close, and so many Baits to its
usual Ambition, was properly by leaving him one foot in the Country, to give
him the opportunity of placing the other, as they saw occasion; 'twas a thing
not unnotic'd the great difficulty occurred in the uniting of the German
Princes, which neither more nor less, but just like an Engine of many Springs,
was brought into motion, but with all the pains and trouble in the World: It
was rational then Enough to fear, if once suffered to knock off, they were not
when one would have them to be got together again; the Prince of Orange had
represented all this at large in the Assembly of the States General, where some
he never mist of, opposing his Opinion, 'twas flatly told him there, the Charge
of the War was not a thing supportable, the excess of which had quite already
drained their Bank, and reduced the People to the last degrees of Indigence;
that a respite of necessity must be given, or resolve in a very little to see
the utter ruin of the Nation: That Prince would have replied the respite not
at all like to last, and France seeking but to sever them from their Allys,
having, once wrought their Ends, would again be playing over her Old Pranks
within a Year or two: But Burgimaster Oftee, of Amsterdam, stopped his Mouth, in
telling the Provinces were indeed consenting with all their Hearts to the
carrying on the War, if his Highness could but hit the way of doing it without*
Money, that the Province of Holland would give not a Stiver more toward it, or
at least the City of Amsterdam would not, as whose Representative he was
commissioned to speak: Now you must know all the Subsidies whatever, raised
upon the Seven Provinces, that of Holland furnishes almost the half, and of
that half more then the two Fifts are paid by the City of Amsterdam. That in
the Quota of Subsidies if the Province of Holland be reckoned to pay Fifteen
Millions, of that Fifteen, Seven is near paid by that City.

After Oftee's having thus declared himself there was no likelihood of thinking
to continue the War any longer, chiefly for that the rest of the Provinces
conformed for the most part in Opinion much with that of Holland, was easily
observable, and that though they yet had not explained themselves so fully upon
the point as Holland had, their great inclination to Peace was like their's
apparently obvious. As the Emperor thoroughly understood at bottom, the French
intentions drove of a long time at Universal Monarchy, at hearing what had past
in Holland was much concerned at the News: Yet to divert if possible those
Provinces from the resolutions they had taken, had it told them, he required no
more of them the Subsidies they used to pay him, offering to return them again
upon the like occasion the same assistance: The Hollanders thank't the Emperor
for his good will, but could not be induced for that to continue the War,
adding that seeing his Imperial Majesty as well as the rest of the Allys
produced every day some fresh Obstacles or other to the Peace then in Treaty at
Nimeguen, warned him, that if he did not think good to conclude the Peace, and
that very suddenly, they should be obliged to do it without him; what made the
Dutch so pressing was, that as France laid the conditions of the Treaty very
disadvantageous to the rest of the Allys, as advantageous and beneficial were
the Terms she made for Holland, for Mastricht they offered to restore, the only
remaining place of all their Conquests, upon that State since the first of the
War, so that though once reduced within an Inch of their Destruction entire,
they were now in prospect of a re-establishment by Virtue of the Peace to the
same it ever had in times of its greatest Prosperity: Something too there was
over and above that caress't their Courage in the proposed Treaty, as they saw
the King of France made it his business to distinguish them from the other
Allys, they thence imagined they should retrieve their lost reputation amongst
other Nations, who formerly held their Forces in such good Opinion, and should
yet think very well of them, seeing they were able to make their party good,
and to defend themselves against a prevailing Power so very formidable: To say
the Truth it is wonderfully strange, and worthy without doubt of the admiration
of Posterity for ever, that a little Nook of Land, as one may say, and Handful
of People, has not been only able to withstand such mighty Armies, but likewise
in condition to afford succor to her Neighbors. 'Twill be subject of surprise
enough to them who shall succeed us, to read in History, that Hollanders,
Spaniards ^rreconcilable Enemies, should be the People who have saved the
Provinces to the King of Spain, nor the Spaniards heretofore so inveterate
against ^^e Hollanders, to find no where a more firm support, nor a more ready
assistance, then that they received at hands of their most Ancient Enemies:
That by a fetch of Fortune so very strange, the Spaniards must have been ruined
had those of Holland never revolted from the Spanish subjection, and should
there come to find their safety, where they ever reckoned on as their certain
Destruction: One may well enough say the Hollanders have twice escaped a
scowring, by their freeing of themselves from the Tyranny of the Spaniards, for
had they still continued under that Dominion, the whole Seventeen Provinces had
equally been lost. And indeed there needs no stress of Politics to discover
the safety, and well being, of the United Provinces, is merely to be owned to
the prudent conduct of those who were at Helm, as a peculiar reward in store
from Heaven, for what their Forefathers had endured for their Religion's sake:

But to resume my Discourse, the Hollanders suffering themselves to be thus
over-reach't by all those glossy appearances, signed cheerfully to the Peace
apart, seeing their Allys remained obstinate in pursuing of the War, contrary
to their Opinion; I shall neither say in doing so they did well or ill, one may
judge enough of it by what since has happened: The Emperor, however and
Spaniard, finding their strongest recourse had thus abandoned them, accepted of
the Peace on their side too, and in like manner abandoned the Duke of
Brandenburg, who could not be brought to admit of Conditions offered him so
very prejudicial. France then direct'd her Arms that way, and as that Elector
was not of himself to resist alone, did what seemed good in her Eyes in Treaty
with that Prince, with this comfort at the least, what he was forced to by
France, was with his Sword in his Hand, and that his last action did not
derogate from a Thousand others, wherein he had during the War so worthily
behaved himself: The Peace being then so happily finished to the content of
France, as it rather had suspended then relinquisht its design of Universal
Monarchy, began now to manage those Princes she saw divided, where there was
ground to hope she might do it to effect, The Duke of Brandenburg could not be
well more discontented with the Emperor, then he then was, obliged to restore
back all he had made Conquest of, without the least show of the Imperial
assistance, France therefore proposes an Alliance with him, with high Promises
of a more Honorable Faith then he had yet found with any of the other; at the
same time the French Money was not wanting in its Benevolencies to that Court
for the acquiring of some confiding Person proper for the backing their design,
and soothed was that Elector with the assurance of a prop from such a Crown as
shook besides those of all its Neighbors, great things were offered him and
to say in a word his resolutions in the Matter staggered by Thousand of
advantageous tempting proffers. He did object though against the project of
that Alliance his Disputes with Swede at that time siding with the Interest of
France, and as those Disputes have often produced but ill effects, it is not
foreign to our purpose for the Readers better instruction, to discourse it in
a word or two.

A certain Marquis of Brandenburg, made in former time some agreement with the
Duke of Pomerania by which they settled their Dominions respectively upon one
another, and to their Children after them of both Parties in case any who
succeeded of either should happen to decease without Issue of his Body: The
Entail taking place, and the Duke of Pomerania dying without Issue some Two
hundred years ago, or thereabouts, the Marquis of Brandenburg by Virtue of the
said Settlement succeeded to the Duchy of Pomerania remaining the peaceable
Possessor thereof till the Great Gustavus took it from him by force of Arms:
Gustavus or his Successors were confirmed in their possession of that Country
by the Treaty of Munster, but as the Marquis thereunto consented but with
regret and per force, a secret certain inckling of having it again has
remained, which so often as the occasion presents him it is not to be doubted
but he makes it his endeavor. When France then understood what 'twas stuck with
the Duke of Brandenburg, and hindered his engaging in her Interests in favor
of him she resolved to make a Sacrifice of Swede, but previous to it, made
first sure of the King of Denmark for that Crown, then in conjunction with
Brandenburg, found her self by the projection of that Confederacy of Strength
enough in the North, not to fear what the rest of its Princes might be
undertaking in opposition to the French designs: The King of Denmark who had a
sample himself like others of the Puissant force of France in the last War,
rejected not the Alliance; but as Brandenburg had before opposed the
interferings too of his Interest with that of Swede, let France understand it
only declined Proposals upon that account: France was otherwise not over
satisfied with Swede, for its hovering as one may call it so long about the
Matter before it could finally declare it self in the late War, that after its
declaring, had acted nothing answerable to that high Reputation the great
Gustavus had gained his Nation by the great things he had done, that far from
managing as formerly that People seemed to have no great regard of upon several
occasions.

The first token she gave of this was in the pretentions she made appear
relating to Homage claimed for the Duchy of Deux-ponts of which she was got
seized in the War time, even in the life of its late Duke, upon pretext of
keeping it for the King of Swedes Use, who was then the presumptive Heir, but
in effect to keep it for themselves, and to make their own uses of it, for the
Promotion of their Designs: And since it here falls out to treat of the Fealty
and Homage that Crown lays claim to from so many Sovereign Heads, 'twill not be
improper to relate upon what bottom that Chimera is grounded, and which at this
very time is the coercive cause why the quiet of all Europe is so unhappily
disturbed.

At Metz there is a Sovereign sort of Court of Judicature, and a Solicitor
General belonging to it, who having had commands from the King of France to
give in an exact Memoir of all that ever was within the jurisdiction, limits,
and precinct of that Parliament, and to remit up the same to Court, he
presently fills his Paper with several Villages which never had been belonging,
but withal with their remarks upon them, how they had been formerly separatd,
and how they had acknowledged the jurisdiction of other Neighboring Princes
who had been very well satisfied to Usurp that Power. The Instrument was drawn
with Argument enough, and though it might want a foundation, did not want for
color and pretext; the State Ministers relishing the Draft, Mr. Solicitor
General is forthwith sent for to Court, to help clear some few Scruples, which
yet remained upon their Mind, the Solicitor come not only maintained what he
had before sent up, but pleasing of himself with the officious part of useful
Man deposes he had found some old Records by which it was to be made out that
the Duchy of Deux-ponts had ever held of the Bishopric, and that many more
considerable Lands by the connivance, and contrivance of the several Bishops
with their own private Relations had been alienated and dismembered, for that
those Bishops being but Tenants for life, were well enough content in Estates
of easy acquisition to accommodate their respective Families with the
conveniences of Church Lands. The French Ministers savored well the Opinion
of Mr. Solicitor, and ordered him diligently to inspect all public Registers,
for what might there be found of New, and thereof to forthwith make an Abstract
with Care, to be afterward made use of in time and place. But to avoid a
partiality which all should do, who undertake a public Information; something
there was of what Mr. Solicitor did allege for many of the Good Bishops to
oblige their Kindred, had truly let them have some Lands within their
particular Donation, but in exchange had received other Lands back again in
lieu; so that those Lands in Justice ought to be restored again which had been
given to the Bishops, or to what had been alienated and granted by the Bishops
to make no pretense. But to the thread of my Discourse, the Solicitor General
was no sooner returned home again to Metz, but fell a searching not only all
the public Registers, but too of all the old Archives of Churches and Abbeys he
could lay his Hand on, and as he was provided with Commission from above
Express, swept them all away without the act of any Witness or making of the
least Inventory in the point, which he ought not to have done, that every Body
that way might have the better understood what properly pertain'd to them, and
that the Jealousy since conceived of the great Antiquity of those Parchments,
(not so very Old as made believe) might so have been removed; so be it Mr.
Solicitor was observed long closeted close up about fixing his Memoirs, which
having framed as he pleased himself returns again to Court swelled with the
presumption of an Eminent Service, not doubting what he brought could be ill
received: Now the Contents of those Memoirs are the pretensions which we have
since seen break out, and at this day make such a rattle all Europe over.

The Marquis of Louvois State-Secretary at Wars, who has a very great Interest
in that Kingdom, whom Mr. Solicitor presented his Memoirs to, could not at
sight of them forbear laughing, for tho 'twas his Business more then any Bodies
to disturb the Peace which turned not to that account time of War might do,
perceiving little in them that would hold Water, was not so willing to expose
his Master upon a light occasion, who when he had mind to be making of a War,
wanted not variety of specious pretexts: He would needs know tho of the
Solicitor whence he had fisht all those Discoveries; Mr. Solicitor General
seeing him so hard of belief draws out of his Pocket another Schedule which
contained the Dates of all the true and false deeds from out of which he had
collected the Instrument he before had given in; as Mr. Solicitor proposed to
himself the making of a great fortune from the success of that Affair he so
closely plied Mr. De Louvois with the Scheme of so many useful things that at
last prevailed with that Minister to promise, when at better leisure, the full
perusal of his Memoir, and thereon to return his Answer.

The Answer to Mr. Solicitor proved more in his Favor then off hand the first
Reception had given him reason to expect: Mr. De Louvois directs him to pursue
his undertaking, and after the Institution of a judicial Court for the
Examining of such pretensions which the King of France might have to several
Territories and Principalities; Mr. Solicitor for his pains was nominated of
that Court Judge in chief which is no more than setting the concerned party in
the Cause upon the Bench.

I know not if I have exspatiated a little too far upon the subject, but I
thought it an incumbent upon me to report here the Original causes of the
Miseries which afflict us, and ready now to involve so many States in trouble
and confusion.

We revert then to where we left, which as I take it was, the King of France
not caring greatly for his Swedish Alliance, Summons that Crown to do him
Fealty and Homage for the Dukedom of Deux-ponts: The King of Swede being a
young Prince, brave, and inferior to none in Resolution and courage, thought
the Chimerical pretention very strange, but not willing to fall out with France
upon a frivolous Matter, his Ambassador had Instructions to show that King the
injustice done him. That the Dukedom of Deux-ponts had ever been a Sovereign
State, and that they who had it acknowledged Fealty and Homage for it to no Man
living, except they meant for a Fealty and Homage, the usual investures they
were obliged to take at the hands of the Emperor.

These Reasons the Court of France approved not of, proceeding on still in her
unjust demands of a Homage, and after a canvas past of pro and con between the
Ambassadors and Ministers, the new Court of Justice pronounces roundly decree
of Reunion, and that Duchy to be annex't to the Crown of France, unless
within such a set time the King of Swede acknowledged for the same his Fealty
and Homage: Now that the World might see it was not from any covet of our
Neighbors goods that Decree of Metz aris'd, the King freely offered the
Investure of that Dukedom to the Duke Adolphus Uncle to the King of Swede in
case the King his Nephew conformed not to the Tenure of the Decree which to be
sure he was not like to do.

Whilst Duke Adolphus halted between the hopes of getting that Dukedom and fear
of disobliging the King his Nephew the King of France sends in the interim the
Prince Palatine of Birkenfield, a Prince of the Palatine Family, to keep that
Duchy in the Name of Duke Alfonsus his near Kinsman, promising in case that
Duke accepted of it not upon the conditions proposed him, he himself should be
then immediately invested; the Prince of Birkenfield having returned his thanks
for the Kings good will toward him, and having done him Fealty and Homage for
the the Dukedom in name of Duke Alphonsus, he repaired accordingly to the
Execution of his Commission, I shall be silent here in reflecting upon the
Extravagancys of this way of proceeding. A Reader does not so much care to have
the point decided to his hand, it is limiting his Fancy, and by reasoning first
upon the subject, but giving Laws to his Faith in what he should believe: And
indeed it is as much as is requisite for the Relator to tell of things as they
nakedly are, and for the Reader to judge as he thinks good: But to close the
small digression not unseasonable to the profession of Writers, the King of
Swede had no sooner heard what had been transacted in France, but upon it
immediately deserted the Alliance he had embraced during the late Wars at the
hazard of his whole Country, and peril of his Life, having exposed himself the
first Man in Person, in Three or Four several Battles for the sake and interest
of that Crown, expecting another kind of usage for his pains from France then
that he met with: Denmark and Brandenburg no sooner well assured what side the
King of Swede would take, but both strike up with France, which had engaged to
furnish the King of Denmark both with Ships and Men for the recovery not only
of some Provinces which the Father of this King of Swede had taken from the
Dane, but likewise for that of Lubeck, upon which City by virtue of some
imaginary Titles Denmark of long hand had great Designs: Brandenburg did
promise to himself too a beneficial Alliance; insomuch as these Three
Potentates united but to the breeding a disturbance in the Northern Peace:
France having thus made sure of these two leaning Staffs, by Virtue of the like
Decrees I now mentioned, proceeds in the same way against other Sovereign
Princes, requiring of them the submission of Fealty and Homage: Many who saw
themselves not in condition to resist acquiesc'd in all they would demand,
others showed themselves more stubborn, but smarted for their standing out by
the Quartering, and Garisoning their Country, forced by fowl means, to do what
by fair they had refused. But here I must give account what happened to the
Rinegrave, his Authority in the Country being great, and his example of
influence to others, France let him understand he had to comply immediately
without a boggle, and that after they would replace him again in all his Rights
and Privileges: The Rinegrave not suspecting the honorable Word of so august a
Crown was overjoyed to be so advantageously distinguished among so many
unfortunate sufferers, and having given his Obedience wrought in others the
same acknowledgment, which as they thought was unavoidable, having without so
much as hesitating seen the Rinegrave Count perform the like submissions, but
when the Count on his side expected they should keep their Word with him, was
told they were not the Masters, and that he must make his Applications to the
Court, thither then must he take a Journey and little to the purpose, for
instead of gaining the thing he made demand of, they even told him he might go
as he came, and wondered in their Hearts such a petty Fellow as he should be
unwilling to hold his Country in Fee of so great a King as was the great King
of France: A little before such another Answer had been made to the Palatine
Elector who sending to the Court of France to complain of his Country being
made daily havoc of by the Licentiousness of the French Forces, to an
infringement of the late Peace, the complainer was answered when a little
Prince like that Elector had the Honor to be Neighbor to so great a King
'twas not for such as he to be that nice: Short and sweet this, hitherto Roses;
but in conclusion we shall have Thorn and all.

France still claims on their right of Dependencys, and finding Spain weak and
apparently helpless, the County of Alost is demanded of them as an appertenance
of the late Conquests; Spain troubled at the demand, because Oudermond with
other Towns and Villages did all belong to the same County, let France
understand the great Iniquity of her pretended right, but whilst this was under
debate between the Spanish Ambassador and the Ministers they yet made more
demands as intricate all out and as perplexed as their first: The County of
Chini had been granted France by the Tenure of the Treaty with all its
appertenancies, and as those Dependancies had not received their full
Explanation in the wording of the Peace, France now become what Spain did use
to be, to say, a wrangler, and full of her fetches, and quibling tricks,
alleged the Dependancies of Chini reached to the very Gates of Luxemburg, and
therefore required to have possession thereof given them by the Spaniards, if
not they would give it themselves: The Spanish Ambassador as very able Man as
he was, was puzzled at the new quiddity, and demanded time to make his Master
acquainted; the time he ask't was granted him, but when expired, France finding
Spain endeavoring to elude its pretensions causes Forces openly to march into
the Country of Luxemburg, blocks up all the Highways that lead to the County,
Town, raises Forts round about, and tho then in the midst of a profound Peace,
commits all the acts of an actual Hostility which could possibly be committed
in a declared War; the Governor of Luxemburg sends his Trumpet to the Commander
in chief of those Forces to know if France mean'd a Declaration of a War with
Spain: But he was answered they meant no such thing, and that they only were
about taking possession of what belonged to them. Mean while under the Notion
of possession-taking they hindered every thing from coming into the Town of
Luxemburg, and every thing from going out on it, and if any offered to pass
their way, they sent them back to the Town again, pretending they came out as
Spies upon their actions, and if there came any from the Country, such as their
Market-people, or the like with Provisions to sell in Town as they were used to
do, they sent them back too, having first stripped them of all they had, to
teach them not to come again a second time, and if those Country People offered
to pass them without Provisions were suffered to go by after a due Examine of
all they had about them, but when they would repass home again, were drove back
into the Town, that so the Provisions of the Place might be consumed the sooner.

When for my part, I reflect upon these violent Courses I could not but be
extremely surpised to see England the Mediator and Garanty of the Peace,
troubled themselves no further in its due execution, they saw before their Eyes
what passed, but without the least concern for the visible infraction; and as
if France had made all sure upon that hand, pursued in their constant and daily
acts of open Hostility; but yet offered still to make England the Umpire of
their debate, which left Spain without all sort of hope; for upon one side not
having confidence enough in England to trust its Interest in their hands, upon
the other knew not what well to say to the King of France so fairly offering to
refer the Matter: Perplexed on both hands, Spain resolves to put something to
the venture of a chance, and seeing the Town of Luxemburg must apparently be
lost for want of Provisions sent the Governor of the place private Orders to
open a passage by force come what will: The Governor who for a long time
desired no better, sallies out at a time when the French least expected him,
and setting upon one of their Quarters, charged them home as they just were
upon the point of making head to dispute the passage: The French made a great
resistance, but overpowered by number, being forced to give way, the Governor
advancing and joining his convoy which he of long hand held before in a
readiness, put his relief into the Town. Some two hundred of the French were
killed in the action, and about Eighteen or Twenty of the Spanish, but among
all these not a Man of note lost, nor so much as one Officer.

France no sooner had the News, but thundered it against the Spaniards as much
indeed to blame they quietly would not endure starving: Drew every where
presently their Forces down toward the Towns that held for Spain, but at the
instant of acting with them, England hindered from further proceeding by making
France get full satisfaction in the point from Spain, who disowned not only all
the Governor of Luxemburg had done, but offering even to discharge him of his
Government, and in short so supinely weak, paid for the Damage in conclusion
sustained by the French, for a certain Sum of Money agreed upon. After this
delicate Treaty, the Blocus of Luxemburg was afresh begun again, and the French
reinforc't their Quarter, and patrol'd the Avenues duly for their greater
security of being in haste caught as they before had been: Truly I cannot
contain from a little digression here, and say Posterity will be hardly made
believe that in the midst of Peace, the one side shall be allowed them to make
War, but the other shall be punished because they submit not in every thing
their Enemies would impose upon them. Howbeit the Luxemburg Garrison being
large, and the Convoy not sufficient for a long supply began again to feel the
same inconveniences it had before: The Governor being a brave Man, who had
much rather have chose to die with his Arms in his Hand, then lead out a life
so very shameful and so unworthy of any Man of Courage, was for all that
necessitated to bear with a Thousand of their Insolences, and insults without
the least daring to gainsay: For the French who well knew his Instructions, and
whose Fingers itcht to be doing, would frequently come within half a Mile sight
of the Town, where having trodden down the Corn under their Horses feet made
show of a defying to engage. Whilst this was doing France Treats for Cazal,
with the Duke of Mantoua, which threw not a little Jealousy Italy all over:
The Emperor too resented it in a high measure for Cazal; besides, being a Feif
of the Empire, he was by descent too the presumptive Heir, and so doubly
entitled as Emperor, and the next near Kinsman to the Duke of Mantoua: It was
not to be expected, the King of France would so much lessen himself to be
sending to the Emperor, to demand investure as was customary to be done for all
Feifs of the Empire, he was not a Prince to be prescribed the conformity of
ordinary rules, and his uncontrolable power freed him in every thing; which
indeed Mr. Solicitor General of the Court of Metz, of whom I have before
spoken, did ingenuously confess as much one day, to some of his Friends taking
freedom to be telling him they did not conceive the strength of his Decrees was
of validity sufficient to be binding in the case of so many Sovereign Princes:
Replied he served a Master who had at beck, a Hundred pieces of Canon, a
Hundred thousand Men, and a Hundred Millions of Money to put those Decrees in
Execution. The Taking of Cazal was not the only thing Italy was alarmed at,
France, whose ambition nothing less then the subjection of the whole World
could satisfy, began now to grumble too at the Republic of Genoua, to have
that color of invading its liberty: They of Genoua send their Ambassador to
France at the same time, to excuse themselves in what they could, but as France
was not without her Reasons, I mean good or bad, the Excuses of the poor
Genoesses were ill received, took the occasion to pick a New quarrel in
requiring them to make restitution of an Estate formerly of the House of
Fieske, with the Interest of the whole for an Age before since accrued; now as
every Body is well satisfied what the case of the House of Fieske is, and how
they were, and for what expelled Genoua would be here superfluous to mention: I
shall but say, never Demand appeared more extraordinary then that did, not to
say never a more unjust, and a more unreasonable. France would oblige a Gree
State to restore to the Heirs and Successors of a Traitor, and Estate forfeited
and confiscated for its delinquency, as if France never had her self
confiscated, and daily did not confiscate Estates of such as she found faulty,
and deficient in their duty: Mean while though the Matter has not been drove
much further, it is not to be imagined notwithstanding wholly laid aside, it is a
smothering Fire in Ashes, which one day will consume all Italy, if not
prevented by the Hand of Heaven; and indeed it is not to be thought France has
quitted therefore the Design of mastering that Commonwealth, because she
defers the doing it to another time, for that the present was of more
consequence to be looking to the Conquest of Flanders which hitherto had been
so tedious a work, and now lay naked and exposed to his ambition through the
unfortunate diversion of the Imperial Arms: 'Twas then ill Policy to draw so
many Enemies upon her Hands at once, whose Business she the easier might all
do, the one after the other: 'Twas an advice worth taking which a grand
Politician once gave his Children upon the point of Death, caused a great many
arrows to be laid before them, some of which in bundle, others lose, and bid
the Children to try the breaking of those unbound, which they easily snap't in
two, then commanded them to try the other, bidding them to break those
likewise, but that being more then they were able, took his occasion from that
Instance to admonish them to remain ever in Union with one another, if they
expected their Enemies should take no hold upon them. Now France deals with
most of the other Princes, as the Children by those Arrows not bound together,
she easily subdues them one after another, which in case they were linkt, and
united as they should be, might perhaps be in a posture of reducing her again
within the bounds of Reason: Indeed what hinders the setting Armies upon foot
as well as France, and thereby an endeavor used for the resettling of things in
that condition again, where every one concerned might find his security.

It looks as if our Forefathers were much the prudenter People: For I remember
well after the Battle of Pavie, where Charles the Fifth Triumph't over the
Affairs and Fortune of Francis the First, they wisely considered not fit to
suffer any more the growth and mightiness of that Power, which already was
become but too formidable among them, and so retrieved again the State of
France at that time much more desperate, and at a lower Ebb then is ours now.
But it is not for want of every Bodies knowing what course was taken in the
times of our Ancestors, but few they be make a true use of what they know.

But all this while, I perceive not my deviation insensibly stealing me from my
Subject, too far carried off by force of Truth: To come then to the point
again, I shall tell you, that whilst Italy took the alarm at the surrender of
Cazal, another business was then brewing in that Country, which might well
occasion its further disturbance. Savoy, as every one knows, lies closed up
between France on one side, and the Provinces of Spain: I mean between those
Countries in Italy under Spanish Dominion: The Neighborhood of these two Powers
has been Reason enough in all former Ages, why the Dukes of Savoy enjoy little
quiet: For at the same time that either of those two Crowns denounced War upon
the other, he must of necessity side with one of the two, to prevent his
Country from being overrun by both, as is the general case of all Neuters. Now
as Savoy turned very much the Scale to the side it inclined to, the two Crowns
strove their utmost which should have him of their party, that sometimes the
Daughters of France, sometimes the Infanta's of Spain found Wives of State for
that Duke, and the need both had of him, was still the Mediums of new
advantages from either: France who knew at what dear rates that Alliance was
sometimes to be purchased, projected a Treaty with him, such as for ever should
debar him from being Spanish any more. The Cardinal Destree they send to Savoy,
a Relation of that Duchess, and as she Governed all during the Minority of her
Son, proposes to her a Match between the young Duke, and the Infanta of
Portugal, his Cousin German, Heir presumptive of that Crown, the then Prince
Regent having no more Children: The Duchess of Savoy being Born in France, and
French in all her Inclinations relishes the Proposal with pleasure: Thinking
the Quality of a King of Portugal, was every whit Equivalent to a Duke of
Savoy: But as they have a Law in Portugal, which Forfeits in a Daughter her
right of Succession to the Crown in case of Marriage with a Stranger, that Law
how to abolish must first be thought of; The Cardinal Destree in Name of his
Master undertook the thing: France sends then to Portugal to that effect, and
as she was in a happy post of carrying all before her, did in that conjuncture
too carry that Affair, insomuch as the having of that Law abrogated, and the
Dukes Marriage with their Infanta finally agreed upon: The Grandees of Savoy,
without whose advice this Business had been determined unsatisfied with the
Match, which ended in a deprivement of their natural Prince, and the
Subordination of a Governor, had their private Cabals to consult the breaking
the Neck of the Marriage, and stop it from further going on. I cannot justly
say, if they confederated for sake of public good, or merely for their private
ends; howbeit the Portugal Match far from being of advantage to the Duke, one
may truly say he was a loser by the Bargain, no less then the Princes in
general of his Family; besides, whilst he was to have resided in Portugal who
should have succor'd Savoy, in case France had had a mind to set up right of
Convenience, a right which they endeavored equally to establish as well as
right of Dependency, and for no other Reason indeed was the Prince of
Montbelliard drove out of his Country then that it did accommodate the Crown:
But they heeded little all that could be said against it, and still went on
their Road, where but a glimpse appeared of probable sucscess: Madam, the
Duchess of Savoy smoakt the drift, as well as any, but the powerful desire of
Sovereign Rule, carried it above all other considerations; and as Alexander of
Farnese, Duke of Parma sent off his Mother in former days, not to be obliged to
share with her the Government of the Low Countries: So the Duchess of Savoy
was for packing away her Son, that she might remain still the absolute Mistress
of that State: She knew well enough they would not fail detaining the Duke in
Portugal to inure him to the ways and customs of a Nation which one day he was
designed to govern; and by the shift secure to her self the Supreme Authority:
In the mean while discontents amongst the Grandees increased daily, and have
frequent meetings to advise upon what they had to do; could not for all that
meet so in private, but the Duchess had Intelligence, willing to secure her
self from the Designs her Grandees might well have of troubling the Government,
caused Forces to be fetched from France in good store to be dispersed in the
Neigbourhood about, under a pretense of covering Cazal.

The Nobility of Savoy, though alarmed at the French assisting thus of the
Duchess, gave not over for all that their Intentions of helping their young
Duke, and having found her out in her Treaty with France, into whose hands she
had agreed to deliver the most important places of strength in the Country, in
Pledge of some Loans of Money she had borrowed of them, for the defray of her
Son's Marriage, were unanimously resolved to hazard all than suffer thus a
general ruin; and as they watch't their opportunity to compass their design,
the Duchess her self favored them with one, which they conceived might serve
their turn, for having left her Son at Turin, contrary to her custom, whilst
her self stepped a Mile or two out of Town, the Grandees, took that Time to speak
to their Duke: That he must look upon himself in French hands, every where
surrounding him as now their Prisoner in a manner, that the Duchess his Mother
had sold them his best Towns, and would yet be selling what remained if not
prevented by his great goodness to his People: That she sent him to Portugal
not to be the Sovereign there, but that at home she might be so: That in case
he met with freedom to his Person there, he must at least expect to meet a
Master, whereas if he vouchsafed to stay with them, he should meet with nothing
but their entire obedience and dutiful respects, that the Portuguises naturally
hated Strangers; and if they did assent to his marrying their Infanta, 'twas by
constraint, and with regret: That he might rest assured the Prince Regent once
dead, they would retract again from what they had done, and bar him of his
Crown as formerly they had done to the King of Spain, that it was not easy to
foresee what might then become of him, for that the French having once seized
his Country perhaps might not be in humor to restore it him again.

These remonstrances startled the young Duke, who yet had not Brains ripe
enough to apprehend among a great many Truths they represented, there was Lies
in an equal number, he ask't them what best for him to act to shun so many
threatening misfortunes: They answered no other way left, then the securing of
his Mother; the expedient was surprising, but finding they had struck from the
first an impression upon the young Prince, gave him no time to the
recollections of a Natural affection, pressed him with telling his own safety lay
for the future in his own power, to resolve for good and all of being a happy
or unhappy Duke the remainder of his life; as for their parts resolved to be
the lookers on of what every Day produced no longer, had designed retiring into
some other Country, where at least they should gain that comfort of Knowing
they had no kind of Hand in any thing that would be attempted against his
Dignity or Person. A few Tears artificially shed, or out of compassionate good
Nature, accomplished persuading of the Duke, calls for Pen and Paper, and signs
a Warrant immediately for the seizing of his Mother: In the mean while before
they could get together to take their measures for execution of their Order,
the Duchess was returned into the Town, and being arrived at her Palais was
extremely surprised to find her Son sad and pensive, and much beside himself,
asked what he ailed, conjuring him to tell her, but finding him not answering,
she adds to her entreaties the blandishments of a Mother, as she embraced him,
perceived he wep't, and Tears to tricle down his Cheeks which troubled her to
the highest degree, sell then to a redoublement of muching, calls him her own
dearest Child, falls her self a crying, and in the end so softens, he confesses
to her they had surprised him, and that he had signed an Order for the
commitment of her Person: The Duchess was her self struck with amaze at the
sort of News, but having now no time to lose, and that every Minut was to her
of highest consequence, sent for those about her immediately she could most
confide in, doubles the Palace Guards, and causes those to be seized in fine
who had resolved her ruin and makes her manifesto, those very Persons were
intended to take away the young Duke, and carry him to Spain, which is more
then I can say they meant, not knowing whether true or not, or whether only a
Sham to render them the more odious to the People: Be it as 'twill, the
Duchess having once retrieved her self from so very great a danger, ordered
the French Forces to March into the Town thereby to show she trusted more to
them, then to those of the Country.

A certain Print for all this remained with the young Duke of what had been
remonstrated; insomuch that though his Equipage was gone already before to
Portugal, and himself soon to follow after, he talked no more of the Voyage:
And as still some body there was in place about him, who privately cherisht the
suspicion they had raised, broke him clean off, ordered his Family to return
their ways home again, to the unspeakable satisfaction of his whole People;
France only remained much mortifid, promising already to it self the
conjunction of Savoy to that Kingdom, and to enchase it amongst the fairest
Flowers of the Crown: The dissatisfaction conceived lay not long hid, the Count
of Soisson who in case of decease of the young Duke was Heir presumptive to the
Dukedom of Savoy, after the Death of Prince Carignan his Uncle, was then in
love with a private Damosel in France, called Madamoseille de Beauais; all the
Relations had thitherto opposed the thing, in fear of his design to marry her,
the King himself had signified as much, and that he ought to think of bestowing
himself some other way, but being thus disobliged by the Grandees of Savoy, he
suffered Count Soisson to do what he had most mind to, to humble him, and that
Count did do what his passion persuaded.

This what past in Piemont, let us now go see a little what a doing in Germany;
France for a long time had a Months mind to the City of Strasburgh, it had
defeated them a number of its measures during the late War, and France had so
well felt the importance of that place to resolve upon the having it, cost it
never so much: To speak of having it by force, looked a little difficult, and to
do that a War must be openly declared, and the adjacent Princes round about
would have engaged in her defense. The easier way then seemed the getting it by
trick: A Resident they kept at Strasburgh, in Character more of Spy then public
Minister, whose Business was to observe all that past; he had given the King
often times account no good was to be done till those Burgemasters of the Town
in present station were out of place, when new came to be made, had by that
time gained a great many of the Votes, got Persons elected to the Magistracy
affection'd to the Interests of France, ready fitted to make sale of their
Country for a piece of Money, with these after that, he strikes a Bargain for
the delivery of the Town upon the first occasion, and they for their Reward to
have each a Hundred Thousand Crowns a Man. The Market being thus set, these
Traitors give the Town to consider the great Burdens of their Debt they stood
charged with occasioned by her vast Expenses incurred in the late War, and that
now in time of Peace they should reduce the Garrison which was too numerous:
That the King of France, whom they had the most cause to fear, had his whole
thoughts took up toward Italy, whither he had drawn the best part of all his
Forces, and that before he could march them back again they should have time
enough to implore the assistance of their Neighbors, whose proper concern in
their preservation was too great not to afford them aid; happen what would they
had the Winter before to look about them, which was now at hand: That the King
was great way distant from them, as indeed he was, and Summer then near spent,
there was no manner of likelihood, he durst undertake any thing actually that
season, and by the means save a good Sum of Money in their Purses; that when
Spring time came, they then should see what other measures were fittest to be
taken.

The advice took with the People, who were all for the sparing point, and for
all the ablest men amongst them could formally oppose what the People once
would have of necessity to be, there was no withstanding, one part of the
Garrison must then be dismissed, and which was remarkable of those the Forces of
the Eldest standing: But as the King of France lay perdue, but for the
occasion, took Journey forthwith from Fountain-bleau at the same time caused
his Men to draw down with expedition and invests the City, at a time they
imagined him in the midst of his Kingdom. Some playing with the Cannon there
was upon both sides, to take off all suspicion off Intelligence, which hindered
not, but those of Strasburgh well enough understood themselves betrayed. And
tho they now understood so with the latest, they yet entertained thoughts of
making a Defense: But a rabble of People hired at the same time by the French
Resident, or it may be as well by the Burgemasters themselves came flocking to
the Townhouse, crying out for a surrender of the Town, which otherwise would
be suddenly consumed by the Fire of the Booms, and by the red hot Bullets. The
Burgemasters soon listn'd to that demand, cause beat a Parley, set up the White
Colors for token of a general readiness to capitulate, and in a word to say
all, yields up the Town.

I do not condemn France, for an act of this importance, since not of humor to
matter much her Faith in point of Treaty; but what I am most scandal'd at, to
have the Face to color it with a show of Justice. The Emperor indeed having
sent Count Mansfeld to complain of the Breach of Peace, was answered that they
much wondered the Emperor would concern himself, where he had not to do, that
it was but lawful for the King to reduce a rebellious City: That Strasburgh, as
the Capital of Alsace did belong to him, by Virtue of the Munster Treaty, and
if he did not lay hold on it sooner 'twas because he had more pressing work in
Hand: But any would but answer me, if that City had been granted him as
pretended, why entertained he there his public Ministers so long time, why did
he in the last War treat with her in Order to her remaining Neuter, and why so
often complaining of her not remaining so? But all that France can say upon the
subject, is indeed not so much as worth an answer, and so I proceed to her
Enterprises elsewhere: The taking of Strasburgh opened the Eyes of a great many
German Princes, lulled for a long time like England in a profound Sleep. Every
one was for revenging the injury, but when they came to act according there was
none but met with a Difficulty and Lion in the way, one had no Money to begin a
War, another for not hazarding his Men, which he reserved for some other time,
another he would first know, to whom the Town should fall when retaken; in
short, if any seemed to be accorded together 'twas but as they conspired each
by their mutual ill conducts in the twisting of Cords for their own Bondage. In
the mean while France lost not her good time thus in unuseful Discourses:
During the last War had all along kept a correspondence with Teckely, by the
help of one Bohan of Ardenn by Nation, and whom I remember to have seen a
Lieutenant of Horse in the French Army. He afterward was in Service with the
Pole, but being reformed upon the Peace made between the Port and that Nation,
went to seek his Fortune with Teckely, who took care to advance him, for that
besides being a Man of good parts, was very likely to make a good Officer; some
three or four years since he had been in France, discoursed the Ministers, and
settled there correspondence with them, that being called upon to make good his
Word he had given them, ordered so his matters, as to content their
expectations, and to the purpose; Teckely engages to give diversion in Hungary,
and that he might be the better in condition to bring in the Turks, has granted
him great supplies of Money, and far greater promised him, if once able to put
in execution, the thing he had undertaken.

This Business has been so generally known, that it is not to be doubted, by any
who have had the least instruction of what passes in the World: Letters went
from France to Germany, from Germany to Bohan by the means of a Secretary, to a
certain Envoy the King there entertained, and from Bohan to Teckely: The
Secretary lay long by the heels for this Business, and had not the King of
France clapped up Count Mansfeld's Secretary in requital, he had not been freed
upon so easy a reckoning; but he being committed to the Bastille, and told he
might be sure to have the same usage, whatever the other had at the hands of
the Emperor, obliged him quickly to post some a way to Vienna to give notice:
The Emperor upon that stopped any further proceedings, and rather chose to
forgive the Guilty, then destroy the Innocent; yet to let see how sensible he
was of the Injury, had the Prisoner let loose, but at Brisac, where for the
greater Marks of Infamy he was brought upon a Cart, bolted with Irons Hand and
Foot, and under Guard sufficient; 'twas feared France provoked by the
Treatment, might do as much to Count Mansfeld's Secretary; but whether out of a
better knowledge of her self, or that she feared offering violence to the Right
of Nations, of which I must needs say she is a most Religious Observer, he was
let go out of the Bastille, without using of any Reprisals in the case, and
even suffered to continue in Paris, where I have been told he yet remains.

The Mighty Huff that followed after the taking of Strasburgh being vanished
into Air: France as I said before, whose Stomach still mended at the sight of a
fresh Dish, began again in Right of her Dependencies, which in proportion to
her greedy Belly she extended, to demand one part of Liege, even to the Moity
of its Capital City, mean while as a Country frontier to Germany, as well as
the Low Countries, and for the designs she had on both it was expedient for her
purpose to meet with no resistance, she had during the late Wars, thrown down
all the Forts, and dismantled the Walls, already was in possession of the
Castle of Dinan, by force of an Article in the Nemiguen Treaty by which the
Spaniards lay under an Obligation to procure them the Propriety of from the
Elector of Cullen, Prince and Bishop of Liege, to whom it of Right pertain'd,
and the same to get ratified at the Diet of Ratisbonne, or otherwise to give
them Charlemont in stead. The Spaniards not able to prevail with the Bishop of
Cullen, to dismember the place from off his Country, or rather France having
underhand hindered him from dismembring to have always pretext in hand to be
tormenting of the poor Spaniard with, when they so pleased: Besides, the Diet
of the Empire would consent to no such alienation; France finding all these
obstacles lay daily pressing of the Spaniards to put Charlemont into their
Hands, according to the Tenure of the Treaty; the Spaniards they hung back all
they could, as if they had foreseen what would come on it. But at last seeing
France, who well knew how to make her use of the misunderstandings of one and
the other, threatened to fall downright upon Flanders if they made not good their
Engagements, Charlemont was delivered, which is one of the best places France
is this day in possession of, though possessing of a great many good ones. When
once Charlemont was in their Hands, the redelivering of Dinan, was no more
mentioned, and so blocks up Namur by the Meuse, that when she pleases, can
hinder any thing from coming to it by Water carriage: For as Mistress of the
whole Liege Country, I know not which way Namur can receive relief, but on the
Land side. The Spaniards might complain their Heart out of being thus dealt
with France, was never the more concerned, but the contrary, the first to cry
out, The Spaniards had not performed to them their Peace of Nimeguen, since as
yet they could not oblige them to a rendidition of the County of Alost, which
of Right did to them belong.

All the Electors, bordering upon the Rhine, had a Crow to pull with France,
about her Right of Dependence by the help of it pretending to swallow all
places that lay commodious for her purpose, but when the thing demanded was
had, or indeed the thing she would give her self, like the Fire which having
consumed all near to it insensibly spreads it self to places more remote, so
she having laid her clutches upon an infinite Tract of Country pushes on her
designs upon the very Capital Towns of the Electoral Princes; to that effect
alleged she that the ground where stood the Stables belonging to the Elector
of Mayence did appertain with all the Hame, Country Soil, remarkable for the
excellent Rhenish that there grows: Her pretentions upon the City of Cullen,
and upon that of Mayence, bounds not with so small a Business; France
maintained that as these two Cities were much increased by length of time, all
that had been built for Four or Five preceding Ages; was built upon what was
granted her by Virtue of the Treaty, that therefore the buildings must be
demolisht, and the City restrained again to its Ancient limits, or the
Proprietors of those Houses from thence forward to pay Allegiance to the Crown
of France.

These Things thus acted by that King, nothing more could show how extremely
they were deceived who said he aimed so much at having his Son chose King of
the Romans, so far was he from designing that he should ever arrive at the
Empire, that 'twas his Business to give it rather an absolute overthrow; and so
began first with the Electors, that for the future such a thing as Emperor
might be no more in Nature.

The Emperor, the Princes of the Empire, the Spaniards, and in fine, all those
of the Cordial Allies saw but too plain the tendency of all these Designs; but
it seems such was the Fate of Europe, whilst they lost whole years in
deliberating about triffles, France brings them under in the mean while, and
prepares their Chains, whose weight is known by none, but by those they load:
For in fine, her own Ancient Subjects, and those very Men, who daily spend
themselves to the last drop of their Blood in assisting them to compass their
intentions meet with the same sort of Treatment is met to others, and to begin
with those who serve in their Armies must be understood are all obliged to make
a profuse Expense till their all be whole run out, when she Knows they have
nothing left them, they pick a Fob-quarrel as one may call it, are after all
glad to take to an Hospital for the final recompense of Service. It Is for that
end, has she truly built, and that a most sumptuous one, but which stands them
not in no great matter of keeping, having laid hold on certain Lands which the
particular Devotion of some People had given toward the relief of Lepers, and
converted to the use of that Hospital, but as those Rents suffice not for the
maintenance or at least will have it so supposed, she detains in her Hands a
certain Sum from both of the pay of Soldier and Officer, and that way makes
them purchase their Places beforehand which each is very well pleased to do for
that they are satisfied, thither they all must come and lay their Bones. And
those out of her Service have not a much better time on it, for though not
obliged to so great an Expense as others are, they squeese them to little by
little till they have squeezed out the last of what they have. And though they
have continued some time in Peace, they have diminisht nothing of their Taxes,
so that their King is the only Gainer by the War, all besides losers.

The Franch County he has added to his Provinces with a great many more several
Conquests, which have very much augmented his Revenue, which by his several new
impositions he has greatly added to, readier to lay more on then to suppress
the Old. Now if they who serve, and who serve him not have so much to suffer,
there yet remains another sort of People in that State who certainly are yet
much more to be pitied: I mean those of the Reformed Religion, who must endure
on all sort of outrageous violences, for tho they do not outright put them to
death by the Hands of a Hangman, as they are daily made to perish by little and
little, their death is but the crueller in that it is the more languishing, and
have for all that never given but Eminent proofs of their Fidelity and
Allegiance; and though when Henry the Fourth came to the Crown did he desert
them, it came not into their Thoughts to do as much by him, which at that time
had wholly ruined his Affairs; some time they did remain quiet, and enjoyed the
benefit of their Edicts, but just it was they who were the great disturbers of
Europe, should too disturb a company of poor unhappy wretches, excluded for
ever from all Marks of Honor and places of trust, have this however to comfort
themselves, that for their Religion it is that they suffer. Amongst the many of
all sorts France thus undoes, whether within or without the Kingdom, the Prince
of Orange was the only, as one may say, that nosed them. And though his power
was no more then what the Commonwealth of Holland were pleased to limit him,
his great Heart was not so bounded, and was incomparably greater then his
Fortune, he never gave over remonstrating to some, that rather they should
choose to perish, then submit to Power so terribly dangerous, to other some the
absolute necessity of arming against her: many things that Prince had retrencht
himself to raise a Fund for the subsistence of some well deserving Officers,
which that State at making of the Peace had reformed, that so through necessity
of Bread, they might not be obliged to seek Employment elsewhere, and when he
had occasion for them, might know where to find them. France which knew she had
in him an Enemy she most of all feared, resolved he should feel in his Personal
concerns, a touch of her Resentment, not to say of her Injustice, his
Principality of Orange lies between Languedoc and Avignon, which as Sovereign
of, he had enjoyed, he, and his Predecessors from the time it past out of the
House of Chalon into that of Nassaw. But that King who was for suffering no
Sovereign in France, nor in Europe neither, besides himself, had the Town of
Orange dismantled; and the Prince of Orange left without any reparation, what
complaint soever at that time he made of it to the King never so Instant: But
the King stopped not there in relation to his Affairs, for having resolved to
strip him absolutely of that Sovereignty, he makes the Duchess of Nemours put
in, who by color of some foolish and idle pretenses, had the Prince cited at
Law to their Courts of Judicature, where not giving his appearance, the
Principality of Orange was adjudg'd her; no body can, no more than I, tell upon
what bottom that Decree could ground: For if by Virtue of some pretended old
Entail from the House of Chalon, to which they will say the Predecessors of the
Prince of Orange did not comply with, as it is easy to give proof sufficient
to the contrary, it is not without a likelihood of Truth to say, that tho Madam
de Nemours could make out the Title, her time was lapsed in point of claim; for
that by the Laws of that Kingdom, such at least as I have seen them in case of
Custom, the prescription of Thirty years Possession was sufficient to quiet a
Title, and that the Prince of Orange, I mean, the Prince and his Predecessors
together have enjoyed for above a Hundred and fifty years: But whether this be
so or not, it hindered not, but Madam de Nemours obtained her Decree, which tho
has for all that been since revok't, in the mean while the Prince has sent Mr.
Hemsius to Paris, to show the King the wrong done him: The States General upon
their part have particularly recommended that Affair to their Ambassador in
France, but hitherto ineffectually; and tho it is now six Months that Mr.
Hemsius is working at it, it yet appears not to have made any progress; but let
us pass to some other matter, this being but trifle in comparison with what I
have yet to say.

The King of Poland had ever been a Friend of France, 'twas by her means he got
the Crown which every foot was sending him presents, in token of her
Friendship, had given him her Order of Holy Ghost, and the only Prince she in
fine, thought well of in Europe besides. Now let us see how they came to break
with him, and at whose Door lies the fault; it is indeed with difficulty I must
discover this, but out it must being got so far there is no going back: The
Money sent by France to Teckely was no useless supply, he had for it engaged
the Turks to fall upon the Emperor; and France having due Intelligence of all
that past, both of time and place, and of the other side preferred the carrying
on of her Intregues to all other concerns, made no Bones of Soliciting the King
of Poland at that time to attack the Emperors Country upon his side, as the
right of convenience was an attractive sort of right in her Eyes, which swayed
with her, imagined it might do the same with the King of Poland, and proposed
to him the Conquest of Silesia, where in probability he was not like to meet
with any great resistance from the Moment the Ottoman Forces had made their
descent into Hungary, the King of Poland who is a sharp Prince, and who needs
no prompters to teach him his Lesson, thought it improper to his own Honor, as
to that of his Crown, to make use of the advice, on the contrary, he accepts of
an Alliance with the Emperor then proposed him by which they mutually engaged
by League Offensive and Defensive to assist each other against the Turk: France
had no sooner learnt what the King of Poland had done but her former Kindness
was immediately changed into an irreconcilable hate, sends to the Marquis of
Vitry her Ambassador in that Court a Man of Parts, and good at an Intregue, to
employ his skill to set all at work in creating misunderstandings betwixt him
and his people, and Morstein high Treasurer of Poland, who was a Pentioner of
France, and where he had thoughts to settle himself, and where he already had
purchased great possessions, assists Vitry in his design; already had they
tampered with some of the discontented Senators, who talked at no lower rates
then the obliging the King of Poland to relinquish the Government. For the
purpose already cast their Eyes upon a Person they had designed the Throne to
in his stead; When as good fortune would have it, the King of Poland
intercepted a Letter of Morstein's writ in Ciphers, he sends for him forthwith,
and having inquired of him the meaning of the Letter, and finding he
endeavored to shift the Truth, bid him give the Key, Morstein replied 'twas
with his Wite, which forced the King to send for her, when she came, and found
for what the King had sent for her, told, she had burnt the Key, and not being
able to get out any better account, commanded the Commitment of them both under
a strong Guard till he sifted the affair a little more narrowly: I shall say no
more upon this Chapter; every one knows the French Ambassador convinced of
Tampering in the Business, a certain Senator out of pure love to his King and
Country was bold enough to say in full assembly, speaking of Morstan, that for
attempts of a less nature the Turks had given Two hundred Bastinadoes to an
Ambassador of France, and 'twas his Opinion, Mr. De Vitry deserved four
hundred: The King of Poland, a sagacious Prince, and great Politician, would
suffer him to say no more, for fear the heat he was in might transport him too
far, hindered also the Entry of his Opinion upon their public Records,
contenting himself to let Mr. De Vitry know he had strained his Character of
Ambassador; Mr. De Vitry remained not long after this in Poland, and if ever
he have Embassy elsewhere, I make no doubt the Princes they fend him to, will
take due care to watch his Water. I have formerly touched upon some
circumstances of Luxemburg, but as insensibly I fell to other subjects, it is
yet not unseasonable to relate what was the success, though to have done
things, exactly methodical it should have been before handled. As the Conquest
of Strasburgh, and the acquisition of Casal had strangely alarmed both Emperor
and Spaniard, had been instant with all their Neigbouring Princes to use their
Endeavors for their regaining of them again, but as some were feeble in all
respects, others gained by the French, they remitted all to the Diet of
Franckfort, where whole Months were spent in canvasing a Passport, four or
five Months more took up in a debate whether they should speak Latin, high
Dutch or French, that so far from hopes of some Redress that way our Disease
became the more incurable. These delatories then making the Imperialists and
Spain despair of gaining their point by means of the Diet, they by concerted
Measures march their Forces toward Strasburgh and Casal, which the French was
then beginning to fortify, and which lay almost every where open for that the
old works had been thrown down to put new in the room: The Emperor and Spaniard
were but in an ill condition to go through with any thing they undertook. But
the King of France newly settled in his Conquest of those two places, imagining
they marched not their Forces but with some design, and might not be without
holding some private Intelligence in both the Towns, raises the Blocus of
Luxemburgh to have Forces in readiness to oppose.

Now as he was willing to have the thanks of that action, sends for the Marquis
of Fuentes Ambassador of Spain, to tell him, that upon the advice he had
received the Turk was falling upon Hungary, he thought good to withdraw his
Forces from Luxemburg, that so the King of Spain might have the greater liberty
to assist the Emperor: The Marquis of Fuentes who knew well enough what to
think of the Business, made his Compliment of thanks to his Majesty
notwithstanding, as an act of great grace and favor, but amongst Friends where
he could be free, would be telling them what was the real cause of so great a
change, which was in every Bodies mouth already who had but the least
smackering in public Affairs: And indeed if I may be allowed a little to argue
the point, who is it does not see the art of this management was too too gross
to pass upon good Eyes? For if true, France had such good natured, and such
pious considerations, why has she since contradicted them by so many of her
actions to the contrary? why a correspondence with Teckely? why Intregues
carried on in Poland? why those Alliances with Denmark and Brandenburgh? why
Princes so warmly plied to draw them to her side? And in short, why those Huffs
at the Imperial Diet, if they consent not to her pretensions? I know before
hand what answer I shall have, I know nothing less will be allowed neither in
regard to Teckely nor to the King of Poland, that to what concerns the rest
will be answered, it was the Masterpiece of a Politic King versed in
King-craft, and the Arts of Government to be making sometimes such sort of
Alliances which have their use, not so much in order to the support of War
abroad amongst his Neighbors, as to hinder his Neighbors from carrying the
War home to his own door. I do know, as I said, the unthinking part of Mankind
may be put upon in disowning of the one, and in giving some kind of gloss to
palliate the other, but I would a little fain know if they can answer this too
which I am now about saying, France was willing to raise the Blocus of
Luxemburg a whole year before the Turks came down upon Hungary, and when
effectually they came with a Vengeance he frames a Camp in Alsatia, to hold the
Emperor in play, makes another in Flanders, to oblige Spain to be upon her
Guard, a Camp upon the River Soar he orders, to frighten the Electors, and in
fine, has another Camp drawn upon the Saonne to keep the rest of Europe in a
Jealousy: France would show to the World she becomes less rapacious upon the
considerations of the great misfortunes that hung now over the Head of
Christendom, and when those misfortunes are actually befallen her, it then
Thunders, Threats and Rants, and lets the Diet be roundly told he only will
give but such certain short day to grant her injust pretentions in and if not
then granted would do her self that right by force of Arms: And to be doing as
well as saying, presents with a great Army upon the Frontier, ready at a
mouthfull to swallow several of the Spainish Provinces; War indeed they cannot
be said to make, but make altogether as much mischief, by their hindering those
Princes which she just dreaded as she did the Turk, from employing their Forces
in favor of the Emperor: The Emperor indeed himself obliged to leave his to
guard the Rhine, whilst a Company of Infidels invades his Dominions, ravages to
the very Heart of his Country, and carries off for Slaves a hundred Thousand
Souls, burns his Palaces, lays waste the Country round, and in conclusion claps
Siege to Vienna, his Capital City, and place of Residence.

But I perceive not all this while, that having but now documented others, I
insensibly fall into the same Error my self I would have them avoid: I fall off
arguing the point, as if every one could not do it as well without me, let us
have done then with these kind of entertainments, and go on to our Examine of
other places whether France aspiring to the Universal Monarchy be Truth, or
Fiction, or rather let us see if she already usurps not upon the right of
Sovereigns as if she actually were the Mistress of the World: Let us see what
she is about, with her Mines in all the Courts of Europe; not that I pretend to
say Policy is a thing forbidden amongst Princes, but that her meaning may no
more be doubted of, every one can tell what an Errand she sent the Republic of
Genoua, whose Coat she fain would pick a hole in, sends word she will not have
her put her Gally's out, lest they should come to join with those of Spain, if
otherwise should take it for an act of Hostility, and should use her
accordingly as an Enemy declared: The Hollanders just so dealt with about a
Month or two since, upon the intent they had of sending some new Ships to the
King of Swede: So that over those two Commonwealths, where she has nothing to
do, she already Lords it as absolute Sovereign, she will not suffer Free
States, who have bought their Liberty with the Price of their Blood shall think
to make Alliances, and succor their Allies, and they that call themselves the
eldest Sons of the Church can yet suffer an Alliance with her most mortal
Enemy: But then let us see how she deals with those that leave her Interest,
and those it self, who are mean spirited enough to adhere to her, let us look a
little upon the different Springs she sets at work to bring her matters about;
what says she not of the Duke of Bavaria, for deserting the side, and his so
very generously embracing that of the Emperor; what does she not at Liege,
where she makes it her Business to soment the Rebellion of that People against
their lawful Prince, that so the Prince not able to master them, may not with
the assistance of other Princes be in a post to make a Barrier of that City,
and stop her passage that way into the Territories of other States? What does
she not act at Cullen, where the Inhabitants are all banding one against
the other, and cutting one another Throats, whilst the Enemy is at their Gates,
ready to devour? What not at Hamburgh and Lubec, where Intregues apparent as
the Sun are carrying on to the ruin both of their Liberty and Country? What
leave they undone in the Courts of the Lunebourg Princes, where People banished
France are most in Credit, but banished after such a fashion as to return again
into that Kingdom, when they will, and privately to see, and discourse the
Ministers? Indeed what is she not brewing in the Emperors Court it self, where
she foments Jealousies among the chief, where she opens the very Cabinet
Counsels with her Silver Key, where not one resolution can be taken, but she
gets notice of, at the same time? Some may say, I discourse but of these
affairs conjecturally: I shall most willingly leave them to their own thoughts
after, saying, what I have in answer.

After the routing the Marshal of Crequi at the Seige of Treves, France lay
open to the prevailing side, there then stood no more Forces in their way, and
had they been so minded might well have carried the Terror of their Arms into
the Heart of the Country: The French were much afraid they would, and begun to
pack their most valuable goods within the walled Towns, when Mr. De Louvois
told a certain Person with whom I had particular acquaintance during the time I
was in France, and whom I have it from, that the Enemy would act no farther
that Campaign, and were then upon their drawing off; I willingly would ask now
if this was news one could reasonably well credit in the then present posture
of Affairs, if one ought not to be supernaturally gifted, if one needed not a
spirit of Revelation to be believing the contrary to what every one else had
reason to believe: But what will not a Man do, as a certain old Author has
remark't, who devotes his whole thought to become rich? To that very effect
have the Suisses took the Bridle in their Mouths by the Fort of Huninghen, and
made sale both of Liberty and Country; a Counselor of their State might
remonstrate his Heart out in full assembly, the Interest those People had to be
early in their opposition to a power, who in her ambitious thoughts devoured
Europe, the Pensioners of France soon stops his Mouth, and as they struck the
greatest stroke with that Commonwealth, must submit to what they pleased to
do: That way 'twas that Nation suffered without opposing the Franch County to
be seized by France, from whence it might have hoped the speedy assistance of a
Neighbor: I speak not of a great many more things happened of the same batch
in the time of the late Wars, will seem too superannuated, and too trifling:
For in fine, who is it, but right well knows that to be the opening Key the
French have with unlockt the Gates of so many Towns; every one can tell it is
with that Instrument she renders all undertakings to her prejudice Abortive,
and did retard the Seige of Phillipsburgh; but 'twere too much work to say here
how very useful their Coin has been in their regard, and how very prejudicial
to the World besides. And yet cannot hold from speaking of a late passage
happened in Denmark, to show she is no such squanderer neither of her Money, as
one would well imagine, Denmark becoming Pensioner to France, or say rather
took Her Money to act as France would have her, Mr. Colbert, through whose
hands the Money went designed for that Court, having fancy to try, how the Dane
would take it to have his Pension retrench't, caused write to that effect to
the French Ambassador in Denmark by the Hand of Mr. Colbert De Croissy his
Brother, whose Province it is to take care of Foreign Affairs; the Ambassador
having received his Instructions went immediately to wait upon the King of
Denmark surprised in the highest Nature, at the proceeding told him, he had no
answer to return, but should give the King of France, one by the hands of his
own Envoy then in Court, and at the same time send Directions to his Envoy to
speak to the King in the Business, and to let him know how ill he took it at
his hands: The King told the Envoy of Denmark, that he understood not what
'twas he spoke to him about, that his Embassad our had acted without order,
that 'twas never his thought neither to add nor diminish any thing in the
Treaty he had made with the King his Master, and should call home his
Ambassador to teach him undertaking thus things of his own Head, so the poor
Ambassador was Sacrificed just like the Governor of Luxemburg, disowned by the
Spaniards, as before related: France too disowns her Ambassador to preserve
Amity with the Crown of Denmark.

It now remains to inspect the cause why France so potent in her Arms, and
knowing how disunited and divided were all her Neighbors, has for all that
been so long without engaging. To this a reason is given with much facility,
nor is there in it much of puzzle.

The private Alliance she had made with the Turks, was the String to her Bow
she most trusted to, but that Alliance could not be expected should produce the
wished effect of a sudden, for the Truce then a foot between the Emperor and
the Port expired but in the Year 1682. and had a mind it should expire first
before any thing was to be undertaken, was not over sure whether the Turks,
whose Faith in that affair could not be well relied on, would effectually
declare against the Emperor, or whether would accept those very advantageous
Terms proposed by the Imperialists, ont'other hand she was upon the fortifying
of a world of places, where much time was requisite to finish the works, and
was against the Rules of common Policy, not to enter upon a War, till she had
seen those places in some probable Perfection, and thitherto truly one might do
her that right she had let slip no favorable occasion, but on the contrary had
been imprudently done to act otherwise: And indeed to show clearly her Design
was to draw her men into the Field from the very critical Minut: The Turks
began the dance with theirs, that no sooner had advice they had fallen upon
Hungary, but the King parts froms Versailles to head their Army, at the same
time a Detachment had already been drawn of those encamp't upon the Saone, with
orders for their March toward the Frontier, and nothing now in Mouths of the
French, but the beseiging of Cullen or Philipsburgh, when all of a sudden a
very extraordinary piece of news altered the resolutions of that Prince: he had
heard the Hungarians had abandoned the pass at Raab, and that the Turks without
the least of stopping at Raab, or Comorra, as was pretended they would have
stopped at, advance on with an innumerable, vast Army toward Vienna, which they
had determined to beseige: Now France was well enough satisfied the Turks
should make Diversion, but sorry they should make themselves Master of the
Empire which he now looked on as his proper Patrimony: France trusted to their
beseiging Raab and Comorra places of great strength both by Art and Nature, and
that they would spend both their time and pains before they gained their point,
in the interim made sure of doing his own Business, and to oblige the Electors
seeing themselves on all hands so surrounded with Enemies to condescend to what
she pleased her self: Hoped after the reinforcing his own, with the Forces of
the Empire, to march them straight up to the Turk, and force him to a Battle or
to retire home again: Noble designs of a great Prince, and brim full of
Ambition; But learning as I said, the Turks had laid Seige to Vienna was
obliged to take new measures: To that effect he found it was no more to his
purpose to set upon the Empire which another was about taking the possession of
by the taking of a single Town: For as that was the only place of Defense it
was possible for him indeed to have caused a great deal of desolation, and
terror of his side, but was the wrong way to settle in the Throne.

France then chose rather at a distance to take her prospect of what might be
the event of the Seige of Vienna, and send her Creatures about still
representing to all the Princes of the Empire, how the Emperor was but a weak
Prince, fitter to hold beads then a Scepter, and to fit in a Cloister by much
then at Helm: That the Empire was Tottering, and even now ready to fall under
his conduct, that henceforth they would need rather a stout, vigorous Prince,
which with a Thousand good qualities besides understood perfectly well that of
Leading of an Army: That if the Turks come once to get Vienna, they ought all
to expect no better then absolute destruction: That their true and only means
to be secured from so imminent a mischief was to implore the aid of the King of
France, who would soon listen to it, provided they elected the Dauphin King of
the Romans, as 'twas a thing he had been instant with them for of a long time,
they should no sooner have answered his desire in that particular, the Face of
their Empire should soon see changed, that the Kings Forces lay ready at their
Gates for their nearer assistance, and would in short retrive the Empire again
into that flourishing condition it had ever yet been in under its greatest
Emperors.

Prince William of Furstenburgh Bishop of Strasburgh de voted wholly to the
Interests of France, who for some Years has been laboring to deliver up his
Country, was one of those most powerfully endeavored to insinuate these kind of
things: But the aversion the Empire had for the French in general, was so
great, and so universal, so far from calling of them into their help, would
have much sooner called in the Turk: And indeed the Turk troubles no Body for
his Religion sake, leaving every one to his Liberty of Conscience, keeping
strictly to their word, where they once give it, and provided their Tribute be
but paid which you promise them, Exact no more, no Leeches there preying upon
the Blood of the People to be seen as in France swarming under the Name of
Partisan, or Farmers of the Kings Revenue, there no laying of new Taxes upon
every sort of thing, or when necessity obliges them to lay any are taken off
again, as the necessity ceases, the Soldier is not there ill handled, nor the
Ministers at every turn threatening to lay them by the heels; on the contrary
the Sword-Man is in great esteem amongst them, and a brave Fellow there is not
without his Mark of Distinction: In a word they had heard so much of the French
Domination and way of Government that they had resolved as one Man to stand it
out to the last then ever have submitted.

In vain then did all these good French men take the pains in giving out as I
was saying they did: The King then seeing he lost his time that way, resolved
upon the employing it somewhere else to better purposes, whilst the occasion
was opportune; his Pretentions to the County of Alost he still kept up, and so
marches to Flanders side with his Forces, proceeds to nominating of his general
Officers, which he is never accustomed to do but upon the neck of a War, and in
fine making all ready to enter upon the Country: But just upon the point of
putting his design in execution, God was pleased to take out of this World the
Queen his Wife, one of the best Princesses upon Earth, after a sickness of two
or three Days.

Her Disease appeared not visibly dangerous, and was but a swelling, which
kindly enough inclined to suppuration, but the Doctors instead of letting
Nature have her Course which was even ready to throw off the malignity as I was
saying, having through Ignorance let her Blood, contrary to the Opinion of Mr.
Fagon her chief Physician, it struck in again to the Heart, and killed her: So
soon as the Queen's condition was perceived Dangerous, the King had notice, who
came presently to her Chamber, and seemed most extremly sensible, threw himself
upon her Bed, with the Tears in his Eyes speaking to her in Spanish, but the
Queens Eyes now setting in Head, and Death approaching died in his Arms without
being able to answer: They had an Hour or two before given Emetick Wine but had
not strength enough to bear it, that instead of doing her good, served only but
to shorten her time, they forced the King away from her, who lay taking on like
wild in her Arms, and the Queen they left upon the Bed of State, till the next
Day, then put her into a Coffin of Lead, placing instead of the Body a waxen
Image made in resemblance, which for Nine days together was served up as if yet
alive, or rather as if it was the Queen her self: She was afterward carried to
St. Dennis the ordinary Burying place of the Kings of France, with a
Magnificence truly Royal: Sixteen thousand Flambeauxs, Six hundred poor People
clad in Black, besides the Servants of her own Family, and those of all the
Princes, and Princesses of the Blood Royal, an infinite of other Persons of the
first quality, with an endless train of Coaches. Her Heart had been carried
some days before to Val-de grace, and placed in the Nuns Quire, right against
the Chapel, where is kept that of the Queen Mother.

Two or three days before the Queen died, there happened a thing of an odd
Nature enough: That Princess who was extremely addicted to her Religion, having
called for an Almanac to her Bedside to see when such a Holyday would fall to
which she had a particular Devotion, perceived the Composer of the Almanac in
his Predictions upon the Month July, foretold the withdrawing of a Prince, and
Death of some great Lady who would be much regretted, and as the Prince of
Condy's leaving the Court, showed perfectly he had hit extreme right, She turns
her self to Madam La Marshalle de Humiers Lady of her Bedchamber, who stood at
her Beds-head and asked if 'twas not she they meant; The particular of this I
had from Madam La Marshalle d' Humiers her self, and since have had the
curiosity to view the Almanac, where those very two things are literally to
be found. However the grief of the King slopt his Flanders expedition, retired
immediately to St. Clou, his Brothers the Duke of Orleance's Country House,
from thence to Fountain-bleau, where in vain they strive to divert him, as the
Queen took great pleasure in that place made him often call to mind his Queen,
tears are frequent in his Eyes, and nothing but length of time can make him
forget her.

Notwithstanding they give out, he persists still in his great designs the
Truth of which we shall soon Know with a little patience: But for me, I think
God sent him that affliction to move him, and that in a little time, he not
only will leave Europe in Peace, but by joining his Arms with the Christians
will force the Turk to leave the Empire in quiet, which we ought all to wish.

FINIS.
THis Book was given to the Bookseller, the Fifteenth of August, by which it is
to be seen, the Author must be well enough acquainted with the Business of
Alost, the manifesto in Relation to it being to come out upon the Saturday, and
her Majesty dying but the day before, etc.


