Formerly of Coleman-street. At the Hospital Gate in Smithfield, next door to
the Coffee-house, lives a Doctor of Physic; who,
FIrst, in Astrology, Resolves all Lawful Questions belonging to the Body or
Estate of Man; as Life, whether long or short; happy or unhappy; rich or poor?
what part of the world is best to live in? If good to follow the advice of a
Friend? if good to go a Journey? Whether Reports or Rumors be true or false?
Whether a Woman be with Child, or ever shall have Children? Whether one shall
fall into the danger they fear? Servants whether real or no? What kind of
Person one shall marry, and how often? or, if have the Party desired, and the
time when? Whether the Sweet-hearts Portion be great or small? Money owing, if
recoverable? Suits at Law, who shall overcome? If one shall attain the
Preferment desired, and in what time? A Friend whether constant or not?
Whether one may obtain what they desire or hope for? And in short, all other
lawful Demands whose Solution depends upon this noble Art, he answers with
great certainty. He also Calculateth Nativities very exactly.

Secondly, In Physic, he has all sorts of Medicines ready prepared, fitted
for the cure of the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, Agues and Fevers of all
sorts, King's Evil, Consumptions, Rickets, Melancholy, Madness, Giddiness,
dimness of Sight, Headache, Toothach, shortness of Breath, want of Appetite,
loathing of Meats, Wind, Worms, Barrenness in Women, Pains and Gripings in the
Breast, Bowels or Joints. He puts a speedy stop to any Cold, Cough, Defluxion
of Rheum, Vomiting, spiting of Blood, or the greatest Looseness that can be. He
cures the Running of the Reins in as short a time as any; taking away all
Soreness, Swelling, Heat, sharp pains, and stop page of Urine: Likewise the
French-Disease to Admiration. With all other Distempers belonging to Men,
Women or Children; Resolving what the Disease is; and whether curable or not.
Lastly, Let none of what quality soever be afraid or ashamed to come to him,
(be they either diseased in Body or Mind) for he is a person of that
Faithfulness, that he will not promise more than he can perform.

He is to spoken with (alone) from morning, till four in the afternoon, at the
place aforesaid.

H. CRAWFORD

Published by Authority.


