Wednesday February 13. 1655, At the Council at Whitehall.
FOrasmuch as for many years last past Complaints have been made of the
excessive charges, with which the office of sheriff has been burdened, partly
through the extraordinary expenses of some preceding sheriffs, whose example
has drawn on others thereunto, to the discouragement of such as shall be
employed in such a public service. For preventing whereof for the future, and
to the end the Charge of such as are employed in that public office may be
lessned as much as may be, Ordered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and the
Council, That the Major Generals do appoint in the respective Counties within
their charge a Troop of Horse of the standing Army or Militia Forces to attend
the Sheriff at the Assizes, or such number of them, and for so long time as the
sheriff shall direct to wait upon the Judges, and perform such other services
as have been usually required of the sheriffs men at the Courts, or otherwise
during the said Assizes. And to take care that they do demean themselves with
all respect and diligence in the said service. That no gratuity or present be
given by any Sheriff to the Judges, Clerks of Assise, or any their Officers or
servants, nor be by them received, nor any table or entertainment kept for
them, or for the Justices of the Peace at the Assizes, at the charge of the
Sheriffs.

Wednesday February 13. 1655.
ORdered by his Highness and the Council, That this Order be forthwith printed
and published.

Henry Scobel, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to his Highness, 1655.


