A true and plenary RELATION Of the great defeat given by my Lord FAIRFAX
Forces unto my Lord of NEVVCASTLES Forces in Yorkshire, January 23:

Which was the absolutest and considerablest Victory that was obtained since
the beginning of these unhappy WARS.

Written by THOMAS CROMPTON Master of Arts, and one of the Chaplains of the
Army for the KING and Parliament, who was there present at the BATTLE.

Together, with the names of the Popish Captains, Lievtenants, Ensigns and
their Colors, which are taken PRISONERS.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop next door to
the King's Head Tavern in Fleestreet, Feb. 6. 1642.

A true and plenary RELATION Of the great defeat given by the Lord Fairfax,
unto my Lord of Newcastles Forces, January 23.
WHereas I understand that some imperfect Relations of the taking of Leeds
aforesaid, have been so divulged, that in this scribbling Age the Press
perchance might take notice of them; therefore to satisfy the World of the
truth of it, and it shall be nothing but what of mine own knowledge I know to
be true.

Upon the 23 of January aforesaid being Monday, Sir Thomas Fairfax General of
the Forces, marched from Bradford six miles distant from thence, with six
Troops of Horse, and three of Dragooners, under the command of Sir Henry Fowls
Baronet, Commissary general of the Horse, and 600 Musketeers with 1200
Club-men under the command of Sir William Fairfax Colonel, and then commander
of the Foot: with these we marched from Bradford aforesaid, and approached
near the Town, about one of the clock, at which time sir Thomas sent a
Trumpeter unto sir William Savill, who commanded in chief there under the Earl
of New castle, His Majesty's General for the Northern parts, requiring the
Town to be delivered unto him for the King and Parliament, but his answer was
as wise as himself; for he said, That he wondered that sir Thomas was so
uncivil as to come so near the Town before he had made him acquainted with
it, and that there might be more virtue in his Actions, than in that paper he
sent before he came there.

Whereupon, Sir Thomas set his battle in order, gave out the word of
Cognizance, which was Emanuel, and to the Commander of the Foot, with his
Commissary general, their stations charges and commands riding from place to
place, and encouraging his men to fall on resolutely, which being encouraged by
the valor of their Leaders, they did accordingly: and al hough most of them
were but unexperienced fresh water Soldiers taken up about Bradford and
Hallifax but upon the Saturday before, yet they came on resolutely and
valiantly, especially the Musketeers under the command of Sir William Fairfax,
Commander of the Foot, who valiantly in the head of his Regiment, and the face
of his enemies, stormed the Town, whereupon began very hot service, the
Soldiers playing very sharply from their Trenches and Works upon our men
without; but they were answered with such courage and resolution, that
notwithstanding their uttermost endeavors, and the assistance of their Drakes
which were often discharged upon us, we killed their Canonier, and after two
hours fight beat them from their Works, and when bullets flew about our ears
as thick as hail; Sir Thomas Fairfax, sir William Fairfax, sir Henry Fowls,
with sir Thomas Norcliffe Captain of the Dragooners, made way by dint of sword
and force of arms into the Town; neither must I forget the valiant carriage of
Sergeant Major Forbes, who was as forward on the other side of the Town,
whereof now by Gods Almighty power we were possessed of, and found therein two
Drakes, with good store of Ammunition, besides we took 600 prisoners that were
common Soldiers, whose oaths were taken never to fight again in this cause;
and so were dismissed; also there was taken prisoners which are now in custody,
Six Captains, viz. Papists, Hemsworth, Waterhouse, Witherington, Thurlewell,
Carnabie, Hillary. Seven Lievetenants Papists, Beomonde, Audesly, Law, Bates,
Burrell, Garret, Maude. Ensigns with their Colors, Benson, Stratsley,
Erington, Bates, Winburne, Mackinson: Besides Sergeants and Gentlemen of note,
with 400 Arms; their Troops fled, and one was intercepted and taken upon that
side the Bridge; but Sir William Savill their valiant General, either for
fear, or religion fled and so escaped, although Sir Thomas made diligent search
for him, and sent out his Emesaries and Officers for that purpose, yet they
returned a non est inventus upon him. Thus have you a true Relation of that
battle, wherein the hand of God was wonderfully seen to be with us; for they
were more within the Town which was well Fortified, then we without, for they
had two strong Regiments under the command of Sir William Savill, and Colonel
VVitherington, four Troops of Horse, and three of Dragoners, with good store
of Ammunition, which we shall make to appear to them that shall come to fetch
it from us. Thus by Gods assistance we obtained a glorious victory, which has
struc^e such a terror in the Earl of Newcastles Army, that the several
Garrisons at Wakefield, Sherburne, and Pomfret are all fled, some few excepted
that remain in Pomfret Castle to keep it.

Gloria Deo.
FINIS.

