BY HIS EXCELLENCY.
FOrasmuch as diverse of this Nation, notwithstanding their Peaceable living and
abiding at their several Habitations, within the Quarters of the Army, under
my Command; Do (contrary to the Laws and Customs of War) pass into the Enemies
Quaters, and do hold correspondence with, and give Intelligence to them, and do
(under pretense of Paying Debts and Rents, and other unwarrantable Pretenses)
transport and carry into the Enemies Quarters, Horses, Arms, Moneys, Plate,
Provisions, and other Goods and Gear, of considerable value. These are
therefore strictly to require from henceforth, That no person presume or
attempt (without License in that behalf first had and obtained in writing,
under Hand and Seal) to pass into the Enemies Quarters, or do give Intelligence
unto, or hold correspondence with them or any within their Quarters, upon any
pretense whatsoever, under pain of being proceeded against as Spies; and that
none do send, transport, or carry, or cause to be sent, transported or carrie^
into the Enemies Quarters, any Horses, Arms, Moneys, Plate, Provisions, or any
oth^^ Goods or Gear, of what kind, or nature soever, as they and any of them
will answer the contrary, upon the penalty of forseiting double the sum of
Money, and double the value of the said Plate, Provisions, Goods, and Gear so
sent, or attempted to be sent, transported o^ carried, and such further course
(against their persons) to be taken, as to justice shall be thought fit. And
for encouragement to all such as shall discover, or apprehend, any who shall be
offenders in any of the forementioned particulars, I do hereby declare, that
one Moity of whatsoever forfeitures shall be adjudged to be paid by any such
Persons, so discovered or apprehended, shall be paid to those that shall
discover or apprehend them, as aforesaid. And that none may pretend ignorance
hereof; It is hereby Ordained that the same be Proclaimed at the Market-Cross
in Edinburgh, and in the other Towns within the Quarters of the Army.

O. CROMWELI


