A WILDERNESS OF TROUBLE, Leading to a Canaan of Comfort.

OR The Method and Manner of God's dealing with the Heirs of Heaven in the
Ministry of the Word.

Wherein is showed, How the Lord brings them into this Trouble, supporteth them
under it; and delivers them out of it: So that none finally miscarry.

By W. CROMPTON, Minister of the Gospel.

Hos. 6.1. He has torn and he will heal us, he has smitten and he will bind
us up. LONDON, Printed by J. D. for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, to be sold by Mich. Hide, Bookseller in Exon. 1679.

To his Honored Friend Mr. JOHN MAYN, Of the City of EXON, MERCHANT.
THat there is a Summum Bonum, or chief Good to be enjoyed by Man, all sorts
acknowledge; Philosophers and Divines, Ancient and Modern. Desired by all (as
naturally as the greatest flames and the little sparks of Fire ascend to their
Sphere) either confusedly, or distinctly; attained only by some, and in the
fruition whereof, true Happiness consists. But what that is, all agree not.
Varro out of Philosophers, and St. Augustine out of Varro, makes mention of two
hundred eighty and eight Opinions about it. Some placing it here, others there,
and have accordingly pursued their own conceits. Error in this Point is not
more common than dangerous, being attended with variety of Uncertainties; every
one striving to maintain, what he does most affect; whether an independing
real-Good, apprehended and presented, by an Understanding rightly informed, or
an apparent Good only, offered by an Erring faculty. Sense and understanding in
Act, is by union between the Faculty and the Object; the Soul is said to be
what it understands; if the Object be a real Good, the Soul by virtue of that
union, has an answerable denomination. In this, Philosophy is an insufficient
Guide, looking only on this Life, and the felicity of the more ignoble part of
Man, du^ing his abode here in the Visible World. A supernatural Revelation is
needful. Reason cannot fathom, nor the light of Nature reach unto the end for
which Man was made. Divinity discovers this, and Faith comprehends it; That Man
was created for God, to be like and enjoy him. Christ is the Means to bring
this to pass. Man is made perfect, but mutable. He falls, Christ steppeth in
to raise him again. A new Covenant is established, whereof Christ as Head,
undertakes to perform Conditions. The Humane Nature must be united to the
Divine, in his Person, that Christ might suffer what Man had deserved, and Man
might receive what Christ merited. The Hypostatical Union is the ground or
medium of another Mystical Union, whereby every Penitent Believer is made a
partaker of the Divine Nature, and of all the privileges of Christ's
Obedience, as if they had done it in their own Persons; as, of Adoption,
Justification, Sanctification, Glory. The End was first, the Reasonable
Creature thought on next, and the Means last. All which were foreseen and
ordered by an eternal Act of the first Cause; not that for this, or this after
that; not the Means first, for the End, nor the End so first, as a motive to
the Means; but the End, Object, and Means together, according to the freedom
and counsel of his Will; foreseeing still to preserve an order in the means,
both of Precedence, and instrumental Efficiency. He willed the Law and Gospel
should be Preached, that Knowledge and Faith might be wrought in his; he willed
Faith, that they might be justified; he willed Justification, that they might
be sanctified and glorified. He willed all these jointly, that the End might be
attained after all, viz. The Communication of his own Excellency, for the
completing of Man's Felicity.

It is not these Titles therefore, can make Man happy. The line of his Life
being drawn forth with so many uncertainties, and the height of his Power laid
on so weak a foundation. At one time or other, of the best it may be said, and
the greatest on Earth may say of himself, I was all things, and yet nothing,
part of the Emperor Severus his Speech to his Council and Captains at York,
where shortly after he died; leaving behind him this Testimony, as many others
have have done, That Man's chiefest Good is not here below. The Earth in her
most glittering furniture is but Earth, Fabulous and Enthusiastic, and can
afford but brittle Happiness. Honor, Riches, Pleasure, are but deceitful Toys:
So far from being Man's happiness, that they often prove greater letts than
helps toward Happiness. Our chiefest good is Bonum immobile and immutabile:
but Riches make themselves Wings, and are uncertain; like the Swallow in Winter
season, suddenly bidding farewell, never perhaps returning again; as a word once
spoken, nescit vox missa reverti. Our chief Good is Bonum aeternum and
perfectum; while Carnal Pleasures, even the deepest here, are most empty,
frothy, and momentany; like Comets made fat with smoaks and vapors of the
Earth, and in stead of giving Light and Brightness, they bring forth Murders
and Contagions. Our chief Good is Bonum Immortale; firm and ever flourishing,
always the same; but Honor is fading, and often buried in the Dust, or quickly
swallowed up in Oblivion. Man was happy by Creation, while the prime faculties
of the Soul had that blissful Object to reflect upon the true God (...), in
whom only is found a satisfying sufficiency, to fill unto contentment, the
infinite appetite of the Soul. When man turned from the Creator to the
Creature, he lost a real for a seeming Happiness; onl^ in this happy, that the
footsteps to true Happ^^^s^ are left imprinted in the Fall: Let him but once
think whence he is fallen, and return, and he cannot miss of Happiness. No
regaining it without returning. Return, return, O Shulamite, return. How often
and earnest does the Lord call for it, as that one Thing necessary, which
should be most intended by us? How vain and empty is the Creature? How full and
solid the Creator? Deformity in the one, Beauty in the other; Bitterness in
this, Sweetness in that. To fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the whole
of Man: The Duty and Dignity, Honor and Felicity of Man; to know Thee, and
whom thou have sent, is Eternal Life: In his Presence is fullness of Joy, and at
his Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore. In him are all the Perfections of
all Creatures by way of Eminency; Quicquid convenit enti quatenus ens; illud
maxim competere in primum ens, quod est Deus: Who may be enjoyed, either by
Faith, properly termed Felicity here in the Way; or by Sense, in our Country,
more fitly called Beatitude. Here is a short and sure Way, return to God by
Christ, and be happy for ever. Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 2.10.
How this is brought about, and how it may be discerned, is the subject of the
following Discourses; unto which I have taken leave to prefix your Name; and by
this poor way endeavored to serve you, since more ample Demonstrations are
wanting to my weak Abilities. Not doubting but your Noble Disposition will be
satisfied with such ordinary Acknowledgments, I commend you to the Blessing of
Heaven, and remain,

Your Servant in Christ, W. CROMPTON.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author being very remote from the Press, and not having seen the Sheets,
it is likely some Errata's have escaped; which the Reader is entreated to
Correct, or Pardon.

HOSEA 2.14. Therefore, behold I will allure her, and bring her into the
Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.


THis, with the rest of the Chapter, is no National History, limited to the
Body, as some temporal Felicity, conveyed in a Promise to that People; but an
Evangelical Prophecy, extended to the Soul, discovering the means, and assuring
everlasting Beatitude to the Church, as under Grace. True it is, and from the
Letter of the Text we may gather, that God was good and bountiful to Israel;
but ungrateful Israel abused God's bounty. [As the fed Hawk forgets his Master,
and as the Full Moon gets farthest from the Sun; so they forgot God, and
wickedly departed from him; like ill Grounds, they cast up Thorns where Roses
were planted; they printed the steps of Sin upon Divine Clemency]. Which moved
the Lord to deprive her of his Blessings, and to send her into Captivity, by
absence to learn the worth of his Presence, and to take good leave and leisure
to bewail her own Folly. [What can he do less than forget them, so they may
remember him?] Where being oppressed, and disconsolate, as a mourning Widow,
bereft of Friends, and means to relieve her, she returns upon her self, and
complains unto God, who saw her Tears, heard her Cries, and brought her from
Babylon to Canaan, turned all her sighing into singing, and made her rejoice on
that Bed which had soaked in Tears, and made to swim again, like David, Psalm.
6.6. Repentance can turn Crosses into Comforts* and like the Philosophers
stone, make Golden Afflictions. But all this was for a further intent and
purpose, even to set forth their Sin, spiritual Bondage, and the manner of
Conversion. Under that, this was meant. And so the words are to be taken with
the best Interpreters of the manner of God's dealing in the dispensation of his
Grace to all in Covenant with him.

The ordinary Method which he observes in bestowing Grace upon Men converted
after actual Sins, is here fully discovered.

First, He convinces all those of their Sins, and that distinctly and
thoroughly, whom he intends to convert; as the skilful Surgeon searches that
Wound to the bottom, which he labors to heal. This may be gathered from the 2,
4, 5 verse. Plead with your Mother, plead; for she is not my Wife, neither am I
her Husband. Let her therefore put away her Whoredoms out of her Sight, etc. As
if the Lord should take a Prodigal aside, and say, These and these, O Man, are
thy Sins, thy Wantonness and Uncleanness, thy Oaths and Lies, thy Pride and
Covetousness; thus it is with thee; thou art the Man, that have abused my
Blessings, profaned my Ordinances, and mis-pent thy time, and which is worst of
all, have often refused Grace so seriously offered: stay now, and consider it,
what will be the end hereof? [God's Word is not like a Shadow, which
represents obscurely and confusedly; but as a Glass, or rather a Picture,
which sets forth things in their distinct Lineaments]. Which Conviction is
begun and finished, in part by the Law, and in part by the Gospel, as in the
Sequel will appear.

Secondly; He threatens and denounces deserved Judgments, if they still
persist and go on in their sinful Practices; in verse. 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Therefore, behold I will hedge up thy Way with Thorns, and make a Wall, that
she shall not find her Paths. Therefore will I return, and take away my C^rn in
the time thereof, etc. i. e. Except thou accept of Grace, now in this thy day,
except thou repent and turn to me, I will pursue thee with variety of Rods,
both privative and positive, and will never leave thee, till thou be amended or
confounded. It is Sin and Obstinacy that puts Thunderbolts into God's hand,
and provokes him to do his Work, his strange Work; and to bring to pass his
Act, his strange Act.

Thirdly; He proceeds to some melting Promises, in the 14 verse. and others
following; like Sunshine after a boisterous Storm, or some purling Dew after a
wasting heat, or refreshing Spring after a nipping Winter. The Sun of
Righteousness never loves to set in a Cloud. I will give her the Valley of
Achor for a Door of Hope: I will make a Covenant for them with the Beasts of
the Field, etc. The meaning whereof is thus much: If both the former ways, viz.
of Conviction and Affliction, shall prove ineffectual, (as indeed they would,
if the Lord should leave them there, and go no further,) if neither prevail to
bring thee home unto me, rather than thou should remain still in the State
of Nature, or in the Wilderness of Legal Terror, but almost converted; or else
after thy Confirmation of a League and Covenant with me, should totally and
finally apostatize; I will take the whole Business into my own hand, and go one
step further with thee, using such means as work infallibly, and never fail: I
will allure her into the Wilderness, etc.

Wherein are three things to be explained, all tending to the Confirmation of
the Proposition laid down in the beginning, viz.

I. The Certainty of the Work here intended: [I will allure her, and I will
speak to her].
The Lord is serious in his Offer of Grace, and infallible in working it at one
time or other, for the Conversion of all those in Covenant with him. Though it
be full of difficulty, yet it is certain for success. It is difficult,
therefore the Lord undertakes it, when no other means is able to do it; and
certainly it shall be done in his time and way. Therefore he promises and
annexeth certain binding Particles, the more to assure it in our apprehension,
(...) Therefore, behold, which Particles are diversely construed by diverse great
Divines, not unskilful in the holy Tongue, causing some obscurity about the
meaning, but more touching the Connection of these with the former words; what
dependence they have, and what Grammatical Construction they may admit. Some
take and understand them here casually only, as if their profaneness and
stubborness in Idolatry, had been the moving cause to this Evangelical Work;
but then it would follow, Let us sin, that Grace may abound. Which Devils Logic
the Apostle confuteth, Romans 6. Others take them illatively, thus: Seeing she is
grown to that height of Wickedness, so vile and so proud, that there is no hope
nor possibility of her thinking or willing by any strength of her own to
return, therefore I will make her mindful and willing to come home: [O the
never enough adored Depth of God's free Grace and super-abundant Love to his
People!] I will heal them, and lead them also, and restore Comforts unto them.
This cannot be misliked. Only a third sort may be adjoined, viz. of those who
take them adversatively also, denoting the Order in any business, as (...) in
Greek, and postea in Latin; and then the meaning is, as if the Lord had said,
Seeing the former means does it not, I will assay another; I will add my Spirit
to her Affliction, and to corporal Rods I will bring in spiritual Troubles, to
the Law, the Gospel; which shall not fail of my proposed end. Therefore,
behold, in the last place, I will undertake to do it verily, truly, undoubtedly.

Here are several useful Doctrines arising, worthy observation. Viz. Doct. 1.
That the Lord can and does turn great Sinners into eminent Saints.

He turns a Wilderness into a River. As in several Changes in the World, Stars
fall from the Firmament, to be changed into Dunghils; so here, the Dunghils of
the Earth* mount up to Heaven, to be metamorphosed into Stars. So much he
promises to do; and it is usual with him to advance them highest in his
favor, who have been least esteemed in the World. Not many wise Men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble; but God has chosen the foolish things
of the World to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. Christ's Disciples were not
fetched from among the Roman Conquerors; no Augustus, or Alexander, or high
noble Blood of the Earth gave denomination to their Pedigree; neither took they
their Rise from among the Jewish Rabbis. They were not seasoned with Athenian
Eloquence, nor beautified with any gay and splendid matters of this World. They
were obscured with Poverty, and shadowed with meanness, in respect of Name and
Gifts, of a poor contemptible Trade, even Fishermen, called from catching of
Fish, to lay out for Souls. The Lord cutteth out his Mercuries of the most
unlikely pieces of Timber, he will have his Temple built of rough and
unpolished Stones. When Jerusalem was in such misery, that she could not help
her self, no more than a poor Infant, and for others they would not, Ezekiel.
16.5. No eye pitied her, to do any thing for her, or to have any compassion
upon her; Then I passed by (says the Lord,) and looked upon thee, etc. Lo
here, Heaven smiled upon Hell! An old broken Instrument is tuned, and made
melodious; tho it be the same String, yet it is quite otherwise tuned. Has not
God chosen the Poor of this World? Jam. 2.5. He hides Treasure under the Bark
and Mantle of mean Persons, base and abject in appearance. The lost Sheep, and
sick Men, as they have most need, both in truth, and in their own apprehension,
so have they most benefit by the Physician. Did not our Savior tell the
Priests and Elders among the Jews, that notwithstanding all their Traditions
and Ceremonies, Publicans and Harlots would believe sooner, and enter the
Kingdom of Heaven before them? Mat. 21.31. And that many should come from the
East and West, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven; when the Children of the Kingdom (who had so good conceit of
themselves, as if out of danger,) should be cast into utter Darkness? Manasses
did evil in the sight of the Lord, like the abominations of the Heathen; he
built the high Places and strange Altars, he observed Times, 2 Chronicles. 33.3, 4,
5, 6. Yet the Lord brought him home at length through this Wilderness into
Canaan. Mary Magdalen was a Nonesuch of uncleanness, she was possessed with
seven Devils; yet Christ cast them out, and of a Den of Devils made her a
Temple for the Holy Spirit to dwell in. St. Paul was a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, mounted in his way to Damascus, to hale the poor Christians to
Prison; but the Lord had chosen him, and now changes the Serpent into a white
Rod. St. Austin was greatly infected with the Sin of his Country, which was as
contagious for Chastity, as the North Wind for Plants; for a great Writer,
speaking of Afric, says it was a Country of Loves, and that it was as strange
a Man should be an African, and not be an African; as to be an African, and not
to be lascivious. He had a Soul as it were of Sulphur, so much was it disposed
to take fire, that he hastened to throw himself into the midst of Flames. In
short, he fell into the Snares he desired, and was involved in wonderful
Labyrinths, where the end of one sinful Passion was the beginning of another.
But behold here an admirable sport of Providence, way-laying and contriving the
Salvation of this great Soul, who became a rare Spectacle, and worthy the
consideration of noble Spirits; for of an earthen Pot he is made a Vessel of
Gold.

Luther (in whose Conversion the Divine Power was most resplendent) of a mad
Monk, as he called himself, was made a zealous Protestant. Basilides was
sometimes a cruel Executioner of Christians, that afterward was called, and
died for the Testimony of Jesus.

Aretius speaks of a certain Man in his time, (it is no feigned Story, says
he, for I saw the Man with my own eyes) who was a vile desperate Sinner, a
Drunkard, Swearer, wanton, etc. and so continued for many years; but at length
God brought him into the Wilderness, where he laid down the flowery Crowns
which he bare on his Head, his Drunkenness, and unthrifty Riots, and enkindled
with zeal to God, lived holily, and died comfortably.

Not to mention others, who converted from a dissolute, profane Conversation,
found Mercy, and became eminent Instruments in the Church of God. Few
experienced Christians, Divines especially, but can add Instances of their own
Observation, how strangely the Lord has turned Men from Wantonness to
Chastity, from Drunkenness to Sobriety, from common Swearing to fear an Oath;
even then when they were running in a violent and deligthful motion toward
Hell.

Now, why the Lord suffers his own to run out so far before he reclaim them, we
may with reverence and submission conceive it is,

First, for the declaration of his own Goodness, both in regard of his
wonderful Power, and absolute Freedom.

Of his Power, effecting this in some without any ordinary means, as he dealt
with Abraham and Paul; in others by weak and unlikely means, as by the Ministry
of poor Fishermen, preaching the Cross: [The great God out of small Acorns
brings up huge Oaks, and usually hangs great weights on little Wires, whereby
he sets out to the view of all the splendour of his Omnipotent Agency.] And in a
third sort, he does it against all ordinary means; as when he occasions
Conversion by some Sin, Affliction, or Persecution: as the curious Alchymist
does by his Skill extract Gold and Silver out of baser Metals; and as the wise
Physician corrects poysonful Ingredients, and makes them Medicinal.

And as of his Power, so of his absolute Freedom, to do what he will with his
own, dispensing his Grace, both when, to whom, and how he will; passing by the
Great, Rich, Learned, (Stars of the first magnitude, or the greatest Letters of
the Alphabet,) and civil Formalists of the World, to pitch on poor, mean, and
ignorant Wretches. Where Sin has abounded, Grace does super-abound. Surgunt
indocti, and rapiunt Coelum etc as Augustine speaks; the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence from the poor lost Sheep; while others puffed up with their
conceited Riches, of Knowledge and Holiness, dreaming of Self-sufficiency, are
kept out, and thrust down into Hell. If he should do otherwise, and call only
those, in whose Policy and Life could be seen some outward Goodness to shine
forth, Men would believe what some cannot forbear to say* that it is the work
of Men that obliges God to call them; and if in rigor they be not worthy of
this Favor, they merit it at least in a seemliness of Equity and Congruity, as
they speak of it in the Schools of Rome. And therefore further, we may conceive
it is to proclaim the Freeness of his Grace; no natural Abilities can merit it,
nor any Sin hinder the bestowing of it. The Wind blows where it lists* Nos
solemus eligere digniores, at Deus ut ostendat suam electionem non ex nostris
meritis, sed ex sola sua gratia fieri, solitus est indigniores eligere, Zanch.
i. e. Men choose the most worthy, but the Lord chooses the most unworthy; to
show that his Choice is not grounded on our Merits, but on his own free Grace.

Secondly; It is for the Instruction of the Church. And so,

1. That no Flesh should glory in his Presence, but that the Glory might be
wholly ascribed to the Lord, whose only work it must needs be acknowledged in
such Libertines. There is nothing to merit, nor any preventing Abilities
stirring, to share with the Lord in this Work. And indeed the Lord's power is
most manifest in reclaiming such wild Prodigals, in washing such Blackmoors,
and changing such Leopards. Digitus Dei! All that see and hear, may wonder and
say, It is the Finger of God; or (as Protogenes said of a curious Line, which
he saw drawn in a Painter's Shop, None but Apelles could draw this,) none but
God could do this. It is a Work worthy of none, but of him who can do what he
will, and will do what he has purposed. This is indeed the great Miracle of
the World, to change Lions into Lambs, Sinks into Fountains, Thorns into Roses.
Mercy is never so resplendent as over Misery. The Ice of Winter makes the
Beauty of the Spring; Darkness contributes to the Luster of Light; nor is the
Sun more bright, than after an Eclipse: Thus Grace, which is the Splendour of
Eternal Light, makes it self to be seen in more triumph, where it has subdued
most Iniquity. And Praise will be more fully ascribed to him, by such as could
deserve no favor, both occasionally and practically. Occasionally, in regard
of others, who are stirred up thereby to admire his Power, to magnify his Love,
and to hope for acceptance upon their unfeigned submission: And practically, in
respect of themselves, who are commonly more humble and thankful, zealous and
watchful ever after.

Observe such as have drank deep of the deceitful Cup of Rebellion and
Prodigality, and after come to taste of the bitter Potion of sound Humiliation,
and say, whether you do not find them of an excellent temper? Paul being made
sensible of himself, as the greatest of Sinners, how passionatly does he break
forth to admire the Love and Mercy of God! I was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor,
and injurious; but by the Grace of God I am what I am. And this Grace bestowed
upon me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly, etc. Where you see his
diligence in redeeming the Time, and ascribing his Change wholly to the Grace
of God.

2. That none in the Church should despair, especially among those in whom the
Offer of Mercy has stirred up any desire after Grace* This Reason is rendered
by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.16. For this cause I obtained Mercy, that in me first
Jesus Christ might show forth all Long-suffering, for a Pattern to them which
should after believe on him to Life everlasting. He that seemed to be an
Epitome, an Abridgment of all Wickedness, obtained Mercy for this cause, that
Jesus Christ might show forth all Long-suffering, i. e. evidence by full
demonstration, so that all might see, and say, There is Mercy with Christ that
he may be feared, yea, Mercy rejoicing over Judgment. Though your. Sins be in
number like a Cloud, and for quality, like Crimson or Scarlet; Yet come, let us
reason together, says the Lord, and I will make them white as Snow or Wool:
Yea, they shall be as tho they had never been. Sin is finite in respect of
matter, but Divine Mercy is infinite. The Consideration of this Disproportion
should be a powerful Loadstone to draw Sinners to Repentance; it should be as a
Cork to the Net, to keep the Heart from sinking into despair; it should be an
Antidote to keep that Poison from entering, or at least, from lodging in the
Heart. If Manasses, Saul, Mary Magdalen, and some of the adulterous drunken
Corinthians, were remembered in Mercy, converted, sanctified, and saved, why
should any despair? When Man has withstood his Good, and the Gates of Hell
have prevailed a long time, even then the Lord's hand has done it for many,
blessed be his Name. We had never heard of these Examples, had it not been for
our encouragement. With this let the penitent Heart be encouraged. [God can
turn noisome Dunghill into a Mine of Gold Brands of Hell into lightsom Stars in
hi^ Firmament, Slaves of Doemons into Angels]. But without presumption, lest
abused Mercy give place to rejecting Fury, and the Lord say, Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand, and no Man regarded:
Therefore now, tho you call upon me, I will not answer; and tho you seek me
early, you shall not find me.

3. That the Hearts of all reasonable Creatures, capable of such a Mystery,
might be enlarged to rejoice in God for his Goodness, and to praise him, who by
plucking such Brands out of the Fire, does manifest such Love and Power, to
free and defend his chosen Ones from the devouring Mouth of the roaring Lion:
The lost Sheep being found, the wild Prodigal returned, first home to himself,
and after to his Father, occasion Joy in the Families; to teach us what we
should do upon the Conversion of any profane Person, Son, Daughter, Servant,
or Neighbor. Was he once proud, and is he now humble? Was he once intemperate,
and is he now sober? was he dead in Sin, and is he now alive through Grace? It
is most singular Mercy, rich Love, it is meet we should be merry. The Lord
has, does, and will deliver, that the Church may be encouraged, Satan enraged
by the loss of his Prey, and the Name of Christ glorified and magnified so much
the more.

A second Doctrine to be noted by the way, is this: Viz. Doct. 2. That the Lord
often uses variety of means to attain one end.

Many Messengers to call home his straying Servants unto him. Sickness of Body,
with variety of Afflictions, sometimes depriving them of good things, sometimes
laying heavy Rods upon them. He uses Fire and Steel to cure those Madmen,
rather than comply with their Malady, to render it incurable. His own Word he
sends, both in Threa^nings to terrify, and Promises to allure; and the Spirit
follows upon both, to make them effectual. Some of these means prepare the
Subject, others work the Cure; the second beginning where the first leaves;
all so knit and ordered, that they make up but one integral mean to produce
such an end. It is the Lord's Patience and Wisdom so to deal with froward Man,
no want of power; he could do it by few and weak means; as great Ships are
turned by a small Helm, and as some say, stopped by a very little Remora, yea,
without any; but it is Man's frowardness that requires this variety of means.
To bring home, and keep the Jews, his first beloved People, in Order and
Safety, he planted a Vineyard, fenced it, and gathered out the Stones, Isa.
5.2. He hewed them by his Prophets, sending them early and late. Hosea 6.4. He
laid his Hand upon them, so that the Head was sick, and the whole Heart faint,
Isa. 1.6. Concluding, when none of these prevailed, O Ephraim, what shall I do
unto thee? O Judah, how shall I persuade thee? Hos. 6.4. Which is as if God
should say, I have done mine utmost, and more than you can challenge from me.
And the like expostulary Expressions of complaint are to be found in many other
places. And this the Lord does:

Reas. 1. To set forth the Riches of his Mercy, and Greatness of his Love, not
willing that Men should perish, but rather return and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Pet.
3.9. God might have dealt with us as with the Angels, who were the eldest
Offspring of his Love, the purest production of that Supreme Light: no Mercy
interposed to avert or suspend their Judgment, but they were immediately
expelled the Divine Presence, and left without remedy; Heb. 8.16. To which of
them has he appointed a Word of Reconciliation? And again, He took not upon
him the Nature of Angels. But, O Goodness Divine! he made sudden way for our
recovery; high Mountains were levelled, and great Depths filled up, that we
might arrive at Happiness. He had Bowels only melting over lost Man. As it is
with a tenderhearted Father toward his weak and sick Child; he desires the
continuance of his Life, and if it were in his power, with some of his own
Blood to give him health; he looks and sighs, he weeps and complains, O my Son,
what shall I do for thee? To the opinion of one, he adds the Consultation of
many Physicians; he makes use of this Receipt, and applies that Remedy, and all
to try what may do him good. Thus, but in a more transcendent manner (removing
Passion and Imperfection, Ignorance and Weakness found in Man) conceive of God.
Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? Jer. 31.20. Since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him, my Bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy upon him. And, Why will ye die, ye House of Israel? And
again, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee? etc.

Reas. 2. It is to leave all without excuse. Men shall have nothing to say, but
justify God when he speaks. Judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard, Isa.
5.3, 4. What could I have done more to my Vineyard, than I have done? Where the
Lord clears himself from all Objections and Repinings whatsoever. And it is, as
if the Lord had said, What fault can be found in me, after so much care and
waiting? Or, as some render it better, What is now more to be done in so
desperate a case? but what he answers in ver. 5. but to take away the Hedge,
etc. Nothing can be alleged as an Error in him, unless that he has done so
much as he had done, as good Authors paraphrase that Text.

Reas. 3. To instruct his Ambassadors, how they should carry themselves
toward a proud, ignorant, gainsaying People; to try all means, to use all
lawful ways, and to become all things to all Men, if it may be possible to save
some, that they may gain them, 1 Cor. 9.21. A Metaphor taken from Merchants,
who are never weary of taking Money. It is their Duty, if the Lord be so
patient and diligent, be instant in season and out of season; i. e. tho it be
to their Loss in other things, as Calvin and Estius have it; and tho the People
on the worser side should think it unseasonable, like Snow in Harvest; yet be
doing, as often as there is any opportunity or hope of doing good. Ministers
must be frequent and resolute, now to thunder in the Threatenings of the Law,
and then to shine upon troubled Minds in the Promises of the Gospel. It is
their Duty to be resident and diligent among their People, so that they may
feed them with Alms, good Example, and wholesome Doctrine. Yea, and last of all,
to add Patience to their Pains. Learn of the Husbandman, after ploughing,
sowing, harrowing, guttering, weeding, etc. he waits for Heaven's Dew and Sun:
so must Ministers, meekly instructing those which oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance, [by any means, at any time] to the
acknowledging of the Truth.

Caution.
Yet first, Let none hereupon presume to live in Sin, and to mis-spend younger
years vainly, upon this Ground. See what will follow, if you so do. Either you
may be cut off even for that Sin of Presumption, and perish, before you come to
be converted. As Mil^ Crotoniates, who was tearing asunder the Stock of an Oak,
his Strength failed him, and the Stock closing, was held so fast by the hands,
that he became a Prey to the Beasts of the Field: So may all the Abusers of
Mercy become a Prey to the Justice of God, that will rend and tear them in
pieces, ere they are aware of it. If God's to day be too soon for thy
Repentance, thy to morrow may be too late for his Acceptance. It is said by
some, and justly feared by others, that many are now in Hell, who had such
confused purposes and hopes, that they would and should be converted, but the
time was not yet come; their Fancies were filled with fair Promises, while they
suffered their Hearts to be carried away with the current of their unmortified
Concupiscence. Or, if not so, yet the longer you go on in Sin, by so much the
heavier, painful, and difficult, will your turning be* Old Sins, like an old
Oak, are hardly to be removed. Can a Man be born again when he is old? Where
Satan pleads Antiquity, he usually pleads Propriety. And it is well known, the
longer the Poison stays in the Stomach the more mortal it is. As a Disease,
the longer it grows, the harder will the Cure be; or as it is in a Journey,
the further we go out of the way, the more Toil and Time will be required ere
we get in again. Rejoice, O young Man, and play the Prodigal; yet know, for all
this, God will bring thee to Judgment. Then thou must turn again by weeping
Cross, or never enter Heaven. Old Sinners are rare Converts. Grace is seldom
grafted on such withered Stocks. Who can expect Water from a drained River? The
common Proverb is true, As is a Man's Life, so is his Death; a wicked Life, a
cursed Death.

2. Let no Man judge his Brother, touching his final Estate. What he is at
present, you may say; but what he will be, you cannot. Mount not into God's
Chair; judge nothing before the time. It is the Office of Angels to sever Sheep
from the Goats, the Tares from the Wheat. Those that undertake peremptorily to
determine of Men's final Estates, they know not what Spirit they are of; with
the Sons of Zebedee, they take too much upon them; with the Sons of Levi, they
understand not what they say, or whereof they affirm, with those Impostors in
Timothy. Indeed, it is a kind of Apostasy and Rebellion against God's
Providence, to judge without calling God to be a President into our Council. As
was intimated before; we may judge the Tree by its Fruit, leaving the final Doom
to the Searcher of all Hearts: censure him for the present to be God's Enemy,
and in a most wretched Estate; but leave him under the charitable Influence of
Heaven. Suppose thy Neighbor be now wild, he may hereafter be tamed; he is now
unclean, hereafter he may be washed, as the Corinthians were; he is now
intemperate, he may be sober; there is Blood and Merit enough in Christ. Of
great Sinners the Lord has and can make great Saints, to be so much the more
zealous for God in his Service, as they have been desperately mad and furious
in the service of their own Lusts. Let all Men in hope attend upon all Means
constantly; if one Means work not, another may; if it work not now, it may
anon. Who knows what a day may bring forth? Neglect no Means, delay no Duty,
and still remember to crave God's blessing upon all. For as it follows in a
third Observation, Doct. 3. No secondary Means can avail to work Grace, without
a concurrence of the first Cause.

Means are used for the reducing of Israel, Prophets were sent, and diverse Rods
laid upon them; yet the Lord adds, I will allure her. Without his helping
hand there is no success to be expected. Means cannot turn or incline
themselves to our help, unless God turn, incline, and command them. If God do
not act and use them, the Instruments can do nothing. It was not the Clay and
the Spittle that cured the blind Man, but Christ's anointing his eyes with
them. What Music can the Organ Pipes make without breath? Paul may plant, and
Apollos may water; but God gives the increase. The reason is, because they are
not natural Agents, working by inherent Virtue, but ordained thereunto, and
qualified by an higher hand. He that chose them, makes them effectual.
According as God is pleased to work, or not to work; so they prove Assistances,
or not Assistances to us. All the means in the World, in themselves considered,
are but as a Mill, which grinds not the Corn, unless the Wind come to it; or
like a Dial, on which if the Sun shine, it may direct us, but if the Sun lies
under a Cloud, it is of no present use to us: So if God hold off from the
means, if he breath not upon them, and cast not a lively Influence into them,
they can do nothing for us. Means are not absolute Lords of their own
Operations, but subordinate Agents, and depend upon God, as for being, so for
operation or restraint. As a Master, that puts a rich Cabinet of Jewels into
his Servant's Chamber, but keeps the Key himself; none of the Jewels can be
given out, but by his will and appointment: In like manner, God has put an
aptness in the means to do us good, yet himself keeps the Key, to give out
according to to his good pleasure. Vnde tanta virtus Aquae, ut Corpus tangat,
and Cor abluat, nisi faciente Verbo? Whence has Water such power, by touching
the Body to wash the Heart, but from the Word? Aug.

Hence it may be concluded,

1. That all Means must be used. We have God himself for a Pattern: he could
enlighten us without the Sun, and afford Fruit without the Earth; but he will
have his creatures operate; and so we are commanded to serve Divine Providence,
and to leave the Issue to him. Man goes not to Heaven, as the Ship moves in the
Tide, whether the Master sleeps or wakes. We must with the skilful Mariner,
have our Eyes on the Stars, and our Hands on the Stern. Provided still, that
the right means be used, hearing of the Word preached, Receipt of the
Sacraments, Meditation, and Prayer, that the Lord would be pleased graciously
to add his Influence, that thereby Grace may be begun, and strengthened in the
several Acts thereof; because the Lord will not work by any means but such as
are of his own appointment. Naaman must be cleansed by washing in Jordan, a
River in Israel; not in Abana or Parphar, Rivers in Damascus. Now the
forementioned means are of the Lord's appointment, as may be read in Isa. 55.3.
Romans 10.17. 2 Timothy 2.7. Jam. 1.5. And as you must use the right, so you must be
careful to use them as Means, that is,

First; Subordinately, with respect to the Lord, upon whose hand and blessing
the whole depends.

2dly. Regularly, with respect to those Directions set down in Scripture, which
are principally such as follow, viz.

1. Diligently, both in regard of frequency of Action, and fervency of Spirit;
as Men are diligent in such matters whereby their Lives might be preserved. To
this is the Promise made, Ask, seek, knock. Such a diligent Hand makes rich.
Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord. Therefore
David prays, Quicken us, O Lord, that we may call upon thy Name, Psalm. 80.18.
Therefore we have Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, to provoke our
diligence. A Neglect, or careless use of the means, is little better in the
sight of God, than contempt of the means, yea, of Himself. He that despises
you, despises me.

2. Opportunely, and seasonably. Every one has his day, there is an acceptable
hour, when the Lord will be entreated, while God calls and waits, while Grace
is dispensed. Days of Grace have their dates. The Vision is for an appointed
time, Hab. 2.3. What the Prophet said of the Prophetical Vision, may be said of
other Divine Dispensations. The Means of Grace have their Limits. Prove. 1.24*
Because I called, and ye resused, etc. Therefore will I laugh at your Calamity,
etc. Whosoever steps in when the Angel moves the Waters, shall be healed.
Neglect not any opportunity, as many do. The Loss of Opportunity is an
irrecoverable Loss. Say not, we shall meet with enough hereafter; a day pas^
cannot be recalled. Every thing is beautiful in its season. God takes delays
for refusals. Saul lost his Kingdom, by not discerning his Time. Archimedes
drew lines so long in the dust, till his City was taken, and the Soldiers
brake in upon him, and slew him: So many that have thoughts of Repentance lose
their precious Souls by sinful delays Consider the foolish Virgins, and be
wise. Let not such a Sun set on Earth, by the Beams o^ which you should walk to
Heaven.

3. Entirely; submitting to all means o^ Salvation, even those which to human
Reason seem weak and mean, yea, contrary to ou^ proud Capacities, and the bent
of our Affections. He that will be saved, must deny his own Will, crucify his
own Affections, captivate his own Imaginations, resign up his own Desire and
Pleasure, give up his Heart as a Blank, that God may write down what he shall
please. Man must not be Funambulus Virtutum, to use Tertullian's Phrase, go in
a narrow Tract of Obedience, pick and choose what he will do, and what not;
follow God only in such Duties as will suit with himself, and no further. There
must be an illimited Resolution for all the ways of Salvation. To slight any,
is to slight the Author.

4. It must be sincerely and constantly used in obedience to God's command,
leaving the Lord free for time and measure. Confine not the Holy one, no not in
your thoughts or desire. Limit him not to time or means, [Deus non alligat
gratiam Sacramentis] further than he is pleased to confine and limit himself.
It was a bold carriage of Popilius, the Roman Ambassador, toward Antiochus,
when he drew a Circle round about him, and bad him give answer ere he stirred
out of it, for he would be put off no longer. Men are more bold than welcome to
God, who dare to set him bounds, where he has left himself free. Learn to wait
for him; you shall reap, if you faint not. Attend in the Morning, and absent
not thy self at evening; thou know not whether this, or that, or both may
prosper. Leave not off, because thou prevailest not at once or twice; He that
endures to the end, shall be saved. Importunity prevails at length, no Oratory
like to it.

2. It may be concluded hence, that we may not rest on the means. A Man may put
his Hand, but not his Heart on them. God commands the one, but forbids the
other. Noah's Dove might make use of her Wings to fly, but trusted only to the
Ark; a Man uses his Feet to go over a Bridge, but trusts to the Bridge for
safety. Christians may and must walk and fly with the Wings of Obedience, but
in the mean time they must trust to the Ark, to the Bridge, Christ, to carry and
lead them over the devouring Sea of Destruction; otherwise they rob God of his
Honor [like Michal, who put an Image in David's room, they put the Means in
the room of God] and themselves of the Help and Comfort. To advance the Means
above their place, is a most compendious way to render them useless, to make
the River a barren Wilderness; as to lay too much weight upon the Pillars
raised by any Man's hands, is the way to pull the whole Frame upon their Heads:
That Stomach will r^main unsatisfied, that feeds on the Dish instead of the
Meat. Nothing can avail without God's blessing. After all, to him we must fly,
and on him we must wait, till he be pleased to bestow what he offers; and of
this we may be assured in his time, because as it follows in the fourth and
last Observation hence: Viz. Doct. 4. That the Lord is earnest in his Offer of
Grace to all under the Means; so that if any perish, it is through their own
default.

Behold, I will allure, and I will speak. He means what he says
indefinitely, and will do what he means, unless Men turn the deaf ear, and
through stubborn resistance exclude themselves. As it fares with some Persons,
who are wilfully set to destroy themselves, notwithstanding they have many
excellent Remedies and Means to the contrary.

This Point will appear two ways.

1. From the truth of the Means designed by the Lord for such an end. The Means
are for the End, and the End is as truly and more really intended than the
Means, if I may so speak. Now it is certain and presupposed, that the Lord is
earnest in the Means, therefore much more in the end. A Man may love the End
for it self, but the Means are ever chosen and loved for the End. I cannot see
how it can stand with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to be earnest in the
Means, and not to intend the End; or to offer that to any, which he has no
purpose to give. The Lord never said to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye my Face in
vain. But whosoever does seek him in the use of means, shall find him.

2. It appears from the qualification of the Means.

1. It is proportioned to the Nature of a reasonable Creature. The Lord works
not upon Men, as on Blocks or Brutes, or on the Stars, who being irrational,
and incapable of acting by any Rule, are therefore acted, and run their Course
by the mighty Word of God's Power, they live of the Spirit's Omnipotency, and
immediate Acts. But on Men he works as upon Creatures endued with
understanding and Will; he enlightneth, allureth, speaks unto the Heart, and
persuadeth by such Arguments and Motives, as cannot be gainsaid. A Sign that
the Lord does really intend what he does pretend.

2. It is followed close with Precepts, enjoining them Constancy in the use of
such means, pressing Line upon Line, day after day, here a little, and there a
little; and diverse Promises of acceptance and success. See those pathetical and
affectionate Expressions, which hold forth not only his Will, but the strength
and height of it in this matter. Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord; then
the Ingemination of it, Turn ye, turn ye, with a vehement expostulation, Why
will ye die? And in diverse other places. Which does assure us, that the Lord
does really purpose what he speaks, and is more ready to give, than Man is to
accept. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you by us; we pray
in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. And who can think or say, he does
not desire our Reconciliation? It is highly injurious to conclude, Deum non
sincere velle, quod se velle dicit, sub condition: That God does not truly and
really will what he says and wills, under the conditions of Faith and
Repentance. What Comfort or encouragement is there for a poor Sinner to come
home to God, if this fail? In and from whom these three Grounds are required.

1. That he be persuaded of God's love unto him, that he wills indeed his
Health and Safety in particular.

2. That the Terms on which he wills it, are the Conditions of the new
Covenant, Faith and Repentance.

3. That an unfeigned submission to God's own Ordinances, is the right and
ready way to enable the Soul to perform these Conditions, and so to attain the
End. Whosoever would be saved, must be well grounded and thoroughly persuaded of
this.

And so much for the first thing mentioned in the beginning. The second and
third follow, which contain the main Business intended, and are the Marrow of
the Text. Viz.

II. The Preparation of the Soul for Grace I will allure her into the
Wilderness.
And herein are two things remarkable.

1. The legal work of the Spirit, in breaking the Heart of Stone, and drawing
it under sound Humiliation. Lactabo eam, I will entice her; so Rivet. Inclinabo
eam, I will incline or bend her to my Mind, says Zanchy. Reddam eam flexibilem
mihi, I will bring her pliant to my hand; so Calvin. Ego seducens eam, ire
faciam desertum; so Arius Montanus* Seeing others have done so to her hurt, I
will seduce her for good. I will allure, and bring her into a Wilderness, [of
saving Trouble, and wholesome fear,]: So our last Translation renders it. The
very Name of Noah's eldest Son by birth, to whom this Promise was first
revealed, does explain this Phrase, and illustrate this Work. Genesis 9.27. God
shall enlarge Japhet, etc. (...) seductus pellectus, persuasus. Which may be,
and is often taken in the worser part; yet the Context here, and in Genesis,
enforces us to take it in the best sense only. I will seduce, allure, persuade
her for good. As the Devil, and his Instruments, had seduced her to hurt, so
the Lord in tender mercy and pity would seduce another way for her good. Even
as Lovers use to improve all their Art and Skill to persuade and obtain the
good Will of those whom they love and affect to marry: So the Lord being in
love with his People, and desiring to marry them to himself, in and by his Son
for ever, speaks thus in the Lovers Dialect, I will allure her, and cause her
to do what she would not, that afterward she may do what she should. Others, I
find, who judge it more sound to derive Japheth from (...), which signifies
dilatare, to enlarge, to open the Heart, and affect it with Joy. Which
doubtless may be admitted as a Consequent of the former, both serving to set
forth this preparative Work, as a necessary disposition preceding Conversion.
For as Faith is the Condition of the Covenant, so is this Preparation the
Condition of Faith. No Faith ordinarily without it in Truth, although many have
Faith without it in regard of Sense. The thing may be done truly, and yet not
observed distinctly.

2. A second thing to be noted here, is the State and Condition of all such as
are under this preparative Work of the Law. They are said to be in the
Wilderness, (...) quasi locus a sermon remotus; a remote Place, far from
Company, from Conference, and from human Comforts, where she should meet with
none to quench the Motions of the Spirit, none to dawb with untempered Mortar,
no Egyptian Reed to rest upon, none to complain unto, or to seek Comfort from,
but the Lord alone. Into such a place or condition the Lord would bring her, as
that none should hinder his Work any longer. So that by (...), or Wilderness,
here is not to be understood a Cell or a Monastery, as Aquinas glanceth, [2. 2
dae q. 188. art. 8.] nor a desert Place, properly called a Wilderness, but
rather the State and Condition of the Parties to be converted; (...), as a
Wilderness, so Hierom; (...), into the Wilderness, so a latter Edition of the
Septuagint, more agreeable to the Original; importing three things, viz.

1. A turning of those to be converted out of all the deceitful Holds of
Nature, wherein Men usually shelter themselves against the Power of the Word of
God. The ready way (we know) to take the Hare, is by driving her from her
Coverts and Buroughs, wherein she does use to hide her self from the Dogs that
pursue her: so here.

2. A presentation to the eye of the Understanding, of many spiritual Dangers,
as so many roaring Cannons on every side, wherewith a Christless Person is
environed; so that he, who thought all to be well with him before, while he
remained securely asleep in the state of Nature, now sees all to be quite
naught, and out of order He dreamed he was rich, happy, and wanted nothing; but
being awake, he sees himself poor, miserable, and naked. Alas for woe! Within
him he hears Conscience telling him the truth; above him he beholds God
offended, frowning, and turning his loving Countenance from him; beneath him he
sees and feels Hell opening her Mouth to receive him, having deserved, as he
now judges, the lowest Room, the darkest Corner, and the fiercest Flames
there; about him trouble and fear is on every side. He is weary of Life,
because of Sin; and yet afraid to die, because of the account; alone he is
tempted and terrified, and in company he is defiled or grieved. What to do, or
whither to go, he knows not. This is a Wilderness indeed. As it is with a
wounded Heart, who feeling the Shaft, runs from the Woods to the Plain, and from
thence to the Woods again, but finds no ease at all, Haeret lateri laethalis
arundo, the deadly Shaft sticks fast in his side. Or as it was with the ancient
Hebrews, when they were* led by Moses and Aaron from Egyptian Bondage, into the
pleasing Liberty of fruitful Canaan, but through a vast Wilderness, full of
Troubles, Conflicts, Trials: So it is with the Woman, the Church, and every
Member thereof, out of Christ, but coming on toward him, they begin to see
their Sins, they hear the terrible Threats of the Law, they fear the Wrath of
God, as a just Judge; they run up and down, here for advice, and there for
comfort, like Men afrighted to distraction, (for so the blind World judges
them) and cannot be comforted, till the Lord speak unto their Hearts.

3. It imports variety of Afflictions, following upon the former Efficacy, and
Discovery of the Law. And these are both positive and privative, sometimes one,
and sometimes both, as need requires.

Privatively, the Lord deals with Men, when he deprives them of Sacrifices,
Sacraments, of Wealth, Honor, Food, House, Friends, or Liberty, and the like;
to pursue and follow them with Infamy, Poverty, Imprisonment, or Captivity; and
all to humble, and make them pliant to his Hand for their good. [He made
Jeshurun look with lean Cheeks, that he might leave kicking, and learn
Righteousness.] I will take away the bravery of thy tinkling Ornaments, and
instead of a sweet smell, there shall be a stink; instead of a Girdle, a Rent;
and Baldness instead of well-set Hair, etc. Crux salutare remediun est ad
tollendam cordis duritiem, non natura sua, etc. i. e. The Cross is a wholesome
Medicine to humble and soften the hard Heart, not in it self, (as the Pool of
Bethsaida did not at any time give healing, but when the Angel descended into
it) but by a Spiritual Power, using that Instrument to bow us.

Now stand, and lay all these together, then you may say, This is the
Wilderness, or, thus is a Soul prepared for Christ. The whole may be comprised
in one Thesis or Theological Conclusion, Viz. Doct. That it is Christ alone,
who in the use of means, brings his chosen Ones into such Trouble for their
good.

In which Proposition are to be observed, the Author, Subject, Means, and End.

First; The Author, (...) Ego, I, even I, the first and the last, with whom the
new Covenant was established, having power to offer Grace in Promises; I that
have satisfied Justice, and overcome all the Enemies of Mankind; I, that do
prevail, and am accepted in a real tender of my own Merits to the Father in
behalf of my Church: It is I, even Jesus Christ, that will do it. He it was
that spoke to the Patriarchs, and by the Prophets; he it was, that made known
the secret Will, and good pleasure of God to Man; he it is, who made the Body,
and prepares the Soul, to erect a Spiritual Frame and Government in the Heart;
supporting the bruised Reed, and blowing the smoking Flax, till he turn the
one into a brazen Pillar, and the other into a triumphant Flame. (...) I,
considerable, either as God simply, or Man really and truly, or as Mediator,
God and Man jointly.

As God, so he is a principle Efficient in this Work. His Names, whereby he is
described in both Testaments, do say so much, viz. (...) All which do signify
Being independent, Authority, Strength, and All Sufficiency, for his undertaken
Charge* (...); two Greek Names, much magnified by Damascen and Aquinas; the one
being a Name of Nature, and signifies absolute and perfect Being, even the
chiefest Good; the other being a Name of Authority and Power, imports the
extent of Divine Providence, compassing, disposing, and working all in all. See
for this purpose, especially two places of Scripture, Exodus 34.6. And the Lord
passed before him, and proclaimed, (...) The Lord, the Lord merciful. Rev. 1.8.
(...), etc. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord,
etc.

As Man, so he is the principal Instrument, by and through his Humanity to
convey Life into all his Members, once called effectually, and united, Joh.
1.14, 16. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, etc. Full of Grace and
Truth. And, Of his Fullness we receive Grace for Grace. Joh. 5.21, 26. As the
Father raises up the Dead, and quickneth them; even so the Son quickneth whom
he will, etc.

As God-Man, the Mediator, so he is the Meritorious Cause, procuring and
preserving Life for and in all his. How, and why this should be appropriated to
the Son, when as there is but one Nature, and so one Principle of Action,
common to all the Persons in that sacred and ever blessed Trinity, is somewhat
difficult to believe, but more hard to conceive and express: possibly the
following Reasons may give some light unto it. Thus it is,

1. Because such was the Will of God, according to his infinite Wisdom so to
order it, that the second Person only should undertake the Office of Mediation,
fulfill the Law, satisfy Justice, and dispense Grace.

2. Because it is a mixed Work, neither simply Opus ad extra, wholly outward,
for so it is common, the Father and the Holy Ghost do cooperate with the Son in
this Dispensation; nor altogether Opus ad intra, an inward Work, for then there
were no doubt nor scruple: but it might be personal, limited to any of the
three, as it was in the Incarnation, all the three Persons were Joint-workers
in a preparative Inchoation, yet in the end and complement of it, we see it was
terminated in and upon the Person of the Son. The Divine Nature was incarnate,
as relatively contracted (with due reverence and submission be it spoken) to a
certain manner of subsistence in the Person of the Son. Quomodo tota Filii
(...) sit incarnata, non tamen Pater, cum sint una (...), credo, licet ad
exprimendum non intelligo, Zanch. So it is in the Dispensation of Grace, the
thing is willed, and the Subject prepared by a Joint Work of all the Persons in
Trinity, but the execution of that purpose, and the actual fruition of Grace,
is in and by the Son; first elected to that Hypostatical Union between the two
Natures, to the Office of Mediation, then given as Head unto the Church, whence
Life and Motion is derived to his Mystical Body, elect in and after him.

2dly. Here is the Subject to be observed, whereon this Work passes, Her. No
one particular Person is here meant, but a select Company to be gathered from
diverse Families, Countries, Kingdoms, [tho here more restrictly, as limited to
the People of the Jews,] and so to be knit into one Body. The Church malignant,
the Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17.1, 3. called Antichrist, is called and compared
to a Woman, [a Whorish Woman, for seeming Beauty, Bravery, Su^tilty, and
Impudency,] not any one, but a Company, that exceed in Wickedness, and increase
in it. So the Church Militant, the Spouse of Christ, is likened to a Woman, for
flexibility and fertility, not any one single Person, but a chosen Company,
gathered together in one; [ Vna Ecclesia, quia ex una Fide, per unum Spiritum
nascitur. Epiphan.] some of all sorts, Men, Women, Jews, Gentiles, Greeks,
Barbarians; not all of any sort; Choice admits not of Universality. The
singular Number here and elsewhere used, imports a Paucity, or at least a
Singularity of Persons. Quare hunc trahit and non illum, noli judicare, si non
vis errare. S. Aug. in Joh. Causa occulta esse potest, injusta esse non potest.
Ibid. Epist. 59. ad Paulin. Choice was made of Her, not for the Multitude, much
less for any Merit. See her Condition, Ezekiel. 16. and her Behavior before, in
the former part of the Chapter. The Promise was of his own free Grace and good
Will, without any merit of preceding Will or Work in her. Works of Nature might
be foreseen, either as future or possible, but could not of congruity merit his
Favor, being so evil. Works of Grace could not be foreseen, because they were
not, nor could be indeed, till Grace were first bestowed. Good Works are an
Effect, no moving Cause, much less meritorious for the procuring of Grace.
About this freedom and particularity of Choice, in electing to the End, and
predestinating to the Means, most of the Fathers downwards from Augustine, and
among the founder sort of School Divines, Lumbard, Aquinas, and many of the
Dominicans, do strike in with the Divines of our Reformed Church.

3dly. Here is the Means, whereby [(...)] I will allure; or whereinto, (...)
the Wilderness: Because I have known her, I will allure her into the
Wilderness. Whosoever is ordained to the End, is also pre-ordained to the
Means. The Lord can do it without Means, but commonly he does it by such, as
suit best with that Nature whereupon he is about to work. Man's will is
naturally free from Co-action, therefore the Lord compels none but gently
allureth all by degrees, of unwilling making them willing.

1. By illumination of the Understanding Things unknown have no motive Faculty
As no Good wrapped up in Darkness, excite desire; so no Evil swathed up in
Ignorance strikes trouble or sorrow.

2. By an effectual persuasion of the Will, and then by an Infusion of renewing
Grace Faith is his Work and Gift, both for preparation of the Subject, the
beginning of Grace and for the increase and consummation of the exercise
thereof, Phil. 1.29. Heb. 12.2. God works all in Man, to will what he should
do, and then to do what he wills, according to his own good pleasure; but not
as upon Stocks or Stones; these are moved without knowledge, as incapable of
Consent, reasonable Creatures not so; they consent and approve, they know, they
will, they love wha^ God works in them. I will make, [ther^ is God's first
work] that they shall walk in my Statutes, [there is Man's after Cooperation.
Without me ye can do nothing: And, Wha^ have thou, O Man, that thou have not
received? A place which St. Cyprian usually urged to exclude all boasting on
Man's behalf; and whereby St. Augustine was brought to retract what he had wrote
before, of Faith in us, and from us. Means must be used, but the Work is
ascribed to an higher Power.

More distinctly know, that Means are of two sorts, either principal, or
instrumental. The principal are either more principal, as Christ, in and by
whom the Church has all, and without whom nothing; or less principal, as the
Benefits which flow from Christ, such are, Adoption by the communication of his
Filiation, Justification by his Grace, and Sanctification by his Spirit. The
instrumental Means are either preparative, in and by the Law; or effective, in
and by the Gospel: of which more hereafter.

4thly. Here is to be considered the End whereunto all this is directed; and
that is twofold, either last, or next. The last End is the Glory of his rich
Grace, in the glorification of his Spouse, the Church; the next End is the
present Good of the Persons to be converted; being thus under preparation for
Regeneration. As it is with a Goldsmith, that would make a Cup for use, or a
Ring for Ornament; his Oar is hard, and full of dross, therefore he casts it
into the Fire, to soften and refine it; this done, he forms and fashioneth it
according to his Will. Gregory applies this Similitude thus: We are the Gold,
hard, and full of filth; this World is the Shop, Troubles are the Fire, God the
Workman; let us learn how to suffer, he knows best how to prepare and fit us
for his Service. As skilful Physicians hunt away the Lethargy, by casting the
Body into some degrees of a Fever, to dry up that adventitious Moisture, which
else would quench natural Heat, and bring in Death; so the Lord brings his
Children into Spiritual Distress, to prevent Eternal Death, and everlasting
Torture in the burning Lake. Or, as it is with a tender Mother, who clothes her
Breast with Gall or Wormwood, to wean the Child in its Affections, and gain it
to eat stronger Meat; so and no otherwise is it with the Lord in this Work; he
weaneth them from the Dugs of the World, and leads them into the Wilderness,
that he might bring them into the possession of Canaan. Now no trouble for the
present seems joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it yields the
peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to them that are exercised therein, enabling
them to say, it was good for us that we were afflicted and broken, that we
might rejoice in more strength. This the Lord only can do. God shall persuade
Japhet. No finite power can work so upon the Spirit, much less upon a weak
fearful Man, and yet sustain him under hope. The Spirit of a Man may help
against Man, and against his own Infirmities; but when he comes to grapple
with the Almighty, when he is brought into the Wilderness to answer God
charging him with his Debt, a terrified, burdened, and wounded Conscience, who
else can support? Prove. 18.14.

For the further opening of the Point, and consequently of this preparative
Work to the capacity of the meaner sort, three things shall be here insisted
on, viz. That it has been so, bow it is effected, and wherefore. In which we
shall find what Sampson did in the Lions Belly, many Honey combs of Spiritual
Honey.

1. This has been, and is the Method observed ordinarily in the Dispensation
of Grace, though a diversity may be granted as to the measure of it. Look as in
Music, all the Strings of the Instrument are touched with the same hand, yet
not with a like stroke; so here. And the Lord is the Agent: for Man being once
turned from Life, and dead in Sin, cannot bring himself into any of this
wholesome Pain, much less out of it; no, no, it is the Lord that in great Love
does both these for him. Our first Parents had a legal Sermon made to them,
before they had any Promise applied, Genesis 3.16. Hagar was brought into a
Wilderness, [real to her, typical to others,] before she was fully wrought upon
in Faith to say, I have seen him that sees me, Genesis 16.13. God begins the
Work* and sees his, before they see or seek him. Manasses was sent into
Captivity, he was put in Prison, and fettered in Irons (the best Ornaments he
ever wore) before his Mountain could be brought low. In such a proud Heart the
Devil keeps his hold a long time; such rusty Locks will not easily open. Now he
is as weary of his Sins, as he is of his Chains. As a Physician deals with
Persons distracted, and out of their wits; he commands that they be kept in the
dark, to be bound in fetters, to have miserable and hard Fare, that by all they
may be brought to their Understanding: Thus God deals with some Sinners, that
are turned mad, and grown out of their right Reason by their Wickedness, that
he may recover them, he binds them in Chains, brings them low, that at length
they may consider of their Condition, and be healed. Paul had both a Voice and
Light to guide him into this Wilderness, before the Lord would speak unto his
Heart, and tell him what he should do. And those of whom mention is made, Acts
2.37.16.30. with many other such of our own observation, were brought into
great distress, through fear and desire; fear of Sin, desire of God's Love and
Favor, not able to resist any where; Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
Comforts they refuse, Threatenings they apply with hand and heart, witty and
ready they are to hurt themselves; as if their vital and animal Spirits were
stopped in their Passage by some Disease, they are often near sinking; such
affinity and agreement there is between the Mind and the Body. Observe such
troubled Spirits, you may, to look heavily, sigh deeply, as if the Heart would
break, and at last to cry out, Woe and alas! if this and that be so, as I fear
it is, and do believe, how can I be saved? If the spots of a Leopard can be
wiped out, if the hue of an Indian can be changed, if a Camel can go through
the eye of a Needle; then may I be cleansed, renewed, and saved. But Lord, how
can that be? is there any Balm, any Blood, any Mercy, for such an one as I?
Tell me, O my Friends, speak thou Man of God, was there ever such an one read
or heard of? a presumptuous Sinner, a beastly Wretch, a close Lover of
Wickedness, an Hater of Holiness? To look upon, I am afraid of my self; what
shall I do? whither shall I fly? say, do not you loath me, and blush to behold
and hear me? was there ever such an one as I accepted?

This is that narrow Way, that leads many to Life; that great Strait, whereinto
the right dearly beloved of the Lord are often brought, to learn, how that is
possible to God, which is impossible with Men. As the Woman by God's
appointment is to bring forth in pangs and travail; so must the Heart of Man
ordinarily labor, till Christ be formed in it.

2. How and after what manner does the Lord effect this?

It is either by removing Impediments, or by presenting to the Eye of the
Conscience,

(1.) The many deceitful Grounds there are, whereon Men naturally rest, and
boast of, as if their Estate at worst were well enough* And till these
deceitful Props be removed, they will not in earnest seek after Christ, much
less accept him, to rest upon him. These the Lord removes, by showing unto Men
their weakness and insufficiency to yield them any comfort. And they are either
inward, or outward: Inward, as Knowledge without Love, Invention without
Judgment, and a Memory without any practical delight in the Notions retained,
[all which a Man may have, and yet be no better than a Devil,] the sufficiency
of Baptismal Regeneration, without any care or thought to perform Conditions.
These being without the power of Godliness, are only as a dead Corpse strewed
and adorned with Flowers, as a gouty Foot covered with a Crimson Shoo, or a
Statue of Earth and Dirt, with some glorious coloring, and old Sepulchers,
with new painting over them. The Lord convinces them, that this Ark is not
sure enough to keep them in the deluge of many Waters, yea, that all things
without Grace will prove an Aggravation of their Condemnation. As in some
Countries, when their Malefactor^ were to be burned in the Fire, they poured
Oil and Pitch to increase their Torments; so will every Privilege make Hell the
hotter for such as these. In the day when the fiery Trial shall be, all their
painting will melt away. Outward, as Riches, Honor, Health, Learning, mere
Civility, and Formality, all commendable in their kind, but not sufficient.
These Men may have, and yet come short of Grace and Life in Glory. Few rich Men
shall be saved, 1 Cor. 1.26. Corpulent Birds seldom fly high. These many things
cumber them: And, If your Righteousness exceed not the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. The best of
these are but Weeds in God's Garden, Tares in his Wheat, Chaff in his Floor.
Therefore the Lord does wisely and timely remove these Impediments.

(2.) He presents Sin, and the Consequents thereof, in their true Colors,
pulls off the Skin of that Viper, washes off the paint, and shows its Face in
full deformity. And this he does ordinarily four ways, viz.

[1.] By corporal Calamities, and temporal Rods, occasionally opening that Eye
which Prosperity and Security had fast closed. As in Joseph's Brethren, and the
Prodigal Son, we have an Instance. The former ( Genesis 42.21.) declare the force
of Conscience, and fruit of Affliction. Old Sins are brought to a new
reckoning. We are very guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
Anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is
this Evil come upon us. The latter came to himself, when he was under want; his
Affliction, like Eyebright Water, had a strange and great Influence on his
bedulled Sight; now he resolves to go to his Father. Yea, many now living can
say, I doubt not, It is good for them that they have been afflicted. They had
been undone, had they not been undone; that they might go weeping toward
Heaven, while others go laughing toward Hell. Poverty may be so ordered, as to
prove a Preparative to Spiritual Riches: Imprisonment antecedent to Evangelical
Liberty. Sickness and weakness of Body often tends to the strength and health
of the Inner Man. This brings to mind that Story in Bromiardus concerning an
Apprentice that had served an hard Master, by whom he had been sore beaten.
These Blows the Lord had made a means of the Man's Conversion. Whereupon lying
on his Deathbed, and his Master standing by, he catched hold fast on his
hands, and kissed them, saying, Hae manus perduxerunt me ad Paradisum, These
hands have helped to bring me to Paradise.

And Beza tells us of himself, that God was pleased to lay the Foundation of
his Spiritual Health, in a violent Sickness which befell him at Paris. Morbus
iste verae Sanitatis principium, Ep. praefix. Confess. What is it, that God
cannot make the Channel to bring in the Ship, the Cistern-pipes to convey the
Water, whose Spring is in Heaven? Ezekiel's Wheels shall move, if the Spirit
drive them, and the Pool of Bethesda communicate Health; if the Angel descend,
and stir the Waters. Blessed is the Man whom thou correctest and teach.

[2.] By Spiritual Combats, raised by the Spirit of Bondage, between Fear and
Desire, Hope and Distrust; continued and increased by the unregenerate Will
going one way, and the Light of natural Conscience going another way; so that
their very Constitution is in discord; there is no more agreement than between
Fire and Water; by reason of which the Soul is brought into great Anguish, much
Fear, because of Sin, and the great Danger it apprehends as the Consequents of
both: these Conflicts being like the Opposition of Planets in the Superior
Orb, forerunners of great Evils.

[3.] Usually it is by the Ministry of the Law, [that Schoolmaster, whose Lash
makes Sinners Backs to smart,] whereby the Lord awakeneth Conscience indeed,
and strikes terror into the Hearts of his Chosen, casting them down very low
to Self-denial; he breaks their stony Hearts in pieces, convincing Men as
Transgressors, telling them that they are the Men, even Men of Death; this they
have done, and that they deserve, discovering millions of Sins more than they
ever dreamed of, quickening Sin in the Conscience, and putting a Weapon into its
hand to kill the Sinner under his Guilt. For this is properly the Office of the
Law to detect and convince Men of such and such Sins, to pass sentence against
them for those Sins, and to follow them so convicted, with a thundering noise
from place to place, hedging and hemming them in on every side, that they can
neither get out, nor be quiet any where, till they humble themselves and fall
down before the Lord's Mercy-Seat.

Fourthly, We may not exclude from this Preparative Work, a branch of the
Gospel, which the Lord makes use of, for the completing this Preparation; by
it, as by beams and heat from a Fire far off, to soften and melt those broken
pieces, that so the Heart being ready to fall asunder, and grieving more kindly
than it can do under mere Legal Terrors, may readily and delightfully admit of
Spiritual Infusions, and be the more speedily brought into a new Mould. And
this the Gospel does,

First, By unvailing unto such distressed Minds, the holy and pure Nature of
God himself [which the Law discovers only as he is a Creature, the Gospel
further, as he is a Father] his patience and loving kindness in Christ, his
rich Mercy, great Love, Free Grace, those Spiritual Beams by which the Divine
Nature shines forth upon us. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? One, that is
so holy and harmless; one that has done so much for thee; one that does so
entirely love thee, and desire thy good; Have thou none to sin against but thy
Savior? None to abuse but thy Friend? None to kick against but the Bowels of
Love? Did not I suffer enough upon the Cross? Must I needs suffer more? This
struck the Nail on the Head, this made his Eyes to water, his Heart to melt;
with this kind salutation, Readiness hard Heart was softened and made pliable to a
further work.

Secondly, By discovering the sinfulness of Sin; that it is not only fearful,
as the Law says, but filthy also; not only evil, but the greatest evil; whence
once disrobed of that pleasing and deceitful shining Skin, patcht up of the
shreds of Pleasure, Profit, and Carnal Content, it is apprehended as opposite to
the greatest Good, and consequently more to be hated and avoided than Hell:
There is no Hell without Sin, nor any Heaven with Sin: Hell is Penal, but Sin
is a Criminal evil: The evil of pain is contrary to the good of a finite being
only, while the evil of fault is opposite to an infinite purity. Both these,
namely, the Law and the Gospel, being thus amplified, pressed and applied to the
sinners Soul, so that he can find no starting hole to evade, no corner to run
into, no gap open to get out of this Wilderness; by this time, it comes to
pass, that he finds a combustion in his Breast, a fire kindled in his Bones,
such new trouble as he never felt: now Hope appears, anon Despair; at one time
Fear, another time Love comes into the Soul, like flashes of Lightning, both
followed with Tears and Complaints; he may be often heard to sigh, and sometime
to beat the Breast, and say, O Lord, that I could repent! O that I could
believe! O that I had a soft tender Heart! That my Head were Waters, and mine
Eyes a fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night: Help me, O my
Friends, for the terrors of the Almighty oppress me, he makes me inherit the
sins of my youth, so that I am ready to sink. Help me, O my God, to do what
thou command, command what thou will, and thou shall not command in vain.
Make me a Man after thy own Heart; give me, O give, if not a Fountain, yet a
Stream; if not a Stream, yet some few drops of penitent Tears, to ease a
burdned Heart, and to prepare a loathsome Soul for the more precious streams of
Christ's Blood.

And yet, as if all this were not enough, behold and see, there steppeth up
another Witness more, against this terrified Creature: And that is, a
reflecting power of the Soul, called Conscience, which joyneth with the Law and
Gospel in their Sentence, and meeting him alone, as flying from both the
former, and hoping somewhere to escape, assaults the poor Soul, and concludes
to this effect: Nay, whither now? Think not to shift off all, hope not to carry
all away, as Sampson did the Gates; go not about to hide it, do not deny or
extenuate it; for all this is true which thou have heard, from the Law and
Gospel. O wretched Creature! thus and thus has God walked toward thee, in
Justice, in Mercy, in Power, in Patience and Bounty, he sent Christ with
healing in his Wings, to heal and do thee good; and yet thus and thus
rebelliously and ungratefully have thou walked toward him; thou have put away
Salvation, bolted out thy Physician: What will thou say? Whither will thou go?
Nay, nay, think not of pleading, dream not of flying, much less of any hiding,
except thou will contract farther guilt, and a greater burden on thy self,
which is heavy enough already: Down proud Heart, down with it lower than thy
Knees, cloth thy self in Sackcloth and Ashes, put a Rope about thy Neck, as
Benhadads Servants did, confess thy faults humbly, aggravate thy folly
ingenuously, and then thou may hope to hear the voice of Mercy; there is no
way to fly from him, but by falling down before him; Blood-letting is a cure
of Bleeding. To close and get in, is the only way to avoid the blow.

Thirdly, Why the Lord thus brings his Children into the Wilderness?

Answ. All God's Actions are ordered by infinite Wisdom, therefore some reason
may always be rendered of his Will: In case we apprehend it not, we must
acknowledge the weakness of our own Capacities and subscribe it, without
enquiring after any Reason, because we know it is his Will: Yet in this
business, something may be said as probable, and with due reverence.

He does it, First, To divorce the Heart from Sin, and to break that Love-knot
between the Heart and Sin in every Natural Man; which ordinarily is not done
without some throws of this Spiritual Trouble. While Men run up and down in the
seeming pleasant fields of Liberty, sin is sweet and fair unto them, so far
from fear that they are in love with it. Who ever saw a covetous Usurer
troubled in mind when he is telling his Money, and reckoning up his Bonds and
Bills? An Adulterer mourning with his Mistress in his Arms? Belshazzar indeed
was taken and troubled among his Cups, and so are some Drunkards; but that was
an extraordinary judgment. While Men are Drunk with Pleasures, and besotted
with delightful Objects, commonly they are not sensible of any danger, but
being once brought into the Wilderness of fear and solitary Silence, they have
leisure to consider, and ability to discern, that Sin is treacherous as a
Jesuit, bitter as Gall, Ugly, more ugly than the Devil: And then they loath and
fly it, then they cry out, Lord, what would thou have us to do? When before,
they would not be ruled, nor persuaded by any reason. The Jews will not part
with their Idols, till they bring them into Captivity; nor Sampson with
Dalilah, till she betray him into the hands of the Philistines; then away
Idols, and let Dalilah be burned alone; Sampson repents. The Viper beaten,
casts up her Poison. The Traitor on the Rack, will confess and forsake all.
The burnt Child dreads the fire; and the Wormwood upon the Breast, weans the
Child from it.

Secondly, It is to humble the Soul, and cause her to set a right Estimate upon
Christ, hitherto undervalued. Christ would not be so sweet, if Sin were not so
bitter. The Man upon whom the Law has not passed Sentence, will not say
Gramercy for a Pardon. Besides, it is necessity that endears any thing to us.
Extremity of pain, makes us to prize a little ease; and extremity of want, to
admire a little plenty. Darius being vanquished by Alexander, and in flight
being in extremity of Thirst, drank Water out of a Puddle, mingled with much
Blood of slain Soldiers, and said, It was the sweetest Drink that ever he
tasted in his Life. The Prodigal that disregarded all the Dainties of his
Father's House, did highly value the Servants Bread there, when he was reduced
to feed upon Husks in the Wilderness. As it is with a weary Swimmer floating in
the restless Sea, ready to sink every moment, how welcome is a bough to him,
when as if he had been upon the shore, he would not have regarded it. So it is
with such a wearied Man brought into the Wilderness of great distress and
danger, he is so humble and gentle, that a Child may lead him: He cried out,
and looked about him, but few hear, none can help him. O how welcome then is
the Thought, the Sight, the Presence of Christ, that Tree of Life! He will part
with all, Sins, Goods, Liberty, Life, or any thing, if he may but touch the hem
of his Garment. Only then, and to all such he is a Jesus indeed.

Thirdly, It is, that they may be the better ever after. More zealous and
serviceable to God, who has some great Work (commonly) for such to do, and
therefore their preparation is answerable. A high Building must have a low
Foundation. Luther observed of himself, that when God was about to set him upon
any special Service, he either laid some fit of Sickness upon him beforehand,
or turned Satan loose upon him. For he was much exercised and beaten from his
tender years with Spiritual Conflicts; as Melancthon testifies in his Life.
And this was in all likelihood to fit him for the great Work, the Lord had cut
out unto him. There is no whole Heart to the broken: None so sound to hold
Grace, as that; and the more it is broken, the more it contains. A Paradox in
Nature, but not in Grace. Besides, they are hereby made more compassionate, and
helpful unto others. Hence it was that God gave Luther such a Grace, that in
his Sermons, all that heard him, thought every one, his own Temptations had
been touched and noted by him; and when signification thereof was made to him by
his Friends, and being demanded how it could be? answered, Mine own Temptation
and Experience are the cause thereof. As a Physician that tries the virtue of
some sovereign composition upon his own Body, he is the better able to Cure
another with that Receipt. It is a great invitation to Mercy, to see one in the
same condition that we our selves have been in: As he said, Haud ignara mali,
miseris succurrere disco. As a Woman that has had a Child can more pity such
as are in Travel, because she has suffered the like pain. When Christians by
their own experience know the Way, like old Travelers, they can lead others,
and bring them into, and guide them through this Spiritual Trouble, saying;
Thus and thus were I brought in, and so came I off; this course I took, and
this success I found, etc. Experienced Learners, are the best Teachers.

These are some of many Reasons which might be given, of the Lord's proceeding
in this manner toward his People. The Sum of all is, for their good. He
casts them down very low, that he might lift them up the higher, he leads
them through a Wilderness, to convey them into Canaan: As hereafter will
appear. So much by way of Doctrine. The Application follows, which is a
principal part of this Discourse. And

Use 1. It condemns such first, as are frequently in the Wilderness of Sin,
and wanton Prodigality, but never in the Wilderness of sorrow and saving Fear;
much under Worldly, but never under Spiritual Trouble. How far are such from
Grace, who have not past this Preparation? How far from Christ, from Comfort,
from true Happiness? As far as the East is from the West, Darkness from Light,
Belial from Christ, in point of Communion. Such have cause to fear, that Sin
sits like a Queen in her Regency, that the strong Man keeps Possession, and
that they are slaves to Satan, subjects of the Kingdom of Darkness. A Man may
have some Trouble and yet not be Converted, but he cannot be Converted without
some Trouble. The Heart cannot be broken for Sin, without the sight of Sin. The
Sun looks upon the Earth, thence draws up Vapors, and distilleth them down
again; so does the Sun of the Understanding, which till it be Convicted, the
Heart cannot be Compuncted. Sight of Sin must necessarily precede sorrow for
Sin. An Infant in the Womb cries not, because it sees not; but as soon as it
comes into the Light, sets up its note. The blind Eye and the hard Heart go
together, as unseparable Companions. Men will never loath themselves, till
there be a remembering of their ways and doings that have not been good, Ezekiel.
36.31.

Quest. It may be demanded, who are they, and how they are kept out?

Answ. Who they are that were never yet in this Wilderness, may easily be known
by what has been spoken already, in the description of this preparative Work;
let any one bring himself, and compare his present estate with it, and the
truth will readily be discovered; especially if he consider, and impartially
answer to such like demands.

1. Whether he does not retain in his Heart the love of some Sin, which either
he knows, or might know to be a Sin: Though he do many things, yet has he
not an Herodias that he will not part with. Though, with the Vintner, he pull
down the Bush, yet has he not as much Heart to his Sin as ever? Though he pull
down the Shop-window [reform outward Sins] yet does he not follow his Trade
within door? Does he not sit brooding upon his Sin? It is hypocritical
repentance, when Men leave some Sins only, and not others also: They can part
with some kind of Corruptions, [it may be they are angry with them] but then
there are others of which it may be said, as was of Goliah's Sword, none like
to that. For as Repentance takes revenge upon every Sin, so more especially
upon that the Sinner took most delight in: As Cranmer, who subscribed with his
right Hand, what was against his Conscience, afterward with revenge put that
first into the Flame; so does the truly humbled Soul, take revenge on that Sin
by which he has most dishonored God. In a word, such actions of the Soul
which admit of private reservations and indulgences, and are not general, as to
this matter, will be found a Meteor of the Brain, not an affection of the Heart.

2. Whether the enjoyments of the World are not more precious in his esteem,
than the Love and Favor of God? For this is certain, the Man that has been
under this Preparative Work, cannot but prefer the apprehensions of God's Love
to all the World. Therefore David prayed that God would remember him with the
Favor which he bears to his People, Psalm. 16.4, 5. this he accounted his
chiefest good. And Luther protested, he would not be put off with the things of
this Life, Left Hand Blessings. To whom may be added that Noble Italian
Marquess, who accounted not that Man worthy the name of a Christian, who
preferred not one Day's communion with God, to all the splendor of the whole
Earth. Now answer to this demand; How stand your affections to Christ, and
other things below him? Are they to Christ as a Spark, to other things as a
Flame? The Unregenerate Man's joy is diffused to Earthly things, but limited to
Spiritual things. Say, are you not more cheerful in Sinning, than in the
performance of holy Duties? As it is with those Fishes that breed your Orient
Pearls; those Pearls are the torment of the Fish, but when they are put upon a
Man, they are an Ornament to him; so those Sins which are the Disease, the
Burden, the Sorrow of a good Man, are they not a matter of delight to you?

3. Whether he does not rest upon somewhat [Creature, or Action] more than upon
Christ, or does not prize something above him, or equal with him? As Augustine
said, That Marcellina hung Christ's Picture, and the Picture of Pythagoras
together; Do not thou, O Man, set Christ and the World, or Christ and thy
Duties together? A Man may magnify Christ as willing to have him in the end,
but part with nothing for him in the mean while; he may prize his Blood, but
not his Grace; his Promises, but not his Precepts, Jesus, but not Christ. If
thine own Conscience answer Affirmatively, it is an evident sign thou have
never been in this Wilderness.

Quest. But how are they kept out, seeing there is so much means to drive them
into it? many Sons of Thunder, who heartily long after their Peoples safety,
how are they hindered?

Answ. I conceive it is from these and the like Reasons:

First, By the Multitude, who run so merrily in the broad-way of Carnal
Pleasures, and draw multitudes after them. How ordinary is it for Men to follow
a multitude to do evil? Few consider that the way to Heaven is a narrow Way,
and that they should be wise with a few. Few are of the mind of Liberius, an
Othodox Bishop of the Second Primitive Times, who when he was pressed by the
Emperor Constantius, to forsake the Truth, and vote for Arrianism, by this
Argument, Art thou wiser than all the World? Very honestly replied, The Truth
is no whit prejudiced by my aloneness in standing out; for of old there were
but three that withstood the wicked Edict of the King of Babel. Most are of
this Principle, It is safe to do as the most do. Like dead Fish, they swim down
the Stream, whithersoever it runs; or like Water that takes the figure of the
Vessel into which it is cast. They set their Dyal by the Town-Clock, not by the
Sun. The Voice of the People is with them the Voice of God: They infer that way
to be truest, which is the largest.

Secondly, By delay, and putting off serious thoughts about Death and their
Account, being afraid to hear of, much more to dive into their Estate, lest
they should find that which would trouble them. The Cup is in the Sack. Thus
the story goes of Galba, who having received a very great sum of Money from the
state of Rome, and not being able to give account for it, took more care to
avoid giving account than to do it. Thus Men keep their Consciences from
considering their Conditions, because it is so bad with them. Like bad Debtors,
who are loath to come to account, lest they should find their Estates low. Or as
Heretics, that are Lucifugae Scripturarum, such Owls that cannot abide the
Day; they are afraid of discovering their Conditions, and so content themselves
in generals, deceiving their own Souls.

Thirdly, By fair promises of future amendment; the thing they will do but in
their own time, as if the Clock of Mercy would strike at their beck. Like those
spoken of, Hag. 1.2. The time is not yet come.

(1.) The time of rebuilding the Second Temple; it might be done hereafter:
Such is the guife of graceless Men, to future and fool away their Salvation;
hereafter may be time enough, and what need of such haste to build the
Spiritual Temple: In space comes Grace, say they; God is more merciful than so,
At what time soever a sinner repents, God will put away all his Wickedness; and
thus they stand trifling with God and their own Souls, being always about to do
that, which if not done, they are undone for ever. Fools and blind Men! As our
Savior calls the Pharisees, Mat. 23.17. Hence it is, when they are pressed to a
speedy meeting of God by Repentance, they answer as Antipater, King of Macedon
did, when one presented him a Book treating of Happiness, (...), I am not at
leisure: Or as Archias the Theban, when warned of a Conspiracy against him,
cast the Letters by, saying, In crastinum seria, and was slain ere the Morrow
came: So these Men will amend hereafter, when they have neither Time nor Grace
to command: They promise a time of Healing, but a time of Terror and Torment
may come. Jer. 14.19. Et jam ex Jesu factus est damnator, salutem consequi non
possum; as Father John said, when exhorted to believe in Christ Jesus, and to
lay hold on his Merits* Cham. Epist. Jesuit. page 124.

Fourthly, Others are kept off from a consideration of the troublesomness of
the Way, and lothness to leave their Sins. Luther said, while he was leavened
with Popish Principles of Contritions and their Penance, there was not a more
bitter word in all the Scripture than Repent; but when he understood the
Gospel, nothing was more precious and welcome. Thus while the Duties of Religion
are looked upon as clothed with Irksomness, and burdensome Men are ready to
reject them; saying, O the Way of the Wilderness is tedious! They will not
crucify the Flesh, cut off the Right Hand, and pull out the Right-eye; Men
will do any thing to avoid it. The Jews would bring multitudes of Sacrifices,
kill many Bullocks and Rams, rather than any one Lust; they would Sacrifice
their Firstborn, when they would not leave their sins. It is an Hell to
Unregenerate Men. Hasen Mullerus reports of one Franciscus Turrianus, who wrote
against the Augustine's Confession, but upon some Conviction, wished he had
never read it, nor the Answer of Anthony Sadeel, against him; for it had made
him somewhat doubtful what to hold, or which way to go, and concludes thus:
God's Word promises me comfort, if I forsake Rome. Sed ego senex hinc exire
non possum: But I am old, and cannot depart hence. He could not submit to the
Trouble, as for the Comforts of Heaven, to depart from Rome. So, many Men are
wedded to their Sins, they can upon no terms part with them. They love not
Trouble. Christianus est perpetua Naturae violentia: Christianity is a
perpetual violence against Nature; and therefore few are brought to it. These
and many other shifts, Natural Men have to hide themselves from the Light and
Stroke of the Word, so that they are not broken, benefited and brought by it
into this Wilderness.

Use 2. Secondly, This Doctrine condemns those, that think themselves to be
in this Wilderness, before they are indeed, and so sitting down under that
misconceit, never come there: Mistaking every Sermon-sick-passion, every
slight sight of Sin, every inward Trouble, every Tear, for sound Contrition
and unfeigned Humiliation. Let such consider [there may be much glistering
where is no true Gold].

First, How far many have gone, and yet come short. Some, like a Ship, have
sunk in the mouth of the Harbor. Esau sought the Blessing carefully, and with
Tears. Ahab humbled himself, even to the renting of his Clothes, and putting on
of Sackcloth. Judas confessed his sin, and made restitution, and both,
doubtless, with abundance of trouble, and yet all came short. It Is plain, there
were great troubles and fears about Sin, as if some excellent and beautiful
Child of Grace had been to be born; but after all the troubles, pangs and
fears, there came forth a great nothing; they are as loathsome and abominable
as before. You have heard of, and known many to cry out in the agony of their
Souls, We have sinned grievously, what shall we do that we may be saved? And
yet for all this Cry, this Travel, the Soul brings forth nothing but wind and
emptiness.

Secondly, Others that have entered upon it, but have too quickly withdrawn
themselves again; as Cain and Herod did: The former cried out, My sins are
greater than I can bear; and therefore to ease himself, builds Cities, and
uses all means to divert his fear and trouble: The latter, with Felix the
Governor, puts it off to a more convenient time, he will consider it another
Season. So, many among us, when the Minister is plain and downright with them,
the Word flasheth in their Faces like Lightning, then they see their Sins
distinctly, and are indeed afraid of Hell; the Voice sounds still in their
Ears, and their Sins like so many Furies follow them, till they betake
themselves to some diverting employment or merry Company, to drive away such
melancholy dumps, as many use to speak; like the wounded Heart, that labors to
eat out the Arrow, they labor to put away Sin, that it may not always be before
them, and then all is lost, as if they had never been there at all: They quench
the Fire that was kindled, and bolt out the Light that shined on them. Such
Tears as t^ese, are but like the Waters of standing Pools, that breed Toads and
other Vermin.

Thirdly, A third sort may be deep and long in this legal Terror; so that they
harden under it, and after a sort grow proud of it; they can bewail their Sins,
and cry out for inward fear and trouble (as if they were truly penitent) and
yet live in them all the while; doing that with secret delight, which they
pretend to fear and hate. O horrible deceit! so bleering the Eyes of Men, while
they bathe Sin, but are unwilling to drown it: Resting upon this, That once
they were humbled, and therefore they need not now fear or care.

Fourthly, Another sort are such, who counterfeit Trouble, and complain of
distress of Mind, when in truth there is no such matter. Like your common
Beggars, who use to complain of such Griefs and Troubles which they never felt;
so these, they complain and weep, only because they see and hear, that such
Sorrow is usual among the Saints, and that such are most approved who pass this
way, by the Wilderness of Legal Fear, into the Canaan of Evangelical Comforts;
and therefore they would be thought to have, what they should have in truth.
The Devil is God's Ape, and imitates him in all his Methods and ordinary ways
of Grace; that if possible by his Delusions, he may gain some into his own
Condemnation.

But to clear this a little further, there may be proposed two Questions of
moment, viz.

First, How far a wicked Man may go under this Preparative Work, and yet come
short of Grace?

Secondly, Wherein, and how far, those which are called according to purpose,
go beyond all others in this Trouble?

Answ. To the first, may be replied; That they are often brought into this
Wilderness, at least for some Degrees, is certain; how far only is questioned.
Therefore to answer directly.

First, They may be brought to Illumination of Mind: By the Glass of the Law
they may see what the Law requires, and how far short they come in their
Obedience, not without some trouble, and it may be great disquiet: And this not
only confusedly, in Generals, as Pharaoh; but distinctly for Particulars, as
Ahab and Judas did. Of one it is said, he repented and confessed, I have sinned
in betraying Innocent Blood, Mat. 27.3. And for the other, Ahab's Humiliation
is so great* 1 Kings 21.27. that the Lord takes notice of it. See how Ahab
humbles himself! And so the Israelites; How often were they in their
Humiliations for sin? But those Land-floods were dried up again; in so much as
Gregory compares them to the Grass-hoppers, which make sudden Leaps from the
Earth, as if they would fly to Heaven, but presently fall down to the Earth
again.

Secondly, They may be and are often brought to Conviction of the Will; that
they may have nothing to say for themselves, against the Light of Divine Truth,
in flashes closing with the Light of Conscience. When that unprepared Guest,
Mat. 22.12. was questioned why he presumed to come without his Wedding Garment;
it is said, he was speechless; having no excuse to pretend; he was
Self-condemned.

Thirdly, They may be brought to a conditional Application, so as to conclude a
possibility of safety, that they might be freed from Sin, and Sentence of the
Law, if they should believe and lay hold on Christ. So far is conceived that
Herod went, by hearing of the Baptist. Yea, more, they may also have a fiducial
Application and Appropriation of God unto themselves in particular; and herein
may have a great resemblance of Justifying Faith. As Paul said, Who loved me,
and gave himself for me. So these may apply Christ to their particular; I thank
my Christ, my Redeemer, my Savior, though in presumption notwithstanding.

Fourthly, They may go one step further; even to some apprehension of the
Beauty of Grace, and that happiness following a Spiritual Union with Christ:
Especially, if they live where the Law and Gospel are distinctly handled,
skilfully intermixed, fully applied; so as not only to wish well, but to
resolve and promise a better course: As appears from that known and famous
Instance, Mat. 13.20. where the third kind of hearers are said, to receive the
Word with joy: As good News affects the hearers about the State and Kingdom,
wherein they are much concerned; so may Men be affected in hearing the glad
tidings, the gracious Counsels of God to save Sinners discovered, and yet not
regenerated. To which may be added, that difficult place in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 6. ver. 4, 5. Many Apostates have had great meltings, and much
sudden and strong joy. But the Issue of all is, they ever dash on one of these
two Rocks: Either they Presume, and so are careless to go on actually to
receive and give themselves to Christ: Or else they Despair, and so are
hopeless of ever having what they see and admire. In all these flashings, the
Truths of God pass by them, as Water through a Conduit, and leave a Dew, but
soak not, as Water into the Earth.

Quest. Secondly, It is demanded, Wherein those which are called according to
purpose, go beyond all others in this Wilderness of Trouble?

Answ. That it should be simply and in all things a common work to those which
are outwardly called only, with those which are inwardly called also, that good
and bad are brought alike into this Wilderness, that those which attain Grace,
and those which attain none, should be brought to lie under one degree of Legal
Preparation is strange to assert; seeing it is the same Spirit under diverse
names, that first prepares by bringing into the Wilderness, as the Spirit of
Bondage; and then infuseth Grace by speaking unto the Heart, as the Spirit of
Adoption: As also considering, it is a promise made here in favor of the
Church, and to her appropriated. Yet it will be granted here, to be difficult
to satisfy any, or to show demonstratively wherein they differ. Only for the
present take what may be offered that way, till some other by searching the
Matter, shall give more and clearer Light for plainer discovery.

Those then, that are specially beloved of God, and whose safety the Lord does
absolutely aim at and intend, go beyond all others in this Work in these
following particulars.

First, In the intent and purpose of God; which is not to Civilize, or only to
Formalize them, as he deals with many; bringing them into trouble, to tame and
keep them in order, for the good of humane Society; but indeed to go through
with them, for their sound Humiliation, and through Sanctification.

Secondly, In the success and event; for some are only terrified and restrained
for a time, when others are heartily grieved, even drencht in Sorrow, to be
savingly renewed after: So that the Spirit of Sanctification does immediately
after manifest both Presence and Power, Victory and Sovereignty. But who
doubts of this? Is there no other way wherein they differ? Yes, and it may be
thus, viz. 1. Modo operationis, in the manner of Working. Some are brought in
by outward means only, (the Law, Sickness, Crosses; as the Marble is said to
sweat in foul Weather, but still remains Marble) assisted and followed with the
common light and power of Natural Conscience; others are brought in, not
without the Holy Ghost, ordering the outward means and their inward sight, to
continue closed, till this Supernatural Work be perfected: As the Father by his
Love in Electing before they had a Being, except in the Divine Understanding,
so the blessed Spirit takes hold upon them by his Power, so soon as they have
any Being; which hold of his is diversely manifested, both in respect of time,
means, and manner of Working: Toward some at one time, by one means, and after
this manner; toward others at another time by some other Ordinance, and after
another manner: By degrees drawing them into this Wilderness, where he
discovers their natural Bondage, stirs them to desire, and directs them
how to attain true Liberty. 2. In duratione and disparitate dispositionis: In
their continuance and dissimilitude of Disposition, while they are there. Those
that are ordained to Life, do continue there commonly longer: Not for
intermitted Hours, to be now in and then out, but for Days, Weeks, Months,
Years; never wholly off, till they pass Jordan, and arrive to their heavenly
Canaan. Some have been sensibly kept there, the most time of their Life, and
yet come off well in the end. Besides, they are more kindled, and deeply
affected with an hatred and loathing of all Sin; their affection is more lively
and feelingly bent upon Purity, hungring and thirsting after Righteousness; and
their hope is stronger, that it may be, that it will be better with them. For
this is that secret Staff, which supporteth such Travelers. They desire
pardon, and they hope they shall have it; they hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, [which others in this case never do] and have some hope to be
satisfied: They long to hear the Voice, and see the loving Countenance of
Christ, and are inwardly upheld with hope of both: Who can tell, say they in
their Hearts, but that the Lord may be entreated to turn away his fierce Anger,
that we perish not here according to our desert? It is our self-harming league
with Sin, that the Lord goes about to break; were that done, he would not
contend nor be angry for ever: When we submit unto him, he will speak unto us,
as he did unto Hagar; however, we must trust in him, although he should kill us
with Hunger and Thirst, in this vast and desolate Wilderness of legal Terror
and Conviction, where no refreshing Streams do flow.

Use 2. Secondly, The Use may be Instructive, both to Ministers and People.
First, To Ministers, that they wisely endeavor it, to bring their People into
and through this Wilderness; by presenting and pressing the Law, which is God's
Instrument to charge Sin upon the Soul, in the true Nature, Root and Fruit
thereof; God having imparted some of his own Brightness and Power unto it, for
this end. To know how the Law does this, may give some Light to Ministers in
the use thereof: And that may be, 1. By way of Illumination of the
Understanding, to see Sin as it is sin, which no word nor means in the World
can do beside; because God has imparted to it the brightness of his own
Purity, [so much as he pleased, and thought to be needful for this end] with a
searching faculty, undeniably to charge Conscience with all, and every Sin;
this supernatural splendour closing with the innate light of Conscience,
proceeding in this manner, viz. First, to discover Actual Sins, beginning often
with some of the most heinous; and going on by degrees to the rest, for number
and nature, how many, how foul; and to that end the Law presents to the Soul,

First, With her Sovereignty, for Constitution and Commission; being made and
ordained by him who is infinite in every Attribute, and has an absolute
dominion over our Bodies and Spirits, and sent abroad with a large Commission,
to show all Sins unto all sorts impartially; whether they be high or low, rich
or poor, profane or holy; the Law has a sovereign power, and exercises it
after a regal manner, sparing none.

Secondly, With her Integrity, and Extent. In this Wilderness, the Law shows
Conscience her Spiritual Authority, her Aggravating Faculties, her exact
Purity, and that mutual Dependency, one Law, and one Member of the Law has
upon another. Her Spiritual Authority; to go into the inward Rooms, yea, into
every corner of those Rooms, and every crevice of those Corners, where Sin
lies hid, and to search and bring out all Sins, great and small, of Omission
and Commission. Like a two-edged Sword, it pierces to the very Marrow, to the
very intents of the Hearts. Her Aggravating Faculty, to set forth particular
Sins to the Eye, as the Glass does the spots of the Face, in the most odious
Colors, that so Sin may appear exceeding sinful. Her Exact Purity, to discover
such practices of our Life to be sinful, which we never dreamt of, nor before
took notice of, so much as to suspect. I had not known Sin, (i. e.) some Sins
to be Sins, but by the Law; this discovers that to be a Mountain, which before
the Sinner judged to be a Mote, and that to be Sin, which before he esteemed
Righteousness; and like a Light, exposed to view those Corruptions which lay
hid and unseen, in their due proportion. Her Mutual Dependency; one Branch does
so hang upon another, that whosoever breaks one, is guilty of all, James
2.10. The whole Law is but one Copulative; and this dependence of one Precept
with another, and all upon the Lawmakers, [whose Authority is violated and
contemned in the breach of one, as well as of all] occasioneth, even one Sin to
be so infinitely weighty. Secondly, The Law proceeds to discover Original Sin,
in the Root and Branches; how we participate in the first sinful Act of Adam;
how that Guilt is imputed, and how Habitual Corruption is propagated from
immediate Parents to all their Posterity, proceeding from them by an ordinary
way of Generation, as Poison is carried from the Fountain to the Cistern; all
herent in the Nature, or redounding on the Person, by virtue of the Covenant;
and this the Law does, either by way of Comparison, or else by way of positive
Description; comparing and preferring it for the evil thereof to Actual Sin, as
the Root or Cause thereof; Et quod efficit tale, est magis tale, is said in
Philosophy, and is true in Divinity: Then describing it either by Names, or
Properties: By Names first, calling it the Old Man, the Body of Death, (as if
Death were nothing without this Sin) a Weight that presses down, etc. By
Properties next; and they are especially four, viz. Eminency, Predominancy,
Insensibility, and Perpetuity. For Eminency, the Law says it is a Transcendent
Evil, and the worst of all Evils. Predominancy; strangely to rule and oversway,
like a second Nature, which Men often confess, while they say, It is their
Nature to do this or that, is to be furious, to swear and curse a little now
and then, they cannot help it; it is their Nature, when indeed it is the
corruption of Nature reigning. Insensibility, to keep all the parts in a sleepy
peace, that Men are not aware of their danger till they be awakened and brought
into this Wilderness. Perpetuity; to cleave fast unto our Nature, even to the
end of our Life. While Blood is in our Veins, Sin is in our Nature; like the
Jebusites, this remains as a Thorn in the side, in the Flesh; even when Victory
is obtained by Grace, over all Actual Sin in a competent measure, that is still
living and stirring, gathering new Forces, and breaking into Rebellion ever and
anon. Thus the Law brings Men into the Wilderness by the work of
Illumination. 2. By the work of Conviction, whereby the Conscience is brought
to this Spiritual assent, that the former Testimony of the Law is true, both
for Crime, Object, and Curse denounced; and the Person to a particular
application, both of the Sins to be personal, and of the sentence against such
Sins and Sinners to be Legal: The sum of which Work may be comprised in this
practical Syllogism, viz. Whosoever is thus Sinful and Cursed according to the
Law, is fully miserable; but I (says the assuming Conscience) am thus sinful
and cursed, therefore I am fully miserable. What shall I do, miserable Man that
I am? who shall deliver me in this vast Wilderness? O help, help me for the
Lord's sake, I am ready to faint, to sink, to die with fear and grief.

The Spirit by the Ministry of the Law works this distinct and sound
Conviction diverse ways:

1. By removing all Impediments, which are usually observed to hinder this
Conviction. One is natural Deadness and penal Hardness, caused by Love and
Custom in some one or many Sins, which, while it is interposed between the Law
and Conscience, will not suffer them to close; and so nothing is done till that
be in part removed. Another is Spiritual Sloth, which is a prevailing
Backwardness, and a precipitating Carelessness, to consider what the Law
discovers, and concludes against Sin. Men naturally love their ease and
quiet, they would not be disturbed. A third is carnal Craft, to pretend
Religion, and to perform all outward Duties, and yet all the while to keep Sin
in the Heart untouched, to remain as habitually and delightfully unclean as
ever.

This Soul-destroying Subtilty appears, 1. In a readiness to shift off Sin and
Reproofs from our selves to others. The Minister met with such an one to day,
there was a Lesson for him indeed, etc. 2. In loathing a sound plain-searching
Ministry, (as sore Eyes do the Sun) which goes about to answer all the
Objections of a natural Heart against the Goodness of Divine Truth. Thus the
Law removes Impediments.

2. It works Conviction, by applying unto the Soul and Conscience,

[1.] Gentle Expostulations, frequently and movingly here and there; as unto
Adam and Gehazi, Genesis 3.9. 2 Kin. 5.26. Tell me, poor Soul, was it not ^ven so?
have not thou done thus and thus? went not my Spirit with thee? and was not
mine Eye over thee? Confess thy Sin, ease thy self, and give glory to God. O
how loving is the Lord, even in his Terrors and Enditements! In the midst of
Judgment he remembers Mercy. Tho his Robes be red, they are not without some
streamings of white; and if he be compelled to pronounce Judgment, as it was
said of Augustus, he does it even with Tears in his Eyes.

[2.] Instances very pertinent, and those either direct, as Psalm. 50.18. etc.
or Parabolical. As Nathan dealt with David, so the Lord deals with those whom
he intends to restrain and renew. You are the Men, says he, that have been so
much addicted to, and delighted with Idleness, Wantonness, Luxury, Pride,
Covetousness, Slandring, Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, and the like.

[3.] Threatenings are added where the former avail not. Cursed is every one
that does not all which is written in the Law. He shall be pursued with
Judgments of diverse Natures to one end, sometimes with prosperity on the right,
and anon with adversity on the left hand; and last of all, which is the worst
of all, dying impenitently, he must needs be damned. Thus the Lord thundereth
in his Law against some, whom nevertheless he intends to sanctify and save; as
a Father may threaten and terrify that Child whom he intends to make his Heir.
But withal you must know, that he does inwardly and secretly support them, that
they dash not upon Presumption, nor sink under final Despair. So that at length
being driven from all their hiding Places, they are brought into this
Wilderness, and forced freely to take upon themselves all those Sins discovered
by the Law, to fall down before God, and to acknowledge their Guilt and Desert
before the Throne of his Majesty, resolving there to lie prostrate till he
raise them in Mercy. Now say they, we see, we feel, we know, how true the Word
of God is; how faithfully such Ministers dealt with us, while we slighted and
laughed them to scorn; and how deceitful Sin is, that appears at first small,
sweet, and clean, when as it is weighty, bitter, and filthy. They cry, who will
take this Dagger out of my Heart? this Millstone off my Back? this Fire out of
my Loins? this Sting out of my Conscience? Now the seeming sweetnes^ of Sin is
turned to Gall. O Sin! how grievous is thy remembrance? Away ye wicked we will
henceforth endeavor to keep the Commandments of our God. No more Swearing,
much less Perjury, no Drunkenness, no more Uncleanness. When these knock at the
door, the answer is, O these are they that cost us dear at such a time, w^ yet
feel the sad Impressions of our former Afflictions for them; we find a Pardon
no easy Enterprise, nor Repentance so pleasing a Potion; we would not for all
the World b^ under that Anger of God, nor feel one drop of his scalding
Indignation, which we have perceived for those Offenses. Thus the bi^^^^ Child
dreads the Fire. And this (with submission) is the Course that Ministers mus^
take in opening and pressing the Law first which is God's Instrument
effectually to charge the Conscience with Sin, and to bring a Person into this
Wilderness.

2dly. The People may learn to join with the Lord in his Ambassadors, so to
furthe^ this Work of the Law, when and where i^ is once begun; and to follow
the Lord under his Cloud, and after this Fire, into this Wi^derness. And that,

1. By a serious Meditation of these many Impediments, which keep Men out of
it, o^ hinder them much in the way toward it* when the Lord is about to bring
them into it. Eye them, that you may avoid them. For instance, to esteem of the
Law as a strange thing, as not appertaining to them, or wherein they are little
or nothing concerned; to interpose some beloved Sin between these two Lights of
the Law and Conscience, that they cannot join. This alone hindered Herod's
Conversion under John's piercing Ministry, the interposition of his Herodias
caused a fearful and final Eclipse. So likewise to go away unthankfully and
carelessly from a good Discourse, does hinder the Work, and quench the Sparks
which might have bred a Flame.

2. By frequent Meditation on diverse good Subjects moving this way, as

(1.) Upon the Mercies of God bestowed upon you in particular from time to
time. This Course the Lord took to humble David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. And
whosoever has tried will say, It is a very piercing way to bring the Heart
into a through and kindly grief. I have read of one, who reading a Pardon sent
him from the King, fell a weeping, and burst out into these Words, A Pardon
has done that which Death could not do; it has made my Heart to relent. As
the Sugar Loaf is dissolved, and weeps it self away, when it is dipped in Wine:
so will Penitents dissolve, and melt themselves away in the sweet sense of
Divine Love, and their neglect or abuse of it. Without doubt the very Behavior
of the Prodigal's Father brake his Heart with more thawings and kindly
mourning, than ever his former Hardship and Misery did. O this! that ever he
should run to meet him! that he should fall upon his Neck, and kiss him! This
kindness of his Lips wounded his Heart with the deeper sense and judging of his
own unkindness. When the Surface of the Water is glazed with Ice, the Sunbeams
dissolve it: such operation has the Grace of Christ upon frozen Hearts, which
are never truly melted into Contrition, but by Evangelical Beams. Surely when a
Sinner shall consider the great Love, the sweetest Kindness, the freest Pardons
offered, the choicest Mercies bestowed, his Heart cannot but melt into a River.
What, all these to and for me, Lord? yea, for thee: What, after such deep
Rebellions and Refusals? yea, after all, and that most freely and willingly.
Good Lord! how can the Soul but weep and mourn now!

(2.) Meditate for that purpose upon the Justice and Power of God, able to
revenge the Quarrel of his Covenant, and to bruise all his proud and stout
Enemies with a Rod of Iron. He is not only a Rock of Refuge to the Godly, but
also a Rock of Destruction to dash the Impenitent in pieces. The strength of
the Rock is seen, as in upholding the House that is built upon it; so in
breaking the Ships that dash against it. The force of Fire is manifested, as in
refining the Gold, so in consuming the Dross. There is none like unto thee, O
Lord; thou art great; and thy Name is great; who would not fear thee, thou King
of Nations? Jer. 10.6. And, It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the
Living God, Heb. 10.31. As a Lion, he tears in pieces the Adversaries, Psalm.
50.22. There is no standing before him, if his Wrath be kindled, though but a
little.

(3.) Meditate upon sinful Nature, there is both Guilt and Filth, such a Nature
which Sighs and Tears may better express than Words. We were in Adam as in a
common Root, and he sinning, we became guilty: Romans 5.12. In whom all have
sinned. By his Treason our Blood is tainted, and this Guilt brings Shame with
it, as its Twin, Romans 6.21. And not only is the Guilt of Adam's Sin imputed,
but the Poison of his Nature is disseminated to us; our Virgin-Nature is
defiled, the Heart is spotted, 1 Kin. 8.38. How then can the Actions be pure?
If the Water be foul in the Well, it cannot be clean in the Bucket. We are all
as an unclean thing. Hell it self, which is the sole Receptacle of Sin and
Sinners, is not in some respect more filthy than Man's Nature. Poor Man is like
a Patient under the Physician's hands, that has no sound part, his Head
bruised, his Liver swelled, his Lungs perished, his Blood enflamed, his Feet
gangrened. Thus it is before Grace comes, Isa. 1.6. Yea, though your Nature be
changed, there are Remainders of this Corruption. The best Saint alive, who is
taken out of the Grave of Sin, yet smells of the Grave-clothes still upon him.
As Basil said of the Rose, that it was a fair Flower, but it wanted not its
Prickles, that might put him in mind of the Curse the Earth was subject unto;
so in the best there are those Remainders and Relics of Sin, which might cause
them to mourn and weep before the Lord.

(4.) Meditate on the Lord Jesus Christ, his Suffering, Agony, how sharp and
bitter it was, [if your Heart be as hard as an Adamant, the Blood of this
Scapegoat will soften it]: It affected his Head, for upon the foresight he
began to be amazed, Mark 14.33. It affected his Heart, for he began to droop,
to faint, Math. 26.37. See how he was affected in his Soul, (the innocent for
the nocent) it was overcast with an heaviness to death; yea, in his Body, he
sweat drops of Blood, Luke 22.44. Meditate on his Sufferings, see if they will
not move you to sorrow. The sight of Caesar's bloody Robes greatly affected the
People of Rome, and edged them to revenge. When St. Augustine read the Story of
Dido, he could not but weep: And when Julius Caesar saw Pompey's Head, tho his
Enemy, he wept, and refused at his return to Rome to ride in Triumph for his
Victory. The like did Charles the 5th upon his great Victory over the French
King at the Siege of Paris. How much more may the Meditation of Christ's
Sufferings, who was our Friend, suffering for our Sins, melt our Hearts? See
him in the Wilderness of Suffering, it may bring you into the Wilderness of
Sorrow.

(5.) Meditate upon the dangerous Consequence, if you have not Sin charged upon
you here in this Life. If you follow not God into this Wilderness of Trouble
for Sin now, but still cleave to Egypt, preferring the momentany Pleasures of
Sin to this Manna, be assured one of these two Evils will follow, either the
Lord will break this League and Union between Sin and your Hearts, or else he
will permit and order that Disorder, till you attain the fullness of Hardness
and Blindness. When Conscience shall be awakened, and Sin charged upon the Soul
suddenly and fully, both for number and weight, your jovial Meetings, excessive
Drinkings, and Heathenish Quaffings, will have weeping and howling here or
hereafter; when it will not be the whole World on Fire, nor the terrible
presence of the Judge, coming with shrill-sounding Trumpets, and Troops of
Angels only, nor Hell and all the Devils there, shall be so fearfully heavy and
unsupportable; but Sin so deceitfully pleasing now, appearing then more ugly
than Hell, or the foulest Fiend there; committed now by degrees, one after
another, some this Day, more next, now an Oath, than a Lie, but presented and
pressed and imputed altogether, even to the sinking of a Soul. O think of this
often, all you in whom the custom of Sinning has taken away the sense of
Sinning! if any thing, this will help to awaken and bring you into this
Wilderness.

3. You may help the Work forward, by special application of what you hear;
when the Law is personally applied, the legal work upon the matter is ended;
and when the Gospel is believed, the whole is perfected. As it was in the
Creation of the World, and in the Conception of Christ, [so soon as ever his
blessed Virgin Mother did close by her understanding and will with the Word and
Message of the Angel, the Hypostatical Union was begun in her Womb; as Zanchy
following Gregory and Damascene, is of opinion] so it is in the Regeneration,
and Sacramental nutrition of the new Man, he said it was done; no sooner is the
Word applied, but the Work is wrought. Put it not off therefore to others, but
say, Certainly this is my case, I am the Man, that have done so and so; that
have such an Heart, so hard, so unclean and deceitful, etc. Then hear what
threatenings are denounced against such Off^nces, then see what judgments have
been inflicted upon the like Offenders; this will pluck the Plumes, and allay
the Jollity of any Person. This is the way to draw proud Minions, and roaring
Gallants, out of their Fools Paradise, into a World of saving trouble, to see
and bewail their monstrous Vanities and youthful Folly. And here let all such
be advised to stay, till the Lord be pleased to speak unto them, and to bring
them as by a Hand of Comfort into Canaan. O pluck not off the Plaster because
it smarts; refuse not the Potion because it is bitter; confine your selves to
his Rules of Physic; break not those Bonds, and cast not off these Cords from
you; haste not out of this Wilderness too soon, because it is Solitary; the end
and issue will support Patience; he that believes will not make haste to apply
unseasonable Comforts. The Lord will be seen in the Mount, and heard in the
cool of the Day. The Corrosive must eat out Corruption to the bottom, before
any healing Salve can well be applied, that so there may be a perfect Cure: The
Law is that Corrosive, promises that healing Oil; both must have their time and
place for Working: O let not, let not preposterous haste prevent good speed, be
more desirous to be ready for Comfort, than to have it; and then doubt not but
it will be enjoyed time enough.

Use 3. Thirdly, The use may serve for Consolation. This Doctrine, like the
Carcass of the Lion, which Sampson found, and therein a swarm of Bees with
sweet Honycombs, yields sweet Consolation to such as have been, or at present
are exercised in this uncomfortable condition. No Affliction is for the present
joyous, but rather grievous: Especially, a wounded Conscience who can bear? To
be alone in a vast Wilderness, encompassed with Sins, with diverse and horrid
Fears; and which is heaviest of all, to have the Wrath of the Almighty
presented to a solitary Soul, no Friend in sight, but all apprehended Enemies
to him; this is a lamentable Case: Yet here is comfort for all this; if the Eye
be once opened as Hagar's was, or the Servants of the Prophet, to see a
Fountain near us opened for Sin and Uncleanness, to see the Mountains covered
with armed Soldiers, and Chariots of Fire on our side; if we once look up and
consider the end which the Lord proposes in so doing, it will never after be
so doleful: he can lead you through the Sea, feed you in the Wilderness, and
easily limit and destroy all your Enemies. Nay, in time, he will do it: And if
the Lord be on our side, we need not fear ten Thousands homming us in on every
side.

Many there be in the World to whom this Comfort belongs, who will not take it;
and they run into two Extremes; either such who have drunken so deep of this
Cup of Legal Terror, that they judge themselves hated of God, as if none of his
Beloved had ever been in that Case; when as his own dear Son was so far brought
into this Wilderness, as to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
And here it is a merciful Promise made unto a beloved People, an ordinary
Course which he does take with those that are dear unto him; through many
Tribulations to bring them into possession of a Kingdom. Let not Satan, nor
your own slavish Fears, so far prepossess you, as to deny audience unto God,
when he shall be pleased to speak unto our Hearts. Or else they are such who
have had either none or so little of it in their apprehensions, that they deem
themselves still in the State of Nature, because they were never humbled
enough, as such and such; they were never in this Wilderness, and so
consequently never yet in the ready way to Heaven. Therefore they refuse
Christ, and all Comfort offered: no Promise, they say, belongs to them.

To such I would say, True it is, that all ordinary Converts are humbled, all
are brought into this Wilderness, and all taste more or less at one time or
other of this Cup of Legal Terror. The Soul that is so prone to Sin must be
stayed, Conscience must be charged with the guilt and weight of Sin, and
pursued with deserved Anger from one place to another, till the Soul be weary
of Sin, and the Party oft-times so afraid, that he dares not be alone, and yet
finds little ease in Company. But then you must know withal, that the Lord is a
free Agent, he has not limited himself to one degree or measure; so neither
can any Man set a stint, to say, Whosoever shall be saved must be humbled to
this and this degree. God cannot be tract in his goings, none can find out his
Footsteps: His ways are past finding out; they are like the way of an Eagle in
the Air. Besides, all need it not alike, and he works it diversely upon most,
according to the number, nature, and continuance of their Sins, and with
reference to that Emploiment he intends them for after; as has been formerly
noted.

A familiar Instance may serve to bring the meaning hereof to every Capacity.
Of Locks some are new, and easily opened; others old and rusty, and must with
violence be broken open; of Stones some are harder than others: So of Persons,
some are more glued unto, and faster riveted in Sin, than others. Paul was
knocked down, while Lydia had her Heart gently opened. Zaccheus, a Publican and
Extortioner, is not stricken from the Tree which he climbs, by any Rays of
Divine Majesty shining upon him; but is like ripe Fruit gathered by the Hand,
not shaken off by the tempestuous Winds. If an old Adulterer, or a deboist lewd
Companion, be once brought into this Wilderness, he is dreadfully handled, his
foul Sins pursue him like Acteon's Hounds, Hellfire seems to fly in his Eyes,
and he fears sinking every moment. Such as have taken much delight in Sin, are
made for their health to vomit up their sweet Morsels with much bitterness. O
my Drunkenness, cries out one in such a place, and with such Company! O my
Fornication and Adultery with such and such, says another! Once pleasant, now
bitter as Gall and Wormwood: Woe unto us, that ever we were born, to go on so
long in Sin, etc. So that by this time all the Town and Country hear and speak
of them; such a Change cannot escape wonder. Thus the Case is difficult with
some. As a Disease come to a Paroxism is hardly cured: And as where the Enemy
is stronger, there the Victory is more difficult. Now for others, who have been
by careful Parents more restrainedly brought up, and religiously educated; they
may be brought into it softly and by degrees, not knowing when or how; thus far
they are come, they hate Sin, all, in all sorts; they love Grace and good
Company, God's favor they prize above all Contentments, loving and cleaving
unto Jesus Christ with sincere Hearts; good Duties they perform, and dare not
often omit them in private or in public; and a good Conscience they desire to
keep toward God and Man; they are the same in words and deeds, to the exactest
of their care and sincere intention; charitable to the Poor, doing good to all,
especially to the Household of Faith. This they know, but that they were ever in
this Wilderness, they remember not. Many times, and unto many Persons, the Lord
hides the violence of this Terror, knowing their weak and tender disposition,
and affords them a saving Proportion by continuance; it is long upon them that
have least, and of shorter continuance in them that have most: Let none measure
themselves by others. A wise Physician proportioneth his Receipt to the
Constitution of the Patient, else he might sooner kill than cure. Who will say,
his Potion can do him no good, because he had not so many drams as another had,
when as his Body would not bear it, neither does his Disease require it? The
Lord knows best what he has to do, and how. Leave it to him, and look rather
to the Quality, than to the Quantity; that you be utterly driven out of your
selves, to rest effectually on Christ, as your Lord and Savior, and then fear
not.

Quest.

But how may a Man know, whether he have been at any time brought into this
Wilderness in truth?

Answ.

By the Manner of working it, and by the Nature of his Sorrow.

1. By the manner of working, as has been formerly described. When a Person is
so far humbled by the Law, as that he acknowledges both Crime and Curse, and
has nothing to say for himself, but to cry out with Tears, I am unclean, I am
unclean: When his Plea is an Appeal, and his Suit is deeply set and closely
followed for Mercy and Grace, it is a good sign.

2. By the nature of this Sorrow and Grief; which if it be only to restrain
him, it is shallow and short; like a Land-flood occasioned by a Storm, which
when it is over, the Flood is gone too: But if it be a preparative to
Renovation, then it is deep and lasting; more or less during Life; it is a
Spring which continually runs. Neither would God have the Wounds of Godly
Sorrow to be so closed up, as not to bleed afresh upon every good occasion. And
this Godly Sorrow may be discerned from all counterfeit dashes of Hypocritical
and Vainglorious Mourning. Thus:

1. By the disposition and desire of the Party in whom it is, to keep it
secret: Although he can rest no where, nor answer himself, being in little
ease; yet is often ashamed any should know it. Hypocrisy loves a Stage to ^ct
her Part upon; to get Credit from Men, ^ather than to glorify God, Mat. 6.16.
But ^lle vere dolet qui sine test dolet. He grieves truly that grieves
privately. So much is contained in that Prophecy, Zach. 12.12. The Land shall
mourn, every Family apart. To show the soundness of their Sorrow; their
sincerity by their Secrecy. They were severed, to show, that they wept not for
company; Sed sponte and proprio affectu, as Calvin has it, but of their own
accord, and out of pure affection.

2. By the quality of the Confessors, which at length after much a-do, he
chooses to make known his case unto; even the most Orthodox and Impartial
Divines, that excel in Sanctity, Experience and soundness of Judgment, who he
thinks will not flatter him, and dare not deceive him for a World. Judas being
troubled, went to the Scribes and Pharisees, and they cared for none of these
things, but turn him off, with a What is that to us, see thou to it: This is
all the help and comfort they can afford him. Miserable Comforters! Physicians
of no value. The Devil and his Imps love to bring Men into the Briars, and
there leave them: As familiar Devils forsake their Witches, when they have once
brought them into Fetters. [If you confess your selves to a Priest and not to
God, said that Martyr, you shall have the reward that Judas had; who confessed
to a Priest, and afterward went and hanged himself.] But they that are kindly
touched, with those in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 2. ver. 37. Haste to
those which wounded them, even to the Disciples, saying, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved?

3. By a restless hatred of Sin, wheresoever seen: It is as fearful and odious
now, as the Devil was heretofore: His Eye and Hand are toward it, his desire
and endeavor is to have it discovered and killed, resolving to do and suffer
any thing rather than to sin; give him any Plague, except the plague of an
hard, unclean Heart: He hates Sin, not only in the public acts, which might
shame him; but also in secret thoughts, which might stain and defile him. The
vengeance of Sin is not only frightful, but the venom of Sin is distastful; he
fears Corruption, not only as it is a Fire burning, but as it is a Coal that is
blacking.

Further, This Work may be known by Fruits and Effects of it. For,

First, If it be right, it is followed with a full and free confession of Sin:
The Person that is in a Wilderness-condition, confesses more than all the
World know, or can accuse him of. As the sensible Sick-man, relates all his
Distempers to the Physician, he rests not in generals, but descends to
particulars. How frequent and full is David in confessing his Murder and
Adultery? What an History does Nehemiah make of Israel's Sins, in his Prayer to
God? How exact does Paul describe his Madness against the Church, his Blasphemy
against Christ? And all to this end, that themselves may be the more ashamed,
and God the more glorified.

Quest. But may not Wicked, Graceless Men make confession of Sin?

Answ. Yes; for Judas did, and others may also: But see the difference. He
confessed to Men, but not to God, and by his confession sought only to ease his
Heart: As Drunkards by Vomiting rid their Stomachs. Thus, as Melancthon relates
it, Chronico. p. 5. Latomus of Lovain confessed, Inter horrendos mugitus se
contra Conscientiam adversatum esse veritati: Roaring and crying out, That
against his Conscience he had persecuted the Truth of God. In trouble of Mind
all will out. Conscience, like Sampson's Wife, will not conceal the Riddle:
Like Fulvia, a whorish Woman, who declared all the secrets of her foolish Lover
Cneius, a noble Roman. But these Confessions of Graceless Men are not from the
concurrence of a judicious active Will, but rather, as the sparkles forced by
the Collision of Flints, elicited by the impressions of appearing and urging
Evils: Like Pharaoh's obedience, forced from Judgments, and nothing else; as
that of some Mariners in a Storm, who in the Calm, turn as wicked as before;
and court the return of those Goods they cast out in a Tempestuous season, when
the Winds are silenced. Here is no true brokeness of Heart, no love of Holiness.

Secondly, It is accompanied with Self-condemnation for Sin. The true penitent
has a County Palatinate within his Bosom, and arraigns and judges himself.
Abraham cries out, I am but dust and ashes: Dust minds us of Mortality, Ashes of
Fire; as if he had deserved both. Jacob says, I am less than the least of all
thy Mercies, Genesis 32.10. The Centurion, I am unworthy thou should come under
my Roof. St. Peter, Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful Man. Bishop
Hooper, in our Martyrologie, Lord, I am Hell, thou art Heaven; I a sink of Sin,
thou a Fount of Grace. This is one chief part of Self-condemnation, to
acknowledge that the utmost Wrath and Severity of God, is justly due to such
Sins as we have committed. For tho gracious Persons by their Sins do not
actually become subject to the Wrath of God and his Vengeance, yet they
meritoriously make such Persons liable to Death; so that a true Penitent under
the apprehensions of his Sins, may say truly, as the Prodigal did, I am no more
worthy to be called thy Son!

Thirdly, The practice and course of Sin is stayed; no more Swearing, no more
wanton Dalliance, no more drunken Meetings. Tho he cannot but sin, yet he does
not will Sin: It is not his Trade; yea, all the ways and m^ans are cut off,
which did, or might provoke, or succor Corruption. As Generals do in besieging
a Town or Castle, they deprive them of all such ways and means, whereby they
might provide for themselves: Or as the Men of Abel dealt with Sheba the Son of
Bichri, they cut off his Head, and cast it over to Joab, that he might depart,
2 Samuel 20.22. So did Zacheus, Luke 19.8. in restitution and contribution, he
pulled down the tents of Sin: And as Mary Magdalen dealt with her wanton Eyes
and whorish Locks, she wept Rivers of Tears with the one, and wiped our
Savior's Feet with the other: Loath to have done so before. It is usual with
Men that would destroy the brood of some Beasts and Birds, they pull down their
Nests, and destroy their Dens: So it is with the true Penitent in respect of
Sin; down with all now, that they would uphold before.

Fourthly, There follows a great Love to a sound-searching Ministry, that
will fully search and try the deceitful Heart, and batter the deceitful holds
of Sin. Threatenings are welcome, that shake the proud, stony Heart, and dash
Babels Brats against the Wall; I mean the crawling Vermin of noisome Lusts. O
strike, thou Man of God, strike in Christ's Name, and spare not, burn and cut
here; O here is an impure, hard Heart, as ever was harbored in any Breast! And
then goes most cheerfully, most thankfully, and best contented, when he is
struck to the quick: What a blessed opportunity was this, happy that I lived to
see this day, to hear such a Sermon. If we hate an Enemy, nothing will satisfy
but his death.

Fifthly, There remains still many fears, and an holy jealousy, that every Sin
he reads or hears of, is his; Master is it I? As it is reported of Socrates,
that when he walked in the Streets and saw any Person disordered, would say to
himself, Am I such a one? And as Master Bradford did, when he looked into the
lewd Lives of others: And so do all humble Christians. Nay, commonly, in this
case he takes all to himself; I have been this, and I am thus, and deserve
that: He needs neither Accuser, nor Judge, but is ready to cast the first stone
at himself.

Thus the intented Convert is brought into the Wilderness of Spiritual Trouble,
where he yet remains a miserable Spectacle, in Chains under Bondage, tossing to
and fro, sighing and looking about, now upon himself, where he sees his
Chains, but no power to loose them; then abroad to see if there be any near;
but there is none to hear or help: Finally, he raises up his Eyes toward
Heaven, in such an earnest, humble, fixed manner, as if he would never leave,
till he heard some word of comfort; for which here is a Promise, which comes in
the next place to be handled.

III. -- I will speak unto her Heart. Containing the third General of the Text,
viz. The first infusion for Apprehension, or actual excitation of Sanctifying
Grace.
In which Promise is presented to your view,

1. The subject of this Evangelical Work, and that is the [Heart]. Instruments
work directly upon the outward Man only, he has his seat in Heaven that works
upon the Heart. This is as Fire among the Elements, that does assimulate every
thing to it self; or as the Primum Mobile to the inferior World, which carries
all the inferior Orbs with it; the first Mover, or great Wheel in a Clock,
once moved, moves with it all the rest; the Tongue, Eyes, Hands, Feet, all move
to the motion of the Heart, and when God has once framed the Soul to his
Discipline, by the ministry of the Law, then he takes the Heart to be a fit
hearer, and speaks unto it.

2. The manner of Exccution, [I will speak unto, or above]. Two things may be
conceived as promised herein:

First, To speak comfortably, to a solitary; disconsolate Soul. So much does
the Hebraism everywhere import. Comfort ye my People, speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, Isa. 40.1. The words are originally as here, (...), Speak to the
Heart of Jerusalem, (i. e.) speak things grateful to her; comfort, raise up,
cheer; as both the Syriack, and Chaldee Paraphrase do take it. As it was with
the Jews, when God gave the Law to Israel by Moses, they heard the Thunder, and
saw the Lightning, but neither heard nor saw God; so it is in this preparative
work of Faith, Men see the bright purity of the Law, they hear many Woes and
Curses denounced, but God in Christ they neither hear nor see, till he further
enlighten them, and raise them up by speaking to their Hearts.

Secondly, To speak Victoriously; above all the strength of that natural
resistability which is in every untamed and unsanctified Heart. In few words,
it is thus much, I will cheer and change her. Whence Ministers are fitly called
Comforters, 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. and the Gospel, a Peace Offering, a word of Comfort
and Reconciliation. How the Lord works this, whether as a Moral Persuader only,
by proposing Objects; or as a Physical Agent, determining the Intellect,
changing the Will, and ordering the whole Business both for efficacy and event?
How the Will of Man has it self toward the Grace of God in the act of
Conversion, has been, and is the great question of the Christian World.
Divines of all sorts are beating about it, some to defend, others to bolt out
the Truth: Pelagians with the Jesuits on one hand, are for the strength of
Nature, and liberty of the Will, to accept or refuse the Voice of God: The
Primitive Fathers, from Augustine downwards, with most Protestants, and the
Dominican Friars on the other hand, are more for the Glory of God's Free Grace,
Who works both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure. Here will be
nothing interposed in order to any determination of this Controversy; only the
studious, whom it may concern, are referred to what is extant, Chamier. Tom. 3.
operum, lib. 3. Cameron. respons. ad Epist. docti viri and alibi. Zanch, lib.
5. de Not. Dei. D. Rivet, comment, in Hos. and in disput. 13. D. Twiss. in
defens. Perk. and Vind. gra.
and may yield better satisfaction. For others who are willing to rest in plain
Truths, and fear to offend by curious enquiries, they may take what follows for
answer, viz.

First, God speaks and works after a secret, if not an unexpressible
manner: Divine Graces curiously and mysteriously insinuate themselves, and the
impressions of the Will are extremely nice: Therefore Men should not be rash in
determining, nor over-bold in presenting to the Eye, what God has veiled;
endeavoring to make Windows in God's Closet, and to unclasp his secret Books.
St. Augustine's Rule is surely safe; Praestat dubitare de occultis, quam de
incertis litigare. And his Counsel is very prudent, viz. Compescenda est humana
temeritas id quod non est non quaerat, ne quod est inveniat. Contra. Manich. l.
8. c. 1. (i. e.) We must bridle our Temerity, and check our Curiosity, lest we
pursue what is not revealed, and find that which is. Let all take heed of
soaring too high, lest they be scorched, and wading too deep, lest they be
drowned. There are some things we may nescire sine crimine, not know without
blame, but cannot know them sine discrimine, without danger: And in respect of
these, a learned Ignorance is to be preferred to an ignorant Learning. Stobaeus
reports of Thales, that he gazing on the Stars, fell into a Pit; so may all
pryers into God's Secrets be suffered to fall into the Pit of Error.

Secondly, Man has certainly lost his freedom to Good, by his first choice of
Evil. Seipsum perdit and liberum arbitrium, as St. Augustine has it. Man can
move no more of, or by himself in Spiritual things especially, without
preventing and assisting Grace, than a dead Man can in Naturals naturally
According to the Church of England, as she teaches, Art. 10.
, no more than a Worm can fly. And therefore Luth^r, with St. Augustine before
him, in opposition of the other side, thought it was better to style it servum
arbitrium, a servile rather than a free Will. Though some kind of Freedom
cannot be denied to be essential and unseparable from the Will. If we consider
this power of Man as in the lower Region, he is not naturally but morally dead,
and as a dead Man is not able to produce any Vital Actions, so neither can any
natural Man produce any Spiritual Action. Quid boni operari potest perditus,
nisi quantum fuit a perditione liberatus? Victore peccato, amissum est liberum
arbitrium; non nisi ad peccatum valet, ut male agendo fit damnabilis ancilla. O
humana Natura! O Adam! Quando sanus eris non stetisti, and tuis viribus
surrexisti? Ecce dico and ego quod qui superbe sapiunt, ut suae voluntatis
viribus tantum existiment esse tribuendum, hi non posse credere in Christum,
etc. August.

Thirdly, That no Creature, nor created Instrument, can reach to work upon the
Will; the frame thereof is too high, and the temper divine: God only can change
and order it. Which indeed he does, working upon Man as upon an intelligent
Creature, ^uaviter flectendo, non violenter torquendo, in a way agreeable to
h^s Frame and Constitution, without committing a Rape upon any faculty; first
enlightening the Mind, then effectually and sweetly persuading the Will, to
yield by surrender, and accept of Grace, whereby the whole Man is enabled to
co^perate in the use and exercise thereof; as will appear in the sequel; only
first observe the contents of this Promise, as it may be drawn out into two
Theological Conclusions, viz.

First, That it is the Heart which is chiefly wrought upon, in the work of
Conversion. Call it the Heart, the Will, or the inner Man, or what else; it is
that within us, which no Instrument nor finite Power can reach unto: And herein
this differs from the former Work; the Understanding was chiefly touched in
that, the Will in this; which is attended as a King, with all the rest of the
inferior Faculties and Senses. A good Will is the good Tree, that makes the
Fruit good; and a bad Will is the bad Tree, that makes the Fruit bad. As all
the evil or good of a Tree comes from the Root, so does all the evil or good
of a Man come from his Will; and till this be sanctified, till this be renewed,
nothing can be good in him. The Eyes may look, the Tongue may talk, and the
Feet may in Men's apprehensions be moving toward Heaven, and yet the Heart all
the while may be bent Hell-ward: As Men rowing in a Boat, look one way, but
drive a contrary Course, and intend another way: The outward Man may be
seemingly Converted, without any saving change in the inward, but the inner Man
cannot be long without the other; as the Candle in the Lanthorn will appear by
its own Light; and as the Diamond, or rich Jewel, will cast a sparkling Luster,
sooner or later before the Eyes of others. Therefore our Gracious Lord and Wise
Physician, takes the surest and soundest way to work a perfect Cure. Give him
the Heart, and the rest will quickly follow. It is the Heart that is hard; by
speaking to it, he softens it; it is the Heart that is unclean, by speaking to
it, he sanctifies it; it is the Heart that is poor, by speaking he does enrich
it; it is the Heart that is distressed, with fears and doubts, by speaking
unto, he comfort and confirms it; it is the Heart that is most out of
order, by speaking to, he brings it into a spiritual frame. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.
Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and you shall be clean. -- A new
Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, etc.

Thus the truth of this Point shines with its own Luster. We will pass from it
with the resolution of a Case here to be propounded, viz. All this I believe,
may some Person say, but how may I discern when my Heart is thus wrought upon?

Answ. 1. When it is tender; not in the present act or exercise of Hearing
only, but after, while you meditate on your Sins, as David did, Psalm. 51.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. He does even drown himself in Tears: Or,
upon God's Mercies in Christ, upon any relation of the Churches distress, at
Home or Abroad, not only as they are Men, but as they are Members of Christ;
both being melting Considerations; and nothing can bring the Heart to this
temper, but the fulfilling of this promise.

2. When it closes with God's Precepts and Promises together; desirous to do
the one, as delighted to believe the other. Where true Conversion is wrought,
the Will is mastered, of unwilling is made willing; and ready to choose what it
once abhorred. Lord, what will thou have me to do? Now the Heart makes a stand
at nothing, objecteth nothing, it is as willing to a word of Command, as to a
word of Promise; to the Work, as to the Reward. It is all over yielding, and
submitting. Which is all that shall be said here, to the Case propounded;
because occasion will be offered to speak more fully to it shortly, in the
amplification of this Point.

Doct. 2. A second Conclusion from this Promise is this, viz. That it is one
and the same Hand which wounds and heals, which casts down and raises
up: Which brings into the Wilderness, and after speaks unto the Heart. [I will
allure, and I will speak]. As the rust of Achilles his Sword only, cured the
Wounds which it made. Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a
broken Heart, and saves such as are of a contrite Spirit. He breaks the
Vessel, and then pours out the Oil of Salvation into it. Hos. 6.1. He has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. The Hand of
God even when it strikes, drops Balsam; his very Rods are bound up in Silk and
softness, and beforehand dipped in Balm. He wounds that he may heal, and in
wounding heals. What the Poet's Fable concerning Telephus his Spear, is here
truly verified: Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. The same holy Hand
that wounded us, must cure us. Romans 9.16. So then it is not of him that
wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. 2 Cor. 1.4. The
Lord of all Comfort, who comfort us in all our Tribulation. -- Jesus Christ
brings the Soul into saving Trouble, and then sheds abroad into the Heart the
comforts of Sanctifying Grace: He is always ready at hand, always good and kind
to Man, but then especially when Man stands in most need of him; as all the
Saints have found and testified. Manasses in Prison; Hagar in the Wilderness;
Daniel in the Lions Den; and they in the fiery Furnace. Job, David, Hezekiah,
in great distress and anguish of Spirit. When the Bottle is dipped under Water,
he saves it from drowning: The more grievous their Oppression, the more
gracious has been his Redemption.

And the reason hereof is good:

First, Because none else can do it: Not Men or Angels, much less the Gilded
Toys of the World, or all that exterior Luster which charmeth the Eyes of so
many, esteemed by a troubled Mind but as a Cloud in painting, a petty vapor of
Water, or as Chaff driven of the Wind. The Jews have a saying common among
them, viz. It is he that opens our Heart in his Law, (i. e.) By his Spirit he
enableth the Heart to understand, and effect Spiritual things; it is a branch
of his Prerogative. Luke 24.45. He opened their Understandings; by removing
Impediments, by breathing into them the Holy Ghost, and bestowing further
Functional Graces: As S. Ambrose expounds and explains that Text by some
passages of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. God touches the Heart, as the Musician
does the strings of his Instrument, and it sounds what he pleases.

Secondly, He has Undertaken and Promised it; by Himself to our First Parents,
and by his Prophets unto the Church in every Age successively. It is the sum
and end of the New Covenant, to accept those who deny themselves, to raise up
them that are cast down, to enrich those that are poor in Spirit, and to speak
comfortably to those, who will not be comforted any other way. He brings them
into this Wilderness for this end, that he may speak, and not speak in vain
unto them. Till then, commonly Man is like an untamed Heifer, or wild Asses
Colt, that runs and revels here and there, that breaks all Bonds, and will hear
no Advice: When Sin is discovered, and Conscience awakened, one syllable of the
Gospel, one word of Comfort, is as good News out of a far Country. In every
natural Man there is a threefold Bar, hindering the entrance of Spiritual
Light and Life; Ignorance in the understanding; it is covered with Ignorance,
as the Deep was at first with Darkness, there is a very Chaos: Hardness in the
Heart, like that of Nabal's, which became like a Stone; and a malicious pravity
in the Will, which is like a noisome Sepulcher; so that as such, he can neither
understand, receive, nor affect this Supernatural Work, till the Lord has
removed them by his Spirit, Cooperating with the Law and Gospel. It is said of
Lydia, that the Lord opened her Heart, i. e. effectually called her, as Calvin
says: He gave her Divine Light and Grace; without which special Concurrence of
his, Paul's labor had been fruitless. In effect, it is all one with this, I
will speak unto her Heart, (i. e.) I will speak Friendly, Plainly, and
Effectually*

Conceive this Evangelical Work to go on in this Order;

First, The Lord reveals himself to such a Heart, so dejected and troubled,
as a Wise and Loving Father, not willing nor suffering any such to perish: As
St. Ambrose told Monica, Filius, tantaram lachrimarum, etc. A Son of so many
Tears (as she shed for her Augustine) cannot perish. Now these brought by a
Voice into the Wilderness, are all Sons of Sorrow, many Tears are shed by them
(as a living Fountain sends forth plentiful Streams) and often many Tears are
shed for them, therefore they cannot Perish. And this the Lord does in three
degrees.

1. He makes it evident, that there is a possibility of Ease, Purity, and
Peace: And to that end, he brings many presidents to their Mind, of old, hard,
rusty Hearts, renewed, softened and opened: For they are recorded in Scriptures
for that purpose. Paul says, he obtained Mercy for this cause, 1 Timothy 1.16.
For a pattern to them which should hereafter believe. The Lord speaks to some
as bad as might be; compared to Sodom and Gomorrah, Isa. 1.9. Yet in the 18.
ver. there is, Come let us reason together, though your sins be as Scarlet,
etc. Others are bespattered with Idolatrous filthiness; yet, I will cleanse you
from all your filthiness, is God's Promise, Ezekiel. 36.25. Besides many others
with the Apostles black Roll, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Such were some of you, but ye
are washed and sanctified. These and the like Instances are here brought to
mind, as evidences of Divine Favor, and encouragements to Faith.

2. He discovers Christ, and acquaints them with the New Covenant, as the
only Remedy, to make up the breach of the First-conditions. Behold, says the
Lord, my Son, a Lamb slain from the beginning, to take away the Sins of the
World. Behold him in Union with your Nature, and in Unction to the Office of
Mediatorship. Behold him in his Obedience, Active and Passive, assuming the
Crime and Curse of your Nature, undergoing the penalty, and fulfilling the
Precept of the Law in his own Person, but in your stead and room. Behold him in
his Meritorious Viatory Office, by way of Purchase and Conquest; as also in his
Applicatory-Intercession for all burdened Souls; who seeing you are truly weary
of Sin, behold the Mediator by a real tender of his own Merits, prevailing for
you among the rest.

3. He offers Christ unto all such, upon condition of Faith and Repentance,
to the performance of which Condition he enableth in his Offer: So that they
will to do, what they are required; saying often with grief and fear, O that we
could Repent and Believe! O that we could take the Lord's offer! etc. Although
Actual Faith be not yet in the Heart, as some are of Opinion [tho Mr. Perkins
judges the contrary], yet it is very near, and shall infallibly follow. Hagar
had her Eyes opened to see the Well, before she went to it, and stooped down to
take and taste it. Faith comes in by exercise, to manifest it self by certain
steps and degrees. And let all those who find themselves past any of them,
thankfully acknowledge God's Work, and be humbly constant in the use of Means,
for the Lord will speak again: Phil. 1.6. He which has begun a good Work in
you, will perform it, etc. And pray, as Luther wonted to do, Confirm, O Lord,
in us what thou have wrought, and perfect the Work that thou have begun in us
to thy Glory. As Queen Elizabeth prayed, Look upon the Wounds of thine Hands,
and despise not the Work of thine Hands; thou have written me down in the Book
of Preservation with thine own Hand, O read thine own Handwriting, and save me!

Secondly, He opens the Heart toward himself, and that in three Degrees:

1. He persuadeth it of the truth of those Passages formerly revealed and
discovered, and that the Lord does seriously intend them to all in this
condition.

2. He raises up in it an earnest longing after them, as the only good to be
desired, with which they may be happy, and without them they must be
everlastingly miserable. The wise Spiritual Merchant, having once found this
Treasure, hides it, and makes haste for joy that there is some possibility of
enjoying it; he sells all that he has, and resolves to purchase it,
whatever he pay, whatever the conditions be. As the hunted Heart longs after the
running Stream; so these Men do now cry out, Give us Christ, or else we die!
They Hear, Read, Fast, and Confer; O they will part with all, they will do any
thing for Christ: A Sight, a Touch, a Taste of him is more worth than the World.

3. After many Conflicts, Doubts, and Fears, the Heart is wrought upon, not
only willing to receive Christ, for so it was before, but actually to cast it
self upon Christ, to rest on him, and to resign it self wholly to his dispose:
[O the sweet Repose which a fainting Soul finds in a Promise rightly applied,
after a storm of Spiritual Trouble!] The Heart is ever with him, the Eye is
always upon him, and the Tongue is delighted often to mention him. Sweet Jesus,
have thou done and suffered so much for me? Was thy Heart pierced, was thy Head
bowed, was thy Body nailed to the Cross for my Redemption? How unworthy am I,
such a wretched Creature, such a rebellious Prodigal, such an impure lump of
Sin, to hear of such Mercy, much more to taste thereof? But seeing it was thy
great Love to do it, and thy Bounty to prevent me by offering it, it is my duty
to receive it, with all readiness of Mind, and thankfulness of Heart: Tho thou
should kill me, yet will I trust in thee; tho thou should after cast me
into Hell, by me merited, yet would I come unto thee: Lo, Lord Jesus, lo, a
dumb, deaf, and lame Leper before thee! if thou will, thou can make me clean
and whole; and if thou will not, (none else can do it) I resolve to sink at thy
Feet, and if it were possible, to perish in thine Arms.

Thirdly, The Lord speaks again to this same Heart, thus far wrought upon
[three times he spoke unto Samuel, before he knew what and to whom to answer],
and the end and effect of it is threefold:

1. By the power of his Word, he turns out the old Inhabitant, [for intus
existens probibet alienum] Satan, who did reign there by Sin, and brings
another into possession, even Christ, by his Spirit and Graces.

2. He changes the natural Disposition of the Heart, truly for Parts, though
not perfectly for Degrees: There is no part but is bespangled with Grace. As
Air in respect of Light, so is the Heart in respect of Grace; of a double he
makes one single; a hard and stony Heart he softeneth: Understand not this of
any Natural, Moral, or Legal yielding (all which are presupposed) but of an
Evangelical softness; a tenderness following upon serious deliberation and
consideration of God's infinite Love, Christ's bitter Sufferings, and the
odious nature of Sin: And lastly, Of an impure, deceitful, hypocritical Heart,
he makes an honest, clean, sincere Heart. Ego non sum ego; It is not what it
was: Such power and healing Virtue there is in the Word of God.

3. By his Divine Breath and Power, this Marriage between Christ and the Soul
is consummate, the Spiritual Bond apprehended, and the Mystical Union
manifested; as it follows in this very Chapter; I will betroth thee unto me
for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in Righteousness, Judgment,
Loving Kindness, and in Mercies: (i. e.) In him, in whom Mercy and Justice
meet, and are reconciled; I will do it truly and firmly, so that all his
Benefits shall be made over by way of Jointure or Dower; thy Poverty and
Deformity shall be accounted his, his Riches and Beauty thine. This is that the
Lord speaks to the Heart finally, for this he allured her into the Wilderness,
that he might win her to himself; and thus is this Work finished.

The manner of Conversion, as for the present we apprehend it to be ordinary,
thus far concluded, and briefly in the Heads only unfolded; we may for further
satisfaction, light and benefit require.

Quest. First, When is the Lord said to speak unto the Heart?

Answ. I answer, 1. When he overcomes the natural hardness of the Heart, and
begins to let out that Spiritual Impostume, or mass of Impurity, which lies
hid in every one by Nature. This is a Work to which neither Men or Angels are
able to set their Hands. The Heart-maker is the only Heart-breaker; and he
alone that knows the Heart can purify or purge it. When Rocks are turned into
streams of Water, and the Mountains melt like Wax, and clods of Earth are made
like Stars of Heaven, surely then God puts forth his Power; then he speaks
to the Heart.

2. When he raises any comfort in distressed Minds, by closing with them in
some promises of Pardon, or power over Sin: This is the Voice of God; for he
only can prepare a Door of Hope in every Valley of Trouble, provide Manna in
the Wilderness, Water in every dry Rock, and Light in every Dungeon. There is
no precious Electuary for sick Souls, but by his Prescription and
Administration.

3. When he answers the desire of the Heart, against such and such a Sin, or
in a timely supply of such a Grace, either in truth where it is not, or for
degrees where it was in a little measure before. All Grace is originally from
Heaven, it comes from above, James 3.17. (i. e.) from God; the first and
second, preventing and assisting. God bids the Soul to mortify such a Lust,
and the Soul complains, as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. I have no might against
this great Army; then the Lord comes in with Auxiliary Forces, and his Grace
has been sufficient. God bids him to pray for such a Mercy, and he finds
himself very unfit; his Heart at first was dead and flat, but on a sudden, he
is carried above his own strength, his Tears drop, his Love flames: God has
then spoken, then he came in with assisting Grace. If the Heart burn in Prayer,
God has struck the Fire; the Spirit has been tuning the Heart, therefore it
makes sweet melody.

4. When there is a close concurrence, and an orderly subordination between
God's Word and the Heart: When the Word is not only delivered to the Heart, but
the Heart also is delivered up unto the Word. By the closing of these two, our
Wills are wholly taken up in God's Will: So that the Heart ever says after, as
Christ did, not my Will, in any thing, but thy Will be done in all, O Lord!
This is one reason alleged by St. Augustine, why he would have all sorts to
read the Scriptures, and frequently to hear them, Quia in illis loquitur Deus
ad Cor indoctorum atque doctorum: Because therein God speaks unto the Heart of
the Learned and Unlearned. [Aug. Epist. 3. ad Volus.]

Quest. Secondly, It may be further demanded, How a Man may know, when and
whether the Lord has, or does speak unto his Heart?

Answ. First, By an awful dread, which fills the Heart when God has spoken
unto it. Josiah trembled at the Voice of God in his Law: And that is a
testimony of God's speaking to him. But thus it is with every Creature that
hears the Voice of God; the Devils tremble, and Men quake; and as the Worms
when it thundreth, wriggle into the corners of the Earth: so for all their
lofty looks, though when all is quiet, they may puff up themselves with a
conceit they are more then ordinary; like Caligula, who thought himself a God,
imitating Joves Thunder: But when the True God gave forth his Voice from
Heaven, he that before was so high, was now as low in spirit, running under his
Bed, or into any Bench-hole for preservation. So let the Lord but arise to
speak, the tallest Cedar, the highest Tower, the loftiest Spirit of Godless Men
can dare it no longer, but will think the holes of the Rocks, and Caves of the
Earth, to be their best shelter. Yea, even the inanimate Creatures show the
impressions of his powerful Voice. The Sea flies, the Mountains skip, the Earth
trembles, and the whole Creation shakes at the Voice of God. Therefore,

Secondly, It may be known by love and longing after him. As it was with
Elisha, after Elijah had saluted him, he was presently inflamed, as if a spark
of Fire had fallen down upon him, so that he would unseparably follow him.
Thou, O my Soul, art Elisha, God is Elijah; if he once speak unto thee, thou will follow him crying, My Lord, and my God! O lift up the light of thy
Countenance upon me! When shall I come and appear before the presence of God?
All the days ^f my appointed time will I wait. Such drawing Virtue is in the
Word of Christ; it is as an Ointment poured forth, therefore the Virgins love
him. Love is the Whet-stone of Love; and the Love of Christ in speaking to his
People, constrains them to love him, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Thirdly, By those Evangelical Effects formerly mentioned. When God speaks unto
a poor grieved Heart, as the Father unto his Prodigal Son, Luke 15.20, etc. The
Heart is raised to admire God in all his Attributes and Ways, and is ravished
with desire of his Glory. What shall I ^^nder, for so much undeserved favor? I
will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord! I will
dwell in the House of the Lord, to behold the fair Beauty of the Lord for ever.

Fourthly, By that speedy reply which the Heart returns unto God, Speak on
Lord, for thy Servant hears, and thy Face will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. The Heart
does echo out as it were an answer to the Voice of God; as Jer. 3.22. the Lord
speaks, Return ye Backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings: They
readily answer, Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art our God! Every gracious
Person has the duplicate of God's Law in his Heart, and is willingly cast into
the mould of his Word. When Men have their Ears only spoken unto in it, at the
best they do but dwell on Duties, and place the sum of their Religion in a bare
outward profession; but when God has once spoken unto the Heart, then they
look more into the substance of Religion.

Quest. Thirdly, If it be demanded, What a Man should do, when the Lord has,
or does speak unto the Heart?

Answ. I answer; With all readiness and humble reverence the Heart must speak
unto the Lord again. So much is expected, and good Manners will teach a Man so
much; to speak when he is spoken unto, especially by such a Superior. Now, the
language of the Heart consists in two things, viz. Receiving, and Returning: In
receiving what the Lord offers, by a flexible yielding unto the Work and Word
of God; and by a concurrence both of consent in respect of his Promises, and of
obedience in regard of his Commands. In returning, Praise, Prayer, and all
hearty service: Praise, for that God is pleased to take notice of you, so mean,
so vile. Great Men are thought to grace their Inferiors, if they vouchsafe to
speak unto them; I am sure it is so here; by speaking to us, the Lord does
exceedingly honor us: (...), says Chrysostom, God's condescension is
incomparable; he speaks to his People, as a Man would speak to his Friend; thus
he graceth them inwardly, outwardly, and so makes them gracious and amiable in
the Eyes of Men. Prayer, that as he has begun, so he would finish the Work,
till the Heart be thoroughly molded into a spiritual temper of Flexibility and
Purity, according to his own Heart.

Use 1. From hence the Erroneous Opinions, and Irregular Practices of all those
are justly to be taxed and reproved;

First, Who ascribe this Work either to inward power and strength of nature, or
to some outward means, as if Man could speak unto the Heart, or the matter of a
Sacrament did contain to convey Grace by the work wrought. Pelagians, old and
new, go the first way; Papists, with their followers, the latter way: Both
joining to derogate from the glory of his Grace, who ascribes this work unto
himself; I will speak unto the Heart. These Men do undertake to sail without
the Stars, and labor without the Sun. They set Dagon before the Ark, equalize
the Creature with the Creator. If this were true, then St. Paul mistook to say,
Not I, but the Grace of God in me; and, it is God that gives the increase.
Gratia non est gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo, is St. Austins
rule. Let them with their Wit and Learning, endeavor to set up the Idol of
Free Will, and strength of Nature; let us with the sacred Scriptures, labor to
set up the Free Grace of God, who works in us both to will and to do, of his
own good Pleasure.

Secondly, Who being in the Wilderness of Spiritual Distress, will not stay
till the Lord speak unto them, but make haste to drink Water out of any Puddle,
to snap up Carnal Ease, from Worldly Jollity, in Eating, Drinking, Gaming, and
other Pastimes, to drive away such Melancholy Dumps: Some by busy Employments,
as Cain thought to do: Others by Music, as Saul; a third sort by variety of
Flesh-pleasing-Company: [Being herein not much unlike to many weak and crasie
Patients, that are ready to fancy any new Medicine they hear of, and to tamper
with that, rather than to expect a Recovery, through a course of Physic
prescribed by the Physician]: All which, you may be sure, will say as the
Scribes and Pharisees did to Judas, What is that to us, see thou to it: Either
they will cast you off desperately; saying, Now you are mad, this you have got
by reading and hearing so many Sermons; or else, they will slight it with
Gallio, and care for none of these things: Or at least they will quench all [a
killing pity too common], by daubing with untempered Mortar: So that one day
you will say out of woeful experience, Miserable Comforters are ye all,
Physicians of no value, good for nothing. Seek not to them, rest not on them,
it is God only in and through Christ, who speaks peace unto his Saints; in this
case, hear only what he says.

Thirdly, A third sort to be blamed are such, as are converted outwardly in
Profession only, [the Lord make them sound!] Pictures without Life, Clouds
without Water, Sodoms Apples, fair only to see to: The outward Man is spoken
unto, and convinced so far as to perform Duties; the Ear is spoken unto so far
as to hear often; the Tongue is spoken unto so far as to discourse well; but
the Heart is not spoken unto; all the devotion of these Men is in Hearing and
Censuring, they come to arraign the Minister at the Bar of their own Judgment,
and to judge that Word, by which they must be judged at the last Day; they come
to debate the Man, not the Doctrine, to censure the Preacher, not to practice
the Sermon: Like Merchant's Coopers, they taste much Wine, but deal for none;
their Hearts are not changed; the same Lusts lodge there as before; restrained
only; they are hard and impure as ever; the virtue of Christ's Death and Life
is not yet applied to such, they are yet destitute of Grace, whatever their
profession be: Nay, you and your Profession are but like the cursed Fig Tree,
that bare Leaves and no Fruit. God has not spoken to your Hearts, neither did
you ever speak in your Hearts to God. Many Prayers you may happily say over, and
yet never pray; for Prayer is an offering up of the Heart, or Will to God by
Christ.

Use 2. The second Use will direct to Duty, which concerns either Minister or
People. Ministers must learn to speak unto the Heart, as near as possible they
can; because God does so, whose Ambassadors they are. Like Marks-men, though
they cannot shoot so as to strike, yet they must aim at this Mark, their Arrows
must be sharpened for this purpose; though like the Arrows of Jonathan, some
fall short of, others go besides the Mark, yet some or other being guided by a
Supreme Power, may pierce the Hearts of the King's Enemies, whereby the People
shall fall under him. Those Ministers speak best, who strive to profit more
than to please; and so must all they that desire to do good in that relation,
they must preach to the Conscience, to the Quick: As King James of famous
Memory, said of a Reverend Bishop of this Land, This Man Preaches as if Death
were at my Back: So should every Minister do: Preach as if Death, Judgment, and
Hell, were even at Men's Backs: Bring the point as near as may be, home to the
hearers Door; that is, plainly, particularly, earnestly; otherwise, they preach
as a Man that shoots his Arrows at randon, and hits not the Mark; it is as if
the Minister should lay his Sermon on his Cushion, and never dart it into the
Peoples Bosoms. If People do not feel your Points at their Backs, Spears in
their Sides, and Swords in their Bellies, they will feel nothing, it will be
lost labor. You that are People and Hearers, may learn,

1. To bring your Hearts with you to God's Ordinances: [How many heartless
Sermons have some heard and made!] Else you bring nothing for God to speak
unto; and it is no more than if you sent your Clothes stuffed with Straw: Yea,
upon the matter you deny his Presence and Office. Men that are his Messengers
speak unto the Ears, and present things from their Lord unto the Eyes of the
Body, and those parts you leave not at Home; for what should we do at Church
(you will say) without our Ears and Eyes? But I say, What make you there
without your Hearts? God is there who speaks unto the Heart, as Men unto the
Ear: If that be away, it is all one as if you were absent: Nay, you aggravate
your Sin, and provoke him more by your heartless presence; in preferring Men,
whom you vouchsafe to hear, unto God, whom you will not hear; but highly
dishonor him, by offering a dead Carcass in his Temple, an unreasonable
service, in such cold Devotion: All such are Abominable; they put a Cheat upon
God, and mock the most High: They come full Mouthed, but empty Hearted; offer a
Case without the Jewel, a Gilded Cup and no Wine in it. To such God will say,
Who required these things at your hands, thus to tread my Courts? My Sons, give
me your Hearts, or you give me nothing: As Joseph said to his Brethren
concerning Benjamin, Genesis 43.3. so God says of the Heart, Ye shall not see my
Face without it. Bring your Family and Bibles to Church, but especially your
Hearts, which are most out of order, and there the Lord will begin his Work.
Join with the Congregation Hand and Heart, offer them both to God in earnest
Prayer, and attentive Hearing; wait and say, When Lord, how long, Holy, and
True! Accept what thou call for, and speak one word to my poor Heart among
the rest, before I go, that the Bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.

2. To labor most about the Heart; the Heart in the Body, and the heart of
Religion; yea, and to prize good Men [who by their good Fruits, testify to
others the goodness of their Hearts, as the good Fruit does the good Tree];
because the Lord has spoken to them. No Relick comparable, no image can be a
more lively remembrancer. If David did so admire Man as Man, how then ought we
to admire and reverence Man as united to Christ, shining with his Image,
adorned with his Beams, clothed with his Righteousness, and entitled to an
everlasting Kingdom. Many as Beautiful, some as rich in Apparel, are very
powerful to draw and dazzle the Eyes of weak Beholders: but for Beauty and
Honor, none are comparable to gracious Hearts; they now partake of Angelical
Splendour, and hereafter shall exceed the Sun in brightness, [Acts 6. ult. Mat.
13.43. Phil. 3. ult.]. But, Who is sufficient for these things? sufficiently
qualified to set forth to the Life, the Beauty and Brightness of Christ
mystical? He had need of a refined Nature, of sublimated Thoughts, of a Quill
taken from the Wing of a Seraphin, and to soar aloft, free from the pressure of
terrene mixtures, in heavenly Contemplation. Who can read, or seriously think
of this mystery of Mercy, without a readier expression of joy mixed with tears,
than their conceits in words? What a Man, a sinful Man, weltering in Blood,
full of Sores and Ulcers, fitter to be loathed than loved; for such a one,
Poor, Blind, Miserable, and Naked, to be married to a Prince, such a Prince,
the Heir of Heaven and Earth? Who can believe our report? or believing it, not
love such an one? To whom will the Arm of the Lord reveal this, but to humbled
Souls, that are meanest in their own apprehensions? Such shall understand this
secret, and partake in it, to sit on Thrones as crowned Kings and Queens for
evermore!

Use 3. Lastly, What transcending Comfort does this Truth and Text afford to
all troubled Minds? Such I mean as have been stayed by Divine Power when they
were running toward Hell, in all sorts of Vanity and Prodigality, and had been
there ere this, had not God in Christ been more merciful to them, than they
were careful about their own safety. If the King should vouchsafe to speak to a
mean Person before many, what an honor would it be? what ravishing thoughts
would arise, and what applause would it procure? How much more should it be so
here, when the King of Kings speaks, and that unto the Heart of a forlorn
Creature, comfortably? I have heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy Tears; behold,
I will heal thee, etc. so the Lord spoke unto the Heart of Hezekiah, 2 Kings
20.5. Thy Prayers and thine Alms, are come up for a memorial before God, etc.
so the Lord spoke unto the Heart of Cornelius, Acts 10.4. And how often did our
blessed Lord, and compassionate Savior Jesus Christ, raise up disconsolate
Souls with such words as these; Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins be forgiven
thee. Daughter, great is thy Faith, go in peace, thy Faith has made thee
whole. Yea, all the precious Promises are such Cordials. See Prove. 28.13. Who
so confesses and forsakes his Sins, shall find Mercy. Job 33.27, 28. He
looks upon Man, and if any say I have sinned and perverted that which is
right, and it profits me not; he will deliver his Soul from going into the
Pit, etc. Isa. 1.18. Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord; though
your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, etc. Chap. 55. ver. 7.
Let the Wicked forsake his way, and the Righteous Man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Mich. 7.19. He will turn again, he will have compassion
upon us; he will subdue our Iniquities, and cast all their Sins into the bottom
of the Sea. Hos. 14.4, 5. I will heal their Backslidings, I will love them
freely. Mal. 4.2. To them that fear my Name, shall the Son of Righteousness
arise with healing in his Wings. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Romans 8.1. Now therefore there is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ, etc. 1 John 1.9. Rev. 21.6. So almost
in every Book of that holy Volume, may be found such Stars of Light, such
pieces of Treasure, such Bezar-stones, to keep sick Souls from fainting under
their Sins and Sorrows; Promises, wherein the Lord speaks something to the
Hearts of believing Penitents to this effect; The Seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpent's Head. Whatsoever Christ did or suffered, was for you; by
his satisfaction God is reconciled to you, all your Sins are pardoned, and your
Souls shall be saved. This is to speak to the Heart of a poor Sinner. Now as
some Artificers after long poring upon a piece of Black Work, and finding a
dimness in their Eyes, are wont to refresh themselves with the beholding the
Verdure of Meadows, or luster of Emeralds; so let poor Penitents, wearied and
heavy laden with the consideration of their Sins, for their refreshment make
use of those Gospel-Cordials, the Promises; they will be chearing to the Eye of
Faith.

But it is sufficiently known, that those to whom this Comfort belongs, are most
ready to put it from them, as none of their Portion. The troubled Spirit makes
Darts of every thing it can, to fight against Reason, and kill it self, not
suspecting its own Poison. The conclusion therefore of this subject shall
endeavor to prevent that mischief, by proposing and answering some Cases,
which may contain the complaints of such troubled Spirits.

Object. 1. My Sins have been so many and great, that I fear to apply any
Promise.

Answ. Nay, therefore you should be the more ready and willing to apply this;
Lord, come unto me, for I am a sinful Man, and have most need of help! Save me,
Lord, or I perish! Greater Sins should hasten all to the Mercy Seat; the
greater Wounds to the Physician. [No Man flies his Counsel because his Cause is
great and intricate, but plies him the more]. Especially while you consider the
extent of his Power and Love who speaks. His Power passes the nature and
number of your Sins whatever they be. Christ is a great Savior. He is called a
Mighty Savior, and the Salvation in him is called Great Salvation, and the
Redemption in him Great Redemption. 1 John 2.1. If any Man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. And for his Love, that
extends to all sorts of Penitents; to Manasses, Mary Magdalen; to the Romans
and Corinthians; to foul Sinners, griping Oppressors, sharp Persecutors,
Sinners in the highest form. 1 John 2.2. And he is the Propitiation for our
Sins, etc. In the Levitical Law, there were Sacrifices for all sorts of Sins;
and what did they prefigure, but the ample efficacy in Christ's Death, which
was an Atonement for Sins of all kinds; and was as the daily Sacrifice, for the
Expiation of the continued and augmented number of Transgressions. Even where
Sin has abounded, there Grace has after much more abounded. So if you
consider the nature of those Promises made unto distressed Souls, both for
Constitution and Condition: For Constitution, they are absolutely free; no
Foreign Power to enforce them from him that made them, nor any Natural
Abilities in Man to reserve them: And for Condition, they are Evangelical,
bringing with them what they require of you. Be of good comfort when he calls
you; fear not, refuse not to receive what he offers: Say rather, Speak Lord,
and speak home, for thy Servant desires to hear.

Object. 2. But alas, it is pleaded, my Cor^^ptions have been and are strong,
and abomina^^^^, that I know not what to do.

Answ. The sense of Sin's strength, is no ^ hopeful symptom, nor prejudice to
Faith. ^f all tempers, the hardened is most dange^^us; and Sin has the greatest
strength, ^here there is the least sense. When a Pati^^t is deadly sick, he
says, and thinks he is ^ell, and feels no pain; but when he is re^^vering, he
is full of sense, and complains ^s Head is weak, his Stomach sick, his Bones
^me, all is amiss, every thing is too hard ^^ him. There is more hope of one
sensible ^^nner, than of a thousand presumptuous ^^rdned Wretches. Sense of Sin
does ever ^^ before sense of Christ. Besides, the pow^^ of God's Voice will
weaken them, and ^^e Efficacy of his Spirit, mortify and sub^^e them. Here it
may be said, as it was of ^^thage, a little before it was taken, Mori^^ium
bestiarum violentiores esse morsus; dying ^asts bite most cruelly, dying Sins
trouble ^^d oppose the Soul most stoutly. Sanctifi^^tion follows Faith, and
presupposes our ^^ion to Christ. You may not stand safely ^^ this pretense,
that you will labor to get ^^me power over your Corruptions, and then ^^u will
hearken to what God will speak ^^to your Hearts; but first hearken, and ^^ctory
will follow by degrees, and that ne^^ssarily upon this ground, viz. The
Principle whence Grace comes, the Stock out o^ which this fair Flower grows,
is stronge^ than the Principle, and Root, whence Corruption, that stinking
Weed, flows; being joined, the weaker must yield in the end* Only do you
resist it and complain often about it in private prayer to Christ, and b^
assured, that he who has broken the Serpent^ Head for you, will also bruise it
in you.

Object. 3. Oh but Satan and my own Hear^ do condemn, and tell me I am a
Castaway!

Answ. In this case hearken not what Me^ or Angels say, much less what Satan
an^ your own deceitful Hearts suggest; but wha^ the Lord says: It is his
Prerogative to spea^ unto the Heart, and your duty to hear him only; before
your selves, much more before Satan. Suppose the Devil should tell you tha^ all
were well, your Sins pardoned, and tha^ you should be saved, would you believe
him for himself? I trow not: And for your selves you are no competent Judges in
this perplexed condition; as the distempered Pala^ is not fit to judge of Meats,
or the vitiated eye of an Object: Consult with experienced Christians, and
still keep an Ear open for this Voice of God, speaking at all hours o^ the Day;
I will hearken what the Lord will say, for he speaks peace to his People. But
withal, let not his Saints return to folly.

Object. 4. Methinks I behold God, not as speaking to my Heart, but as still
frowning upon (...), and speaking against me, as a Judge for the ^ach of his
Laws; and after the use of much ^ans in private and public, I can feel no
^^mfort.

Answ. This is a sore scruple, which vehe^ently beats upon most sensible
Sinners; ^ore need therefore to assoil it. The an^wer is this, You must learn
to live and walk ^^ Faith, and not so much by Sense, to be^^eve more than you
feel. Your comfort is ^et more in Promises than in Possession. Al^^ough the
Fig Tree should not blossom, neither ^ruit be on the Vine; though the labor of
the ^live should fail, and the Fields should yield no ^^eat, etc. Yet (says
the Prophet by Faith) ^ould I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God ^f my
salvation; who is my strength, and ^ill make my feet like Hinds feet, and make
^e to walk upon my high places. Even ^ith Abraham, beyond hope to believe under
^ope; so shall you bring much Glory to God.

Now to help forward this Spiritual Appre^ension and Resolution,

1. Labor to have your Judgments rightly ^nform'd in the manner of Divine
Dispensa^ion of Grace, what Method and Degrees ^he Holy Spirit observes in
Converting and Sanctifying the Heart. Ignorance of this is ^ollowed with great
heaviness, and much ^auseless discomfort, of long continuance.

2. Look off your selves, and beyond all means [which are as Guides and
Conduits; Guides to lead you to Christ, and Conduits to convey Virtue from him
unto your Hearts]: Dwell not on the well-doing of Duties, rest not on the
exercise of Grace; there is no satisfying Merit, no purifying Blood, in all, or
any of these; that so you may look upon the Mediator only [all our Riches and
Safety is from without, from this blessed Object, conveyed and received by
Faith] and through him upon the Father. It is horrible to think on God, and
terrible to hear him, much more to see him without Christ: Guilt dare not look
on Majesty, and Majesty is most terrible in an Enemy and a Judge. I have read of
a politic Practice of a Macedonian Courtier, who being banished King Philip's
presence, adventured once again to come into the Court, and further, into the
King's presence, with young Alexander in his Arms; as if he said, Let him plead
for me; and accordingly for his Wit, he was pardoned and accepted into Favor.
Change the Persons, and you may make it a President. True it is, you are
deservedly banished Heaven, and God frowneth upon you; but come with Christ in
your Arms, make him your Friend; and then no doubt of acceptance; He has made
us accepted in the Beloved. In Christ he is a reconciled God, a tender Father
in Jesus Christ; in Christ God's Nature is lovely to us, and our Persons lovely
to God.

3. Meditate often, what it is you have in and with Christ, viz. Perfect
Righteousness, imputed to Justification, and imparted to San^^ification. All
your Sins remitted freely, your Persons accepted to Eternal Life. So that Men
nor Devils, the Gates of Hell shall not finally prevail against you, either
actively to hurt or hinder, or passively to withstand you.

Object. 5. But I find my Heart hard and impure, therefore I fear God has not
spoken (...) it.

Answ. To find this, and in truth to bewail it, is one sign of God's speaking
to it. God in the still Voice has discovered that unto you, which
undiscovered, might have proved your Bane. [The Scum appears not, ^ill forced
by the heat of the Fire; the impurity of the Heart would lie undiscerned were
^^ not for the Fire of God's Word]. Live ^ot under the reign of any one Sin;
pray for more Sanctity and Softness, [remembring those two precious Promises,
viz. Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine Heart, -- to love
the Lord --. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and
you shall be clean, etc. Wherein God speaks again to perfect what he has
begun], and for more Spiritual enlargement; to be more thankful for this, that
the Lord has vouchsafed to single you out above many others, to allure you
into this Wilderness, and to speak unto you: be sure God's Words and Works
shall not be left imperfect. Upon the falling of your Eyes toward the Earth in
token of Humility, let your Hearts be raised toward Heaven, to testify your
Spiritual Joy; by saying with Mephibosheth, What is thy Servant, that thou
should look upon such a dead Dog as I am? With Abigail, Behold, let thy
Handmaid be a Servant, to wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord. With Ruth,
Why have I found Grace in thine Eyes, that thou should take notice of me,
seeing I am a Stranger? And with Jesus Christ, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes; even so, O Father, because it was thy good
pleasure!

Quest. After all this, how may a Man know the truth and soundness of his
Conversion?

Answ. To this, the following Discourse will offer some resolution; for which
purpose it is designedly adjoined. Read and reap Profit! Give Glory to God by
Jesus Christ.

In the Mount will the Lord be seen. FINIS.
A CANAAN OF COMFORT; DISCOVERING That a true sight of Sin is an infallible
sign of Grace:

from that Expression of Holy and Penitent David,

Psalm. 51.3. -- My Sin is ever before me.

By W. C.

London, Printed in the Year, 1679.

A Consolatory Preface to poor Christians, dejected under the sense of their
Sins.
GOd's Ministers are commanded by the Voice of that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah,
to comfort, to speak to the Lord's People, to comfort Jerusalem, and cry unto
her, that her Warfare is accomplished, and that her Iniquity is pardoned. In
obedience to this Command, I have presumed to publish this Word in season, for
your Benefit, in the following plain Discourse; and the plainer, because such a
dress does best become Divinity. Affected terms may please the Fancy, but will
never feed the Understanding; they Court, but not Comfort. In these Points,
Experience is more than Reading. Both ways (all praise be to the Author of
Grace!) you have learned how the Lord by degrees, allureth and draws Men and
Women, out of the pleasing Fields of Prodigality, into the Wilderness of
Spiritual Trouble, that he might there speak unto their Hearts, and work them
to a gracicious Temper; wherein afterward he keeps them, partly by presenting
Sin to the Eye and Conscience, as he did to David: Which you must know is not
to sink, nor drive them to Despair, but to nourish and increase in them, an
hatred of Sin, and a longing love after Christ; seeing the one daily, to loath
it; and feeling the want of the other, more to desire him. It was an excellent
Speech of that eminent Martyr, Mr. Lambert, who lifting up his Hands flaming
with Fire (as his Heart did with Love and Zeal) cried aloud to the People out
of the Fire, Christ, and none but Christ.

Which I designedly put you in mind of, and commend to you, whereby to
encourage you in your dejected Condition, and to propound as a pattern for your
Practice: For an adequate object of Faith, to accept and rest upon as the only
Mediator of Justification and Salvation, Christ, and none but Christ: In the
exercise of Repentance for a term to which we must trust, and by whom we have
access to the Father, Christ, and none but Christ: In the duty of Prayer, for
an Intercessor to give weight and worth unto them, Christ, and none but Christ:
For a complete Savior, both to redeem by Purchase and Conquest, in regard of
Man's two^old Bondage, and to adorn the Soul with Righteousness, Christ, and
none but Christ. As Sin is, so let Christ be ever before you; in his
Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercessi^n: In his Natures
and Offices; in the excellency of his Merit and Efficacy of ^is Spirit; in his
Beauty and Innocen^y, in his Power and Pity; in his hidden Treasure and Riches
unsearch^ble; believe it, there is no such Image ^o look upon, no such Picture
to pray before, as the Promises present in him ^o every believing Eye; in your
Chamber, and at Church, Alone and in Company, ^n Health and Sickness, in Life
and Death, look upon him, love him and say, Christ, and none but Christ.

Then may you be assured, that God has brought you the best way out of Egypt
into Canaan, that he has spoken unto your Heart indeed, and that Christ's
Blood is, and shall be effectually applied, to put Sin both out of Affection
and Memory; and in due time, to cleanse your Nature from the power and being of
Sin. In a word, be of good Courage, keep on in your way, your Labor will not
be in vain in the Lord. Heaven, or rather Christ, will pay for all. If then you
would have Sin pardoned, Hardness and Dullness removed, Grace bestowed, in the
Habit, Acts, or Degrees, Doubts answered, Weakness strengthened; Prayers and
Tears with Christ will do it: Children of many Tears cannot perish.

Farewell.
A Canaan of Comfort, DISCOVERING That a true sight of Sin, is an infallible
sign of Grace.
Psalm. 51.3. -- My Sin is ever before me.


OF Books, the Scripture, of Scripture, the Psalms, of Psalms, the
Penitentials, of Penitentials, this has worthily obtained the place of
Eminency, Basil. Hom. 12 in Psalm.
and for Use and Comfort, [were it meet to compare things, which are in their
own nature Superlative] of Super-excellency in the Church of God: And that
justly, whether we regard the Author, the Occasion, the Subject, or the End of
it. The Author was David, a King, a Prophet, a Penitent Sinner; every way
great; great in his Gifts, great in his Person and Place, and greatly Beloved:
great in his Fall, and great in his Recovery; and all to draw transgressing
Greatness unto imitation; either by Watchfulness to prevent, or by Penitency,
to recover themselves out of Satan's snares. The Occasion, was his too too-long
departure from God, in that great and presumptuous Sin against the Lord, in the
matter of Vriah, being at the Leaguer of Rabbah; David violated the Chastity of
Bathsheba his Wife, [whosoever dares the Devil by Idleness, shall surely be
tempted by him to some forbidden Employment. Ocium est principium male
faciendi. Basil. Hex.
] She conceived; he labors to hide it, as fast as she by growth did discover
it; by sending for Vriah home, that so he might be deemed the Father of that
Adulterous Issue: This not succeeding [altho he had added the strength of Wine
to his command, to make him at once forgetful and inordinate,] he gives way to
another bloody Project: For commonly, Sin goes not without company (being like
the Sea, the end of one Wave is the beginning of another; or like the Circles
in a Pond, one begets another: And as in a case of Stairs, one is a step to
another; so every Sin is a Stair to help up to higher and worse Sins). And that
was to send him back with Letters drawn by David s Pen, to the General Joab,
that he might under some Warlike Adventure, place him in the way of Death; so
to free David, as he deceitfully thought, both from Vriah's presence, and his
Blood, while he was taken out of the way by the Sword of the Children of Ammon;
Not I, but they have done it. Which being done, David married Bathsheba,
thinking that way to cloak his Sin, and so all was hushed and quiet on David's
side: But the Thunderclap is yet behind; The thing that David had done,
displeased the Lord. God loved David, and therefore hated his Sin, and would
not suffer it by concealment (like a dangerous Sore) to fester; but sends
Nathan to take away the evil that blinded him, and to allure him by a borrowed
speech into the Wilderness, that there he might speak unto his Heart; to open
what Sin had shut, to cleanse what Sin had defiled, to soften what Sin had
hardened, and to bring him to some satisfaction, and that by way of public
Confession, and as it were to do open Penance in a white Sheet.

The Subject is an expression of Evangelical Sorrow, or the language of a
melting Heart, breathing out a compassionate Lamentation, after Pardon desired,
obtained, and sealed. The cause of fear was past, Nathan had declaratively
removed it upon his acknowledgment; The Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall
not die. God had put away his Sin from before him, because he loved David; but
David could not forget his Sin, because he loved the Lord. Love makes God
forget it, and the Sinner to remember it: David's love to God, so freely
forgiving such heinous Sins, did increase daily, and with this love his sorrow
grew, that he should so ill requite the Lord; the thought of it carried him
more and more into God's Presence, whose Purity and Brightness meeting with the
light of David s Conscience, represented his Sin more clearly, as ever before
him. When he considered what God had done for him, and what he had now done
against the Lord, moving common Enemies to blaspheme, he was even ashamed and
confounded, so Planet-struck he was, that he could not, durst not lift up his
Face, Tacita sudant praecordia culpa. Juven.
he is at the Meridian, Zenith, Vertical Point of Shame, he could not mount
higher. The End, why it was penned and published was, partly in respect of
himself, to get further assurance of God's repromised Favor in his own
apprehension; and partly, with reference to others, to leave a ground of
encouragement for poor Souls that fall after Baptism (against that
Spirit-quenching Doctrine of the Novatians, who leave no room for pardon of Sin
after Baptism) or Repentance, to assure them it is possible they may be
forgiven and received into Favor; as also, to leave a pattern of Penitency to
all Posterity: After grievous falls, even into ^resumptuous Sins, it is
possible Men may ^e raised, returned, and entertained; but it ^ust be done
thus, after the pattern showed ^s in this Mount; such Sins will be ever before
them, in Memory and Detestation, and ^he burden will be intolerable; so that
they ^ill often cry out with David, My Sins are ^er before me!

The meaning may be thus unfolded; as ^f David had said, and enlarged himself
after ^his manner:

First, I am mindful of my Fault, as if it ^ere written upon every Wall; God
has ^orgiven the Guilt, that it should not redound ^o Condemnation: but my
Conscience cannot ^et go the Memory of that I have done; in ^he Daytime I
think of it, and in the Night (...) dream of it; as my Book it is when I read,
and as an Image when I pray, (ever before ^e); while I am alone, it does
accompany me, and when I am in Company, the thought ^f it does not forsake me:
Whither-soever (...) go, that woeful Story is still presented with all the
aggravating Circumstances: Bathsheba defiled, Vriah slain, a harmless
Sacrifice, and both by David; a Man called from the Sheep^ook to the Scepter,
raised to highest Dig^ity out of deep Obscurity, and honored with such a
Style, as never any Man had: Oh Ingratitude! Shall not all Men in all Ages, cry
out upon David, that he should so far forget God, as to leave his own, many of
his own, and to take his poor Neighbor's Lamb to dress for his Stranger? Oh
fearful! These or the like are my thoughts by Day, and no other are my conceits
by Night; in Company I am alone, and while I am alone, I have these Companions,
My Sins are ever before me!

Secondly, I am wonderfully troubled about it. For methinks mine Eyes and Ears
have no other Object; I see my Sins in that order as they were acted; Idleness
first, but followed with Adultery, first of the Eye, next of the Mind, and
lastly of the Body; Adultery is attended by Drunkenness-active ( he made Uriah
drunk) and that Drunkenness by Murder. See the Bead-roll, viz. Idleness,
Adultery, Drunkenness, and Murder, and hearken to the cry of them, one
answering another, but all are against David; one was occasioned by another,
and the former still punished in the latter: Many and fearful they are, more
hideous than Hell, pursuing me like so many Furies into every place, as, of the
whole Army, accusing me of Negligence and Security; of Bathsheba, bewailing the
stain of her own Body, and her Husband's Bed; of Vriah's Blood calling from the
Ground for vengeance; of all my Subjects, brought in danger by their Prince's
Folly; yea, of all the Birds in the Air, whistling David's Crime on every Tree;
of Heaven and Earth, groaning under the burden of such a Report, That David, a
Man after God's own Heart, so beloved and advanced, should be thus foully
overtaken; and lastly, of Jesus Christ, showing his Wounds rubbed up afresh by
these Abominations of mine: What Ear ^an endure, or Heart hold to see and hear
his ^ins thus set in order before him?

Thirdly, I am horribly afraid, not so much ^f Damnation (God has graciously
put away my Sin, I know I shall not die) as of the ugly face of Sin; at first
it was not apprehended by me, (I little thought of what I how feel) but now it
is presented to me in true Colors, black as Hell, bitter as Gall, and more
heavy than Mountains; the pleasure was small and past, but the bitterness ^s
present, and does far exceed; it was momentany that delighted me, but lasting
that ^exeth me: I am ashamed of every passage, that I, knowing so much, and
professing the contrary, should be so foolish and forgetful; first, to
perpetrate the Act, then to cover it with Fig leaves; as if any Person, Thing,
or Act, could be hid by any means from this bright Eye of the Word? Well may
God be hid from me, but I can never be hid from God; All things are naked and
open to him. Sin deceives most when it promises most, and brings a Curse
with its sweetest Morsels; being like that Gold which ever brought destruction
to the Owners of it. Aurum Tholosanum.
Or like that Horse which had all perfections that could be named, belonging to
an Horse, Of Cn. Cejus.
for stature, feature, color, strength, limbs, comeliness; but withal, the
Owner of him was sure to die an unhappy death. This is the misery of Sin, how
pleasant, profitable, or advantageous soever it may seem to be unto Flesh and
Blood, it has always Calamity in the end, it ever expires in Trouble.

Fourthly, I acknowledge all, not confusedly, as before, through the light of
Conscience, but distinctly, and feelingly, by the Light of God's Word, closing
with the light of Conscience. All this while I went about to please my self,
but now I find by woeful experience, that the things which I have done,
displease the Lord; and therefore now, I desire my Repentance may be answerable
to my Sin, (i. e.) multiplied, and ever before me; that others may hear and
learn by my example, how deceitful Sin is, taking away from Men, what it
promises to bring, viz. Pleasure and Contentment; and for one pleasing sight
or touch it presents, it presents an ugly face for ever after. O that Men were
Wise aforehand, or would be warned by my Example, thus tormented with the sight
and thought of former Sins, to consider what Sin will do, either sooner or
laer, when it is once committed; as it is implied in this short Sentence, a
part of David's Confession, viz. My Sin is ever before me!

The sum whereof may be comprised and presented in these two Positions, viz.

First, That Sin once committed, will be often presented.

Secondly, That whosoever is thus mindful of Sin and troubled about it, to him
it is a good sign of the Pardon of it.

First, That Sin once committed, will be often presented. The Act is soon past,
but the Guilt remains more firm. Before Repentance, Forgetfulness may cover it,
but after, nothing can hide it. Although a Person should be willing, yet
Conscience will not suffer it to be out of sight: It is so bitter to the taste,
so ugly to the sight, and so heavy a burden to a tender awakened Conscience,
that it will not easily out of Memory again: and for any thing is known to the
contrary, this was true of David to his dying Day, though not always alike for
Degrees. If you do not well, Sin lies at the Door, Genesis 4.7. The presence and
conscience of Sin, like a bawling Ban-Dog, will be ever Barking at you; when
you go out, and when you go in, it is ready to fill your Ears with terrifying
Clamours. If you sin against the Lord, be sure your Sin will find you out,
Numb. 32.23. both by way of Manifestation and Vindication; as it did our first
Parents, Righteous Job, Zealous Paul, (1 Timothy 1.13. I was a Persecutor, a
Blasphemer, Injurious, these were always before him, after his Eyes were once
opened) and Religous Austin, as his Confessions do abundantly testify. All
these cried out, as David did, My Sins are ever before me. This Man complains
of one Sin, and that of another, according to the nature of the Sin and measure
of delight taken in Commission. Much delight, argues much consent of the Will,
and great Sins do trouble greatly; they appear as it were in Battle Array, and
compass a Man about, till they make him cry out, Wretched Man that I am! I was
conceived in Sin, enough to have sunk me to the lowest Hell, and yet I have not
ceased daily to add unto it, by a wilful omission of Duties, and a greedy
commission of foul Enormities; I have been Ignorant and Idle; I have been
addicted to Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Murder, and Lying, to Pride,
Covetousness, and Swearing, to Sacrilege, Bribery, with an infinite more;
besides those inward Sins of a more Spiritual Nature, as Infidelity, Idolatry,
Impenitency, Hypocrifie, Vainglory, Covetousness, etc. Once they appeared but
Toys and tricks of Youth, but now the least of them, seems heavier than Weight
it self: Thus Conscience awakened, and set on work by Justice, brings in many
Bills of Account, some of long standing, others lately entered; happy is he that
can overlook them without Horror and Delight. It is a great work of the
Spirit, and does argue a mighty work of Grace, to stand before the sight of Sin
without horror for ^t, or delight in it; as it was with David here: otherwise
it will fall out, that upon every presentation of Sin, we should either turn
again to act it anew, at least in Speculation, or sink under it: For commonly,
if it appear not delightful, it appears very fearful.

For the further opening and illustrating of this Point, it may not be
unprofitable to enquire, after the Time when, the Grounds whereupon, and the
Ends why, Sin once committed, should be so often presented to the ^rue Penitent?

First, The Time when; is either in our Life and Health, or at the hour of
Death; ^ometimes, and to some Persons it is pre^ented in both: To all those
living under ^he Means and Covenant of Grace, commonly the Lord causes it to
be presented in their Life and Health, at one time or other, by one means or
other; either by the Ministry of the Word; so the Law presents it, and makes
Men mourn out of fear; the Gospel presents it and causes more kindly Grief out
of Love; or else by the Tongues of Men, our Neighbors; and they our Christian
Friends, who do it privately in Love* not carrying their Teeth in their
Tongues* nor bite whilst they speak, not leaving a Sca^ upon their Persons,
when they are endeavoring to heal a Wound in their Brethrens Actions: And such
reprehension should be ever well taken, yea, the Gracious will say* Let the
Righteous smite me: Or by our Enemies in anger. As Augustine reports of his
Mother Monica, that her Sin was set before her A young Maid, formerly her
Partner in Potting, fell at Variance with her, and (as Malice, when she shoots,
draws her Arrows to the head) called her Tosspot and Drunkard, whereupon Monica
reformed her Life and became Temperate. Thus bitter Taunts sometimes make
wholesome Physic, when God sanctifies unto us the malice of our Enemies to
perform the office of good Will. So Fuller in his Holy State, in the Life of
Monica.
by a Servant Maid; and as Shimei dealt with David. Thus a Man may gain by an
Enemy, as Poison unto some Creatures affords Nourishment. As Telephus his
Imposthume was opened by the Dart of an Enemy, which was intended for his hurt.
And, as they say, those Roses are sweetest which grow near unto Garlic; so the
nearness of an Enemy makes a good Man better. For both Friends and Enemies, the
Lord makes use of to set our Sins in order before us. According to the saying
of an Heathen, though no Heathenish saying, That he who would be good, must
either have a faithful Friend to instruct him, or a watchful Enemy to correct
him. Exclude not the good use of many excellent Discourses sent abroad for this
end. By reading what another speaks, a Man may by reflection observe and learn,
what himself has been, and what he is for the present. So for the time of
Life. And then for the hour of Death; ^ain and fear do stir up Conscience to
call back and present Sin to the Sinner's Eye; God withdraws the Vail, and
gives the Sinner penitent, once more a full view of his own Fruits, that they
may be as much loathed, as ever they were loved; nay, he per^itteth Satan
sometimes to come after and show his black Claws, to join with Sin, and ^o
second these accusing Cries; whereby the ^anguishing Spirits of a poor Penitent
(who may not live, and yet dares not die) ^re much moved and affrighted, to the
astonishment of unexperienced beholders. This ^s a heavy Conflict, for such as
have endured ^he heat of the Day, in the close, when they ^hought all Enemies
had been overcome and subdued, to meet with such an Assault; and yet it may be
so ordered in great Love and Mercy: Either because they had not seen it ^right
before, or that now they might take their farewell of it, never to see it more.
And so truly gracious Souls have their Joy and Happiness increased thereby;
(were this remembered, it would prove a comfort to those, whose Religious
Friends do often end their Days in such distress). For by coming so immediately
from the sight of such an ugly Obj^ct, to the Intuition and Fruition of such
Beauty as is in Christ, the Vision is more beatifical: To pass from the
presence of Sin, into the presence of God, does more ravish the Soul with
Celestial Joy. God in Christ will excel in Beauty and Glory to that Man's Eye
and Apprehension, who has lately seen the sinfulness of Sin. As the Sin is
never more glorious, than when it breaks out of a black Cloud, so the Glory of
Heaven will certainly be more admirable and lovely to those, unto whom Sin has
appeared exceeding sinful.

Now, if it pass unseen these two Days, and if it be not presented to be seen
and loathed in one of those Hours, then it will be presented at the Great-Day
(which is emphatically called the Day of Discovery, 1 Cor. 3.13.) in fullness of
Horror, and inevitable Fury: When the Curtain shall be drawn aside, and all the
secrets of the World discovered, and every Man see the actions of his Life as
upon a piece of Tapestry spread before his Eyes, appearing as so many Thorns
and Venomous Beasts; and no Mercy to be showed, no Grace to be offered; when no
Petitions will be received, nor any Voice heard, but, Go ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire: As may be gathered from diverse passages of sacred Scripture,
viz. Psalm. 50.21. Matthew. 7.22, 23, 25, 41. Hodie, hodie poenitentiae locus,
says St. Augustine. To day there is room for Repentance; you must repent now,
or perish then. If the Tap be not now thawed, it may be frozen for ever. Hell
vomiteth up our highest desires, and will afford no felicities. Happy is he
whose Sins are ever before him here in a grieved memory, they shall never be
set before him there; if they vex thee now, as a loathed burden, they shall not
torment thee then: The Sins which ye have seen to Day, ye shall see them again
no more for ever.

Secondly, The Grounds whereupon this truth rests, are such as follow, viz.

1. That inviolable dependency which all effects and conclusions have upon
their own Causes and Principles whence they flow. Acts, Powers, and Habits, are
unseparable from the Person, as they are one from another. Every Agent is and
shall be attended with its own Works; the Dead in the Lord are blessed, and
their Works follow them. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's
Crib. Sin lies at the Sinner's door, and will acknowledge no other Master. What
is once done cannot be undone. No Power can recall it from being. Only a
penitent sight of Sin, may hide it from the sight of Justice, and Mercy can
recall it from being imputed. An act contracting Guilt, may pass from a Person,
and yet not redound upon the Person, by a supernatural interposition of
satisfying Merit. Christ must come between and stay his Course, or else Sin
would not only be set before us, but even upon us in full Guilt and Weight, and
that for ever.

2. The nature of the Soul in her retaining Faculties, is another Ground;
whereby she is necessarily enabled by reflection to recall, to see and judge all
her own past Actions. This is essential, and therefore it is, that such Power
and Impressions do remain inseparated, either to punish or cheer them, by the
remembrance of things past. To which you may adjoyn the office of Conscience;
which is to bear witness, and accuse or excuse, according to Demerit. A guilty
Conscience, we use to say, (and more say, than some are aware of what they say)
is as a thousand Witnesses. It will tell us all that we have done for many
Years ago, and present us with all the Follies of our Youth. This is the Book
wherein Men may read their own History and Doom, both what they have done and
what they have deserved. There are two Rules; the one is God's Word, which
points out both Estates; and the other is every Man's Conscience, which is
privy to the frame and standing of his Heart, and which of these Estates is
his. As long then, as there is such a Soul with us, endowed with such admirable
Faculties, viz. Understanding, Memory, and Conscience; so long will Sin be
before us; if we once do evil, we shall hear of it ever after, till
Sanctification be perfect, and Grace be crowned with Glory.

3. The Order of Divine Justice, requiring some proportion between the pleasure
taken in Sin, and the vexation for it after. Beautiful it appeared in coming,
but ugly and deformed in going: sweet it was in the offer and act, but bitter
in the close; like Honey which is very sweet, but begets most bitter Choler: Or
as Claudius his Mushrom, which was pleasant but poysonful. How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her,
Rev. 18.7. As it shall appear hereafter with the Impenitents in Hell, suffering
by way of Satisfaction; so it is here on Earth with Penitents, suffering by way
of Correction. Intention of delight in the act of sinning, is justly
recompensed with extension of continued Grief. It will vex you long, because it
did affect you much: Sin was before you, when it should not, and now it must be
before you, when you would not. Justice being refused in the first, will be
heard in the latter.

Thirdly, The Ends of all this, wherefore a single Commission is followed with
frequent Presentations, we may conceive to be such as these.

1. To keep the Heart of God's People in a spiritual frame of Self-denial and
Humility, and that the habitual grace of Repentance may be upheld, and more
lively in exercise. Hereupon I am apt to think that Mr. Fox, (that industrious
preserver of the Honor of many of God's Servants) was observed to say, That
nothing did him more hurt than his Graces, nothing more good than his Sins,
being ever before him. His Graces through the prevailing power of Corruption
remaining, were ready to puff him up, and to set him in God's room, by
self-seeking: whilst his Sins kept him down, and kept him humble and meek. Few
know the benefit of this Combat: It is one of the best remedies against
spiritual Pride and Security, to keep the Mind upon Sin, and Sin in the Mind.
Hence that confident speech of renowned Austin, I dare be bold to say, that it
is good for proud Persons to fall into some Sin, Vnde sibi displiceant, qui jam
sibi placendo ceciderunt. Salubrius enim Petrus displicuit quando flevit, quam
sibi placuit quando presumpsit. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 14. That they may be
humbled as Peter was, and so saved.

2. To terrify his Adversaries, and so to leave them inexcusable, when the
full weight of Sin falls upon them. If the memory of Sin do so follow them
which have repented and are pardoned, how will it be with the Impenitent? And
what shall be the end of those who obey not the Gospel? Cain had his Sin
presented in the Morning, and Judas in the evening of his Day; to assure all
Men, that they are sure to hear of Sin again, either sooner or later.

3. It is to admonish all sorts to be Wise and Watchful, lest Sin deceive them.
It comes masked, and goes away smoothly, as if it would never return; and
say, it were so minded indeed; yet Justice will recall it, and cause it to be
unvailed, at such a time, when you shall have best leisure to attend it and
look upon it. As it is with a Sergeant, who has a Warrant to Arrest a Debtor,
but seeing him in the company of many of his Friends, who are to stand up for
him, passes by, as if he saw him not, or meant no such matter against him;
till after, winding about, he meets him alone and carries him away. So it is
here. Sin has authority (the strength of Sin is the Law) to attach every Son
of Adam, but seeing them in the height of Carnal Content and Jollity, Eating,
Drinking, Playing, and fearing nothing; while they are in such delightful and
Sinpleasing Company, nothing is done; Sin is not seen, Conscience is not
discharged, all is at rest and quiet; till after some time, they are found
alone, withdrawn from their wild Companions, into a Sickbed, or before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, then Sin comes suddenly, and irresistably, like the
Philistines upon Sampson; then account must be given of old Scores, and every
one must bear his own burden, there is no way to escape, no Bail to be taken.

4. We may conceive it is to perfect Mortification, and to prevent the
dangerous violence of Enemies from without. Satan tempts, the World allureth,
Company entice, and bad examples would draw us powerfully after them, did not
this Image past, terrify and withhold us by continual Alarms. Take heed, and
yield not for your lives; remember my Wormwood and my Gall; and, like the burnt
Child, dread the fire, etc. This, Sin does not directly and by it self, but
accidentally, and as it is overruled and ordered by an higher Hand;
occasionally to humble and drive us out of our selves, that we may fetch daily
more mortifying Virtue from Christ. Thus Light is brought out of Darkness, and
Good extracted out of Evil.

The Use of this Point may be threefold,

First, To inform the Judgment of two things.

1. About the deceitfulness of Sin. It comes at first pleasantly, as Judeth to
Holophernes (dazzling his Eyes with the splendour of Visage, and charming his Ear
with the sweetness of Discourse) clad with smiling circumstances of Pleasure,
Profit, and much Content, and after it seems to go away presently, as if it
would never return: And may be resembled not unfitly to a certain Serpent that
has a shining Skin and a pleasant smell, but is a Serpent still, and makes use
of both only to ensnare and kill: Or to the Indian Beast, which has the Face
of a Man, and the body of a Lion, who counterfeits the sound of Flutes to charm
Passengers, and then entraps and kills them with a tail of the Scorpion: Thus
under the smiling brows of Sin, may be discovered an hundred snares, who
strangle while they seem to embrace. The cup of Honey will end in Gall, even the
gall of Asps, Job 20.12, 13. Of which Pliny writes, that it is their Poison;
and to this Poison is Sin there compared: for when an Asp stingeth a Man, it
has a provoking faculty first to make him laugh, but then casts him into a
sleep, till the Poison by little and little gets to the Heart, after which it
paineth him more than ever it delighted him; so does Sin. It is a bitter sweet.
Bernard compares it to the Itch, which first yields pleasure, and afterward
smart. And St. Austin says. Many devour that on Earrh, which they must digest
in Hell, where they shall have Punishment without Pity, Misery without Mercy,
Sorrow without Succor, Torments without End. Thus as the Ancients that have
delighted to make Medals, caused the Faces of them to be quite different and
contrary; on the one side they graved an Achilles, on the other they figured a
Thersites; if on one side an Absolon, on the other an Aesop; if on one side a
Rose, on the other an Onion: The same may be observed in the Medal of Sin; if
you look on the one side, you shall see a Figure infinitely charming, on the
other an hideous Fury. When therefore thou art making a covenant with Sin, say,
O Man, to thy Soul, as Boaz said to his Kinsman, Ruth. 4.4. What time thou
buyest it, thou must have Ruth with it. So if thou will have the sweet of Sin,
thou must have the Curse with it; and let thy Soul answer as he does, No, I may
not do it, I shall spoil a better Inheritance. Follow Aristotle's advice, to
look upon Pleasure going and not coming.

Principium dulce est, sed finis amoris amarus:
Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet.
They leave Horror and Terror behind them. As the Head of the Polypus, which is
sweet to the Palate, but after causes troublesome Sleep, and frightful Dreams;
as Plutarch reports. At present you only see the pleasure, not the torment of
Sin. Look upon Cain and Judas, and they will tell thee what a Scorpion it will
be in thy side one time or other: That with Orphean Ayrs, and dextrous Warbles,
it will lead thee to the flames of Hell.

2. About the folly of Man to think otherwise of Sin; either that God will
forget it, or that they shall never see it again: Hence it is that there are so
many fly and hypocritical Persons in the World, that labor to carry all
things in the Clouds and dark Contrivances, that think to dance in a Net, as we
say, and not be seen; and are still very desperate Wretches, close Drunkards,
Cheaters, despisers of that which is Good. Well, let them look to it, and
remember the words of Moses, to the Tribes of Israel, Reuben, and Gad, Numb.
32.23. Be sure your Sin will find you out. God is Justice and Memory it self,
he cannot forget, nor (things as they now stand) forgive without satisfaction
made and applied. Man is the unhappy Parent of Sin, and must acknowledge his own
issue. As sure then, as there is an ever-living God above, and an everlasting
Light within a Man, a Soul with retaining Faculties and reflecting Power,
enobled with that branch of Eternity [Immortality,] so sure will Sin return,
and the Soul shall see and acknowledge her own Actions; either here to begin and
continue Evangelical sorrow, or hereafter, to beget and increase Infernal
Horrors and Terrors inexpressible. It is great weakness to think otherwise.
Believe those that have had, and given experience of this Truth; who have felt
the burden of Sin, and have been hunted with it from place to place, and could
find no peace nor rest a long time; and all because Sin was ever before them.
Happy are those who learn Wisdom from the harms of others.

Secondly, The use hereof may tend to reform the Life, by reproving three sorts
of Misbelievers: Though, as Calvin said in one of his Books, concerning God's
Government of the World, I suppose my Discourse will be unwelcome to many, and
that because it is a smart and sharp reprehension. Men love not the taste of
Wormwood, of Increpation. But the Diet, though not so toothsome, yet is
wholesome; this rebuke though not so pleasing, yet is surely profitable, and
especially being seasonable and suitable.

And, 1. It reproves such as make a mock of Sin, Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock
of Sin; and drink down Iniquity like Water, selling themselves to work
Wickedness, and so heaping up Wrath against the Day of Wrath. As if Sin were
but a Trick of Youth, a Toy, a Vapor, a Bubble, to be seen to day, and never
after; as if it were as soon past as done, and as short-lived as the Ephemora,
that lived but eight Hours, and were no more. How do such swarm amongst us?
Have we not our Cains, that kill their Brethren with Envy and Anger? Our
Nimrods, mighty and cunning Hunters, after the Souls, Bodies, and Estates of
Men? Our Esau's, that sell their Birthright, all their hope and right to
Heaven, for Carnal Contentment? Our Achan's, who commit Sacriledg, and steal
Coals from the Altar, to burn up themselves and Posterity after them, by
appropriating, or selling the consecrated Portion? Our Ahab's, that covet their
Neighbors Vinyards, their Places and Goods, to build up their own Houses
higher, though it be with Blood? Our Jezebel's, in many proud and flanting
Minions, who mispend their precious time in Spotting, Painting, Gaudy-dressing,
as if they were mere lumps of Flesh, or a Body without a Soul, having no other
Deity but Pleasure and Ambition, no Idol but their conceited Beauty? Have we
not our ambitious Absolon's, our Politic Achitophels, Vainglorious Herod's,
whose natural inclinations proceed from them as flashing streaks from a Cloud,
to be instantly turned into Lightning: Many a Worldly Demas, who have no other
God but Self to adore, and therefore confound Elements, and mix Stars with the
Dust of the Earth, bring God to submit to the Creature, whereby to attain the
end of their exorbitant pretentions. And which is worst of all, even in the
Lord's House there are found Hophni and Phineas, Gehazi and Simon Magus, too
many dark Lanterns, blind deceitful Guides, whose Feet cast Dirt in their
Mouths, and whose Lives are at Sanballat's Work, when the Doctrine is, or
should be at Nehemiah's, and make Hebrew of their Discourses, reading them
backward in their Practice; whose Inconformity pulls down more than they
build? We know the end of these Men, and yet dare imitate them. Te miror
Antoni, quorum sacta imiteris, eorum exitum non perhorrescere, was the Orator's
saying against Antonius; I wonder, Anthony, thou art not afraid of the end of
those Men, whose deeds thou do imitate. Time hastes when such shall feel,
what they will not now believe: When they shall see nothing but Sin, hear
nothing but Devils and yelling of damned Ghosts; remember nothing but the
vanity of Carnal Pleasures past, and the eternity of present Woe. O Fools and
Madmen, will they then cry out, that we were, to forget God, hate Instruction,
and imitate such wild Wretches, knowing their end aforehand, and so
delightfully to embrace this deceitful Harlot Sin, to our own Ruin, etc. But
then it will be too late to complain.

2. Such, who, though they do not slight Sin in it self, yet they are thus
conceited of it, that it will never trouble them after Commission. In the Act,
they think the best and worst is past. True it is, you your selves may make a
shift to forget it, for a time to put it out of your fight; and your Neighbors
who once knew, may forget it for ever: But God and your own Conscience cannot
finally; they may as soon cease to be, as to forget to work according to their
Nature. What is not now, may be hereafter. Men lose not their right, because
they take not that time; which other Men ignorantly prescribe them. -- Nullum
tempus occurit Regi; The King may lay claim to his right at any ^ime;
forbearance is no acquittance; much ^ess can any time prescribe against the
King ^f Kings. Because Sentence is not speedily exe^^ted against an Evil-doer,
shall we therefore conclude that it will never be? The thing ^s certain, the
time free. Some difference ^ndeed there is between the commission of Sin, and
the presentation of it after; Sins are committed single and apart, now one,
then another; sluggish Idleness in the Morning, swi^ish Drunkenness at Midday,
and filthy Whoredom at Night; the first occasioneth ^he second, and the last is
a Punishment of the former; but (as Vapors that ascend ^nvisibly, come down in
Storms and plenti^ul Showers) they are presented altogether. ^These things,
even all these things have thou done.) As it is with Stewards, their
disb^rsments are diverse, and at diverse times, ^ut the Account is brought in at
once, as one; so it is with Sinners, Item for this, Item for that: Which
Multitudes never think of; and yet this is one thing that makes Sin so heavy.

3. Such as put Sin off and will not see it; and deal with their Souls as
others do with their Bodies, who when their Beauty is de^a^ed, they desire to
hide it from themselves by false Glasses, and from others by false Excuses. If
they are told, these and these are your Sins; they will not acknowledge them.
What, am I a Dog, that I should do such a thing? When as indeed, there is no
Dog, though he want Reason, will do so much against Reason, as some Natural Men
that have Reason. Yet a private Christian, a loving Friend or Neighbor, must
not seem to dislike what they do, so as to admonish them, though wisely and
lovingly done; and are like the Nettle, which will sting though touched never
so gently. Ministers must not reprove them, then they personate; Magistrates
must not punish them, for then they are Cruel; others must not mind them of
their Duty, for their good, for then they are Busybodies, intermeddling with
Matters that concern them not; What have you to do with us? Are you our
Keepers? Let us alone, we must answer for our selves, and every Vessel shall
stand on his own bottom, etc. Like strayed Asses, they will not be brought
Home: And the more you touch them, like Toads, the more they swell; and like
Serpents, the more they are meddled with, the more Poison they gather to spit
out. Go about to cool them, you shall but add to their heat, as the Smith's
Forg-fries, when cold water is cast upon it; and as hot water stirred, casts up
the more fume. But let them know for all their anger, that Sin will be
presented, either to humble them here, or to damn them hereafter. A Day is
coming, and it hasteneth, when you shall see them all presented at once, and
shall no way avoid that sight; when you will think you see nothing but Fire,
that you hear nothing but a sudden noise, passing the greatest clap of horrid
Thunder, and shall choose Death rather, if it were possible to annihilation,
than Life with such an object before you. As it fell out to that usurping
Richard, after the horrible Murder committed upon his innocent Nephews; he
could rest no where, he could be no where free; a tumultuous army of Thoughts,
struck an Alarm to his Repose; at Bed and Board, Day and Night, alone and in
company, he thought he saw and heard them; when as in truth it was his Sin that
was ever legally before him, and his own guilty Conscience that did pursue him:
And to that Judge Morgan, who gave Sentence upon that virtuous and innocent Lady
Jane; in so much that he grew Mad shortly after, and still cried out, Take away
the Lady Jane from me; and in that Horror ended his Days and wretched Life. As
Mr. Speed relates in the Life of Q. Mary, and Mr. Clark, in his Life of the
Lady Jane. And so it will be with you here, or hereafter. Tell me then, is it
not better to see them apart now, when you may repent and be freed, than to put
them off unto another Day, when you must see them altogether, and sink under
them without any hope of recovery? O consider this, all ye that forget God,
lest he tear you i^ pieces, and there be none to deliver!

Thirdly, The use of this Point may be to instruct the Person in matter of
Duty, and so like a well drawn Picture, looks upon all that look upon it. If
this be so, that Sin once committed will be often presented, it prompts all, 1.
To think thus of Sin; When you are tempted, remember this Text set before you
here, or else you will think of it after to your pain. It is momentany and
frothy that delights you in Sin, but it is eternal that will vex and torment
you. To repent, is to take a bitter, though wholesome Potion, and Impenitency
is followed with Damnation. Say you purpose and do repent, yet your Sin will
ever be before you, either to grieve and terrify you, as it did David, or to
allure you to the same again, as it did Augustine often. Especially the sins of
Blood, corporal Uncleanness, Apostasy after knowledge and profession of the
Truth. These sink Men either under senseless Sottishness, or unsupportable
Horror. Witness Cain for the first, David for the second, and Francis Spira for
the third; because they are not only Sins but Scandals. David thought he might
have covered one Sin with another, Adultery with Murder, but hereby they were
both augmented and seen further: Not only he himself, but all Posterity must
know it; David did that which was right in the Eyes of the Lord, save only in
the matter of Uriah; That stuck in Memory, and shall in History. Not because he
had never committed other Sins, but because none of the rest were so
scandalous, none so accented, none so burdensome to the Conscience as these,
being against so much Light, of Nature, of Scripture, and of Humane Laws; few
Repenting, none without difficulty, and many falling into presumption, or
despair by them. Under the guilt of any of these, for the most part, Men feel
either too much, or too little; either they keep themselves out of sight
always, when the Conscience is seared, the Heart hardened, and Men are past
feeling, or else they are still present and staring in the face of Conscience,
as it were with the eyes of many Devils. Think of this aforehand, and beware,
1. Of Apostasy, in whole, or in part; because it is better never to know the
way of Righteousness, than to sin against Knowledge. 2. Of Murder, because Men
are made after God's Image, and such Blood cries from the Earth, till it have
hearing: So many drops of Blood, so many Tongues, and every drop a Voice to cry
for Vengeance. Give them Blood to drink, for they are worthy, Rev. 16.6. And it
is threatened, He that sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man his Blood shall be shed,
Genesis 9.6. 3. Of Adultery, because it brings with it much guilt and great stain
upon the Soul. Hoc grande flagitium est, says Job 31.11. This is an heinous
Crime; a Wickedness with a witness, a Fire that consumes to destruction. God
will judge it, who ever be slack to punish it. Hear what the Scripture says of
this Sin, the hainousness and danger thereof, as a motive to avoid it. Prove.
22.14. A Whore is a deep Ditch, and he that is abhorred of the Lord, shall fall
therein. David moiled himself in this deep Pit, and there might have stuck in
the Mire, had not God drawn him out by a merciful Violence, and purged him with
Hysop from that abhorred filth. Prove. 6.32, 33. Who so commits Adultery with
a Woman, lacks understanding; he that does it, destroys his own Soul. A
Wound and Dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach shall not be wiped away. It
is not therefore leve peccatum, a small Sin, as the Pope's Canonists call it.
Divine Justice does not use to kill Flies with Beetles. Briefly, it is a Sin
that hurts both Body and Soul, it hurts Men in Goods, in Name, Posterity; and
will be ever before them, to make them mourn and say, How have we hated
Instruction, and our Hearts despised Reproof? And have not obeyed the Voice of
our Teachers? O what length and depth of Comfort does a Man lose for a little
Folly! not worth the name of Pleasure, because it is brutish; and brings many
and heavy burdens indeed; a stain upon the Soul, rottenness into the Bones, and
a blemish indelible on the Name. Who would purchase that at so dear a rate,
which he may have for nothing? Or use Violence, where he may have leave and a
blessing too? Run the way of Hell for that Pleasure, which they may enjoy more
fully in the right Path and Way of Heaven? This Men consider not. Had David
thought of the end, he would never have adventured on the beginning; had he
thought of ever seeing Sin, he would have wished he had never seen Bathsheba,
or that his Eyes had gone alone and left his Heart at home; then they could
never have brought their Lord into such a straight. Remember David and all his
troubles. His sweet never countervailed his bitter Sauce. Bathsheba was a
pleasing Object for a time, but Sin is fearful and grievous for ever. Lust
wrestleth till it bring forth Sin, but Sin grows and labors till it bring
forth Death. And although the Combat be healed, and the Wound healed, yet some
Scars remain. A great deal of preventing Sorrow and wholesome Suffering, must be
undergone; read it in David. The Child that was born unto him must die. Thamar
was defiled, Ammon murdered, and he himself turned out of House and Kingdom, by
his own Son. (It is a bitter thing to sin against the Lord.) He fasteth and
prays, weepeth and sigheth, saying often, or to this effect: O Lord, rebuke
me not in thine Anger, neither chasten me in thy hot Displeasure; have Mercy
upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my Bones are vexed. My Soul
is sore troubled, but thou, O Lord, how long? Return, O Lord, deliver my Soul;
O save me for thy Mercy-sake: I am weary with groaning, all the Night make I my
Bed to swim; I water my Couch with my Tears; mine Eye is consumed, because of
grief. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide
thy Face from me? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so
far from helping me, and from the words of my Roaring? O my God, I cry in the
Daytime, but thou hear not, and in the Night-season and am not silent: I am
poured out like Water, and all my Bones are out of joint, my Heart is like Wax,
it is melted in the midst of my Bowels: my strength is dried up like a Pot
sheard, my Tongue cleaves to the roof of my Jaws: Have Mercy upon me, O Lord,
for I am in trouble; my Eye is consumed with grief, yea, my Soul and my Belly:
My Life is spent with grief, and my Years with sighing; my strength fails
because of my Iniquities, and my Bones are consumed: Make thy Face to shine
upon thy Servant, save me for thy Mercy-sake. Day and Night thy Hand is heavy
upon me, my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. Blessed is he whose
Sin is covered, and whose Transgression is forgiven. O Lord, rebuke me not in
thy Wrath, neither chasten me in thine hot Displeasure: For thine Arrows stick
fast in me, and thy Hand presses me sore: There is no soundness in my Flesh,
because of thine Anger; neither is there any rest in my Bones, because of my
Sin; for mine Iniquities are gone over my Head, as a heavy Burden, they are too
heavy for me. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the Day
long. My Loins are filled with a loathsome Disease; there is no soundness in my
Flesh. I am feeble, and sore broken. My Heart pants, my Strength fails me;
my groaning is not hid from thee: Yea, Lord, all my desire is before thee. Have
mercy upon me, O my God, according to thy loving Kindness; according to the
multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgression, wash me thoroughly
from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin; for I acknowledge my
Transgressions, and my Sin is ever before me: Purge me with Hssyop, and I shall
be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. Make me to hear the voice
of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Hide
thy Face from my Sins, and blot out all mine Iniquities; create in me a clean
Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy
Presence, take not thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy
Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit: Then will I teach Transgressors
thy Ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee. I remembered God and was
troubled, I complained and my Spirit was overwhelmed: Thou hold mine Eyes
waking; I am sore troubled that I cannot speak. Will the Lord cast me off for
ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is his Mercy clan gone for ever? Does
his Promise fail for evermore? And will he be favorable no more? Has God
forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies, etc.

Stay now, and look back and say, Is not this a great Mourning? Was not David
in deep distress? How many ways does he take? What words does he use? Do not
you see a Penitent exceedingly humbled, a Heart bleeding, a sad and disfigured
Face, a Body made thin, Sighings redoubled one upon another? Here are Joints
pined away with sadness; here is a fixed love of Tears; the joyous Harp hangs
up, and knows no more what Songs of Triumph mean; he is wholly employed in
expressing Griefs. He dies to all Mortal things of the Earth, and being cast
upon the Sea of Repentance, he makes it to echo with Groanings, and
continually swell with his Weepings. And all to describe his condition by the
presence of his Sins, and excite the Divine Compassion toward him. And if
David, penitent David, was thus pursued with the thoughts and sight of Sin, if
he were sent, and kept such a strong Beggar for Mercy all his days, for the
matter of Vriah, Oh what will become of most of us, who sin more and desire
less, who are more cunning to Transgress, and more careless in Praying? Where
is our Rhetoric, our Fervor, our Sighs, our Tears? Oh, how faint are our
Desires? How cold our Prayers? As if our many Sins were never before us, or not
fearful to us; as if Mercy and Grace were as easy to get as to lose; or as if
Heaven and God's Favor would fall upon us at last, without any labor, which
cost David so much Fasting, so many Prayers, so many Tears in secret? And yet
his Fasting, his Prayers, and Tears could not do it, without satisfying-Blood
applied and pleaded. If it be so, as we have proved from the Text, then do you
your selves set Sin before you, be desirous of it, and patient while others do
it. Yea, kiss that Hand, and praise God for that Means whereby it is done:
Attend to your Pastors, look your selves in the Glass of the Law, and pray
with David, search and try me, O Lord, set my Sins in order before me now, that
I may be wail them, and thou may forgive them! Never leave this endeavor,
till you be enabled to see and say, Woe, and alas, wretched Man that I am, thus
to dishonor God, what shall I say or do? Mine Iniquities have separated
between me and my God. My Sins have hid his Face from me, so that I cannot see
him. The Glory is departed, and that bright Sun fearfully eclipsed toward me.
Can I rejoice with the joy of other People? Can I laugh and be merry, while my
Sins are always before me? Can I sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land! Call
me not Naomi, but call me Marah; the Lord deals bitterly with me, yet
deservedly. Sin has been my Delight, now it is my Torment; I have followed
Sin, and now Sin follows me: See, do you not see my Drunkenness here, my
Whoredoms there? my Pride, my Hypocrisy, my Covetousness, and Vainglory? a
bundle of blasphemous Thoughts in one place, and a flying roll of Lies and
Oaths in another place; save me from them, sweet Jesus! A wounded Israelite was
healed by looking upon the Brazen Serpent: Wounded I am, the stings of Death
(all of my own making, for other, Death has none) do stick in me, and compass
me about; to the Lord Jesus I look, unto his Arms I fly, and there resolve to
rest. Yet, me thinks I hear, and that all others should hear, Husbands accusing
me of Wrong and Injustice, Virgins and Wives complaining of a Stain brought by
me to their Beds and Bodies; my Neighbors muttering out my breach of Wedlock
band, yea, all my Folly and Prodigality. What shall I say? Or whither shall I
go? My Sins are ever before me! Speak no word of comfort, raise me not up, but
rather trample me under Feet, as unsavory Salt; cast me out of Company, as
unworthy to live, or breath: O ye Heavens, why do ye shine upon me? O thou Air,
why do thou refresh me? O thou Earth, why do thou bare me up? It is I
that have rebelled against our Sovereign Lord; it is I that have play^d the
Beast; it is I that have been so ungrateful and forgetful: My Sins are ever
before me. Droop, O my Soul, and weep abundantly, hang down the Head, and weep
and mourn in deep bitterness. It is better to lose the sense of Seeing by
weeping, than always to see Sin. Resolve never to look cheerfully, much less to
entertain a thought of Joy, till thou hear Christ saying to thee, Son be of
good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee!

No more of this here, the second Point com^s to hand, viz.

2. Doct. That whosoever is thus mindful of Sin, and troubled about it, to him
it is a good sign of the pardon of it, and of his being in the state of Grace.

Multitudes of Scriptures may be produced proving this Conclusion, by just
Consequence and easy Deduction. Some are noted in the Margin 2 Chronicles. 33.12.
Job 13.26. Psalm. 32.5. Romans 7.24.
. Examples to illustrate, you have in all the Saints of God, of whose
Conversion, and being in a ^tate of Grace, we ought to be assured; evidenced to
our Faith, by the Word recording it, and to our knowledge ^y this following
trouble for and about Sin. As in David, here and in many other Psalms: Ps.
25.7. and 32.5. and 38.4. Isa 38.17. Luke 7.38. Mat. ^6. ult. 1 Timothy 1.13. Act.
2.43. and 16.30.
In Hezekiah, Mary Magdalen, St. Peter, and S. Paul, the two great Apostles,
the latter of which was a furious Persecutor of Christianity, till subdued by
the Spirit of God; and of a Ravening Wolf, was made a Lamb of the Fold; with
those mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, and many others of our own
Knowledge, who have and do speak out of experience, and most comfortable
assurance, that it was good for them that ever they were thus troubled; and I
believe, never any read or heard of any that miscarried, who once came to this
kindly sight of Sin. And there are two Grounds of this truth.

Reason 1. The First is God's Order, which he observes in the Conversion of a
Person, and Sanctification of our Natures, by discovering the Maladies, and
setting Sin before the Eye of that Sinner, whose safety he desires and intends.
Partly, to stay him from running on further toward Hell; partly, to prepare
him for the receipt and exercise of Regenerating Grace, and partly, to keep him
humble, and weaned from an immoderate love of Worldly Glory, as from the former
Discourse will more fully appear.

Reason 2. Secondly, The other Reason is, God's free Promises annexed to the
second Covenant, and presupposing this Condition. Only Faith is the condition
of the Covenant, but this trouble of Mind is the condition and companion of
Faith. As legally considered, it is a condition Preparative, and preceding
Faith; as Evangelically, it is an unseparable Companion ever following. Behold
this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in you, etc. 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. Faith is in us first, in order of Nature
at least, though Godly sorrow is apt first to appear; as sap and life are first
in the Root, yet Buds, Leaves and Fruits first discover themselves in the
Branches. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced; there is Faith; for
Christ crucified, can be beheld with no other Eye; and they shall mourn for
him, etc. Zech. 12.10. There is brokenness of Spirit, Spiritual trouble
resulting from it. It is an hard question in Divinity, Whether Faith be no part
of Repentance? Which some resolve thus Synops. purio. Theolog. Disp. 32.. 40.
: If Repentance (of which this Trouble is a branch) be considered largely, for
the whole work of Conversion, so Faith is comprised in it; if strictly, so it
is the cause thereof: However, it is apparent they are nearly allied, they are
Sister-Graces; where the former is, there is the latter also.

Reason 3. To which, a third Ground may be added: When Man approaches near
unto God, he sees both himself and Sin better: Sin appears to be greater, and
himself lesser: The Divine Light and Purity, represents both as they are in
deed, and not as Satan's-Jesuits (Pleasure and Profit) do misreport: As it is
with the Moon, the further off it is from the Sun, the greater it is; but by
near approaching, it appears lesser. It is St. Austin's allusion in one of his
Epistles. Thus it is with Man in respect of God; Quo propius ad Deum aceedit
Homo, eo melius sentit, quam miserae sit, and abjectae conditionis, says
Rivet; The nearer Man comes to God, the better he sees his own miserable
Condition: According to that of Gregory in his Morals, Quanto magis internae
Divinitatis conspiciunt omnes Sancti, tanto magis se nihil esse cognoscunt:
When the Saints by Faith come to apprehend Spiritual Mysteries, then they
clearly see their own nothingness; that glorious Sun discovers all their Dust;
they are ashamed of their droppings, when they stand before that Ocean. As the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, who was immediately inspired by the Holy Spirit,
and of great Sanctity, no less then a Cherubim scorched with Celestial Ardours,
and who pitched his Feet upon the front of the Sun, became most vile in his own
Eyes, when he was carried up nearest to God. Such poverty of Spirit, such
trouble of Mind, such a sight of Sin, is an infallible sign of our Conversion
to God, and of obtained Pardon.

Object. It may be objected, May not a Natural, Unregenerate Man; such as have
no renewing Grace, have a sight of Sin? May not they be troubled about Sin, and
yet never return to, amend and procure Pardon?

Answ. Doubtless they may not only see Sin with some trouble and distaste, but
also leave the exercise thereof; they may see Sin and be brought, I say, to
some trouble about it, by the inward light of Natural Conscience, by the use of
outward means, while they live within the bounds of a Visible Church; by the
fear and force of Humane Laws, or by some heavy Judgment falling upon them in
their Bodies and Estates; all, or any of which, may force open their Eyes to
see, and acknowledge their own evil ways; as it fell out with Pharaoh, who
sighed at every Plague, and seemed to be willing to turn to God: And so did
Ahab, Saul, and Judas. Yea, they may go further, to leave some Sins, at least
for a time, as it is probable Herod did at St. John's Preaching; and yet for
all this, they may not repent Evangelically, so as to be grieved and thoroughly
changed. But this is it we say; No Man in a state of Nature can see Sin, and be
troubled about it as David here was.

Vebridius Aug. refert Epist. 23. ad Bonificium, non procula fine.
exceedingly hated, de quaestione magna, responsionem brevem, a short Answer to
a weighty Question. A little more therefore to clear this in hand; see the
difference of the sight of Sin that is in Natural Men and Unregenerate, from
that of true Converts, viz.

First, David's sorrow proceeded from Love: When he considered, that God who
had done so great things for him, was dishonored by him, and displeased with
him; that his own Heart was made unfit for God's Service, and that the common
Enemies were occasioned to rejoice and blaspheme; then he burst out into this
supplicatory Confession: This was the Fountain whence his penitential Tears did
flow. But thus it is not with any mere graceless Person; his sorrow for Sin is
at the best from Fear, not from Love. Judas had an hellish sorrow, a desperate
grief for Sin; David was Evangelical. Against thee, thee only have I sinned.
Lo, there lay the pinch of his grief, in that he had offended so good a God,
that had maintained him, loved, delivered, crowned, and redeemed him: Oh,
against thee, thee only! Such matchless Love, melting Bowels, such precious
Blood of such a Savior. He is pricked with the Thorns of Christ's Crown, he
bled over his bleeding Wounds, with the truly sorrowful Soul, even tares
himself in pieces, for taring Christ's Side open.

Secondly, It was free, like Water out of a Spring. Fained, forced Grief is
nothing worth Virtus nolentium nulla est.
; it is like that of Judas, which was fired out of him, as sweet Water is out
of Roses; and squeezed out of him, as Verjuice is out of Crabs: But gracious
Persons are Volunteers in their sorrow; which we see practiced by David, after
he had numbered the People, 2 Samuel 24.10. His Heart smote him, and David said to
the Lord, Take away the iniquity of thy Servant, for I have done very
foolishly. And a shadow hereby we find in the example of Epaminondas the Theban
General, who the next day after Victory and Triumph, went drooping and hanging
down his Head; and being asked why he did so? Answered, Yesterday I found my
self too much elated with Vain glory, therefore I correct my self to day. But a
better example we have of David, whose Heart smote him, as before. He was not
smitten by God's Hand, or the Prophet's Reproof, as afterward; yet his
sanctified Conscience did its Office, that of a faithful Monitor; his Heart
misgave him. Bee-masters tell us, those are the best Hives that make the
greatest noise: Sure it is, that Heart is best, that suffers a Man not to sleep
in Sin. As for Unregenerate Men, it is not so with them.

Thirdly, David saw Sin, and was troubled about it, as it was Sin, ugly as
Hell, opposite to the holy and pure Nature of God, a defacer of his Image, and
pleasing only to the Devil, God's greatest Enemy. But Natural Men, see and
grieve for Sin, only as it is attended with pain, of loss and sense. Take away
this Plague, said Pharaoh, the outward Scourge, not take away this hard Heart,
the greatest Plague of all. All trouble like Mercury's Influence, is good only
if joined with a good, but bad if joined with a bad Planet. The Object of
sorrow must be observed, and that will show the nature of it.

Fourthly, David saw Sin with more hatred, indignation, and abomination than
ever: It swelled like a Toad in his Eyes; he spat it out of his Mouth with
utmost abhorrency, resolving to watch for ever after more carefully all his
ways. I considered my ways (that they were not good) and turned my Feet unto
thy Testimony; I have (now) hid thy Word in my Heart, that I may not sin
against thee. Turn away mine Eyes from beholding Vanity, and set a watch before
the door of my Lips. Thus David saw it, and these effects followed. So then,
that sight of Sin, which I account an infallible consequent of renewing Grace,
(that none may be mistaken) is and must be timely, kindly, fully and
constantly. Timely, while the Day of Grace lasts; as Judas saw Sin when it
was too late. Kindly and willingly, being led and kept in view thereof, by an
inward light and power of Grace, fighting against Corruption, and thereby
keeping it still in Memory; else, Reprobates may and do often see their Sins
here by force, driven to it by Judgments, casting out their Sins, as Mariners
do their Goods in a Storm, wishing for them again in a Calm. Fully it must be,
both for Intention and Extension; for the nature of it, it must be hearty, and
for the Object, it must be universal. Greater and lesser Sins, open and secret
Evils, the sins of Youth and riper Age; all must be bewailed, where one is
seen, though all are not alike burdensome; some wound and terrify more than
others, according as there was more or less delight in commission. Adultery and
Murder did flash most in David's Face, bringing along with them into his mind
and sight, even his Birth-sin. St. Austin was much troubled, for that he brake
into an Orchard when he was a Boy; and for that he had stayed another time,
delightfully to behold two Cocks fighting, and that but once: So much he
testifies in his Confessions. And if so, how will they be troubled another day,
who spend many Days, the most of their Time, in Hunting, Cock-fighting, Bull,
or Bear-baiting, turning Recreation into Vocation? How will they be disquieted
with the sight of Sin, who rob not only Orchards in their School-way, but
Houses, not of Men, but of God; as our Appriators and Simonists do; of whom the
Prophet Malachy complains. The trouble of others, should raise some trouble in
their Minds, who are guilty in any kind. Sin will have Trouble. I have read of
one, who was a Steward to some Gentleman, or a Factor to some Merchant, that
was much afflicted, as for other Sins, so for one dash with his Pen, which was
done to wrong another. The redounding guilt of a small Act is heavy. Sin
receives weight from the purity and justice of God, who forbids it
indefinitely; not only great Sins, but all Sins. For if he arm but one Sin
against us (which Men may deem little, if not Venial) that little one is enough
to hunt and sink a Man, as far as it is possible for a Creature to fall from
God. And as it must be fully, so it must be constantly. This sight of Sin,
which is nothing but Evangelical Sorrow for Sin, following upon the Spiritual
Combat and renewed light of Conscience, is not bounded but by Death: More or
less it continues during Life, and rather increases than decays, as Love
does. It is not sufficient to see Sin once a Year, (and yet it would be better
for some then it is, did they go so far) as our Adversaries require Confession;
nor once in our Life, only at Death to cast an eye upon it, and bid it adieu,
with an O Lord, Lord be merciful, and open unto me, (which good words and
seasonable too, are not blamed, but the delaying of so main a Duty till then):
Heaven is not to be had usually at so cheap a rate. Satan ordinarily is not so
soon vanquished, nor Sin so easily put off: Whosoever thinks it so easy a
matter to repent and believe, as that he has seen and sorrowed enough for Sin,
now he may desist from both, did never see nor sorrow for it at all. What David
here said of himself, is true of every renewed Heart, more or less, during
Life, My Sin is ever before me.

Use 1. The use hereof may be, 1. To discover to you a twofold Error, to be
carefully avoided, because common and dangerous.

First, Of the Romanists, who in their Doctrine and Practice, do place Sin
rather, before the Ear of the Confessor, than before the Eye of the Committer:
That the one must hear it, is absolutely necessary, without which, there is no
Salvation, that the other should see it, is not so; at least not so much pressed
by them. Auricular Confession is more insisted on, than inward Contrition: And
Penance is too far severed by them from Repentance. We hear much and often of
the one, but of the other there is too deep a silence. Confession and
Satisfaction are strictly looked unto, by such as profess their Religion in
earnest, (to give them their due, that nothing may be blamed in them, but what
is blameworthy). But Contrition and Sanctification, this personal sight of
Sin, and Evangelical sorrow for it, are not so much urged, neither in their
Writings nor Practice, for ought I can learn. However, I dislike not
Confession, it is a Duty very comfortable and useful; the abuse set aside, I
could wish it more frequent among us; but never used in public or private,
without Contrition: Let the Heart accompany the Tongue, else it is the most
unsavory piece of Formality that can be.

Secondly, Of our common People; who deem the worst of such as are thus
troubled; condemning rash judgment in others, do yet pass the bounds of Charity
toward them: As if, poor Souls, they only were cursed of God, and hated of
others, because they are thus pursued by Sin, and baited by Satan, especially
if it be on their Sickbed. Strange it is to hear them cry out upon profession
of Religion! as if Religion were the worse for it, because her followers are
thus affrighted for their good. They will not profess Religion, no, not they,
nor be tied to frequent the Church, to perform Duties in private, because such
and such are distracted by it; Sure they are out of their Wits, this
Book-learning has made them Mad, else they would never complain and cry out
so, that their Sins are ever before them. Why, say they, are not we all
Sinners, as well as they? and yet our Sins never trouble us: More is the pity,
and greater is their Misery. Poor Souls, you cannot distinguish between trouble
for Sin, and senslessness under Sin; between the desperate pangs of Despair,
and the genuine th^ows of a troubled Mind: Mi^ht you not as truly have said the
same of David, St. Paul, and all the rest of God's Saints in every Age, who
have passed through this Wilderness to Canaan? But in so doing, know, you
dishonor God, lay a blemish on his Work, and often condemn the Generation of
the Righteous. This trouble of Mind being one of the most infallible marks of
true Penitency, the Road-way to Heaven for adult Persons, and one of the best
signs of this Nature, that any one can see in himself, or desire in his Friend.
Let my Sins, good Lord, be always before me, as David 's were: Let all thine be
so disquieted here, that so all our Sins may never come in sight at that Day,
but be buried in everlasting forgetfulness.

True it is, some Men may superstitiously endeavor to make the Way to Heave
narrower than indeed it is; but far more there are, who voluptuously endeavor
to enlarge it, and make it more broad and easy, than God has made it; without
any such sight of Sin, or trouble about it; crying out, To what end serves
this waste? What needs all this ado? Cannot Men be saved without this sight
of Sin, and sorrow for it? Whether they can or no, I will not stand to
determine; sure I am, ordinarily they will not: Till they be brought into the
Wilderness, they are intractable, indocible; therefore the Lord troubles them,
that they may be willing to be saved. To all such as think otherwise, I should
commend these following passages of holy Scripture to be considered, in their
most retired Thoughts, Numb. 32.23. Genesis 4.7. Psalm. 50.21, 22. Mat. 7.13, 14.
Phil. 3.11. 1 Pet. 4.18. The Righteous shall scarcely be saved: ad praesentis
Vitae difficultates debet referri, etc. says a judicious Interpreter on that
place: Our Race or Warfare here in this World, is like a Voyage by Sea, beset
and encountered with many Difficulties, Rocks, Tempests, Pirates, open Enemies,
and false Brethren: Ardua prima via est; which made St. Paul say, -- If by any
means, I may attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead: A phrase importing
difficulty without doubtting; he was persuaded he should attain it, but not
without the use of such means, and after much struggling. What else is meant by
the Wrestling of Jacob, the Praying and Fasting of David; the Running of Paul;
the Scruples and Cases of Conscience proposed by the Saints of God frequently,
and in great variety, when once they begin to benefit by the Word. Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And the like
Complaints are very frequent, where the Word has awakened them. The Pains and
bitter Sufferings of all our renowned Martyrs, both of the Primitive Times, and
in the late Marian-Days, do preach unto us the Straightway: The difficulty of
obtaining and keeping a grounded persuasion of God's Favor in the free pardon
of all our Sins, through the Satisfaction and Intercession of Christ. The
Church Militant is a Lilly among Thorns, having Enemies ever about her, and her
Sins always before her. Non est ad astra mollis e terris via. We may not expect
to be carried to Heaven on Beds of Down, but through many Tribulations; not to
go to Paradise through Paradise, a Way ^^rowed with Roses. The Kingdom of
Heaven suffers Violence; few arrive in this Harbor without danger and
difficulty. It is not so easy a thing to work out Salvation, as most deem; and
yet through Christ it is easy to all them that receive him.

Thirdly, Hereunto may be added, another Error, though not so common; and that
is, when upon these and the like Grounds, Men and Women, enough oppressed with
the thought and burden of their former Sins, will ^et be always poring upon
them, till at length ^hey are either entangled with delight in them, ^r almost
overwhelmed with horror for them. There is an excess in this. Men may look upon
their Sins too much, as upon Christ too ^ittle. See and consider the
Consequence; ^ereby it comes to pass, that Men's Hearts ^re straightned and
bound up from the due praise of God, that they walk heavily, and bring an evil
report upon the Truth, (as if (...) were indeed as desolate and uncomfortable
(...) way, as the Devil and his Servants commonly esteem and declare)
performing Chri^tian Duties constantly with great unchearfulness; when as we
know the Lord delights in a cheerful Servant, and threatens the contrary.
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness and gladness of
Heart for the abundance of all things; therefore shall thou serve thine
Enemies, in Hunger, Thirst, and Nakedness, and in want of all things. Deuteronomy.
28.47, 48. Let your Sins be set before you, that they may humble and drive you,
not from God, nor from the sight of God's Grace and free Mercy in Christ; but
more out of your selves toward Christ: Endeavor to see your Sins, that you may
behold also at the same time, your safety from them in Christ; and let the
frequent sight of your Sins be more, and more often accompanied with Love than
Fear.

Use 2. The second Use may be, to show, in what case they are, whose Sins are
never before them. The Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in
their Feasts, they lie upon the Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves on their
Couches; they eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and Calves out of the Stall, they
chant to the sound of the Viol, and drink their Wine in Bowls, they anoint
themselves with chief Ointments, and cast away Care: Riches, Pleasure and
Honor, with all the Gay-branches of Worldly-glory, are the pleasing objects of
their Eyes: They eat, drink, and are merry, driving all Objects from their
Minds, which may bring the least disgust, and afford the Body all Pleasures,
which may preserve it in a flourishing Health, accompanied with Grace, vigor
and vivacity of Senses; but for their Sins, they are ever behind them, out of
sight, out of mind: but what follows, which one day they must hear, Thou Fool,
this night thy Soul shall be taken from thee, and then, whose shall all these
things be? Suddenly they are cut down, as the Philistines and Belshazzar were,
and sink into the Infernal Pit, in a moment. Such I mean to reprove in this Use,

1. As continue in any known Sin, after discovery, or, that sufficient means
for Detection and Conviction, have been afforded.

2. As are busied in setting other Men's Sins before them, but not their own.
Only Swine delight to be muzling in Dung; and Dogs, we know are pleased in
licking Sores; Flies pass over the sound parts, and if there be any raw, they
light on them; Beetles fly over sweet Flowers, but creep into Dung: Such for
condition are those People who are always rubbing on their Neighbor's Sores,
and searching the Wounds of others, whilst their own do bleed to Death. Were it
not for other Men's sins, Sin would seldom be seen, or spoken of by such; this
sets before him the Sins of that, and that, the Sins of this Man: The
Covetous Man sets before him (as odious) the Sin of the Drunkard, and the
Drunkard the Sin of the Covetous Man, and both, the Sins of a third; but
neither sets before him his own Sins. One thing more which is worse, Too many,
as may be feared, esteem a chief part of Religion to find faults abroad, and
reproving others, especially Superiors, who are further out of their power to
redress, than from their Sight and Hearing; whereby it comes to pass, that
much precious Time is lost and misspent, good Conference hindered, and Christian
Meetings frustrated of their main end. I speak not this to shield common
Corruptions, and National Abominations from just Censure; nor to debar Men from
manifesting their dislike of that, whereby God is dishonored, and Religion
hindered; provided, Men have a Calling thereunto, and power with opportunity to
do Good.

3. Such as cannot endure a sound plain-searching Ministry, no more than Ahab
could endure Micah, Herodias a John Baptist, or Festus a Paul: Like gaul'd
Horses, they cannot endure the rubbing of their Sores. Such blunt Fellows, say
they, preach all of Righteousness, of Temperance, and of Judgment to come; we
cannot have a Dalilah, nor an Herodias for them, they will set our Sins in
order before us, as plainly and boldly, as ever Nathan did David's, or
Chrysostom Eudoxia's Luxury, and wanton Dancing. But this know, that if these
kind of Men, Sound, Sober, Godly Divines I mean, be an Eyesore to you, Sin was
never before you, as a Burden to you; nay, it was not so much as once in your
sight, except as an object obscured from the Sense, either by disproportion of
Distance, or distemperature of the Medium; and then upon such a confused
glimmering, your study and endeavor has been, and is, either with Gehazi to
deny it, or with Achan to hide it from the sight of others, or with Adam and
Saul, to extenuate it, or else to be angry with, if not to plot Revenge against
such as did present it; like the Serpent, which they say, the more he is
stirred, the more he gathers up his Poison to spit at those that move him; and
so by degrees you labor to forget it: And how soon may a Man forget that,
which he has neither will, nor delight to remember? But in the Name of Christ,
let me entreat all such to know and consider,

First, How grossly the Devil deludes them, whilst for a time, he hides the
ugly face of Sin from them, either with variety of Presidents, or some
probability of deluding Promises, as of Pleasure, Content, and Secrecy; when as
indeed, there ever follows abundance of bitter Discontent, and an
impossibility of Concealment. As he did of old, so he does still, he shows the
Honey, but hides the Gall, offers the Rose, but covers the Pin in it. The Devil
deals with Sinners, as deceitful Tradesmen, who show their Chapmen the better
part of the Cloth, and conceal the worst: as the Panther deals with Beasts, who
hides his deformed Head, till his sweet scent has drawn them into his danger:
Till Men have sinned, Satan is a Parasite; when they have sinned, he is found a
Tyrant. Like a treacherous Host, though he welcome us into the Inn with a
smiling Countenance, yet he will cut our Throats in the Bed.

Secondly, How far they are yet from the truth of Grace, that were never
troubled with any sight of Sin, or sense of it. Sorrow through fear, is a
preparative for Grace. St. Austin compares it to the Needle that draws in the
Thread; it is sometimes introductory by the blessing of God, of a more excellent
Way. Sorrow for Sin through Love, is a consequent of Grace. Strangers to both,
are strangers to Grace. They are yet in their Sins.

Thirdly What an heavy Judgment this dead and benumbed Conscience is; it never
sees Sin, never grieves for Sin, never prizeth Christ, but goes on in Sin,
day after day, without feeling weight, or fearing smart. A wild Beast while
asleep, seems very tame and gentle, but when awaked, it begins to show it self,
by flying at the Face. Your Consciences are now asleep, but God will one day
awake them, when they will never again afford you one day or hour of rest.
Though for a while you live in Mirth, swim in the sweet waters of Pleasures,
and having despised the Immortal Manna, lay out all your care to stuff your
Intrails with corruptible Meats, and Conscience lets you alone: Though you
Feast to day, like Nabal, and make your selves glad, yet there is an Abigail, a
Conscience, which to Morrow will tell you of it, and then your Hearts will die
within you, and be like Stones, as cold and as heavy as a Stone within you.
This, O Sinner, like a Snake shall hiss in thy Bosom, and bray thee like a Fool
in a Mortar, as it were with a Pestel, and beat and distress thee for ever.
This is the Moth that gets into the Cloth and eats it. When thou with
rebukes do correct Man for Iniquity, thou make his Beauty to consume away,
like as when a Moth fretteth a Garment. Psalm. 39.11. This will make thy Face
gather blackness, and thy Spirit be overwhelmed for evermore. This is
unavoidable to all that live and continue in Sin, without a sight and trouble
for it.

Fourthly, That the Lord will one day set all their Sins in order before them,
in their proper Colors, both for number and nature; Sins of Infancy, Youth,
and riper Years; Sins of commission, and careless omission; especially
presumptuous Sins, and those of positive Infidelity, Impenitency,
unthankfulness for Christ, and unfruitfulness under the Means; all these will
come upon them all together, crying out, that all the World shall hear and
know, we are yours, and you must own us; when there will be neither way to
escape, nor time to plead. Whosoever is wise, will consider these things, and he
shall understand to conclude it far better, to see Sin now than hereafter; now,
while it may be pardoned, rather than hereafter when it must be punished.

Use 3. Thirdly, What Comfort and Encouragement may this Discourse afford to
all in David's Case. They have sinned grievously, and their Sins are ever
before them; now, not so much out of Fear, as out of Love, not by constraint
but willingly. They may be assured, and ought to be persuaded of their being in
a state of Grace; although many of them cannot quiet their Hearts to believe
it. Their manner is, to frequent solitary Places, to be alone, to meditate of
the Lord's Holiness and Goodness, ever and anon reflecting with detestation
upon their own actual Sins, and habitual Uncleanness; then they complain, sigh,
and cry, as if there were no hope of safety for them. What, say they, can such
as we be pardoned and saved? We, that have committed such Sins, abused such
Mercies, and trampled under feet such great Salvation! We, that have such hard
Hearts, impure Natures, Eyes full of Adultery, every object yielding fuel to
this Fire; and are daily followed with the memory of so many Sins! Whose
thoughts by Day, and dreams by Night, are sufficient evidences of a cursed
disposition? That can do nothing but Sin, Day nor Night? O heavy Case! O
wretched Condition! Who shall deliver? Or, who can persuade us that it is
possible? etc. When indeed, this sight of Sin, and trouble for it, is one
ground of Hope, a mark of Grace, and a fruit of God's Love. Come therefore let
us reason together; say the worst against your selves, (for so I know you will)
let all out; say, you see your Sins for Number innumerable, for Nature heinous,
and crying; and for Weight insupportable, even to corporal Weakness, to
Paleness and Fainting; accompanied with strange Fears and Consumptions of the
Body (this is possible); say you feel the burden of unclean Hearts and Eyes
(usually they go together) daily and hourly; that you cannot think without
Sinning, nor look without Lusting, in sudden motions arising from every
Creature, any way capable of such a Passion; no, nor sleep without filthy
Dreams, symptoms of an impure Heart: Say you are ready to sink every moment,
under fear of Despair, or Apostasy, by reason of the multitude and pressing
constancy of all the former: Was not David, a Man after God's own Heart, was
not penitent David thus affected, pursued and troubled, after his Pardon was
obtained and assured to him? His Sin was ever before him, and yet he was then
in a state of Grace. Be not discouraged; only be careful to tread in his Steps,
and you shall find his Success.

Quest. How may we know whether we see our Sins savingly, as David did, or no?

Answ. By diverse Marks it may be discerned; as,

First, If you see Sin in it self, as it is Sin, and as abstracted from
Concomitants, viz. Shame, and Pain. If you loath it, and your selves for it,
because it is so opposite to the holy and pure Nature of God; and if the bent
of your affection be against it, as the greatest evil; that you desire freedom
from Sin above all other Boons; if you be weary of it, to fear and hate it more
than the Devil, desiring it may be apprehended and killed at every Sermon you
hear; resolving howsoever to leave all, whatever come: If it be thus with you
in some good measure, it is a good sign you see Sin aright.

Secondly, If you see Sin so, as that for it, you cannot see, to remember any
of your weak performances of holy Duties, since your Conversion. This one thing
I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those
things which are before, I press to the Mark, says blessed Paul. David fasted
and prayed, sacrificed and sung Psalms, stood up for the Church, and relieved
the Poor, etc. But none of these are now thought on to be mentioned, his Sin
only is ever before him. Our best Works in a state of Grace, are so far from
meriting, that sometimes they will not come in to yield a Man any comfort in
this Case; they are full of failings, impure and imperfect. There are more
threads of Copper than of Gold, in the best Web we weave: Our very Righteousness
is as a silthy Garment: While Sin comes in full and perfect, and so weighs down
the Scale; that our good Deeds are not in memory when Sin is before us: If it
be so with you, it is another good sign.

Thirdly, If Sin be heavy to you, all other Crosses and Troubles are light in
comparison, and more easily born. David was grievously afflicted, by the
rebellion of Absolon, and the death of Ammon, with the occasion thereof; yet it
is not said, that these were before him, he was comforted concerning them; but
his Sin was ever before him: All the Sufferings and Evils in the World could
not so much affect him. St. Paul went through many Tribulations, endured great
Sufferings (as may be read, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24. at large) yet all these Scourges,
Prisons, and Persecutions, went not so near his Heart as Sin, even the
presence, though not the power of Sin. Though he suffered much, yet we read
not that ever he cried, Oh! for all; and yet he does for Sin; O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Sin? And we read of
Chrysostom, when he was threatened Banishment by Eudoxia, said, Go tell her, Nil
nisi peccatum timeo: I fear nothing but Sin. To such a one there is more evil
in a drop of Corruption, than in a sea of Affliction. Say then, are all your
Burdens nothing to the burden of Sin? It is a good sign.

Fourthly, If you can think somewhat comfortably of Death, and be content and
desirous to Die, chiefly for this end to be freed from Sin, with those combats
and destractions in Duty following it: That this ever may be turned into never;
that Christ might be as Sin is now, ever before you: It is a very good sign;
and blessed are they which are in this condition: They may be assured in the
Name of Christ Jesus, and by the Authority committed to his Ministers, to
absolve and heal Sin-sick-souls, that all their Sins are done away by Faith in
the Blood of Christ; they shall not die. He that caused your Sins to be set
before your Face, has cast them behind his own Back. When Israel see their own
Sins, the Lord sees no Sin in Israel. When the Church complains that she is
Black, the Lord proclaims her, the fairest among Women.

Thus would I comfort all those who are in this Condition, that I my self might
partake with them in their Consolation. It is my judgment, all the Promises
belong to them, and they ought to apply them. So that they may say with the
Apostle, It is good to be here and build Tabernacles, to shield us from the
roaring Lion, and our own Fears pursuing us.

Use 3. To close up all, in the last place, by way of Instruction: From what
has been said, you may learn some Duties, most needful to be practiced by you,
viz.

First. To draw back Sin (which else will keep out of sight and memory till the
day of Death, or Judgment) as Joab did Abner, to kill him, even all your Sins,
for the kinds of them, spare none, from the first that was imputed, to the last
that was committed by you, and set them in order before you, either by your
Memory, or the help of a Note-book, so far forth as God shall enable you,
particularly to recall, and give them their Deaths-wound, by the application of
Christ's Death. It is conceived Job did so, when he said, He could not answer
for one of a thousand. It is manifest in David, and reported of that holy
Martyr, Mr. Bradford, that he kept a Diarie, or a Debt-book of Receipts and
Expenses, between God and his own Soul. It is a course full of Comfort and
Profit: Hereby it will come to pass, that when a Man draws nigh to his
Journeys-end, he shall have nothing to do, but to give good Counsel, to pray
and die. Now that you may so do, know this to be one main difference between
Nature and Grace; the one sees Sin ever, the other sees it never, or to no
purpose. Nature is ever boasting of Innocence, of good Deeds, and of good
assurance of Salvation without any doubting. O God, I thank thee, I am not as
other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or as this Publican: I fast
twice a Week, etc. Luke 18.11. Non vulnera sed munera ostendit. He shows not
his Want, but his Worth. While Grace, most complains of Sin, of defects and
imperfections in the best Duties. Even the Righteousness of gracious Souls,
appears in their sight, like the Moon full of spots. A penitent Publican dares
not lift up his Eyes toward Heaven, but beats his Breast and cries, O God, be
merciful to me, a Sinner! even the chief of Sinners. Though he is high in his
Privileges, yet how low is he in his Affections? Lord, I am Hell, thou art
Heaven, said that holy Man.

Secondly, Be thankful for this sight of Sin, and testify this your
thankfulness by a timely use of the Means, to finish what is begun. Means, I
say, of Inspection, Meditation, and Prayer. Of Inspection into the Glass of the
Law. This is that Light which discovers those Corruptions which lie unknown in
the darkness of Ignorance, and makes them appear in their due shape and
proportion. That which seemed but as a Mote, will now be judged as a Mountain,
and that to be Sin, which before looked as Righteousness. Hereby you will see
much to bemoan, to confess; and be ashamed of, nothing to boast and glory in.
Of Meditation after every Exercise; and therein be frequent and constant.
Reading and Hearing without Meditation, is like weak Physic which will not
work. It is not taking in of Food, but the Stomach concocting it, which makes
it turn into Blood and Spirits; so it is not the taking in of any Truth at the
Ear, but the meditating it (which is the concoction thereof in the Mind) makes
it nourish. Be frequent in Meditation. Press your Conscience with Particulars,
saying with deep Sorrow, These are my Oaths, my Carnal Sports, and unlawful
Pastimes, which now terrify more than ever they delighted me: This is my
Luxury, my Pride and Impurity: This is my Blindness and Hardness, Hypocrisy and
Sacrilegious Vainglory, which is so much struck at from Press and Pulpit: I am
the Man, and my sins are ever before me. Unto this effect let your Meditation
be raised and continued. And lastly, Use the exercise of frequent and fervent
Prayer, in private to your offended God, that he would not only put away your
Sins, but also wash you thoroughly, and restore you the joy of his Salvation. Be
instant, and the Lord will not deny; You shall reap, if you faint not.

Thirdly, Your duty is, to set the Mediator always before you at the same time.
To see Sin without Christ, will drive you to despair; and to see Christ without
Sin, may cast you upon Presumption; or at least, occasion you to undervalue
Christ, and not prize him so highly as he deserves. Labor to see both
together. Set Sin on one hand, and Christ on the other, as a King, a Priest,
and a Prophet; as a King to rule you, as a Prophet to teach, and as a Priest to
sacrifice and satisfy for you, and all yours under Covenant. Then by an
appropriating Act of Faith, receive and apply all his Doctrine to inform you,
his Government to subdue and bring you unto Self denial; his Satisfaction and
Intercession to prevail for you; that his Obedience may be accepted for your
Disobedience, his Meritorious Sufferings for your Sins, and that with his
stripes you may be healed.

Object. But alas, I see my Sins so much and so often, that I cannot, I dare
not, apply any Promise, I know not with what face to look upon Christ, so
abused, and even crucified by me!

Answ. True it is, and I believe a Christian may look upon his Sins in some
Sense too much, and pore upon them too long, and so stand in his own light,
become an hindrance to himself; especially then, when he shall dwell upon
Duties as if they were his Savior, and hope for acceptance, by equalizing his
Sorrow to his Sins; when he looks on them so, as that they deter and keep him
from Christ. This is a fruit of Self-pride, and followed with continual doubts
and much unchearfulness. Whoever studieth to be rich in Sorrow and Self-denial,
before he will take Christ, does not understand God's Way and Method, nor
rightly apprehend and prize the Treasure offered in and by Christ. If you had
no Sin, or if you had Victory over all, if you could only wash away all your
filth with Tears, then you would believe; but then I tell you, you had no need
of Christ. The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. When you are
most mean and vile in your own Eyes, when you are filthy and wounded, sick unto
Death, then you have most need of Christ, and most right unto him. Most need, I
say, because of danger: As it is with a weary Swimmer, who upon a Shipwreck,
being cast into the Sea to shift for himself, is there tossed with Billows up and
down, and almost drowned, till at length he espieth a Bough reached out to him
from the Shore, which he readily and thankfully (without any scruples or doubts
of his own unworthiness to have such a favor) lays hold on, and is safe.
Thus it is, and should be with sinful Man. For in truth this Swimmer is Man,
cast into the Ocean of Legal Fear and Trouble; Christ is the Tree of Life,
offered by the Father to every one that needs, and will receive him. He came
not to call the Righteous, but Sinners, of all sorts, to Repentance and Life.
And as they have most need of him, so they have most right unto him, because of
the Covenant, wherein all the Promises are made over to such. Come, let us
reason together: and though your Sins were as Crimson, or Scarlet, I will make
them as white as Snow, or Wool. Isa. 1.18. Yea, All ye that are weary and
heavy-laden, come unto me, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. To him that is
athirst, I will give of the Water of Life freely. Rev. 21.6.

For, this sight of Sin which is here discoursed of, argues Union by Faith and
the Spirit, to be begun, and a reparation of Christ's Image in you, which by
reflection causes it; and then not to believe, not to receive him, not to give
your selves to him, that you might rest wholly upon him, is the greatest Sin
that ever you committed. Think not to lessen, by increasing your Sins. O add
not this to all, and above all the rest. Refuse not so rich a Marriage because
you are poor, mean, and deformed: If your Husband like to take you with all
your Faults, as in earnest he offers, why will you stand against your own
Preferment? If you be mean and low, he will raise and advance you; if you be
poor, he will enrich you; if you be deformed and loathsome to behold, he can
and will bestow Beau^^ upon you. Who will refuse such an Husband? that brings
all things with him, and requires nothing but Poverty and Self-denial; a
willingness to part with our own Rags, and to put on his new Robes. If you be
filthy, he will wash you in his own Blood, from the stain and guilt of Sin: If
you be Naked, he will cloth you with his own Righteousness, and seat you above
Angels. Briefly, be willing to take Christ, and you shall want nothing. Give
your selves to him freely, fully, deliberately, and he will prove a Jesus to
you, to save you from your Sins, which else will be ever before, and upon you
in their full weight. Did Men know and weigh the Treasure hid in him, called
unsearchable Riches, there would be no need to persuade any: They would take
him more greedily, than ever the hunted Heart did the running Water.

And now, to all who have traveled through this Wilderness of fear and sorrow
for Sin, and are come even to the Borders of Canaan; in the Name of God the
Father, I the most unworthy of all his Ministers, do offer unto you Christ
Jesus, with all his Merits: take and apply them, for all are yours, you are
Christ's, and Christ is God's. And thus I have brought you to the Fountain and
Dispenser of true Happiness, where I leave you, with the rest of God's
traveling Saints, to rejoice in their Way, with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory.

Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for, and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
FOLIO.
JOsephus's History of the Jews, with Cuts. Bishop Usher's Body of Divinity,
with his Life, and an Alphabetical Table, the seventh Edition. Parthenissa, a
Romance. Heylin's History of the World.
In QUARTO.
Dr. Dillingham's Sermon at the Lady Alston's Funeral. Dr. Bates's Harmony of
the Divine Attributes. Dr. Jacomb, on the 8th of the Romans. Dr. Tuckney's 40
Sermons on several occasions. -- Ejus Praelectiones and Determinationes, Lat.
Mr. Haworth's several Pieces against the Quakers. The Jesuits Cabinet, or a
Discourse of the Jesuits designs.
In OCTAVO.
Mr. Theoph. Gale, his Philosophy. -- Anatomy of Infidelity. Mr. Baxter's more
Proofs for Infant Baptism. -- His Treatise of Justification. Mr. Whiston's 4
Books in Defense of Infant Baptism. Mr. Wills's 3 Books in Defense of
Infant Baptism, against Mr. Danvers. A Contest for Christianity: Or, an Account
of two great Disputes between the Anabaptists and the Quakers. Mr. Barret's
Christian Temper, or a Discourse on the Nature and Properties of the Graces of
Sanctification. Mr. Shelton's Discourse of Superstition, with respect to the
present Times. A Catechism according to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
with Scripture-Proofs at large, together with Directions for plain Christians
to pray on most occasions, and to receive the Lord's Supper, by the use and
knowledge of the said Catechism. A Catechism; or the Church-Catechism enlarged,
and the Doctrine proved by Scripture, for the use of such as were not Baptized
in their Infancy, or had no Godfathers and Godmothers. Mr. Ranew of Divine
Meditation.
In TWELVES.
Mr. Pearse's Great Concern, or Directions for a timely preparation for Death,
recommended as proper to be given at Funerals. -- The best Match, or the Souls
espousal to Christ. Mr. Case's Treatise of Afflictions, useful for these Times.
Mr. Hooker's Doubting Christian drawn to Christ. The Barren Fig Tree, or the
Fruitless Professor's Doom. By John Bunyon. The Epitome of the Bible, briefly
explaining the Contents of the Old and New Testament, penned in Meter for
better remembrance, useful for Children. The Sacred Diary, or Select
Meditations for every part of the Day.
There is now in the Press a second Volume of Dr. Manton's Sermons, which will
be Published shortly.


