THE JUDGMENTS of GOD UPON THE Roman Catholic Church, FROM Its first Rigid
Laws for Universal Conformity to it, unto its last End.

WITH A Prospect of these near approaching Revolutions, VIZ.

The Revival of the Protestant Profession in an Eminent Kingdom, where it was
totally suppressed.

The last end of all Turkish Hostilities.

The general Mortification of the Power of the Roman Church in all Parts of its
Dominions.

In Explication of the TRUMPETS and VIALS of the Apocalypse, UPON Principles
generally acknowledged by Protestant Interpreters.

By DRUE CRESSENER, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
PROPHECIES concerning public Events near at hand, were used to be first
communicated to the Prince, who was to have the first hand in their
Accomplishment. This gives Your Majesty a Right to the Dedication of the
Interpretations, which I here present. They come to bring You a Prospect of a
speedy Revival of the Reformation where it has been extinguished, which is from
thence to go on continually advancing upon the Ruins of the Roman Church to
her last end. And then Your Majesty's peaceable Triumphs here must be concluded
to be the immediate Hand of God out of the Cloud for the first opening of that
Glorious Scene.

SIR,

The first discovery in this kind came from a worthy Man then under Your
Protection; And this gave You an antecedent Claim to all the accessory
improvements of it. His Attempt for want of a distinct settlement of the first
grounds of it had the ill fortune in these parts to be received but as his
Conjecture. The importance of the thing did thereupon inflame my Curiosity to
enter upon a more strict Enquiry after the foundations of these hopes, having
before been encouraged by some Learned Men in a Method, that I had chosen for
securing the Explication of the more lightsome parts of the Prophecy.

In pursuance of this I have more distinctly stated the first Principles of the
Grounds, that have been formerly given, and have added other Evidences to them,
which seem more clearly to fix the beginning of this happy Revolution, than the
light that the main Prophecy it self does offer for it.

But that which makes the fairest promise of the near approach of this time,
is, Your Majesty's unexpected success in these Nations, which has given a
perfect new turn to all the Affairs of Europe, and in Concurrence with them
does already show the World a plain Prospect of such a state of things near at
hand. It is manifest, That in all appearance the next causes are now in Action.

It is for this reason that I have found it necessary to look out for
sufficient Testimonies, that these Predictions were Penned long before Your
Majesty's Expedition into these parts. They would otherwise run the danger of
being thought to be nothing but the Glozing Flatteries of an unsincere
Pretender; Which Your known aversion for such servile Artifices might assure me
You would reject with Displeasure.

But after such Testimonies, if there be any strength in these Interpretations,
it may be of Use to Your Majesty's Government to have them divulged before they
come to be fulfilled. To those, that believe them, they will be like a Voice
from Heaven not only for present comfort to themselves, but to call for their
best assistance to Your Conduct; And what is it, that a Nation can think too
much for a Prince, whom they believe to be designed by God for the Deliverance
of his Church from the most deplorable Slavery, that ever was yet heard of,
from the very shadow of Death, and of Hell it self.

It is no hard thing, Sir, to have this generally believed of You. The defense
of the Reformation is known to go inseparably along with the Lineal descent of
Your Illustrious Family. They have been called away from their Native Seats to
watch continually for this very thing; And Your Majesty's. late removal into
tbis Land in the time of such a distress of the Neighboring Churches, as never
was since there was a Nation, seems to be Dan. 12. 1.
chiefly to give You a convenient Post to be the Reviver of that oppressed
Cause, which next under Heaven owed its last firm Setlement in the World to the
Arms of one of Your Ancestors of the same Name.

We have already seen Your Majesty in those Circumstances of the Prophecy,
which presage the sudden Accomplishment of that promised Deliverance. We have
seen You at the Head of almost all the several kinds of Peoples, and Nations,
and Rev. 11. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Tongues, that would not suffer the dead Bodies of the Witnesses to be buried.
We our selves were thereupon in a manner made the First Fruits from the Dead
before their approaching Resurrection.

The immediate Effect of this we see, is, that it not only cuts off all hopes
of Assistance from the great Oppressor, but does also let loose upon him the
Forces of an abused Kingdom, at a time when he is going to be attacked by such
a general Storm on all sides of him, as can hardly be paralleled in the
Histories of falling Empires.

After this it will be easy to believe, that Your Majesty's appearance in
behalf of the Oppressed must make their Adversaries think of diverting the Fury
of a Million of the most enraged of their Enemies within their own Bowels;
especially when the only way that they can hope to compass it by, is that,
which will cost them nothing, viz. A Liberty of their Religion. Though their
hopes of any considerable success in it may be never so vain, yet they will
find themselves forced to make trial of it, when all other ways will but
strengthen the interest of an appearing Enemy. And then will the Resurrection
of the Witnesses be accomplished.

Who can think that the Gallican Church will after that endure to be enslaved
any longer to those Superstitions, which they have long since nauseated, and
have forced their Consciences to put false colors upon? This will make it
easy to conceive, how the Witnesses should ascend into the Throne, and, as the
Prophecy concludes, How the whole Kingdom should be converted without any
violent Methods from the revived Reformation.

If we should once see that happy Change, none would question, but that so
great an increase of the Interest of the Reformation would soon bring on such a
general mortification of the power of the Roman Church in all parts of its
Dominion, as would make it sink by degrees into nothing.

All Men may see from Your Majesty's public Testimonies of it, how firmly Your
Heart is set upon the Means, that do the most naturally tend to this end; And
there seems to be as promising a concurrence of the Hearts of Your People
toward it, which still confirms the likelihood of the Event. That all Your
Majesty's Designs for this end may meet with as great Encouragements both from
God, and Man, is the hearty Prayer of

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Dutiful Subject DRUE CRESSENER.
March 25. 1689.
THese are to certify, That this Commentary upon the Revelation of St. John,
to the Nineteenth Chapter, was sent to me by the Author, and read over by me,
near a Year ago; when there was not so much as a Thought of what is since come
to pass in this Kingdom.

March 22. 1688/9. Simon Patrick, Dean of Peterborough.

THe Revolutions that are mentioned in the Title of this Book, were
communicated to me in Letters from the Author, in the Year 1687.

March 22. 1688/9. Henry Plumptre.

Charterhouse, March 25. 1689.
THis Treatise [concerning the Explication of the Trumpets and Vials of the
Apocalypse] was perused by me, to the Nineteenth Chapter of it, near a Year ago.

T. Burnet.

March 25. 1689.
WE do testify, That the following Papers, to the Nineteenth Chapter, were in
our hands the last Year, when the Bishops were sent to the Tower, and then
offered to Lambeth, in order to be Published.

Tho. Paget, D. D. Sam. Freeman, D. D.


I Do attest, That what is contained in these Papers [concerning the Recovery
of the Protestant Churches, and the final end of all Turkish Hostilities, and
the general Mortification of the Roman Church in all Parts of its Dominion] was
Written by Dr. Cressener, and Transcribed by me in the Year 1687, in order to
be Published.

Josh. Thompson.

THE JUDGMENTS of GOD UPON THE Roman Catholic Church.

SUPPOSITIONS AND THEOREMS.
TO avoid all troublesome interruptions of the Attention, the Proof of every
Theorem should be closely attended to, when it comes first in order to be Read;
But when the Theorem comes afterward to be cited to confirm any thing else, the
Proof of it is to be supposed, and nothing to be then regarded, but the bare
terms of it, and their force to confirm that which it is cited for.

Suppositions for the Second Part.
Suppos. 1. THE Beast, and the false Prophet are the chief Ruling Power of the
present Church of Rome Suppos. 2. That the time, times and an half, the 42
Months, and the 1260 Days are all but diverse names of one and the same space of
1260 Years. Suppos. 3. That the rise of the Beast was before the Year 620.
Suppos. 4. That the Two Witnesses in Sackcloth do represent the whole True
Church of Christ, that is under the domination of the Beast. Suppos. 5. That
Babylon signifies the City of Rome in a state of Ecclesiastical Domination.
THEOREMS.
Theor. 1. The Woe of the seventh Trumpet destroys the power of the Beast.
Theor. 2. The 144000 are the True Church of Christ upon Earth. Theor. 3. The
144000 are contemporary with the first times of the Beast. Theor. 4. The 144000
are sealed to save them from the Plagues of the Trumpets. Theor. 5. The whole
time of the Beast is within the time of the Trumpets. Conseq. The Kingdom of
the Beast is an Object of the Trumpets during that Time. Theor. 6. The Body of
the Christian Church is very much corrupted before the time of the Trumpets.
Theor. 7. The Plagues of the Trumpets do in that succession fall upon all parts
of the Church, that are corrupted in their time. Conseq. The Party of the Beast
are some corrupt part of the Christian Church. Theor. 8. The Plagues of the
Trumpets do affect the Dominions of the Roman Church all the time of the Beast.
Theor. 9. The Plagues of the Trumpets, the most heavy in their time upon the
place where they fall. Theor. 10. The Plagues of the Trumpets not capable of
being taken in a literal sense. Conseq. Those Plagues that fall in the time of
the Beast, the heaviest of any within that time to the places where they fall.
Theor. 11. The great Tribulation, Chap. 7. is neither the Judgments of the
sixth Seal, n^ those in the Trumpets. Theor. 12. The great Tribulation is the
same with the killing of the rest of the Brethren i^ the fifth Seal. Conseq.
The rest of the Brethren in the fifth Seal is the same with the great
multitude, Chap. 7. 9. Theor. 13. The Vengeance promised in the fifth Seal is
the Plagues of the Trumpets. Theor. 14. The Plagues of the Trumpets are not
till after some universal Persecution the Church. Theor. 15. The Martyrdoms of
the fifth Seal are all past before the rise of the Beast. Conseq. 1. The great
multitude, Chap. 7. 9. is before the rise of the Beast. Conseq. 2. All the
Martyrs in the fifth Seal, both those slain, and that were to be killed before
the Year 620. Theor. 16. All the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, etc. were killed
under Heathen Roman Emperors. Conseq. The Martyrs in the fifth Seal were all
that were killed from that time to t^ end of the Persecution of Rome Pagan.
Theor. 17. The sixth Seal is the change of the Pagan Government of Rome before
the end of all Pagan power in it. Theor. 18. The Plagues of the Trumpets fall
upon the same Nation, that killed the Martyrs in the fifth Seal. Conseq. The
Plagues of the Trumpets are executed upon the Romans. Theor. 19. The Saracens
and Turks were two of the Woes of the last three Trumpets. Conseq. 1. The
Saracens and Turks are the Woes of the fifth and sixth Trumpet. Conseq. 2. The
Turks are the second Woe. Conseq. 3. The Plagues of the first four Trumpets
must fall upon the Romans betwixt t^ end of the Pagan Emperors and the Year
631. Theor. 20. The great City, Chap. 11. 8. is the same with Babylon the
Great. Theor. 21. The Streets of the great City are the Dominions of Babylon.
Conseq. 1. The tenth part of the City is the tenth part of the Dominions of
Babylon. Conseq. 2. The tenth part of the City is one of the ten Kingdoms, that
were given to the Beast. Conseq. 3. The fall of the tenth part of, etc. is the
Reformation of that Kingdom. Theor. 22. The Roman Church continues in power
after the Ascension of the Witnesses. Theor. 23. The Ascension of the Witnesses
is their advancement upon an Earthly Throne. Theor. 24. The killing of the
Witnesses, ver. 7. is not the whole time of the Persecution ^ the Beast. Theor.
25. The killing the Witnesses is the fiercest Persecution of the Church, and
about the end of the Beast. Theor. 26. The killing, etc. a perfect suppression
at least of the True Religion in all part^ of the Dominion of the Beast. Theor.
27. The three days and an half, ver. 9. are at least three years and an half.
Theor. 28. The Dead Bodies of the Witnesses, ver. 9. cannot signify literally.
Conseq. 1. The Death of the Witnesses cannot be a literal Death. Conseq. 2. The
killing of the Witnesses cannot be a general Massacre of the Protestants.
Theor. 29. The killing of the Witnesses can be nothing but the Suppression of
the True Religion in all Parts of the Jurisdiction of the Beast. Theor. 30. The
killing of the Witnesses is at an end, when the True Religion is suppressed in
all places where the Roman Church is the National Religion. Theor. 31. The
killing of the Witnesses does not extend to the whole True Church at that time
in being. Theor. 32. The Resurrection of the Witnesses, Ver. 11. is the
reviving of the true Religion in some of the Dominions of the Roman Church,
where it has been suppressed. Theor. 33. The Resurrection of the Witnesses is
not yet past. Theor. 34. The Preaching the everlasting Gospel to every Nation,
etc. Chapter 14. 6. is the Preaching up of a general Reformation of the Roman
Church in the time of the Beast. Theor. 35. The Hour of God's Judgments, Ver.
7. is about the same time with the preaching the everlasting Gospel. Theor. 36.
The Hour of God's Judgments, etc. is the beginning of the final ruin of the
Roman Church. Theor. 37. The preaching the everlasting Gospel not before the
Protestant Reformation. Theor. 38. The Vintage, Ver. 19. is the last
Destruction of the Beast. Theor. 39. The time of the patience of the Saints,
Ver. 12. is the fiercest Persecution of the Church by the Beast, betwixt the
preaching the everlasting Gospel, and the last end of the Beast. Theor. 40. The
time of the patience of the Saints the same with that of the killing of
Witnesses. Theor. 41. The Harvest, Ver. 15. is after the Resurrection of the
Witnesses. Theor. 42. The preaching the everlasting Gospel is the time of the
Protestant Reformation. Theor. 43. The Hour of God 's Judgments, Ver. 7. must
be near the first times of the Protestant Reformation. Theor. 44. The seven
Vials are an orderly succession of Judgments upon the Beast to bring him to his
ruin. Theor. 45. The seven Vials cannot begin before the Protestant
Reformation. Theor. 46. The seven Vials and Trumpets do comprehend in them all
the most considerable Judgments upon the Romans that are mentioned in the
Prophecy, from the rise of the Beast, to his last end. Theor. 47. The Hour of
God's Judgments is the beginning of the time of the seven Vials. Conseq. The
seven Vials begin soon after the first times of the Protestant Reformation.
Theor. 48. The second Vial is already poured out. Theor. 49. The Plague of the
second Vial was at an end, at the latest, at the Truce ^twixt the Spaniards and
the Dutch, Anno Dom. 1609. Theor. 50. The Plague of the third Vial ended with
the Sweedish War in Germany. Theor. 51. The Plague of the fourth Vial is the
Vexations of the Papal and Imperi^ Party by the King of France. Conseq. 1.
Every one of the Vials require many years to be fulfilled in. Conseq. 2. Every
Vial ends at forty years distance from the preceding Vial. Conseq. 3. The fifth
Vial is near at hand. Conseq. 4. The time of the Beast does end about the Year
1800. Theor. 52. The third Woe falls wholly upon that part of the Roman Empire
which is ^ Empire of the Beast. Theor. 53. The last act of the seventh Vial is
the same with the last part of the third Woe Theor. 54. The Plague of the sixth
Vial is not till after the end of the second Woe. Theor. 55. The Plague of the
sixth Vial is all in the time of the third Woe. Theor. 56. The Whole time of
the seventh Vial is but the latter part of the time of ^ third Woe. Theor. 57.
The Plague of the fifth Vial is not yet come. Theor. 58. The third Woe is a
continued advancement of the Church in all parts of ^ Dominion of the Beast
till the last end of his Power. Theor. 59. All the Vials that are in the time
of the third Woe, are parts of that Woe. Theor. 60. The third Woe is nothing
else but the Vials that are contemporary with it. Conseq. The beginning of the
third Woe is the first of the Vials that are contemporar^ with it. Theor. 61.
The Slaughter and Conversion of the Enemies of the Witnesses, Chap. 11. 1^ is
at the conclusion of either the fourth or the fifth Vial. Theor. 62. The
Slaughter and Conversion, etc. Chapter 11. is but in one particular part ^ the
Dominion of the Beast. Theor. 63. The Slaughter and Conversion, etc. Chapter 11. is
no part of any of the Vials. Theor. 64. The Plagues of the Vials fall not upon
one particular part only of the Dominion of the Beast. Theor. 65. The Plague of
the fifth Vial is an eminent Humiliation of the power of t^ Beast in all parts
of his Dominion. Theor. 66. The whole Plague of the fifth Vial is within the
time of the third Woe. Conseq. 1. The second Woe is the Turkish Empire. Conseq.
2. The beginning of the Plagues of the fifth Vial is the beginning of the third
Woe Theor. 67. The final end of the Turkish Hostilities, as the second Woe, and
much more the time of the Resurrection of the Witnesses, is near at hand.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THe kind of Proof, that is here endeavored after. The reason of the
Method. Five Suppositions generally allowed by Protestant Interpreters, upon
which the whole Discourse relies. The Party of the Beast, a corrupt part of the
Christian Church. The Roman Church, an Object of the Plagues of all the
Trumpets. The Saracens and Turks the first and second Woe Page 1 Chap. II. The
great Tribulation, and great Multitude, chap. 7. 9. applied: The rest of the
Brethren and the Vengeance promised, chap. 6. 11. The matter of the sixth Seal.
The Object of the Plagues of the Trumpets. The Hostilities of the Saracens, and
Turks, further evinced to be the business of the first and second Woe. The
bounds of the first four Trumpets determined p. 15 Chap. III. The four first
Trumpets applied. The signification of a third part in the Trumpets
scrupulously enquired after and determined. Objections answered p. 29 Chap. IV.
The particular Application of the Matter of the first four Trumpets, according
to the Notion of the third part mentioned in them. The reason of the difference
betwixt the four first and the three last Trumpets. What Provocations were the
cause of the Judgments of the Trumpets. How they were the Vengeance promised to
the Martyrs under Rome Heathen p. 45 Chap. V. The Plagues of the Trumpets
parallel to the increase of the degeneracy of the Church. An Analysis of the
Prophetical Schemes from the first Trumpet in the Eighth Chapter, up to the
fifth Seal in the sixth Chapter. And the necessity of their Application, first
from the signification of the Schemes, and the order in which they are placed.
And then from the remarkableness of the Events, which required such a
Prophetical Scene to represent them. The direct order of the same Application
from the fifth Seal to the first Trumpet. The Schemes before the time of the
rise of the Beast in the Twelfth Chapter paralleled with those in the Sixth,
Seventh and Eighth Chapters p. 65 Chap. VI. The signification of the Characters
of the Two Witnesses demonstrated. Their Death fixed to the Suppression of the
True Church in the Dominions of the Beast only. The Death of the Witnesses no
general Massacre. Two general distinct Suppressions of the True Church not
possible. The Bodies of the Witnesses kept from being buried, an Act of
Friendship. This attributed to Peoples, Tongues and Nations, denotes the
Assistance of Protestant States p. 82 Chap. VI. The Resurrection of the
Witnesses is the Recovery of the True Church, where it was totally suppressed;
It is fixed to this present time. Objections answered. The Resurrection of the
Witnesses, the Recovery of the Protestant Churches. And to begin in 1689, or at
farthest in 1690 p. 98 Chap. VIII. The time of the Resurrection of the
Witnesses confirmed from the Expiration of the time assigned to the second Woe.
The second Woe is the Turkish Empire. The Explication of the Hour, Day, Mouth,
Year, assigned to the second Woe. The first Date of that time p. 110 Chap. 9.
The particular Date of the Hour, Day, Month and Year, stated. The end of the
second Woe, or of all Turkish Wars just at hand. And therefore the recovery of
the Protestant Churches by the Resurrection of the Witnesses to be be very
shortly expected. The Parallel in the Twelfth Chapter of Daniel with this of
the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the end of the second Woe. p. 123 Chap.
X. The last Slaughter, and first Resurrection of the Witnesses confined to the
Kingdom of France, and its Neighborhood. From thence it dispreads it self over
all the Roman Jurisdiction. Why the passing away of the second Woe deferred
till the Account of the Beast and Witnesses was interrupted, Chap. 11. he risen
Witnesses the Executors of the third Woe. The third Woe of some considerable
duration. The Western Empire the only Object of the third Woe p. 135 Chap. XI.
The Trumpets and Vials have different Objects. The first date of the Vials not
before the Protestant Reformation p. 177 Chap. XII. Objections against the date
of the Vials from the Reformation answered p. 193 Chap. XIII. The particular
Application of the Vials to the most remarkable Events since the Reformation.
The Commotions in all Countries upon the Reformation, the first Vial. The Wars
all over Europe for Religion, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the second Vial.
The Swedish War, the third Vial. The Humiliations of the Papal and Imperial
Interest by the present King of France, the fourth Vial. How providentially his
owning the Sun for his Emblem does agree with it. The general Humiliation of
the Roman Church in all Roman States, the fifth Vial. Some Enemies beyond
Euphrates, the sixth Vial. A conjecture about Harmageddon. p. 199 Chap. XIV.
The Preaching the Everlasting Gospel (Rev. 14.) is the preaching up a general
Reformation of the Church of Rome. The Hour of God's Judgments (ibid.) must be
just about the same time. The Vintage is the last destruction of the Beast. The
time of the patience of the Saints is the same with that of the killing of the
Witnesses, Chap. 11. The Harvest after the Resurrection of the Witnesses. The
death of the Witnesses no bodily death. The preaching the Everlasting Gospel
the Protestant Reformation. The 7 Vials cannot begin before the Protestant
Reformation. The Hour of God's Judgments the beginning of the 7 Vials. The 7
Vials begin soon after the Protestant Reformation p. 219. Chap. XV. A
particular Application of the four first Vials; The second Vial must be already
poured out. It was at an end at farthest at the Truce of the Netherlands, Anno
16. 9. The absurd consequences of denying it. The Plague of the third Vial
ended with the Swedish War in Germany. The demonstration of it. The Plague of
the fourth Vial, the King of France: This evinced. The fifth Vial is now near
at hand. p. 235 Chap. XVI. The Plagues of the three last Vials the same with
the third Woe of the last Trumpet. The Slaughter and Conversion of the Enemies
of the Risen Witnesses, is but in one particular Kingdom of the dominion of the
Roman Church. The fifth Vial a general Mortification of the Roman Church. p.
24^ Chap. XVII. The Whole Plague of the fifth Vial within the time of the third
Woe: It begins the third Woe. The last end of the Turkish Wars or their Ruin,
and the Resurrection of the Witnesses near at hand. Further evinced, that the
Vials must begin soon after the Reformation, to signify the Plagues that fell
upon the Roman Party by the Reformation, distinct from those that they suffered
at the same time from the Turks as the secord Woe; How the third Woe is said to
come quickly. The date of the Vials soon after the Reformation, aptly intimated
at the end of the 9th. Chapter of the Revelations, and the beginning of the
10th. The same further proved from the nature of the Victory mentioned, Rev.
15. 2. before the Vials. No proof from Rev. 10. 6, 7. That the beginning of the
seven Vials must be after the sound of the seventh Trumpet. p. 255 Chap. XVIII.
The exact Agreement of the Order of Things in the 9th. 10th. and 11th. Chapters
of the Revelations, with that of the Schemes in the 14th. Chapter. The Vials
contemporary with them both. The four first Vials evinced to be before the
third Woe. The coming quickly of the third Woe explained. The last end of the
Turkish Wars, and the Resurrection of the Witnesses further proved to be just
at hand; As also that the three last Vials are contained in the third Woe. Why
those three make but one Woe. An Objection that the third Woe must contain all
the Vials, Answered. Another Reason why the third Woe is said to come quickly.
Why the seven Vials cannot come after all the seven Trumpets. Why nothing of
the great Persecution in the seven Vials. The Reason of the name of the seven
last Plagues given to the Vials. p. 270 Chap. XIX. Conjectures about the
particular applications of the Harvest, and Vintage Chap. 14. The Vintage,
cannot contain in it all the seven Vials. The Millennium to be upon the Earth:
But after the conflagration of this Earth. Many Countries inhabited after the
beginning of the Conflagration from Dan 7. 12. A middle State of the Church
betwixt the end of Antichrist, and the Millennium during the Conflagration. p.
284 Chap XX. The three great Revolutions, that are to happen very shortly,
considered singly, and with relation to one another. How they strengthen the
Proof of one another. Why the three last Vials are distinguished from the four
first. How the time assigned to the Vials, proves the first rise and last end
of the Beast. The time of the first rise of the Beast further evinced from the
event p. 302


THE PREFACE.
IN all my designs for the interpretation of the Apocalypse, I have as much as
I could avoided all dispute about the different ways, that Protestants have
fancied in their applications of the Prophecy to the Church of Rome; And have
insisted every where upon the things in which they generally agree in that way.
My first attempt in this way was to demonstrate the main conclusion in which
they all agree; And this last does from their general agreements together, as
its Principles, and Foundation, deduce the Interpretation of the Rest of the
Prophecy, which used to be always confined to the fancy, in which every
Interpreter differed from the rest about the particular nature, and first
Epoch of that, which is called the Beast.

By this it appears, that as the first of these designs must be chiefly aimed
at the Romanists, so this on the contrary can have no dispute with them. For it
goes upon such suppositions, as they do wholly reject; The following
Interpretations are therefore intended only for such Protestants, as think they
have reason to be satisfied, that the present Roman Church is the great object
of this Prophecy.

The Reason, why this Second Part, does precede the other, is, because the
World is tollerably satisfied of the truth, that the former does design to
confirm; And also because This does contain predictions in it, that may begin
to be accomplished soon after that they are published.

My business in it is, to explain, and apply the matter of the Trumpets, and
Vials, and such parts of the Prophecy, as are implicated with them; and that
which I chiefly aim at in the doing of it, is to proceed in a close, and
distinct order of deductions from Principles generally acknowledged by
Protestant Interpreters.

By acknowledged Principles I prevent the perplexities, that the different
Schemes, and Principles of Interpreters do fill Men with, and which affright
the greatest part of those, that are otherwise curious enough, from the perusal
of any thing of this nature; And by close and distinct Reasoning from them, I
would remove the fears of that loose, and wild liberty of fancy, and talk,
which is no unordinary infirmity of discourses on this Subject, and which has
prejudiced the most judicious against any thing, that can be offered them in
this kind.

This has forced me to follow the same course which the first Mathematicians
took about the Elements of Geometry; And that was to lay down those
Propositions first, which they saw to be necessary for the proof of that truth,
which they were in quest of, without any regard to the critical method, that it
should be delivered in as a particular science; so also have I here begun from
such Principles, as I found necessary to the proof of my conclusion in any part
of the Prophecy, without much regard to the continued order of the Visions.

It is therefore very requisite for the easier understanding of this part, to
have a general Idea of the terms here used from either Mr. Medes, or some such
Protestant Interpretation, And to bring such an attention, as Mathematical
Sciences do generally call for.

Some Readers will be forthwith apt to judge from hence, that I seem here to
pretend to a Mathematical Evidence about such matters, as they conclude to be
incapable of any certain explication.

But I am as incapable of so vain a confidence; I am well satisfied of the
impossibility of any such degree of evidence in the Interpretation of almost
any Writing; And it has been so ordinary, and frequent a thing with me to
correct the most promising shows, that I have had, of assurance in these
things, and I am so sensible of the great variety of faces, and of the
intricate complications of the Schemes of the Prophecy with one another, that I
shall never be in danger of pretending to any thing like to that which is
strictly called Demonstration; so that if sometimes I be found to use that
word, I can intend no more by it, than a seeming cogency of proof in
distinction to a loose conjecture.

The Reason why I took that severe Method, was the great dissatisfaction I
found in the strange liberty of imagination, that I saw taken in these kind of
Interpretations, where the whole Body of them is ordinarily nothing but a
Systeme of concinnities and congruities, without any tolerable evidence for
the Application, and almost every sentence full of arbitrary suppositions in
it. Of these I saw there might be as many varieties, as there were ingenious
and contriving heads, of which infinite instances might be given.

On the other side I looked upon the Apocalypse to be far the most important
and coherent Prophecy, that ever was delivered for the instruction, and for the
comfort of the Church to the end of the World; And as it is at present lost to
us in the dark Schemes, in which it is wrapped up, so the only way to make it
appear again, as the Word of God to us, is to prove, and not to guess at, the
meaning of it.

This I have here endeavored to do, by laying down Principles, that are
generally assented to by the best Interpreters of that Church, which we own,
and by a distinct process of deductions from them apart by themselves, for the
clearer discovery of the strength of the proof, which must have been much more
implicated, and confused in a continued discourse. The variety of the Schemes,
and the remote relations of things to one another, and the long series of
consequences, that is required in the reasoning about them, made me think it
necessary to give a distinct view of every conclusion alone by it self; Which
does more clearly show the connection of what is truly deduced, and makes it
more easy to discover the weakness of a mistake.

But yet it must be allowed, that there is a great difference in the strength
of several of these conclusions, and some are more apparently looser than
others. And where I could not see any clear bottom to proceed upon, I have
either left them in their incertainty, or have used a more free and continued
discourse about them. And these are ordinarily applications of History, or
conjectural Interpretations. But yet I believe it will ordinarily be found,
that where I have declared for any of that kind, I have endeavored as much as
I could to imitate the same kind of caution, that I have done in the other. One
instance of which is that Latitude of application, which I sometimes leave
things to, where there seems to be no clear grounds for a determination. This I
fear will as much displease some for the scepticalness of it, as the former
will do others for the niceness, and severity of the process.

But I hope the free, and ingenuous Readers will approve of the reasons of
both; And upon that account, if I should be found sometimes to fail of what I
intend, will pardon the oversights, that I may be discovered by the more
sagacious to have fallen into amongst the intricate mazes of these Visions. I
can assure them it is no easy matter for any man of free thoughts to keep
himself from many slips, and inadvertencies in these things.

I think, I may justly be allowed to have taken more care to clear the first
foundations of these matters, and to carry on the explication of them in a more
distinct and coherent order, then has yet been attempted; And the incitation,
that I may chance thereby to give to others, that are more able to do it
better, as well as the use of mine own best endeavor to be publicly useful in
it, may not only atone for my defects, but procure me the favorable opinion of
all, that consider how easy it is to wander, when one goes out of the beaten
Road in this obscure Wilderness.

It cannot but be expected, that so different a method from what has been used,
must have as different effects in respect of the applications of the Prophecy.
And I must own, that though I generally prefer Mr. Medes critical exposition of
the words, yet I could hardly settle upon any of his applications without new
grounds for them.

Of this kind will the application of the two first Woes and their characters
appear to be, which was before but lightly guessed at, and never satisfactorily
evinced. This I mention in particular, because upon that does all the
Interpretation of the rest of the Trumpets seem to depend.

The same may be said of the applications of the fifth Seal, the only key to
open that part of the Prophecy, which yet was never before confirmed upon any
tolerable evidence.

This may excuse the great niceness, that I have used in those two points.
Others no question may make the proof shorter; But most of those that think so,
may also possibly find themselves, as much disappointed, as I was when they
come to try it with any accuracy. However I found this advantage from digging
so low for my foundation, that it discovered many new truths to me about some
particular Schemes, which forced me to depart from Mr. Mede in almost all the
series of the Prophecy; And this also upon that great Rule of all accountable
Interpretation, which he himself has appeared for, viz. That the literal sense
be adhered to without evidence for another. Upon this do I establish the order
of Events according to the order of the Schemes in the Text, where there is no
cogent proof of their being anticipated, or transposed.

From hence I conclude the time of the Martyrs with White Robes (Chap. 7, 9.)
to be the same with the Rest, that were to be killed within a little season in
the fifth Seal, and therefore before the Trumpets. As also the time of the
Conquerors (Chap. 15. 2.) to be just before the pouring out of the Vials, and
after the sight of the Judgments of them in the first Verse.

From hence also do I draw the Links of that Chain; that I have demonstrated in
the 14th Chap. which is one of the most useful discoveries for clearing up the
Order of all the Events in the latter times, which we meet with in the other
Chapters. Monsieur Jurieu must indeed be allowed to have given the World the
first Alarm of the death of the Witnesses at this present time. But the chief
strength of that conclusion, in respect of the time to which it is confined,
does lie in the order it is found in, in the 11th Chapter before the passing
away of the second Woe, and from the place, that the great Persecution is found
to have in the 14th Chapter, after the Reformation. Theor. 39.

Without these boundaries, that Prophecy is left loose to the different
acceptations of the terms in which it is described; But by the fixed period
that the Prophecy gives to the continuance of the second Woe, the Resurrection
of the Witnesses is confined to these present times. Whatever strength the
grounds, that Monsieur Jurieu gave, may have in them, it is certain, that they
were not much regarded in these parts, but amongst his own Countrymen; Which
does sufficiently justify the pains that I have taken to clear up the
foundation, that he depended upon, and to add a new proof of mine own.

My Appearance at this time in this prediction may by some be apprehended to be
but a politic conjecture from the present State of Affairs, which at this time
do seem very plainly to point out such a revolution in the Kingdom of France,
which in all humane appearance can no ways be hindered. And to strengthen the
Presumption, that may be taken for the belief of this Prophecy from my
Concurrence with others in it upon new grounds, it is convenient to remove this
apprehension.

I have sufficient Testimonies, that these things were wrote long before the
least appearance of any lightsome circumstances in behalf of the Reformed
Churches, and that they were offered to the public at a time, when there was
the thickest Cloud over them in almost all Parts of Europe. My Lord of St.
Asaph can testify, that they were in his hands a little before the Bishops
were sent to the Tower. And I was much pleased to hear his Lordship upon the
same grounds speak with such assurance in that place, that there could be no
extinction of the Reformation in these Parts, at that very time, when all were
in astonishing Apprehensions of the issue of his Imprisonment.

But long before this I had communicated the same with my new grounds for it to
my Worthy Friends, the Dean of Peterborough, and Henry Plumptre Esquire To whose
peculiar Zeal for the Interest of the Reformation, I owe next under God the
chief motive to my undertaking of this part of the Prophecy. And all my Friends
can testify with what confidence I did remove the fears of Bishop Ushers
Prophecy, and of any general Persecution among us, when to all outward
appearance there seemed to be the greatest likelihood of it.

But yet I never accounted the grounds of any of these particular Events so
necessary, as those that Protestants generally agree in for fixing the main
Object and concern of these Visions to the Church of Rome. And therefore, tho
these Predictions should fail, yet that will not prejudice the strength of the
main Conclusion, because there is no such immediate connection betwixt them, as
to make it necessary for them to stand and fall together.

FOR the present Satisfaction of those who may question the grounds of those
Suppositions upon which these Papers do wholly rely, from the Authority of
Grotius and Dr. Hammond, who have diverted the Scene of these Visions from the
Church of Rome, it will be convenient here to transcribe the contrary
Authorities of the most zealous and judicious Interpreters of the Church of
Rome, concerning the chief Foundations of the Grotian Interpretation, for the
interest of their Cause.

It would be infinite to transcribe all the Contrarities of the Romanists to
this way. And therefore I will only pick out those Passages wherein they
censure all the most considerable Foundations of it, as the Imaginations of
none but Madmen, of Men of no sense in them, or of such as are perfectly blind,
or that say things that never any did own before since the writing of the
Prophecy, or such as are against the common Stream of all considerable
Interpreters, Jews and Christians, Ancient and Modern, or the contrary to which
is manifest and unquestionable, or which no Man of sense can doubt of.

To begin with that which is the most necessary to the Grotian way.

1. It was necessary for Grotius to deny, That the Beast in the Revelations was
the same with the fourth Beast in the 7th. of Daniel. For then it must have
continued till the second coming of the Son of Man, whereas he makes his Beast
to be at an end long before. And therefore since the Beast in the Revelations,
is agreed by him to be the Roman Empire, he makes the fourth Beast in the 7th.
of Daniel, to be a part of the Grecian Monarchy, of which the third Beast there
is only the first Appearance.

NOW hear what the most Eminent of the Roman Interpreters say to this.

The Jesuit Malvenda (who seems to have been the most laborious in this
Subject) speaking of this under the name of Porphyries Opinion, page 222. de
Antichristo Porphyrii Sententiam esse apertissimum delirium S. Hieronymus and
alii Clarissime demonstrant. -- Omnes enim exploratissimum habent, cum Hebraei,
cum Christiani tertiam and quartam Bestiam esse distinctissimas. -- Ut insanae
proculdubio Mentis sit, qui secus sentsat, ibidem. -- Quartam Bestiam esse
Romanum Imperium certum and pervagatum est apud Omnes Christiani Nominis
Professores. -- Reducendus est (Lector) in Viam Regiam, and rectissimam.
St. Hierom, says he, and others do most clearly demonstrate, That Porphyries
Opinion is a perfect Madness. -- For All find it to be unquestionable, as well
Jews as Christians, That the third and fourth Beast are two very distinct
Beasts; so that he ought without all question, to be accounted A Man of no
sense in him, that can think otherwise. -- Again, That the fourth Beast is the
Roman Empire, is very certain and commonly agreed upon by all that profess the
Name of Christ. -- And that the Reader is therefore to be brought into the
Common Road and the Kings Highway.

The Jesuit Viega in his Comment upon the 13th. Chapter of Apocal. Sect. 1.
Pro hujus loci Expositione sciendum est Danieli cap. 7. Similem quandam
ostensam fuisse Visionem -- Quae Bestia juxta Communem Doctorum Sententiam est
Imperium Romanum.
It is to be known for the Explication of this place, That there was a Vision
like to this, shown unto Daniel in his 7th. Chapter, (viz. about the fourth
Beast there,) -- Which Beast according to the Common Opinion of the Learned, is
the Roman Empire.

The Jesuit Alcasar, who (as Cornelius a Lapide informs us, Prolegom in
Apocal.) had spent twenty Years in compiling his Comment upon the Apocalypse,
and seems to make it his business to correct all the Weaknesses of the other
Commentators, says thus in Comment in Cap. 13. Apocal. Sect. 5. Negari non
potest quin in hac Bestia 10 Cornuum alludatur ad quartam Bestiam Danielis. --
Quam esse Romani Imperia Figuram, ut Symbolum Liquido Constat. -- Bestia quarto
Danielis, per quam Evidens est Imperium denotari Romanum.
It cannot be denied, but that by this Beast with the Ten Horns, there is an
Allusion to the fourth Beast in the seventh of Daniel, -- which does manifestly
appear to be a Figure, and Symbol of the Roman Empire.

So also on the 12th. Chapter of Apocal. The fourth Beast in the 7th. of
Daniel, which it is evident, does signify the Roman Empire.

The Jesuit Pererius upon the 7th. of Daniel, v. Quarta Haec Bestia, ut Omnes
Interpretantur, and ut Res ipsa Loquitur, Imaginem referebat Romani Imperii.
The fourth Beast, as All do interpret it, and as the Thing it self does
declare it, is the Image of the Roman Empire.

But Grotius's Interpretation of Grotius in v. 13. Cap. 7. Dan. Filius Hominis]
id est Populus Romanus.
the Son of Man to be the Roman People, v. 13. c. 7. Dan. is beyond all their
Censures, because it was never broached by any before; And we have the Judgment
of the High Priest of the Jews, That to apply it to any but to the true
Messiah, is Blasphemy, Mat. 26. 65.

2. The next great Foundation of the Grotian Scheme, is his explaining the
seven Heads of the Beast to be seven single Emperors, because said to be seven
Kings, Cap. 17. v. 10.

But the Jesuit Ribera, one of the most Judicious of all the Roman
Interpreters, admires him for his Affected Singularity in this. In his Comment
upon the 17th. Chap. Apocal. Numer 15. Quodsi cui durum videtur in uno Rege
multos significar^. -- Putatque Septem esse tantum, is primum sciet Omnes
Expositores intellexisse in singulis horum septem multos comprehendi,
Neminemque septem tantum Homines esse dixisse praeter Victorinum, cujus
Sententiae Merito Omnes Refragantur. -- Postremo intelligat non esse inusitatum
in Scriptura, ut in uno Rege multi similes, and quasi ejusdem Corporis
significentur quod est sum observandum. Nam Dan. 8. legimus. Ecce Aries. --
Nec dissimile and illud, Jeremiae 25.
If any one should think (says he) that these seven Kings are but seven single
Persons, let him know in the first place, That All Expositors have made
account, that in every one of these there are a great many comprehended, and
that never any Man but Victorinus, did take them for seven single Persons,
whose Opinion All do deservedly cry out against. -- And then next let him
understand, That it is ordinary in Scripture, by one King to signify many of
the same Kind, and as it were of one and the same Body, which is more
especially to be observed: So in Dan. cap. 8. The Ram, etc. So Jeremiah, cap.
25. And ye shall serve the King of Babylon seventy Years.

3. Grotius makes a great Advantage of making the Term of the Beast to signify
different Things in every different Show of it.

For this He meets with this lash from Malvenda, in respect of the Show of the
Beast, in the 11th. and 13th. Chapters, page 226. de Antichristo. Eandem fuisse
Bestiam Nemo Sanae Mentis poterit dubitare.
No Man in his Wits, says he, can doubt, but that the Beast in the 11th.
Chapter, and that in the 13th. are the same Beast.

And in respect of the Shows of the Beast in the 13th. and 17th. Chapter, he
has this rub from Alcasar, in Cap. 13. Apoc. v. 1. Certum namque est maris
Bestiam de qua in hoc capite and Bestiam illam cui Babylon insidet (cap. 17.)
esse unam candemque Bestiam, ut diserte Hieronymus, and suo loco demonstrahimus.
For it is certain, says he, That the Beast out of the Sea, (Chap. 13.) and
that Beast upon which Babylon sits, (Chap. 17.) are but one and the same Beast,
as Hierom does expressly affirm, and as we shall in its place demonstrate.

So also in his Comment upon the 17th. Chap. Apocal. Disputat. 10. Speaking of
the Opinion of those that did distinguish betwixt the Beast of the Sea in the
13th. Chapter, and that in the 17th. Verumenimvero pro Comperto habeo, Bestiam
cui Mulier insidet, candem esse cum Maris Bestia, quae cap. 13. descripta est.
But for my part I take it for undoubted, That the Beast upon which the Woman
here sits, is the same with the Beast out of the Sea, described in the 13th.
Chapter.

4. To fix the Application of the Characters of the Beast in the 11th. Chap.
Apoc. to the first Times, it was necessary for Grotius to understand the
Judgment of the Dead at the 18th. verse, to be nothing but the Revenging of the
Cause of the Martyrs of those Times.

But Ribera sets this mark upon him for it, (Comment in Cap. 10. Apoc. Numer.
20.) upon a mention of that part of the 11th. Chap. Caecus est, qui non videt
Haec nisi post interitum Antichristi, and tempore judicii non futura.
He is blind, says he, that does not see, that these things cannot come to pass
before the Ruin of Antichrist, and the Times of the last Judgment.

5. One of the greatest Motives that Grotius had, to make him fancy the seven
Heads to be but seven single Persons, was, Because the time of the chief
Actions is said to be but forty two Months or three Years and an half. For
this length of time is mentioned in five several places of these Visions, and
yet Alcasar in v. 2. cap. 11. Apocal. Notatione quarta. Quamobrem Necesse est
spatium trium annorum cum dimidio esse mysticum, id quod Exigebat Aenigmatis
ratio.

Item in v. 2. cap, 11. Ante Notation. -- veruntamen quemadmodum dimidia hora,
cap. octavo, and quinque menses, cap. nono, non sunt in sensu proprio desumpta,
sed Mystico, ita etiam convenienter ad Apocalypseos Contextum Accipiendi sunt
hi 42 menses in sensu Mystico, non proprio. Etenim accipere Hos numeros Dierum
aut mensium, ut sonant, id quidem Nequaquam stylo aenigmatico quadrat.


Alcasar does positively determine about these three years and an half, that
they must necessarily be understood in a Mystical Sense, to answer the nature
of a Mystical Prophecy, as this is. According as we see the half hour in the
8th. Chapter, and the five Months in the 9th. Chapter, to be taken; which he
says, are an Instance in the Prophecy, to direct us to the Mystical Use of Time
in all other places of it. And to take the Days and Months in their literal
sense, he says, Is not at all suitable to an Aenigmatical Style.

6. Dr. Hammond upon those words, chap. 1. v. 1. Apoc. -- Things which must
shortly come to pass, says, That those Words were to him the Key for the whole
Prophecy, and thence does confidently determine, That the Visions of the
Apocalypse, were to be fulfilled very shortly after the Delivery of the
Prophecy.

Not to mention the inconsistency of this with the Doctors Interpretations of
the Ten Horns 200 Years after, and of the 1000 Years after that in the 20th.
Chapter, together with his Application of God and Magog to the Turks after
those 1000 Years;

See what small Account Ribera makes of the ground of this confidence upon
those very same Words: -- He says, Ribera in cap. 11. v. 1. Apocal. Numer. 5.
Id quod incipitur jam fit. Cum ergo illae Persecutiones, etc. cito incipi
deberent, recte ait, Quae oportet fieri cito, etsi non cito essent finienda.
Ita probat Communis consuetudo Sermonis, and consuetudo Scripturae.
It is a common ordinary way of Speech, and the Custom of Scripture, To say of
Things that were shortly to begin, that they should shortly come to pass, tho
they were not shortly to be finished.

This sharp and severe Censure of all the main Foundations of the Grotian Way
from the Mouth of that Party, whom it does most oblige, does sufficiently
justify the same kind of Sentence, that has been passed upon it by the most
sagacious of the Protestant Interpreters, who cannot but look upon Grotius in
most of the obstruse parts of Prophecy, as most affectedly singular; and to
that degree in some places, as to make him one of the most apparent Instances
of that old observation, Nullum Magnum Ingenium sine mixtura.

I will therefore now venture to conclude, That the Authority of Grotius, and
Dr. Hammond will not much prejudice any Protestant against the Suppositions,
which are at first laid down as the Basis of these Interpretations.

But if the Predictions before mentioned be shortly fulfilled, they will be a
most considerable confirmation of the Suppositions upon which they rely.

Whatever may be the Issue of these particular Applications to these present
Times, the main Body of the Interpretations stands secure upon another Bottom,
viz. Their past Accomplishment. And that long Train of Divine Judgments, which
through the Course of so many Ages has always run down Parallel with the
violent Practices of the Roman Church, is expeperience enough to assure all the
divided Parts of the Reformation, That the biting and devouring one another for
their Religious Differences, are the next Causes of most of the Judgments of
God that come upon them.

March 25. 1689.
THE Judgments of God UPON THE ROMAN CHURCH, In Explication of the TRUMPETS and
VIALLS of the APOCALYPSE.
CHAP. I.
The kind of Proof, that is here endeavored after. The reason of the Method.
Five Suppositions generally allowed by Protestant Interpreters, upon which the
whole Discourse relies. The Party of the Beast, a corrupt part of the Christian
Church. The Roman Church, an Object of the Plagues of all the Trumpets. The
Saracens, and Turks the first and second Woe.

AS I always accounted the Visions of the Apocalypse to be a resemblance of the
first great Deep, or a dark Abyss of all THE Jesuit Pererius to this purpose
Disput. 4. in Apoc. God designed here to signify -- the whole progress, and
course of the Church, from the beginning of it to the end of it -- And withal,
All the most considerable, and remarkable fortunes of it, the prosperous as
well as the cloudy. So also Disput. 9. -- This is above all to be retained --
that there are here foretold the most eminent and remarkable Fortunes, and
Events in the Church both prosperous, and the contrary, from the beginning of
it to the last end of it.
the considerable fortunes of the Christian Church, to the end of the World: So
was it a long while before I could think it possible to go further in any clear
discoveries from them, than the work of the first Day, or to divide the Light
of it from the Darkness, which is the whole design of my first Part. The
perplexities that I had been in, when I first engaged my self in these things,
upon the account of the infinite variety of different Apprehensions, that I met
with about them, had settled me in a strong and habitual aversion against all
tempting conjectures, that had nothing but a fair Concinnity for their
Foundation. And upon a general and curfory Survey of the Schemes of those
Visions, I could not think there was any better ground of satisfaction to be
had about the Application of far the greatest part of them.

Wherefore after some satisfactory discoveries of the insufficiency of the
grounds, that I found others to rely upon, and some fruitless endeavors of
mine own to determine the time and application of the Trumpets and Vials, I
came at last to despair of making any further progress in these things.

But upon a more particular, and close Application of my Thoughts, to the
darker sides of the Prophecy, I am now more satisfied, that there are such
plain marks of their relation to the clearer parts of it, Idem Disput. 10. But
this I take to be the reason why there were so few things plainly signified,
namely, That we might from those open-hints hunt after the understanding of the
rest.
as are able to lead one to a particular discovery of all the material things
that are signified by them.

I will not engage that all that shall be here delivered shall appear as
absolutely Necessary, and Cogent, as the first part of these Enquiries, because
they are deductions from those principles. But yet it will be convenient to
follow the same Process and Method, that has been there observed, or to set all
the Conclusions distinctly by themselves, and to dispose them into that Order,
in which they do most naturally depend upon one another, which will render the
whole Prospect of them more clear, and open, and make it more easy to discover
any weakness, that may be suspected to be in them.

It may easily be apprehended, that it is not my business here, to prove the
principles upon which I rely; Because this is but the consequence of another
work. But yet I will here make use of no other Suppositions, than such as are
the most obvious things in the whole Prophecy: And are therefore generally
agreed upon by all Protestant Interpreters of any Note; And of that kind are
these that follow, which I therefore take as so many acknowledged Postulata, or
Foundations to proceed upon.

1. That the Beast and the False Prophet, are the chief Ruling Suppositions.
Power of the present Church of Rome. 2. That the Time, Times and an half, the
42 Months of the Reast, and the 1260 Days, are 1260 Years, and are all one and
the same individual Time. 3. That the rise of the Beast was before the Year
620. 4. That the Two Witnesses, in Sackcloth, are the Representatives of the
whole true Church of God, under subjection to Roman States. 5. That Babylon is
the City of Rome in a State of Ecclesiastical Domination.
SINCE all hopes of the Application of the Trumpets do seem to depend upon the
Relation, that they may be found to have with that, which is the most clearly
known in the Prophecy, that is, The characters of the Beast, the first
Conclusion that shall be here offered, is That

The Woe of the seventh Trumpet does put an end to all the Power of the Beast.
For the Beast is signified to be in Power against the Church Revel. 11. ^, and
15.
of Christ, just before the Woe of the seventh Trumpet; And that Woe makes all
the Kingdoms of this World, the Kingdoms of Christ for ever; And therefore must
all the Power of the Beast against the Church be made an end of by it.

It may next be observed, That

The 144000 chap. 14. 1. are the faithful Members of Christ's Church upon
Earth. For they are the opposite party to that of the Beast. And Rev. 14. 1.
therefore must be upon Earth. And they are represented as upon Mount Sion with
the Lamb, The Jesuit Alcasar in cap. 14. Apoc. By Sion in the Holy Scripture is
signified the whole Church Militant; Because, as S. Paul says, The rest are
ingrafted upon the same Olive Tree. Paul does so use the name of Sion, Gal. 4.
24. Heb. 12. 22.
and therefore must they be the faithful members of the Christian Church upon
Earth; And in the Ibid. These 144000 are without all question the very same
with those in the seventh Chapter.
7. Chap. they are said to be the servants of God Sealed to escape the Evils,
that were to come upon the Earth.

It appears also from thence, That

The 144000 chap. 14. 1. are Contemporary with the first times of the Reign of
the Beast. For the party of the Beast at their first appearance are said Revel.
13. 16.
to have received the mark, and name of the Beast in their Right Hands, or
their Foreheads, just before the mention of the 144000, who are said to be
sealed also in their Foreheads with the Seal of the Name of God, which does
manifestly intimate, that the 144000 were then in being, when the other were
marked out to be distinguished from them, that is, at their first appearance.

Wherefore the 144000 do continue with the party of the Beast, from the first
beginning of his Reign.

But then it is evident, That,

The 144000. chap. 7. were sealed to save them from the Evils of the Trumpets.
For they were sealed to be secured from the evils, that Revel. 7. 2.
were going to be inflicted on the Earth and Sea, just before the appearance of
the Trumpets. And it appears from the fifth Trumpet, which was to torment all
who had not Revel. 9. 4.
the Seal of God in their Foreheads, that the evils, that the 144000 were
secured from, were the judgments of the Trumpets.

Indeed the whole 7. Chap. which shows upon what account the 144000 were
sealed, appears to be put in betwixt the sixth and the seventh Seal, for no
other purpose, but to signify what was first to be done to make way for the
execution of the Judgments of the Trumpets. For those Judgments Revel. 6. 11.
ver. 17.
had been promised in the fifth Seal, in revenge of the Blood of the Christian
Martyrs, and were seen to be near at hand in the sixth Seal, just before the 7.
Chap. but were deferred to be executed till after that Chapter, at the opening
of the seventh Seal. Revel. 8. 2.


The Reason for which appears from the matter of the 7. Chap. which is nothing
else but an account, either of the 144000 (who were to be sealed before the
Judgments of the Trumpets, in order to their security under them) or of the
great multitude of all Nations at the 9. verse, who are said to be come out of
the Great Tribulation, and appear to be those rest of the Brethren, that were
in the fifth Seal foretold should be killed within a little season, and just
Revel. 6. 11
before the Vengeance there promised to the Blood of the Martyrs. For these
rest of the Brethren that in the fifth Seal are said should be killed, are all
the rest of the Martyrs, that were to die in the same kind of Persecution, in
which those others in the fifth Seal were slain, as it is signified by the
expression of those that should be killed, as they were; Chap. 6. 11.
And they being to be killed, within a little season, and before the beginning
of the Vengeance, there promised, they have just the same Character, with that
of the great multitude Revel. 7. 9.
of all Nations come out of Tribulation in the sixth Seal.

For the great multitude do by their place in the sixth Seal appear to be
within a little season after the time of the fifth Seal, And they were all the
rest of the Brethren, that were to be killed, because they were an innumerable
multitude of all nations, kindreds, and people, and tongues, and had white
robes given them like the Martyrs in the fifth Seal; They are also described as
all killed just before the time of the Trumpets, as the killing of the rest of
the Brethren was foretold should be just before the Vengeance there promised.

This does make it sufficiently manifest, that all the business of the 7. Chap.
has a relation to the judgments of the Trumpets, that were immediately to
follow it; And therefore that the sealing of the 144000, was only to save them
from those evils.

The sealing of the 144000 is indeed an unquestionable allusion to the like
representation in the 9. Chap. of Ezekiel, where the Angels, under whose charge
the City Jerusalem was, are commanded to slay all that were in it without pity,
excepting those who were ordered to be marked in their Foreheads, that they
might be passed over upon the account Ezekiel. 9 4.
of their mourning for the abominations of that people.

And by this it does appear, that the reason of the mark, and number of both
the opposite parties in the 14. Chapter, is this sealing of the 144000 in the
7. Chap. For there is no manner of account why that particular and unusual
Character is given to the followers of the Beast, but only for their being
there made the opposite party to another, that was sealed and numbered; whereas
there had been an account given in the 7. Chap. long before, of the sealing of
the 144000, for a very particular end, without any relation or mention of the
mark, and number of the Beast.

The time therefore of the 144000, does by this seem to be represented, as
having been some while at least before the time of the Beast, because they were
sealed before the other were marked:

It cannot however be questioned, but That

The whole time of the Reign of the Beast is within the time of the Trumpets.
For the Reign of the Beast ends with the Woe of the seventh Trumpet (by
Theoreme 1.) -- And it begins in the time of the 144000 (by Theoreme 3.) And
therefore in the time of the Trumpets, because the 144000 were sealed to be
secured from the evils of the Trumpets (Theor. 4.) And so must be contemporary
with the first of them.

The whole time then of the Reign of the Beast must be in the time of the
Trumpets, because they begin as soon as that Reign, and end after it.

And then it cannot be easily doubted, but That

The Kingdom of the Beast, is an Object of the Plagues of the Trumpets, during
the whole time of his Reign. For the whole time of the Reign of the Beast is in
the time of the Trumpets (Theoreme 5.)

And the followers of the Beast are distinguished by their mark, as the
opposite party to the 144000. And therefore must they be in the same Empire
with the 144000 according to all the use of marking out persons in Scripture,
to save them from the evils, that were to come upon the rest. The rest
therefore, that were not so sealed, or the party of the Beast, must be the
Objects of the Plagues from which the 144000 were secured, that is, the Objects
of the Trumpets.

It is also not less manifest, That

The main Body of the Christian Church is in a State of great Corruption before
the time of the Trumpets. For the Twelve Tribes, out of which the 144000 are
Revel. 7.
chosen in order to be distinguished from them, by being sealed, are the whole
Jewish State and Church; And the Jewish Church is known Idem Notat. 21. in
prooem Apocal. It is the ordinary way of the Prophets to touch upon Jewish
matters, and to refer them to the things of the Christian Church.

Idem Notat. in cap. 15. v. 3. It is very usual with the Prophets under the
cover of Jewish Histories to refer to the History of the Christian Church.


to be generally used in this Prophecy for the Christian Church, and must be so
here, because the 144000 are Christians (by Theoreme 2.)

Now the 144000 are chosen out from the rest, because Revel. 7. 3.
they are the Servants of God, and therefore cannot the rest be the true
Servants of God. For wherever the Favorites or Servants of God are in the
Scriptures marked out to be secured from any Judgments of God, The rest that
are not marked are known to have drawn down those Judgments upon their Heads by
some extraordinary wickedness.

And then how far they are from being the true Servants of God, is sufficiently
signified by the heaviness of the Judgments, that the 144000 were sealed to be
secured from. And which therefore must fall upon those who were not sealed.

This then does sufficiently show the whole Christian Church, excepting the
144000 to be in a very corrupt state before the time of the Trumpets.

By this it appears, That

The Plagues of the Trumpets do in their succession fall upon all the parts of
the Christian Church, which in the time of those Plagues are not the true
Servants of God. For none but the 144000, who are the faithful Members of the
Christian Church, are secured from the Plagues of the Trumpets; And they are
chosen out, and sealed to be distinguished from all the rest in the time of
those Judgments. And therefore must they fall upon all the rest who are not
sealed. And this is openly expressed in the fifth Trumpet, Revel. 9. 4, ^.
which is said to torment none but those indefinitely, that have not the Seal
of God in their Foreheads, that is, all the considerable part of the rest of
the Church.

And from hence without relying upon any former suppositions, concerning the
Nature of the Beast, is a very fair ground offered to conclude, That

The Party of the Beast, are some corrupt part of the Christian Church. For by
the sealing the 144000 to save them from the Plagues of the Trumpets, it
appears that those Plagues are wholly designed against the rest of the
Christian Church, out of whom the 144000 are chosen, in order to their being
secured from those evils. And since these Plagues are found to fall upon the
Followers of the Beast, Conseq. Theor. 5.) That Party must consequently be some
corrupt part of the Christian Church.

This then may answer that common Question, What evidence there is, That the
Beast is a Christian Rule, or Church. For what can be more openly and plainly
signified, than this is, from his being the opposite party to the 144000, and
the Object of the Trumpets, which were all to fall upon the Christian Church?

But yet it is not necessary from hence, that the Plagues of every Trumpet
should fall upon all the parts of the Church, that are at that Time in a
corrupt state. It is on the contrary very clearly expressed, that the Plagues
of the four first Trumpets do extend but to a third part of the Subject upon
which they fall; And therefore cannot every one of them be supposed to affect
the Universal Church.

But in what state soever the other parts of the Christian Church may be, yet
since it is supposed, that the Beast is the Ruling Power of the Roman Church,
it must be allowed, That

The Plagues of the Trumpets do fall upon the Dominions of the Roman Church,
during the whole Time of the Reign of the Beast. 1. That the Plagues of the
Trumpets do fall upon the dominions of the Roman Church, during the Reign of
the Beast, appears from the security, that the 144000 have from those Plagues
during that time. For the 144000 are the party opposite to that of the Beast,
from whom the followers of the Beast are distinguished by their number, and
their mark. These two parties must therefore continue together, thus
distinguished from one another; And since the 144000 are secured from the evils
of the Trumpets by nothing but their mark, those Plagues must therefore fall
upon their Adversaries who have not that mark, that is upon the party of the
Beast, which is supposed to be those of the Roman Church (Suppos. 1.)

2. And then these Plagues do fall upon the Roman Party for the whole time of
the Reign of the Beast, because the whole time of the Reign of the Beast is in
the time of these Plagues (Theor. 5.)

But yet it is to be considered, that the Plagues of the Trumpets may fall upon
other parts of the World, besides the Territories of the Roman Church, during
the Reign of the Beast. For these Plagues are found to concern all the
corrupted parts of the Church at one time or other, (Theor. 7.) -- And the
144000 are signified to be dispersed among all the corrupted parts of the
Church, by being taken out of all the twelve Tribes, that is, out of all the
parts that make up the whole Church, and to have a Seal upon them to
distinguish the several Parcels of them from the rest of that Division. So that
unless it can be made appear, That the jurisdiction of the Beast contains all
the corrupted parts of the Christian Church in it, the Plagues of the Trumpets
are not to be confined to that Party only for their Object.

However the concern of the Beast alone, in the Plagues of the Trumpets, for
the whole time of his Reign, is sufficient to make any conclude, That

The Plagues of the Trumpets are the Pererius Disput. 5. Apocalypse. The most
eminent events are here referred to. See Pererius in Note the first.

Alcasar Notat. 6. prooem. The Historical sense does apply all to the History
of the Christian Church -- To the events in it, not those that are minute, and
inconsiderable, but to the most remarkable and eminent.

Cornel. a Lapide prolegom -- Apocal. de variis modis interpretandi Apoc. -- 2.
others, and far the truest, do apply to some of the most famous events in
several Ages.


most heavy and, lasting Calamities that do happen in their time, within those
parts of the Empire, upon which they fall. For the Plagues of the Trumpets, do
take up as much time at least to be executed in, as the length of the Reign of
the Beast is. (Theor. 5.) -- And that is agreed to be 1260 Years (Suppos. 2.)
And these Plagues are set out, as the most dreadful Calamities that do happen
within that length of time.

This is first signified by the solemn representation of the Rev. 7. 1. and 3.
four Angels, standing at the four corners of the Earth, and holding the four
Winds, that they should not do that mischief that was going to be executed upon
the Earth and the Sea. And then next by as solemn a sealing of the Servants of
God to save them from those evils for this length of time: And again,
afterward by the Voices and Thunderings and Lightnings Rev. 8. 5.
and Earthquake, that followed upon the casting of the Fire of the Altar upon
the Earth, just before the beginning of the Trumpets.

But the most Emphatical Description of the Terrors of some of these Plagues,
is the dreadful and loud cry of Rev. 8. 13.
the Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, Chap. 8. 13. Woe, Woe, Woe, to
express the Terrors of the three Trumpets that were then to come.

This is farther signified by the choice that is made of the Plagues of Egypt
to set out these Calamities by; They are of that sort of Egyptian Plagues, of
which God says, in distinction Exodus 9. 14.
to all the rest, That he would send them, that Pharaoh might know, that there
was none like him in all the Earth. And of the first of these, The hail, He
says it should v. 18.
be such as had never been in Egypt since the Foundation of it till then; And
of the Locusts, That they should do that which neither their Fathers, nor their
Father's Fathers had Exodus 10. 6.
seen, since the day that they were upon the Earth. And the darkness is called
thick darkness, and such as might be v. 21, 22.
felt.

But the plainest evidence of the heavy nature and extent of these Plagues, is
the matter of the second and sixth Trumpet; The burning Mountain cast into the
Sea is never Rev. 8. 8.
used amongst the Prophets, but to signify the utter ruin of Empire; And the
slaying the third part of Men is such a Rev. 9. 19.
Plague, as never was before heard of.

To the circumstances also of the Hail of Egypt, is here added that of Blood,
in the Hail of the first Trumpet; And to those of the Egyptian Locusts are such
adjuncts added in the fifth Rev. 9. 7.
Trumpet, as make them appear to be very dreadful and terrible.

And then for the long continuance of them, the Locusts, in v. 5, 10.
the fifth Trumpet, are described to continue five Months, to show the
different nature of that Plague, from its Pattern in Egypt. And the great
slaughter of Men in the sixth Trumpet, which seems to refer to the slaughter of
the Firstborn in Egypt, is described to continue for a Day, a Month and a Year.

Wherefore the Plagues of the Trumpets must be the heaviest Calamities, upon
the place where they fall, of any that happen in the whole compass of the time
that they are executed in. And therefore are they the most dreadful Plagues
that can happen in the length of 1260. Years, which they do certainly take up,
during the Reign only of the Beast, (Suppos. 2.)

From hence it appears unquestionable, That

The Plagues of the Trumpets cannot be understood in the literal sense of the
words, by which they are described. For the expressions before mentioned, are
of much too high and solemn a signification to signify nothing but a great
Rev. 8.
Hail and Blasting, as the Plague of the first Trumpet does literally signify;
Or a change only in the Waters of the Sea and Rivers, as it is in the Plague of
the second and third; Or nothing but an Eclipse of the Sun and Moon, as it is
in the fourth Trumpet, and which besides bear no manner of proportion to the
Calamities, that do happen in any place within such a compass of Years, as the
Plagues of the Trumpets have been found to be executed in, (Conseq. Theor. 5.)

But to make it altogether unquestionable, That the matter of the Trumpets,
cannot be taken in the literal sense of the words, it is to be observed, That
the Plague of the third Trumpet is a Star falling like a Lamp upon the third
part of the River: Now this is impossible for one falling Star, as it literally
signifies, to be able to do, though it were as big as the biggest Lamp that
ever was seen, especially since it is said also to fall upon the Fountains of
Water, which must be at too great a distance from one another, for a falling
Star to spread it self over in a literal sense. And how is it possible to
conceive a slaughter of the third part of Men in a War of little above a Years
continuance, as it is literally expressed in the sixth Trumpet? The Mountain
also in the second Trumpet, that is said to burn with Fire, and to be cast into
the Sea, is a very peculiar prophetical Jerem. 51. 25.
expression, and is no where used in Scripture, but in a mystical sense, and
that only for a destruction of Empire.

On the other side, nothing is more obvious amongst the Prophets than to use
those Terms in a mystical sense, that are here the Characters of the evils of
the Trumpets: And the ordinary use of them there, is to denote the several
Calamities that befall a Nation.

It may therefore be very safely concluded, That the Plagues of the Trumpets
are to be understood of greater Calamities than they literally signify.

And then by what has before been observed,

The Plagues of the Trumpets, that fall within the time of the Reign of the
Beast, must be the greatest of all the Calamities that do happen within those
places where they fall, during the whole time of that Reign. It is necessary to
put in the limitation of the places upon which they fall, because there are
frequent mentions of the particular parts of Subjects that are affected by the
matter of the Trumpets.

The Conclusion is also so much the stronger by that Restriction.

It may therefore now be concluded, That the evils of those Trumpets, which
happened during the Reign of the Beast, must be the most remarkable calamities,
that befell the Roman Empire, within the 1260 Years of his Reign.

From hence it would be inferred, that the Saracen Vexations of the Roman
Empire must necessarily be one of the Plagues of these Trumpets; For it fell
within the Time of the Reign of the Beast, which is generally supposed by
Protestant Interpreters to have begun before the Year 620. (Supposition 3.)
Whereas the Saracen Invasions were not till after the Year 630; And the whole
Roman Empire both in the East and West was the Empire of the Beast, when the
Saracen Invasions began. For at that time there was but one Roman Church in all
those Parts, and it continued to be so for above an hundred Years after; all
which time did the Saracens continue their Hostilities against the Eastern
Empire.

And soon after the setlement of the new Western Empire, Anno 800.
they began their vexations of that part also of the Empire of the Beast; And
continued them upon Italy it self, for much the same number of years, that they
had plagued the Eastern parts, from their first inroads till that time. So that
here was a plague upon the proper Empire of the Beast for near 300 years
together, which must certainly have been signified by some of these Trumpets,
since they are found to fall upon the Dominions of the Beast during the whole
time of his Reign (Theor. 5.)

If it be so manifest, that the Saracen Empire must be the matter of one of the
Trumpets, then certainly the Turkish Hostilities must be the business of
another; For betwixt them both they have been a plague to the Roman Empire,
both in the East and West, for near 1100. years together of the Reign of the
Beast, which is almost the whole time of his Reign.

And from hence does it also appear, That the Saracen and Turkish Empires must
necessarily be the first and second Woe. For according to the general opinion
of Interpreters concerning the latest rise of the Beast, (Suppos. 2.) He cannot
have much above an hundred years still to come, of which there must be some
part allowed for the execution of the third Woe upon him in the seventh
Trumpet. So that if the first or second Woe were still to come, they would be
nothing so considerable, as the vexations of the Empire by the Saracens and
Turks, had been before, which is contrary to the representation of the three
last Woes in the Prophecy, which are signified to be far heavier, and much more
considerable evils, than any of the Plagues of the Trumpets before Rev. 8. 13.
them.

Here is therefore now a very fair ground of clear satisfaction, concerning the
Nature of the two first Woes; but the necessity of this will appear much more
unquestionable, See Theorem 33.
from a further consideration of the Prophecy, and especially from the relation
of the second Woe, to the time of the Resurrection and Ascension of the
Witnesses, Chap. 8. Note 5. And from the nature and time of the fifth Vial,
Conseq. 1. Theor. 66.

CHAP. II.
The Great Tribulation, and great Multitude, chap. 7. 9. applied: The rest of
the Brethren and the Vengeance promised, chapter 6. 11. The matter of the sixth
Seal. The object of the plagues of the Trumpets. The Hostilities of the
Saracens, and Turks, further evinced to be the business of the first and second
Woe. The bounds of the first four Trumpets determined.

THE Application of the Plagues of the fifth and sixth Trumpet to the Saracen,
and Turkish vexations of the Roman Empire, may possibly be apprehended to have
been sufficiently secured by the process of the former discourse.

But because this conclusion is the foundation of all the hopes, that I have of
coming to a determinate knowledge of the significations of the rest of the
Trumpets, I will endeavor to setle it upon a still firmer bottom in such a
method, as may at the same time give an intimation of the ground and reason of
the judgments of the Trumpets, which will have a very great influence toward
the discovery of the chief point of the malignity of the Beast.

For this purpose it may in the first place be observed, That

The great Tribulation, out of which the great multitude in white Robes are
said to be come, chap. 7. 14. cannot be either the judgments of the sixth Seal,
or those in the Trumpets. For the great multitude in white Robes, Chap. 7. are
represented as the faithful Members of the Christian Church that were come out
of great Tribulation, Verse. 14.

But the faithful Members of the Christian Church are sealed to escape the
calamities of the Trumpets (by Theor. 4.) and are the peculiar select number of
144000 for all that time which is mentioned in the seventh Chapter, as a note
of distinction betwixt them, and the great multitude, that comes immediately
after in the same Chapter.

And the calamities of the sixth Seal are shown to be intended Revel. 6. 16.
against the Enemies of the Lamb, and not against his faithful followers.

The great Tribulation cannot therefore be either the Terrors in the sixth
Seal, or the judgments of the Trumpets.

And therefore,

The great Tribulation, etc. chap. 7. must be the same with the presecution, in
which the rest of the Brethren are said to be killed in the fifth Seal. The
Original does make this appear to be necessary. That which is translated out of
the great Tribulation, is (...), which rendered verbatim signifies, out of the
Tribulation Revel. 7. 14.
the great one. And as it is thus called the Great Tribulation with an Article
of Reference before it, so must it import some Reference in it to a
Tribulation, that is some where thereabouts mentioned; Now there are no other
Tribulations mentioned any thing near this place, but the calamities of the
sixth Seal, Those of the Trumpets and the Persecutions and Martyrdoms in the
fifth Seal.

1. But the great Tribulation cannot be meant of the calamities of the sixth
Seal or Trumpets (by Theor. 11)

It must therefore be some Tribulation mentioned in the fifth Seal.

2. It cannot be the Martyrdom of the Souls, that were Revel 6. 10.
seen slain under the Altar in the fifth Seal. For they are said at that time
to have been slain, and to have had white Robes given unto them. Whereas this
multitude are described to come out of Tribulation after the sixth Seal, and to
Revel. 7. 9.
be then in white Robes. Those slain in the fifth Seal are also represented but
as a part of those, that were killed for the word of God; But these in the
seventh Chapter are a great multitude, which no Man could number, of all
Nations and Kingdoms, and Peoples and Tongues.

The Tribulation then out of which this great multitude are said to come, must
be the persecution, in which those called the rest of the Brethren are foretold
in the fifth Chapter should be killed: For this Tribulation must be some
persecution mentioned in the fifth Seal, by the first Article of this proof;
And there is no other persecution mentioned in the fifth Seal, but only that of
the Souls under the Altar, and this of the rest of the Brethren. And by the
second Article of this same proof, it cannot be that Persecution of the Souls
under the Altar. This Tribulation must therefore be the Persecution of the rest
of the Brethren.

Besides, it appears from the proper and natural exposition of the context,
that this multitude in the seventh Chapter must be the rest of the Brethren,
that are said in the fifth Seal should be killed within a little season after.

For when we see an express mention in the fifth Seal of Revel. 6. 11.
the rest of the Martyrs that were to be killed after that time, and that
determined to be within a little season after; And when presently after there
comes in the mention of a Revel. 7. 9.
great multitude of all Nations, or of all parts of the World come out of a
great Tribulation (which is just the same with all the rest of the Brethren
Martyrs) and who were clothed in White, just as those were, who were slain in
the fifth Seal; And this also just before the execution of the Vengeance of the
Trumpets, which had been promised in the fifth Seal, after the killing of the
rest of the Brethren; How can any one, without wresting these plain intimations
to a forced sense of his own, not conclude, That this multitude, said there to
be come out of Tribulation, must necessarily be those, who were foretold in the
fifth Seal just before?

Especially, if it be considered that the Article of Reference in that
expression of the Great Tribulation, does necessarily import in it a Relation
to some known Tribulation, and that there is no other mentioned any where near
these Chapters that can suit with it, but only that Persecution in which the
rest of the Brethren in the fifth Seal were to be killed.

Nothing but so very an extraordinary weight of Reason, as is sufficient to
force one to another Interpretation, ought to be regarded against the great
evidence, upon which the former Exposition has been established; And yet the
only Reason, that Mr. Mede does give for his different apprehension in this
point, is, That it is said, that this multitude was seen after the vision of
the 144000, And therefore must be after the time of those 144000, that is,
after the sounding of all the Trumpets, because wherever the term of (...) is
used in this Prophecy, it is pretended that it signifies a succession of things.

But all that need be done to expose the weakness of this ground, is only to
show, that the term of after these things does properly signify no more in any
History of Visions succeeding one another, than that the Vision, which that
term brings in, was after another Vision, that had been represented before it,
and not that the things themselves that are described in the latter of the
Visions, must necessarily be fulfilled after the time of all the things and
persons that are any ways mentioned in the Vision which is before it. And this
may be sufficiently proved by instances of that kind, in this very Prophecy it
self. For example,

The very first opening of the Scene of these Visions is introduced with this
expression, after these things, or (...), chap. 4. 1. And yet the first Seal is
agreed by Mr. Mede to be before the end of many of those things, that are
mentioned in the Prophecy concerning the seven Churches, As particularly the
victory, and the reward mentioned in every one of the Prophecies of the seven
Churches. The ruin also of Babylon, chap. 18. is said to be seen (...), or
after the things that had been mentioned in the Chapters before, and yet the
Vintage which is part of those things, Rev. 14. ^0.
does not end till after the ruin of Babylon; And this very same destruction of
Babylon had been one of the things mentioned in the seventeenth Chapter just
before. The Alleluiahs in the ninteenth Chapter are said to be after these
things, that is, after the burning of Babylon, Chap. 18. And yet are these
Alleluiahs represented to be at the same time with the ascending up of the
smoke of it.

And yet though it should be granted, that the term of after these things
should denote a Succession of Events, as well as of Visions, yet all that could
be made of it in this place, would be only this, that the time of the great
multitude in white Robes, was after the time of the first sealing of the
144000, or the true Church; And not that they must needs be after the end of
the whole time of the sealed company. There is evil enough represented in the
sixth Seal, for their first sealing, and to be secured from before the last
coming of the Christian Martyrs out of all Heathen Tribulation.

From the former Theoreme, it clearly follows, That

The rest of the Brethren that were to be killed in the fifth Seal, chap. 6.
11. were the same with the great multitude, which could not be numbered of all
Nations, and Kingdoms, and people and Tongues in the seventh chap. verse. 9. For
the great Tribulation out of which that great multitude of all Nations is said
to have been come, is the same with the Persecution in the fifth Seal, in which
the rest of the Brethren there mentioned, are foretold should be killed (by
Theoreme 12.) And the rest of the Brethren, that were to be killed in a
persecution, includes in it all the Martyrs in that persecution; And therefore
is the same with that great multitude from all parts of the World.

Wherefore,

The Vengeance promised to the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, must be the
calamities of the seven Trumpets. For that promised Vengeance was not to be
executed till the rest of the Brethren there mentioned were killed. And those
rest of the Brethren, are the same with the multitude that came out of great
Tribulation in the seventh Chap. (by Conseq. Theor. 12.)

And that multitude did not come out of Tribulation, till after the opening of
the sixth Seal, and just before the seventh Seal; Wherefore the Vengeance
promised in the fifth Seal must be the evils of the seven Trumpets, which
Revel. 8. 2.
do immediately follow upon the opening of the seventh Seal.

Again, The Vengeance promised in the fifth Seal, must be either the Terrors of
the sixth Seal, or of the Trumpets in the seventh Seal; For it is promised to
be within a little Revel. 6. 11.
season after.

But it could not be those of the sixth Seal. For the Vengeance promised in the
fifth Seal, was not to come till after the killing of the rest of the Brethren
therein mentioned. And those rest of the Brethren could not be killed, during
the period of the fifth Seal; for they are manifestly distinguished from those,
who are there said to be slain, and who are made the proper business of that
Seal. Now the sixth Seal opens immediately after the end of the fifth, without
the least mention of any further killing of the Brethren: On the contrary the
great business of it is those Terrors, that are described in it, against the
Enemies of God ver. 15, 16, 17.
and the Lamb. Those terrors therefore seem plainly to be before the killing
of the rest of the Brethren, and so could not be the Vengeance that was to come
after the killing of them.

Especially if it be considered, that immediately after the sixth Seal, there
is just such a Representation of the killing Chap. 7. 9. Revel. 7. 14.
of all the rest of the Brethren, as had been mentioned in the fifth Seal, and
there made the mark to know the time of the Vengeance there promised, by.

And though the sixth Seal does open with a very dreadful representation of
God's Judgments upon all kind of persons upon Earth, High and Low, yet all
that terrible description of the change of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc. does
among the Prophets signify no more, than some great change of a State, and of
the political Government of it; And the fright that the great Kings and
Captains, and all degrees of persons, are represented to be in thereupon, may
be nothing but the great apprehensions they had of the consequences of that
change of State. But the Judgments themselves, that they were afraid of,
seemed to be very manifestly deferred, from the provision, that is immediately
made against them in the seventh Chap. by the sealing of the 144000.

It is therefore those Judgments which they were sealed against, (and which
were to be executed after that great change of the State, which is represented
in the sixth Seal) that were the Vengeance that was to be given to the Martyrs
in the fifth Seal; And those were the Calamities of the Trumpets.

It may then now be concluded, That

The Calamities of the Trumpets could not begin till after the end of some
Universal persecution of the Christian Church all over the World. For the
Calamities of the Trumpets were the Vengeance promised to the Martyrs in the
fifth Seal, (by Theor. 13.) -- And the Vengeance promised in the fifth Seal was
not to be performed till after that the rest of the Brethren that were to be
killed, as they were, were Martyred, Rev. 6. 11. And those rest of the
Brethren, were the great multitude in the seventh Chap. which no Man could
number, of all Nations and Kingdoms, and People and Tongues, (by Conseq. Theor.
12.) -- Which cannot signify any thing less, than an Universal Persecution of
the Christian Church all over the World. The Calamities therefore of the
Trumpets could not begin till after such an Universal Persecution.

From hence it necessarily follows, That

The Martyrdoms of the fifth Seal must have been all past before the rise of
the Beast. For the Martyrs in the fifth Seal are those who were then slain, and
all the rest that were to be slain all over the World in that kind of
Persecution, Rev. 6. 11. and this was to be before the seven Trumpets, (by
Theor. 14.) Wherefore either none of them could have been Martyred by the
Beast, or they must have been all those that ever were Martyred by the Beast;
And that also before the Trumpets. Whereas the worst of the Martyrdoms under
the Beast, or the killing of the Two Witnesses, was after the sixth Rev. 11. 7.
Trumpet. Wherefore the Martyrdoms of the fifth Seal must have been all past
before the rise of the Beast.

Besides, the Martyrs in the fifth Seal were all to be killed, within a little
season, after the time of that Seal, which the slain Witnesses in the sixth
Trumpet could not possibly be; And therefore could not the Witnesses be the
rest that were to be killed in the fifth Seal; which yet they must be, if any
of the Martyrdoms of the fifth Seal were in the time of the Beast. For the term
of the rest of the Brethren in the fifth Seal includes all that remain to be
Martyred by the same power.

Wherefore all the Martyrs, in the fifth Seal, were to be killed before the
time of the Beast.

And then it is as certain, That

The great multitude, Chap. 7. must have come out of Tribulation before the
rise of the Beast. For that multitude has been already found to be the rest of
the Brethren in the fifth Seal that were to be killed, (Conseq. Theor. 12.)

But this conclusion seems to be much more clearly confirmed in this manner:

The 144000 are contemporary with the first times of the Reign of the Beast.
(Theor. 3.) And the time for which they were chosen out, and sealed against,
was the time of the seven Trumpets. (Theor. 4.) And therefore the time of the
Beast could not be before the beginning of the seven Trumpets. But the great
multitude, Chap. 7. are represented before the opening of the seventh Seal, as
come out of Tribulation; whereas the seven Trumpets do not appear till after
the opening of the seventh Seal. That multitude must therefore be come out of
Tribulation before the time of the Chap. 12. 10, 11, 12. is the same
description of ^ triumph of Martyrs with that of the great multitude, Chap. 7.
10, 11, 12, 14. And Protestants agree, That the former describes the times of
Constantine.
Beast.

And therefore,

All the Martyrs in the fifth Seal either then slain, or that were to be slain,
were martyred before the Year 620. For they were all martyred before the Rise
of the Beast (by Theoreme 15.) -- And the Rise of the Beast was before the Year
620. (Supposition 3.) From hence then it appears, That

All the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, were killed under the Heathen Emperors of
Rome. For the last Martyrs of the fifth Seal, were a multitude of all Nations,
and People, that no man could number (by Conseq. Theor. 12.) -- And they were
all killed before the Year 620. (by Conseq. ^. Theor. 15.) -- And there were no
other persecutions betwixt the Conversion of the Imperial Throne to
Christianity, and the Year 620. that can tolerably answer the characters of so
universal a state of Martyrdom all the World over.

It is also as manifest from thence, That

The Martyrs in the fifth Seal were all the Christian Martyrs, from that time
to the end of the persecutions of Rome Pagan. For they were those, that were
then slain, and all the rest that were to be killed all the World over in the
same manner (by Conseq. Theor. 12. and Revel. 6. 11.) And they were all killed
under Heathen Emperors of Rome (by Theor. 16.) -- They were therefore all that
were to be killed from that time to the end of all persecution, by Rome Pagan.

And then it is necessary, That

The business of the sixth Seal, be some great change of the Pagan Government
of the Empire, before the utter ruin of all Pagan Power in it. For the
multitude in the seventh Chapter were martyred by Rome Pagan, after the opening
of the sixth Seal (by Conseq. Theor. 12. and Theor. 16.)

Now there need not much pains to prove, That

The People or Nation, upon whom the calamities of the seven Trumpets are
executed, must be the same Nation with those who killed the Martyrs in the
fifth Seal. For since the calamities of the Trumpets are the Vengeance promised
to the Martyrs in the fifth Seal (by Theor. 13.) -- The Vengeance must then be
executed upon that Nation, who killed them, or else it could be no revenge for
the shedding their blood.

Wherefore,

The plagues of the Trumpets are executed upon the Roman Empire. For the
plagues of the Trumpets are the promised Vengeance of the fifth Seal (by Theor.
13.) -- And they must fall upon the same People, or Nation, who shed the blood
of the Martyrs in the fifth Seal (by Theor. 18.) -- And those were the Romans
(by Theor. 16.)

Again,

That the Roman Empire in general is the Object of the Plagues of the Trumpets,
at some time or other, appears from the chief Object of the Calamities of the
Trumpets, which is the whole corrupted Christian Church (Theor. 7.) Now in that
part of the time of the Beast, which was after the Year 620. (Suppos. 2.) The
whole Roman Empire was the Dominions of the corrupted Church for above an
hundred Year together. For there was but one Emperor of the East and West.
Wherefore the whole Roman Empire is the Object of the Plagues of the Trumpets.

Therefore must those calamities be executed upon the Roman Empire.

It might be imagined indeed, that because it was the Heathen Emperors, that
shed the blood of the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, that those calamities ought to
fall upon Rome Heathen, to be a Vengeance for the blood of those Martyrs.

But we see, that the Vengeance was not to begin till all the Martyrs were
slain; And they were not all slain, till after the time of Maximinus and
Licinius at the soonest. The persecution under Maximinus has the very same
character in Petavius, that the great multitude is set out by Chap. 7. that is,
an innumerable multitude. Above all the rest, says he, Maximinus expressed the
greatest rage and fury in the East, and killed an innumerable multitude of
Martyrs. Ab Anno Christi 304. ad 337. Rationar. Tempor. Now Maximinus and
Licinius were the last considerable Persecutors of the Christians. So that
there was no Pagan Empire left after them, for the Trumpets to be executed upon.

For the Trumpets were not to begin to sound, till after the power of Rome
Pagan was past (Theor. 17.) and yet were to continue to the Universal Reign of
Christ over all the World, at the end of the Woe of the last Trumpet. There was
therefore nothing left for the judgment of the Trumpets to be executed upon,
but the Roman Empire converted to Christianity. For Julian's Reign afterward,
was too inconsiderable to be the Object of them.

There cannot be any further question about this, when it is considered, that
the Object of the calamities of the Trumpets, is all the twelve Tribes,
excepting the 144000, that is, as has been before shown, (Theor. 7.) All the
corrupt parts of the Universal Church. And therefore must the Christian Empire
be the only Object of those evils.

Indeed, if it be well considered, there could not well have been a clearer
representation of this, than what we find at the opening of the sixth Seal; and
in the seventh Chapter of Revel. For as the appearances of the great change of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, have been found to signify the change of the Roman
State from Paganism to Christianity. (Theor. 17.) So is this plainly enough
signified by the twelve Tribes, in the seventh Chapter, which do properly
signify the Jewish State, and not the Jewish Church. For their Church is
represented in this Prophecy by the Elders, and the Temple, etc. And what then
can this signify, but that now the Roman State was become a Christian State,
as the twelve Tribes must here signify. And then the reason of the distinction
betwixt the 144000, and the great multitude presently after them appears to be,
that the one (or the 144000) were the true Church, in a Christian state of the
Empire; but the great multitude were come out Martyrs out of an heathen state,
as all People, and Tongues, and Nations are here opposed to the peculiar people
of the twelve Tribes.

Wherefore by the distinction of the 144000 from the rest of the Tribes, who
are made the Objects of the Trumpets, it is manifest, that there must be
supposed a great degeneracy of the Roman Church, to which those calamities are
signified to belong, before the time of the Plagues of the Trumpets.

It can be no wonder, that the Christian Government degenerated, should be
counted so great an Adversary to the Church of God: And the Object of his
highest fury for it. For the Jews who were the only people of God, were known
to be the fiercest enemies to the Christian Church, which was but their own
Religion improved.

But whenever those Judgments may be thought to begin, yet since it is made
unquestionable, that they are to fall upon the Roman Empire in a continued
series, from within a little season after the end of the Pagan persecutions, to
the end of the Woe of the last Trumpet, or to the end of the Reign of the
Beast, It is not to be doubted, but That

The Hostilities of the Saracens and Turks against the and Western Roman
Empire, were the matter of two of the last three Trumpets. For the calamities
of the Trumpets, begin within a little season after the end of the Heathen
persecutions (by Conseq. Theor. 16. and 13.) And they do not end before the end
of the Reign of the Beast (by Theor. 1.) -- And they do all fall upon the
remains of the old Roman Empire (by Conseq. Theor 18.) The Hostilities
therefore of the Saracens, and Turks, against the Eastern and Western Empire,
must be some of the matter of these Trumpets.

And since the three last Trumpets are represented to have far the most
dreadful Woes in them of any other: The Saracens and Turkish Empire must be two
of those three Woes. For the whole time of the sixth and seventh Seal with the
Trumpets cannot be above 1550 years, counting from the last end of the Pagan
persecutions in Licinius, after the year 300, to the utmost end of the Reign of
the Beast, that can be supposed, (Suppos. 3.) And there are still 170 years of
that time now remaining upon that supposition; so that the whole time of the
calamities of the Trumpets to this present cannot be 1400 years. And the
Hostilities of the Saracens and Turks have continued near 1100 years of that
time, ever since the year 631 at the latest.

Wherefore since there can be but an hundred and seventy years (according to
the latest suppositions, of the rise of the Beast) yet remaining of the whole
time of the Trumpets; The Saracens, and Turkish vexations must necessarily be
two of the last three Trumpets, that are represented to be the three great Woes
upon the Roman Empire. For there is none to come after them, that can be
greater than the Turkish Empire, either for length of time, or for the
destroying effects of it; For that has destroyed more of the Roman Empire, than
now remains to be ruined under the Beast.

Again,

The Saracens must have been one of these Woes, because it fell upon the Roman
Empire, when it was all under the jurisdiction of the Beast. Both the Eastern
and Western parts were but one Roman Church in the year 620, when the Beast
must at latest have been in being, (Suppos. 2.) and under the Plagues of the
Trumpets, (Theor. 5.) And then it is certain that the Saracens were not the
second Woe, because that Woe cannot be yet past; for the third Woe comes
quickly after it, which destroies the power of the Beast, (Theor. 1.) So the
third Woe must then have been come ever since the ruin of the Saracens, and
have been continually destroying the power of the Beast ever since that time,
that is, for these 300 years, which is absurd to imagine. For the Beast has
been in the greatest flush of his power, for the most part of the time.

The Saracen troubles must then have been the first Woe.

And then must the Turks have been the second Woe, Because the second Woe must
be some that were the Masters of Euphrates. And there has been none that have
been considerable Revel. ^ 14.
for that, since the Saracen Empire, but the Turks only.

From hence it appears, That

The Hostilities of the Saracens, and Turks must necessarily be the Woes of the
fifth and sixth Trumpet. And therefore,

The Turkish vexations of the Roman Empire are the second Woe. From hence also
does it appear unquestionable, That the rest who are mentioned, Chap. 9. 20. as
sufferers by the second Woe, and yet were not made to repent of their Idols of
Gold and Silver by it, must necessarily be the Western Christians of the Church
of Rome. For as there is no other part of the ancient Roman Empire but this
alone, which is not already destroyed by the Turks; so also cannot there be
found any other people besides, that are any thing near the bounds of that
Empire, that have had any Idols of Gold, or Silver, or any thing like them
since the first rise of the Turkish Empire. The only worships of God besides
that of the Roman Church, within the extent of the Roman Empire, are the
Mohammedan, the Jewish, that of the Greek Church, and the Reformation, all which
are known to detest Image Worship.

By the knowledge we now have of the time of the fifth Trumpet, it is not hard
to discover the bounds of the other four before it. For it is now
unquestionable, That

The Plagues of the first four Trumpets must be executed upon the Roman Empire,
betwixt the end of the Pagan power of Rome, and the year 631. For the Saracens
began their Invasions in the year 631. And they are the business of the fifth
Trumpet (Conseq. 1. Theor. 19.) And the calamities of the first Trumpet do not
begin till after the end of all Pagan persecution. (Theor. 13. and Conseq.
Theor. 16.)

Wherefore all the first four Trumpets must have been past betwixt the end of
the Pagan Empire, and the year 631.

CHAP. III.
The four first Trumpets applied. The signification of a third part in the
Trumpets scrupulously enquired after, and determined. Objections answered.

TO give a fuller Idea of the Judgments of God upon the Roman Empire, at its
first degeneracy from the true Spirit of the Christian Religion, I will now
make a more particular search after the business of the first four Trumpets,
and chiefly because it will give us a better discovery of the several steps,
and gradual advances of that which is the chief malignity of the Beast before
his full grown appearance.

It has been already shown that the first four Trumpets must begin after the
end of the time of the Pagan Emperors (by Conseq. 3. Theor. 19.) And therefore
could they not be a revenge upon Rome Pagan.

It is as impossible that they should begin while the Empire was truly
Christian; for they are a revenge upon the Roman Empire for the Blood of
Christian Martyrs, which therefore could not possibly fall upon any true Church
of Christ; for that would be to revenge the cruelties of the Enemies of the
Church upon the Church it self; and besides, it is plainly expressed, that all
the true Members of the Church are secured from all the evils of the Trumpets,
under the figure of the 144000, that were sealed to escape those calamities.

Wherefore since it must be after the time of both Rome Pagan, and Rome truly
Christian, that these Trumpets must begin to be executed, it must necessarily
be after some degeneracy of the Roman Empire, or after the beginning of some
corrupt state of the Roman Church.

For all the first Plagues of the Trumpets, as well as of the Vials, are
nothing but references to the same kind of Plagues upon Egypt; and so do
plainly intimate, that the Church must first be in a state of great Bondage and
Oppression under the Roman Empire; upon the account of which, as it was the
Continuation of the same Spirit of Cruelty, for which these Judgments had been
before promised, these Calamities of the Trumpets are signified to be inflicted.

This gives a very satisfactory Account of the signification of the Trumpets in
this place. For as they are described to be the Denunciations of very great
Evils, so must they be the Trumpets of God, to declare War against the Enemies
of his Church, according to the Use of them among the Jews. And if we consider
their Number, and the ruining and destroying Nature of their Plagues, but
especially the Effect and Matter of the Seventh, which is a Shout in Heaven at
Rev. 11. 15.
the Fall of all the Kingdoms of this World into the Hands of God, and Christ,
and his Church, It cannot but be concluded with the judicious Jesuit Ribera,
That the seven Trumpets are a reference to the going about the Walls of Jericho
seven days with the sound of Trumpets, and to the falling down of the Wall of
it, at the shout of the People, on the last of those days. And thus do the
seven Trumpets appear to be so many several Calamities upon the Roman Empire,
in order to its last Ruin.

The Time for the beginning of this, is confined to a little season after the
killing of those in the Fifth Seal; and that signifies the same with a little
while after the time of the Heathen Emperors. Conseq. Theor. 16.

We are therefore to find out Four great Calamities that besel the Roman
Empire, betwixt the end of the Rule of Paganism in it, and the Year 631, which
is the acknowledged Date of the beginning of the Fifth Trumpet, or of the
Saracen Empire. And they must be such as may answer the Characters of the first
Four Trumpets, in the same Order in which they lie in the Text.

But because it may seem difficult to determine the Time of the Degeneracy of
the Christian Religion in the Empire, after the Ruin of Paganism, I will choose
to seek for the Application of these Four Trumpets, from what is already known
of the Fifth, which has been found to begin about the Year 631, (Conseq. Theor.
19.) And from thence returning back, according to the Order of the Events to
which they are applied, it will be more easy to determine the particular Age
in which this Degeneracy of the Roman Church, or Empire, did begin.

The Fourth Trumpet then must be some very great Calamity upon some of the
Ruling part of the Roman Empire. The darkning of the Sun, Moon and Stars, must
signify an Eclipse of the Majesty of the Empire, those parts of the Heavens
being generally used in their Mystical Signification for Supreme Government.
And that neither the Matter of this, nor of the rest of the Trumpets can
signify those real things by which they are described, appears from Theor. 10.
And as this darkness is here determined to a third part of these Schemes; so
must it also be restrained to part only of the Rule of the Roman Empire.

For since it is found to signify mystically a Diminution of the Majesty of
the Empire, (Theor. 10.) the third part must either signify the third part of
the Supreme Government of the World, of which the Roman Empire is supposed to
be the third part here concerned, or it must be a third part only of the Roman
Empire. But the World cannot be said to lose a third part of the Majesty of it
by the Diminution of the Ruling Power of the Roman Empire. For there were other
Supreme Governments that started up in the room of it.

The only Events that can be imagined to be any ways suitable to this
Representation, before the Saracon Inroads about the Year 631, are first that
famous Eruption of the Persians under Chosroes, somewhat before the Year 610,
which overspread the greatest part of the Roman Territories in Asia, as far as
Chalcedon in Bithynia; and that like a Torrent, or a general Conflagration, as
Petavius represents it. They seized Jerusalem, and got to be Masters of Egypt,
Alexandria and Libya; And the Emperor was so humbled by it, that he begged a
Peace of them, but could not obtain it, unless he would deny Christ, and
worship the Sun; And so this continued above Twenty Years. But yet in all this,
there was no part of the Majesty of the Empire, which must here be signified at
least by the Sun, that was darkened.

The Lombard Invasion in Italy, about the Year 568, may next come in with a
pretense to this Fourth Trumpet; For it overran all Italy, but Rome and
Ravenna. But the excepting of these two Places, which were the Seats of the
Majesty of the Roman Empire, seems sufficient to excuse them from Eclipsing the
third part of the Sun.

Justinian's depriving of Rome of all the ancient Glory of its Senate and
Consuls, and its being burnt by Totila about that time, may make a fair show of
smiting the Sun. But that seems to be nothing but an Eclipse upon the City of
Rome, which had lest almost all its Superiority under the Command of the Goths
in Italy, and had continued for a long time in that condition before this Act
of Justinian's; and then Justinian's Conquests could not be the Plague of this
Fourth Trumpet; because they were no Judgment upon the Roman Empire, but an
increase of the Glory of it. For the Majesty of the Roman Empire was accounted
the same thing, wherever the Emperor himself did reside.

It is therefore most probable, that the Submission of Rome and Italy, and of
that part of the Empire to the barbarous Kings of the Heruli and Goths, is the
Fourth Trumpet; for it succeeded into the place of the Western Empire, which
was very properly the smiting of the third part of the Sun, Moon and Stars, as
they signify the most dignified part of the Empire.

The Third Trumpet must then be the Miseries of the Romans upon the Fall of the
Western Empire, about the time of Valentinian the Third; whose Death the
Historians do generally look upon as the Date of the Fall of the Western
Empire, though it did continue struggling for Life among the scuffles of several
Competitors above twenty years after. How this might be represented by a great
Star falling from Heaven, as a Lamp, and by its fall filling all that part of
the World with great bitterness of Spirit, will be better understood afterward.

And then the Second Trumpet before it, must be some great Invasion of the
Empire by a vest Inundation of People upon it, to the utter ruin of some third
part of it. For the Sea signifies Multitudes and Nations, etc. And the third
part of the Sea becoming Blood, must signify the Wars and bloody Fights of
those Nations and Multitudes. The Effect of which is very plainly determined by
the mention of the great Mountain burning with Fire; which is the same
Expression that the Prophet Jeremy makes use of to signify the Destruction of
Babylon; and then here it can signify nothing Jerem. 31. 25.
but the laying waste the Territories of some third part of the Empire by the
Barbarous Nations, and the sharing it among themselves; which is very fitly
represented by what is expressed of casting the Mountain into the Sea; for that
is of the same import with being swallowed up by the Sea, that is, by those
Multitudes and Nations.

The first Trumpet then must be some great destroying Enemy, since we are sure
by the Applications of the rest, that the Hail mentioned in it, cannot be
literally understood. And then, when besides its being mingled with Fire, in
which it resembles the Hail of Egypt, it has the addition of Blood also with
it, it must denote some bloody storms of Enemies upon the Roman Empire. And
this does very exactly represent the Invasions of the Empire by the Northern
Nations, which is the Region of Hail, before their great Successes to the utter
ruin of any part of the Empire.

But the Explication of these Trumpets, as well as those that follow them, will
be much more cleared and confirmed by settling the Notion of a Third part, which
is mentioned as the Object of every one of them.

The Third part cannot be here, as some would have it, of an Indefinite
signification, or only signify a great part in general, or the greatest part
of the Subject that it is joined with; for a Third part has always a definite
and determinate signification, wherever it has a known sense in Scripture.
(See Concordance in Third Part.)

From hence therefore appears the vanity of all those Interpretations of these
Trumpets, which make account that they are general Calamities upon the Subject
where they fall; as those which make the Visible Church, or the World,
indefinitely to be the Object of them all.

But yet in the next place, the Third part cannot signify the whole Roman
Empire, as a Third part of the known World in St. John's time; For in the Sixth
Trumpet there is a plain Revel. 9.
distinction betwixt the third part that were slain, and the rest who were not
killed, and yet did not repent. By the third part then in that place cannot
possibly be meant the Roman Empire in general; for then the sense of the Text
must be, that it killed those of the Roman Empire, which is supposed to be the
third part of the World; and that the rest of the World beside, whom it killed
not, did not repent; whereas all the Judgments of these Trumpets have been
found to have the Roman Empire only for their Object, (Conseq. Theor. 18.)

Again, The Saracens in the Fifth Trumpet, (Conseq. 1. Theor. 19.) are
distinguished from the Plagues of all the other Trumpets, by falling upon all
in general, who had not the Seal of God in their Foreheads: whereas all the
rest are confined to a third part. So that if the third part in the rest were
the whole Roman Empire, the Saracens must have been the Conquerors of all the
World; whereas all their considerable Conquests were upon the parts of the
Roman Empire.

And besides, all their Vexations, as they were one of the Calamities of the
Trumpets, had only the Roman Empire for their Object, (Conseq. Theor. 18)

The darkning also of the third part of the Sun in the Fourth Trumpet, cannot
possibly signify an Eclipse of the third part of the Ruling Power of the whole
World, at the pulling down of the Imperial Throne of Rome in the West; for the
Kingdoms that started up in the room of the Imperial Throne, were as
considerable parts of the Supreme Power of the World, as those of the other two
parts of it out of the Bounds of the Roman Empire. Nor could the Imperial
Throne in the West alone be called the third part of the Ruling Power of the
World, because both the Imperial Thrones in the East and West are supposed in
this Opinion to be but the third part of the Supreme Power of the World.

If by the third part cannot be meant the Roman Empire in general, then must it
signify a third part of that Empire only. For the Roman Empire is certainly
the Object of these Trumpets.

And by this it appears, that the several Subjects, upon which these Plagues do
fall, do represent some general Attribute of a third part of the Roman Empire.
For if they signified any thing less, they could not represent the Evils of a
whole third part of the Empire; and therefore by the Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun,
etc. must be meant something that was common to all the places of some third
part of the Roman Empire.

It will then forthwith be apprehended, That since the World was commonly known
in St. John's time to be divided into three parts, Europe, Asia and Africa; and
that the Roman Empire had the Rule in the several and chiefest parts of them
all, that by a third part must be meant one of these Divisions of the Empire.

But then the Saracens in the Fifth Trumpet, to whom Africa was irrecoverably
lost, must have slain the third part of Men, as well as the Turks in the Sixth
Trumpet; whereas those in the Fifth Trumpet are said only to Torment, and not
to Kill Men. The slaying the third part of Men, which is found to be but a
third part of the Roman Empire, cannot be understood of any literal slaughter
of all the Romans in those Parts. Whoever heard of such a Butchery in any part
of the World? And therefore it must signify mystically, or the GRotius de jure
B. and P. Lib. 2. c. 9. Artic. 3, 4, 5, 6. Where he shows, that as a people
continue one and the same living Body, as long as they continue in an united
Society: so may they be said also to die, when their Government, and Society is
taken from them; as when a people are reduced under the power of another Nation.
utter Extinction of the Name or Power of the Romans there, according as that
Expression is used in a mystical sense by the Prophets. And in this sense would
the Saracens have slain the third part of Men, if Africa had been intended here
for one of the third parts in these Trumpets. The Loss of that we see is
accounted but one of the Vexations with which the Saracens tormented those that
had not the Seal of God in their Foreheads, in distinction to the killing of a
third part, as it is expressly said of them.

One would be extremely tempted after this to judge, that by the third part
cannot be meant any Division of the Empire into three parts that were all in
being together. For it is known that there were but Two constant distinct parts
of the Roman Empire, and these were the Eastern and Western Empire.

By the third part in these Trumpets might then be apprehended to be meant one
of the Three successive Thrones of the Roman Empire, that is, the ancient
Western Empire, the Eastern or Constantinopolitan, and the new restored Empire
in the West. For this would very well agree with the order of the Trumpets,
where it seems manifest that the four first Trumpets ruin the ancient Western
Empire, the two next the Constantinopolitan, and the last Trumpet makes an end
of the Beast, and of his new restored Empire in the West.

But it is too plain, that the third part here is one part of three that were
then in being, to allow of this Conjecture, though otherwise very tempting. The
Sea in the Second Trumpet must have two parts more in it at that present time
when the third part of it became Blood. And by the third part of the Creatures
that were in it is manifestly signified, that there were twice as many in it
that did not die by that Plague. And it could not be said that a third part of
the Sun or of the Moon was darkened, unless there were two other parts of them
at the same time which were not eclipsed by the sound of the Fourth Trumpet.

It must therefore now be concluded, that this Expression does refer to some
real Division of the Roman Empire into three parts, before the time of the
Trumpets.

The History of those Times gives us this light about it. At the Death of
Constantine the Great, the Empire was shared among his three Sons. Constantine
the Eldest had all the Western part of it beyond the Alps, Britain, the Gauls,
and Spain. Constance the Youngest had all the rest of Europe, with almost all
Africa, and the Isles between them. And Constantius all the Asiatick part of
it, with the Kingdom of Egypt. And though the whole Empire did not long after
fall into the Hands of Constantius, yet besides the Roman and
Constantinopolitan Seats, which were soon after settled Imperial Thrones, there
was continually some or other starting up in the farthest Western Division,
till the famous Inundation of the Barbarous Nations all over the Empire. So
that here seems to be ground enough to rely upon this Tripartite Division of
the Empire at the Death of Constantine for the Applications of the several
mentions of the third part of the Empire. For it may be thought to be no
greater Objection against these three parts, that they were often under but two
Emperors, than it would be against the two parts of it, that they were often
united under one single Emperor.

But that, which does the most unanswerably confirm this threefold division of
the Empire, is the Office of the Praefecti Praetorio, or the Prefects of the
Palace, or of the Guard, who were the next Administrators of the Government
under the Emperors, like the Majors of the Palace in France after the time of
Clotaire, who ruled as absolutely as the Kings themselves did before, and like
the Vice Roys of Kingdoms at this present. They were called Cassiodor. Variar.
Lib. 6. cap. 3. Formula P. P. He is called the Father of the Empire -- some
privileges of this Dignity are such as make them sharers with our selves -- He
wants very little of making Laws, since his Authority can make an end of
Affairs without any power of appeal from his sentence -- And he punishes the
offenses of the Judges of the Provinces -- no Dignity is equal to it -- he
judges every where as Vicegerent of the supreme power. We willingly confirm
whatsoever he appoints, whose authority we our selves do so much reverence,
that we without scruple do those things, which we know him to have Decreed, etc.

Joh. Fersius Silesius de P. Praet. observes that they acted like the Roman
Dictators.


the Fathers of the Empire, which was a title allowed to none but the Emperors
and themselves; and they were the last appeal in their several jurisdictions,
and displaced all other Governors at their pleasure.

These Prefects of the Guard, before the time of Valerian, were but two, and
they also without any particular Jurisdiction assigned them. Ragonius was
Praefectus Praetorio Gall. and of Illyricum in the time of Valerian, and so was
Q. Vicarius. Spartian in Ballista.
Valerian divided the Empire into so many Jurisdictions under them, but this
was only upon some urgent necessity of the times; They had not yet any constant
or settled Jurisdictions.

Constantine So says Zosimus Lib. 2.
was the first, who divided the Empire amongst his Praefecti Praetorio, and
made them the ordinary standing Authority of the Division, over which they
presided. But to break their power, he increased them to four; one over Italy,
and Africa; another over all the West, beyond the Alps, which contained in it
Britain, Gaul, and Spain; a third over Illyricum; and a fourth over the East.
And when he came afterward to divide the Empire amongst his three Sons, His
youngest Son Constance had two of these Prefectures to his share, viz. The
Italian, and that of Illyricum. Constantine his eldest, had the Prefecture of
Gaul; and Constantius his second Son had the Prefecture of the East for his
Empire.

By this means was the memory of the threefold division of the Empire kept up,
after that the Empire was returned again into the sole power of the Surviving
Brother, Constantius. These Prefectures continued still distinct, and though
they were four, yet it was as well known that those of Illyricum and Italy were
but the two parts of one Imperial share, and were sometimes confounded
together, when the whole Empire was united under one Emperor.

This appears from Ammianus Marcellinus to have been done Lib. 26.
in the days of Julian the Apostate, in whose time Mamertinus was the Prefect
of Italy, Africa and Illyricum, which shows that till after the time of Julian
the Apostate at least, the only constant division of the Empire among these
Prefects was that of the three divisions of the Empire by Constantine among his
Sons at his death. For till that time the two Prefectures of Italy, and
Illyricum were accounted but such a part of the Roman Empire, as they had been
before, when they made the Body of Constans's share in the division, that is, a
third part of the whole Empire. And therefore were they sometime united
together under one Prefect, as has been observed; and L. 21. C. Theodos. de
Naviculis.
after the division of the Empire, the Italian Prefect had all the Western
share of Illyricum.

Now the time, at which the Trumpets began, cannot be much after the Reign of
Julian, who reduced the four Prefects to three, according to the former
division of the Empire among the Sons of Constantine. For the first Trumpets
are See Page 31. 32, 33.
found to begin before the Inundation of the Barbarous Nations upon the Roman
Empire soon after the Reign of Theodosius; and then there must be a convenient
space allowed for the end of the first Trumpet to have its course in before
that time; which therefore must be allowed to begin within a very short while
after the Reign of Julian.

It cannot therefore be any Objection against this threefold division of the
Imperial Seats, that the Empire was presently after the Reign of Julian divided
into the East and West, in the Reign of Valentinian: and that each division had
two of these Prefects in it. For the third part in the Trumpets is found to
refer to a threefold division of the Empire, which must at the fulfilling of
the Prophecy be well known; and the division of it by Valentinian into two
parts, and the ranging of the Prefect of the Eastern Illyricum Pancirol. Notit.
Imperii Orientalis cap. 23.
under the Eastern division, as a distinct Prefect from the other three, would
not hinder the World in those days, from concluding that by the name of a third
part of the Empire must certainly be understood one of the former three
Imperial shares, which were kept distinct by the Praefecti Praetorio, who
appeared as so many Lords Deputies of the Empire. For there was no known
division of the Empire into three distinct parts at that time, but this, and
this was very openly and remarkably known for such.

Wherefore the third part mentioned in the Trumpets, which has been found to be
a real third part of some division of the Roman Empire, must be one of the
three Imperial jurisdictions set up by Constantine, and preserved in memory by
the standing Offices of the Praefecti Praetorio.

It is no small confirmation of this conclusion, that Constantine was the first
Author, both of parting out the Roman Empire into particular jurisdictions
under the Praefecti Praetorio, and into distinct Imperial Seats amongst his
three Sons; And besides, Constantine is allowed by almost all Interpreters to
be very particularly described in the Prophecy; so that such remarkable actions
of his, as these were, may very well be determined to have been pointed at by
such schemes in the Prophecy, as do very naturally signify them, and which
cannot be found to agree to any thing else.

That these divisions of the Empire were but the parts of one and the same
Empire, was shown by the public ensigns of Authority, which were constantly
carried before the Praefecti Praetorio in their several jurisdictions; though
each of these Prefects were under the immediate authority of but one Emperor,
yet before every one of them was carried the Heads of all the Emperors, who
were at that time in power, to show, that they were all together the United
Majesty of that Empire, though they had distinct jurisdictions. This may be
seen in that eminent fragment of the State of the Roman Empire, the Notitia
Imperii published and explained by Pancirollus, where it appears that in the
time of the division Cap. 24. Notit. Imp. Oriental.
of the Empire into the Eastern and Western Seats all the great Magistrates of
both the divisions had the Heads of both the Emperors carried before them.

But it is still more evident from the matter of the Trumpets, that the third
part in them must have a reference to three distinct Imperial Seats, or shares
in one and the same Empire. For what else can possibly be signified by a third
part of the Sun, Moon and Stars (in the fourth Trumpet) since the Sun in
general is known in mystical use, to denote the supreme power of but one Nation
or Empire? There is then in that expression of the third part of the Sun, a
plain signification of two other Imperial Seats besides that, which is intended
by the first third part.

There is also besides, a particular mention of two other supreme Soveraignties
among the Trumpets, really distinct from that which is here called a third part
of the Sun. For in the second Trumpet there is a description of a Mountain
burning, and cast into the Sea, which is the very expression, that is used by
the Prophet Jeremy, to set out the Fall of the Babylonian Throne. And in the
sixth Trumpet there Jerem. 51. 25.
is an account of a slaughter of the third part of men; which being known to
signify the Turkish advances upon the Empire, in distinction to those of the
Saracens, who are said not to kill men, but to torment them, must necessarily
denote See Grotius in Note the first, concerning the death of a People.
the utter destruction of the Eastern Roman Empire; here are therefore the two
other third shares of the Majesty of the Empire particularly described.

It is as evident that these three shares of the Empire, must be three Imperial
parts, that are really distinct from one another, the Mountain cast into the
Sea in the second Trumpet must necessarily be the utter ruin of one Imperial
part, according to the use of it in Prophecy. And therefore must it be really
distinct from any other part that is mentioned after it; and then the third
part of men in the sixth Trumpet, is as certainly the Eastern division: Because
the Woe of that Trumpet has been determined to be the Turkish Empire; and the
character of the Eclipse upon the third part of the Sun, is as unquestionably
to be understood of the Roman Throne, because no other part of the Empire
before the Turkish Conquests, did lose its supreme Government: after that the
Mountain was cast into the Sea, as it is here described.

There has been the more care taken in the former Discourse to clear the notion
of the third part, which is so often repeated among the Trumpets, because there
is scarce any thing in the Prophecy, that has more perplexed me, or that is
more slightly passed over by others, or that has more influence upon the
interpretation of this part of the Prophecy.

And it may now be concluded from the resolution of this difficulty, that the
threefold division of the Empire, to which every mention of the third part in
any of the Trumpets does refer, is the division of it among the three Sons of
Constantine, whose particular Jurisdictions were preserved in memory by the
Office of the Praefecti Praetorio, who continued as the Viceroys or Deputy
Emperors in the Government, and so did represent that threefold division of the
Empire after the time of the three Brothers, and who were soon after the Death
of the last of them reduced to the same number with their Lords, whom they
represented.

Against this it will be objected, That the Dragon in the 12. Chapter, who has
there the proper and peculiar Badges of the Roman Empire, is said to have drawn
the third part of the Stars of Heaven with his Tail, and to have cast them to
the Earth; which according to the mystical signification of Stars and Heaven in
that place, must represent the Roman Conquests, of which the Body of the Roman
Empire consisted; And thus is the Roman Empire signified to be but a third part
of the World, which is here represented by Heaven; Which seems to show, that by
the third part in the Trumpets is meant no more than the Roman Empire in
general.

This might have a much more plausible show, if it had been said in general,
that the Dragon had cast down the third part of the Stars to the Earth; But
when it is attributed to no other part of the Dragon, but his Tail, that seems
at first sight to intimate, that the third part of the Stars, are not the
concern of the whole Roman Empire. Mr. Mede whose opinion has the most interest
in this Objection, does give this account, why the power of the Locusts in the
fifth Trumpet is said to lie in their Tails. The Head of the Saracen Empire,
who are agreed upon to be meant by the Mede p. 1113. in cap. 9. Apoc.
Locusts, was in Asia: Their Tail therefore, says he, must be in the parts of
their Empire, which were at greatest distance from thence, and by their Tails
must be meant the Western parts of their Empire in Europe. Upon the same
account may it be answered, that the Dragons Tail must be the Roman Conquests
in Asia, since the Head of the Roman Empire was Italy. And then by his casting
down the third part of the Stars to the Earth with his Tail, can be signified
no more, than the Asiatick part of the Roman Empire.

There is indeed a very manifest reason, why this should be made one of the
characters to know the time of the Dragon by. For, as it is elsewhere proved,
the Roman Empire cannot be the Red Dragon persecuting the Woman before the
Roman Conquests of Syria at the soonest. For as the Woman Revel. 12.
with the Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head, is unquestionably the Church of
God under the proper Badge of the Jewish Church, that is, the twelve Tribes, or
which is of the same import, the twelve Apostles represented by the twelve
Stars: so could it not possibly be said to have any trouble from the Romans
before their Conquest either of Judaea or of Syria, which were both of them
just about the same time; And then the casting down of the third part of the
Stars to the Earth by the Dragons Tail does very properly signify, that the
time of the Dragon began just about the end of the Conquest of Asia and Aegpyt,
which have been found to have afterward made the third part in the division of
Constantine's Empire.

But there is another state of things, that this power of the Dragons Tail
seems more especially to refer to. I look upon this whole 12. Chapter to be
intended only to set out the several states of the Pagan and Christian Religion
till the ruin of Paganism in the Empire, and not to signify any civil changes
of the Government.

We do accordingly find both the Woman and the Dragon represented as seen in
Heaven; so that Heaven cannot possibly in this place signify civil authority
or worldly power. For then the Woman would be in as much Authority as the
Dragon at the time she was persecuted by the Roman Empire, which is a
contradiction. Nor can Heaven on the other side signify any place of true
spiritual Dignity. For it is the place of the Dragon as well as the Woman. And
yet it is represented as a place of some advantage or credit to both; For both
the casting down of the Stars to the Earth by the Dragon, and of the Dragon
himself with his Angels by Michael and his assistants are represented as a
great diminution of their state. And what then can this mystical state of
Heaven be, which is a common advantage to both a true persecuted and a false
persecuting Religion at the same time, but the visible or outward profession of
Religion in general, which is common both to the persecuted, and the
persecuting Party?

According to this, to be cast out of Heaven down to the Earth, must signify
the loss of the open, outward profession of either of those Religions: and
therefore is the Dragon Revel. 12. 5, 7.
represented still in Heaven after that the man-child was got into the Throne
of God, to show that the open profession of the Pagan Religion was not at an
end upon the enthroning of Christianity in the Empire, nor till after the great
strugle, that it had with the Defenders of the Pagan Religion, which is
represented by the fight of Michael with the Dragon and his Angels; And then
the casting the Dragon out of Heaven being the end of the public profession of
Paganism, his casting down of the third part of the Stars to the Earth with his
Tail must signify the ruin of all the Religions of the Greek Empire in Asia,
as the drawing them after him by the same means may denote the Grotius c. 13.
Apoc. Laws were made at Rome against strange Gods. Cicero 3. de Leg. And
amongst foreign Nations there were every where Temples and Al^a^s raised in
honor of Rome, and its Emperors -- Nor did ever the Idolatry of any other
Nation extend so far in the worship of the City and its Emperors, as that of
Rome.

Ribera in, cap. 14. Apoc. Numer. 41. of Rome. And those Gods which it did it
self worship, it set up to be worshipped by all Nations besides.

Idem in cap. 17. Numer. 5. The Romans -- did convey (the worship of) their
Idols, and their corrupt manners to all Nations, where they ruled, and to those
who came to inhabit their City. And because all Nations did stand in need of
the favor, and assistance of the Romans, under whose Dominion they, and all
else were, they did therefore willingly comply with them in it. Besides, the
Kings, and Princes of the Earth, who did above all study to please the Romans,
that they might obtain Kingdoms of them, or by their help keep them, did
easily, and readily worship their Idols, and command them to be worshipped in
their Kingdoms.


Confusion of those Religions in the Roman Worship.

There were indeed for a while some remainders of the Religions of the
conquered Grecians, as well as of Paganism, in the Roman Empire, after the time
of that mortification of each of them, which is here supposed to be their being
cast out of Heaven. But then they were both in as different an appearance in
respect of the open profession of them all over the two Empires, as Heaven is
from Earth, according to the Scheme of them in the Prophecy.

CHAP. IV.
The particular Application of the Matter of the first four Trumpets, according
to the Notion of the third part mentioned in them. The reason of the difference
betwixt the four first and the three last Trumpets. What Provocations were the
cause of the Judgments of the Trumpets. How they were the Vengeance promised to
the Martyrs under Rome Heathen.

IF we come to apply the Explication, that has been given of the third part, to
the several mentions of it among the Trumpets it is certain in the first place,
that the same third part of the Empire must be the Subject of more than one of
the Trumpets. For there are five distinct mentions of the third part in several
Trumpets, and there cannot be above three of these third parts that can be
really distinct from one another.

With this Intimation we may proceed to observe, that Rev. 8. ^.
the Hail in the First Trumpet having been found to be the first bloody storms
of the Northern Nations against the Chap. 3.
Roman Empire next before their prodigious overthrow of it, represented by the
Sea in the Second Trumpet, the Hail with the Effect of it upon the Third part
of the Trees and Grass, may very well be applied to SEE Zosimus lib. 5.
the Invasions of the Goths, in the time of Valens, Theodosius, Arcadius, and
From 37^. ^^ 412.
part of the Reign of Honorius. And the continuance of this storm may be
determined to be till the departure of the Goths out of Italy, after the
Sacking of Rome by Alaricus and Athaulphus, which was in the Year 411, which
was just about the time that those swarms of diverse Nations began with Triumph
and Success to gain upon the Transalpine part of the Western Empire, according
to the Character of the Sea of Blood in the Second Trumpet.

It may then now be observed, that the Calamities of the First Trumpet do fall
wholly upon the Italian Division, which was a third share of the Empire, and
which was formerly all under Constans. This, besides Zosimus gives an account
of this in his 20th Book.
Africa, reached to the Hellespont, within which compass happened all the
Commotions and Invasions of the Goths under Athanaricus, Alaricus, Gainas,
Rhodagaisus and Athaulphus; Which being a continued Vexation of the Empire by
one and the same People, upon one and the same third part of the Empire
(according to the first Division of it, though at the time of these Events
under two several Princes) may very well deserve the name of one and the same
kind of storm, as the Hail is represented to be in the First Trumpet. And there
is a manifest reason to warrant the dating the beginning of the First Trumpet
as high as the Reign of Socrates l. 4. Cap. 13. gives an account of Eighty of
the Orthodox Party at one time, that were ordered to be burnt in a Ship. And in
the 14. Chap. continues the same subject about those which were besides
executed by the command of Valens. And in his 19. Chap. gives a very sad
relation of the persecution of the Religious Men in Egypt upon the same
account, and says, That Valens had ordained persecution by Law.
Valens, upon the account of the great severities and sierceness of Valens
against the Monks and Bishops of the Church, which was the first Instance of
any considerable Persecution against Dissenters.

Some possibly will be pleased to find, that both at the beginning and end of
these Gothic Troubles, there was a Storm of such Hail as was of a prodigious
and incredible size. The first is said to have been as big as great Stones, by
which (according to S. Jerome's Relation) there were several Men struck Jerome.
in Chronic.
dead. The other are said to be of Eight Pound weight. This has the credit of
almost all the Historians of those times to confirm it. And Johnson might
therefore well put them both into the Account of his Admiranda Meteororum. Of
the first kind ( Socrat. l. 4. c. 10.
) Socrates gives this Account, That it was commonly judged that it was a
Judgment of God for the Emperors Severities against the Churchmen.

This indeed might be a concurrent circumstance to allarm the World in after
Times to fix the beginning of the Trumpets to those days, when there was so
very remarkable an Event according to the Letter of the Prophecy. But it is
unquestionable that it could be no more than a mystical Scheme of some other
far more considerable Judgment that was signified by it, as all the Expressions
concerning the matter of the Trumpets has been already found to be, (Theor. 10.)

It will not be questioned but that the next third part, which v. 8.
is the third part of the Sea turned into Blood, with a burning Mountain cast
into it, must be that great Inundation of the Barbarous Nations all over the
Transalpine part of the Western Empire, after the departure of the Goths out of
From about 412, to 446.
Italy. The great and known Effects of which was the loss of all the Prefecture
of Gaul (or Constantine's third share of the Empire) to the several Nations
that invaded it; as Britain to the Saxons; Gaul to the Goths, Franks and
Burgundians; and Spain to the Suevi, Alans and Vandals.

This is very properly expressed by the casting a burning Mountain into the
Sea; which is a very peculiar Expression, and is known to be used by the
Prophet Jeremy to signify the ruin of Babylon, Jerem. 51. 25.

Now this is here restrained to that third part only of the Sea which became
Blood. And besides we find afterward in the Fourth Trumpet a mention of
another third part of the Majesty of the Empire. Which makes it evident, that
by the Mountain cast into the Sea, cannot be here meant the loss of more than
one third part of the Roman Empire, which has the name of Babylon all over this
Prophecy.

And then, since the casting of the Mountain into the Sea all burning with
Fire, does very manifestly signify the utter and final loss of it from the
Romans, it seems thereby to be determined which of the three parts of the
Empire it must needs be. It is certain it cannot be any part of the Eastern
Empire; for that is not lost before the Destruction of it by the Turks in the
Sixth Trumpet. Nor can it be the loss of the Imperial Seat of Rome; for that
was never finally lost from the Romans. And besides, whatever Eclipse of the
Majesty of it there might be before the Fifth Trumpet, it is vey eminently set
out by the darkning of the Sun, Moon and Stars in the Fourth. And to conceive,
that the burning Mountain cast into the Sea might be the same third part, that
had the third part of the Sun darkened in it afterward, would be to make one
and the same part of the Roman Empire to be first like Babylon utterly ruined,
and after that to be like Babylon under the loss of but a part of the Majesty
of it.

The Mountain cast into the Sea cannot therefore be either the Eastern or the
Italian Seat of the Empire; and therefore must it be the Transalpine part of
the Western Empire, commonly known by the name of the Prefecture of Gaul, and
the Empire of the Eldest of the Sons of Constantine: And so accordingly does it
appear upon Record in Pancirol. Notit. Imperii occident. Cap. 1.
the Notitia Imperii. After the success of the Barbarous Nations upon this part
of the Empire, the Praefectus Praetorio of Gaul has no Ensigns of his Authority
set down there. Because, says Pancirollus, all the parts of that Prefecture
were seized upon, and in the Possession of the Barbarous People.

That which does further confirm the casting of the Mountain into the Sea to
signify the utter loss of that part of the Roman Empire, is, that the third
part of the Creatures are said to have died in the Sea, as well as the third
part of the Sea said to become Blood. For See Grotius in Note the first upon
Chap. 3.
killing and slaying a community of Men does in this Prophecy signify the
utter end of that community, as will afterward more certainly appear from the
slaying of the third part of Men in the Sixth Trumpet, and from the killing of
the Witness in the Eleventh Chapter. And this gives a very satisfactory
Account, why the Conquest of Africa by the same Nations within the same period
cannot be acounted any part of this Sea of Blood, or of the Mountain cast into
the Sea, because it was not the last ruin of that third part of the Empire to
which it did belong, that is, of the Italian Share or Prefecture. And therefore
must it be said of those African Conquerors, as it is of the Saracens in the
Fifth Trumpet, who over ran the same place, that they did not kill, but only
torment Men; And so were not capable of being any part of that Sea of Blood
wherein all the Creatures of it died.

It cannot be here said, that the burning of Rome by Alaricus An^o 4^^.
does the most properly answer the burnt Mountain. It must be considered, that
in this place it cannot be the bare City of Rome that can deserve the Name of
the Mountain. It must be the Rule and Domination of it, if any thing. And then
the burnt Mountain cannot signify any thing less than the ruins of some part
of its Empire; whereas Rome lost very little of her Imperial Power by that
whole Expedition of Alaricus; and it was not the Seat of the Empire when this
happened, and is represented to be little regarded by Honorius, who had long
before left it.

The time of the continuance of this Calamity in the Second Trumpet, must reach
to the Settlements of the Barbarous People all over the Prefecture of Gaul, and
that could not be at the soonest before the loss of Britain to the Saxons in
the Year 446. After that indeed the Romans seemed to have very little to do
beyond the Alps, but to fight sometimes upon the Borders with those who had
settled themselves all over that part of the Empire. Aetius it is true did march
through the heart of the Country at the defeat of A^tila; But it was because he
had all the Kings of those Parts for his Consederates in that Expedition.

THE fall of the great Star like a Lamp upon the Rivers of V. 10, 11.
Waters, seems after this to be the Death of Aetius; Of whom About the Year 450.
it is said See Petavius lib. 6. c. 18. Rationar. Temp. part. I.

Aetius, who himself alone did at that time keep up the Roman Empire from its
utter ruin. So Cuspinian in Cassiodori Chronicon. Aetio 4o and Studio C^ss.
page 447. and in Theodosio and Valentiniano. page 127. de Caesaribus. So dyed
Aetius -- with whom also fell the Western Empire, and the safety of the
Commonwealth, nor could it ever after be raised again.

Hieron. Rubeus to the same purpose l. 2. Histor. Ravennat. in fine. Aetius who
was accounted the Great security of the Western Empire.


by all kind of Historians, That He alone was the Upholder of the Western
Empire against all those violent Irruptions of Barbarians for near thirty Years
together. And though the Death of Valentinian, which was just about the same
time, may be thought to be more considerable, and so a more proper Application
to it, yet since the Emperor must be part of the Sun, if any thing, in the
Roman Empire, he is too high for the Name of a Star. But Aetius his quality did
exactly answer that Character, and his Death was of much greater influence upon
the miseries that followed upon the Western Empire presently after; And so did
much more deserve to be accounted the Calamity of the Third Trumpet, than any
thing else that did happen in that Age; And his great Actions might very well
represent him to be as a Star like a great Lamp. And then the imbittering of
the Fountains and Rivers, which is the effect of the fall of this Star, will be
easily understood to signify such a sad condition of the Roman Empire, as
bitterness does usually signify among the Prophets when spoken of the state of
a Nation. And the miseries of that Empire after the Death of Aetius will afford
Matter enough for the Application of it.

But both the fall of the Star and the effect of it is restrained to a third
part of the Rivers; And there needs no long search for the subject to which
this is to be applied. For since there is nothing that does so well answer the
Character of this falling Star, as the Death of Aetius, and the Consequences of
it, it must be the Italian Division that must be the third part in this place.

THE Matter of the Fourth Trumpet does at first sight appear to be the pulling
down of the Ruling Power of one of the three Imperial Shares. The darkning of
the third part of the Rev. 8. 12.
Sun, Moon and Stars can be nothing else. For the whole Sun is known to
signify among the Prophets the whole Supreme Power of a Nation.

It is not difficult to find the Application of this, if it be considered, that
betwixt the Settlements of the Northern People in the furthest Western part of
the Empire (which must be the Matter of the Second Trumpet) and the Saracen
Invasions, which is the Plague of the Fifth, there was Page 47.
no Supreme Power of the Romans pulled down but the Imperial Government of Rome.

The darkning of the Sun, Moon and Stars must therefore be the ceasing of the
Imperial Government in the West for a time, which because it had then the
Command of nothing but the Remains of the Italian share, is therefore very
properly called the darkning of but a third part of the Sun that was afterward
to come out of the darkness. For though there were at that time two parts of
the three Imperial Thrones pulled down, yet the influence of the Fourth Trumpet
in particular was but upon one of those Thrones; And therefore could not there
above one third part of the Sun be said to be eclipsed by it. The darkning of
one third part of the Sun does not make it necessary that there should be two
parts not darkened. In an Eclipse of the Moon which affects two third parts of
the Body of it, it might very properly be said at the darkning of the latter of
those two third parts, that it took away the Light of the third part of the
Moon, though there had been another third part darkened before, especially if
there had been an account before of the Eclipsing of the first third part of it
under another Term, as there is here before this in the Second Trumpet under
the Scheme of a Mountain cast into the Sea. But besides it will presently be
found, that the term of darkning the third part of the Sun in this place is to
give it a peculiar distinction from any other third part of him, which had its
Light wholly and finally extinguished. For this darkness was Anno 476 and 490.
to vanish again in some years after, and therefore might very well be said of
the third part, though the whole Body of the Sun besides had been lost.

The Calamity of the Fourth Trumpet does therefore by this appear to be the
Fall of the Imperial Government, and of all its immediate dependants at the
Conquests of Italy by Odoacer and the Geths after him, and the end of the
Imperial Rule there in Augustulus about the same time.

This is very aptly signified by an Eclipse of the third part of the Sun,
because that does intimate, that it was not a final end of the Imperial Roman
Authority in those parts but a Mortification of it for a set time only,
according to the nature of an Eclipse, which in time passes away, and then the
Sun returns to its former luster again. And just so did the Imperial Government
appear again in that third part of the Empire at the recovey of the African and
Italian part of it by Justinian; For then the Imperial Authority was there
returned About the Year 540.
to be as real a third part of the Sun in those Parts, as it had been in the
Presecture of Gaul under the Western Emperor.

But Justinian's change of the Dignities of Rome and Italy, cannot as some
would have it) be taken for any Eclipse of the Roman Sun, as long as there was
the same Imperial Authority in those Parts that there always had been in the
time of any of the Eastern Emperors, who had the whole Empire under them. For
it is the Imperial Authority that must be meant by the Sun in this place, which
received no more Diminution in the West by Justinian, than by any other Prince
of the East. All that can be pretended from his putting an end to the Senate
and Consul of Rome, will amount to no more than the darkning of the Moon and
Stars at most. So that the beginning of this darkness must necessarily be
fetched from the end of the Imperial Authority in the West with Augustulus.

It is also worth the observing, that this Plague of the Fourth Trumpet is set
out by the Fall of the Imperial Authority in the Italian part of the Empire
under the Scheme of the eclipsed Sun, rather than by the loss of the Body of
that Third part; Because there was still a considerable part of the Italian
share of the Empire remaining entire in the hands of the Eastern Emperors, that
is, all the Eastern part of Illyricum, which was so considerable as to have a
Praefectus Praetorio over it alone to it self. And there was besides a
distinction made betwixt the Conquerors of Italy and the Romans there in all
the Administration of the Government, as may particularly Cassiodor. Varior. l.
1. Ep. 28. King Theodoric to all Goths, and Romans. So l. 2. Ep. 19. And l. 3.
Ep. 49. But more particularly l. 8. Ep. 4, and 5. King Athalaricus writes
distinctly first to all Romans, and then to all Goths to take an Oath of
Allegiance to him.
be observed in the time of all the Gothish Kings. So that the Body of the
Romans seemed to be kept still distinct, and that the only change of their
State was the loss of their Head; which therefore to our Admiration is
distinctly represented in the Prophecy by the Sun, Moon and Stars, which are
known to signify a change of the Ruling Power only of a Nation.

Thus does the Object of the Fourth Trumpet stand distinguished from that of
the Second. They are both very dreadful Mortifications of the Roman Power in
two several third parts of that Empire. But the Second Trumpet describes its
whole third part as at its last end under the Character of a Mountain cast into
the Sea; Whereas the Fourth does intimate no more of its third part, but only
that the Supreme Government of it was changed, and that also but for a time,
that there was but a present Eclipse upon it.

But yet it was so long a time before this Eclipse was passed off, that it was
fit there should be some more than ordinary Character of it; According as it is
here expressed in five several Instances, by the darkning of a third part of
the Sun, of the Moon, of the Stars, and by the darkness of a third part of the
day, and a third part of the Night. For this Eclipse of the Majesty of this
part of the Empire continued at least till the beginning of the conquest of
Africa by Justinian, which was above fifty years after the first appearance of
it. And therefore is there no mention of the Prefectures of Gaul or Italy in
Justinian's Code, because the Imperial Dignity was then lost there.

It Is true, there will thus be a very great interval betwixt From 4^6, to 631.
the end of the Fourth Trumpet and the beginning of the Fifth, and a very great
disproportion betwixt the continuance of the four first Trumpets, and the two
next.

But the Prophecy it self does give very manifest Intimations of them both. For
after the Fourth Trumpet there is a very solemn Pause made before the sounding
of the Rev. 8. 13.
Fifth, and a new Scene of things prepared to signify the importance of it; As
if it were on purpose introduced to make us pass by all other less considerable
Calamities that might fall upon the Empire betwixt the Fourth, and that which
is really the Fifth.

For after the bare mention of the four first Trumpets, and their effects in
few words, and in a close order, there is in the last Verse of the Eighth
Chapter this solemn Pause and Introduction concerning the three remaining
Trumpets. -- And I beheld and heard an Angel. -- And it was an Angel flying
through the midst of Heaven. -- And then, that cried with a loud voice. -- And
that a very dreadful cry, Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, by
reason of the other voices of the Trumpets of the three Angels which are yet to
sound.

So very strange and peculiar an Alarm from the Text to make the World observe
the distinction betwixt the three last Trumpets and the four first, is a
sufficient warning to all to neglect any smaller Plagues upon the Empire, which
might happen betwixt the end of the Plague of the Fourth Trumpet and that which
was really to be the Fifth. They might easily perceive by this, that no Plague
or Judgment upon the Roman Empire could answer the Character or Woe in the
Fifth Trumpet but what was very considerably heavier than any of the Plagues of
the former Trumpets, though the last of them was the ruin of the Majesty of
the Western Empire. And therefore none could be able after this to fit the
Plague of the Fifth Trumpet to any Event that happened before the rise of the
Saracens.

And then the same solemn Expressions, that set out the great difference
betwixt the heaviness of those Woes that were to come, in comparison of any of
the Plagues of the other Trumpets, do also at the same time intimate, that
there was some more than ordinary Provocation that was the cause of those
different Judgments.

And upon a small Enquiry it will be found, that there was a secret
correspondence carried on betwixt the Bishop of Rome and the Eastern Emperor
for the advancement of the Authority of the Roman Church over all others after
the ruin of the Western Empire by the Barbarous Nations in Italy. The hopes of
the Emperor for the recovery of Italy, made him look upon it as very requisite
for him to gain the Bishop of Rome to his interest by advancing the Superiority
of that See. And thus was the Authority of the Roman Church continually
increasing soon after the Settlement of the Barbarous Nations in Italy, till it
came to a full height not long before the Saracen Invasions.

The first foundation of this Supremacy was the Anastasius Bibliothecarius
gives an account of this in the Life of Pope Hormisda. But the most eminent
Monument of it is the Record of the carrying the instrument of the union about
the Cities of Greece, by Pope Hormisda's Ambassadors, in Tom. 2. Concilior.
Reconciliation of the Greek and Roman Church by the Emperor Justin and Pope
Hormisda in the Year 519, after a Schism of Forty Years together; And for which
the Emperor had the Title of See Anastasius Bibliothecarius in the Lives of
Hormisda, and John the First. Cuspinian in Justino Caesare.
Justin the Orthodox.

The next great step was Cod. Justinian. l. 8, 9. de summa Trinitate.
Justinian's Profession of his Faith to Pope John, wherein he asserts the
Pope's Primacy, and promises his Assistance, that all other Churches should be
united under that See. And this was thought to be so considerable as to be
entered into the Code with the Pope's acknowledgment of the Kindness.

The next advance is Justinian's Novell. Justinian. de Haereticis, especially
that of Tit. 5. Let not Heretics stay upon Roman Ground. and de Apostatis; Let
the Goods of Apostates be confiscated.
new Laws against Dissenters, and his The Theodosian Laws against Heretics,
which had been hindered from being executed by the invasions of the Western
Empire by the Barbarians.
enforcing his old Penal Laws against them, which by the Invasions of the
Barbarians had been laid asleep almost ever since they were made; But from the
time that they were thus revived by Justinian, they continued in force to this
day.

The last finishing part of this Church-work was the Settlement of the Title of
Universal Bishop upon Boniface by A^^^ 606.
Phocas.

An Affair of so great Importance as this was, especially since the whole
Prophecy is concerned about it, ought to have some significations of the first
appearance of it some way proportionable to the nature of it. And there is
nothing among the Trumpets that can tolerably be applied to it but the warning
that is here given concerning the three last Woes. The first of these Woes must
therefore be at as great a distance from the Fourth Trumpet as was taken up in
laying this Foundation of the Kingdom of the Beast, which was the Provocation
that brought on these Woes.

It may now be enquired, wherein lay the chief Point of the heaviness of the
three last Trumpets, which are distinguished from the rest by the name of the
three last Woes; For the Second Trumpet utterly ruins its third part, and the
Fourth Trumpet destroys the Imperial Rule of its respective part. It might at
first be apprehended that the difference betwixt them could be nothing but the
length of the continuance of the Woes in comparison with the rest of the
Trumpets. But this is not so clear of the third Woe, which must do its work in
a much shorter time than the other.

But the certain and unquestionable difference betwixt them, is, that Whereas
the common nature of all the Trumpets is to be Plagues upon the Roman Empire,
so the three last Woes were the final ruin and loss of both the Roman Name and
Authority in the greatest part of the Dominions where they fell; But the
greatest loss of the Roman Authority by the other Trumpets was repaired again
by the Authority of the Roman Church among them, which was far more absolute
than ever the Imperial Authority had been, and made all that part of the World
take upon them the Name of Romans again.

BY this Account that has been given of the first four Trumpets, it does
appear, that the ground and occasion of the Plagues of them began very early in
the Christian Church, and that in so high a measure as fitted the Body of the
whole Roman Empire to be the Object of such terrible Expressions of the Wrath
of God toward them.

If it should be hereupon enquired, What Alteration it might be of the Spirit
of the Christian Church which could give God such a Provocation in those early
times, It must be considered, that that which appears to be the high malignity
of the Beast began to be very rife soon after that the Imperial Throne was come
into the Church; And that was the forcing Men against their Consciences to
reverence the Roman Authority in Points of Faith and Worship for the only Rule
and Standard of Christian Truth. And to give this the more solemn appearance,
it was propounded under the name of the Judgment of the Catholic Church, which
had an Infallible Spirit which dictated to it all the things of Religion that
the Emperors enjoined by their Edicts; Whereas it does manifestly appear, that
the Councils to whom this Name was given did very ordinarily contradict one
another; And that the major part of every one of them (who were They that made
all the Canons in them) did generally conform themselves to that Emperor's
Opinion that called them and overruled them. So that the sitting in the Temple
of God, and showing himself there as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
seemed to be then in its first Formation by the Conduct of some of the Roman
Emperors soon after the advancement of Christianity upon the Throne.

The very First Fruits of the Imperial Authority in the Church in the days of
Constantine, and even before the full end of the Pagan Persecution with
Licinius, were the Depositions Socrat. l. 1.
and Banishments of the Arian Bishops, severe Laws for the punishing even
Socrates l. 1. cap. 6. Ep. Constantini ad Episcopos and populum.

This also we straightly charge and command, That if any be found ^^ hide or
conceal any Book made by Arrius, and does not forthwith bring it forth, and
deliver it to be burnt, that he dye the Death. For as soon as he is taken, our
pleasure is, That his Head be stricken off from his Shoulders.


with Death all those that should but conceal any of the Books of Arius;
Besides the denouncing of the Curses of God upon all the Arian Party seemed to
be Punishments highly disproportionable to the nature of that Crime. The Roman
Councils began also at the same time to be accounted the Infallible Oracles of
God. Constantine says of the Council of Nice, Socrates Lib. 1. Cap. 6. Ep. 2.
Constantine to the Church of Alexandria.
That it was inspired by the Will of God himself. And that that which seemed
good to them was to be taken for nothing less than the Mind of God. And of Idem
L. 1. Cap 6. Ep 4. Constantine to the Churches.
Councils in general, That whatsoever was decreed in them, ought to be
accounted the Will of God. And in this esteem of Divine Inspiration were all
the Arian as well as the Orthodox Councils among their several Followers,
though they were plainly contradictory to one another.

It is not much to the purpose to object here that one part of these Councils
must undoubtedly be in the Truth; And that those at least could not be blamed
for such Usurpations upon the Consciences of Men. For, Which soever of them had
the Truth on their side, yet since the main of the Controversy was about
Luther contra Latom. If my Soul hates the word Homo^sion, and I will not use
it, I am not an Heretic for that. Ibid. Homo^sion, which Hierom did also
desire might be laid aside.

Grotius in Respons. de Antichristo, Almost all the Lutherans accuse Calvin of
Arrianism; He ought therefore (according to your use of Servetus) to have been
burnt.


Words which were no where expressly determined in Scripture; And which were of
so ambiguous and obscure a nature as the Greek and Latin Church were divided
about the true meaning of them: And which were as ordinarily rejected by those
very same Persons that at some times defended them, To Pronounce the peremptory
Curses of the Church upon conscientious Dissenters in such speculative and
abstruse Matters as these, and to deprive them of the necessary comforts of
this Life for it, and thus to overawe them to take that for the inspired Will
of God, which they would apprehend to be no more at best than the Philosophical
Exercises of Men's Wits, did plainly manifest a somewhat too assuming Spirit in
the Government of the Church in those days.

Whatsoever Reasons of State there may be for suppressing the public Meetings
of such kind of Zealots in Religion, who may be judged from their former
behavior to make it a Principle of their Conscience to endeavor the
Subversion of the Government that they live under, there seems nothing of that
kind to have been objected against the Orthodox, or Arian Dissenters in those
days. Their Crime was nothing else considerable, but mere differences of
Opinion in Religious Matters.

There seems therefore to be liberty enough to begin the Trumpets from any
great and general Calamities, that can be found to be agreeable to the
characters of them, at almost any time after the conversion of Constantine; And
they may very well then be said to be Judgments for the Blood of the Martyrs
formerly shed in the Heathen Persecutions, because the Emperors began to take
the same power upon them, which made the Heathen Emperors appear such Tyrants
against the Christian Church; And that is, The power of giving Law to the
Consciences of Men in disputable things, (and of enforcing it upon them against
their own Judgments,) which is the peculiar Attribute of God. Thus might the
Christian Emperors deserve very well to bear the punishment of their Pagan
Predecessors, since they began now to make themselves Ribera in cap. 14. numer.
43, 44. Besides, as that is accounted one and the same City, which had been
before, and is built upon the Ruin of the former, so are they accounted the
same Citizens, although they he not of the Lineage of the former. For they join
themselves to them, and become as it were one Body, and one Commonwealth with
them. And then are they chiefly to be accounted One Body with them, when they
imitate the deeds, and Crimes of their Predecessors; for which they are to be
called The Children of them, whose Sons in reality they are not. So John the 8.
they are called the Children of the Devil. And Ezekiel. 16. the Jews are called
the Sons of the Canaanites, not of the Patriarchs. And Origin in his 4th.
Homily upon Ezekiel discourses at large, That Fathers and Sons are used in
Scripture very ordinarily, for those only who are alike in manners Thus though
the Jews were not of the Race of Cain, yet the Blood of Abel came upon them.
And there were many that were not of the Race of those that killed Zacharias
the Son of Bara^^ias, upon whom nevertheless the revenge of his Blood was to
fall -- And they shall be more heavily punished, that imitate the wickedness of
their Predecessors, because they sin more boldly and impudently, that do those
things, which they know did provoke God in their Forefathers. Babylon's sins
came to be remembered, because its old sins had been forgotten for the Religion
that it had embraced. But new sins like the former appearing the first are
brought again into mind.
one continued Succession with them of Spiritual Dictators to the Consciences
of Men, which is one of the greatest Calamities, that can happen to the
Christian Church. For though Men may be in an error, yet it is infinitely more
provoking to be forced to play the Hypocrite with God, even in the holding of
the truth against a Man's Conscience; than it is to worship him in an erroneous
manner with a sincere and an upright Heart.

If others will think it better to pitch upon any other kind of provocation in
the first Christian Emperors to fix the beginning of the Trumpets to, yet this
Light they cannot but have from these considerations about the first date of
them, That the ruling Religion of the Empire was provoking enough, soon after
the ruin of Paganism in it, to make the Roman Empire the object of the
vengeance that was to be given to the Blood of those who were Martyred under
the Heathen Emperors. For whatsoever those Heathen Princes were in other
respects, yet the thing which made them so abominable in the Eyes of God was
their Tyrannies to his Church; That therefore which made the Christian Emperors
partakers in their sins, so as to bear the vengeance of them, must be a like
exercise of the Imperial Authority over the Consciences of Men; Whatsoever
corruption therefore of the true Religion others may think more proper to
attribute these Judgments to, this consideration that it was enforced upon the
Consciences of Men, will add a much greater aggravation to it; And the greatest
corruption of Christianity that can be imagined, even Idolatry it self, will
never be able to answer the character of the Beast without it.

It is certain that the sealing the 144000 against the evils of the Trumpets is
a manifest reference to the marking of those in the Forehead, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Who
were there marked out to be distinguished from the whole Body of the Jews
besides; And the reason of that great slaughter of the rest there mentioned is
expressly said to be, because the Land was defiled with Blood, which if it be
compared with the reason of the vengeance of the Trumpets in the fifth Seal,
will very much incline any to conclude, that it must be some acts of either
Blood, or of some great cruelty, that must be the cause of the Calamities of
the Trumpets.

But yet this Spirit of Cruelty is generally accompanied with the corruption
and degeneracy of the Church in respect of the true worship of God; And the
exercise of the Tyrannising Power of the Magistrate is usually to force the
Consciences of Men to comply with a false worship, as it was in the
forementioned case in Ezekiel, where the Blood, that the Land was defiled with,
was shed in the time of the Idolatry of the Jewish Commonwealth; And so also
does it appear that the Superstitions of the Roman Church were begun before the
considerable Violences and Cruelties of the Roman Emperors; As Mr. Mede does at
in 1 Timothy 4. 1.
large make appear in the instances of Saint-worship before the time of
Theodosius. But still that which laid the foundation
for the observance of these superstitions was the severity of the Laws to
enforce all to an Uniformity in the Roman Worship.

HOW early this began may be determined by those events to which the first
Trumpets have been fixed; The severities of See Note the third on this Chapter.

Pererius in Disput. 1. in Apoc. does cite Bede's Testimony for Ticonius, that
he applied the Persecutions that are spoken of in the Apocalypse to
Valentinian's Persecutions of the Donatists, which were his Sect; And calls
them Martyrdoms, and bewails them. And this was about the same time with Valens
from another Hand.


Valens, and the severe Laws of The Theodosian Code is full of the greatest
Severities against Heretics, Cod. Theodos. l. 15. de Haereticis 16. c.
Theodos. Tit. 4 de his qui sup. Religion^ all quod contendunt. Lex. 2. idem
Lex. 3. idem. 16. c. Theodos. l. 21. de Hereticis, l. 26. de Haereticis.

And Inquisitors were appointed to find out Heretics in order to their
Conviction and Punishment. 9, 13, 15, 31, 32, 35, 52 Cod. Theodos. de Hereticis.

La decadence des Empires, p. 184. shows, that as the Excesses of the Donatists
about this time did provoke the Orthodox to return the same to them; so by this
means it came to pass, that Persecution came then first to be made a Doctrine
of Christian Religion. Before that time all believed the contrary, and the
Bishops judged themselves bound to oppose themselves (by Remonstrances and
Addresses) against the Emperors Wills, who would make use of force and violence
to reduce the Heretics. This he calls the most remarkable part of the History
of those times, and afterward observes (p. 186.) that the Judgments of God did
as manifestly show how contrary these Precedents were to his Will, in these
words, mais ce qu'il y a de plus important, c' est que comme ce sut eu ce temps
and en ce lieu que les Orthodoxes adopte^ent la doctrine de la persecution, ce
sut a^ssidans le mesme temps and dans le mesm^ lieu, que Dieu fit connoistr^
par des Effroiables, jugemens combien il avoit l' honor pources Maxims
seuri^uses.


Theodosius, which From 370, to 395.
made an Universal conformity to the Imperial Religion to be a Law of the
Empire under Penalties sufficient to affright the Consciences of the generality
to a Compliance with them against the real judgments of their minds, did give
the World a very fair mark to fix the date of these Trumpets upon them; For
since this was much the same Tyranny, that had before been exercised by the
Heathen Emperors, they might very well be judged to have brought the guilt of
those Princes upon their own Heads; According to our Savior's expression about
the Jews in his time, That they did bear witness, That they allowed the St.
Luke 7. 47, 48.
Deeds of their Fathers in killing the Prophets; And by slaying and persecuting
the Prophets and Apostles, (which were as much of their own Religion, as the
several Sects of Christians are to one another) they did bring the Blood of all
the Prophets, that were slain from the foundation of the World, upon their own
Heads.

And yet most of those Prophets were slain while the Kingdom of Israel was
Idolatrous, whereas in the time of our Savior, they were much reformed from
all those corruptions, as they generally were in all the time of the captivity;
Which shows that there is See Ribera in Note the Seventeenth of this Chapter.
Idem in Cap. 14. Numer. 44. Wherefore as Jerusalem should not have been
destroyed by the Romans for its old Sins, unless it had increased them by new
and very grievous ones, When it knew not the time of its Visitation, as our
Lord says, but killed even them by whom it was to have been preserved. So Rome,
after the Worship of so many Idols, after the most cruel effusion of the Blood
of so many Martyrs, should have continued to the end of the World, because it
was become the Seat of their Vicar of Christ, unless it had equalled its former
Impiety by new and unheard of Barbarities and Sins.

Idem. in ver. 24. cap. 18. Apoc. He shows, that as Rome ruled over all the
World, so the Blood of all the Martyrs of Jesus were found in her. And those
that were otherwise killed are not worth the mentioning. But, says he, there
shall be many more also of the Christian Martyrs killed by the Romans in the
same manner, that is, more than those under Heathen Persecution.


a perfect agreement betwixt the avenging of the Heathen Tyranny upon the
Christian Empire grown unmerciful to its fellow Christians, and the avenging of
the Blood of all the Prophets slain by the Idolatrous state of the Jews upon
the same Nation, when it was become free from Idolatry, but retained the same
Spirit of oppression and cruelty.

And though the several Captivities were the punishment of their Idolatry, yet
the last ruin of their State is said to be in revenge of the Blood of all the
Prophets and Apostles, that had been slain from the foundation of the World.
Just as the pulling down of Paganism out of the Imperial Throne was God's
Judgment upon them for the Idolatrous exercise of their power; But those
Judgments which were to ruin their state are expressed to be a vengeance for
the Blood of all the Martyrs, that had been slain by that Empire.

And as the setting up uncertain Tradition for the Rule of Faith by the Jews in
our Savior's time, while they were building the Sepulchers of the Prophets,
who were slain for the Word of God, was the leading crime of the Jewish Church
in those days: So was Tradition coming in for the Rule of Faith into the
Christian Church just before the judgments of the Trumpets, while at the same
time they were raising Churches upon the Sepulchers of those Martyrs, which had
been slain for testifying the Word of God to be the only rule of their
judgments, and actions.

But to make the case of the Jews in our Savior's time, still more parallel to
that of the Christian Romans after the conversion of the Empire, it may be
further observed, That as the ruin of the Jewish state was deferred till after
their rejection of the Messiah, which did make it evident, that there was no
further hopes to be had of their Repentance and Reformation: So were the
Judgments of the Trumpets deferred till after the appearance of Christianity
upon the Imperial Throne of the Romans, and till after their continuance
notwithstanding it in the same Spirit of cruelty and oppression toward their
fellow Christians. For this did also show that there was no further hopes of
Reformation from the Roman Empire in that respect.

There was indeed this difference betwixt the case of the Jews and the
Christian Romans, which made it a greater provocation in the Romans, That the
last persecuting Spirit of the Jews before the Judgments, that brought them to
their ruin, did make use of little else, but the power of their Church to
affright the Consciences of Men from the Christian Faith; For the Civil Sword
was before taken out of their Hands. But the Laws which were made by the
Christian Roman Emperors against all that complied not with the Roman Religion,
were enforced by the supreme Authority of the State.

It is certain that the Trumpets can in no other sense be called a vengeance
upon the Empire, turned Christian, for the Blood of the Martyrs mentioned in
the fifth Seal, who were slain by Pagan Emperors, but only for their like
persecutions of their fellow Christians, which made the Blood of all the
Martyrs of God, that ever were slain by that Empire or Nation to be required at
their hands: As the Blood of all the Prophets was charged upon that one
Generation of the Jews, who persecuted the Church of Christ.

And in this the Calamities that befell the Roman Empire, when turned Christian,
did exactly resemble the miseries of the Jews about the destruction of
Jerusalem, when a great part of that Nation were become Christians; For as
those Calamities fell generally upon the gross Body of the Nation of the Jews,
and the Christians did generally escape them: So also is the security of the
true Members of the Christian Church in the time of the Trumpets here signified
by the 144000, who were sealed to escape those Judgments.

CHAP. V.
The Plagues of the Trumpets parallel to the increase of the degeneracy of the
Church. An Analysis of the Prophetical Schemes from the First Trumpet in the
Eighth Chapter up to the Fifth Seal in the Sixth Chapter. And the necessity of
their Application, first from the Signification of the Schemes, and the order
in which they are placed. And then from the remarkableness of the Events, which
required such a Prophetical Scene to represent them. The direct order of the
same Application from the Fifth Seal to the First Trumpet. The Schemes before
the time of the rise of the Beast in the Twelfth Chapter paralleled with those
in the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Chapters.

THe Account, that has been given in the preceding Discourse, of the moving
Cause of the Judgments of the Trumpets does make it sufficiently manifest, that
the degeneracy of the Roman Church or Empire must be accounted at least from
the first beginning of the sounding of the Trumpets. For since the Trumpets are
a revenge for the Christian Blood that was shed before the Empire was Theor.
13. and Conseq. 3. Theor. 19.
converted, there must be first some great Provocation after the Conversion of
the Imperial Throne, that could bring that former Blood upon their Heads; And
since the Provocation must be some acts of Cruelty toward Christians, some way
like those of the Heathen Emperors, as we see in our Savior's Instance of the
Jews, this Provocation can be nothing but the persecuting of their
Fellow Christians, who were sincere and conscientious in their Service and
Worship of God. For that was the Crime for Rev. 6. 1^, 11.
which God's Vengeance was desired and solicited, and for the continuance of
which it was also promised to be granted.

This then does now show us a very plain distinction betwixt the first
Conception of the malignity of the Beast, (together with the several Processes
of his growth in the Womb of the Roman Empire) And his first Birth and
Appearance.

For one may observe, that the bounds of the Plagues of the first four Trumpets
reach no farther than to the end of Chap. 4.
the Power of the Goths in Italy, or at farthest but to the first beginning of
Justinian's Reign, and so do extend no farther than to about the first times of
the Beast; But the three last Trumpets do come all after that time.

And this does give a very accountable Reason of the vast disproportion betwixt
the Plagues of the four first Trumpets, and those of the three last. The
Plagues of the four first were proportioned to the nature of the Provocations
for which they were inflicted; which being but the first endeavors and
beginnings only of the malignity of the Beast in the Civil Power, had Judgments
accordingly proportioned to them of no very long continuance upon the Empire.
But the three last Woes being Judgments upon them after that the Tyranny of the
Beast was come to its full appearance in confederacy with the false Prophet
newly advanced to the Spiritual Monarchy, were vastly more dreadful. And the
fury of this Tyranny being still much more whetted on by the increase and
exercise of the Papal Power, just before the founding of the Sixth Trumpet, or
the beginning of the Turkish Empire, the Woe of that Trumpet is accordingly
much heavier and of longer continuance than that of the Fifth.

It may hereupon be imagined, that since the Beast was translated from the
Eastern Empire to the Western at the Anno 800.
investing of Charlemaign with the Imperial Dignity, the Eastern Empire should
have been no longer the Object of the Plagues of the Trumpets.

But it is known, that though the Succession of the Line of the Beast, as Head
of the City of Rome, might fall into the Family and Successors of Charlemaign,
yet the Eastern Emperor must necessarily be a great Limb of him, because they
retained still the same persecuting Laws for Uniformity and Conformity to the
Roman Church in those Parts, which they had received from their Predecessors
while they were the sole Heads of the Roman Church. And their differences from
the Western Church in some few Instances did not hinder them from being much
the same for the main; As we see at this present in the differences betwixt the
Gallican and the Roman Church.

Wherefore the Eastern and Western Emperors after that Division in Leo
Isaurus's time seem in this respect to be much the same one Head of the Beast,
that they had been in Anno 730.
the same kind of Division of the Seats of the Empire before the fall of the
Western Empire in Augustulus; And though there was no such consent betwixt them
in matters of Civil Government as there had anciently been, yet they both
agreed in their joint designs for the advancement of the Honor of the former
Roman Church in each of their Divisions, as the sole Rule of Faith, according
to the Definitions of the ancient Roman Councils.

But if the History of the Eastern Empire be more narrowly and particularly
searched into, it will be found, that the Eastern Empire was in a perfect
conformity to the Roman Western Church for all material Points, and even about
the Worship of Images and the Supremacy of the Pope for some considerable part
of the Reigns of those Eastern Princes, who came betwixt the Excommunication of
Leo Isaurus and the end of the Constantinopolitan Empire. And this is very
plainly signified to be the cause of the Success of the Turks against the
Eastern Empire by what is said of the behavior of the Western Romanists under
the second Woe, Rev. 9. 20. That the rest repented not. For that shows that
those who were said before to have been killed by that Woe, were punished for
the same fault of which the rest would not repent themselves. And it is known
to be the Eastern Empire that is there represented by the third part of Men
that are said to be killed by the second Woe.

Wherefore the Turks in the Sixth Trumpet may now very well be esteemed a
Judgment upon the Eastern Empire for its share in the party of the Beast,
notwithstanding the Excommunication of the Greek Emperor out of the Western
Roman Church. For he was still the Roman Emperor in far the biggest remainder
of the Empire, and used very often much the same kind of Tyranny over the
Conscience that had been in use among his Predecessors; And that also upon much
the same Plea, viz. the Divine Authority of the former Councils of the Roman
Church.

It is not difficult after the stating of the beginning of the first four
Trumpets, to discover the intent of all the Actions Rev. 8.
that are described to precede them in order from the end of the fifth Seal;
And the best way to perform it will be to begin with those which are the
nearest to the First Trumpet, and so to trace them upward from thence, as from
things that are already known, and so most likely to determine the nature of
those that are next them, according to the method that has been already used
for finding out the signification of the first Trumpets.

It is very plain at first view, that the Angels casting the fire of the Altar
upon the earth, upon which followed Voices, Ver. 5.
and Thunderings, and Lightnings, and an Earthquake, must signify great
Judgments that were then coming upon the Earth. For besides the natural
signification of those Expressions for that purpose, immediately upon it the
seven Angels which had the seven Trumpets are said to prepare themselves to
sound, that is, to bring on those Calamities, which were the business of the
Trumpets.

And then, when it is considered that this Fire of the Altar was cast out of
the same Censer out of which the smoke of the Incense had just before ascended
up before God, with the Prayers of the Saints, and that also out of the hand of
the same Angel, Ver 3.
and that the ascending up of the Prayers of the Saints with the Incense before
God signifies their being accepted and well-pleasing to God, it may very
reasonably be concluded, That the Plagues of the Trumpets were Judgments upon
the Empire upon the account of those Saints that offered up their prayers to
God, and were accepted and heard; which, according to what has been declared to
be the reason of the Plagues of the Trumpets, would signify, that those
Prayers were the Complaints of those who were prosecuted by the Roman Powers,
from the first beginning of the sounding of the Trumpets to the end of them.

Especially if it be considered, that these Prayers of the Rev. 8. Ver. 2. Ver.
5 and 6.
Saints with the Incense are placed just after the first appearance of the
Angels with the seven Trumpets, and just before the show of the Judgments, for
which the Angels with the seven Trumpets are said to prepare themselves to
sound.

There is also, just before that first mention of the Angels with the seven
Trumpets, another circumstance to signify the Prayers of the Saints to be just
at hand, and that is, that there was silence in heaven for half an hour. For
this Silence joined with the offering up of the Incense is a manifest Ver. 1.
allusion to the custom in the Temple of offering up the Prayers in silence at
the time of Incense, as Mr. Mede has observed. So that now here appears no
fewer than four interchanges betwixt the Prayers of the Saints and the Trumpets
to show their immediate relation to one another. First the Silence to signify
the time of Incense and Prayer, then next the appearance of the seven Angels
with the seven Trumpets immediately upon it; And then the offering up the
Prayers with the Incense; And lastly, the execution of the Judgments of the
Trumpets.

When to this it is added, That the Prayers and the Judgments are conveyed by
the same Censer, and by the same Ver. 3, 4, 5.
Angel, and that the Judgments are returned down upon Earth by the same Censer,
just immediately after that the Smoke of the Incense with the Prayers of the
Saints, which had been offered up by it, was ascended up before God, -- when
they thus appear to have so plain a Relation of Cause and Effect to one
another, it is very hard to withhold from determining that the Prayers of all
the Saints with the Incense must be the immediate moving cause of those
Judgments; And therefore that those Prayers must be the Complaints of those
Christians to God that were persecuted by the Roman Governors from the first
times, that that Spirit of Persecution appeared in the Roman Emperors.

But if all these different interfering mentions of the Prayers of the Saints
and the Judgments of the Trumpets should only signify a mere Priority of
Order, and not really any Causality or Effect upon one another, then by the
first bare mention only of the Angels with the seven Trumpets, just before the
time of Incense and the Prayers of all the Saints Rev. 8.
is to be understood the readiness of those Angels to begin Ver. 3, 4, 5.
the Judgments of the Seventh Seal at the first opening of it, but that the
execution of them is deferred till the first Zeal and Devotion of the true
Christian Roman Church (after the Conversion of the Empire) was over, after
which it was a very convenient season to begin the Vengeance promised to the
Martyrs in the Fifth Seal.

However in either of those ways it appears, that at the opening of the Seventh
Seal the Judgments of the Trumpets are just ready at hand, and that they are
the chief business of that Seal. For they are introduced immediately upon the
opening of that Seal. So that though there should be a signification in it of
the pure state of the Christian Church before the Trumpets by the Prayers of
the Saints, yet it appears to be but of a very short continuance.

For it is represented first by the half hours silence at the time of Incense
and Prayer in the Temple; And that critical Ver. 1.
Determination of it to that space of time in the words of the Prophecy, must
be apprehended to signify the shortness of the time, that those Devotions
should continue before the coming on of the Plagues of the Judgments. The
Angels Ver. 2.
with the Trumpets are also represented as just ready to execute those
Judgments at the first mention of that half hour, the time of which had also
been before signified to be just at hand by the Sealing of the 144000 in the
Seventh Chapter before the opening of the Seventh Seal.

All which does extremely well agree with the short time of the free state of
the whole Christian Church after Constantine's Death. It began to be the Spirit
of the Imperial Authority soon after that time to make severe Laws about
matters of mere Conscience, to force Men to a conformity to the Roman Church
against their Wills and Judgments; And the Judgments of the Trumpets did
immediately follow upon it.

And further, that the time of the Trumpets could not be long after the
Conversion of the Empire by Constantine, is also apparent from the place where
the great multitude said to be come out of the great Tribulation are found; And
that is betwixt the Sealing of the 144000, and the Seventh Seal. Rev. 7. 9.
For the Sealing of the 144000 is known to signify that the Theor. 4.
Judgments of the Trumpets were not then far of; And yet betwixt that and the
execution of them there is described that great multitude come out of the great
Tribulation, which has been found to be the last end of the Heathen Emperors,
and of their Persecutions, (Theor 16.) And immediately after that appears the
opening of the Seventh Seal, the first show of which is the appearance of the
Angels with the seven Trumpets. This does very plainly signify that the end of
Rev. 8. 1.
the Pagan Persecution, and the beginning of the Plagues of the Trumpets were
very near one another, if not immediately after.

And yet since the Sealing of the 144000 comes in before Chap. 7.
the great multitude, one would think that that should signify some
providential design to secure the faithful part of the true Church from those
evils before the end of the Heathen Persecutions; Which seems something
difficult to comprehend at the first view. For it might seem to have been more
proper to have put the Sealing of the 144000 just before the executing of the
Plagues of the Seventh Seal, against which they were secured.

But that may easily be thus accounted for. In the Fifth Seal there was a
Promise of Revenge given to all those Rev. 6. 11.
that were then killed, to be fulfilled, when the rest of their Brethren that
were to be martyred, as they were, should be slain. Immediately upon this, at
the opening of the Sixth Seal, does follow a dreadful appearance of a Vengeance
Ver. 15, 16.
that was very near approaching with a great change of the Government of the
Empire. It was then very natural to put in the Exception to this general Threat
that was going to be executed; And so do we find the Seventh Chapter entering
after the terrors of the Sixth Seal with a delay of execution Chap. 7. 2.
till the 144000 were sealed to escape it. After which comes the great
multitude out of the great Tribulation, or that Ver. 9.
killing of the rest of the Brethren which was set up in the Fifth Seal, as the
Mark to discern the time of the promised Theor. 1^.
Vengeance by; And presently after that opens the Seventh Chap. 8.
Seal, with the appearance of the Trumpets which were to bring on those
Calamities that had been threatened.

So that the Sealing of the 144000 is but only to follow the decorum of the
subject that was then in hand, or to put in the Exception in the same place
where the Vengeance was represented to be general or universal. For the
excepting of the 144000 is presently after the mention of the panick fear that
all the World was in for the Wrath of God, that Chap. 6. 16.
was foreseen in the Sixth Seal.

It is also evident from the express words of the fifth Seal, That the
Calamities of the Trumpets were to be very soon after the end of the Pagan
Emperors. For the Vengeance is there promised to be within a little season
after that time; Chap. 6. 11.
And the Expiration of that little season is also further determined to be out
when the rest of the Brethren should be all killed, which has been found to
signify the end of the Pagan Conseq. Theor. 16.
Emperors, and of all their Persecutions. So that the Trumpets must begin to
sound at farthest soon after the time of Julian the Apostate.

And since the end of the Pagan Persecutions is represented Theor. 12. and 16.
Chap. 7.
by the great multitude come out of great Tribulation, which are described as
coming after the time of the Sixth Seal: That great change of the State that is
set out in the Sixth Seal just before them by the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon,
Rev. 6. 12.
and the change of the Stars, must according to the use of these Prophetical
Schemes necessarily denote the Conversion of the Imperial Throne to the
Christian Faith in Constantine. For the Effect of it is a very dreadful
apprehension of an approaching Destruction by all those that had been the
Enemies of him that sat upon the Throne, and of the Lamb, or the ruin of all
the Enemies of the Christian Church, just after the Martyrdoms in the Fifth
Seal, which are known to be the Persecutions under Heathen Emperors, (Theor.
16.) And there is nothing in the History of those times that can any ways
answer that Description, but the beginning of the Conversion of the Empire, and
of the ruin of the Pagan Rule in it by Constantine.

But lest any should imagine, that the terrors of the sixth Seal are the
vengeance, that is promised to the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, it must be
remembered, That the great Tribulation, out of which the great multitude in the
seventh Chapter are said to be come, cannot be any thing else but the same kind
of persecution, in which the rest of the Brethren mentioned in the fifth Seal
were to be killed, (Theor. 12.) Rev. 6. 11.
before the end of which persecution the vengeance there promised was not to
begin; And that great Tribulation must necessarily be after the opening of the
sixth Seal, according as it is described, because it is found to continue till
just before the Calamities of the Trumpets, which are the business of Chap. 7.
9, etc. Ver. 3, 4.
the seventh Seal, and is placed betwixt the sealing of the 144000 (which
intimates the evils of the Trumpets to be then just at hand) and the real
beginning of those Chap. 8. 1.
evils.

Besides if we should regard nothing but the expressions of the fifth Seal, it
seems very plain, that the vengeance there promised must be after the time of
the Calamities of the sixth Seal. For it is confined to a little season after
Chap. 6. 11.
those Martyrs in the fifth Seal; And that little season also determined to
reach to the end of all persecution of that kind, in which the rest of the
Martyrs were to be killed, as they were. Now these rest of the Brethren could
not be killed in the period of the fifth Seal; For they are distinguished from
those, who are made the business of that Seal. And the Calamities of the sixth
Seal appear at the Ver. 12.
first opening of it after the fifth Seal; There is therefore no place before
them for the killing of the rest of the Brethren. They cannot therefore be that
vengeance, which in the fifth Seal is promised to come after the killing of
them.

Wherefore since the Contents of the sixth Seal are placed before the end of
all Pagan Persecution, and yet are a very great show of Judgment upon the
Enemies of the Lamb, who at that time could be none but Pagans, they cannot
tolerably be apprehended to be any thing else, but the beginning of the ruin
of Paganism, which was not completed before the perfect end of all Pagan Power
in the Government, and the entire triumph of the Christian Church; And that was
not till many Years after the Conversion of Constantine, But the continued
decay, and weakening of that Interest, from the first change of the Imperial
Throne, is very emphatically expressed by the characters of the things in the
sixth Seal.

If it should be objected, That those expressions in the Rev. 6. 12, etc.
Prophets do never signify any thing less, than the total subversion of that
State, of which they are spoken, it is to be considered, that the expressions
in themselves have no manner of direct signification for any such thing. They
are equally capable of being understood of the ruin of any sort of People; And
the time of this Ruin and Destruction being confined in the Prophecy to the
Pagan State of the Roman Empire, it cannot be understood of any thing else, but
of the ruin of that.

THE EVENT does confirm all the Application that has been made of the Actions
before the first Trumpet, past all scruple. For as there must have been one of
the Seals to signify so dreadful a state of the Church, as the Dioclesian
Persecution; so must there have been another to signify the change of the
Empire by Constantine; And this last Seal, to answer the order of events in
History, must have begun, as the sixth Seal does, before the last end of all
Pagan Persecution; But then, after that, and before the execution of the
vengeance, that was promised in the fifth Seal, there must also have been a
description of the end of all Pagan Persecution, as there is at the end of the
sixth Seal, because it is expressly said, in the fifth Seal, That after the rest
of the Brethren should be killed, the Martyrs, said there to have been already
slain, should be avenged; And the multitude come out of Tribulation, just
before the Trumpets, Chap. 7. 9.
does exactly answer this.

But yet that revenge could not come, before the Christian Church had put on
the Spirit of those, that killed the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, and therefore
ought there before the Trumpets to be, as there is (Chap. 8. 3, 4, 5.) a
signification of the persecuting methods of the Christian Emperors, which
brought down that vengeance upon their heads, which was promised for the Blood
of the Martyrs that was shed under the Pagans.

BY the method which has been used to determine the Application of the first
four Trumpets, it appears what is to be understood by all the Actions, that are
recorded betwixt the fifth Seal, and the first Trumpet: And after this
particular Analysis of all the mystical Representations of this part of the
Prophecy, it will now be not unpleasant, to take a more direct view of the
order and dependence of them upon one another, according to that series in
which they lie, and to observe how exactly they answer to the events of those
times, to which they are applied.

THE fifth Seal is a very lively Representation of the fiercest Persecution of
the Christian Church under the Pagan Emperors, and that but a little season
before the last end of all Pagan Power. This does extremely well agree with
Rev. 6. 11.
the Persecution under Diocletian, just before the appearance of Christianity
upon the Throne.

But then it is there foretold, That these judgments, which the Blood of those
Martyrs did cry for from Heaven, should not be executed, till the rest of their
Brethren were killed; Ibid.
Which suits very well with the continuance of the Persecutions of the Church
in some parts of the Empire after the end of that fierce Storm in the Reign of
Diocletian, and after the Conversion of Constantine. Maximinus and Maxentius,
and after them Licinius did exercise very Barbarous Cruelties against the
Church after that time. The accurate Petavius says of Maximinus alone, That the
Martyred an innumerable Rationer. Temp. Part. 1. in Maximino. V. 12.
multitude. Accordingly do we find in the first place after these Predictions
the sixth Seal opening with the significations of a very eminent change in the
Governing part of the Empire, with the approaching ruin of the Enemies of the
Church; And Constantine's appearance upon the Throne with the figure of the
Cross, and the promising Motto of it, In hoc signo vince, ought not to have any
ordinary characters to set it out by. The change of Paganism for the triumphant
appearance of the Christian Church upon the Imperial Throne, did require as
emphatical Characters to express it by, as the destruction of any other
Monarchy, that tyrannized over the Church, for which those high expressions are
made use of by the Prophets. And there is nothing in that lively expression of
the general Panick Fear of V. 15, 16.
that whole party in the sixth Seal, which was not literally fulfilled in the
voluntary retirements of Diocletian and Maximian from the Throne, and the
recantations of Maximinus.

And as the time seemed now to be come for the vengeance to be executed, that
was promised to the Martyrs in the fifth Seal, so do we find an universal dread
of Ibid.
it in this Seal; And immediately after it the mention of those of the True
Church, who were to escape it, and to Rev. 7. 4.
be secured from feeling it, in the sealing of the 144000.

That sealing did plainly show, That the time was just at hand for the
Judgments, which were threatened; And therefore there wanted nothing now to
bring them on, but the end of that great Persecution, in which the rest of the
Christian Martyrs, in the fifth Seal, were to be killed; There is therefore
next introduced the great multitude of all Nations, that are said to be come
out of the great Tribulation, V. 9.
which signifies the whole number of those that were to be killed all over the
World by the Heathen Emperors, to be now completed.

Wherefore presently after this is the seventh Seal opened, Rev. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
with the appearance of the Judgments of the Trumpets, and the Prayers of the
Saints that were heard for the execution of those Judgments, just as it was
made good in effect by the beginning of the irruptions of the Barbarous Nations
upon the Roman Empire soon after the end of all the Heathen Emperors.

But that the promised vengeance was not to fall upon the Empire, while it
continued Pagan, is sufficiently shown by the intimation in the fifth Seal,
that it was not to be fulfilled till after the end of all Heathen Persecution;
And that could not be till the Pagan Government was destroyed. This shows the
difference that there is betwixt the Judgments of the sixth, and those of the
seventh Seal; For now it appears that the objects of the sixth Seal was Rome
Pagan, but those of the seventh, Rome Christian degenerated.

The Judgments of the Trumpets then were to be executed upon Rome Christian,
but not till Rome Christian had begun to bring the guilt of its own Martyrs
upon its head, by following the same cruel methods of Government toward its
fellow Christians, as were in exercise by the Heathen Emperors. For the Roman
Empire must be first fitted for the Wrath of God, before that wrath could be
executed upon it; And it was sufficiently declared in the Prophecy, what
provocations they should be, that should fit them for those Judgments, and that
by the nature of them, as they were a revenge for the Blood of Martyrs. Nothing
could make them a subject of God's revenge for the shedding of Christian Blood
by their Heathen Predecessors, but the same kind of Spirit and Actions in
themselves.

This does excellently well suit with the practices of those times, when the
first Trumpet began to be sounded; For just before that irruption of the
Barbarous Nations upon the Empire, the Christian Emperors had begun to exercise
great-Cruelties toward those who complied not with them, and to make
unmerciful Laws against them; which though they enjoined not such corruptions
as those afterward in the time of the Beast, yet were they sufficient to make
the Lives of Dissenters very uneasy to them, and to affright them out of their
sincerity; And this Spirit continued in them to the time of the rise of the
Beast, with some small intervals of toleration in the Eastern Empire. There
were then manifest provocations enough to fit them for the Calamities of the
first four Trumpets; And then, after the time of the rise of the Beast, there
needs no enquiry to be made for the reasons of the far greater evils in the
fifth and sixth Trumpet.

AND NOW by the whole process of these figures, from the time of the fifth Seal
to the rise of the Beast, we may discern a very exact resemblance betwixt the
description of the State of the Church in this part of the Prophecy, and that
description which we have of the same interval all along the Twelfth Chapter.
It will be very convenient to compare them together, to strengthen the
Application that has been already made.

The cry of the Martyrs in the fifth Seal to express the heaviness Rev. 6. 11.
of the Heathen Persecution, that they were under, is just the same with the
cry of the Woman traveling in birth, and in Rev. 12. 1, 2.
great pain, which is known to signify the Church under Heathen Persecution,
crying for deliverance by the Conversion of the Imperial Throne.

The opening of the sixth Seal immediately after, with all those Rev. 6. 12.
great Significations of the change of an Empire, is very well fitted to
express the great change of the Scene from Paganism to Christianity upon the
Throne, and is of the same signification with the Woman's being delivered of a
Man-child who was to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, and the Rev. 12. 5.
taking up of that Child to the Throne of God, which is known to denote an
advancement to the Royal Seat of a Kingdom.

The first mention of the Woman's flying into the Wilderness Rev. 12. 6.
before she actually did it, does extremely resemble the mention of the sealing
of the 144000 before the time of the Rev. 7. 4.
evils that they were sealed against; Though I take the first beginning of the
time of the 144000 to be long before the time of the Woman in the Wilderness.
But as her first flying into the Wilderness signifies her preparation only for
it from the very time of her Delivery, and the advancement of her Son to the
Throne. So does that answer the first sealing of the 144000 before the real
danger against which they were sealed was come. But by both Figures is
signified a very early Preparation of the Roman Church for the Judgments of God
by some general degeneracy from the true Christian Spirit.

The dreadful circumstances of the change of the Empire in the sixth Seal, so
as to make the Kings of the Earth hide themselves Rev. 12. 16.
with the Intimations of the Executions of God's Wrath upon the then great
Enemies of the Lamb, is a particular account of the Tragical Effects of the War
of Michael and his Rev. 12. 7, 8.
Angels, with the Dragon and his Angels, ending with the casting them out of
Heaven, or from the Ruling Power and Public Exercise of the Pagan Religion.

But the complete Victory over them, and the casting them Rev. 12. 9, 10, 11.
Rev. 7. 10, 11, 12.
down in effect is very livelily expressed by the great multitude with white
Robes, and Palms in their hands, who are said to be just then come out of the
great Tribulation. For all the circumstances of that Triumph that is expressed
to have been in Heaven at the casting down of the Dragon and his Angels Rev. 12
10, 11, 12.
are very particularly answered by the same kind of Phrases in the Description
of the Affairs of that multitude. There was in both the same crying, and that
also with a loud Chap. 7. 10.
voice in heaven.

The words of their Triumphant Cry are much the same with that of the
Multitude; it is in the one, Salvation to our Chap. 7. 10. Chap. 12. 10.
God and to the Lamb; in the other, Now is come salvation and strength, and the
kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ.

Those of the great Multitude are said to have come out Chap. 7. 14.
of the great Tribulation, and to have washed their Robes, and to have made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb, and are described as Conquerors with Palms
in their Hands.

And the Brethren in the Twelfth Chapter are said to have Ver. 11.
overcome the Dragon by the Blood of the Lamb, and because they loved not their
Lives unto the Death.

The Heavens and those that were in them are called to rejoice Chap. 12. 12.
at the overthrow of the Dragon.

And the Angels and Elders are represented in Heaven with Chap. 7. 11, 12. Rev.
12. 12.
the great Multitude, as actually rejoicing and saying, Blessing, and glory,
and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God
for ever and ever, Amen.

After this Victory there is warning given of a time of Woe upon the Inhabiters
of the Earth and Sea, from the Wrath of the Dragon: So also in the Seventh
Chapter the evils of the Trumpets against which the 144000 were sealed, are
signified to come upon the Earth and Sea, but not till after the time of the
Victorious Multitude there after mentioned. There is indeed this difference
betwixt them, Rev. 7. 2, 3.
That the time of the Dragons Woe is designed by the Devil for the ruin of the
Church; But the Evils of the Trumpets are designed by God to be Judgments upon
the degenerate part of the Empire. It appears however in both places, that the
gross Body of the new Christian Empire, is the Object of the Dragons Woes, and
the Calamities of the Trumpets.

The Dragon begins the execution of the Woe, that was forewarned, with the
Persecution of the Woman that brought Rev. 12. 13.
forth the Man-child. His Intention was to destroy the Church by it; But the
Woman had two Wings given her to fly into the Wilderness to save her from it.
Just as the 144000 are said to be sealed against the Evils of the Rev. ^. 3. 4.
Trumpets.

But before the settlement of the Woman in the Wilderness for the number of
days, that are allotted to her abiding there, the Dragon is said to cast out a
Flood after Chap. 12. 15.
her, to cause her to be carried away by it. As many Waters are interpreted by
the Angel in the Seventeenth Chapter to signify multitudes and Nations, so
must a Ver. 15.
Flood signify a great inundation of People or Nations; And then, the Dragons
Flood must necessarily be, all that inundation of the Barbarous Nations, which
destroyed the Roman Empire, and shared it among themselves.

And since this Flood is here described as the last effort of the Dragon
against the Church, till the time of the rise of the Beast in the Thirteenth
Chapter. The time of this Flood must be the whole time of the inundation of the
Chap. 8.
Barbarous Nations upon the Empire, and therefore must it be the same with the
Calamities of all the first four See CHAP. IV.
Trumpets.

To answer the first four Trumpets, this time is indeed divided into four
considerable Events, by which this Invasion gained upon the Empire, because the
four Trumpets do signify so many different Judgments upon the Roman Empire;
But all these different parts of their success being no ways considerable for
endangering the Church, but only for their overrunning the Empire like a
Torrent, they might all very properly be comprehended under the Scheme of a
Flood, which was the one general nature of them all, as they were the Devils
malice against the Church.

Thus then we see, that the next attempt of the Dragon against the purer part
of the Church, does run parallel to the Judgments of the first four Trumpets
against the degenerate part of it; And so the same Calamities, that the Devils
malice did intend against the Church of God, are made the Executioners of the
Wrath of God upon those whom the Devil had inspired to persecute them; And in
this sense, is the Earth said to have helped the Woman by Rev. 12. 16.
swallowing up of the Flood, when those Barbarous Nations came to have a fixed
settlement in the Roman Empire, upon their destroying of the Western Power of
it, and their dividing it amongst themselves. For by this the Roman Empire in
those parts came to be one settled Roman Church in so many divided Kingdoms, in
which the True Church did sojourn in Sackcloth and as in the Wilderness. Thus
stood the Roman Empire ready prepared to be that confederacy, which is
represented by the Beast, and the Ten Kings, and which is immediately after in
the beginning of the Thirteenth Chapter set out by a Beast rising out of the
Sea, (or out of this great Flood, that the Dragon poured out,) with Ten Horns,
representing so many Kingdoms, springing out of this Inundation of People.

CHAP. VI.
The signification of the Characters of the Two Witnesses demonstrated. Their
Death fixed to the Suppression of the True Church in the Dominions of the Beast
only. The Death of the Witnesses no general Massacre. Two general distinct
Suppressions of the True Church not possible. The Bodies of the Witnesses kept
from being buried, an Act of Friendship. This attributed to Peoples, Tongues
and Nations, denotes the Assistance of Protestant States.

AMongst all the enquiries, that are at present made concerning Rev. 11.
the relation of the Affairs of the Beast to the times, that we now live in,
there is none that is so much the general concern of all that are curious, as
the killing, and the rising again of the Two Witnesses in Sackcloth in the
Eleventh Chapter. And it will be expected that I should propound my
apprehensions about that Affair, especially about the conjectures that are
generally made concerning its Application to the present posture of the Affairs
of the Church. I must indeed acknowledge, That, however different I am from
Monsieur Jurieu in almost every thing else, yet I was extremely surprised with
the light that he has given to the Prophecy about the Death of the Two
Witnesses from the present face of the Protestant Churches all over Europe, and
the foresight of what is likely to succeed them, compared with the Characters
of the Text; I own this to have been the first occasion of all the thoughts,
that I have had about those things, and it did so strongly affect me, that I
was impatient to see it settled upon a clearer foundation, than he has laid for
it. I have therefore nicely stated all the single Characters in the Text, that
relate to that account, and have resolved the explication of it into clear
Propositions in an orderly dependence upon one another; And have afterward
endeavored to confirm the same apprehension by a new proof from the expiration
of the time of the second Woe, or the last end of the Turkish Wars, and from
the near approach of the business of the fifth Vial. I will not venture to say,
That what I have here to propound about this part of the Prophecy, is as
unquestionable as any of my Propositions; And yet I cannot but think the
greatest part of it at least will be judged to be but very little short of
them, if the principles upon which I rely, and which are elsewhere secured, be
once granted me.

However, to show, that I am careful to distinguish betwixt the different
evidence of the grounds, that I offer for all my Conclusions, I will not
pretend to so high a degree of certainty for what I shall here deliver about
these matters, as I make account there is in that part of these enquiries, that
determines the nature and rise of the Beast.

It has been already supposed, That the Two Witnesses do represent the True
Church of God in all the time of its humiliation under the Beast in Sackcloth,
(Suppos. 4.) As also that the Forty two Months of the Beast, and the 1260 Years
of the Witnesses do begin and end together, (Suppos. 2.)

It is said of the Witnesses, that when they should finish Ver. ^, 3^. 11, 12,
13.
their Testimony, that, The Beast should war against them, should overcome
them, and kill them; That their dead Bodies should lie unburied in the Streets
of the great City three days and an half; And then should they come to life
again, and stand upon their feet, and should be called up to Heaven, and ascend
thither in a Cloud; And that their Enemies should behold them as they ascended;
And that at the same time, that they should ascend, there should be a great
Earthquake, and the fall of the tenth part of the City, and that in the
Earthquake there should be slain seven thousand Men, and that the rest should
be affrighted, and give glory to God.

It is unquestionable in the first place, That

The great City, where the dead Bodies of the Witnesses did lie, is the same
with Babylon the Great. Ver. 8.
For it must necessarily be the City of the Beast, who killed the Witnesses,
which is known to be Babylon all over this Prophecy, and which has also the
same particular Name of the Great City in all the Chapters wherein it is
mentioned: And in the Eighteenth Chapter alone it has this peculiar Epithet
given it no less than five or six times; When with this it is also considered,
that the term of the Great City denotes a reference to such a City somewhere
before hinted at, it cannot possibly be apprehended to be any thing else.
Accordingly do we find all kind of Protestant Interpreters agreed about it.

But then it is also apparent, That

By the Street of the great City must be meant, The Dominion or Jurisdiction of
Babylon, and not the real Streets of any particular City. Rev. 8.
For since the Witnesses represent the whole Church under the Dominion of the
Beast (Suppos. 4.) And under the Oppression and Tyranny of that Party for above
a thousand years together (Suppos. 2.) It is a very absurd thing to imagine,
that by the killing of them at the conclusion of their Testimony, in
distinction to all their Sufferings before, should be meant nothing but the
Destruction of them in one particular City only, or that their dead Bodies
should be contained within so short a compass. Ribera in cap. 17. Apoc. numer.
7. Rome is not here said to be drunk only for that Blood, which was shed in
that City, but also for that Blood, that was shed in other Cities by its
Command and Authority. For Rome it self did also shed that Blood.

Idem in cap. 18. v. 24. The Blood of all etc. was found in her, the Blood of
all was imputed to her, as the Author of it. For -- All things were done by the
Governors, which Rome did set over the Provinces.

Idem in cap. 14. numer. 41. For She (Rome) killed all, that were killed by the
Command and Authority of her Ministers.


The Great City must therefore in this place necessarily signify that Dominion
or Empire of Rome which is called Babylon, according as it does also usually
signify very frequently in this Prophecy; And so also is the name of Babylon
used among those Prophets, Isai. 1. 22. and chapter 47. Jerem. 50. and chapter 51.
from whom it is here borrowed, for the whole Babylonian Kingdom.

The presence also of the Peoples, and Kingdoms, and Tongues, and Nations, at
the sight of the dead Bodies, does make the ver. 9.
place where they were to appear to be some great Empire. For those Expressions
do signify Rev. 13. 7. chapter 14. 6. chap. 17. 15. Ver. 10.
in this Prophecy all the several Nations of the Roman Empire: The same also
does appear from what is said about the rejoicing of those that dwell upon
Earth, over the dead Bodies: For it would be a very extravagant thing to apply
this to a three days Death of two Persons in any particular City.

From hence it necessarily follows, That

The tenth part of the City, ver. 13. must signify the tenth part of the
Jurisdiction of Rome, which is called Babylon. For the term of the tenth part
of the City is a plain reference to some known City, that had been before
mentioned; And that can be nothing, but the great City just before it.

Wherefore by the tenth part of the City must be meant the tenth part of the
Babylonish Empire; And then considering that that Empire is set out by the
Figure of a Beast with ten Horns, which are said to be ten Kingdoms, Rev. 17.
12, 17.

The tenth part of the City must be one of the ten Kingdoms of the Roman Party.
And consequently

The fall of the tenth part of the City must denote the Conversion of that
Kingdom from the Roman Church. For the Fall of Babylon is the decay of the
Interest of the Roman Church in general (Suppos. 5.) And therefore by the Fall
of one of its Kingdoms must be meant the Conversion of it from that Church.

And then it being evident from hence, that the other parts of Babylon do not
fall at the same time, It is manifest, That

The Roman Church continues in power after the Ascension of the Witnesses
mentioned ver. 12. For after that Ascension of the Witnesses is the fall of the
tenth part of the City, which implies the rest of the City to be still entire.

But this is made much more manifest by the nature of the third Woe, which
supposes the Beast in being for its Object; And from the latter Vials, which
are certainly part of the third Woe, and Plagues upon the Beast, as will appear
Chap. 7. and Chap. 16.

Wherefore

The Ascension of the Witnesses into Heaven can be nothing but the advancement
of them to a Throne here upon Earth. Ver. 12.
For the Beast, or Roman Church, continues in power after that Ascension of the
Witnesses (Theor. 22.) And the Witnesses continue with the Beast to the end of
his Reign (Suppos. 2.)

Therefore must the Witnesses continue upon Earth after that which is called
their Ascension into Heaven. Their Ascension then cannot signify any real
Ascension into Heaven.

And then, if that Expression be necessary to be understood in a mystical
sense, of some advancement of them upon Earth, it must signify their
advancement to an earthly Throne. For it must be some visible advancement,
because their Enemies beheld them ascending; And the usual signification of
ascending into Heaven in a mystical acceptance, especially where Isai. 14. 12,
13.
it is expressed to be a visible advancement, as it is here, is an advancement
to an earthly Throne. What indeed can tolerably answer the Character of
ascending into Heaven in a visible manner without leaving the Earth, but
supreme power upon Earth?

This is confirmed past all scruple by being immediately followed with the fall
of the tenth part of the City, which is said to be at the same hour that they
ascended; For since that is found to signify the Conversion of a Kingdom Ver.
13.
of the Roman Party (Conseq. 3. Theor. 21) It must be the Kingdom, that belongs
to the risen Witnesses. And besides it is expressly said, That all in that
place were either slain or converted, which denotes the entire Submission of it
to the Ver. 12.
Church.

And then, by the Earthquake at the same time, which must relate to a whole
Kingdom with these circumstances added to it, it would be hard to understand
any thing else but the change of the State of that Kingdom, according to the
mystical signification of that Expression in Prophecy.

By these conclusions it does appear, That all this Account of the Fortunes of
the Witnesses after their Resurrection is in Allegorical Expressions, which
gives one a good ground to apprehend, that all, that is said of them before
about their being killed, and rising again, is also Figurative or Allegorical
only, as will be further proved for the clearer understanding of the Fortunes
of the Church in the latter times of the Beast, which is here particularly
described.

But it may be the following Conclusions will be judged to be more clear and
necessary in their own light, than those which have been here advanced before
them; And then it will be useful to consider those that follow as good grounds
to confirm the certainty of those, that have gone before them. For they have
neither of them any show of a necessary dependence upon one another for their
Evidence.

Before any further advances to this purpose, it is to be considered, That

The overcoming and killing of the Witnesses cannot signify the whole time of
their Persecution by the Beast. For, First, This War and Murder is at the
finishing of the Ver. 7.
Testimony of the Witnesses, whereas for the greatest part of their whole time
they were Prophesying, and so could not be said to be killed. And the rendering
of the Original, whilst they shall perform their Testimony, is a very forced
Translation of it; And would make the Church represented by these Witnesses to
be without any Life in it, whilst it was doing its Office, especially when it
appears, That is was such a killing them, as to make them lie Dead in the
Streets, which is quite contrary to their exercising the Office of Prophets for
the whole time of their continuance.

Secondly, The three days and an half also of their Death, which are made in
this new way to be the whole time of the Witnesses, are described to come after
the killing them; And this is impossible to understand of the whole time of
their continuance for 1260 days. For then the whole time of their continuance
would come after their Death which is a contradiction.

Besides, that there is as manifest a difference in the signification of 1260
days, and 3 days and a half, as could be expressed. So that it looks like one
of the greatest extravagancies, that ever Learned Men were guilty of, to make
two Dr. More, etc. in cap. 11. Apoc.
such plainly different, and inconsistent expressions to signify but one and
the same thing.

Wherefore the overcoming and killing of the Witnesses cannot possibly signify
the whole time of their persecution by the Beast.

And then it will necessarily follow, That

The overcoming and killing of the Witnesses must be the fiercest persecution
in the latter time of the Beast, that ever the Church was to suffer. First, It
is in the latter time of his Reign. For it cannot signify the whole time of
their Persecution, (Theor. 24.) and if it signify a particular time, it must
be that which is a little before the time of the third Woe, as it is described
to be; and that being the last Woe upon the Beast, it must be in the Ver. 14.
latter time of his Reign. Besides, the proper signification of the
expressions, by which the time of it is determined, is, when the Witnesses
should have finished their Testimony; And the time of their continuance being
of the same length with the Reign of the Beast, (Suppos. 2.) It must be also at
the conclusion of his Reign, as well as about the finishing of their Testimony.

Secondly, That it is the fiercest Persecution that ever the Church was to
suffer from the Beast, appears by the Character of it in comparison with that
of the state of the Church in all the other parts of his Reign. The state of
the Church under the Oppression of the Beast at all other times has the name
only of the Witnesses in Sackcloath; But this is represented by the making war
with them, and overcoming them, and killing them, which must signify as much
more considerable a Persecution than any other, as the killing a Man is in
comparison of his being in a sorrowful and a mourning condition.

To apprehend of what nature this storm of Persecution should be, it must be
concluded in the first place, That

The overcoming and killing of the Witnesses must at least signify a perfect
Suppression of the Profession of the True Religion in all considerable Parts of
the Dominion of the Beast. For it is the fiercest Persecution that ever the
Church was to suffer, and that in the latter times of the Beast (Theor. 25.)
And there have been all kind of Martyrdoms and Cruelties exercised against the
Professors of the Truth in particular Parts of the Dominion of the Beast for
many hundreds of years before the latter times of the Beast: For his
continuance is for Twelve hundred and sixty years together (Suppos. 2)

This overcoming therefore, and the killing of the Witnesses must be an utter
Suppression of all considerable public Profession of the Truth in all Parts of
the Dominions of the Beast.

Indeed the killing of the Witnesses, since they represent the whole Church
(Suppos. 4.) cannot without great force and wresting be understood of any thing
less than of the Suppression of all public Testimony of the Truth in all the
considerable Parts of the Dominion of the Beast, where they are in Sackcloth;
They would not be overcome or killed, nor would they lie dead, if they were
Prophesying in any considerable Parts of the Dominion of the Beast; The most
absolute Suppression of the True Religion in particular Parts of the Dominion
of the Beast, would be but the cutting off of some Limbs of the Witnesses, or
of the Body of the Church, whom they represent. The killing of the Witnesses
must therefore be a total Extirpation of the True Church, out of all the
considerable Parts of the Dominion of the Beast.

Hence it appears, That

By the three days and an half of the dead Bodies of the Witnesses, must
necessarily be understood at least three years and an half. Ver. 9.
For it is impossible, that they should signify literally three natural days
and an half only. For how is it possible that Peoples, and Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations, which is used in Prophecy to signify many different
Nations, should Ibid. Chap. 13. 7. Chap. 14. 6. Chap 17. 15.
be represented, as looking upon the dead Bodies of the Witnesses, that is,
upon the ruins of the whole Church in all parts of the Dominions of the Beast
(Suppos. 4) for three days and an half only? Especially when we see half a day
added to the number, which it is absurd to imagine of an Event, which is found
to be of so general extent all over the Roman Empire.

And then, whatsoever length of time a day may signify in mystical Language,
yet since Twelve hundred and sixty days just before have been found to signify
at least so many Suppos. 2.
years, That is a present Example to determine the signification of three days
and an half to so many years.

Wherefore

The dead Bodies of the Witnesses cannot signify literally the dead Carcasses
of slain Men. For then (by Theor. 27.) they must be supposed to lie three years
and an half unburied in all the parts of the Dominion of the Beast, where they
are represented to be killed (Theor. 21.) which is a monstrous thing to imagine
of any really dead Carcasses of Men.

For the same reason

The Death of the Witnesses cannot possibly signify literally a bodily Death.
For then by their dead Bodies must also be literally understood real Carcasses,
contrary to 28. Theor.

By this then it is undoubted, That

By the killing of the Witnesses cannot be understood any general Massacre of
the Protestants. Wherefore it is not now to be questioned, but that the killing
of the Witnesses, is not to be understood in a literal, but in a mystical sense
only. And then,

By the killing of the Witnesses is to be understood nothing else but a total
Suppression of the public Profession of the True Religion in all parts of the
Jurisdiction of the Beast. First, It is nothing but a Suppression of the
Profession of the True Religion. For since it is not any bodily Death of the
Witnesses, it must be a Suppression of that, which is the mystical Life of the
Witnesses, and that is, their testifying to the Truth; And so their continuance
in a state of Death for three years and an half, can signify nothing else, but
that perfect state of silence, in which the Church continues in the Regions of
the Beast during that space of time.

Grotius to this purpose does very learnedly observe upon Mat. 8. 22. out of
the customs of the Pythagorick and Platonic Schools (who were the most
universally followed in the Apostles times) that those who had left off the
Profession of Philosophy, and were become vicious, were represented as Men dead
among them, and had their Coffins set up in the Schools.

This is agreeable to the ordinary signification of killing and slaying in this
Prophecy, as the slaying or killing the third part of Men in the Sixth Trumpet,
the not killing them in the Fifth, and the Death of the Creatures in the Sea in
the Second; in All which Killing and Death is taken for the Extinction of the
Name and Profession of the Roman Nation, or the Non appearance of them under
that Name, though they were really in being.

Secondly, That this extends only to the Jurisdiction of the Beast, appears
from the place where the dead Bodies of the Witnesses are said to lie, which is
in the Street of the great City, and that has been found to be the Dominion or
Jurisdiction of the Roman Church (Theor. 21.) And besides, they are the dead
Bodies of the Witnesses in Sackcloth only, which signifies that part of the
Church only, which is under the Dominion of the Roman Church (Suppos. 4.) And
from hence it may be concluded, That

The killing of the Witnesses is at an end, when the Profession of the True
Religion is effectually suppressed in all States, where the Roman Faith is the
National Religion. For the killing of the Witnesses is nothing but the total
Suppression of the Profession of the Truth in all parts of the Dominion of the
Beast (Theor. 29.) And therefore it is at an end, when that Profession is
suppressed in all considerable States that own the Roman Faith for the National
Religion. For that is only the Dominion of the Beast, or of the great City,
viz. where the Roman Church has the chief Power of the Nation.

It may be objected, That the determinate Time of the last killing of the
Witnesses cannot be known, because there may new States come under the Dominion
of the Roman Church after the total Suppression of the True Religion in all
parts of the then present Dominion of it; And that therefore the end of the
killing of the Witnesses cannot be, till the Church be silenced in all those
States, which are still to come under the Roman Yoke.

But then, there would be two Deaths of the Witnesses, or two suppressions of
the Church under the Roman Party. For since the Witnesses in Sackcloth are only
that part of the True Church, which is in subjection to the Beast, (Suppos. 4.)
-- And that the killing them is found to be nothing, but the effectual
silencing of all that part of the Church, (Theor. 29.) -- The Witnesses must be
accounted to be dead in all their Limbs and Members, whenever there happens
such a total suppression of the True Religion in all parts of the Dominions of
the Roman Party.

And if the other parts of the True Church, which were not at that time in a
Sackcloth state, but in a free and prosperous condition, should afterward come
under subjection to the Roman Church, there would then be a new appearance of
the Witnesses in Sackcloth before the Resurrection of those that had been
killed; And these Suppos. 4.
new Witnesses being supposed to be the whole Church, which is at that time in
subjection to the Beast, the suppression of their Testimony would be a second
killing of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, or a new suppression of the whole Church
under the Beast; Whereas, after the first three years of the dead Bodies of the
Witnesses they rise again, and continue in Life to the end of the Reign Ver. 11.
of the Beast; So that whenever there happens to be such a total suppression of
the True Religion in all places, where the Roman Church is in Rule, for three
years and an half together, the first appearance of that time ought to be
looked upon as the only time of the death of the Witnesses.

Wherefore, the killing of the Witnesses must be at an end as soon as ever the
profession of the True Religion is effectually suppressed in all places where
the Roman Church is the Ruling Religion.

TO take away all fears of an universal Conquest of the Church and suppression
of the Truth all over the World in this great Persecution, here are very fair
intimations, That

The death of the Witnesses does not extend to all parts of the True Church,
that are at that time in being. This may very reasonably be gathered from what
is said Verse 9. that those of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and
Nations, shall see the dead Bodies, but shall not suffer them to be buried. At
the first one would be apt to look upon the hindrance of Burial by these People
to be an high instance of malice in them against the slain Witnesses, according
as it is almost every where in Scripture represented to be, when mentioned with
the dead Bodies of the Saints.

But it is to be considered, that the dead Bodies of the Witnesses do in this
place signify, The Members of the Church in a state of perfect silence,
without any outward Theor. 29.
profession of the Truth: And then the putting them into Graves must
necessarily signify a still higher mischief in that kind, or the utter
extinction, disappearance, and annihilation of the silenced Church; This is
confirmed by what is made to be the usual signification of lying unburied in a
mystical sense amongst the Eastern Nations, whose ways of speaking are
generally agreeable to the usage of Scripture. The being dead in a mystical
sense without any signification of being buried does with them denote hopes of
health and recovery; But the being dead and buried signifies the irrecoverable
ruin of a Man; As it may be found in the 130th of the Apotelesmes of Apomasar
or Achmetes the Arabian, which is a Collection of the ancient Interpretations
of Prophetical Dreams or Visions, that were in use amongst the Kings of Persia
and India, and is highly approved of for its use in the Schemes of this Book,
by the Two most eminent Critics in these matters, Grotius and Mr. Mede, though
the greatest Adversaries to one another in their Applications of this Prophecy.

According to this, the hinderance of the dead Bodies of the Witnesses from
being put into Graves, must necessarily signify, the not suffering the
silenced Church to be wholly lost, and annihilated; And since with this it is
said also, That those of the Peoples and Nations did see the dead Bodies all
this while, this does plainly intimate the oppressed Church to be in a Visible
state, and the hindering of their Burial must therefore signify the keeping the
Church up in a visible, though ruined Condition; And then considering also that
they were to rise again within three days after, the hinderance of their Burial
must necessarily denote the keeping them in a readiness for their Resurrection;
As on the contrary the setting a Watch, St. Matthew. 27. 64, 65, 66.
and the making all sure about the Sepulcher of our Lord (to whose death, and
Resurrection, and Ascension, this account of the Witnesses does unquestionably
refer) was a design in his Enemies to put an end to all hopes of his
Resurrection.

All these considerations may assure any Man, that the hinderance of the Burial
of the Dead Witnesses was an act of great Charity, and Friendship; And then,
those of the People and Nations, who were thus concerned for them, must be some
People, who had a great compassion for the Church in that oppressed state, and
who would not suffer it to be wholly lost in the Dominions of the Beast. These
Friends of the oppressed Church must then be such, as were of a Party contrary
to that of the Beast, who killed the Witnesses; and considering withal that
they were able to hinder the utter extinction of the Church in all parts of the
Dominion of the Beast, (Suppos. 2.) -- They must be a very considerable Party;
For they were able not to suffer the Enemies of the Church wholly to bury it;
And those Enemies were the whole Power and Party of the Beast amongst whom the
Church had been, Theor. 29.

What then can these Friends of the oppressed Church be, but some States or
People, that are independent upon the Roman Church, or the Beast, able to
hinder them from making an utter end of the Church, which they had suppressed?
And what can those States or People be but the rest of the True Church in some
neighboring Territories?

It may indeed be objected against this, That the Peoples and Tongues and
Nations, and those who are said to dwell upon the Earth, Verse 9, 10. must be
the same People. For so are they, Chapter 13. 7, 8. and Chapter 17. 8, 15. And
then those People must be such, as rejoice, and make merry over the dead Bodies
of the Witnesses, which shows them to be the worst of their Enemies. Ver. 10.


But in the first place, there is always a very clear distinction put betwixt
those, that dwell upon the Earth, and the Peoples and Nations, where ever they
are mentioned together in this Book, which is very often; And those that are
said to dwell upon the Earth, are every where, but in one place represented and
set out with a signification of their being the Enemies of God, and the Church.
As Chap. 6. 10. Chap. 8. 13. Chap. 13. 8, 12, 14. Chap. 17. 8. Chap. 12. 14.
and very expressly in this place before us. And in that one place, where it has
not the plain mark of this set upon it, (Chap. 14. 6.) yet it is expressly
distinguished from the Peoples and Nations and Tongues; Whereas the worst that
is said of the Peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, is that the Beast had power
over them, and that the Woman did sit upon them, which is no more than Rev. 13
7. Chap. 17. 15.
that the Beast, and the Woman, had an universal command of the World, which is
all that the Peoples and Nations do signify.

But here is besides under the terms of they or some of the Peoples and
Nations, etc. an intimation of a select sort Ver. 9.
of People distinct from the whole mass of those Nations and People, over whom
the Beast is said elsewhere to have had power, that is, within the bounds of
the ancient Empire of the Beast. And as those that dwell on the Earth are set
out as that part of these Peoples and Nations, which were the special Friends
and Party of the Beast, by their rejoicing and making merry over the Dead
Witnesses; So are these on the other side distinguished from them by the care
they took to hinder their Burial, which kept their dead Bodies in a readiness
to rise again to the confusion of their Enemies.

Wherefore it may now be safely resolved, That those of the Peoples and Nations
that hindered the Burial of the Witnesses, must be some States, that had been
formerly part of the Empire of the Beast, (as Peoples and Nations in other
places are found to signify) but who were at this time independent upon his
power, and who took part with the Church, to keep it from being utterly lost in
this eminent oppression of it; And what then can these possibly be but some
parts of Christendom freed from the Roman Yoke, who encourage and give
protection to those that fly to them, and who animate and assist the rest, whom
they left behind them, to continue firm to the Truth within them, which they
were forced to deny with their Mouths, or to deny all the Life and Power of it
in them?

CHAP. VII.
The Resurrection of the Witnesses is the Recovery of the True Church, where it
was totally suppressed; It is fixed to this present time. Objections answered.
The Resurrection of the Witnesses, the recovery of the Protestant Churches. And
to begin in 1689, or at farthest in 1690.

FRom what has been found to have been the undoubted Rev. 11.
signification of the Death of the Witnesses, it is as unquestionable, That

The Resurrection of the Witnesses is the reviving of the outward public
profession of the Truth in some part of the Dominion of the Roman Church, where
it had Ver. 11.
been wholly suppressed. For since the killing and the dead Bodies before the
Resurrection, and the Ascension after it, have been found to CHAP. VI.
be but figurative expressions, there is no question but their Resurrection
must be taken in the same sense; And then must the Resurrection of the
Witnesses necessarily signify the return of the same Life into them, which was
taken away from them by their Death; And that Death having been found to be the
suppression of the free profession of the Truth, (Theor. 29.) -- Their
Resurrection must consequently be the open profession of it.

And this must be in such places of the Beast, where this freedom had been
suppressed; Because the Witnesses cannot possibly be said to rise from the Dead
in places where they never were killed. Besides, that the Resurrection of the
dead Bodies of the Witnesses must necessarily be where the dead Bodies are said
to lie, and that is in the Street of the great City, or within the jurisdiction
of the Roman Church, (Theor. 21.) -- where they were killed.

But then, it does not appear, that the Resurrection of the Witnesses was in
all the places, where the dead Bodies lay. As their killing was carried on by
degrees, so it is very probable, that their Resurrection will not be all at a
time. But from what will afterward be found to be the time of the fifth Vial,
it will appear, that the Witnesses will be all risen again within a very few
years after the first beginning of their Resurrection. For the third Woe,
Conseq. 2. Theor. 66. Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.
with which the fifth Vial begins will appear to be within a very short time
after the Resurrection of the Witnesses; And that represents the beginning of
the Kingdom of Christ in all the Kingdoms of this World: As the fifth Vial Ver.
11, 15. To^ 6^.
brings on a general Mortification of the Roman Church in all parts of his
Dominion.

But in the place, where they first rise from the Dead, the Protestant Church
must be soon after the ruling Religion of that Nation, according to what has
been observed about the Ascension of the risen Witnesses into Heaven, (Theor.
23.)

About the particular time of this eminent recovery, and new Life of the Church
after its last dreadful oppression by the Beast, there are various
apprehensions amongst those, who yet agree in the particular application of the
Tyranny of the Beast to the Persecutions of the Roman Church. Some would have
the time of this Resurrection of the Witnesses to have been at the first clear
settlement of the Reformation, others would have it still to come, and some are
positive that it cannot be till just about the end of the Reign of the Beast;
And nothing is more worthy our Curiosity, or our most diligent enquiry to
satisfy it, than the resolution of this Question.

It will be a great advance toward this to be assured, That

The Resurrection of the Witnesses is not yet past. That which does most assure
this to us is the knowledge we have of the second Woe. For the passing away of
the second Woe is described to be just after the Resurrection and Ascension of
the Witnesses; And seems manifestly to have Ver. 14.
been put in there alone by it self at so great a distance from the true place
of it (at the end of all the business of it in the Ninth Chapter) for no other
end than to stand for a remarkable event to know the time of this great
deliverance by. Now the second Woe has been found to be the Turkish Empire,
(Conseq. 2. Theor. 19.) And cannot be yet said to be passed away.

But this may be still much more confirmed; For it is easy to see, that the
second Woe cannot possibly have been passed away either before, or since that
the Turkish Empire began; 1. Not before, because the last deliverance of the
Church by the Resurrection of the Witnesses must then have been before that
time; And the glorious appearance of the Church in the third Woe, which comes
quickly after the Ver. 14.
second, must have been very soon after that time, and have continued for ever.
But this is contrary to all the suppositions of those, that make the Roman Rule
to be the Beast.

The time of the Beast, and the Witnesses must also have been long since at an
end, if the second Woe had been passed away before the beginning of the Turkish
Empire. For the Resurrection of the Witnesses, which is just before the end of
that Woe, is said to be when the Witnesses had finished, or were about to
finish their Testimony. Ver. 7.


2. It is in the next place as impossible, that the second Woe should have been
passed away at any time since the rise of the Turkish Empire. For the second
Woe is known to be the business of the sixth Trumpet, which is the second of
those Trumpets, which had the three dreadful Woes Rev 8. 13.
proclaimed to be the business of them. Now the Woe of the sixth Trumpet is the
Wars of the four Angels, which were loosed from the River Euphrates, and who by
their Wars, and Conquests, and Equipage there described, must be some Princes
of Asia about the course of the River Euphrates. But from the first rise of the
Turkish Empire there has been no other Princes of any power, or continuance in
those parts, but the Turkish Emperors. There has been therefore no appearance
since the first rise of that Empire of any such Woe in those parts that could
be different from them; And therefore cannot the second Woe have been passed
since the beginning of the Turkish Empire, whatsoever that Woe may be in
particular.

And if the second Woe be not yet passed away, neither can the time of the
Resurrection of the Witnesses be yet past, because the passing away of the
second Woe, and the Resurrection of the Witnesses are described to be Ver. 11.
and 14.
much about the same time, whereas it is certain that for these thirty years at
least there has been so little an appearance of the last deliverance of the
Church, that it has been rooted out of almost all places where the Roman Church
has been in any considerable power.

It may possibly be thought to be as impossible, that the Resurrection of the
Witnesses should be near these present times, because they are said to have
finished their Ver. 7
Testimony before they were killed. For according to that both the Witnesses
and the Beast with whom they are contemporary, (Suppos. 2.) seem to be just at
their last end at the time of their Resurrection; whereas it is utterly
improbable that the Party of the Beast in so many several Kingdoms as he Rules
in, should wholly lose all that power in so short a space of time.

I grant it to be utterly improbable that the Reign of the Beast should be so
suddenly at an end; But there is no such necessity from the Prophecy that the
finishing of the Testimony of the Witnesses should signify the last end of
their time. It is certain that the Reign of the Beast or the time of the Two
Witnesses could not be at an end till some while after the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet; For the seventh Trumpet brings on the third Woe, which Ver.
14, 1^.
must be a Woe or Plague upon the Kingdom of the Beast, because there is no
other remainders of the Roman Empire for it to fall upon. And it is elsewhere
shown that the Roman Empire is the only object of the Plagues of the Trumpets,
Conseq. Theor. 18.

It is also said at the end of the sixth Trumpet, that the Rev. 9. 20,
rest did not repent of their Idols of Gold and Silver; And there is no part of
the Roman Empire, but the Church of the Beast, to which that can belong, which
shows them not to be converted just before the seventh Trumpet. Chap. 10. 7.


This is further confirmed by the effect of the Ascension of the Witnesses,
just before the passing away of the second Woe, and that was the Conversion but
of the tenth part of the Kingdom of the Beast; so that there remained all the
rest of it to be brought to Repentance by the third Woe, which is said to come
quickly after; And the last effect of that Woe is said in the Eighteenth Verse
to be to destroy those who had destroyed the Earth, who must be the Party of
the Beast, and does exactly answer, what is said of that Party, Chap. 13. 10.
That they that did lead into Captivity, and killed with the Sword, must go into
Captivity and be killed with the Sword.

The Beast then cannot possibly be at an end before the execution of the third
Woe upon him; And therefore neither can the Twelve hundred and sixty years of
the two Witnesses be at an end before the execution of that Woe upon the Beast.
Now that the third Woe will require some considerable time to execute it in,
after the beginning of the Seventh Trumpet, ought not to be questioned by any,
who consider that the three Woes of the three last Trumpets have a very solemn
mark set upon them, at the first notice, that is given of them Chap. 8. 13.
Especially when it is also found, that the two first of these three Woes have
taken up above a thousand years (Theor. 19.) and that this last contains in it
the three last Vials. Chap. 16.


That which is argued for the short continuance of the third Woe, because it is
said to come quickly after the passing away of the Second, is of no force,
except the coming quickly can be proved to signify the going away quickly,
which seems ver. 14.
to be contrary to it. Coming quickly does indeed in several places in this
Prophecy, and infinite places of Scripture beside, signify no more than the
sudden appearance of a Riberain Chapter 1. Apoc. Ver. 1. That which is begun is
already come. -- The common usage of Speech, and the usage of Scripture, does
approve of that way of (...). So also in Verse 3. ^^^d. -- For the time is at
hand, i. e. For these things will soon begin to come to pass,
thing, not the short stay of it.

Wherefore it must be concluded, That the end of the Beast, which is the same
with the end of the Witnesses Prophecy in Sackcloth, may be many scores of
years after the first sounding of the Seventh Trumpet. For though at the
sounding of the Seventh Trumpet it be said, that the Kingdoms of the World are
become the Kingdoms of the Lord Ver. 15.
and of his Christ, and that from thence he should reign for ever, yet it is
also said, That the Seventh Trumpet is the Third Woe; And it must first execute
that great Woe upon the Beast, before there can be such an universal Kingdom of
Christ established in the World.

There will indeed be no manner of difficulty to apprehend this, if it be but
considered, That all the Trumpets, as well as the Seals and Vials, take up long
periods of time within the compass of which the business mentioned in them is
fulfilled; And therefore the Universal Reign of Christ in the Seventh Trumpet
must be understood of the concluding part of the period of the Seventh Trumpet,
when the whole business of it is come to its complete perfection and
accomplishment; And the means by which it is to be brought to its perfection
being the ruin of the Kingdom of the Beast by the third Woe, well may the
whole business of the Seventh Trumpet be represented to be the advancement of
the universal glorious Kingdom of Christ in the World for all the time, that
the power of the Beast is gradually decaying under the third Woe, and that the
True Church is advancing upon the ruins of it.

From hence then it appears, That the Two Witnesses continue a long while after
their Resurrection and Ascension, or till the third Woe in the Seventh Trumpet
be fully executed upon the Beast; Which, if it have any proportion to the two
Woes before it, ought to continue for a great many years together.

It is therefore now easy to understand, that by the finishing of the
Testimony of the Witnesses just before their being Ver. 7.
killed, cannot be meant the end of their Twelve hundred and sixty years
Prophecy. It may therefore denote either the time, when they had fully made
known their Testimony to the World, which might be some time after the
Reformation, or when they were about finishing the Twelve hundred and sixty
years; As that word of finishing a business, is commonly used for the latter
part, but not the last conclusion of Affairs that require a long time for the
performance of them. The finishing them is many times meant of their being past
all the considerable business in them.

But that the finishing of their Testimony cannot signify the end of the time
of their Sackcloth Prophecy is manifest. For then the Forty two Months of the
Beast would also have been at an end (Suppos. 2.) Whereas the Beast is said
after that time to have made War with them, and to have killed them; Ver 7.
Which must denote some years after that time, if we consider, that the
Witnesses are the whole Body of the Church in all the Dominions of the Beast
(Suppos. 4.) And to make the time of the Beast to be at an end before this, is
to make the Beast to be in the highest flush of his power after the end of his
power, which is a Contradiction; Besides what has been already said of the
continuance of the Beast for all the time of the third Woe in the Seventh
Trumpet.

It may be thought to be inconsistent with the triumphant state of the
Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, that their Sackcloth-Prophecy
should continue for a long while after that time, and even after the sounding
of the Seventh Trumpet.

But it may easily be observed, That the Ascension of the Witnesses, and the
Conversion of their Enemies, did affect but a tenth part of the great City,
which can signify but a tenth part of the Kingdoms under the Authority of
Babylon Ver 13.
(Conseq. 2. Theor. 21.) which hinders them not from being in Sackcloth still
under the rest, though they should be risen again from the dead in those other
places also; And there is no more inconsistency in supposing them in Sackcloth
an hundred years after their Resurrection in some places, than there was in
their being said to be in Sackcloth ever since the Reformation; Whereas the
True Church has been the ruling or triumphing Religion of many Kingdoms since
that time, and therefore far from being in Sackcloth in those places.

It Is enough to give them the denomination of their being the Witnesses in
Sackcloth for their whole time, That they were all in a state of Humiliation
under the Beast, till just about the latter end of their Prophecy, And that
some of them continued to be so till the very last time of it.

But that the being in Sackcloth for their whole time cannot be said of them in
any other sense, appears from Theor. 33. where it is made unquestionable, that
the Witnesses are not yet risen again, and therefore have been in their
Sackcloth state ever since the Reformation, notwithstanding their flourishing
appearance in several Kingdoms since that time.

From what has been here premised there will now appear nothing in my Opinion
concerning the end of the Reign of the Beast to hinder the fixing of the
Resurrection of the Witnesses to these present times. For we see business
enough in the third Woe of the Seventh Trumpet for to keep up their Adversary
the Beast a long time after their Resurrection and Ascension, which will fill
up the remaining part of the Twelve hundred and sixty years of the Witnesses,
that in my way is still yet to come from this present time.

IT IS therefore now to be enquired, Whether there be any Circumstances, in the
Description of the killing of the Witnesses, that are sufficient to determine
it to this present time.

That which makes the fairest offer of this kind is the Expression of the
killing of the Witnesses in Sackcloth. For since the killing of the Witnesses
is not an universal Extinction of the Profession of the True Religion (Theor.
31.) It must then be supposed to extend no farther than to those, to whom the
Expressions in the Prophecy seem to confine it, that is, to the Witnesses in
Sackcloth, or to the Church in a state of Humiliation under the Beast, or his
Party, which according to all Protestants can signify nothing but the
Protestant Churches under the Rule of Roman States.

IF NOW we cast our eyes upon the present state of the Reformed Churches, in
almost all parts of Europe, wherever they have been under Roman Catholic
States, it will appear, that they want very little or nothing of being totally
suppressed. In all the Imperial Countries, in France, Poland, and Savoy, they
have been silenced. And what other considerable part of the World is there,
where they have any allowance under Roman Catholics? It Is true, the Churches of
England, and of the Palatinate, were lately come under Governors of the Roman
Party; But they were far from being in a state of Humiliation under the Roman
Church. For they were the ruling Religion in those Countries. They had all the
Revenues and Preferments of the Church in those Places; They had an open
freedom and liberty in the public Exercise of their Religion, and had all the
Revenues of the ancient Roman Church for their encouragements in it; And the
Exercise of the Religion of their Princes looked rather like a Toleration of
it, than like the ruling commanding Religion of the Country.

The Protestant Churches therefore in those places, must first have been
dispossessed of their Rights, and have been brought down to a state of
Toleration only, before they could have been in a capacity to be the Objects of
this last Persecution.

Wherefore to all appearance, the Witnesses in Sackcloth have been as really
put to death by the Beast, or Roman Party, as can be expected to be requisite
for the fulfilling of a Prophecy about so large a Society, as the Witnesses are
known to signify. For Prophecies about things of so general and comprehensive
a nature, do not usually regard every small part or single member of that
company; And therefore, though there may be some particular Towns, or little
Islands under the Domination of France, or some inconsiderable Principalities
in other places where the Witnesses are not yet altogether slain, That can
signify little or nothing to make one judge the Prophecy not to be as yet
fulfilled.

If it should be thought that the Churches of England and the Palatinate ought
first to have met with the same fate with the rest of their Brethren, it must
be considered, That their condition has not yet qualified them to be Objects of
this Persecution, because they were not in a Sackcloth state. There is then all
reason to judge by the outward appearances of things, that we have been now in
the time of the Death of the Witnesses.

I must confess I see no manner of force in the Criticism about the
signification of (...), to induce me to it, Ver. 8.
as if that must needs signify the Great Place, or Marketplace of the City,
and so denote the place to be France; For I find it very frequent in the
Septuagint to signify no more by that word in the singular number, than in the
common streets of the City, in opposition to the being not so openly exposed to
view, without any restriction to any one place in the Town, that is bigger than
the rest.

Besides, that (...) is the known word in the New Testament, and very commonly
used to signify a Marketplace, and no where is (...) certainly known to be
used in that signification.

But yet since the Suppression of the Protestants in France was so extremely
remarkable for the new Methods, and the horror of it, and did extend to far
the largest part of the Church, and especially because it was the last
considerable slaughter of them, there is all reason to judge, That the three
years and an half of their continuance in a state of Death did begin soon after
the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, that is, as soon as the Promise in it of
suffering the Protestants to continue in the Kingdom without any further
molestation of them, was violated by the Military Executions upon them, the
immediate effect of which was the general Apostasy of the whole Church there.

It is certain that present Death could not have been so much dreaded, as those
daily Vexations, which the Protestants were there under from those Barbarous
Executioners; Because there was no prospect of any end of their misery under
them; And nothing could have more shown that Persecution to be the last killing
of the Witnesses. For as the killing of the Witnesses will appear to be the
same with the great Persecution in Chap. 14. 12. So is Death there represented
to be a great ease and deliverance from the evils which were to be endured in
it, Theor. 40.

I cannot think that the faithful continuance of some Confessors among them can
signify any thing to the retarding of the Death of the Witnesses, because they
were so few and inconsiderable. Nor can the Humiliation of the Protestants in
Hungary signify any thing to the retarding of this Date of the Death of the
Witnesses, because they were totally suppressed there, about the same time that
the Persecution began in France.

That which makes me the more inclined to this Opinion, is the common use of
the things of this Prophecy to have very signal and remarkable Events, and such
as all the World must take notice of, To fulfill every considerable thing, that
is foretold in it; And as the French Persecution was the last so it made far
the greatest noise in the World of any other.

It is no small confirmation of this to consider, That as the time, times and
an half of the Beast and Witnesses, have been found according to the very
frequent use of the number 7 in this Prophecy to be a reference to some 7, of
which they are the half; so also do the three days and an half of the Death of
the Witnesses seem to refer to some seven years. For they are a very precise
number, and the only instance of that kind, except the time, times and an half.
This would exactly answer the time of the French Persecution from the first
flight of the Protestants in Poictou to the Peoples and Tongues Ver. 9.
in the Spring 1682, to the Resurrection of the Witnesses in the Year 1689, of
which the fiercest part of it at the Revocation of the Edict of Nants would be
the just half, or three years and an half; But the three years and an half of
the dead Bodies being restrained to the Nations sight of them, the seven Ver. 9.
years may very well be apprehended to begin when the Peoples and Nations began
to see the first beginning of that last Execution in the Year 1682.

But yet if the Resurrection of the Witnesses should be retarded for some small
while after the time, that this would fix it to; Here is still matter enough
from these Objections to justify the agreement of the Prophecy with the event;
especially if we consider withal, that the Persecution in Savoy ended not till
a year after that in France; And since that was the rooting out of all the
remainders of the old Albigenses, Mornay. page 318, 319.
who were almost the only Party of the Witnesses for many Ages together, that
Persecution may possibly be intended to signify the last end of their Life for
the last killing of the Witnesses, or their last struggles with Death; And then
the Resurrection of the Witnesses will not be, till a year after the time, that
is counted upon from the Revocation of the Edict of Nants.

But till it appears to be deferred, we must think it much more probable to be
sooner.

However, from that which is said about the passing away of the second Woe just
after the Ascension of the Witnesses, and from the Characters of that second
Woe, not only the Resurrection but the Ascension also of the Witnesses seems
plainly to be confined within the space of a very few years from this present
time. For I make account there is very great Evidence, that the second Woe must
necessarily be very shortly at an end, which will be the matter of the
following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
The time of the Resurrection of the Witnesses confirmed from the Expiration of
the time assigned to the Second Woe. The Second Woe is the Turkish Empire. The
Explication of the Hour, Day, Month, Year assigned to the Second Woe. The first
Date of that time.

THE grounds that I rely upon to make me apprehend that the second Woe will be
at an end within these few years, are these:

1. That the Second Woe is the Turkish Empire, and its Invasions upon the Roman
Empire; And next, that the time of the continuance of that Woe is determined in
the Prophecy to a set number of Years; which if we count from the first rise of
the Ottoman Empire, about the Year 1300, will expire soon after the Year 1690.

And first, That the Second Woe is the Turkish Empire, has been already
demonstrated (Conseq. 2. Theor. 19.) and will be still further confirmed when
it appears, That the time of the continuance of the Second Woe is more than
Three hundred and ninety years. And this I will now endeavor to make appear to
be necessary from the Text.

The Four Angels, which are the matter of the Second Woe, are said to be
prepared for an Hour, and a Day, and Rev. 9. 15.
a Month, and a Year, to slay the third part of Men.

To be prepared for an hour, a day, a month, and a year, to do a thing, does
literally and properly signify the length of time, that one continues either
prepared for it, or in the performing it. And we see every where in this
Prophecy, that any mention of length of time in it, does signify as many Years
as it has Days in it (Suppos. 2.) According to which, the Second Woe must
continue at least about Three hundred and ninety Years. For there is about that
number of days in those Rev. 9.
parts of time above mentioned in any account of the days of a year.

It is a very frivolous Objection, which is here put in by some, That by the
four Angels can never be meant, four Kings upon Earth; For their Armies are
afterward numbered and their place made to be the River Euphrates upon Ver. 14,
16.
Earth.

If it should be replied to this, That the being prepared for an hour, and a
day, and a month, and a year does signify no more than that they were ready
upon every occasion, or ready at a set appointed time to slay the third part of
Men, here is this to offer against it.

I. It appears not from any other example in Scripture, That there is any such
use of these peculiar expressions in so indefinite a manner; To be prepared for
an hour, or at a day, etc. put alone by themselves would, agreeably enough to
the common use of them, signify the being ready at a set time, or at any time.
But to be prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year joined all
together must have a very particular signification in it. For it would look
very odly at this time to use such expressions as these, only to signify so
common a thing, as a Man's constant readiness at all times for his employment,
to say of him, That he was ready for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a
year; when any one of them would have been enough, and it is not at all usual
to join them all together. The least therefore that can be said of this
interpretation, is, That it is arbitrary, and without example; There is good
reason therefore to apprehend it to be a mystical, and no common expression.

II. It is also contrary to the proper, and natural signification of these
terms to understand them of a set point of time, and not of the continuance of
time. The first of them would take away all the force of the other in the
former signification. For if a Man be ready at an hour, it includes in it his
being ready at a day, as his being ready at a day includes his being ready at a
month, and a year; And if there had been any design to have signified an exact
readiness by those words, they must have been in a quite contrary order; It
must have been said that they were prepared for a year, and a month, and a day,
and an hour. But in the order, in which they now lie, they do very properly,
and naturally signify the time of their continuance, but very improperly, if
not absurdly, any exact points of time; As this way of speaking would now
appear to be to express the set time of the beginning of a Campaign, that it
was ready to begin at a day, and at a month, and at a quarter; Its being ready
at a day includes a much greater exactness in it, than its being ready at a
month, and makes all that comes after it insignificant.

III. On the other side we see it very usual in this Prophecy to join the
length of the continuance of any considerable thing to the mention of it, and
to express it by days, or months, which are known to signify, as many years,
as there are days in that quantity of time that is made mention of; As thrice
in the next Chapter but one Rev. 11. 1, 2, 9. Rev. 12. 6, 14.
to this; And twice in the next to that about the Woman in the Wilderness.

IV. But that which does still more confirm the use of these expressions here
to be for a length of time, is the particular time of five months assigned to
the Trumpet just Rev. 9. 5, 10.
before it; And this sixth Trumpet being of the same kind with that before it,
or one of the three great Woes, there is all manner of reason to make one
conclude, That the day, and month, and year in this does also signify the
length of the time, that these Horsemen should continue to be the second Woe.
For the particular heaviness of those two Woes, is thereby signified to consist
chiefly in the prodigious length of their continuance in comparison with any of
the other Trumpets; And since the length of its continuance is expressly
mentioned in the first of them, and that there are words very proper for the
signification of a particular length of time in this second Trumpet, it is a
great presumption that they signify nothing else here, but the length of the
continuance of this Woe.

V. The employment also, that they were said to be prepared for, does show that
by the day, and month, and year must be meant the length of the time, that they
were to perform it in, and not any set time, or upon every fit occasion; For it
is very improper to say, That a Nation is ready at an hour, or a day, or a
month to slay the third part of Men. The slaying of the third part of Men does
de Ver. 15.
note a continuance of action for a long time together. And it is impossible to
apprehend, that that can be done at any set time, or upon every occasion
offered.

Wherefore to be constant to the common use of all the parts of times in this
Prophecy, by the day, month, and year of the four Angels in the sixth Trumpet
must be understood about 390 years, that is, as many years as there are days in
all those several parcels of time, and the Addition of the hour does determine
it to that exact period of time.

There cannot therefore come in any other Conquerors about the River Euphrates
after the end of the Turkish Empire to be the second Woe before the sounding of
the seventh Trumpet, and the end of the Reign of the Beast. For the second Woe,
if it were still to come, must continue more than 390 years before the end of
that time. Whereas according to all the considerable Opinions of Protestant
Interpreters, (Suppos. 3.) the end of the Reign of the Beast must be long
before that time; And yet the Reign of the Beast does not end till after the
passing away of the second Woe, (Theor. 1.)

It has also been sufficiently assured before, that the second CHAP. VII.
Woe cannot possibly have been passed away either before or since the Turkish
Empire began, because the Resurrection of the Witnesses, which must be before
the passing away of the second Woe, is not yet past, (Theor. 33.)

It may now then be safely concluded, That the Turkish Hostilities are the
second Woe, since the second Woe can neither be before them, nor come after
them, and yet by the Character of it, it must be in the same part of the ver.
14.
World, where they are now the Masters.

This conclusion will be as necessary, let the years which are signified by the
day, month, and year in the second Woe, be supposed to be of what kind they
will. But it will be serviceable for the fixing of the time both of their
beginning, and their last ending, to enquire, of what kind these years are.

There seems to be a Key plainly offered for the opening of the number of days,
that are assigned to the length of a year in this Prophecy; And that appears
from the 1260 days in the Twelfth Chapter to be 360 days to a year. For the
Woman's time in the Wilderness is there expressed to be a time, times and an
half, and 1260 days. Now by the name of a time is by all agreed to be
signified, a year, and the time, times and an half in that place, is an
unanimously agreed to signify three years and an half. And then, from the 1260
days, which are the same with the time, times and an half, it appears that each
of these years, can have but 360 days in it to make all the three years, and an
half to contain in them but 1260 days.

According to this account the day, month and year in the second Woe, will be
but 391 of such years as are now in common use.

It would a little puzzle one at the first to imagine what should be the reason
of this strange computation of years contrary to what was then the common
account of the number of days in them amongst both the Jews and Romans. For the
Jews had long before followed the Grecian account of 365 days to the year ever
since the Grecian Conquest of them.

But the mystery of this will soon be discovered, when it is considered, that
the time, times, and an half in this Prophecy is a known reference to the same
account of the times of the little Horn in Daniel; (Chap. 7.) And the
industrious explication of that time in this place by Forty two Months and 1260
Days, is for no other end but to signify, that the years here meant by the
times are to be accounted according to the account of the Babylonian Month in
whose Reign Daniel Prophesyed; And it is known, that the Babylonian year after
the time of Nabonassar consisted but of Twelve Months, each of Thirty days
length, to which they added an Appendix of five days, which the Greeks called
their Epagomena. So that when we find here 42 Months making but 1260 days, it
is to be understood according to the Egyptian and Babylonian account of 30
days to a month; As also the account of but 1260 days to three years, and an
half, where the Epagomena is omitted, because of the account by Months only.

This is the only tolerable reason, that I could ever find for expressing the
same length of time in this Prophecy in so many different ways, though others
are pleased with other fancies, amongst which Mr. Mede's concerning the fitness
of the Lunar to the Beast, and of the Solar for the Church is remarkable. But
whether this way of account ought to be admitted of in the computation of the
Day, Month and Year of the second Woe is not so certain. All that can be said
of it, is, That it is possible to be so; But the example of the time, and times
is no proof of it. For that was a peculiar Phrase taken out of Daniel, and so
had reason to be explained by 1260 Days and 42 Months according to the
Babylonian account, which Daniel and all in those Countries did ordinarily then
reckon by. But the Day, Month, and Year of the second Woe are not borrowed
expressions, and therefore seem to have reason to be understood in the common
way of their acceptance in St. John's time, that is, for 396 days, and
therefore in their Prophetical acceptance for so many Years, and those also
Roman Years, because those were the years in use at the time of this Prophecy,
as the Babylonian were in the time of Daniel.

Upon enquiry after the first date of the years here signified by the Day,
Month and Year; It will soon appear that they have so great a Latitude for
their Application to the Turkish Invasions of the Roman Empire, that it will
require some care to find the determinate Point of the first beginning of them;
For the Turks, from their first Invasions of the Eastern Empire, have now
continued above 600 Years; And therefore do we find very different
apprehensions, about the first date of these years, Even among those, who agree
upon the signification of the number of the years from these Schemes in the
Prophecy.

The only considerable differences, that I have met with, are the Opinions of
Mr. Mede and Mr. Brightman.

Mr. Mede would have these years begin with the first settlement of the Turks
about Euphrates, at the taking of Babylon in the Year 1057, and to end at the
taking of Constantinople, by Mahomet the Great, in the Year 1453.

Mr. Brightman would have them begin at the joint inrodes of the Turks upon the
Eastern Empire, about the year 1300, and to end in the year 1696.

Mr. Mede's grounds for his Opinion are, First, That the four Angels are said
to be prepared for so long a time to slay the third part of Men; And the
slaying the third part of Men must mean the total subversion of the
Constantinopolitan Empire to distinguish it from the Invasions of the Saracens
in the first Woe, who are said not to have killed them, but only to have
tormented them; Whereas Ver. 5.
the Saracens did as much as the Turks against that Empire, excepting only the
utter subversion of it; And the taking of Constantinople was the last
conclusion of the Fate of the Constantinopolitan Empire, and so might well be
accounted the last Act of the slaying the third part of Men; And therefore be
the last point of the period of the 396 years. That which he thinks does much
confirm this apprehension, is, That there were just the number of 396 years
betwixt the first settlement of the Turks about Euphrates, (by which the
Prophecy describes them) and the taking of the City of Constantinople, which
was the last end of the Eastern Empire.

But this Fancy of Mr. Mede's does not answer the account that we find in
History of the end of the Eastern Empire; And besides, it puts a very unnatural
force upon the literal construction of the Text.

1. For first, though it be acknowledged that by the third part of Men is meant
the Eastern Empire, the taking of Constantinople has no reason to be accounted
the last end of the Eastern Empire: For there was another Imperial Throne at
Trapezond which was not destroyed till near ten years after; Which does take
away the foundation that made Mr. Mede so very much pleased with this Fancy,
that is, the exact agreement of the event with the words of the Prophecy to a
year; Especially when with this it is remembered, that these years according to
the number of days in a year in this Prophecy may not be above 391 of our
common years, and so would have been expired about six years before the last
end of the Empire of Constantinople, but fifteen years before the end of that
at Trapezond.

2. Again, the number of years is agreed by Mr. Mede to be mentioned here, as
the length of the continuance of the second Woe in slaying the third part of
Men; And how incongruous would it be with the event to make those years reach
no farther, than the taking the Imperial Seat of the Eastern Empire, when as
the Turks have been for near Two hundred years since that time as bad a Plague
to the remainders of that Empire, as they ever were before. And it appears from
the difference betwixt the smiting the third part of the Sun in the fourth
Trumpet, and the slaying the third part of Men in this sixth, (which is upon
that account made one of the three great Woes in distinction to the first four
Trumpets) that it is not the Imperial Throne, that is here signified by the
third part of Men, but the Body of the Roman Power in that part of the Empire,
as a distinct People of that name, which were put See Grotius in Note the first
on Chap. 3. and Chap. 4.
an end to, or lost in the Nation, that overran them, and conquered them.

It will in the next place appear to put a very unnatural force upon the
literal construction of the Text to make these 396 Years to end at the taking
of Constantinople by the Turks.

3. For there is a description in the Text of four Angels Ver. 14.
bound in the River Euphrates, See Mr. Mede on v. 14. chap. 9. Rev.
which is agreed on both sides to be the settlement of the Turkish Sultanies in
those parts a long time before their famous joint Invasions of that Empire upon
their removal from those parts of Asia. They are also said upon their being
loosed, to be prepared for an Hour, and a Day, and a Month, and a Year; or, as
it is Ver. 15.
also See the beginning of this Chapter.
agreed, for 396 Years, to slay the third part of Men; And the word (...) here
rendered preparea does properly signify the being in a readiness to do it.

Wherefore, when they are said to be in a readiness for 396 years to slay the
third part of Men, the natural signification of those expressions would by all
impartial persons be judged to be either that they were in a readiness for 396
years together, before they were let loose, to do it, or that they were ready
to slay the third part of Men for 396 years after they were loosed; Their being
in a readiness for 396 years must signify either that they were ready for so
long a time together before their being let loose to do it, or that they were
in a readiness to act for all that length of time, after they were let loose
for it.

But in Mr. Mede's way it must signify that they were ready partly before and
partly after they were let loose for that execution. For In Cap. 9. Apoc. Ver.
14.
he does grant, that the unbinding, or loosing of the Turks in the Text was
about the year 1300, and so makes 243 of the 396 years to be before that
loosing of them, and 153 of those years to be after their loosing; Which yet is
not pretended to have any thing in the Text to favor it, and besides is
contrary to the natural force of the words.

It may be said indeed, That the slaying the third part of Men signifies only
the last Act of the Subversion of the Constantinopolitan Empire, since every
thing else was but the same with the tormenting them, which is attributed to
those Ver. 5.
of the Fifth Trumpet before this with an express distinction of the term of
tormenting them from that of killing them; just as the killing of the Witnesses
in the Eleventh Chapter is agreed to be understood of the last considerable
Suppression of the True Religion, though they had been killed in other
Countries long before; For the three days and an half begin from that last
Suppression of them only.

In this sense, the readiness of the Turks for the Three hundred ninety six
years to perform that last Act of the ruin of the Eastern Empire, may very
properly signify their being ready from their first settlement in Asia for the
performance of that last work, which was the business, that they were designed
for, and for which all the time of their continuance there was wholly intended.

But it is very easy to observe, that the slaying of the third part of Men is
joined with the letting loose of the Angels that were bound in the River
Euphrates, and that the design of their being loosed was for that end; And
therefore that the first beginning of slaying the third part of Men must be
soon after their being let loose upon the Roman Empire, which shows, that
though the last murdering Act of this Employment was the utter Subversion of
the Eastern Empire; yet that the whole process of it from the beginning to the
end is here to be understood by the slaying them from that time, that it was
begun upon the loosing of the four Angels to the last accomplishment of it.
Wherefore the slaying of the third part of Men must begin long before the
concluding part of the Three hundred ninety six years, or from the time of
their being let loose.

IV. And since their being in a readiness is placed in the Text betwixt the
letting loose of the Conquerors, and the execution of the design, that they
were let loose for, it is far more natural to understand it of a readiness at
that time to execute their design, than of being ready Three hundred ninety six
years before.

V. Since it is left indifferent in the Text to join the Day, Month and Year
either with their being prepared to Act, or with the Action and Employment it
self, it is far more agreeable to See Chap 9. 5, 10. Chap. 11. 3. and 12. 14.
Chap. 13. 5.
all the Examples of any length of time, that is mentioned in this Prophecy, to
join it to the Action it self, than to the being prepared for it; And the
Action it self is the slaying the third part of Men, which is agreed not to
begin till about the Year 1300.

VI. Besides, it is very improper to call the time of the Turks being bound in
the River Euphrates, their being ready prepared to slay the third part of Men,
as they must do who will have the Three hundred ninety six years to begin
before their being loosed from thence. For the binding the Angels in the River
Euphrates, is agreed by all to signify a check upon their Power, and a
confinement of them within their own Bounds, which is contrary to their being
ready prepared to invade or to destroy others.

VII. And then, as altogether improper is it to give the time, that they were
executing this murdering design after they were loosed, the same Expression, of
being in a readiness only to do it, which in this way is given to that state,
in which they were for all the time that they were bound, or hindered from
executing their design, before they were loosed. For of these two parcels of
time, that is, of the Years in which they were bound, and of those in which
they were loosed, must these Three hundred ninety six years of being in a
readiness be made up in Mr. Mede's way.

VIII. The time of the Saracen Hostilities against the Roman Empire, as the
first Woe, is set out in the Prophecy by the number of five Months twice
repeated, which do reach to the whole time of their Invasions of the Eastern
and Western Ver. 5. 10.
Empire; And this comes just before the mention of the Three hundred ninety six
years of this sixth Trumpet, which is the second Woe. Well therefore may the
time that is here prescribed for the continuance of the second Woe be concluded
to signify nothing but the whole time of its continuance to be that Woe; And
the time assigned for that, is those parts of time, which are agreed to
signify Three hundred ninety six years; The Date of which is expressed in the
Prophecy to be at the loosing of the four Angels, which is agreed to be about
the Year 1300.

IX. From the proper and natural Construction of the Text, the whole matter of
the second Woe will appear to fall within the time which is agreed to be
assigned to the slaying of the third part of Men; And therefore the second Woe,
or the Turkish Hostilities, not being yet past, the Three hundred and ninety
six years can begin but very few years before the Year 1300; For there are very
near Three hundred ninety six years past since that time, though we should
account them common Years. But according to the Apocalyptical Account of Three
hundred and sixty Days to a Year in the then time and times, there has been
already Three hundred ninety three Chaldaick Years and an half since that time.

And that the whole matter of the second Woe does fall within the Years
assigned to the slaying the third part of Men does thus appear from the most
proper acceptance of the Expressions of the Text.

The third part of Men, and the rest, that were not killed, Ver. 18, 20.
are the whole matter, or Object, of the second Woe; And the killing the third
part of Men, and the not killing the rest, must in propriety of Speech be
understood of the same time of Action, when some were killed, and the rest
escaped; As, when in the first Woe it is said, that they should hurt only those
Men, who had not the Seal of God in their Foreheads, it is plain, that the
rest, or the 144000 were signified to be secure for all that same time of the
five Months during which that Plague continued upon others.

Especially if we consider, that those who are said here not to be killed, are
said not to have repented upon it; which intimates them to have been Sufferers
in these Judgments at the time, when the other were killed, that is, within the
time of the Three hundred ninety six years.

Besides, the whole business of the four Angels, who are the second Woe, seems
to be expressed at the first sounding of the sixth Trumpet to be to slay the
third part of Men; and this is limited to a set number of Years, as it is
granted by Mr. Mede. When therefore there comes in afterward the mention of
the Rest, who were not slain, who would ever understand their not being slain,
but of the same time, when the others were slain, which had at first been
mentioned, as the whole time of the Plague of the four Angels?

The Three hundred ninety six years therefore are the whole time of the second
Woe, and so are known not to be capable of beginning till about the Year 1300,
because they are not yet at an end. For the Turks are at this present in Arms
against the Western Empire.

And besides it appears, That the second Woe is not to end till after the
Ascension of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 14. and the Ascension of the Witnesses is
certainly yet to come, as has before been shown, Theor. 33.

It is manifest, that the main reason of deferring the Declaration in Chap. 11.
14. concerning the passing away of the second Woe so long after the true place
of it, that is, at the end of the Ninth Chapter, was only to determine the time
of the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses.

We may therefore now securely conclude, That the Years, agreed to be signified
by the Day, Month and Year in the second Woe, are to be accounted from the
time, that the Turks were let loose upon the Roman Empire, after they had
continued for some time settled in the Parts of Asia about Euphrates.

CHAP. IX.
The particular Date of the Hour, Day, Month and Year stated. The end of the
second Woe, or of all Turkish Wars just at hand. And therefore the recovery of
the Protestant Churches by the Resurrection of the Witnesses to be very shortly
expected. The Parallel in the Twelfth Chapter of Daniel with this of the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the end of the second Woe.

FOR our better satisfaction about the point of time to Rev. 9.
which this loosing of the Turks from their ancient Settlements in Asia is to
be fixed, from whence the Three hundred ninety six years are to begin their
Date, it is agreed by Med. 586. A little before the year 1300.
Mr. Mede, and others, that it was about the Year 1300.

But because all hopes of coming to any determinate knowledge about the end of
the second Woe, and consequently about the utmost bounds of the time of the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, does wholly depend upon the clear stating of the
first date of these Years, I will make a more particular Enquiry after the
Circumstances that are to six and determine the first beginning of them at the
letting loose of the Turks upon the Roman Empire.

It is a very surprising thing to see how particularly the Circumstances of the
first entrance of these Euphratean Kings upon their Office are described, as
well as to how precise and set a number of Years they are confined for the
discharge of it, as has been just now observed.

Their first entrance upon their work is described to be after the loosing of
the four Angels, which had for some while been bound in the River Euphrates. By
this very Description of them, they must have been always understood, since the
Prophecy was given, to have been some four Barbarous Kings about the Confines
of the Roman Empire in Asia. For Euphrates was the last Bounds of the Roman
Empire, and of the Jewish Commonwealth, where the Prophecy was given. And by
their Armies, and Conquests, and Equipage, these four Angels appear to be other
kind of fashioned Kings, than were ever known among Civilized Nations.

But we are spared the labor of any further particular search after them by
the discovery that has been already made of CHAP. VIII. of this Part.
them, which has made it unquestionable that they must signify four Kingdoms
of the Turks.

If we consult with History for the signification of this binding and loosing
of the Turks about the River Euphrates, this Account we shall find of it:

The Turks, who before had been for the most part a wandering Knowles Turkish
History.
People, in the Year 1042, rose up against their Masters in Persia, by whom
they had been taken into Pay, and made themselves Masters of that Kingdom. From
thence they made their Encroachments upon the Roman Empire in Asia, and under
several Leaders had erected four Kingdoms about the Confines of the River
Euphrates, just a little before the first famous Expedition of the Western
Christians, or the Crusado's into Palaestine, somewhat before the Year 1100.

These Kingdoms were the Mede 585.
four Sultanies. 1. At Caesarea in Cappadocia, begun there by Cutlumusus, but
confined to the Borders of Euphrates in the time of Solomon his Successor. 2.
Of Aleppo. 3. Of Damascus. And 4. Of Bagdad, which were all up by the Year
1080. And though there was now and then a greater number of these Kingdoms than
four, yet, as the many Divisions of the Grecian Monarchy in the third Kingdom
of Daniel are determined to the number Four, because that was Dan 7. 6.
the most lasting number of the most considerable of them: So may this number
very well comprehend in it the whole time of the Divisions of the Turkish
Monarchy, though they were not without some inconsiderable Variations from it.

This Settlement therefore of the Turks in that fourfold Kingdom about the
Confines of the River Euphrates for about an Hundred and fifty Years together
without any considerable advances upon the Roman Empire, may very properly be
called in Prophecy, as it is there, Their being bound in the River Euphrates,
that is, about the Bounds or Coasts of that River; For in no other manner can
four Kings be imagined to be bound within a River; And so would any one now
conclude of the same kind of Expression concerning any River of England: For
Example, That there were in former times three or four Kings bound within the
River Thames, or Trent, or Severn, that it must denote the Settlement of three
or four Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy within the Bounds of those Rivers.
Their being said to be bound there, would be judged to be nothing more, but
their being there fixed by Providence, and kept in and confined there by
neighboring Princes.

But there is a very eminent circumstance in the Account of the first
Settlement of these four Kingdoms about the River Euphrates, to which the
binding of these four Angels may be in all reason apprehended to refer; And
that is, the forementioned Expedition of the Crusado's into Palaestine for the
Holy War, and their continual Wars with the Turkish Sultans from the very
first. For by this means were the advances of the Turks upon the Eastern Empire
repressed. Within less than Twenty Years they were beaten out of the most
considerable places of the Western part of their Encroachments, especially in
Syria and Palaestine; So that they were forced back again to the more Eastern
Parts of Asia about the River Euphrates.

This was so very remarkable a check to the Turkish progress, and it makes so
great a figure in the Affairs of those times, that it may very well be
concluded to have a special remark set upon it in the Prophecy; Especially when
it is considered, that this Holy War began just about those times, when these
four Kingdoms of the Turks in Asia were first founded; Which was not above
twenty years before that Expedition, and ended but just before that great
Inundation of the Turks upon the Greek Empire, Anno Dom. 1300, and was backed
by the greatest Confederacy of the Roman State that ever was known, by the
Authority of the most famous of all the Roman Councils, that of the first
Lateran.

And then the loosing of the four Angels from the place to which they were
bound, must at least signify the freeing of the Turks from this, and all other
Checks and Confinements, And their Commotions and Invasions of the remainders
of the Roman Empire, upon which this and all other Plagues of the Trumpets do
certainly fall. The business for which they were loosed we see is said to be to
slay the third part of Men, from which they had before been hindered.

Now it is well known, that the check, that was given to the progress of the
Turks by the Holy War, was all taken off at the Conquest of all the remainders
of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and at the abandoning of Palaestine by the Western
Christians; And there were therefore two points of time to which the loosing of
the bound Angels might refer in this respect. The one was at the taking of
Ptolemais by the Anno 1291.
Egyptian Sultan, which was the last Town then remaining in the Hands of the
Christians, and from whence upon that account the end of the Holy War in
Palaestine is generally dated by the Historians.

But it may be observed, that just about the same time Cassanes one of the
Tartar Princes invaded Syria, and recovered Jerusalem together with all the
most considerable Cities of Syria, out of the hands of the Egyptian Sultan, and
did thereupon put Tire into the hands of the Christians with many other Towns
and Forts, which the Knights Hospitallers, and Templers defended till about the
Year 1300; At which time the Egyptian Sultan recovered all again, into his
hands; And all the Orders of the Knights, that had continued till then to be
the Champions of the Christians against the Infidels for about 200 years, were
thereupon for ever driven out of those parts.

This is the account of the continuance of the Holy War in Palaestine; But at
the time of the first of these two dates, that is, in the year 1291 the Turks
themselves were overrun by the Tartars, and made Tributaries to them, and had
been for many years in that condition, before the end of the Holy War, which in
the latter time of it, was only against the Mamalukes in Egypt, without any
concern with the Turks. Wherefore since there are now about 396 years past
since the year 1291, and that the Turks do still continue to be the Second Woe,
the date of those years cannot be taken from that time; Nor can it be thought,
that any remainders of that War with the Knights Hospitallers, and Templers
till the year 1300 were a continuance of the binding of the Turks to the
confines of Euphrates, since we see that the Holy War had had nothing to do
with the Turks for many years before the year 1291. The Turks had been long
before invaded, and overrun by the Tartars, and the Sultans of Egypt were the
only Adversaries, that the Crusadoes had to do with.

Wherefore for a further satisfaction about the point of time, when the Turks,
who were before confined to the Western parts of Asia about Euphrates were
loosed from thence, it is requisite to enquire from their History, at what time
they were freed from the chief hindrances of their advances upon the
Constantinopolitan Empire, and when they did thereupon actually begin their
joint Invasions of it with success; Of which we have this following account.

About the year 1260, when the power of the Crusadoes in Palaestine was
decaying, the Great Tartar Cham made such an inroad upon the Turks all over
Asia, that they took away all their Sultanies from them. They did indeed suffer
some of them to enjoy their Sovereignty in some small part of their ancient
Dominions, but yet as their Slaves and Tributaries.

This subjection to the Tartars continued to be acknowledged till the end of
the Reign of Aladin the younger, which was about the year 1300. But he dying
without Issue, and his Vizier Sahib being thrown off, the great Men of his
Kingdom shared his Dominions amongst themselves; And from that time they began
their several Invasions upon the Greek Empire with great success. Amongst these
was Ottoman, the founder of the present Ottoman Empire; who, as he was far the
greatest Conqueror of them all in his time, so did his Family after him soon
swallow up the divided Kingdoms of the rest; And so have they continued the
sole Monarchs of the Turkish Empire to this day.

Now as the present Ottoman Family has ever since the Union of all the other
Kingdoms of the Turks to it been it self alone the whole Party of the four
Angels, who in the Prophecy are said to slay the third part of Men, so are we
by that directed to enquire, when that Family first began those Conquests upon
the Eastern Empire, which have gone on ever since without any interruption. For
from that time was the Ottoman Kingdom let loose to perform the Work, which is
assigned to the four Angels in the Prophecy, and have ever since continued in
it.

It is unquestionable, that about the year 1300 upon Aladin's Death, Ottoman
was an absolute Sovereign; And at that time all the rest of the divided
Sultanies began with him to invade the Roman Empire; So that there is no
question to be made, whether the loosing of the four Angels was at that time
fulfilled; All manner of check, or confinement was then taken off them, the
Tartars Tribute was at an end, and every one of them set up for himself, and
advanced upon the neighboring Provinces of the Greek Empire.

But we find Ottoman full of action and success before that time; He succeeded
his Father Orthogrul about the year 1290. That very year he gained the Castles
of Chalce, and Chara chisar, and soon after, the Castle of Einegiol, and before
Aladin's Death he took the City of Nice, which had continued all the time of
the Reign of the Latins at Constantinople to be the Imperial Seat of the Greek
Empire till about thirty years before. He was indeed all this time but an
underling to Aladin; But yet he had the absolute command of his Country, and
power of making Conquests upon the Christians, and upon the taking of Nice had
a Commission from Aladin to take the name and honors of a Sultan upon him.
Ottoman indeed is said to have been sparing of using them, while Aladin lived;
But his Conquests are sufficient to show that the murdering employment of the
Angels was then begun with that success, that it continued ever after without
any considerable interruption.

Wherefore though the Turks might continue to be under subjection to the
Tartars for all the time of Aladin, yet since that was no stop to Ottoman's
conquering Spirit, it is very reasonable to apprehend, that the loosing of the
Turks from their confinement to slay the third part of Men was begun by Ottoman
in Aladin's life time; Especially considering that the Prophecy does generally
pitch upon very remarkable events in all its figures; And that nothing can be
more remarkable, than the first beginning of the Ottoman Power, which the
taking an Imperial Seat of the Empire might be very well accounted.

According to this it is possible enough for the 396 years in the Prophecy to
begin some years before the year 1300, if we account them common years.

But they cannot begin after that year, because there was in that year a very
eminent letting loose of the Turks, who had before been kept under, and
confined within their own bounds; The immediate effect of which was, their
entering upon the murdering employment, for which the loosing of the four Angels
was designed, and which has been continued without interruption since that time.

But it is also as certain, that the date of these years cannot begin long
before the Year 1300, because, there are very near 396 years now passed since
that time, and yet the Turks continue still to be the Second Woe.

Wherefore upon the same account is the end of these years as capable of
various applications, as their beginning; That is, though they cannot be
continued beyond the year 1696, yet may they be at an end some few years
sooner. Thus were the seventy years of the Babylonish Captivity capable of
being dated either from the first beginnings of it in the days of Jeh^jakim, or
from the last accomplishment of it in the utter desolation of Jerusalem in the
Reign 2 Kings 24 1. Chap. 25. 1.
of Zed^kiah. And by the event we see it fixed to the first, which was that,
which would have been the least thought of.

It is therefore manifest, that according to the common custom of almost all
the Applications of the mystical figures in this Prophecy, there are very
remarkable circumstances, to make the beginning of the Second Woe in the sixth
Trumpet to be observed by all the World, and those are, The general Invasion of
the Eastern Empire by the Turks, and this at the same time with the rise of the
Ottoman Empire, and at the last end of the Holy War; Which had all of them
eight or mine years Latitude to be applied to. The end of the Holy War may be
either dated from the year 1291, or from about the year 1300. The beginning of
the Ottoman Empire, and of the Turkish Invasions of the Eastern Empire, seems
capable of being dated from any time of Ottoman's Conquests before the Death of
Aladin.

But the end of the Years assigned to the continuance of the second Woe, seems
to be very precisely determined in the Prophecy to a Year, by the mention of an
Hour, and a Day, as well as of a Month, and a Year, and that also without the
interposition of a Week betwixt them, as the Order of the parts of time in a
Year would require; Which seems plainly to determine the continuance of this
Woe to the definite number of Years which are contained in those three parts of
time; And since it must be some very remarkable Event, from whence the Date of
these Years does begin, they cannot be supposed to end many years sooner than
the Year 1696, (if we account by common Years,) because there was no part of
Ottoman's Reign more considerable than another before the Death of Aladin,
excepting his Conquest of Nice, and Aladin's Commission upon it for the Title
and Honor of a Sultan, which could not be many years, though it must have been
some while before the Year 1300. For in the Year 1300 Ottoman did certainly
take upon him the Title of Sultan after Aladin's Death; And betwixt Aladin's
Death, and the Division of his Kingdom among the several Sharers, there must
some time be allowed for his Favorite Sahib's Government before the Year 1300.
And some time also for Ottoman's Possession of Nice before that time, and for
Aladin's Commission to be Sultan. And we have the Authority of the accurate
Petavius from the Turkish Annals, which are esteemed the Ra^ion ^. Temp. (...)
1. lib. 9. cap ^.
most exact Account of the Turkish Affairs, That Ottoman's Reign must
necessarily begin near two Years before the Year 1300. And this last Day
determines the end of the Years in this way to the Year 1694 at the farthest,
but it may also be a few Years sooner, upon the other mentioned ground.

This Calculation does all this while suppose these years to be such years as
are now in use; But according to the Example of this Prophecy (as has been
observed) a Year may possibly here be accounted to be but Three hundred and
sixty See page 1^4, 10^.
Days, and then the Day, Month and Year of the continuance of the second Woe
will be but Three hundred ninety one Years. According to this, the term of them
would be expired in the Year 1691, counting from the latest Era of the Reign
of Ottoman. But if from about two Years before, they would then be at an end in
1689; And then the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, and the
Conversion of the whole Kingdom, whence they shall rise, as well as the passing
away of the second Woe, would be all in this present Year.

Whatever uncertainty there may be as to the particular Year when this period
shall end, it is certain, that the end of it cannot be far off; And it is a
very wonderful thing to see what great and eminent Circumstances there were to
signalize the beginning of it, which must make it taken notice of by all the
World, especially that of the rise of the present Ottoman Empire, which has
been the Terror of the World for these many Ages, and this also just about the
same time, when all the other Turkish Kings did begin to discharge themselves
like a vast Torrent upon the Greek Empire, and from that first beginning
continued their Invasions ever after with an uninterrupted Success, till they
had seized upon all the broken remainders of that Empire.

And to make this every way answerable to the Characters of it in the Prophecy,
this was all accompanied with that eminent Circumstance of the departure of the
Western Christians out of the Holy Land, who had continued from the very first
Setlements of the Turks about Euphrates, till a very few years before the end
of the Holy War, to give Check to the further progress of the Turks, and to
keep them within the Confines of that River: So that their leaving those Parts
did look like the giving up of the Greek Empire into the hands of the Turks,
whom before they had always used to bridle in and restrain from invading it,
and did very exactly answer the Expressions of the Prophecy concerning the
binding them within the River Euphrates.

For though the Turks at the departure of the Crusado's were not in Arms
against them, yet since their departure did take off all that restraint, which
was the whole business of their stay in those Parts, and which they had always
been active in, and which they must always have continued, as long as they
should stay there, it is very reasonable to conclude, That the Greek Empire was
left naked without its ancient Guards, and Champions, at their return home
again, and so seemed to be delivered up into the hands of its Executioners, for
that murdering Act, which is called in the Text, The slaying the third part of
Men.

But it is not necessary from the Text, that the Year of this departure should
be thought to be the first of the 396 years, though it were the unbinding or
loosing of the four Angels; For the 396 years are described in the Text to
begin with the actual beginning of the Execution of those Angels upon the third
part of Men, after they were loosed, which may very well be allowed to be some
few years after; As it has been found Necessary so to be from the number of
years which Page 118.
are already passed since the time of that departure.

But from all the concurrent Circumstances, which have been specified, it is
manifest, that the end of the second Woe is now almost just at hand: And does
not the present posture of the Turkish Affairs extremely agree with this? The
least that can come of the late Humiliation of them, must in all likelihood be
the keeping them in perpetual Peace and Quiet, and so prove the End of the
second Woe.

I must indeed confess, that I do not think it necessary, that the end of the
second Woe should be the utter ruin of the Turkish Empire. For I see, that the
Saracens, who were unquestionably the first Woe, are said to be passed away, as
they were the first Ver. 12.
Woe, long before the end of the Saracen Empire, that is, at the time when they
ceased to be any longer a Torment and Vexation to the Roman Empire, which was
near 200 years before the last end of their own Empire. The torment of five
Months, though twice repeated, could not be much longer than 300 years, which,
as it does indeed well enough answer the continuance of each of the Hostilities
against the Eastern first, and then the Western Empire, so was the last end of
both near 200 years before the last end of the Saracen Rule.

But all things concur to verify the Prophecy about the passing away of the
second Woe within a very short time. The period assigned for it in the Prophecy
is just almost at its last end: There is a very great appearance of the Death
of the two Witnesses, which must happen before it. The Treaty for a general
Peace with them is already advanced, and in all kind of likelihood to succeed,
and the present Humiliations of the Turks, are the most like the last
conclusion of all their Hostilities of any condition, that they ever yet were
in; And whenever the Peace shall come to be made with them, there will be so
many confederated Princes engaged in it by Interest to secure the perpetual
Observation of it, as will in all likelihood affright those People from ever
attempting to break it, before their Empire comes to its last end: And besides,
it will require a very long breathing while, before that unwieldy Monarchy can
recover it self from the weakness, that it is now reduced to.

Here it might without any great difficulty be shown, how exactly agreeable
this conjunction of the end of the Turkish Empire with the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, is to the same kind of Description of the latter end of the Turkish
Empire in the last Verse of the Eleventh Chapter of Daniel, and in the
beginning of the Twelfth Chapter.

For, as it is elsewhere made to appear, the full end and PART I.
accomplishment of the deliverance of God's People mentioned in the First Verse
of the Twelfth Chapter of Daniel, is the beginning of the Universal and Eternal
Kingdom of Christ. For it is the end of the times of the little Horn, which is
just before the Kingdom of the Son of Man, as the Angel does expressly declare,
Chap. 12. 7. And then is the scattering of the Holy People, or the Captivity
and Bondage of the Church under the Beast, said to be accomplished, ibid. And
therefore does the full deliverance of the Church in that place appear to be
the same with the glorious effect of the Woe of the Seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.
15.

Wherefore since there is also in the same First Verse of that Twelfth Chapter,
the mention of such a time of Trouble, as never was, since there was a Nation,
even to that same time, which was to be just before the beginning of that
deliverance, what can that be but the killing of the Witnesses just before
their Resurrection and Ascension, and the Woe of the seventh Trumpet? Which is
elsewhere shown to be the fiercest Persecution, that ever the Church was to
suffer (Theor. 4^.) And that just before the beginning of the last deliverance
of the Church by the Woe of the seventh Trumpet.

Now the time of this great distress in the Twelfth Chapter of Daniel is said
to be at the same time (Verse 1.) that some great Empire, that planted its
Tabernacle, or Royal Seat betwixt the Seas, in the glorious Holy Mountain,
should come to its end, Chap. 11. 45. Which cannot be understood of any other
Empire, than what must at least rule over Palestine, or the Holy Land. The Holy
Mountain does always in Scripture signify something of Mount Sion. And there
is no other Empire but the Turkish Empire, which can have those Characters at
the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses. For the Turks, who are
unquestionably the second Woe (Conseq. 2. Theor. 19.) are not at an end till
after that time, Rev. 11. 14.

The Turkish Empire does therefore there appear to come to an end just about
the same time with the fiercest Persecution of the Church, which is said to be
immediately followed at the Dan. 11. 45. and 12. 1.
same time with the great deliverance of the Church, in the same manner as the
second Woe is said to pass away presently after the Resurrection and Ascension
of the Witnesses, which was much about the same time with their Death, or Rev.
11. 14.
with the fiercest Persecution of the Church just before the beginning of its
last deliverance.

And then the Description (Dan. 11.) of the Hostilities of the King of the
North and of the South before the end of the latter of them, which are
described to be against another great Potentate first mentioned at Verse 36. do
very exactly agree with the Descriptions of the Saracens and Turks, as the two
first Woes in the Fifth and Sixth Trumpet upon the Roman Empire, which is A
L^aser on Ver. 2. Cap. 11. Apocal. Notat. 3. speaking of the latter end of the
Eleventh and beginning of the Twelfth Chapter of Daniel, -- From thence (says
he) c^^e the common consent of the Doctors (of the Church) that Daniel did pass
on from the Persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, in the Eleventh Chapter, to the
Prophecy of Antichrist: And quotes Bellarmin, lib. 3. de Pontif. cap. 8. for
delivering there, That the Ancient Fathers made no doubt, but that those words
of Daniel in the Eleventh and Twelfth Chapters, were to be referred to
Antichrist. And that Pererius says the same on Dan. 12. And S^r^a^ius in Pract.
Histor. fol. 590.
agreed to be signified by the King in Verse 36. For Arabia, the Country of the
Saracens, was South of the place, where the Prophecy was given, and Armenia,
the Seat of the Turks, was on the North of it.

CHAP. X.
The last Slaughter, and first Resurrection of the Witnesses confined to the
Kingdom of France, and its Neighborhood. From thence it dispreads it self over
all the Roman Jurisdiction. Why the passing away of the second Woe deferred
till the Account of the Beast and Witnesses was interrupted, Chap. 11. The
risen Witnesses the Executors of the third Woe. The third Woe of some
considerable duration. The Western Empire the only Object of the third Woe.

BY what has been just before shown concerning the time Rev. 11.
fixed in the Prophecy for the last end of the Turkish Hostilities under the
Character of the second Woe, it appears that the deliverance of the oppressed
Protestant Churches, called the Resurrection of the two slain Witnesses, must
begin at least in some of the Dominions of the Roman Party within a very short
time. For according to the Order of things in the Text, the Witnesses must not
only rise again, but ascend into Heaven, or into the Throne, as that is
generally known to signify in Prophecy, before the passing away of that Woe.
They must also before the end of that Woe have conquered all the Opposition,
Ver 12, 13, 14.
that will be made against them in those Parts, where they rise up, which may
reasonably be supposed to take up some time after their first Resurrection. For
upon their Ascension there is a Description of the Fall of the tenth part of
the City, and then a slaughter of 7000 Men of the opposite Party, and of the
Submission and Conversion of all the rest of them; The effecting of all which
may very well be judged to require as long a time as that interval which may be
supposed to come betwixt the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the last end of
the Turkish Wars.

Wherefore it appears from hence to be very improbable, that the final
slaughter of the two Witnesses should not be already past; For according to the
best, and most exact account of the beginning of the Reign of Ottoman, and of
his fellow sharers of the Aladinian Kingdom (two or three years before the year
1300.) There is now but a very short time yet behind according to the common
account of years. And there must be time enough allowed after the killing of
the Witnesses for the three years of the Dead Bodies of the Witnesses, and for
their being so powerful as to ascend into the Throne after their coming to Life
again, and for conquering all that opposition, which is signified in the
Prophecy should be made against them; And that cannot be supposed to be done on
a sudden; because, that after the slaughter of a part of their Enemies, the
rest are said to have given glory to God, or to have been Converted; And Ver.
14.
how can it be imagined, that there should be such a general Conversion of a
Nation on a sudden, without any methods of violence, and constraint, which we
are not to think, that the True Church newly restored out of Persecution will
ever make use of? We have indeed of late been so used to miraculous
Providence, that we may possibly enough see such a revolution in a
neighboring Kingdom, as Affairs do now promise. But then that does still more
invite us to expect the Resurrection of the Witnesses at this present time.

It may therefore now be very reasonably concluded, That the Death of the
Witnesses is already past, and that in all probability the point of time, from
which the three years and an half of its continuance did begin, was at the
revocation of the Edict of Nants by the King of France; Which, as it was done
with the greatest Formalities of public Authority against far the largest Body
of the Reformed Churches, that were in a state of humiliation under the Roman
Party, so did it appear upon that account to have the proper mark of an event
that was sit to be referred to in this Prophecy; Which, according to what has
been observed of the signification of the Schemes of it, does generally referr
to very eminent and remarkable events: And it is said of this in particular,
That Peoples, Tongues and Nations should see the Dead Bodies for the three days
and an half, to signify it to be so notorious, as that all the World should
take notice of it; And nothing of that kind, since the Heathen Persecutions did
ever make a greater noise in the World to draw the like observation of all Men
after it, than the new Acts of Cruelty against the French Protestants, which
made Life appear far more dreadful to them, than present Death and Martyrdom.

There was indeed all Artifice used by the Ecclesiastics to conceal and
disguise the Truth of these Proceedings, as if there had been no methods of
force or violence heard of among them. But the vast multitudes, which poured
themselves into all the neighboring Nations round about them, were a
sufficient Cloud of Witnesses to all the World to confirm them in the certainty
of it; And the Miseries to which they exposed themselves to get free from the
force and violence which they were there under, are unquestionable assurances
of the horror of it.

In all probability there cannot be any other Persecution yet to come, of which
it can be so properly said, as of the late Persecution in France, That the
Peoples, Tongues and Nations did then begin to take such special notice of it.
But besides, The French Church was the last considerable part of the
Reformation, that was in a Sackcloth state, and so must in all likelihood be
the last murdering blow in the slaughter of the Witnesses.

To this it is well worth the adding, That there must be some special reason,
why the time of the dead Bodies of the Witnesses should be expressed by Three
Days and an half. For as it has been observed of the time, times and an half,
so is there the same reason, that the Three Days and an half should be judged
to refer to some seven Days of which they are the half, because the whole Book
of the Apocalypse was wholly upon the number seven in almost all its number of
things. And therefore when we find such (...).
a peculiar and precise number of Three and an half, in the times, and in these
days, which are the almost only broken number, that can be found in the whole
Book besides; It would make one strongly presume, that they must be the half of
some remarkable Seven.

Now as no other Hypothesis does give any Account of this about the time and
times, etc. so cannot there be any other Persecution betwixt this of France,
and the end of the Turkish Hostilities (as the second Woe) that can have room
enough to come in for a claim to the Prophecy: Because it must be of seven
years continuance, according to this reference of the three days and an half,
whereas the second Woe must be at an end before that time.

But the beginning of the fierceness of this last Persecution in France does
admirably well suit with this; as has been before observed. For from the flight
of the Protestants in Poicton in the Spring 1682 (to give notice to the World,
or to the Peoples, and Tongues, and Kindreds, and Nations, that the slaughter
Ver. 9.
of the Witnesses was then begun) to the full completing of the slaughter of
them, October. 1685, was just about three years and an half; And then the three
years and an half more of the dead Bodies of the Witnesses from that time, to
the Year 1689, would make the exact whole number of Seven.

This would incline one to apprehend, that the first reviving of the true
Religion, that had been before suppressed, ought to be in the Kingdom of
France. The dead Bodies of the Witnesses one would imagine should rise to life
again in the same place, where they received their last Deaths Wound; And it
must be acknowledged, that all the Circumstances in this Prophecy would very
well agree with this. For there is the mention of the Fall of the tenth part of
the City upon it, which, according as it is proved (Conseq. 2. Theor. 21.) must
signify one of the ten Kingdoms, which are represented by the ten Horns of the
Beast to be in league with Babylon. For by the City here is unquestionably to
be understood the same City of Babylon, in whose Streets the dead Bodies of the
Witnesses are said just before to lie; And by that great City is as undoubtedly
signified the whole Theor. 20, 21.
Dominion of the Church of Rome, and not the particular City of Rome, or the
Territories only adjoining to it. And therefore the tenth part of the City may
very well signify the Kingdom of France.

But yet I must confess, I see no such plain Characters in the Text to
determine the first rising of the Witnesses to that particular Kingdom. For as
for that Criticism of Monsieur Jurieu's about the word (...), as if that should
signify the great place of the City, and so denote France, which is the
biggest Kingdom of the Roman Party, I have before observed, that there is no
force at all in it; which yet he acknowledges to be the chief thing that
induced him to have that Apprehension.

And then the other ground just now alleged for it, That the Witnesses should
rise again in the same place, where they received their last deadly Wound, may
be thus easily answered, viz. That by the two Witnesses are understood a large
Society of Men; And by the killing them is only meant the killing of the last
remaining part of them, which therefore was the final murder of the whole Body
of them. Wherefore by the same way of speaking, as the killing the last part of
them is made the date of the Death of the whole Company, may the reviving of
any other part of them be also made the date of the Resurrection of them all,
since they are all to rise again. The first date of the Resurrection of the
Witnesses may therefore begin in any other Kingdom of the Roman Party, as well
as in that, where the last Body of them was killed.

And yet when it is considered, That the Ascension of the Witnesses comes
immediately after their Resurrection, which is known to signify their being
placed in the Throne of that Kingdom, where they rise, it is very difficult to
imagine, where this can happen, but in the Kingdom of France. For as it must be
in a Roman Catholic Kingdom to be the tenth part of the City, so cannot it be
in the Imperial Throne; For the Beast is to continue in his Throne long after
this time, and how is it possible for the rest to be converted there, as it is
intimated in the Text by the fright of the Remnant, and their giving glory Ver.
14.
to God.

Nor is it any thing likely to be in Spain or Italy; For it is utterly
improbable, that there should be so strange and sudden a Conversion, as must
follow presently after the Ascension of the Witnesses, in those Parts, where
there are not the least footsteps of the Reformation. Nor can it indeed be
called the Resurrection of the Witnesses in a place where they never were in
Sackcloth, nor put to Theor. 32.
death in that condition. The same may be said of any other Parts of Germany,
where the Protestant Religion was never, as yet, in the free and full
Possession of its Liberty.

The Duke of Savoy seems not to be considerable enough to have his Dominions
accounted one of those Kingdoms, which are represented by the ten Horns of the
Beast, and which only can here be meant by the tenth part of the City; And
besides, he seems to be but one and the same Interest with France. And there is
no other places to fix it upon, but either Poland or France; And Poland has
been now so long settled in an universal conformity, that it is nothing so
likely to be the place of so general a Reformation and Conversion, within so
short a space of time; But the Gallican Church, in the present state of it,
seems to be already in the fair way to a thorough Reformation.

Again, one would be apt to conclude, that that which is said of the dead
Bodies of the Witnesses, That Peoples, and Tongues, and Nations, would not
suffer them to be put into Graves during the time of the three days and an
half, must more particularly refer to the Protection and Provision that was
made by other Protestant States for the late Sufferers of France. As the
killing the Witnesses was the total Suppression of the public exercise of
their Religion, so their not suffering their Bodies to be put into Graves must
be the keeping up the Members of that Church which is in a state of death and
silence, in a capacity of reviving the public Profession of their Religion
again. And nothing does so properly provide for that as the encouragement of
the slight of those Persons by which they are preserved from the necessity of
conforming themselves to the Worship of the Beast, which would be the burying
of the Truth in them past all hopes of reviving. Now all the concern of the
Protestant States in this kind in behalf of their persecuted Brethren from the
date of the three days and an half, was all to make Provision for the French,
and their Neighbors of Savoy, who are to be accounted of the same Church and
Persecution with them.

Wherefore since the persons that are to rise again from the Dead, are the same
with those, whose Dead Bodies were not suffered to be put into Graves during
the time of the three days and an half, it would make one apprehend that the
Resurrection of the Witnesses must be first verified of the French Protestants;
It is they alone who have been the considerable concern and care of all
Protestant States ever since their slight, upon the final suppression of their
Religion, and that is the time from whence the not suffering of the Dead Bodies
to be buried is supposed to begin.

And then by the reference, that has been observed to be in the three days and
an half, to some whole number of a seven years Persecution, the French
Persecution, which does exactly answer this as yet, would make one almost
confident, That France must be the concern of the whole time of those years
from the first beginning of them at that slaughter of the Witnesses in Poictou,
to the last end of them at the Resurrection.

That which has been here discoursed relates to the first Resurrection of the
slain Witnesses in one particular Kingdom, according to the Character of it in
the Text. But that will soon be followed by the same kind of Revolutions in
other places in respect of Religion, as we see the Trumpet promising it after
the passing away of the second Woe, or after the end of the Turkish War; And if
the care I have taken to fix the beginning of the date of the Vials be
successful, the fifth Vial must in my way begin the business of the seventh
Trumpet not long after the Resurrection of the Witnesses in France, or
presently after the end of the Turkish Wars, as the second Woe; And the
Revolution in the fifth Vial does promise an universal disturbance in the whole
Kingdom of the Beast, or in all the Roman Territories.

It may now be observed upon what account the mention of the Beast, and
Witnesses, comes to be interposed betwixt the conclusion of the business of the
second Woe, at the end of the Ninth Chapter, and the signification of the
passing away of that Woe at the Fourteenth Verse of the Eleventh Chapter. For
the proper place for that declaration of the passing away of the second Woe, is
at the end of all the business of it, which is concluded in the Ninth Chapter.
It is manifest that the reason of this misplacing of things is for nothing but
to join the latter part of the times of the Beast, and Witnesses, with the
concluding part of the sixth Trumpet, and thereby to show what relation there
is betwixt the History of the Beast (which is the business of the rest of the
Prophecy) and the times of the Trumpets.

But that which is the more particular design for this kind of interposing the
account of the Death and Resurrection of the Witnesses before the end of the
second Woe, seems evidently to be to show what Enemy it was that should be the
third Woe, and who should be the objects of it. For after the whole business of
the second Woe had been concluded in the Ninth Chapter, it is said Verse 20.
That the rest repented not of the works of their hands; After which comes in
the Relation of the Beast, and Witnesses to show who were those rest, that
repented not for the Judgment of that Woe, (upon whom for that reason the next
Woe was to fall) and who should be the inflicters of the succeeding Woe:
According to the examples of the Two Woes, that went before, where there is
first an account of the object of the Woe, which in the Chap. ^. ^. Ver. 15.
fifth Trumpet is those who were not sealed, and in the sixth Trumpet the third
part of Men, and then, the enemy, that was to be the inflicter of it, which in
the fifth Trumpet is the Locusts, and in the sixth Trumpet the Euphratean
Horsemen. So also here is the Party of the Beast introduced for the object of
the last Woe, or the seventh Trumpet, and the Witnesses represented to rise
from the Dead, and to be enthroned just before it, together with their Triumph
over their Enemies, to show who are to be the Enemies, and Tormentors to
execute the third Woe.

It is plain, that the third Woe must be one and the same Enemy, and interest
to hold any resemblance to the other two; And accordingly do we find it so
represented by the effect of it, which was the advancement of the universal
Kingdom of Christ; And since this is described to be begun by the success of
the Two Witnesses just before the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, it is to be
concluded, That the executors of the third Woe are the risen Witnesses, and
that they are altogether the Agents in it. The whole business of the seventh
Trumpet is the continual advancement of the Kingdom of Christ; This is
signified to be a Woe, and destruction to the Beast; And therefore must all the
inflicters of it be of the party of that Kingdom, to make it one single Woe
only: According as the Agents in the two first Woes have been found to be.
Wherefore the power of the risen Witnesses must be accounted the chief Agent in
the third Woe or seventh Trumpet.

That the Beast and Witnesses must necessarily continue together in the
business of the seventh Trumpet for a considerable time, is unquestionable:
because they both end together, and must therefore continue together during all
the time of the execution of the third Woe upon the Beast.

And if the time of the passing away of the second Woe, or the Turkish
Hostilities, be any thing so near, as has been already proved, the continuance
of the third Woe CHAP. VII* I^X, and X.
must be for many years together: For the third Woe is said to come quickly
after the passing away of the second, which, as has been shown, must denote the
sudden beginning of the third Woe after the second, and not the sudden
execution of it.

As for that which is alleged in favor of the sudden execution of the third
Woe presently after the end of the second, from that expression in the Tenth
Chapter, When the seventh Angel should begin to sound, the mystery of God
should be finished, as if that should signify, That the third Woe should be
fully accomplished at the first sounding of the seventh Trumpet, that objection
has all its force from the Translation of (...), but that expression is as
ordinarily taken for the whole time of any action to come, as it is for the
beginning of it.

If it should be questioned whether the seventh Trumpet, or third Woe may not
concern the Eastern Empire, as the two Woes before it did, and so have little
or nothing to do with the Affairs of the Beast; It is to be considered, That
the Eastern Empire is signified to have been utterly destroyed by the second
Woe under the terms of the slaying the third part of Men, which can signify
nothing more against the Greek Empire, than what the Saracens before them did,
but unless it was the utter ruin of that Empire; And so there is nothing now
remaining of the Roman Empire for the last Woe to be executed upon, but only
the Dominion of the Party of the Beast; And the Roman Empire has been before
proved to be, the only object of the Calamities of the Trumpets, (Conseq.
Theor. 18.)

CHAP. XI.
The Trumpets and Vials have different Objects. The first Date of the Vials not
before the Protestant Reformation.

THE Discovery that has been made of the nature of the third Woe, is a fair
invitation to enquire, what Relation the Seven Vials have to the latter Times
of the Beast. For it is certain that the third Woe must have some relation in
it to the Vials, because the Vials are said to be the last Plagues upon the
Beast, and the third Woe is found to be the last Woe that brings him to his
ruin.

It will indeed be found to be of the greatest importance, for the fixing the
Applications of all the parts of the Prophecy which relate to the latter
Fortunes of the Church, and of the Beast, to determine the first Date of the
time of the seven Vials.

At the first cursory view of the Matter of them, one would be very apt to
judge them to be the same Plagues with the Trumpets. For as they are the same
precise number with them, so do they, every one of them in particular, fall
upon the same Subject, that each of the Trumpets are concerned about, and that
also exactly in the same order; the first in each upon the Earth, the second
upon the Sea, the third upon the Rivers, the fourth upon the Sun, the fifth
upon the Men that had not the Seal of God in their Foreheads, or upon the
Kingdom of the Beast, the sixth upon the River Euphrates, the seventh upon all
the Remainders of the power of the Beast, to his final Destruction.

But it is to be considered in the first place, That how great a Presumption
soever this may give to think them to be but one and the same thing, yet it is
certain, that it is very usual in this Book to give the same general Characters
of very different Things. One great Instance of which, is the frequent use of
the number Seven, to signify the Sums of Things of one and the same Kind, tho
the several Sums that have that name, be very different from one another in the
number of the Particulars that are included in each of those Seven; so also are
there the same Descriptions of the Doxologies of the 24 Elders in several parts
of the Prophecy, which yet are agreed by all to be applied to very different
Things.

This then does sufficiently satisfy one, that it would be agreeable enough to
the use and custom of this Prophecy, That the seven Trumpets and the seven
Vials should have one or two of the same general Characters in each, tho they
should belong to very different Things.

The Trumpets and Vials might thus have both of them the number of 7, to
express their being the Sum of all the Plagues of each Kind; and each of these
Kinds might have the same general Object assigned to them, tho in other
respects they were very different from one another.

One may indeed easily perceive the reason of the Order in which the first five
Subjects of the Plagues, both of the Trumpets and Vials are placed, to be only
to resemble the Empire, upon which they fall to a System of the World; and
accordingly do we find the parts of it reckoned up in that order in which the
parts of the World do the most nearly regard us: The Earth first, with the
Contents of it, the Trees and Grass; and then the Sea, with the Things in it,
the Ships and Fish: After that the Rivers, which are the last considerable
parts of this lower World; then the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, as the
Description of the celestial part of the World; and after them, the Air betwixt
Heaven and Earth, which in both the fifth Trumpet and fifth Vial, is
represented to be darkened. But then that the Evils themselves which are
inflicted in each of these Vials and Trumpets, must be Plagues really different
from one another, is apparent upon these several Accounts.

1. The respective Plagues of each Trumpet and Vial, are signified by the
Schemes of different Plagues. The Egyptian Hail is the plague of the first
Trumpet; but the plague of the first Vial is that of the Boyles and Sores. The
plague of the third Trumpet is the Egyptian Plague of the Rivers turned into
Blood: The plague of the third Vial, is the bitterness of the Waters of the
River, like the Waters of Marah. The plague of the fourth Trumpet, is the Sun
smitten and darkened: The plague of the fourth Vial is on the contrary, the Sun
in great power, and scorching Men with the heat of its Light. The fifth Trumpet
is the plague of the Egyptian Locusts, and the smoke of the Pit that brought
them: The fifth Vial brings on the Egyptian Plague of Darkness.

2. The Plagues of each Kind are also distinguished from one another, by the
different parts of the Subject that they fall upon; those of the Trumpets do
generally extend but to a third part of the Subject that they are concerned
about, those of the Vials do fall upon the same kind of Subject without
limitation.

3. Again, The plagues of the Vials are very expressly distinguished by name
from those of the Trumpets; they are called the seven last Plagues after the
seven Trumpets had been before particularly described. There could not have
been a more plain and manifest note of distinction from one another than this.
For tho the last Days and the last Times be taken in a great Latitude in
Scripture, yet the Name of the seven last Plagues, after an account of seven
other Plagues which had been described almost just before them in the same
Prophecy, cannot without forcing and wresting the Expressions be thought to
have no relation to the Plagues that had been mentioned before them.

4. And then it is expressly signified, that the first Vial is contemporary with
the Reign of the Beast; for it fell upon those who had his Mark, and that not
till there was a very signal Victory obtained over those that had that mark, as
is described chap. 15. 2. But the Plagues of the Trumpets must be in their full
power at the first beginning of the Reign of the Beast at latest, and when he
is in the highest flush of Prosperity; for the whole time of the Reign of the
Beast is in the time of the Trumpets. Theor. 5.

It cannot be here pretended, that the Victory over the Beast, chap. 15. 2. was
after any of the Vials; for it is described at the same time with the first
sight of the 7 Angels with the 7 last Plagues, and before they went out to
execute them: And besides, it is said, That after that they were seen to go out
of the Temple for that purpose.

Indeed, from the consideration of the place of this Victory in that Chapter,
compared with the Circumstances in which it is mentioned, and with the Fortunes
of the Church since the first rise of the Beast, I cannot but conclude that the
first Date of the Vials must be some time after the beginning of the Protestant
Reformation.

The Grounds upon which I rely for it are various; and the strongest are those
which are drawn from the 14th. Chapter, in the latter end of these Papers. But
I will at present consider, what Advantages there are here offered in the 15th.
Chapter, by way of Preamble, to the more particular account of the Vials, which
follows it in the 16th. Chapter: And tho I do not esteem all the particulars
that I bring here in this Chapter, to confirm it to be of equal force for it,
yet there is enough in them to make it unquestionable, that the Vials could not
begin before that time.

1. It is plain from the Text, that the Time of the Vials began not till after
a very signal Victory over the Beast, Rev. 15. 2.
and his Image, etc. And as the whole Time of the Beast is described all over
the Prophecy, as a State of outward real Tyranny and Oppression, so must the
Victory over the Beast be as Idem. To overcome the Beast is not only not to
adore him, (for that they might do by flight,) but to denounce the fiercest War
to the Beast, by the Ministers of the Gospel.
real and literal a deliverance from that Tyranny; or be at least the humbling
or subduing the power of it. The Victory of the Witnesses over the Beast, which
is the Victory here meant, must be allowed to be as real and literal as the
Victory of the Beast over the Witnesses.

The Conquerors are indeed said to be seen in Heaven, as if it were only a
deliverance from the Tyranny of the Beast by Death; but it is well known, that
Heaven all over these Visions, is taken in very different senses, and generally
does signify nothing but the peculiar presence of God in his Church upon
Earth, when it is joined with the Temple, as in this place; and so is it in
several places of this Prophecy set out by the Temple, with the chief things
belonging to it: And tho perseverance to the death in the midst of Persecution,
be also called a Victory in this Prophecy, yet that is a Victory that runs
through the whole Time of the Reign of the Beast, whereas this is represented
as a peculiar deliverance, just at the beginning of the seven last Plagues.

2. It is also represented as a deliverance out of Egypt as is Alcasar in cap.
15. There is a manifest allusion in the Sea of Glass to the Red Sea, which the
Children of Israel passed through -- with this difference, that the Plagues in
that History go before the entrance of the Israelites into the Sea; but the
Plagues in this place, do not go before the Entrance of these mystical
Israelites into the Sea, but follow it.

Ibid. The Sea here is not to be understood of the Sea in the Temple, as it is
in the 4th. Chapter, but of the Red Sea.

Ibid. The Song of Moses here is the Song of Deliverance, in the 15th. Chapter
of Exodus. And the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, is the Song of Moses taken
mystically for a Christian Song. It is usual with the Prophets under the cover
of Jewish Histories, to allude to the Histories of the Christian Church. John
first saw (the Conquerors on) the Sea of Glass, and after that the Angels with
the seven Vials: But the Angels are first mentioned, to signify the Judgments,
that the Conquerors rejoiced to foresee just then coming.

Ibid. The Victory is a Triumph over the mystical Pharaoh.

Ibid. The Conquerors here mentioned, I make account, are unquestionably the
144000 in the 7th. and 14th. Chapters: And therefore as Conquerors they have
Palms in their Hands, in the 17th. Chapter. And Harps here, and in the 14th.
Chapter.

Ibid. They are said to stand upon the Sea, as the Angel in the 10th. Chapter,
because they stood in the Sea.

Cornel. a Lapide, on the 15th. chap. Apoc. v. 2. This is an allusion to the
Passage of the Israelites over the Red Sea dry-foot -- It does therefore
signify the Passage of the first of the Faithful through the Sea of Gentilism.

Ribera, cap. 15. Apoc. The Conquerors stand upon the Sea, that is, just at the
brink of it. (Upon, is taken here for near.) Now they stand just near the Sea,
not within it, because they are not a part of that Sea; -- tho they live near
the followers of Antichrist.

Ibid. They sing the Song of Moses, -- that is, the same that Moses sung with
the People after their Passage over the Red Sea, -- But with very good reason
shall the Conquerors of Antichrist sing this Song, because as the Children of
Israel sung it, because they were not catched by Pharaoh: -- So they, because
they are not overcome by Antichrist, whose Type Pharaoh was.

And as the Children of Israel sung upon the Shore of the Red Sea, so shall the
just sing upon the Shore of the Sea of Glass.


evident from the mention of the Song of Moses, which they sung, which is much
the same with that which was sung by the Israelites at their deliverance from
the Egyptian Bondage; And therefore are they represented upon a Sea of Glass
Exodus 15. 1.
mingled with Fire, in reference to the Red Sea which that did represent.

Accordingly do we find the Tyranny of the Beast represented by Egypt, which is
one of the Names of Rome in this Book; and the seven Plagues are here described
in a plain allusion to the Plagues of Egypt: But yet with this difference
betwixt them, that the Song of Moses is here sung upon a Deliverance that was
before the Plagues; whereas in that of Exodus, it was sung upon a Deliverance
after the Plagues: And there is in this of the Vials the mention of two
Deliverances; one of a part of the Church, which is Rev. 15. 2.
described here as coming before the Vials; and another of the whole Church at
the end of the Vials; and therefore are Chap. 11. 1^.
there two distinct Songs of Victory and Deliverance. One here before the
Vials, and another after the Vials, in Chap. 15. 3.
Chap. 19. and in the last Trumpet, Chap. 11. just as the Temple of the
Tabernacle is here opened before the Execution V. 5.
of the Plagues of the Vials, and is found in the same Expressions at the end
of the Matter of the last Trumpet, Chap. 11. 19.
which is certainly after the time of the Vials. And by the opening of the
inner Court of the Temple, or of the Tabernacle of the Testimony, must be
understood a greater Freedom of the true Christian Church, than before had
been, as will be afterward made to appear.

This first Victory then cannot tolerably be understood of any thing less than
a Freedom from the Bondage of the Roman Church, or of a free Exercise of the
true Religion: For this Victory must answer the Deliverance out of Egypt. There
must be a distinction made betwixt it and the serving God under Bondage and
Slavery, as the Israelites did in Egypt: And therefore must it be not only a
Spiritual Freedom from the worship of the Beast in their Souls, but an outward
freedom also from the constraints and oppressions of their Enemies.

This does Monsieur Jurieu very well urge about the last deliverance of the
Church, before which it is said to be in a Captivity, which is called Egypt,
under the Tyranny of the Beast; Its deliverance out of it must therefore (as he
observes) be a state of freedom upon Earth, if not an Earthly Canaan. It cannot
be less than an enjoyment of a freedom from all molestation from the Beast in
the service of God; for that is the plain litteral sense of the expressions.
And since the victory in this place is allowed by him to have also the
characters of a deliverance out of Egypt, there is altogether the same reason
for interpreting it to be an outward freedom of a part of the Church from the
same Yoke and Oppression, tho not so full, and complete, as that glorious
deliverance of the whole Church of Christ at the last end of the Beast; And
there is no tolerable excuse for judging it to be otherwise, unless it were
here joined with some other circumstances, which did make it necessary to be a
Spiritual victory only.

Now such a free Exercise of the true Religion can never be found to have been
till the time of the Reformation. The Waldenses, and Albigenses were indeed in
the public profession of their Religion before that time; but it was almost
constantly with their Arms in their Hands; They were far from having any open
secure freedom in it; or any Protection from the Civil Power; And how little
like that was to a Victory over their Enemies, and all their Confederates, as
it is here described to be over the Beast, and his Image, and his Mark, and his
Name, etc. does appear from the constant troubles, and Wars that people were
in, during that small interval, in which they had the public exercise of their
Religion. If that can be called a victory over the Beast, what can be called
Warring with him?

As for other more spiritual notions of War and Victory, they must first be
proved to be necessary, before we can be allowed to leave the litteral
acceptations of them, which is the common use of them in this book.

The humbling of the Papal Authority by the Councils of Constance and Basil can
be nothing of the Victory here described. For the most that can be made of
that, is, that it was a Victory of the Image or of the Church of Rome, over the
False Prophet, or the Papal Power. The Roman Church continued still to be the
Rule of Faith, which is the great malignity of the Beast and his Image; and a
very notorious effect was there shown of it at that time, when John Hus and
Hierome of Prague were burnt for their Erroneous Opinions.

3. It cannot but seem very harsh and incongruous at the first sight, to place
these Vials in any part of the Reign of the Beast betwixt the first advancement
of the Papal Power, and the Reformation, because that was the most flourishing
state of the Roman Church; and the Vials are but the several Judgments of God
to bring that Church to its end by so many sensible decays of his Power.

They are represented as so many present vexations and humiliations of that
party, as the Plagues of Egypt were to Pharaoh and the Egyptians.

Now from the time of Gregory the 7th, 1074. till the time of the Reformation,
the Roman Church was in its highest triumph, and the followers of the Lamb
under the most absolute Slavery, and the most Tyrannical Oppressions; And how
can that be consistent with any such signal Victory over the Beast, as is
described to precede these judgments upon him? For this Victory cannot denote
any thing less, than a freedom from the Roman Yoke, and some signal blow to the
weakening of the Empire of the Church, and which was the beginning of their
sorrows, and was followed by the rest of the seven plagues in order, till that
Church was utterly ruined.

Indeed there has nothing yet been offered that does give any tolerable account
of any Victory of the true Church of Christ, before the Reformation, from
whence the date of these Vials should begin. Most of the applications of the
Vials themselves are so far from being accompanied with any Victory over the
Beast, that the very Vials themselves and the judgments in them are applied
many times to things, that were the greatest strength, and advancement of the
Roman Church, such as these that follow; The reducing of the several Kingdoms
of the World under the Obedience of the Roman Church, by a Sea of Blood, is
made a Vial; and yet that was the greatest advancement of that interest. The
Barbarity of the Tenth Age is made another Vial, and yet it was that that
established the most absurd Doctrines of the Church of Rome. The Slaughter of
the Crusado's is made another; and yet that Holy War was the occasion of the
encroachments of the Papal Power upon the rights of Princes in their absence.
The Tyrannical Exercise of the power of the Church over Kings and Princes, is
made the scorching Sun, and yet, that was so far from being a Judgment, that it
was the most flourishing instance of the Commanding Sovereignty of it. The fury
of Princes against the Waldenses and Albigenses is made the same Vial with as
little reason. The Turkish Inroads are made another Vial; and yet it is known
that it was the Greek Church only, that they oppressed before the Reformation,
excepting some small encroachments upon the Venetians, which can hardly be
called a Judgment upon the Beast.

It is evident enough, that the Plagues of these Vials are described as so many
sensible torments and present humiliations of the power of the Beast, as has
been observed; And that indeed is the proper signification of a plague, and of
(...) in the Original, especially when said to be as here, the fierce wrath of
God, which sure must be some thing, that is very sensibly felt in the smart,
and pain of it. But those forementioned events, though they might be judgments
upon the Beast, as his greatest victories may also be made to be, yet they were
so far from being any present sensible trouble to him, that they were either
the fiercest exercise of his Tyrannical Rule, or the greatest advancements of
his Interests. And then how can the Saints of God be represented as singing
that Song of Triumph, that Moses sang at the destruction of Pharaoh and all his
host in the Red Sea, when the Beast is in his greatest Exaltation and Tyranny?

4. Conscquent to these Characters of a victory and deliverance of the Church,
before the inflicting of these plagues, is the opening of the Temple of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven, which does also very properly signify,
the Freedom of the true Christian Church at the Reformation. For as the Temple
in general, with the presence of God in it, and called Heaven, does in many
places of Scripture, but especially in this Prophecy, signify the Christian
Church, so that part of the Temple, which is here described, is by all
acknowledged to be the innermost part of it, and is generally agreed to
signify the Ribera, cap. 11. Apoc. v. 2. -- None can be ignorant, that what is
here said of the Temple and Altar, cannot be understood of the Temple of
Jerusalem; since it was destroyed by Titus, and was not in being when John
wrote these things. But by it, he signifies the Church, of which the Temple was
the Figure or Type.

Ibid. In the Temple were Two Parts. The first was that which none but the
Priests and Ministers of the Temple were to go into, where the Altar stood,
which was the inner Court. The other was the outward Court, where all the
Laymen were placed. The first was properly called the Temple of God, because
all the Sacrifices, Offerings, and Incense, were offered up there upon the
Altar. The other part is often called the Temple, but in a more large and
improper use of the word. By the first part, and the Priests in it, are here
understood the best in the Church, and the most dear to God, and the Elect. By
the other part, or the outward Court, is here understood the unsanctified part
of the Church, that is, those that are at greater distance from God, and less
under the sense of his Fear. By this may easily be understood what John here
writes; he is commanded to measure the Temple, etc. which is the same with the
making a separation and choice of the Elect Members of the Church, who are not
to be delivered to Antichrist. nor to his Assistants.


true Church of Christ upon Earth, in chap. 11. v. 1.

Now the opening of the Temple here, is the same Expression with the opening of
the Temple at Hezekia's Reformation, which had been shut in the time of
Idolatry and Apostasy. And if this be compared with the place where those who
are said to sing the Song of Victory did stand, that is, upon the Sea or Laver
near the Altar, it seems to be a very plain Signification of a free exercise of
the true Religion in the Church, which had been suppressed before, when the
Temple was shut. However, we have great reason to think this opening of the
inmost part of the Temple to be some new manifestation of God to the World;
First, Because it is intimated to have been opened, that all Nations might come
and worship before God, v. 4. And next, Because it is said, v. 8. That none was
able to enter in till the Plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled; which
shows it to have been opened for their Entrance in, after that was over. And
lastly, Because the Temple had been mentioned twice together just before this
Chapter, without any such Circumstances: And then, what is meant by the Glory
of God in the Temple, as we here find it may be understood from the Reason that
God gives, Ezekiel. 43. 9. for the stay of his Glory in the Temple, viz. The
putting away their Whoredoms, that is, Idolatry.

5. Especially, when we see this also followed with that remarkable
circumstance of the Temples being filled with smoke from the Glory of God, so
that none could enter into it before the seven Plagues of the seven Angels were
fulfilled. For this seems to be a very plain allusion to the same Circumstances
and Expressions about the first Dedication or Consecration of the Tabernacle,
Exodus 40. 34. and also to the same Description of the first Dedication of
Solomon's Temple, in Kings and Chronicles: For in those places 1 Kings 8. 10,
11. 2 Chronicles. 5. 13, 14.
we find just the same peculiar Expressions with these here, and no where else
besides in Scripture; and therefore ought the same phrase here to be
interpreted of some new Dedication or Consecration of the Christian Church to
Gods Service, after the Profanations of it by the Beast: And what Eminent
Change of the State of the Christian Church from the corruptions of the Roman
Hierarchy can any ways answer this but the Reformation?

If it should be here objected, that according to this the Consecration of the
Christian Church must have lasted from the Reformation to the end of the Vials,
and that none of the Reformed could have entered into the Church till then; and
that therefore, the first mentioning of the opening of the Temple could not
mean the Reformation, since it appears here to be as good as shut immediately
after:

That may easily be answered by the like Examples of the Tabernacle and Temple:
None, no not the Priests could enter into them, till the Cloud of Gods Glory
was taken away: For it was not thoroughly dedicated till then; and so the
continuance of the Cloud of Gods Glory did signify the Time that was taken up
in the Consecrating the House of God, to fit it for a continual Habitation for
himself after that was done.

And then the like circumstance in this mystical Temple, the Christian Church,
can signify nothing else, but the preparation of the Church for Gods Service,
from the time of the Reformation to the end of the seven Vials, when all the
World shall become one holy Temple to God, the new Jerusalem fitted and
prepared for him to dwell in with his People: Till then, tho the Temple might
be said to be opened, yet it could not be wholly set apart for Gods Service;
for the Christian Church was first to be purged and cleared, before it could be
wholly dedicated to such holy Uses: And therefore the Vials were first to be
poured out upon that Power which sat in the outward Court of the Temple,
showing himself there that he was God. For this seems to have a very plain
allusion to chap. 11. 1, 2. where the inner part of the Temple is possessed by
the true Church only, while the outward Court is trodden under foot by the
Gentiles, till the end of the Reign of the Beast.

Wherefore the not entering into the Temple in this interval, betwixt the
Reformation and the Universal Reign of Christ in his Church, can only signify,
That the Reformed Churches are but scattered Altars, and particular Synagogues,
till they come all to be united into one Universal Temple at the end of the
Consecration of the Christian Church, that is, at the end of the Vials and of
all the Enemies of Christ.

We do accordingly find, that at the last Trumpet the Temple, which is here
described to be so full of the Glory Rev. 11. 19
of God that none*could enter in, is there said to be opened again, as it was
expressed of it before that appearance of the Smoke, and the Glory of God in
it. And this does confirm what before was said of the Significations of two
several triumphant Appearances of the Church: The first of which is represented
in this place, by the opening of the innermost part of the Temple upon the
Victory Chap. 15. 5. v. 2, 3, 4.
over the Beast and his Image, which is accompanied with a Song of Victory and
Triumph; all which is described to be before the going out of the Angels with
the seven Vials: And the other is at the sounding of the last Trumpet, with
Chap. 11. 19.
just the same Expressions of the opening of the inmost part of the Temple,
which was introduced also with a Song v. 17.
of Triumph, of much the same nature with the former.

7. But yet to show that these two Songs of Triumph did belong to very
different Times of the Church; in the first Song of the 15th. Chapter, it is
said of a Time then to come, All Nations shall come and worship before thee:
But in the other verse 4.
of Chapter the 11th. at the sounding of the last Trumpet, it is said of the
Time then present, The Kingdoms of the World verse 15.
are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall Reign for
ever and ever. And the Conquerors that sing the first Song, are represented
standing on the mystical Red verse 2.
Sea, not yet passed over it, but in a condition still to be pursued by the
mystical Pharaoh, which does exactly represent the first State of the
Reformation.

8. And yet without the consideration of either any signal Deliverance or
freedom of the Church, the very nature of the seven Plagues is sufficient to
satisfy one, that they cannot begin before the Reformation: Because, till then
the Roman Hierarchy was in its full Glory, whereas the seven Plagues are all
great Mortifications to the power of the Beast. They are said to be in Vials
full of the Wrath V. 1, 7.
of God, and in which the Wrath of God is filled up.

These are the concurrent Circumstances of the Text, to determine the Date of
the Vials to be after the time of the Reformation; and the proof that has been
drawn from them, will be still much more strengthened, if it be considered,

9. That the Reformation was so very eminent and general a Triumph over the
Beast, so remarkable a Deliverance of a great part of the Church from Slavery
and Captivity, so exactly answering the Characters of the opening of the Temple
of God, and of the new Dedication of it to Gods Service, That it ought to be
somewhere in these Visions about the Beast described by as eminent Marks of
Deliverance from Captivity, and of the free exercise of the true Religion. But
no where is there any Characters that do so remarkably set out these things as
those here in the 15th. Chapter. Those in the 14th. Chapter, which are the only
Expressions besides which seem capable of signifying this great Change of the
State of the Church, will appear to be necessary to be the same State of the
Church with this, tho they do nothing so fully and openly express it, as these
in this place.

Some indeed would have the time of the Reformation to be described in the
seventh Trumpet. But tho the Characters of that might well enough suit it, yet
it is certain, that the seventh Trumpet is not yet sounded, because neither are
the Witnesses yet risen again, (Theor. 33.) Nor the second Woe yet passed away,
Ibid. Which yet must both be before the time of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.
11, 14.

10. But after all, it must be also considered, That there have been since the
Reformation, three or four more eminent Judgments upon the whole party of the
Beast, than any of those that are made the business of the Vials before the
Reformation; and these have been distinct one from another, and cannot be all
comprehended in the seventh Vial, no more than the Judgments of the three last
Vials can be comprehended under the third or fourth. Never was there so
universal an Ocean of Blood all over Europe, and that to the establishment of
the true Religion, and to the weakening of the Roman Party, as about the
beginning of the Dutch Commonwealth: Never was there before such Rivers of
Blood in the Imperial Countries, as during the time of the Swedish War: Who
before could ever be so compared to the Sun in the fourth Vial, as the present
King of France, since by that Character it must be the most eminent Monarch in
Europe, in enmity to the Imperial Power? And what Heats and Vexations have the
Imperial Party had at any time before the Reformation comparable in the length
of their continuance to those hot Effects of the Sun, with which the King of
France has enraged and enflamed them, and diverted them from advancing their
Universal Monarchy over the World?

These Plagues and Vexations then of so considerable and of so general a
concern to the whole Roman, both Imperial and Papal Party, do more deserve to
have so many distinct Vials for the matter of them, than those Events that are
applied to these Vials before the Reformation.

There is therefore no ground for comprehending these distinct remarkable
Judgments, which were at such distance from one another under the seventh Vial
only.

Now if we compare all these Considerations together, they will still much more
strengthen one another. The Victory here mentioned is such a Deliverance from
the Roman Slavery, as the Deliverance of the People of God out of Egypt was: It
must then be as real a Freedom as that was a real Bondage and Oppression. It
was also a Deliverance that was followed with the last Plagues of Egypt, which
brought the Beast to his ruin: And such also as was accompanied with a new
opening of the Temple of God, which does elsewhere signify the full liberty of
the true Christian Church; and is also described by a new Consecration of the
Church to Gods Service: It is also described as the first Deliverance of a part
of the Church with the same kind of opening of the Temple and Song of Victory,
that the last Deliverance of the whole Church is set out by.

And therefore, this Victory and Deliverance must necessarily be at some great
Mortification of the Papal Power before the last ruin of it, and with some
great Triumph and Freedom of the Christian Church in the full and free Exercise
of the true Religion, after a great Oppression under Antichristian Tyranny, and
yet long before the last general Freedom from it. And what remarkable time can
this be apprehended to be, since the first Exaltation of the Tyrannical Power
of the Roman Church, but the Reformation?

Especially, if we add to this, that so eminent a Change of the State of the
Church, as the Reformation was, and the remarkable Judgments which have since
happened upon the Roman Party, ought to have been somewhere in this Prophecy as
particularly exposed. And yet there is not so clear or consistent Characters of
either of them in any other part of the Prophecy: But these Circumstances here
in the beginning of the 15th. Chapter, with the first half of the Vials, do all
very exactly suit these Events, and concur together to express the Order of
them. For we have here a description of a first Deliverance of a part of the
Church of God from the Tyranny of the Beast, in reference to the last full
Deliverance of the whole Church after the pouring out of those seven Plagues
upon the Beast, which were to begin upon the first Victory over him, and which
will be found to be to admiration, answerable to the several Humiliations that
the Roman Church has suffered since that time. (a) A Leasar in cap. 15. Apoc.
The seven Angels it may be, are an allusion to the seven Bedchamber Officers
of the King of Persia.

Ribera. cap. 15. Apoc. By seven I do not understand many, as Bede and others,
but only seven. For, he calls them the seven last Plagues which were in the
Vials of the seven Angels.




CHAP. XII.
Objections against the Date of the Vials from the Reformation answered.

AGainst all that has been concluded in the former Discourse, it may be urged,
That this Victory here mentioned in the 15th. Chapter, does seem to be set out
as a Triumph over the Beast at the end of the Plagues. For the Song that they
sing, does refer to the executing of the Judgments of those Plagues.

But tho this should be granted of the Song, yet this Victory is represented as
a distinct thing from the matter of the Song; for the reason of their singing
may indeed in all probability, be their sight of the seven Angels with the
seven last Plagues, mentioned just before their Appearance, as it became the
Conquerors of those Enemies of God upon whom the Plagues were to fall. But
there is not the least hint, that their Victory was nothing but the ruin of
the Beast by those Plagues, and at the end of them all; on the contrary, it is
represented as a Deliverance before the pouring out of any of the Vials, and as
distinct from them.

It may be further objected in confirmation of the former, That this Victory
and Deliverance is set out as a Deliverance out of Egypt; and the Plagues have
a manifest reference to the Plagues of Egypt; now the Israelites Deliverance
out of Egypt, was not till after the Plagues of Egypt: And therefore neither
should this Victory here be till after these Plagues.

This would signify something, if the Deliverance here were expressly said to
be just in the same manner with the Deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt,
and that the Plagues here did go before the Victory, as it is related of the
other Plagues of Egypt before the Deliverance of that People.

But it is far otherwise here. The Victory here is as manifestly set before the
Plagues, as the Deliverance in the History of the Israelites is related to come
after the Plagues; the Conquerors here do only triumph at the manifestation of
Gods Judgments to them, after the seven Angels with the seven Plagues were
seen, and before they went out of the Temple to pour out their Vials.

Besides, we have the mention of two distinct Triumphs before and after the
Vials, as has been observed; and this here before the Vials, is not the same
with that after them in the seventh Trumpet: For in this it is said, All
Nations shall come and worship before thee; but in that, The Kingdoms of this
World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever. The first relates to an Universal Conformity that was
to come, and the latter to such a Christian Uniformity that was then present.

It also follows here, that after the Victory and Song here mentioned, there
was an opening of the Temple; and this was another distinct opening of it than
that which is mentioned at the Deliverance in the seventh Trumpet; Chap. 11. 19.
and therefore must the Deliverance here be also distinct from that which is
mentioned there, which was at the end of the seven Vials.

That the opening of the Temple here after the Song of Victory, was different
from that after the seventh Trumpet is manifest; for the opening of the Temple
here, was before the going out of the Angel with the seven Vials, and before
the filling it with smoke from the Glory of God; but the opening of it after
the seventh Trumpet, was after the end of the Vials; for it is said, That none
could enter into the Temple till the seven Plagues were fulfilled.

But it may be further alleged in Plea, for the placing the Deliverance here
mentioned after the Vials, that it is usual in this Prophecy, before any
extraordinary Judgments of God, to represent a Scene of Persons rejoicing and
triumphing as Conquerors, by way of Anticipation; whereas the true time of that
Victory is at the end of those Judgments: And so may the Victory here mentioned
be no more, than the triumphant state of the Church after the fulfilling of the
seven plagues.

Thus we see before the sounding of the seven Trumpets there is a show of a
great multitude, with White Robes and Palms in their hands, Glorifying God, all
which are undoubted significations of a victorious state of the Church; But yet
the time of these Palm-bearers, and of their Victory, could not be till after
the Judgments of those Trumpets. For the Palm-bearers are said to be seen after
the Vision of the 144000, which were sealed to be saved from the Judgments of
the Trumpets, and who therefore must be contemporaries with the seven Trumpets.
The Palm-bearers therefore must be after the Trumpets, though represented as
before them, because they come after those that are Sealed, who are at the same
time with the Trumpets; For whenever a Vision is said to be after another in
this Book, as this of the Palm-bearers is said to be after the Sealed Company,
it is pretended, that it always signifies, that the things seen in that Vision,
are after the things that were seen in the Vision before it, and not only that
the sight of the one was after the sight of the other.

So also are the 144000 represented in the 14th Chapter upon Mount Sion,
singing a new Song, with Harpers singing to their Harps, before the pronouncing
Babylon fallen, or the threat of God's Judgments upon those who should Worship
the Beast, and yet (say they) it cannot be thought, that that triumph could be
before the fall of Babylon.

In the latter of these instances, there is no mention at all of any triumph
over Babylon: Their Song and their Harping may be very reasonably Judged to be
the Religious Exercises of the Church in the time of Persecution, which seems
to be very plainly intimated by what is said of the Song that they sung, verse
3. that it was a new Song, which none could learn but the 144000. For what can
that signify but Religious Worship, kept up by them alone, since it is
represented to be Sung before the Throne, as the song of the Elders? Chap. 5.
11. But the first of these instances requires a little more pains to answer it.

That which the Objection from it does chiefly rely upon, is, that the vision
is said to be (...), or after that of the sealed Company.

But that does in propriety of speech signify no more, than that such things
were seen after the other, and not that the things in the one, came after the
end of those things that were seen in the Vision before.

And there are also Examples in this very Prophesy of such acceptations of the
same kind of phrase, as has been shown, Theorem 12.

And yet, if this constant signification of (...), or after these things should
be granted, it would be a new confirmation of what has been said about the time
of the deliverance and Song of triumph in the 15th Chapter. For it is said,
that after that, the Temple was seen to be opened, which has been shown to be
necessarily understood of an opening of the Temple before the pouring out of
the Vials; and therefore much more must the deliverance there mentioned be
before the same Vials, since the opening of the Temple is said to be after that
Vision.

There is therefore either no force at all in the term of (...) to prove the
Palm-bearers to come after the end of the fortunes of the Sealed Company, or
the same force in it to assure us, that the Conquerours in the 15th Chapter
were before the Vials.

This does excellently well agree with what the 6th Seal is generally
interpreted by others to be; For if that be the Enthroning of the Christian
Profession by Constantine, it is certain that nothing could have more shown the
glorifying of God by this Multitude to be at that time, than the exact
agreement of the description of it here, with those expressions which we find
at the casting out of the Red-Dragon out of Heaven in the 12th Chapter; for in
both they cry with a loud voice; They both use the same kind of phrases,
Salvation to our God and to the Lamb, and, now is come Salvation, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; They are both represented as
Conquerours. The one with Palms, and white Robes washed in the blood of the
Lamb, and the other by overcoming their Enemy by the blood of the Lamb; They
are both represented as the Martyrs of God, the one is said to come out of the
great Tribulation; The other, not to have loved their Lives unto the Death;
They are both a victory that cause triumph in Heaven; In the one, the Heavens
are said to rejoice and them that dwell therein, and in the other, all the
Angels about the Throne. And no where besides in this book are there any
characters, that do so expressly agree with the circumstances of these
Palm-bearers, as these in the 12th Chapter, which is generally agreed to be the
description of the Pagan Persecution, and of the Conquest of it by the
establishment of the Christian Profession in the Imperial throne.

There is indeed in that 12th Chapter, the mention of the Remnant of the Seed
of the Woman, with whom the Dragon went to make War after the Woman was fled
into the Wilderness, which may at first be thought to be the same with the rest
of the Brethren, that in the 5th Seal are said, should be killed; And then the
Palm-bearers might be the rest of the Brethren mentioned in the fifth seal, and
yet by this appear necessarily to be after the Trumpets, as the Victory of that
Remnant in the 12th Chapter, was to be.

But it is manifest, that the rest of the Brethren in the 5th seal cannot be
the same with the Remnant of the seed of the Woman in the 12th Chapter; for
those in the fifth Seal were to be all killed within a little season after the
time of that Seal, and the vengeance of the Trumpets was also to be after that
they were killed. For upon their Cry for Judgment, and vengeance, they are bid
to rest for a little season, or to wait a little while with patience for it,
till the rest should be killed; The plain obvious sense of which is, That after
the killing of the rest of their Brethren within a short while after, the
Murderers should have filled up the measure of their wickedness, and then they
should be ripe for judgment; which shows the judgment was to come after the
killing of the rest, and that not long after the time of the fifth seal; But it
is certain, that the Dragons War with the Remnant of the seed of the Woman, and
the killing them was during the whole time of the Reign of the Beast; and
therefore not within a little season, nor before the vengeance of the Trumpets,
or before the promised vengeance of the fifth Seal; for the time of most of the
Trumpets is generally agreed to be within the time of the Reign of the Beast.

Wherefore if we now compare the forementioned circumstances together, the
force of (...) will signify nothing to wrest the Palm-bearers out of their
natural proper place and order in the sixth seal, to make them come four
Chapters after the Order, that they have in the Prophecy, and after no fewer
than seven long judgments which they are placed before.

There is therefore no example now to be found of any such singing a Triumph
before a victory, as some would have these Conquerours of the Beast, and of his
Image here to do.

But on the other side we may now with a great deal of satisfaction observe
from this last instance, how exact a correspondence there is betwixt the seven
Trumpets, and the seven Vials in the manner of their first Rise, as well as in
all other respects; and it is chiefly for the clearing of this Remark, that I
have so long insisted upon answering the last Objection. E. G.

As both the Trumpets and the Vials are set out as just the same number of
Plagues, or several instances of the wrath of God, and both seem to have a
plain reference to the Plagues of Egypt, so are they both shown to belong to
almost all the same subjects, and that in the very same Order, as the Earth,
and the Sea, the Rivers, the Sun, the River Euphrates, Heaven. They are also
both first foretold in General, before they are reckoned up in order, the
Trumpets in the sixth Seal, and the Vials in the Harvest and Vintage; and both
of them are described to begin at a signal deliverance of the Church, or at a
signal humbling of the power of the Enemies of God. The Kings and great Men hid
themselves in the rocks at the sixth Seal before the Trumpets, and the
Conquerours of the Beast appear before the Vials, standing upon a Sea, like the
Red Sea. The Church also is in a great Triumph of joy in the Palm-bearers with
the Angels before the Throne just before the Trumpets, and the Song of Moses is
sung just before the Vials; and therefore well might the Vials have the name of
the seven last plagues, for their perfect resemblance with the seven Trumpets,
which were the seven first plagues.

And if we allow with the generally of Interpreters that the Deliverance of the
Church before the Trumpets, was the first Conversions of the Christian
Emperors, how natural is it to think that the deliverance of the Church before
the Vials was nothing but a new Return or Reformation of the Christian Religion
upon some of the Thrones of the ten Kings?

The Objections against the beginning of the time of the Vials, before the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet, are sufficiently answered chap. 18.

CHAP. XIII.
The particular Application of the Vials to the most remarkable Events since
the Reformation. The Commotions in all Countries upon the Reformation, the first
Vial. The Wars all over Europe for Religion, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
the second Vial. The Swedish War, the third Vial. The Humiliations of the Papal
and Imperial Interest by the present King of France, the fourth Vial. How
providentially his owning the Sun for his Emblem does agree with it. The
general Humiliation of the Roman Church in all Roman States, the fifth Vial.
Some Enemies beyond Euphrates, the sixth Vial. A conjecture about Harmageddon.

THE Application of the seven Vials, does in my way give the Prophecy so great
a part in all the great Actions and Expectations of this present Age, that I
could not think that I could be accounted tedious in the nicest and most
scrupulous Examination I could use, to strengthen and to secure the Foundation
of it. It Is upon this account that I have been so careful to establish the
first Date of the Vials, upon which the whole Application is chiefly grounded;
and there are so many things of the greatest importance as well as of present
concern, to gratify and surprise the Curiosity of all Men in the particulars
of this Application, that I am apt to imagine, that nothing will be judged to
have been unnecessary, that has been employed to establish the grounds of it.

If we then date the Victory of the Reformation from about the year 1530. when
it was carried on with the face of Authority in Germany and Switzerland, and by
Protestant Leagues, there will then be about the space of forty years for each
of the first four Vials to take their turn in.

I do not confine the Period of every Vial to that precise number of forty
years, because there is no Character in the Text that does so determine them to
those bounds. But besides my own Suppositions about the end of the Beast, which
would well agree with it, there have been such remarkable Events that have
happened within the space of every forty years since the Reformation, and which
do very wonderfully suit the matter of these Vials, that one can hardly forbear
from being confident, that they must be the fulfilling of the first four Vials,
if the whole seven begin about the time of the Reformation, and have near 300
years to run their course in, as I make account has been elsewhere established.

Especially, if we consider, That there are no other Judgments upon the Roman
Church since the Reformation, that do so considerably answer the Characters of
these Vials, as these signal ones that are here pitched upon.

For SEE note the first, and 6th, on the first Chapter, especially the 6th.
these Plagues according to their Description, must first be so many very
eminent Judgments upon the Roman Party, and that to the greatest extent of the
Dominion of that Church to make them remarkable, and therefore upon the
greatest part of Europe. They must also be eminent Plagues of a long
continuance, to distinguish them from the lesser Evils which do usually happen
within the space of forty years, which is supposed to be the Period for every
Vial; and they must lastly, answer the Characters of each Plague in the Text.
And those which I shall mention, and none other, will be found to be thus
qualified for the time that is past since the Reformation, which is much above
half the whole term assigned them.

And first, I question not but that all will grant, that the Reformation gave
vexation and uneasiness enough to the whole party of the Beast, to qualify it
for the Application of the first Vial. For what does more properly answer the
grievous sore of the first Vial, than the inward Torment and exulcerated
Spirits of the Romanists in general, at the Success of the Reformation? And
what but an inward uneasiness of Mind can be signified, by the inflicting of a
grievous Sore upon a particular party of Men, in distinction to the rest who
live amongst them, as this is said here to be inflicted upon the Men that had
the mark of the Beast? To apprehend it to be any other kind of outward Sore
upon a particular party of Men only, would be to make it to be some
extraordinary Miracle from Heaven, which is not by any Interpreters of this
Prophecy judged to be necessary, for the fulfilling of the Judgments foretold
in it. On the contrary It is also the opinion of the best of the Roman
Interpreters, that these plagues are to be understood in a mystical sense.

Alcasar in Note the third on the 11th Chap. does show all the Schemes to be
Mystical allusions to the Histories of the Israelites, and says besides
expressly, that the Seven Plagues are to be taken in a mystical sense. And for
proof of this does instance in the fifth Vial, which he says is by none
understood as it literally signifies, and thereupon demands, why the rest
should not be interpreted after the same way, or in a mystical sense.

And Ribera on the second Verse of the 16th Chapter, does show that many do
understand the first plague (of the grievous sore) in a Moral (yet Mystical)
sense; As Bede and others. And that Andreas Bishop of Caesarea in particular,
and Arethas the best of the old Commentators do in particular make the grievous
sore to be a burning vexation of the heart, as it is here made to be.


it is generally agreed by all the considerable Protestant Interpreters, that
the Plagues of the Vials are generally to be understood in a mystical sense.
And tho this inward Vexation may be thought to be too common a Disposition of
that Party under all the Vials, to be made the Judgment of any one of them in
distinction to the rest, yet it cannot but be imagined, that their Fury and
Indignation at the first appearances of this new Face of Religion, must be in a
very different degree from what it was after they were long used to it. The
History of that Time does sufficiently convince us, That the new Surprise, that
the Spirits of Men were then in at this new Doctrine, did more inflame them
about the first Times of the preaching it, than they can be supposed to have
been since, tho the Effect of it was chiefly within them: For Rage is the most
painful and fretting before it breaks out into Revenge, and that was enough to
make it a different Plague from all the rest.

But besides, those inward Vexations were the peculiar Evils of those first
forty years, without any other very considerable Judgment upon the Beast. For
his loss of the States and Kingdoms which embraced the Reformation, is included
in the Victory over the Beast before the Vials, tho the first Date of that
Victory be from the first considerable appearance of Authority in defense of
the Reformation.

But yet after all the Reasons that I have alleged for it, I do not expect
that the Character of this first Vial should be generally allowed by any, that
have been fixed upon any other way, to be so necessarily and clearly determined
in the Text, to signify the Matter unto which it is applied. And I do not
pretend to maintain, that it is incapable of any other Interpretation, which
may be thought to agree better with the first beginning of the Reformation and
the Characters of the Judgment of this Vial.

But the effect of the second Vial, is expressed in terms of as manifest and
open a signification in Prophecy, as it well could have been; The Sea becoming
like the Blood of a Rev. 15. 3.
dead Man, and that of every living Soul dying in the Sea, are Expressions that
have no ambiguity in them. The Sea is known to signify in several places of
this Prophecy, the same with that which many Waters is explained Rev. 17. 14.
to signify in the 17th. Chapter, where the Angel tells the Apostle, That it
was his design to interpret the dark terms of the Vision to him.

The Sea must therefore here signify Multitudes, and Tongues, and Nations; and
its becoming like the Blood of a dead Man, can then signify nothing but an
Universal Sea of Blood amongst all People and Nations, that is, amongst those
Nations who were confederates with the Beast. For the Dominion and Sphere of
the Beast, must always be accounted the Scene of all the Judgments of these
Vials.

And what was there ever more notoriously answerable to this, than that Ocean
of Blood that was shed in the Low Countries, in France, in Sea Fights betwixt
England and Spain, and the Dutch, besides other lesser Effusions of it in
Scotland, and other Countries, during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of England?
And all upon the account of Religion.

The Succession of King James to the Crown of England, and the peace of Vervins
betwixt the French and Spaniard together with the settlement of Henry the
fourth, in the Throne of France, and his Edicts of Pacification with the
Protestants, and the Truce betwixt the Spaniards, and the Dutch, may very well
be accounted a very remarkable end of this Sea of blood, or of the General
effusion of it in almost all parts of Europe.

This event was so very famous a circumstance of the humbling the power of the
Roman Interest, that it ought to have been very signally remarked by some of
these Vials, and none could have more fully, and plainly expressed it than this
Sea of blood in the second of them. Neither is there any other State of affairs
since the Reformation that does so fitly answer the Characters of this Vial as
this, that has been mentioned. And it is a sufficient prejudice against all
other Interpretations of this second Vial, which place it, as I do, after the
Reformation, that they take no notice of so signal, and so generally manifest a
Judgment upon the Beast, as this universal Bloodshed was, notwithstanding that
it is so plainly set forth in the expressions of this Vial, and was so
remarkably fulfilled also in the event before the Eyes, and to the sense and
feeling of almost all Europe, which is that part of the World who are the
general concern of all the Vials.

Whatever therefore may be scrupled at in the application of the first Vial, it
cannot hinder us from determining the bounds of it to that time that was
betwixt the beginning of the Reformation, and this Sea of Blood; For there
could not have been a more open prediction, or a more exact conformity to it,
than there is betwixt the second Vial, and the Sea of Blood, within the Time of
the second forty years after the Reformation.

Neither is it any objection against this, and the following Applications, that
the Protestants were almost as great sufferers as the Roman Party. For all that
is here to be regarded, is, whether all these evils were not great humiliations
of that Interest, and of those, who were the great Lords and Masters of the
World before. There is no considerable conquest to be had over any powerful
Enemies, without a great loss of Blood on the Conquerours side; For a Victory
does generally suppose a fight before it, and there is no Fighting without
Blows on both sides.

THE Rivers of Blood, which are the Judgment of the third Vial, began in those
remainders of the Religious War betwixt the Spaniard and the Dutch: Or, if that
seem rather the Ebb of the Sea of Blood, in the occasional Tumults of Hungary,
and Transylvania for Liberty of Conscience, Anno 1605.
wherein the Papal and Imperial party had generally the worst, especially under
the management of Stephen Botski, who, as Petavius says in short of him, did
exceedingly torment the Roman Catholics.

But it may be very reasonably thought, that the Bohemian War in the same
period, wherein both the Palatinates were gained to the Imperial party, was a
sufficient amends for all the other troubles, and losses, that the Beast had
sustained; and the humbling of the Protestants in France at the taking of
Rochell, soon after the other, was a great advancement of the Papal Interest.

That therefore which does the most remarkably fufill the intent of this Vial
is the descent of the Swedes into Germany, and their overrunning it like a
Torrent, and their continuing Conquerours there in one of the most Bloody Wars,
that ever was heard of for near 17 years together; Which did all fall so
heavily at last upon the Papal Interest, and the Roman Church, that at the
treaty of Munster, the Popes Nuncio, Fabio Chigi, who was afterward Alexander
the 7th, made a very solemn protestation there in the name of his Master
against the peace of Munster, as if it had been but a bargain to betray, and
give up the Revenues, Privileges, and Rights of the Roman Church. And who can
be supposed to be a better Judge of the evil of this plague, than they who were
the most interested in it, and the chief sufferers by it?

There were indeed very strange Alienations made of Church Lands and Goods into
Secular hands by that Treaty, so as even to give great offense and scandal to
many Protestants themselves; and a general Liberty for the exercise of the
Reformed Religion was established by it almost all over the Empire: And it is
well known, that the Swedes, at their first coming into the Empire, declared it
was to restore the Liberties of the Protestant Religion, as well as of the
Princes of the Empire. And in all the management of that War, one may see it
was nothing but a War for Religion, and that it had as bloody effects every way
suitable to the usual heats and animosities, in such cases.

It is certain that Jonas Wex de Antichristo. p. 86. who wrote about the middle
of the Swedish War, and was himself a Swede, after he had divided the plagues
upon the Beast into Spritual and Corporal, in the 91 and 92 Articles, says thus
-- The greatest Corporal Judgment that has been poured out upon the Kingdom of
Antichrist since the first settlement of his Kingdom, is that which was brought
upon it by a Northern Lion, that is, Gustavus Adolphus. -- For in the year
1630. did he break in upon the Kingdom of Antichrist, upon the Babylonian
Confederacy, and give it such a Corporal wound, as it never before had received
since the first settlement of the Domination of the Pope, and the open
discovery of the fornication of his Babylon.
the Swedish War did make so great a noise in all parts of the World, that it
must needs have a peculiar place to it self in some of these Vials, if they
begin with the Reformation; Almost all Europe was engaged in it, the Princes of
the Empire, France, Spain, the Dutch, the Swedes, the Pope, and England was an
abettor and assistant; and where can we find a place for it so every way
suitable to it, as in this of the Rivers of Blood? For though it did engage
almost all the Princes of Europe in the Quarrel, yet in this it differed from
the Sea of Blood in the second Vial, That the seat of this War was only in
Germany and the borders of it. And so was it but Rivers of Blood in one
particular part of Europe at one time, whereas the other was an Ocean of Blood
almost all over Europe at the same time.

Besides, there must be two distinct Vials for these two so distinct and
eminent Events, and which were at such distance from one another, and therefore
must the Sea of Blood in the second Vial belong only to the first of these two.

This does extremely well agree with what is added in this Vial, to determine
it to the most considerable part of the Rivers, and that is, that it was poured
out upon the fountains of Waters, which must signify, that it was a Judgment
upon the Head, and fountain of the Empire of the Beast, since all the parts of
the World mentioned as the Subjects of these Vials, are all but so many
respective parts of the Territories, and power of the Beast; and then by these
Fountains of Water must in all reason be understood the Imperial Family, or
their Dominions, which are the chief Fountains of all the power of the Beast;
and so was this War the most heavy upon the Territories of the Austrian Family,
or their immediate dependants.

The event does also very exactly answer the reason that is given for these
Rivers of Blood, which is expressed to be some former very bloody Cruelties
against the Saints of God; and the Cruelties of the Imperial party toward the
Protestants after the end of the Bohemian War was one of the chief motives of
the Swedish Invasion.

Never did Germany drink so deeply of God's Judgments in blood, as during the
time of this War; and the Triumph of the Protestant party in it, was much like
the exultation of the Angel of the Waters at the pouring out of this Vial. v.
5, 6. Thou art Righteous, O Lord, because thou have Judged thus. For they have
shed the blood of Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to
drink; for they are worthy.

And this by the way does give us a very satisfactory account, why the Swedish
War should be accounted the chief matter of this third Vial alone by it self,
though it continued not above a third part of the period of the Vial.

For here is an intimation of a very dreadful shedding of Blood by the party of
the Beast, before the return made to it by the Rivers of Blood; which does
suppose the Cruelties of the Beast to take up a considerable part of the period
allotted to this Vial, and to go before the Judgment continued in it; and then
the shedding of their Blood in that War can be but the latter part of the Vial,
as it does appear also to be in the event.

The end of the plague of this third Vial may very reasonably be determined to
the conclusion of the Treaty of Munster. For that Treaty was the most Eminent
and Famous, as well as the most General agreement, and Peace of all Europe, to
the great advantage of the Protestant Cause.

We may therefore now conclude, that the Prophecy, and the Events, do extend
the bounds of the three first Vials, to the end at least of the chief part of
the fury of the Swedish War in Germany; and this does very well agree with the
three first forty years after the Reformation assigned to them.

There is no need of making any very curious enquiry, what eminent Interest it
can be, that is signified by the Judgment of the next Vial, which is said to be
the giving the Sun power to scorch Men with fire. For the Earth, and Sea, and
Rivers having been found here not to signify literally, but Mystically, as
they are often used in this Prophecy for the several states of Men in the Roman
party, by the Sun must be meant some chief conquering Potentate within the
compass of the Empire of the Roman Church, which is the common Scene of all the
Vials, and Judgments. If to this we join, that it must also be some eminent
Potentate, that is made use of as a judgment upon either the Papal or Imperial
Interest, and therefore not the Emperor, (whose Super-eminent Roman Title
shows him to be an Head of the Beast;) who can it be, that can be the business
of this Vial for the next forty years, but the King of France, who is so
considerable in Europe as to go under the name of Lewis the Great, the Eldest
Son of the Roman Church, and the Most Christian King in the Antichristian
State? He is far the most likely to be the Sun in that Heaven, where the Beast
sits as God.

If it be Objected that he is an advancer of the Interest of the Beast; It must
be considered, that all that he is regarded for in this Vial is that part of
his History wherein he has been a plague to the Confederates, and supporters of
the Beast. And has he not been so for almost the whole forty years after the
Swedish War in his Quarrels with the Popes, and his continual Wars with the
Austrian Family, to the great hinderance of the growth and Progress of the
cause, which they were always so zealous to promote? Excepting that one
expedition into Holland, which did leave little or nothing in the possession of
the French after the Kings return home again; Who is there that have lost any
considerable part of their dominion by him, but the Austrian Family, and the
inseparable adhaerent to the Interest of that Family, the Duke of Lorrain?

As for the effects of his Quarrels with the Popes, we may sufficiently see,
what heats they have put the Sea of Rome into by the preparations that were
made by Alexander the Seventh against the French about the affairs of the
Corsi, and by the zeal of this present Pope, in the business of the Regale,
which concluded with the determination of those famous points concerning the
Papal Authority by the general Assembly of the whole French Clergy; All which
were as great humiliations of the Spiritual Head of the Roman Party, as the
French Conquests were of the Secular Head of them.

And both the Papal and Imperial Party may very properly be said to blaspheme
the God of Heaven, for the inflicting these Plagues upon them, by attributing
it wholly to the Devil, whom they would affirm to move the King of France to
all these things against them, whereas they are the just Judgments of God upon
them only to bring them to Repentance, as we see it plainly here intimated by
way of Explication: They blasphemed God, who had power over these Plagues, or
from whose hand they came, and they repented not to give him Glory, or the
Glory of his Justice: For they attributed all this to the power of the Devil
only in him.

This Vial then does very fitly suit the Actions of the French King, till the
late general Truce.

In the mean while it is to be considered, That so eminent an Hostility against
the Austrian Interest for so long a continuance, could not reasonably be
omitted out of the Judgments upon the Beast; and besides, there would be so
many years past since the Swedish War, without any Judgment considerable,
unless this be allowed to come in for one.

It is certain, there is nothing expressed in the Prophecy about this power
given to the Sun, which is not very well answered by the heat and vexation that
the King of Frances Quarrels and Wars have put the Papalins, and the
Imperialists and Spaniards into. For the scorching with Heat being acknowledged
to be mystically understood, it may properly enough signify any Vexation that
comes by the means of him who is there meant by the Sun.

But for the satisfaction of those who may desire a more literal Application of
this Character of scorching Men with Fire, it may be further considered, That
since by the Sun must here be meant some Sovereign Power of Men, according as
we see Men to be understood by the Sea and the Rivers; the only thing that can
be imagined to be answerable to the Character of scorching Men with Fire, by
such a conquering Power, is the burning their Towns and Houses; and does not
this very well suit with the French Bombs, which make a Town intolerable to the
Inhabitants of it before it be taken? And so makes a distinction betwixt the
Swedish War, which was by Blood and Cruelty* and the French War, which was
little else then the taking of Towns without any such a great effusion of the
Blood of the Romish Party.

If there be ground enough upon other accounts, to fasten this Vial upon that
King, it was very providentially ordered, That he should give the Sun for his
device upon his Coin, from the first Times of his Appearance after the Swedish
Wars, as may be seen in almost all his first Brass and Golden Coins, to
signify his appearance like the Sun out of a Cloud after his first Troubles,
with the Princes of the Blood.

This is still the King of France's Emblem; but now is come to be a Sun shining
upon the Universe, with this Motto, Nec pluribus impar; and it is publicly
given him in his Triumphs and Honors, and is as gravely owned by himself: Anno
168^.
An eminent confirmation of this was his last Reception at Luxemburgh, where
all the Windows of the Streets were full of nothing but glorious
Representations of the Sun by Artificial Lamps, on purpose contrived in honor
of him. And the contention betwixt Dr. Wagenseil, professor at Altdorf, and
Father Menestrier, about the conformity of this to the Laws and Rules for
Devices, does give sufficient Testimony to the matter of Fact it self, which is
the ground of their Dispute.

Dr. Wagenseil is of opinion, that all well invented Devices of Princes, do
come by Inspiration. I am sure, that would very well suit with the present
Application of this part of the Prophecy to the King of France; if other
Considerations should make it very probable, this remark would incline one to
think, that God had put it into the mind of that King and his Flatterers to
pitch upon, and to own this Device in so public a manner. But this I mention
only as a concurrent circumstance, to make him known to the World by.

The business of the fourth Vial, does then seem to end just about this present
time. And now if we take a review of these four first Vials, it will be hard
for any to find out any other four Events since the Reformation, considerable
enough to be accounted Judgments upon the Beast, much less any four such
remarkable ones, as those which have been pitched upon, that have been so much
the concern of all Europe, and have lasted so long, and are so exactly
answerable to the Characters of each Vial in the Text; and those are the proper
Qualifications for the matter of every one of the Vials, that is, that it be of
a general extent, that it last many years, and that it be agreeable to Verse. 1,
2, 3.
the Characters of the Text.

But if it should be questioned, Whether there be yet four of the Vials past,
tho it should be granted that the Reformation was the first Date of them all,
That scruple may be easily removed, if it be considered, That there must be
either four of them past or but two: For if it be allowed that the Rivers of
Blood in the third Vial, were fulfilled before the present King of France's
Appearance in Action, He must necessarily be the business of the fourth Vial,
because for these forty years the Beast has not had any trouble from any other
hand that can tolerably answer the general extent or vexation of a Judgment
upon the Roman Party. But if it be not allowed, that the Rivers of Blood were
fulfilled before that time, they could not have been fulfilled in his Reign;
for they are very plainly described to be a bloody Revenge for the Cruelties of
that Party to the true Church, to which the French Conquests have no manner of
likeness. They were rather Surprises of Towns than any great Acts of Blood, and
the Protestants were fellow Sufferers with the rest in those few Battles that
were fought.

Wherefore if the Sea of Blood in the second Vial, should be extended to the
beginning of the King of Frances Reign, there could have been no other Vial
fulfilled since that time: For the Rivers of Blood are the next Vial; and there
has been now forty years past without any thing like the Characters of that.

Now if there should be but two Vials yet past for these One hundred and
seventy years since the Reformation, there would be no manner of proportion
betwixt them and the other five, which would all of them be crowded within the
space of about One hundred years at farthest, according to the third
Supposition about the end of the Reign of the Beast. And yet there is no such
remark upon these two first Vials, to distinguish them from the other five, as
there is upon the three last Trumpets, to distinguish them from the four first,
in respect of the different length of their continuance. And besides, there
would be above sixty years interval betwixt the second and the third Vial,
without the concern of any of the Vials in it.

THE Period of the FIFTH Vial then must begin at the extirpation of those
forty years that began at the end Rev. 16. 10.
of the Swedish War.

The Judgment therefore to be poured out of this fifth Vial, is still to be
expected. For it may be observed in all the former Vials, That the Period in
which the Event happens, must be distinguished from the Judgment, which is the
matter of it, and which many times does take up scarce half the time of the
Period in which it happens.

Thus the Sea of Blood was but for part of the time of the second Vial, and the
Rivers of Blood but part of the third; and great interruptions were there in
those scorching hot Actions of the Sun in the fourth. So also in this fifth it
must be expected, That the Darkness over all the Kingdom of the Beast must be
by intervals.

And therefore no Man is to wonder, that in the time of a Vial that is poured
out upon the Seat of the Beast, as this is, the Beast should at first have the
greatest flush of power, and the greatest likelihood of a general Success. For
such was the appearance of the Power of Charles the Fifth, at the beginning of
the first Vial; of the power of Philip of Spain by the Duke of Alva, and of the
Leaguers in France, and of Queen Mary in England about, or a little after the
beginning of the second Vial; such also was the fair show of the Roman Interest
in France upon the conversion of Henry the fourth at the beginning of the third
Vial; and this was followed with the conquest of the Palatinate, and the
victories over the Protestants in France, before there was any considerable
appearance of any River of blood, which yet was very eminently fulfilled by the
Swedish war; The Peace also of the Pyreneans did quite take of the scorching of
the Sun for a while at the beginning of the fourth Vial.

Wherefore we are to look upon the present oppression of the Protestants in
France, and in other places, and the flourishing show of the Papal Interest at
present to be but a breathing while for them, and a preparation only for a very
great cloud, which shall continue long upon them within the compass of these
next forty years which are now coming on.

By the description of the plague of this Vial, and the different characters of
it, in distinction to the Sea and Rivers of blood and the being scorched with
heat, which were the plagues of the preceding Vials; It seems rather to be some
great confusion and vexation in the Kingdom, and Throne of the Beast, then any
great Acts of cruelty against that Party; It must be as different from that, as
a Cloud is from Rivers of blood.

And then since there is the mention of the same effects of this Vial, with
those in the first Vial, that is, of pains and sores, with the addition also of
the great fury and indignation which they did put the Subjects of the Beast
into, so as to make them gnaw their Tongues, and blaspheme the God of Heaven;
There is good reason to apprehend, that it may signify much the same thing
with the first Vial, And that is, the Rage, and fury of the Romanists at a new
Reformation getting ground amongst them; And if this present juncture should be
the time of the death of the two Witnesses in the 11th. Chap. as has in the
9th. and 10th. Chapters been made appear to be very probable, one cannot but be
verily persuaded, that this fifth Plague which is now approaching must be such a
fury and vexation at the Rise of a new Reformation amongst them upon the
Resurrection of the two Witnesses.

But however the darkness upon the Kingdom and Throne of the Beast, must be a
great Eclipse of their present Triumphant Condition; And it is a character
distinct from all the plagues that did signify any Acts of blood or litteral
Conquests of his Territories.

The place for this Plague to be poured out upon, has a very signal mark given
it. The Seat, or Throne of the Beast may be either that where he really Reigns,
and resides, which is the Imperial Hereditary Countries, or that from whence he
has the name of the Beast, which is the City of Rome, and nothing but the event
can determine which of the two is here meant.

But by his Ribera on the 10th V. of the 16th Chap. Apocal. upon the Seat of
the Beast:] That is, says he, upon the Kingdom, as Andreas Caesareensis says;
He smote the Kingdom of the Beast.
Throne may also be meant only his Supreme Authority in general, because it is
here explained by his Kingdom, the Darkness in which was the Plague upon his
Throne. And by his Kingdom in this place will be found to be meant nothing but
his power in general, Theor. 65. See further there.

The Sixth Vial seems to be just such a confederacy of the Papal and Imperial
Interest in a War against some Eastern Princes, as we see at present carried on
against the Turks, Rev. 16. 10.
but with a much different Success; This of the sixth Vial being intended for a
very signal Judgment upon the Beast.

By the mention of the River Euphrates one would at first apprehend, that the
judgment of the sixth Vial was to be executed by the same people, who were the
Actors in the Sixth Trumpet, who are there described to be Kings Rev. 9. 14.
about the River Euphrates, as these are here said to be the Kings of the East,
for whose passage the River Euphrates is said here to be dried up.

But it is plain, that they must be two different Nations; For those in the
sixth Trumpet are described to be Kings bound within the River Euphrates, and
are known to be the Turkish Empire, as has been shown: But these Kings in the
Sixth Vial, are some Kings of the East, who are on the Ribera. V. 14. Cap. 16.
Apocal. -- Kings, who shall then be in the Provinces of the East -- nothing but
the River Euphrates shall stand in their way -- to hinder the march of their
Army. Andreas Caesareensis does hereupon imagine, that Antichrist shall come
with these Kings out of the East, that is, out of Persia.
other side of the River Euphrates, and for whose easy passage toward the
Beast, the waters of that River are to be dried up.

The Kings of the East must therefore here be some Princes beyond the River
Euphrates; The chief of whom now is the Persian; But before the time of this
Vial may appear some other Princes of quite another nature.

It may seem a little difficult at the first to comprehend how these Eastern
Princes should be able to make their way to the Imperial Countries, for which
here the River Euphrates seems to be dried up: For there is the whole Turkish
Empire betwixt them. And it is hard indeed to apprehend how it should be done
but by the destruction of the Turkish Empire; And the present posture of their
Affairs does offer us sufficient ground to apprehend that to be possible
enough. Here is almost all the length of the period of this present Fifth Vial
to give time for such a work, besides the number of years that there may be
allowed for it also in the period of the Sixth, before the Judgment of that
Vial shall begin.

But according to the description of the time of the Turkish vexations in the
Sixth Trumpet, and the passing over of the second woe, together with the
Ascension of the Witnesses, Their end should be within a very few years,
according to the Reasons that I have given for it in the Ninth Chapter.

As for the Interpretations of the River Euphrates, which would make it have a
mystical signification, they seem to be sufficiently taken off by the known
litteral signification of the River Euphrates in the Sixth Trumpet, which is
now generally acknowledged to be there taken for the real River only; And is
also proved to be necessary to be so, Chapter the 9th. And so we have an
Example in this Prophecy to determine this Interpretation of it, as well as the
proper litteral signification of the term it self, which ought not to be
departed from, when it may as easily be retained.

The effect of this Vial seems to be a great destruction of the party of the
Beast by their Enemies, which according to the plague of every Vial is to
continue a long while amongst them; And though it be called the Battle of the
great V. 14, 15.
day of Almighty God, as if it were but some great Battle at one time, yet by
that term of the great day of the Lord is in many places signified a long
continuance of time.

But here is a peculiar coming of Christ, described in that Verse 15.
manner, that his coming unexpectedly, and suddenly for the inflicting of some
Judgment is set out in several places of the New Testament; Which gives one
ground to apprehend, That that War must be a very signal destruction of the
Confederates of the Beast. And yet I cannot think it to be the same with that
Battle, Chapter 19. where the Beast Verse 19, 20.
and False Prophet were destroyed. For all that seems plainly to belong to the
seventh Vial, as well as the Judgment upon Babylon mentioned before it, and
threatened in the Cha. 16. 19.
seventh Vial; and it would confound the Order of the things in these Visions
to set the matter of the sixth Vial behind the business of the seventh.

Indeed if it be well observed, there is a plain distinction to be found
betwixt the Enemies in the sixth Vial, and those in the seventh. For the
burning of Babylon, which is one great effect of the seventh Vial is known to
have been foretold to belong to the ten Kings, that were to be the Confederates
of the Beast till the words of God should be fulfilled, and wear his ten horns.
Rev. 17. 16. But the Enemies in the sixth Vial are the Kings of the East, who
are quite another part of the World, than those Western Princes of the Roman
Party.

As for the place of the Battle called Harma-Geddon I think Mr. Mede's
determination of all the controversies about it is the best, that it is one of
the secrets of God, and not to be defined by us, till the Event shall make it
known.

But yet it must be confessed, that the Expressions are not determinate enough
to assure any that this meeting together in Harma-Geddon is more than a
preparative for a continued lasting War in the seventh Vial. And then since by
the drying up the River Euphrates, the Turkish Empire appears to be then
utterly ruined, by the gathering together of the Beast with his Confederates,
and the Kings of the East Idem, in v. 16. ibid, Armageddon] He gives an Hebrew
name, because it was a place of the Hebrews, not either known, or named any
where else -- But where it is we cannot certainly know, because the Scripture
has made no mention of it any where: I apprehend it to be a place nigh
Jerusalem, and the Valley of Jehosaphat. -- Interpreters give various reasons
for its name, but which seem all to be little to the purpose.

But because none can tell where this shall be, and it is no where mentioned in
the Scripture, I imagine that the name of it may be wrong wrote, and Corrupted,
and that it should be Mageddon -- which is known to be a large Plain fit for a
Battle, where Josias died fighting with the King of Egypt. Tyconius is of the
same mind. Homil. 13. But if it is really Harma-Geddon, then it signifies the
Mountain of Megiddo, because that Plain was upon a great Elevation.


in Harma-Geddon seems to be signified, that Syria, and Palestine to which the
name of Harma-Geddon does most likely refer, should be the Seat of the most
considerable of the last conflicts of the Beast with his Conquerours.

The Seventh Vial brings on the last Ruin of Babylon and the Beast. And the
first expression in it does very fully signify it. It is done, must referr to
the accomplishment of Rev. 16. 17.
all the business of the Vials at least; and the Vials are declared to be the
last plagues, in which the wrath of God is fulfilled; And this wrath is against
the Beast, and his Confederates, and therefore must the last of these Vials be
the last act of the wrath of God against the Beast, or, his destruction.

But this must be understood of the conclusion of the period of the seventh
Vial, not of the beginning of it. For we see great preparations for the
destruction of the Beast, and his Confederates after this first mention of the
Vial in General. There is the great City to be divided into verse 19, 20, 21
three Parts; The Cities of the Nations to fall; Great Babylon to be judged;
The plague of the Hail out of Heaven; and then the Armies of the Word of God,
to fight with the Armies of the Beast, and of the Kings of the Earth. Chap. 19.
19.


This expression, It is done, at the first pouring out of the seventh Vial, is
like to those at the first founding of the seventh Trumpet, The Kingdoms of
this World are become Chap. 11. 15.
the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; Which yet were not verified, till
after the third Woe (which is part of the matter of the seventh Trumpet) was
Executed upon the Beast; And the time of the third Woe must be a good part of
the seventh Trumpet to hold any proportion to those two Woes, which went before
it, which took up the whole business of the fifth and sixth Trumpet, and are
found to have continued very near Eleven hundred years.

Wherefore it is evident, that the seventh Vial contains in it the last ruin of
the Beast and his party; Which is the same with the end of the third Woe in the
seventh Trumpet, after which begins the Universal reign of Christ over Chap.
11. 15.
all the Kingdoms of the World. And since the Vials are called the seven last
plagues in relation to the Trumpets, which were the seven first, the last Vial
must then be the last part of the third Woe of the seventh Trumpet.

For the last of the seven last Plagues must be at least after the beginning of
the last of the seven first Plagues, or after the first sounding of the seventh
Trumpet: The first of the seven last Plagues must needs be after the first of
the seven first Plagues, and so must the last also of the one be after the last
of the other.

From hence then it appears, that the beginning of the seventh Vial is not yet
come. For the last Trumpet is not yet sounded, because neither are the
Witnesses yet risen again, nor are the Turks, who are certainly the sixth
Trumpet, and the second Woe, yet passed away, as it is said of the second Chap.
11. 14.
Woe before the seventh Trumpet.

Besides, the seventh Vial is the last of the last Plagues upon the Beast, and
therefore must be after the seventh Trumpet, which is also a Plague upon the
Beast, as it is the third Woe, of which the Beast alone is the Object; because
after the time of the second Woe there is no other part of the Roman Empire,
but the Kingdom of the Beast to be the object of it; and all the Trumpets are
certainly plagues upon some part of the Roman Empire, (Conseq. Theor. 18.)
Besides, That the effect of the Woe of the seventh Trumpet is the same with
that of the seventh Vial, which is the last end of all the Enemies of the
Christian Church. The Seventh Vial must therefore be the last part of the Woe
of this seventh Trumpet, and therefore cannot be yet past, because the sixth
Trumpet is not yet passed away.

The Seven Vials then cannot be yet poured out, as some would have them, and
there must be another of the Vials found out to signify the Reformation, than
this seventh Vial, by those who would have the Vials begin before that time.

CHAP. XIV.
The Preaching the Everlasting Gospel (Rev. 14.) is the preaching up a General
Reformation of the Church of Rome. The Hour of God's Judgments (ibid,) must be
just about the same time. The Vintage is the last destruction of the Beast. The
time of the patience of the Saints is the same with that of the killing of the
Witnesses, Chap. 11. The Harvest after the Resurrection of the Witnesses. The
death of the Witnesses no bodily death. The preaching the Everlasting Gospel
the Protestant Reformation. The 7 Vials cannot begin before the Protestant
Reformation. The Hour of God's Judgments the beginning of the 7 Vials. The 7
Vials begin soon after the Protestant Reformation.

THOUGH the time of the first date of the seven Vials, and the application of
every one of them in particular, seem to have been sufficiently cleared in the
preceding Chapters, yet it will be convenient to take in all the light, that is
offered from the Prophecy, to confirm the grounds that have been already given
for them. And upon a small reflection it will at the first sight be found, that
there are very fair advantages offered for this purpose in the 14th Chapter of
this Book.

I will therefore take a new prospect of the seven Vials with respect to the
relation that they may be found to have to that part of the Prophecy, and will
endeavor from thence to represent the reasons, that do still much more confirm
the explication, that I have given of the Vials in as close and dependant an
order, as any that have been yet delivered.

In order to this I think it ought to be granted me, that

The Events which are referred to in the 14th Chap. do follow one another in
the same Order, in which the Schemes that represent them are there placed.

For this is the natural and litteral construction of the Order of all the
Schemes in the Prophecy, and therefore without some great evidence for another
Order A Leasar in Chap. 13. Disputat de totius Capitis Argumento. -- Therefore
Ribera will have no Order of the things to be adhered to, nor the Series of the
Prophecy to be observed. But that which Ribera thinks good to swallow, neither
will the Millenaries nor any else swallow, who has found out a way to carry on
a suitable Interpretation, according to the Order of the things in the
Prophecy, without any Anticipations or Leaps, or confusion of the Order.
it ought to be adhered to; For that I account one of the most certain Rules of
Interpretation, and without it, the most seemingly plain Interpretations of all
would be but arbitrary and groundless.

But here is besides a, particular Order, and Succession of Angels one after
another, from the beginning to the end of the Chapter, to make it
unquestionable, that the Events which they signify are in an Orderly Succession
to one another.

That which is in the first place to be observed for the design abovementioned
is, that,

The preaching of the Everlasting Gospel to every Nation, etc. is a preaching
up of a general Reformation of the Roman Church in the time of the Reign of the
Beast. 1. It is preached in the Time of the Reign of the Beast; For it follows
in Order after the account of the Rise of the Beast, in the 13th Chap. And
after the account of the 144000, (who are said to be sealed, as the opposite
party to those, who had received the mark of the Beast) at the first verse Rev.
14.
of this Chapter.

2. It is the preaching up of a Reformation, because the matter of it is an
exhortation to Repentance, upon a declaration of God's Judgments being then at
hand, in these Terms; Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his
Judgment is Rev. 14. 7.
come; And to give glory to God in such circumstances is known to signify a
public profession of Repentance.

3. And it is a general Reformation, because it is preached to every Nation,
and Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and that also after a more depressed, and
silenced state of the Church during the Reign of the Beast, which is intimated
by the Select and chosen number of the 144000, said just before this to have
been the first fruits, in distinction to the innumerable V. 4.
multitudes of all Nations, to whom the Gospel is said here to be preached, and
who are therefore introduced immediately after the account of them.

4. It appears also to be a call to a general Reformation of the Roman Church,
because that immediately after it follows a declaration of the nearness of Gods
Judgments, and thereupon there is a denunciation of a Judgment upon Babylon,
and another threat presently after to those who should Worship the V. 8, 9.
Beast or his Image; which shows, that the friends of Babylon, and of the
Beast, are the whole intent of this Reformation.

The Hour of Gods Judgments, chap. 14. v. 7. is just about the same time with
the preaching the everlasting Gospel. For the near approach of the Judgments of
God, is made the motive to persuade Men to comply with the Preachers of the
Gospel. They are moved to fear God and to give Glory to him, which is to make a
solemn and public profession of Repentance, because the hour of his Judgment
was come, or was just then at hand.

There are indeed much the same expressions in the prophets that speak of the
Judgments of God as then present upon Babylon, which were not to appear till
many scores of years after that time. But then those expressions are joined
with others, which show the time of their fulfilling to be a great many years
off. But here the nearness of Gods Judgments is made an Argument to persuade to
a Reformation, at that present time when the Gospel was preached. They are
exhorted to give Glory to God at that present time, because the hour of the
Judgments of God was then come; which does very manifestly confine the hour of
Gods Judgments to the same time that the everlasting Gospel was preached.

Again, the persons to whom Isaiah, and Jeremiah did preach the destruction of
Babylon were not then present. But the persons to whom this Angel was to preach
must be present, when he was to preach to them, or there must be a force put
upon the words. For they are a plain relation of the preaching of an Angel to
all Kindred, and Nations for the hastening of their repentance by alarming them
against the hour of Gods Judgment then coming upon them; Whereas the Judgments
upon Babylon foretold by the Prophets were known not to concern any of that
Age, And so were nothing but a prophetical representation of judgments at a
distance.

It may also be every where observed See concordance in the Word near.
amongst the Prophets, that when ever the Judgments of God are said to be near,
it is certainly meant, that they are near those times in which the people, to
whom it is spoken are exhorted to repent: And so must the time of judgment here
be at the same time that the everlasting Gospel was preached to make men
repent. The hour of Gods Judgment in this place, must therefore be at the same
time with the preaching the everlasting Gospel.

The hour of Gods Judgments v. 7. is the beginning of those judgments of God
upon the Roman Church, which brought it to its final ruin. For when the hour of
Gods Judgment is said to be come upon a Nation amongst the Prophets, it always
signifies the Time of its last Judgments, or the gradual advances of its
destruction. But more perticularly does the hour of Gods Judgment upon Babylon,
to which this use of it here refers, most certainly denote the last
forerunners of its Ruin, among the Prophets, Isaiah 13. chapter 47. Jerem. 50. chapter
51. And then by all that does follow immediately upon it, This hour of judgment
appears to be the beginning of the last destruction of the rule of Babylon, and
the Beast. For from this place to the end of the chapter is a continued
declaration of destroying judgments, by the fall of Babylon, and by drinking of
the Wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup
of his Indignation, and by the Harvest, and Vintage, which are always taken for
destroying judgments, Joel 3. 13. Jerem. 51. 33, 34. with Lament. 1. 15. Matthew.
13. 39.

The preaching of the everlasting Gospel to all Nations and People v. 6. could
not be before the Protestant Reformation. For this preaching the Gospel, is the
preaching of an Universal Reformation of the Roman Church in all the
Territories of the Beast. (Theor. 34.) -- But there was no such general
preaching up of Reformation before the Protestant Reformation. There are none
but the Waldenses, and Albigenses who can be pretended to have began this
design.

But that which does most certainly exclude the Albigenses from any concern in
this, is, That the hour of Gods last judgments upon the Roman Church, was come
at the same time, when this preaching began (Theor. 35.) -- But the Albigenses
served for nothing but for matter of greater Triumph, and glory to the Roman
Church. And tho they might in their time have been a present check, and
Mortification to that party, yet it could not possibly be said, That the hour
of Gods Judgment was then come upon them, because that expression does at least
denote the beginning of a continued Succession of such judgments upon the Roman
Church as do gradually bring it to its last ruin (Theor. 36.) -- Whereas the
Roman Church was in a much higher exaltation for Three hundred years after that
time, than ever it was before; And a much greater check had that party received
from the Greek Church some Hundreds of years before the Albigenses, than it had
from them. Wherefore that preaching of the Gospel could not be before the
Protestant Reformation.

The Vintage in chap. 14. v. 19. is the last destruction of the Beast. For so
it is Represented (both in this chap. and in the 19. chapter 15.) as the last work
of the conquest of Christ in his destruction of the Beast. But besides, The
vintage is used among the Prophets for nothing but the last destruction of a
Joel 3. 13. Lam. 1. 15.
Nation, when it is used to signify any judgment upon it.

The time of the patience of the Saints chap. 14. v. 12. is the fiercest
persecution of the true Church by the Beast, betwixt the preaching of the
everlasting Gospel, and the last destruction of the Beast. I. That it is
betwixt the preaching of the Gospel, and the last destruction of the Beast, is
manifest from the place, that it has in the Prophecy betwixt the preaching and
the Vintage.

II. And that it is the fiercest persecution of the Church within that compass
of Time, is sufficiently signified by these emphatical expressions -- Here is
the patience of the Saints. -- Here are those that keep the Commandments of
God: And -- Blessed are they that die in the Lord from henceforth, for they
rest from their Labors.

There could hardly have been a more emphatical signification of a very
extraordinary Trial of the patience and constancy of the true Church at that
particular Time above any other Trial whatsoever; They are expressions of a
most remarkable persecution, and distinguish it from all others of the kind: As
if the patience of the Saints and their constancy to the Faith in all other
Trials, had been nothing to be regarded in comparison with the exercise of it
under this: And as if their deliverances from all other persecutions, were not
at all to be compared with the happiness of their deliverance out of this, tho
it were by their deaths; Which by the way shows, that the sufferings in this
persecution were much more grievous, then Martyrdom it self: For death is
represented to be an ease and a deliverance from these sufferings; and that is
repeated again, after the first mention of the Blessedness of such a death,
together with the reason given for it, in these Terms; Yea, says the spirit,
for they rest from their Labors.

There is indeed the first of these characters mentioned in the 13. chapter v. 10.
But that seems to refer to the whole time of the Tyranny of the Beast in
General, whereas this here is singled out, and fixed to a particular time, that
is, just before the last destroying calamities upon the Beast; Or if that in
the 13. chapter be any particular time of the Beast and the place of it, which is
after the account of the Fortunes of the Beast, and the call for attention v.
9. and the threat of Revenge that is joined immediately with it, under the term
of going into Captivity and of being killed with the Sword does Rev. 13. 9, 10.
show it to be the same particular time of persecution, with this, which is
just before the last destroying judgments upon that party.

The particular time of this persecution is fixed by the order of the
prophecy, as has been observed. For it is found betwixt the new preaching of
the Gospel and the Vintage which is the last destruction of the Beast (Theor.
38.)

The time of the patience of the Saints chap. 14. v. 12. is the same with the
time of the overcoming and killing of the two witnesses in the 11. chap. v. 7.
For the time of the patience of the Saints is after the (Th. 39.) and therefore
since the Protestant Reformation, (Theor. 37.) -- It is also (Theor. 38.) --
And it is the fiercest Theor. 39.)

Now the overcoming and killing of the two Witnesses (Theor. 33) -- And their
Resurrection must at farthest be, within three years and an half after their
death, (Theor. 27.) -- And then the overcoming

It is also the fiercest storm of persecution within those

Now there can be but one, and the same persecution, that can be called the
fiercest of all that were within the same bounds of time.

Besides, the killing of the Witnesses appears to be the same with the time of
trouble, Dan. 12. 1. because they are Dan. 11. 45. Rev. 9. 14. and 11. 14. And
both of them have the Characters of a great Persecution of the Church in those
circumstances. Daniel was such, as never had been since there was a Nation,
even unto that same time, v. 1. that is, not from the beginning of the World to
almost the latter end of it, as the time that is there described does appear to
be.

Wherefore the time of the patience of the Saints is the same with that of the
overcoming and killing of the Witnesses.

And from hence it is further confirmed, that,

The Killing of the Witnesses (Chap. 11. 7.) cannot be a bodily death. For
death is in this persecution, represented to be a blessing, Rev. 14. 13.
and a great deliverance, and time of rest from the pains and vexations, that
they were here under.

From the former proposition it is also evident, that,

The Harvest just before the Vintage, chap. 14th, must be after the
Resurrection of the Witnesses. verse 15.
For it is a part of the last destroying Judgments upon the Beast after the
time of the patience of the Saints; and so Rev. 14. 16.
is a Revenge upon the Beast for the death of the Witnesses, which cannot be
till after the Resurrection of the Witnesses, because the Resurrection is
within three years and an half Joel 3. 13.
after their death, (Theor. 27.)

The preaching the Everlasting Gospel to every Nation, etc. is the Time of the
Protestant Reformation. Verse 6.
For it cannot be before the Protestant Reformation, (Theor. 37.) -- And it is
the preaching up of a General Reformation before the time of the patience of
the Saints, that is, before the death of the Witnesses, (Theor. 40.) -- And
therefore cannot the preaching up of the Gospel to every Nation, etc. be either
at the new appearance of the Risen Witnesses, or of the Harvest in the 14th
Chap. which is after the Resurrection of the Witnesses, (Theor. 41.) -- Or at
the sound of the last Trumpet: And there is no other Scheme in the Prophecy,
that does any way suit the character of it.

Besides, it is represented here as the first preaching of the Gospel of
Repentance to every Nation, etc. after a silenced or depressed state of the
Church, during the Reign of the Beast, signified by the peculiar number of the
144000, in distinction to the innumerable multitudes of all Nations, to whom it
was preached. And therefore must it be the first preaching up of the General
Reformation of the Roman Church, or the first beginning of the Protestant
Reformation, since it has been found impossible to be before that Reformation.
(Theor. 37.) -- From whence it necessarily follows, that,

The Hour of Gods Judgments, Chap. 14. 7. must be about the first times of the
Protestant Reformation. For the hour of God's Judgments, v. 7. is just about
the same time with the preaching up of the Everlasting Gospel (Theor. 35.) --
which is found to be in the beginning of the Protestant Reformation, (Theor.
42.)

The seven Vials are an Orderly succession of Judgments upon the Beast Idem in
Cap. 13. Apoc. Sect. 5. The Plagues of the Vials signify the War that the
Christian Church make against Idolatry, till it did destroy it; As Irenaeus
learnt with a great deal of pleasure, of one of the Ancient Elders, who it may
be was Polycarp the Disciple of John.
to bring him to his last Ruin. For they are called the last Judgments of God,
in which the wrath of God is filled up, Chap. 15. v. 1. And it is Rev. 15. 1.
manifest, that the Beast is the Object of them all, and is brought to his last
end by the last of them.

1. That the Beast is the Object of them all, is manifest from the Characters
of them; it is expressly mentioned in the first Rev. 16. 2, 10, 12. v. 4, 19.
Vial, and in the fifth and sixth, and openly enough intimated in the third and
seventh.

There remains then no question about any, but the second and the fourth. And
the knowledge that we have of the Object of all the rest, is sufficient to
determine them to the same party; especially, when it is plainly signified in
the 15th. Chapter of all the seven Vials in general, That they V. 3, 4.
are the manifestations of Gods Judgments, just upon the Victory that was
obtained over the Beast and his Image; and this is expressed in the very Song
of Triumph that accompanies that Victory.

Besides, the Sea in the second Vial, becoming like the Blood of a dead Man,
does naturally denote an Ocean of Rev. 16. 3.
Blood; and the acceptance of many Waters, is found to signify in this
Prophecy, multitudes of Nations and People; and so Rev. 17. 15.
does comprehend in it at least those People and Nations, that are within the
Territories of the Beast, because it is a Judgment upon the Enemies of God, of
which the Beast is in almost all these Vials, signified to be the chief; And
then those in the fourth Vial after this, will necessarily be Chap. 16. 8.
determined to the same party of Men with all the rest, especially, when it is
found that they blasphemed God, and verse 9.
repented not.

2. And further, that these Vials do follow soon after one another, to the last
ruin of the Beast, appears from the effect of them all, which is, that they
were the manifestation of Gods Judgments, so as to make all Nations come, and
worship before Rev. 15. 4.
him; which, as it does denote them to be the ruin of the Beast, so could not
this have been said of them, If there had been any such long intervals betwixt
them, as gave the Beast time to recover himself of the Wounds of the former,
before the next Judgment came to touch him.

The continuance also of the Glory of God in the Temple Rev. 15. 8.
until the Plagues of the Vials were fulfilled, and the constant continuance of
the Smoke there, to hinder any from coming into the Temple before the end of
those Judgments, does sufficiently intimate, that they were an uninterrupted
Succession of Judgments, and the constant continuance of the Wrath of God upon
that party, from the first beginning to the last end of them.

Wherefore the seven Vials are an immediate Succession of the last Judgments of
God upon the Beast, which bring him to his ruin.

And from thence it appears, That

The seven Vials cannot begin before the Protestant Reformation. For the seven
Vials are the last Judgments upon the Beast, (Theor. 44. and Rev. 15. 1.) And
they are said to be the Judgments Rev. 15. 1. V. 4.
of God, made manifest about the time that they begin; and therefore must the
hour of Gods Judgment upon the Beast have necessarily been come at that time.
But the hour of Gods Judgment is not before the Protestant Reformation, (Theor.
43.) And therefore, neither can the seven Vials begin before that time.

But yet since this does not prove the certain time of their beginning since
the Reformation: To determine the first Point of that beginning, it may be
considered, That

The seven Trumpets and the seven Vials, do contain in them all the sensible
Judgments of God, of a general concern, upon the Roman Empire, that are
mentioned in this Prophecy, from the beginning of the Reign of the Beast to the
last end of it. For the seven Trumpets begin before the Reign of the Beast,
(Theor. 5.) -- And both the Vials and Trumpets continue to the end of his
Reign. (Theor. 1. and Theor. 44.) -- And both the Vials and Trumpets have the
Roman Empire for their Object, (Conseq. Theor. 18. and Theor. 44.) -- And the
seven Vials are called the seven last Plagues upon Rev. 15. 1* and CHAP. 1^ of
this part.
that Empire, in relation to the seven Trumpets, which are the seven first; And
there was no interval betwixt the first and last Plagues, for any other to come
in betwixt them. For the Trumpets, which are the first continue to the last end
of the Beast; And therefore may they well be concluded, to contain under them
all the Plagues or Judgments of God upon the Roman Empire, at least those that
were the most considerable from the time of the first of them to the end of the
last of them. For if there had been more considerable Judgments than those upon
that Empire recorded in this Prophecy within that compass of time, the Plagues
would have then been more than the number which is here assigned to them.

It has also been made to appear, That the seven Trumpets are a continued
Series of Calamities, which brought all Theor 1. and Theor. 8.
the parts of the Roman Empire to their final ruin at the glorious Reign of
Christ in the seventh Trumpet; And more particularly, That the four first
Trumpets did ruin the first Western Empire; the two next, the Eastern Empire;
and CHAP. 4.
the last, the new Western Empire, called the Beast. And the seven Vials are a
continued Succession of so many Calamities in particular, that brought the last
Remainder of the Empire (called the Beast) to its last ruin, (Theor. 44.) And
to what end should they be so particularly mentioned in a set number, if they
were not all the considerable things of that kind, within that compass of time
in which they were placed; that is, sometime before the Rise of the Beast to
the last end of his Reign?

But this does the most satisfactorily appear, from most of the particular
Instances of Gods Judgments upon the Roman Empire, which are mentioned in this
Prophecy after the Rise of the Beast. For Example, The Judgments upon Babylon
and the Beast, in the 17th. 18th. 19th. Chapters of the Revelations, were
foretold to belong to the 7th. Vial, Chap. 16. 19. compared with the first
verse of the 17th. Chapter. The Vintage in the 14th. Chapter is expressly named
as the business of the seventh Vial, in the Verse 19.
19th. Chapter. The Harvest in the 14th. Chapter, being after the Resurrection
of the Witnesses, (Theor. 41.) -- must Verse 15.
be a part of the third Woe in the seventh Trumpet, which comes quickly after
the passing away of the second; and the second passes away just after the
Resurrection of the Witnesses. The least that can be meant by the fall Rev. 11.
14.
of Babylon in the 14th. Chapter, must be either the beginning Verse 8.
or the end of the Vials, because that is the whole design and end of the
Vials, to bring Babylon and the Beast to their last Ruin, (Theor. 44.) -- The
seven Thunders in the 10th. Chapter, are in a very proper place to be the same
Verse. 3, 4.
thing with the 7 Vials, and so are they generally accounted by almost all
sorts of Interpreters. So that of all the particular Instances of Gods
Judgments, after the Rise of the Beast, there remains nothing but the hour of
the Judgments of God, mentioned in the 14th. Chapter, that is Verse 7.
not expressly known to belong either to the Trumpets or the Vials: And yet
since the Fall of Babylon does immediately follow the mention of it, as the
particular explication of the Judgments, whose hour was just before said to be
come, it cannot be imagined, but the hour of Gods Judgments must be the
beginning of the same Judgments which are made to be the Fall of Babylon; And
so must that also belong to some of the Vials.

Indeed, the Fall of the tenth part of the City, and the slaying the 7000,
(Chap. 11. 13.) is not to be reduced to any of either the Trumpets or Vials:
But then neither is it to be looked upon as any considerable Judgment of God
upon the whole Roman Church, because it is described to be done in a moment,
and to extend but to a tenth part of the Jurisdiction of it.

The Victory over the Beast and his Image in the 15th. Verse 2.
Chapter, is but in a part of the Territories of the Beast, and not general,
and is plainly a Spiritual Conquest of that Party, and rather a deliverance
from them than a triumph over them; and therefore is no sensible Judgment upon
the Beast, but the immediate effect of that Victory as a Judgment upon the
Beast, is set out in the first of the Rev. 16. 2.
Vials.

Wherefore, it may now safely be concluded, That the Trumpets and Vials are all
the considerable Judgments of God upon the Roman Empire, that are mentioned in
this Prophecy in any time betwixt the first Rise of the Beast and his last end.

It is easy therefore now to apprehend, That,

The hour of Gods Judgments, Chap. 14 5. is the beginning of the time of the
seven Vials. For the hour of Gods Judgments is signified to be the beginning of
the last Judgments of God upon the Beast, which brought him to his ruin,
(Theor. 36.) -- And all the considerable Judgments of God upon the Roman
Empire, from the first Rise of the Beast, are contained in the Trumpets and
Vials, (Theor. 46.) -- And the hour of Gods Judgments cannot be the beginning
of any Judgments of the Trumpets upon the party of the Beast. For it is found
to be just after the beginning of the Reformation, which was the time of the
sixth Trumpet, or of the Turkish Hostilities, (Theor. 19.) But the Turks had
been a plague to the party of the Beast, long before that time, in his Wars
with the Venetians; And if it should be said, That they begun but then to
attack the Empire of the Beast in Hungary, yet they cannot possibly be
accounted the beginning of Gods Judgments, which brought that Party to their
ruin. For after one or two Expeditions of Solomon the Magnificent, they ceased
from molesting them for above 130 years after, and now lately have lost much
more to them than they ever took from them. The hour of Gods Judgments cannot
therefore be the beginning of any Plagues upon the Beast in the Trumpets; And
therefore must it be the beginning of some of the Judgments of the Vials upon
him, (Theor. 46.)

Now if this hour of Judgment be the beginning of any of the Vials, it must
begin with the Plague of the first Vial; for otherwise the Judgment in the
first Vial would have been before that the hour of Gods last Judgments upon the
Beast was come, (Theor. 36.) -- Whereas the first Vial is one of those last
Judgments upon him, (Theor. 44.) -- And so would the hour of Gods last
Judgments have been come with the first Vial before it was come, which is a
contradiction. Wherefore the hour of Gods Judgments, Chap. 14. 7. must be the
beginning of the time of the first Vial.

It is a very great confirmation of this conclusion, That the Vials have the
same peculiar Expressions, to signify the nature of them, that are found
joined with the particular Instances of Gods Judgments, immediately after the
general Declaration about the nearness of the Hour of them in the 8th and 9th.
Verses of the 14th. Chapter. For Example: The Vials are said to be the Wrath of
God, and the Time of Rev. 15. 1, 7. Chap. 16. 19.
the Wrath of God; and the last of them to be the Cup of the Wine of the
fierceness of his Wrath; which are all the same Expressions with the Hour of
Gods Judgments, and with what is threatened, should be the last end of those who
should worship the Beast or his Image, in the 10th. Verse of the 14th. Chapter,
That they should drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, that is poured out
without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, that is, should be destroyed
in the Vintage, and be tormented with Fire and Brimstone.

And it is said, That the Judgments of God were made manifest by the Vials,
which is just the same with the Hour of his Rev. 15. 4
Judgments are come; And They are called the seven last Plagues, as the Hour of
Gods Judgment does also signify the Verse 1*
last Judgments upon a Nation: And the Victory over the Beast, with the Song of
Deliverance out of Spiritual Egypt, Chap. 15. 2, 3, 4. is of the same
Signification with the preaching the everlasting Gospel to every Nation, after
a narrower confinement of it to the 144000, and the exclusion Rev. 14. 6.
of all the rest.

It is not therefore now to be questioned, but that the Hour of Gods Judgments,
Chap. 14. is the beginning of the time of the seven Vials; And as necessary is
it upon the same account, That

The seven Vials begin soon after the first-Times of the Reformation. For that
Hour of Judgment which is the beginning of the seven Vials, (Theor. 47.) is
just about the time of the Reformation, (Theor. 43.)

From hence it appears, That the Vials cannot be all fulfilled within a short
space of time, as some would have it signified of them, by the coming quickly
of the Rev. 11. 14.
third Woe. For they begin with the Reformation (Conseq. praeced.) and end with
the Beast, who is not yet at an end.

CHAP. XV.
A particular Application of the four first Vials; The second Vial must be
already poured out. It was at an end at farthest at the Truce of the
Netherlands, Anno 1609. The absured consequences of denying it. The Plague of
the third Vial ended with the Swedish War in Germany. The demonstration of it.
The Plague of the fourth Vial, the King of France: This evinced. The fifth Vial
is now near at hand.

THE first Date of the Vials, will make it easy to fix the particular
Applications of them. But to avoid all loose Conjectures, it will be requisite
to confine our selves within the same strict order of deductions that has been
before used; And the first Foundation for this End, is, That

The second Vial is already poured out. For the Character of the second Vial,
is, The Sea becoming Rev. 16. 3.
like the Blood of a dead Man, or a Sea of Blood; which does manifestly denote
a time of general Bloodshed in the Territories of the Beast. For the Vials fall
all upon the Beast, (Theor. 44.) -- And as there is here a distinction made
betwixt a Sea of Blood, and the Rivers of Blood in the third Vial, so by the
Sea of Blood must be signified a general effusion of Blood in all parts of the
Empire of the Beast, in distinction to Rivers of the same kind, which must be
but in particular places of that Empire, according to the natural Signification
of the Schemes: A Sea has been also found in Prophecy, to signify Multitudes,
Rev. 17. 15.
and Nations, and People.

Now about the time of the first founding of the Dutch Commonwealth, almost
all Europe was in Blood in Wars about Religion: England, France, Spain, and the
Low Countries, were for a long time engaged in these Wars by Sea and Land; And
then this time of Blood must necessarily be either the Plague of the first or
of the second Vial: For they begin all soon after the Reformation, (Conseq.
Theor. 47.) -- And since the Character of the first Vial is a grievous sore
upon the party of the Beast, and the second is the Sea of Blood, it is hardly
possible for any impartial Person not to be assured, That this general effusion
of Blood at the beginning of the Dutch Commonwealth, must be the Plague of the
second Vial.

By this, the time of the first Vial appears to be confined within the compass
of forty years, that is, betwixt the first public Settlement of the
Reformation, which might be called a Victory over the Beast and his Image,
(Chap. 15. 1.) And the beginning of the Low Country Commotions, which was about
the year 1570. And the first public Settlement of the Reformation after a
Victory over the Roman Party, cannot be accounted before the Leagues of the
Protestants with one another in Germany, about the year 1530.

The time of the second Vial was at an end at the farthest, upon the Truce
betwixt the Spaniards and the Dutch, in the year 1609. 1. For the second Vial
began to be poured out about the beginning of the Low Country Commotions,
(Theor. 48.)

And there was an end of all the Wars for Religion in Europe, at the Truce
betwixt the Dutch and Spaniards, in the year 1609. So that the Sea of Blood in
the second Vial, could not have continued longer than to that time.

For there was no other Wars after that time for Religion, but such as the
Roman Party were victorious in, till the beginning of the Swedish War, which
was not till twenty years after; And the Religious Wars within that time, in
some particular places and at distant times, as in Bohemia and France, in which
none but the Party of the Beast was victorious and successful, could not be
part of this Sea of Blood, because they were neither general nor Judgments upon
the Beast, as all the Vials are, (Theor. 44.) -- And yet are these two the
principal parts of the character of the second Vial, both as it is a Vial in
general, and as it is that particular Vial.

This indeed does appear to be a sufficient ground of Satisfaction about this
matter, to those who can allow the former conclusions concerning the time, that
the Vials in general and that this in particular did begin at.

But because there may a very great use be made of the full certainty of this
position, it will be worth the while to consider, What inconsistent and harsh
consequences will necessarily attend the extending the second Vial beyond that
time.

It is certain, That if the second Vial continue longer, it must reach to the
end of the Swedish War; For since the business of it is a bloody Judgment upon
the party of the Beast, (Rev. 16. 3. and Theor. 44.) there will be no other
Religious War found before the Swedish, that it can be applied to, after the
end of the general Commotions of Europe with the Peace of the Netherlands.

For in the Bohemian and French Wars, as has been observed, Anno 1618, and 1627.
the Party of the Beast did triumph over the Church. The second Vial must then
according to this Supposition, be extended to the end of the Swedish War at
least, which was not till the year 1647. And then must these following
Inconsistences be digested.

1. The time of the first Vial would not have been above forty years, but the
time of the second would have continued for near eighty years, and that without
the least hint of any such difference betwixt them in the Prophecy; whereas it
is usual in this Prophecy to set a mark of distinction upon Plagues of the same
kind, that are any thing considerably different from one another in the length
of their continuance. This may be observed in the distinction that is made
betwixt the three last Trumpets and the four former; And there is a precise
Time mentioned in the fifth and sixth Trumpets, to distinguish their
disproportion to one another; And this distinction in some places does seem
plainly to intimate, That there is no considerable difference betwixt the
length of the rest, that have no such mark to signify it by. For exceptio
firmat Regulam.

2. There would thus have been about 120 years betwixt the beginning of the
second Vial and the beginning of the third, whereas there was but forty years
distance betwixt the beginning of the first and of the second.

For if the Sea of Blood be extended to the end of the Swedish War, the third
Vial would not be yet come; For there has been nothing since the end of the
Swedish War, that can tolerably deserve the name of a dreadful Revenge upon the
Beast for former Barbarities to the Church in Rivers of Blood, which is the
Character of the third Vial.

3. There would also have been very great intervals betwixt the parts of the
Plague of the second Vial, and betwixt the Plague of the second Vial and the
third: Whereas the Judgments of the Vials are represented to be mortifying
Judgments of the Beast, coming soon after one another, (Theor. 44.) -- But in
this Supposition, there would have been twenty years triumph of the Beast in
the second Vial, betwixt the Truce of the Netherlands and the Swedish War; And
forty years interval betwixt the end of the second Vial, with the War of it,
and the beginning of the third Vial, which is not yet come: And all this
without the least hint of it in the Prophecy, as has been found to be usual in
such Cases.

4. That which did most properly and exactly answer the Character of the third
Vial, would thus be applied only to the second, for which it is unnatural and
improper. The Rivers of Blood in the third Vial, which are signified to be sent
as a Revenge upon the party of the Beast, for great Cruelties Rev. 16. 4, 5, 6,
7.
that were committed before, do very properly and naturally represent the
Swedish War in the several parts of Germany, which was declared to have been
undertaken in Vindication of the Protestants States, who had suffered by the
Imperial Usurpations and Cruelties some years before it; And was continued by
them and their Allies only in Germany, or the Confines of it: Whereas that
particular Seat of War, and the Revenge which it was to be for the former
Cruelties of that Party, has nothing to represent it in the Sea of Blood in the
second Vial, which must be a general effusion of Blood in almost all parts of
the Western Empire, and in which the States that are the Friends of the Church,
are comprehended as well as the party of the Beast, tho it be a Judgment only
upon the latter.

5. The Humiliations which the party of the Beast has suffered ever since the
Swedish War, would thus be passed over as no concern of the Vials; whereas the
Mortifications that they have received from the King of France for this forty
years together since that time, have been at least as great as those that are
signified by the Characters of the first and fourth Vials.

6. This Proof would be still more unquestionable, if it were further
considered, That there is now but about One hundred years to the end of the
Vials, as has been demonstrated PART. I.
concerning the time of the first Rise of the Beast; And therefore that in this
way, the second Vial would take up as much time as all the five that are yet to
come. But the proof that has been already given of it, is sufficiently clear
without it.

It may therefore now be safely determined, That the Universal Bloodshed in the
second Vial, must have been at an end, upon the forementioned League betwixt
the Spaniards and the Dutch at the farthest.

The Plague of the third Vial ended with the Swedish War in Germany. For the
Plague of the third Vial could end neither before nor after that War.

1. Not before the Swedish War; because betwixt the Universal Bloodshed in the
second Vial, and the Swedish War, there was no such bloody Revenge upon the
Beast for Cruelties before committed, as is made to be the Character of the
third Vial. The particular Wars in some places before that time, betwixt the
Romanists and the Protestants, tho they might begin some execution upon that
party, yet were almost all to the great disadvantage of the Church, as the
Bohemian and French Wars in particular, which were the only considerable Events
of that kind.

2. Again, If the third Vial had ended before the Swedish War, then that War
must have been the Plague of the fourth Vial. For there could not have been
more than the Judgment of one Vial upon the Beast, betwixt the end of the
general Sea of Blood in the second Vial and the Swedish War, because the party
of the Beast were the Conquerors for near twenty years after the time of the
second Vial: And then the Swedish War must have been the fourth Vial, because
it was the greatest Mortification that the Beast has received since the
Reformation; And so could not be left out as no part of any Vial.

But the Swedish War could not have been the fourth Vial; For then the time
after it would have been the fifth; whereas since the Swedish War there has
been nothing that comes any thing near the Character of the fifth Vial: But on
the contrary, instead of weakening of the Kingdom of the Beast and humbling his
Throne, the Beast has been successful in the extirpation of the true Religion
out of all the Roman Catholic Countries, where it had been settled. For these
forty years together he has been rooting them out of Poland, out of all the
Imperial Countries, out of the Kingdom of France and the Dukedom of Savoy,
where there is now no appearance of the outward profession of the Protestant
Religion.

2. The Plague of the third Vial could not end after the Swedish War. For there
has been nothing answerable to the Character of a bloody Revenge upon the
Beast, that is signified by Rivers of Blood, since the fierceness of that War.
And there would be an interval of eighty years since the end of the second Vial
and the beginning of the third, if the third Vial were still to come; And the
Swedish War would have been in that interval accounted no Judgment upon the
Beast, which was the most bloody Revenge upon him that he ever yet had.

The French and Spaniards did indeed continue the War. Till the year 1660.
But they were both of the same Religion, and the contest was only Civil
Jurisdiction; And so could not have in it any thing of the nature of a
Vengeance for Blood.

As for the beginning of this third Vial, it may be dated from Stephen Botsky's
Cruelties to the Roman Party in Anno 1605.
Hungary. For Botsky's Actions could not be accounted part of the Sea of Blood,
because it was in none of the Territories in which the rest were; but might
very well be looked upon as part of the Rivers of Blood, because they were the
beginning of Bloodshed in the Fountains of Waters, Rev. 16. 4.
that is, in the Imperial Countries. This indeed did happen three or four years
before the Dutch and Spanish Truce, but that is not worth the considering.

The Plague of the fourth Vial is the Vexations of the Imperial and Papal
Party, by the present King of France. 1. For the Plague of the fourth Vial is
those Mortifications

Now the Vexations of that Party by the present King of France, have first
continued upon them for as considerable continued for forty years together
after the end of the third Vial or the Swedish War.

The whole Reign of this present King of France has been nothing but an almost
continued Mortification of the Papal Party and the Austrian Family, or its very
near Dependants and Allies, with some small and inconsiderable Interruptions.

The beginning of it may be accounted the continuance of the French Hostilities
in Flanders after the Swedish War, and the Peace of Munster, which lasted till
the Peace of the Pyrenaeans above ten years together. It was again renewed by
the Seizure of Lorain, and was continued by the Conquests in Flanders and
Burgundy, and after that carried on by the German War, and a new Invasion of
the Low Countries; And followed with the taking of Luxemburgh, and will now be
concluded with a Phaethontean Fall of this Sun in his scorching Heats about the
Rhine.

During these Humiliations of the Imperial Party, he had also very frequent
occasion to vex and humble the several Popes within these forty years, for the
Restitution Innocent X.
of Castro, and the Rights of the Duke of Modena, but especially in the Affair
of the Corsi, and about the Regale, Alexander VII.
and now lately in the business of the Franchises. Innocent XI.


2. And next, that these Hostilities do very properly answer the Characters of
the fourth Vial, has been already sufficiently shown, Chap. 13.

Since the common Subject of all the Vials is the Empire of the Beast, never
can one hope to find any Hostilities against him, that can so well answer the
Character of the Sun, and the scorching that Party with his Heat, than Verse. 8,
9.
the Vexations of him who is set out by the Title of the Eldest Son of his
Kingdom, and who is in so Eminent a manner the greatest Potentate in Europe,
and is every where known by the name of the most Christian King for his
Eminency in the Roman Party.

Again, If the French Vexations of the Imperial and Papal Party for these last
forty years, should not be the (Theor. 44.) And which is explained by the
Example of the three first Vials that did come soon after one another, (Theor.
49, 50, 51.) And next there would have been no account made of all the Evils
that the Party of the Beast has suffered from the French for these forty
years, tho they have been greater than the Plagues of the first Vial, and tho
they do very exactly answer the Character of the fourth.

The Actions of the last past forty years, do not answer the Characters of
either the second, or third, or

After this evidence for the Application from the Prophecy it self, it cannot
but surprise one to see how providentially it was ordered for the making it
known to the World, as has been remarked, That from the beginning CHAP. XIII.
of the Reign of this present King of France to this time, the French Court
should be so extremely fond of the Figure of the Sun for their Kings Device, so
as even to stamp it upon the public Coin, and should be so zealous in the
Defense of the Propriety of it against all Opposers.

Now if the time of the Vials does begin soon after the Reformation, (according
to Theor. 47.) And the present French King be the chief matter of the fourth
Vial, it may safely be concluded of the Vials in general, That

Every one of the Plagues of the Vials do take up a great many years to be
fulfilled in. And then does it appear more particularly, That,

The distance of the end of each Vial from the end of that which went before
it, is about forty years. For it appears from the different Characters of the
three last Trumpets in comparison with the four first, Rev. 8. 13.
That the Prophecy takes care to give very plain and open significations of the
different lengths of the several Plagues, where the difference betwixt them is
any thing considerable in the lengths of the Events: And therefore may it be
reasonably concluded, that if there were any considerable difference betwixt
the distance of any one of the Vials from another that was next before it, in
comparison with the distance of the rest from those that did immediately
precede them, There would have been some peculiar Signification given of it in
the Prophecy. But there is no such distinguishing mark set upon any of the
Vials, as does in the least intimate any difference betwixt them, in regard of
the length of their continuance.

It may therefore from hence be gathered, That the Ends of the time of the
Vials, are at equal distances from one another; And this being determined by
the four first Vials, (which are already known,) to the term of about forty
years, is to be applied upon that account to the time of the three last Vials
also.

This would very much confirm that which is elsewhere PART I.
endeavored to be demonstrated, That,

The time of the Beast must be at an end about the year 1800. For the three
last Vials according to the Example of those before them, are to continue each
of them about forty years, and they are yet to come. But the last of them may
be supposed to finish its business in a shorter time, and then the end of the
Beast must be some years before that time.

It does also follow from what has been observed, of the usual time of the
continuance of every Vial, compared with the length of the Reign of the present
King of France, That,

The fifth Vial is now near at hand. For the present King of France has Reigned
now above Forty years since the end of the third Vial, or the Swedish War. And
that space of time will be found to be the common distance of all the other
Vials from any other: Wherefore the fourth Vial must be now very near its end,
and the beginning of the fifth near at hand.

CHAP. XVI.
The Plagues of the three last Vials the same with the third Woe of the last
Trumpet. The Slaughter and Conversion of the Enemies of the Risen Witnesses, is
but in one particular Kingdom of the dominion of the Roman Church. The fifth
Vial a general Mortification of the Roman Church.

The third Woe in the seventh Trumpet, falls wholly upon that part of the Roman
Empire which belongs to the Beast. FOR all the Trumpets fall upon some part of
the Roman Empire, (Conseq. Theor. 18.) -- And the Woe of the sixth Trumpet does
destroy the Eastern Empire, (Conseq. 2. Theor 19.) -- There remains therefore
nothing to be the Object of the third Woe in the seventh Trumpet, but the
Western Empire with the Church Rule of it, which is the Jurisdiction of the
Beast.

The last Act of the seventh Vial, is the same with the last part of the third
Woe in the seventh Trumpet. For the sole Object of the third Woe is the Party
of the Beast, (by Theor. 52.) -- And it ends with the ruin of that Party just
before the Universal and Eternal Reign of Christ, Rev. 11. And the seventh Vial
does end with the destruction of the Beast, (Rev. 19. Theor. 44.) The last Act
of both, must therefore be but one and the same thing.

The Plague of the sixth Vial cannot appear till after the end of the second
Woe in the sixth Trumpet. For the Plague of the sixth Vial is to be after the
Reformation, (Theor. 45.) And therefore long after the settlement of the Turks
on this side the River Euphrates, (Rev. 9. 14. Theor. 19.) It is also described
to come from beyond the River Euphrates, and to have the Waters of Rev. 16 12.
Euphrates dried up for a more easy Passage: And the drying up of the Waters
of the River of a Nation, does signify amongst the Prophets the destruction of
the Kingdom, to which they are a Fence, Isaiah 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. Jerem. 51. 36,
43. compared with Isaiah 44. 27. Jerem. 50. 38. Isaiah 11. 15, 16.

And Waters do represent a whole Nation amongst the Prophets, Isa. 8. 7. And
then the drying them up can be nothing but the destruction of that Nation.

Now there is no Kingdom that has appeared in those parts since the
Reformation, but the Turkish Empire; much less any that can deserve that
Epithet of the great River Euphrates any thing like the Turkish Empire;
Wherefore the Plague of the sixth Vial cannot appear till after the Ruin of
all the Remainders of the Turkish Empire about Euphrates, that is, not till
after the passing away of the second Woe.

Indeed, it cannot be conceived how any Enemy should be able to come from
beyond the River Euphrates against the Western Empire by Land, as is here
signified by the drying up of the Waters of the River, as long as the Turkish
Empire holds up in Asia.

And besides, if there should be any such new Plague from those parts before
the passing away of the second Woe, there would be a new Trumpet sounded
against the Roman Empire from the same quarter of the World, before the passing
away of the Trumpet before it; whereas the second Woe of the sixth Trumpet is
said to pass away Rev. 11. 14.
before the sounding of the seventh Trumpet.

If it should be hereupon imagined, That the Plague of the sixth Vial might be
nothing else but the passing away of the second Woe, or the end of the Turkish
Empire signified by the drying up of Euphrates, it is to be considered, That
the drying up of the Waters of Euphrates is not the Plague of the sixth Vial,
but only to make way for the Plague of that Vial, which is the preparation of
the Eastern Kings upon the Beast and false Prophet; Rev. 1^. 12, 13.
And besides, the Plague of every Vial falls upon the Party of the Beast,
(Theor. 44.) And therefore cannot that of the sixth be designed against any
other.

The Plague of the sixth Vial must necessarily be in the time of the third Woe.
For the Plague of the sixth Vial is after the passing away of the second Woe,
(Theor. 54.) -- And the third Woe comes quickly after the second, which it
cannot be Rev. 11. 14.
imagined to do if the Plague of the sixth Vial should come in betwixt the
passing away of the second Woe and the coming of the third; For the business of
the sixth Vial is the last destruction of the great Kingdom near Euphrates, and
great preparations for War betwixt the whole Party of the Beast all the World
over, and the Kings of the East, which cannot be brought about in a small time.

And from hence it appears, That,

The whole time of the Plague of the seventh Vial, is contemporary with the
latter part only of the time of the third Woe. For the Plague of the sixth Vial
is executed in the time of the third Woe, (Theor. 55.) -- And the whole time of
the seventh Vial is after that of the sixth, (Theor. 44.) -- And the last end
of the seventh Vial is the same with the last part of the third Woe, (Theor.
53.) -- The whole time therefore of the seventh Vial, is in the time of the
latter part of the third Woe.

It is also apparent from the former Proposition, That,

The Plague of the fifth Vial is not yet come. This does necessarily follow
from what has been found to be the time of the fourth Vial, which appears to be
but now at its last conclusion; But this is now still further confirmed from
what has been just now found about the time of the sixth Vial.

For the Plague of the fifth Vial is at an end before that the sixth begins,
(Theor 44.) And the Plague of the sixth Vial is in the time of the third Woe,
(Theor. 55.) -- And the third Woe is not yet come, because the second is not
yet passed away, (Theor. 19.) If then the Plague of the fifth Vial were already
come, it must be in being at this present time, because the sixth which is not
yet come, must be soon after it, (Theor. 44.)

But there is no manner of appearance of any such Darkness upon the Kingdom of
the Beast at this present, as is described Rev. 16. 10.
in the fifth Vial. But instead of it, we see the Majesty of the Roman Church
to be so far from being Anno 168^.
eclipsed, that it is now in the greatest Glory and Splendour, that it has been
since the Reformation; it has been continually victorious over the Church for
above these thirty years together in all parts of the Dominions of the Roman
Church, where the Protestants had any allowance, in Poland, Bohemia, Silesia,
Moravia, Hungary, the Bavarian Territories, and lately very remarkably in the
great Kingdom of France, and in the Dukedom of Savoy, to the utter extinction
of all profession of the true Religion amongst them.

Wherefore the Plague of the fifth Vial cannot be yet come.

Now to show what Relation the fifth Vial has to the third Woe, it is to be
observed, That,

The third woe is a continual advancement of the Church in all parts of the
Dominion of the Beast till the last end of his Power. 1. The third Woe is an
advancement of the interest of the Church, because it is a Woe upon the Party
of the Beast, (Theor. 52.) that advances the Universal Kingdom Rev. 11. 15.
of Christ.

2. It is such an advancement of the Interest of the Church in all parts of the
Dominions of the Beast, because the whole matter of it is the Kingdoms of this
world become the Kingdom Ibid.
of the Lord and his Christ; And this also after the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, which is the beginning of the new recovery of the Church in all
parts of the dominion of the Beast, where they had been killed.

3. It is a continual or gradual advancement of the Church, and not a sudden
total triumph over its enemies, because it is contemporary with the two last
Vials at least, (Theor. 55 and 56. Which are gradual advances of the
destruction of the Beast; whereas if the third woe were nothing but a sudden
general Triumph of the Church over the power of the Beast, it could not be in
the time of the sixth Vial at least, Rev. 16, ^^.
which represents the Party of the Beast to be in a considerable posture of
opposition.

4. It is a continual or uninterrupted success of the Church against the Beast,
because first it is after the Resurrection of the Witnesses which appear to be
the last deliverance of the Church from the oppressions of the Beast, (Theor.
1.)

And next, because the Character of the third woe Chap. 11. 51.
is the conversion of the Kingdoms of this World, which cannot signify less
then an uninterrupted advancement of the power of the Church above the power of
its chief enemies, which in this place are none but the party of the Beast,
(Theor. 52.)

5. The third Woe is also a continual or uninterrupted success of the Church to
the last ruin of the Beast, because it is the Woe of the last Trumpet, which
makes all the Kingdoms Rev. 11. 15.
of the World the Kingdom of Christ, and also because it is the same thing in
the last end of it with the last part of the seventh Vial, (Theor. 53.) -- For
the last part of the seventh Vial is the ruin of Babylon and the Beast, upon
which succeeds the everlasting Reign of Christ with his Saints. Wherefore the
third Woe is a continual advancement of the interest of the Church in all parts
of the dominion of the Beast with an uninterrupted success against that Party
to their last ruin.

All the Vials, that are contemporary with the third Woe, are parts of it. For
the third Woe is the uninterrupted success of the Church to the last ruin of
the Beast, (Theor. 58.) -- It is also all the parts of that success to the
last, because in all parts of the dominion of the Beast to the last, (Theor. 1.
and 52.) -- And all the Vials are the last Plagues upon the Beast to mortify
his power in the Church, and to bring him to his last ruin, (by Theor. 44.)

Wherefore those Vials, which are contemporary with the last Woe, are but parts
of the same uninterrupted success of the Church, which the last Woe is in
general.

This is confirmed by the example of the other two Woes before the last
Trumpet. For the second Woe is all the parts of the success of the Turks
against the Roman Empire; And the first Woe was all the parts of the success of
the Saracens within the time allotted to it.

And by this it appears, That

The third Woe is nothing else but the Vials that are contemporary with it. For
if there were any more plagues in the third Woe, besides the Vials, that are
contemporary with it, Then the Vials would not be the seven last plagues, which
brought the Beast to his ruin; For those plagues which are supposed to be in
the third Woe besides the plagues of the Vials, that are contemporary with it,
would be some of the seven last plagues. Wherefore the Vials that are
contemporary with the third Woe, are All the parts of that Ruin of the Beast,
which is the third Woe in general.

And therefore,

The beginning of the third Woe is the plague of the first of those Vials. AS a
further preparation for a discovery of the Relation of the fifth Vial to the
third Woe, it may be considered, That

The slaughter, and conversion of the enemies of the risen witnesses chapter 11th.
13. is at the conclusion of either the fourth or fifth Vial. For that
slaughter, and conversion is just before the third woe, and therefore just
before that Vial that begins the Rev. 11. 13.
third woe, (Theor. 60.) -- And that Vial must be either the fifth or the
sixth; For the third woe is not yet come, And the fourth Vial is just about its
last end; (conseq. Theor. 51.) And the sixth is known to be a part of the third
woe (Theor. 55. and 59.) Wherefore that slaughter and conversion must be either
just before the fifth or the sixth Vial, that is, either at the conclusion of
the fourth or fifth Vial.

The slaughter, and conversion etc. chap. 11th. is but in one particular part
of the dominion of the Beast. For all the enemies of the Witnesses in that
place are signified to be at an end, seven Thousand were slain and the rest
Rev. 11. 13.
converted; Which shows the Scene of that event to be but one part of the
dominion of the Beast, because the party of the Beast continues in opposition
to the Church long after that Time, for the whole continuance of the Time of
the sixth and seventh Vials in the third Woe (Theor. 44.)

The slaughter and conversion etc. chap. 11th is no part of any of the seven
Vials. For it is at the conclusion of either the fourth or the fifth Vial
(Theor. 61.) -- And the Persons, who are the objects of the fourth and fifth
Vials continue impenitent after Rev. 16. 9, 11.
the Plagues of them, whereas after the slaughter in chap. 11th the rest are
said to give Glory to God or to repent and be converted; The persons therefore
in that place of the 11th chap. must be different from those, who are the
objects of the fourth and fifth Vials; And the sixth Vial is certainly after
the time of that slaughter and conversion, which is described to be before the
passing away of the second Woe; For the sixth Vial is a part of the third Woe,
(Theor. 59.) Wherefore that slaughter and conversion can be no part of the
plagues of any of the Vials.

From hence it does appear, That

The Plagues of the Vials do not fall upon one particular part only of the
dominion of the Beast. For if the Plagues of the Vials did fall upon any
particular parts only of the dominion of the Beast, Then would the slaughter
and conversion of the enemies of the Witnesses belong to one of the seven
Vials, contrary to (Theor. 63.)

The consequence is necessary, For the seven Vials are the seven last Plagues
upon the Beast, And that slaughter and conversion, etc. is within the time of
the Vials, because not yet past, (Theor. 33.) -- It is also as considerable a
Plague upon the Beast, as any can be in a particular part only of his dominion,
because it appears to be the total ruin of the interest of the Beast in the
place, where it is, Seven Thousand were slain and the rest converted; It is
therefore as much qualified to be one of the seven last Plagues, as any of the
Vials, if they fall upon particular parts only, of the dominion of the Beast.

It may be replied, that the Vials may be the seven last Plagues in some parts
of the dominion of the Beast, And yet this be a Plague different from them in
another part of his dominion. But then there must be eight last Plagues upon
the Beast in all, whereas the Vials are called the seven last Plagues in which
the wrath of God was Rev. 15. 1.
filled up: Which does plainly signify them to be seven, and no more.
Especially when we see them reckoned up in order one after another, which shows
the number seven to be a broken number, and therefore to be limited to just so
many particulars.

Wherefore the Vials must be Plagues of a different nature, and much more
considerable, then the slaughter and conversion of the enemies of the Witnesses
was; And this they could not be, as has been shown, if they had been upon
particular parts only of the dominion of the Beast. And therefore must they be
of a more general extent.

It is also apparent from all the objects of the Vials, that the Plagues are
poured out upon all the chief supporters of the interest of the Beast. The
first Vial pours out a Plague upon all those in general, that had the mark Rev.
16. 2. v. 3.
of the Beast; The second brings in an Ocean of blood in v. 4.
all parts of the dominion of the Beast, The third extends to all the
considerable friends of the Imperial and Papal Interest, the Rivers and
Fountains, the King of Spain, the Duke of Lorraine, the Duke of Bavaria, and
all the Imperial Party in Germany. The fourth is found to be of v. 8.
much the same extent; The fifth has nothing in it that contradicts this, but
is said to fall upon the Kingdom of v. 10.
the Beast indefinitely; The sixth is expressly intimated to concern the Beast
and false Prophet, and all the Kings of the earth, that are their confederates;
And the seventh is generally agreed to be the final destruction of the whole
Party.

Wherefore it may now be concluded, that the Plagues of the Vials, do not fall
upon particular parts only of the dominion of the Beast.

The Plague of the fifth Vial is an eminent humiliation of the Ruling power of
the Beast in all parts of his dominion. 1. It is an eminent humiliation of the
Ruling power of the Beast, because it is said to fall upon his throne, and to
fill his Kingdom with darkness; And darkness upon a Kingdom is Rev. 16. 10.
commonly used amongst the Prophets, to signify at least a great disorder in
the Government of a Kingdom, but sometimes also it denotes the utter ruin of
it: Wherefore since the Kingdom of the Beast is said here to be full of
darkness; The least that that can signify is a very eminent humiliation of the
Ruling power of the Beast.

2. The Plague of the fifth Vial is also an humiliation of the power of the
Beast in all parts of his dominion, because fill his Kingdom: And by the
Kingdom of the Beast must be understood his Roman Kingdom. For it is his Roman
Authority in general which in all parts of this Prophecy is signified by the
terms of the Kingdom, or Power, or Authority of the Beast. And his Roman
Kingdom is all the parts of the dominion of the Beast.

2. This is also further confirmed by the Sphere, and Object of all the other
Vials which is the party of the Beast in general, as has been observed, (Theor.
64.)

3. Whatever might be signified by the Object of the other Vials, yet by the
Kingdom of the Beast in distinction to the several Parts of it named in the
other Vials, as the Earth, Sea, Rivers, etc. cannot be signified less, then
that whole Kingdom of which the others seem to be but the Parts; And that must
be his whole Roman Kingdom. For it is that dominion, of which the Earth, Sea,
and Rivers in the other Vials are said to be the Parts.

4. By the Dominion, Authority, and Kingdom of the Beast in all other Parts of
this Prophecy is signified his Rev. 13. 3, 4, 5, 7, 12. and Chapter 17, 13, 17.
Kingdom and Authority indefinitely, or without any limitation to one
particular Principality, where his chief Seat is; And so denotes his Authority
in general or in all Parts of his Dominion; And therefore ought his Kingdom in
the fifth Vial to be understood indefinitely, or without restriction to any
particular Part of his Jurisdiction.

5. Especially, if it be considered, that in the figure of the Beast, The Ten
Horns, which represent all the other Kingdoms, are shown to belong to him as
his proper furniture; And in the explication Those Ten Kings are said to have
one mind, and to agree to give their Kingdoms to Rev. 17, 13, 17.
the Beast, by which they become all his one Kingdom only.

6. By the Kingdom of the Beast must at least be signified something more than
what is called the tenth Part of the City chap. 11. v. 13. That is, more than
one of the Ten Kingdoms which are said to be given to the Beast, (Conseq. 2.
Theor. 21.) And therefore must the Kingdom of the Beast signify more than
either the Imperial Countries or the Papacy; And then what can it signify, but
the whole extent of the Dominion of the Beast or his Kingdom in general?

The pouring out of the Vial upon the Throne of the Beast, need not be fixed to
any particular Seat of the Beast. For the Seat and Throne of the Beast in this
Prophecy, is frequently used for his supreme Authority in general, and not for
any particular place, where it resides, as Chap. 13. 2. and Chap. 17. 15. The
waters where the whore sits: As Babylon, and the great City, are also known
to be used for the Universal Domination of Rome.

CHAP. XVII.
The whole Plague of the fifth Vial within the time of the third Woe: It begins
the third Woe. The last end of the Turkish Wars or their Ruin, and the
Resurrection of the Witnesses near at hand. Further evinced, that the Vials
must begin soon after the Reformation, to signify the Plagues that fell upon
the Roman Party by the Reformation, distinct from those that they suffered at
the same time from the Turks as the second Woe; How the third Woe is said to
come quickly. The date of the Vials soon after the Reformation, aptly intimated
at the end of the 9th. Chapter of the Revelations, and the beginning of the
10th. The same further proved from the nature of the Victory mentioned, Rev.
15. 2. before the Vials. No proof from Rev. 10. 6, 7. That the beginning of the
seven Vials must be after the sound of the seventh Trumpet.

I Have been the more scrupulous to confirm the general extent of the Vials
upon the whole Kingdom of the Beast, because upon the strength of that does
depend all determinate Knowledge of the beginning of the time of the fifth
Vial, which is very requisite for fixing the time of the Resurrection of the
Witnesses: For now it appears, That

The whole Plague of the fifth Vial is within the time of 1. For the fifth Vial
ends just before the time of the sixth, (by Theor. 44.) -- And the sixth is
part of the third Woe, (Theor. 55. and 59.) -- And would begin the third Woe,
if it were the first of the Vials in the third Woe, (Conseq. Theor. 60.) -- And
then the fifth Vial being not long before it, (Theor. 44.) -- Would be
contemporary with that State of things which is described to come just before
the passing away of the second Woe; For the third Woe comes quickly after the
passing away of the second. Rev. 11. 14.


But the Plague of the fifth Vial cannot possibly be contemporary with that
State of things that is described to come just before the passing away of the
second Woe.

For the Plague of the fifth Vial continues for a great many years together,
(Conseq. Theor. 51.) -- And therefore, if it were contemporary with those
things that are described before the passing away of the second Woe, it must be
contemporary with the overcoming and killing of R(...) 13.
the witnesses. For they rose again from the dead within three years and an
half at the farthest after their killing, And their Ascension into the Throne,
is described to be presently after; And the Earthquake, and all that Verse 1^,
14.
follows till the mention of the passing away of the third Woe, is said to be
at the same time with their Ascension: So that the time of the fifth Vial must
then reach as high at least, as the overcoming and killing the Witnesses.

Now the Witnesses represent the whole Church under the power of the Beast,
(Suppos. 4) -- And the overcoming and killing them, is the utter extinction of
all public profession of the true Religion within the Jurisdiction of the
Beast, (Theor. 29.) -- Which must therefore require many years to accomplish
it; especially if it be considered, That that Suppression of the true Religion
in all Roman Catholic Countries, called the Death of the VVitnesses, must be
after the beginning of the Reformation, and when it has got ground in many
Kingdoms; because it is just before the third Woe.

But it is a plain contradiction, that the Plague of the fifth Vial should be
at the same time with such a Triumph of the Beast over the Church in all parts
of his Dominion for many years together. For that Plague is, on the contrary,
an eminent Humiliation of the power of the Beast in all parts of his Dominion
for many years together, (Theor. 65. Conseq. Theor. 51.) -- Neither can the
Plague of the fifth Vial be part of it before the passing away of the second
woe, after the Triumph of the Beast over the Church in killing the witnesses
and part of it in the time of the third woe; For then it must be contemporary
with the Slaughter and Conversion of the Enemies of the VVitnesses, or the
Party of the Beast, Rev. 11. 13, 14. -- Whereas the fifth Vial represents all
Parts of the Dominion of the Beast to be impenitent. Rev. 16. 11.
The Plague of it was upon his whole Kingdom, (Theor. 65.) And they are said
not to repent, which signifies, That no part of his Kingdom were converted; And
therefore can there be no part of the Plague of the fifth Vial before the time
of the third woe, because the third woe follows presently after the second, at
the passing away of which, Rev. 11. 14.
that Slaughter and Conversion of the Roman Party is described to be.

Wherefore since no part of the fifth Vial can be before the third woe, it
must necessarily All of it be within the time of the third woe.

2. It appears also by what is found to be meant by the Plague of the fifth
Vial, That it could not be before the beginning of the third woe, because the
third woe is the beginning of the uninterrupted Increase of the Success of the
Church against the Beast, in all parts of his Dominion till his last Ruin,
(Theor. 58.) -- And the sixth Vial is certainly a part of that Success, (Theor.
55.) -- And the fifth Vial is just before the sixth, (Theor. 44.) -- And
represented to be an Humiliation of the power of the Beast in all parts of his
Kingdom, (Theor. 65.)

The fifth Vial must therefore begin at the same time with the third woe, and
be the same with it upon that account, (Theor. 59.)

3. The Character of the fifth Vial does seem to have an immediate Relation to
the business of the third woe. Rev. 16. 10.
The Plague of it falls upon the Throne and Kingdom of the Beast, which does
very naturally signify the beginning of a general Humiliation of the power of
the Beast in all the ten Kingdoms, of which his Kingdom consists, which does
properly denote, That the Kingdoms of this world do then begin to be the
Kingdom of Christ, according Rev. 11. 15.
to the Character of the third woe: And this is another confirmation, that the
fifth Vial begins the third woe.

4. The Plague of the fifth Vial has also the same effect attributed to it that
the first Vial had at the beginning of the Reformation, that is, Sores and
Pains to make them gnaw Rev. 16. 10.
their Tongues for pain; Which seems to intimate, That they shall have much the
same uneasiness and indignation from alike Cause, or by reason of a new
Reformation amongst them, since there is none of the other Vials that are said
to have that effect, but only the first: And then what can be liker the
Character of the third woe, then the beginning of such a Reformation, which is
to continue to the end of all the Vials? And it is not easy to imagine, what
else can be meant by the darkning of the Kingdom of the Beast, and the humbling
of his Throne, but a general Reformation in all Roman Catholic Countries; For
that is properly the Kingdom of the Beast.

All the Proof that has been hitherto given of this Proposition, is wholly
independent upon the Application of the Trumpets; And upon that account it may
be made use of as another confirmation, That, The second Woe is the Turkish
Empire.

For the second woe is a Nation that was loosed from Euphrates to destroy the
third part of Men, and it ending just before the third woe, that is, just
before the fifth Vial, (Theor. 66.) It must necessarily be now in being;
Conseq. Theor. 60.
For the fifth Vial is near at hand, (Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.) Now there is no
other Nation in being at this present, to which those circumstances can agree;
but the Turkish Empire on the other side, since it has been proved in the
Interpretation of the Trumpets, (Conseq. 2. Theor. 19.) That the Turkish
Hostilities are the second woe; The present condition of the Turkish Empire
does show, That the second woe is passing away at this present, that is, just
before the time of the fifth Vial, (Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.) And therefore must
the fifth Vial begin the third woe.

For whatsoever may be the issue of this present Humiliation of the Turks, yet
the least that can be conceived of it is, That they will be no more a Woe to
the VVestern Empire; For it appears from the sixth Vial, (Theor. 54.) that
there will be no Turkish Empire at that time to hinder the Passage of the Kings
of the East; And according to the Examples of all the rest of the Vials before
it, the fifth must be past within these next forty years; And therefore it
cannot be above so many years at farthest before the end of all the Power of
the Turks. Now it cannot be conceived, That they should be in any disposition
or capacity, within so short a space of time, to be a new woe to their
neighbor Princes, especially when it is considered, How many Allies must be
comprehended in the next general Peace with the Turks, and how much it will be
the interest of them all to join against any Violation of it.

Tho the Turks should continue a distinct People and Kingdom till that time,
for forty years longer; yet according to the Example of the first woe, That
would not qualify them to be still accounted the continuance of the second
woe; for the time of the first woe was past before the loosing of the four
Angels, or the Reign of Ottoman, that is, when the Saracens ceased to be a
Vexation to the Roman Empire, which was long before the Saracen Empire was
destroyed.

Wherefore, since in all Appearance the second Woe must at farthest be passed
away upon the next general Peace with the Turks; And since either a general
Peace or their last Ruin cannot be far of, the third Woe must begin very
shortly; And therefore must the fifth Vial also, which is now near at hand,
(Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.) be within the time of the third woe.

5. The description also of the killing of the Witnesses just before the third
woe, does extremely well agree with the State of the Protestant Church at this
present, (as has been observed, Chap. 7.) which makes it very probable, That
the third Woe is not farther off this present time than the fifth Vial, whose
time is near at hand, (Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.) And therefore that the Plague of
the fifth Vial is in the time of the third woe.

The general Tendency of all Christendom at this present toward a Reformation,
does still further confirm our Expectations of the near approach of the third
woe; Molinos Success in almost all the Southern parts of Europe, to the
alienating their Hearts from many of the Superstitions of their Church: And the
general disgust, that the most considerable part of the Gallicane Church have
against the offensive Doctrines of the Roman Party, are very plain Testimonies
of the general Inclination of that Party to a new Reformation: The plainest
instance of which, is their new way of defending their Cause by false colors,
to make their Religion to be much the same with that of the Reformed Churches,
which has now the Approbation of all the Ruling Part of their Church.

NOW if the Plague of the fifth Vial be in the time of the third woe, since it
must be the first of these Vials that are contemporary with that woe; it is
then apparent from Conseq. Theor. 60. That,

The beginning of the Plague of the fifth Vial, is the beginning of the third
woe. AND as the present posture of the Turkish Affairs, and the present State
of the Protestant Churches all over Europe, do much confirm the fifth Vial to
be the beginning of the third woe; so do the other parts of the proof of that
Proposition much more strongly prove, That,

The final end of the Turkish Hostilities as the second woe, and much more the
time of the Resurrection of the witnesses is near at hand. For the third woe
begins with the Plague of the fifth Vial, (Conseq. 2. Theor. 66.) and that
Plague is near at hand (Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.) and therefore must the things
which are described to come before the third woe be still more near this
present Time, The first of which is the passing away of the second woe, or the
final end of all the Turkish hostilities.

Now if the final end of all Turkish hostilities be so near, the Resurrection
of the Witnesses must be just at hand. For the advancement of the Reformed
Religion, into the Throne of a Kingdom, where the Witnesses lay dead, called
their Ascension (especially since it is accompanied with the end of all their
Enemies in that Kingdom by the Rev. 11. 12, 13.
conversion of it, all which is to happen before the end of the second woe)
must in all likelihood take up almost all the Time that is now to come before
the end of that woe, since it is determined to be so near at hand. And then the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, which must be before all those events must be
very near this present Time.

This is very much confirmed by the examples of all the Vials that are past;
The business of each of them did follow soon after one other. It is true, the
Plague of the third Vial did not appear it may be to any purpose, till twenty
years after the end of that of the second.

But there was enough in the Hungarian, Austrian, and Bohemian commotions just
about the end of the second Vial, to give them the name of the beginning of the
third Vial upon the fountains of Waters; And the more considerable
insurrections in Bohemia, and Hungary were not long after; And they were both
in much the same place with the Swedish War, and upon much the same account,
for a liberty of Religion.

According to this general example of the rest, The fifth Vial must begin
within a very few years: And since the third Woe begins with the fifth Vial,
which is now at hand (Conseq. 4. Theor. 51.) The second Woe must pass away in a
very short Time.

The present State of the Turkish Affairs will not in all appearance allow any
long delay for the accomplishing of this; That Government seems to be incapable
of subsisting so long without a peace. Their late pillages of Constantinople,
and the impoverishing of the richer sort among them, which was the only thing
they could have recourse to in a Time of need, has disabled all the great Men
to relieve them on any emergent occasion; And the public revenue was so much
fallen before, and their treasury so wholly exhausted, that there is no
appearance of any way for them to raise a fund for the further continuance of
the War, against such Victorious Enemies, as are now engaged by interest to
continue their Conquests upon them. Now the next general Peace with their
Enemies, if they have any, must, as has been observed (CHAP. 9.) be the last
end of their hostilities: But since these things were wrote, there has been an
apparent beginning of the Peace. And if the second Woe must so necessarily be
at an end within that compass of years, then certainly by the day month and
year of the continuance of the second Woe, chap. 9. 15. must necessarily be
meant above 390 years, since it will be just about that number of years from
the letting loose of the Turks, from their confinement about Euphrates to the
forementioned Time: which is another Roman Party (Conseq. 2. Theor. 21.) which
cannot be imagined to require less then the time, that remains to conclude the
Turkish Peace; Especially when it appears, that all the Neighboring Kingdoms
of that Party are represented to be still impenitent, and powerful enough to
encourage Rev. 16. 9.
their friends against such an Apostasy; And that it cannot be thought that the
Witnesses just risen with an abhorrence of the cruelties that they had suffered
should carry on such a conversion by Force and Violence, after that all those
that openly opposed them are destroyed, or at least disabled from doing any
hurt, as it is here represented. Rev. 11. 13.
The conviction of the consciences of an whole Kingdom, while many other
Kingdoms of that Party do at the same time continue their impenitence, must in
all reason require at least so short a time to accomplish it in.

The Resurrection of the Witnesses then which is to be before all these things,
cannot be judged to be a years distance from this present time at the farthest,
and then this present time must be the time of the death of the Witnesses. For
otherwise there would be three years and an half still to come before their
Resurrection, whereas the end of the second Woe seems not likely to allow time
for it. From hence does appear how unlikely it is that the last great
Persecution of the Church should be yet to come.

BUT if this present be the Time of the death of the Witnesses, there is no
Persecution considerable enough to be made the date of it, that is, of the last
suppression of the whole reformed Church, since the time of that which began
with the Revocation of the Edict of Nants in France October. 1685. From which
Time therefore the date of the three years and an half of the death of the
Witnesses, may very reasonably be apprehended to begin, And their Resurrection
may upon the same account be expected before the middle of this year. But
especially when this consideration is joined with all the rest that have been
mentioned before.

Indeed if the length of the years, that are comprehended in the day, month,
and year of the second woe be well attended to, and be concluded to follow the
example of the years contained in the time, times, and an half, that is, 360
days to a year, the years of the second woe must end at farthest in the year
1691, but according to the most accurate account of the beginning of Ottomans
Reign they must end before; And before the end of that second woe the Witnesses
must be risen again, and be ascended.

It is easy now to discern the reason, why the Ascension of the Witnesses, and
the fall of the tenth Part of the City, and the ruin or conversion of all that
were in it, are no Parts of the third woe, notwithstanding that they are the
beginning of the uninterrupted success of the Church against its Enemies.
Theor. 65.
For by the nature of the fifth Vial it appears, that the beginning of the
third woe is a general calamity upon the Kingdom of the Beast; whereas all
those other events have regard but to a tenth Part of his Kingdom.

It is also easy to discern, why the third woe is said to come quickly after
the passing away of the second; For the Witnesses or the Church having
recovered it self from the oppressions of the Beast, and triumphed in the
conquest of an whole Kingdom of that Party before the end of the second woe,
The third woe which begins with the uninterrupted success of the Church to the
last end of the Beast, cannot be far off from such a glorious beginning of the
triumph of it.

For coming quickly both in its own natural signification, and in its frequent
use in Scripture does signify the sudden beginning of a thing to appear, not
the sudden passing of it away, as some would have it understood.

And from hence it appears, why the declaration concerning the passing away of
the second woe, is brought Rev. 11. 14.
in here alone by it self, at so great a distance from the proper place of it
at the end of the 9th chap. to which it refers: It seems to be plainly for no
other end, but only, that it might serve, as an eminent event to know the Time
of the last deliverance of the Church from the power of the Beast by; And upon
that account must the Time of its passing away be presently after the first
triumph of the Church after its deliverance at the Ascension of the Witnesses,
because the general success of the Church Theor. 59.
which is the third woe, must begin soon after so fair an advance toward it.

It may now with some satisfaction be observed, that as the whole account of
the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of the Witnesses, is a manifest allusion
to the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ; so also is the Universal
Reign of Christ over the Kingdoms of this World in the third woe, represented
to be just upon the Ascension of the Witnesses into Heaven, As the Kingdom of
Christ is said to begin at his Ascension into Heaven. And as the whole time of
our Lords appearance in his office upon earth was three years and an half, and
his stay in the Grave three days and an half, so also is the whole time of the
Witnesses Prophecy three years and an half, and the time of their death three
days and an half.

THUS have we in the third woe first the general Agent, from whence it has its
distinction from the rest of the Trumpets, and that is, the Interest of the
Church, as the distinction of the two other woes is from the Persons, that
execute them, The Locusts, and the Horsemen Rev. 9.
about Euphrates. Here are also the diverse ways by which this woe is executed,
that is, by the three Vials, as we see in the other two woes the different
manner of their vexations, of the Eastern first, and then of the Western
Empire, under the Schemes of five months twice mentioned V. 5, 10.
in the first, and the third part of men, and the rest in the second. It might
be hereupon demanded, why the rest of the Vials should not upon the same
account have their place also in the third Woe; For they appear to be all
Plagues upon the Beast to bring him to his ruin, and to advance the power of
the true Church; And there is no appearance of any such thing any where else in
the 11th chap. before the third Woe. For the Beast is set out in the highest
flush of his power, till just almost before the sounding of the seventh Trumpet.

But all that fair show of the Beast before the seventh Trumpet, is expressly
said to regard nothing but the last issue of the last War of the Beast against
the Witnesses, or the overcoming them, and the killing them; And that Rev. 1^. ^
is but a very inconsiderable part of the latter times of the Beast. But if we
cast our eyes upon the fortunes of the Beast ever since the Reformation, it
must be acknowledged, that there has been other signal humiliations of his
power, and so exactly answerable to the characters of the first Vials, that as
they must have been somewhere signified amongst the judgments upon the Beast,
and are no where else found to be intimated, so is there all reason to fix them
upon those Vials.

And though there be no mention of any such mortifications of the Party of the
Beast, in the 11th chap. before the Resurrection of the Witnesses; and the
third Woe, yet is there a manifest intimation in the 10th chap. of at least the
beginning of some terrible judgments upon them, some while before that time.
For after it had been signified at the end of the 9th chap. that the Rest of V.
20.
the Roman Empire, who were not destroyed by the Turks, but only tormented, did
not repent of their Idols of Gold and Silver, notwithstanding all that they had
suffered by that Woe, it follows immediately upon it in the beginning of the
10th chap. that the seven Thunders uttered their Voices; which seems to be a
manifest intimation of the farther chastisement of those, who could not be
brought to Repentance by the former judgments; And those must necessarily be
the Party of the Beast: Because after the destruction of the Greek Empire by
the Turks, signified by the slaying the third part of Men, about the end of the
9th chap. just before, there was no other remainder of the Roman Empire, but
they, that could be those impenitent Persons, much less, that could be said to
worship any Idol of Gold and Silver.

Now the seven Thunders are uttered long before the Declaration about the
passing away of the second Woe Rev. 10. 4.
in the 11th. chap. And therefore must the Time of them at least begin before
the third Woe. And what can the judgments of the seven Thunders be imagined to
be, but the Plagues of the seven Thunders be imagined to be, but the Plagues of
the seven Vials, since they are the same number of Plagues upon the same Party,
and appear just about the concluding time of the Trumpets, which does
sufficiently qualify them for the same name of the seven last Plagues, by
which the seven Vials are known? There is therefore ground enough from hence to
be very confident, that the seven Vials must begin before the found of the
seventh Trumpet, or before the third Woe.

As for the particular time of their beginning, it appears from the 15th chap.
That the Vials do begin upon some eminent Victory over the Beast, and over his
Image, and over V. 2.
his Mark, and over the number of his Name. A victory over the Image of the
Beast, and the number of his name, that is, over the Church Power of the Roman
Party, and the name of a Roman Catholic can signify nothing but the PART I.
Chap. ^^.
free and undisturbed profession of the true Religion, reformed from the Roman
Impositions.

And by the place of the seven Thunders in the tenth chap. which appears now to
be the same with the seven Vials, this Victory or Freedom from the Yoke of the
Roman Church, must be before the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the passing
away of the second Woe. So that it must then be, the first beginning of such a
new Reformation, and of the undisturbed profession of it, as must happen before
the Resurrection of the Witnesses, Theor. 33.
who are elsewhere determined not yet to be risen again; And what remarkable
time can that be, but the beginning of the Protestant Reformation?

For the victory over the Image of the Beast, which denotes this freedom of
Religion, must be understood in that indefinite sense in which it is expressed
in the Text, and so to comprehend in it all the Parts of the Reformation; And
it being also described as a Victory newly obtained, and a deliverance from
oppression just newly appearing, it must then signify the first beginning of a
general Reformation before the time of the Resurrection of the Witnesses; And
therefore to no other point can this Victory be reasonably fixed, but to the
first beginnings of the Lutheran Reformation. The Vials then must begin soon
after that Time, and be fitted to those events, which do most remarkably answer
the characters of them in that series, in which they follow one another; And
the knowledge that is already had of the time of the three last Vials will
confine the four first to those events, which do the most exactly suit them
since the beginning of the Reformation.

Again, since the seven Thunders are a further chastisement of the Party of the
Beast, for their impenitency under the evils of the second Woe, or the Turkish
Hostilities, the Vials may very well be supposed to begin presently after the
invasion of the Imperial Countries by Solomon the Magnificent, and his famous
Siege of Vienna, the Imperial seat of the Beast; Which happening just at the
same Time, when the Roman Party were every where called to repentance by the
Preachers of the Reformation, and they notwithstanding continuing obstinate
after it, was a sufficient ground for new judgments upon them, and for those
mortifications which they received by the success of the Reformation.

It is indeed pretended, that from this very account of swear, that the Time of
them v. 6, 7.
should not be yet, (as it is in the Original,) But that in the days of the
seventh Angel, (which is the time of the third woe) the mystery of God should
be finished.

But it is manifest from all the description of that Angel, which is made up of
several very strange, and peculiar circumstances (the very same with that of
the Angel in the 12th chap. of Daniel. 7. 5.) That the solemn asseveration,
that he here makes is the same with those which he swears so solemnly to in
that place of Daniel, and that is, to declare, when the seven Thunders, and the
Times of the Beast should end, not when those last Plagues upon the Beast
should begin.

As for that expression in the Original (...), as if that should signify, that
the Time of the Trumpets v. 6.
should not be yet, or not before the seventh Trumpet: It is known that the
general signification of (...) is a space of Time taken Indefinitely, and that
the word, that is every where used in the N. T. to signify the time or season
of a thing is (...); And though (...) might be pretended in some rare use of it
to signify the particular Time of a thing, yet it has then most certainly the
Article before it; And never will it be found that (...) without an Article
does signify any definite particular time. And therefore cannot it here
signify the particular time, or season of the seven Vials.

The proper signification therefore of that expression, (...), is either, that
there should be no longer delay of those last Judgments of the Thunders, which
should put an end to the Times of the Beast; But that they should all be
finished under the seventh Trumpet; Which would both determine the time, when
the Judgments of the Thunders should begin, that is, immediately after the
impenitency of the Romanists, under some great mortifications of them by the
second Woe, and would also fix the point beyond which the last finishing of
them should not be delayed, which is signified to be the Time of the seventh
Trumpet; Or else it must signify that after the seven Thunders, there should
be no longer Time of any Roman Rule, which is the Object of all the Trumpets,
but that in the days of the seventh Trumpet (after the last Thunder) All the
Prophecy concerning the Roman Empire should be fulfilled. For (...) without an
Article must signify length of Time indefinitely or in general; And thus does
the proper import of (...), still further prove the beginning of the seven
Vials to be before the seventh Trumpet or last Woe.

CHAP. XVIII.
The exact Agreement of the Order of Things in the 9th. 10th. and 11th.
Chapters of the Revelations, with that of the Schemes in the 14th. Chapter. The
Vials contemporary with them both. The four first Vials evinced to be before
the third Woe. The coming quickly of the third Woe explained. The last end of
the Turkish Wars, and the Resurrection of the Witnesses further proved to be
just at hand; As also that the three last Vials are contained in the third Woe.
Why those three make but one Woe. An Objection that the third Woe must contain
all the Vials, Answered. Another Reason why the third Woe is said to come
quickly. Why the seven Vials cannot come after all the seven Trumpets. Why
nothing of the great Persecution in the seven Vials. The Reason of the name of
the seven last Plagues given to the Vials.

OF all the Interpretations that have been made in this part, there is none
that seems to be more near the certainty and clearness of a moral
Demonstration, than the conclusions which have been just before drawn from the
Order of things in the fourteenth Chapter.

And by the use that has been made of those Deductions from the 14th. Chapter,
it may with a great deal of satisfaction be observed, How exactly answerable
the whole process of that Chapter is to the Series of Events, that are
described from the end of the 9th. Chapter, to the end of the last woe in the
11th. Chapter.

The time of the 144000, who are sealed to escape the Calamities of the
Trumpets, seems plainly to be at an end, Rev. 7.
after the chief Heat of the sixth Trumpet, at the last Verse of the 9th.
Chapter. They could not be sealed to be secured against the Evils of the
seventh Trumpet; For the Evils of the seventh Trumpet is the power of the true
Rev. 11. 15. and Rev. 14. 6. Theor. 58.
Church it self, or of the 144000 themselves, increased into a numberless
number of all Nations, and advancing by degrees upon the Ruins of the
remaining part of the Roman Empire, after the destruction of the Eastern
Empire; And therefore could not the 144000 be sealed to escape the Evils of the
last Trumpet.

The end of that number of the 144000, seems then to be at the impenitency of
the Romanists, after the Invasions of Germany by the Turks, and the Siege of
Vienna by Solomon the Magnificent, just at the beginning of the Reformation,
when all Europe began to come into the Church, and so turned the 144000 into
the innumerable multitude, Chap. 14. 6. Or just before the uttering of the
seven Thunders, immediately after the end of the 9th. Chapter, Rev. 10. 4.
which are found by the seven Vials to begin with the Reformation. For tho the
144000 are represented as the opposite Party to that of the Beast, and so seem
to be made contemporary with the Beast to his last end, yet since it is
certain, That the 144000 were sealed long before the Reign of the Beast, which
was not till after the first Trumpets, (CHAP. I IV. Second Part.) Their time
may be as well at an end before the end of the Reign of the Beast, according as
it is here represented to be.

Thus also is the time of the 144000 in the 14th. Chapter, represented to be
past just before the preaching of the Rev. 14. 6. Theor. 42.
Gospel to all Tongues and Nations, which is now found to be the first Times of
the Reformation. They are said to be the First Fruits to God and to the Lamb,
and to be Verse. 3, 4.
redeemed from the Earth, in distinction to the great Body of the Church of all
Tongues and Nations, who are described to follow immediately after them,
according to the known distinction of the First Fruits from the rest Rev. 14
of the Heap in the Jewish Law, and of the Firstborn from the rest of the
numerous Family, who were to be redeemed by something else in lieu of them, and
not to be sacrificed. And so their being said here to have been redeemed, does
confine the Signification of the First Fruits to their proper Notion, as things
distinct from and before the rest that follow, according as the use of this
same term of First fruits is found to be in the New Testament it self, as Romans
16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 15.

By this then it is here signified, That the time of the 144000 was past at the
preaching of the Gospel to all People and Nations, or at the beginning of the
Reformation, just as their time is found to end after the fury of the sixth
Trumpet, or with the beginning of the seven Thunders in the 10th. Chapter. Page
271.


The first uttering of the seven Thunders, as the time that they begin at, is
before the War, and the overcoming and killing of the Witnesses, in the 10th.
and 11th. Chapters.

So also is the Hour of Gods Judgments, which is of the same import, described
to be before the great Persecution, in the 14th. Chap. verse. 7, and 12.

The War and Success of the Beast against the Witnesses in the 11th. Chapter,
is described to be betwixt the beginning of the seven Thunders at the
Reformation, and the end of the second Woe, and immediately before the second
Woe.

And so is the great Persecution in the 14th. Chapter, betwixt the Fall of
Babylon at the Reformation, and the Harvest and Vintage, which are known to be
the Theor 38, and 41.
same with the third Woe. And in both of those Chapters, is that Persecution
described to be the fiercest Storm that ever fell upon the Church, during the
whole time of the Reign of the Beast. In the 11th. Chapter, it is expressed by
the terms of overcoming and killing the two Witnesses, in distinction to all
the other Humiliations of the Church over the Beast, which are represented only
by their being in Sackcloth; And in the 14th. Chapter, it is set out by words
of special remark, for the same purpose; As, Here is the patience of the
Saints: As if the patience and constancy of the Saints and Martyrs under all
other Trials and Sufferings in the time of the Beast, were nothing to be
compared with this.

And then the work of the Harvest being performed Rev. 14. 14.
by one like the Son of Man, and the Wine Press after the Vintage being trodden
by one whose name was the Word, does show, That they are both parts of Gods
last Rev. 19. 13, 15.
Vengeance executed upon the Beast by the interest of Christ and his Church,
just as the third Woe in the 11th. Chapter, is known to be nothing but the
Victories of the Christian Church over the Beast.

The History of the seven Vials, has been already found to be contemporary with
the whole time of these two agreeing parts of the Prophecy, and must therefore
necessarily receive a great Light from them for the determination of the
particular place of every Vial, as well as it self illustrate the Order of the
Things that are delivered in those other Chapters.

And by comparing all these three Accounts together, it appears first, That as
the time of the Vials has been found to begin with the Reformation, so the
Victory over the Beast and his Image, just before the Vials, Chap. 15. must be
the same with the liberty of Preaching the Gospel to all People and Nations,
Chap. 14. 6.

And then it having been before proved, That the three last Vials are confined
to the last Woe in the seventh Trumpet, And also that the beginning of the
whole number of them is at the Reformation, That gives very good ground to
conclude, That the place of the four first Vials must be betwixt the beginning
of the Reformation and the last Trumpet.

For if but one of those four should be made to belong to the last Trumpet,
there would then be no proportion betwixt the time of the last four of the
Vials and the first three. Since the time of the end of all the Vials must be
the destruction of the Beast, which is determined to about the year 1800,
(Suppos. 3.) there will be near 300 years betwixt the first Vial and the last;
And then the last Woe in the seventh Trumpet, being known not to be yet come,
there remains but about an 100 years for the continuance of it.

Wherefore if there should be four Vials in the last Woe, and but three before
it, there would be no manner of proportion betwixt the time of the three first
and of the four last. The three first would have taken up near 200 years, and
the four last would not have above 100 years for their continuance; And so the
three first, which are not half the number, would have continued near twice as
long as the four last, which are more than half the number; which cannot be
imagined of them, since there appears no mark of distinction betwixt them in
the Text. For we have very good grounds to conclude from the mark of
distinction, that is set upon the three last Rev. 8. 14.
Woes, to signify the great disproportion of their continuance in comparison
with the four first, And from the five Months allotted to the first Woe, to
distinguish it from the much longer continuance of the second VVoe, That if
there were any such great difference betwixt the time of the first and last
Vials, it would have been some ways hinted in the account of them.

If it be here objected, that there is no such distinction of the third woe
from the two former, which yet is not to continue a quarter of the time that is
given to the second woe, it is to be considered, That the last woe is the end
of all the business of the Prophecy, and so was the eternal Triumph of the
Church over the Beast.

As for that which may be pretended from what is said of the last woe, which is
the same with the latter Vials, That it should come quickly after the second
woe, as if that might be interpreted of the short time of every particular Vial
contained in the third woe, in comparison with those before them. It is to be
considered, That it is the last woe only in general, that is said to come
quickly, and not the parts of the last woe in respect of one another, of which
kind the Vials of the last woe are supposed to be; And that Expression can then
at best signify no more, than that the last woe should come quickly, in
distinction to the other woes before it; And let the last woe be as short as it
will in comparison with those before it, yet that would give no Authority to
place any more of the Vials in it, than would hold proportion to the time of
the rest of the Vials that went before them.

But it has besides been shown, (CHAP. 17.) That the last we is said to come
quickly, because it was to begin very shortly after the end of the second woe;
As to come quickly after another does naturally and usually signify in
Scripture, and not because it was very shortly to be fulfilled.

Wherefore to keep any tolerable proportion betwixt the distant Periods of the
first and latter Vials, the three last of them must take up the whole time of
the last woe; And so there will be an equal proportion betwixt the time of the
four first Vials (which will take up above 160 years,) and the time of the
three last, which will not have above 100 years to perform their work in.

From hence it may next be concluded, That the Resurrection of the witnesses
and the end of the Turkish Hostilities is just at hand. For the time of the
first four Vials which begin with the Reformation, is now run out; And there is
but just room enough left for the three last Vials to have their course; And
the three last Vials being Theor. 66. Conseq. 2.
proved to belong to the third Woe, the third Woe must therefore be just at
hand, and so the second Woe by the same Reason, must also be very nigh its end.
Now the second Woe is known to be the Turkish Hostilities (Cons. 2. Theor. 19.)

And if the second Woe be so very near its end, the Resurrection of the
Witnesses must be still nearer; For there seems to be many things to be done,
betwixt the Resurrection of the Witnesses and the passing away of the second
Woe. And this is another ground to expect a removal of the Clouds that are at
present upon the Reformed Church, and an end of the Turkish Power within very
few years, though there should be little strength apprehended to be in the
proof of it, from the Day, Month, and Year, Rev. 9. 15.

From hence also we see the length of the third Woe in the last Trumpet to be
determined to the whole time of the three last Vials, which in proportion to
the rest, cannot take up much less than 100 years; This does also show, That
the last Trumpet must begin to sound within very few years, and bring in a
victorious State of the Church, advancing continually without any considerable
check, upon the ruins of the Kingdom of the Beast and his Party, till it end
in a perfect Triumph over all the Remainders of his Power in the World; And
that the chief remarkable Events by which this shall be effected, shall be the
Calamities of the three Vials.

If it should be hereupon enquired, how the three last Vials can be the same
thing with the one last Woe of the seventh Trumpet, there is a very obvious
Account of it in that which is made to be the last Woe, which is the
uninterrupted Triumph of the Church over its Enemies, (Theor. 58.) Now the
three last Woes have their nature and distinction from those who are the
particular Executors of them; And the only Agent in the Woe of the last Trumpet
being the Interest of the Church or of the revived Witnesses, it is therefore
made but one Trumpet, according to the Examples of the two Woes before it;
Which make but two single Trumpets, tho each of them contain in them many
different Vexations of the several parts of the Roman Empire, which is the
Object of them. But the Vials being the several kinds of Judgments upon the
Party of the Beast from the same Agents, are therefore as many as there are
different kinds of Humiliation of them by that one and the same Interest.

And tho the Plague of the sixth Vial seems to come from another hand than that
of the Church, under the Name of the Kings of the East, yet before they are
described to act against the Beast, or to come to the Battle, there is a
manifest intimation of a very extraordinary Presence of Christ himself coming
into their Party, and that in such a manner, as he is signified in other places
to come to inflict some eminent Judgment.

But it may seem at first sight to be something harsh, from the account just
mentioned, to make but three of the Vials to be the Woe of the last Trumpet,
since that Woe is here made to be the whole Series of the last Mortifications
of the Beast by the Church, (Theor. 58.) And for that Reason ought to include
in it all the former Vials, which were Mortifications of the Beast by the same
hand.

In answer to this, it is to be considered.

1. That though the last Trumpet be nothing but the last Judgments upon the Beast
from the Church, yet it can be but that part of them, which began after the
passing away of the second Woe, or of the power of the Turks; And the second
Woe being certainly known not to be yet past, and there having already been
several Judgments upon the Beast, since the Reformation, contemporary with the
second Woe, and yet no parts of it, the third Woe, or the last Trumpet, cannot
possibly be thought to have any thing to do with those Judgments.

2. Again, there is a manifest reason in the Text why the four first Vials
should be before the last Trumpet, though they be most of them Plagues from the
Church, as well as the Woe of that Trumpet; For there is a plain difference
betwixt the power of the Church against the Beast in the first Vials, and the
success of it in the three last. The four first Vials have been found to be
before the death of the two Witnesses (Theor 61.) And the success of the Church
against the Beast before that Time was very variable, and more like the chance
of War; It was continually interrupted with the like fortunes of the Party of
the Beast, and, considering the last Issue of this War betwixt them, viz. the
killing of the two Witnesses, the Beast seemed to have gotten much the
advantage of the Church by this War. But the success of the Church against the
Beast in the three last Vials, is represented as an uninterrupted triumph over
their Enemies in the way to their utter ruin. And thus the Death and
Resurrection of the Witnesses put in betwixt the four first Vials, and the
three last stands in the Prophecy, like a very Remarkable boundary and
partition, to distinguish the bounds and nature of the first Vials from the
last. And just as betwixt the fourth and the fifth Trumpet, comes in that great
recovery of the Roman Empire by Justinian, before the three last destroying
Trumpets, so here betwixt the fourth and fifth Vial, comes in the killing of
the Witnesses, as a great recovery of the Beast before the beginning of the
three last destroying Vials.

Thus does the first beginning of the business of the third Woe, appear to be
just like that of the second; The same thing, that was the matter of each of
them, was acting long before it came to be the particular business of the Woe.
The Turks who are the second Woe were a great Plague to the Eastern Empire near
200 years before the time, that they began the Execution of that Woe, by
slaying the third part of Men, which was not begun Rev 9. 15.
till about the year 1300. As long as they were held in check by the Crusadoes
in the Holy War, and were repressed by them, they are not made to be any part
of the second Woe. So also are the Plagues upon the Beast from the Church not
accounted any part of the third Woe in the Time of the first Vials, whilst they
were continually returned again upon the Church; But the first date of it, as
the third Woe, is from the first beginning of such a Victorious State of the
Church, as continued triumphant over its Enemies to their last ruin without
any considerable interruption. And as the beginning of the second Woe is
determined to the Time, that the Turks were loosed from their confinement about
Euphrates, which had a very great event in History to make it generally known:
so is the beginning of the third Woe signified to be presently after the Death
and Resurrection of the Witnesses, which was to be a State of the Church, that
should alarm all the World to take notice of it.

It is now apparent therefore from the Text, why the third Woe must of
necessity come quickly after the end of the second, as it is there said of it;
For the Resurrection and Ascension of the two Witnesses, which is just before
the end of the second Woe, must be such a new flourishing of the Church, as is
made by the Text to be the beginning of the third Woe. And it is easy to
believe, that by the Resurrection of the Witnesses the executioners of the
third woe were ready prepared to do their office, when we see they had already
begun a part of it, at the fall of the tenth part of the City, just before the
Rev. 11. 13, 1
passing away of the second Woe.

The third woe therefore must needs come quickly after the second, because it
began to appear just before the end of the second, whereas the characters of
the second woe Conseq. 1. Theor. 19. CHAP. III. VIII, and IX.
did not appear till about 300 years after the end of the first woe, nor the
first woe till near an 100 years after the end of the Plague of the fourth
Trumpet, that went before it.

It must be acknowledged, that it would make a much fairer show of concinnity
in the Prophecy, if the seven Vials were included in the last woe, or the
seventh Trumpet, as the seven Trumpets seem to be included in the seventh Seal;
For this would make these Visions seem to have a very orderly dependence upon
one another, from the first opening of the Scene in the fifth chap. to the end
of the Prophecy; whereas now these Vials seem to interfere confusedly with the
Trumpets, four of them are in the Time of the sixth Trumpet, and three of them
in the time of the seventh; And I must confess I was so desirous to have the
Vials fall all under the last Trumpet, that I was sometimes thereby biased to
apprehend, that the victory over the Beast before the Vials in the 15th chap.
must be the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, and then the Vials
must have all fallen within the seventh Trumpet.

But the Reformation was so remarkable a triumph Theor. 43.
of God upon that Party, that I could not avoid the pitching upon that for the
fixed point to date the Vials from; Especially when I found that there had

And then, it is no wonder, that the Vials should interfere with the two last
Trumpets, because at the same time that the woe of the sixth Trumpet was plying
the Beast on one side, the Plagues of the first four Vials were upon him on the
other side, and so were two sorts of Plagues contemporary with one another from
several quarters, and therefore could not be included in one another. If the
Turks were the sixth Trumpet, it is certain, that the sixth Trumpet could not
include those eminent Judgments, that have fallen upon the Romanists since the
Reformation, and therefore must these judgments be signified either by so many
Vials, or not be signified at all; Whereas they were far more considerable
humiliations of that Party, than their vexations from the Turks at the same
Time; As that Ocean of blood, that has been shed to the end of the Swedish War,
and that to the establishment of the Protestant Interest, must be acknowledged
to have been.

But it may be demanded, why the History of the seven Vials in the 15th and
16th chapters, and which is now found to be contemporary with almost all the
time of the two former agreeing Parts of the Prophecy, (in the 11th and 14th
chap.) should have nothing in it, concerning the great Persecution before the
last end of the Beast, which is so distinctly mentioned in both of the other.

In answer to this, it is to be considered that the Prophecy of the Vials
regards nothing but the account of those Vials, and the judgments in them, for
which end alone they are set apart by themselves, as singled out to have them
particularly understood under the name of the seven last Plagues upon the
Beast; And very improper had it been to interpose any discourse of the success
of that Party over the Church of God in the midst of them.

For though the great persecution (chap. 11.) be mentioned in the account of the
Trumpets, which seemed to be as much singled out to signify so many Plagues,
as the Vials are, yet there seems to be an evident Reason for that; and that
is, because it was necessary before the last Trumpet, to give some account of
those that were to be the Actors in it, which were the Witnesses risen again
from the dead: As also to show the connection of the Prophecy of the Trumpets,
with the rest of the Prophecy that follows after it to the end of the Book
about the Reign of the Beast; And no other account is there of the Tyranny of
the Beast amongst the Trumpets, but only that Persecution, To show, that it was
brought in as necessary to serve that end.

Besides, that Persecution amongst the Trumpets did not check the Plagues of
the sixth Trumpet upon the Beast, where it is placed, but was the success of
the Beast against quite another Enemy, then those in the sixth Trumpet, and so
was proper enough to be mentioned, with the account of the Plague, that the
Beast did suffer from that Trumpet, at the same Time; But it could not be
mentioned amongst the Vials without confounding the humiliations of the Beast
in the Vials, with his Triumphs in respect of the same Enemy, that is, the
Party of the true Church.

It may indeed at the first be apprehended, that considering that there is no
mention in the History of the Vials of any of the events that are signified to
come before the last Trumpet in the 11th chap. That that very name of the seven
last Plagues should intimate, that the Vials could not begin, till after the
sounding of the last of the Trumpets, which are the seven first Plagues.

But it is to be considered, that the last Trumpet is, the last Woe, or last
Plague upon the Beast; For it brings him to his last Ruin; And therefore is it
impossible for the Vials, which are Plagues upon the Beast, to be after the
last Trumpet. And this does sufficiently satisfy us, that the name of the last
Plagues given to the Vials cannot possibly signify, that they were to come
after all the seven first; And if not after all the seven first, then there is
no force in that expression to determine the Time of them to any particular
part of the latter end of them; They may as well be called the last Plagues, if
they fall in the Time of the sixth Trumpet, as well as if they fall in the Time
of the seventh, if they be different evils from that of the sixth Trumpet;
Especially when it is found that to make them contemporaries with the last
Trumpet, they must be a part of the business of it (Theor. 59.) And therefore
cannot possibly have the name of the last Plagues for coming after that
Trumpet, with which they are contemporary.

There must therefore be some other reason for their name of the seven last
Plagues, then their coming after all the seven Trumpets; And from the
consideration of the nature and order of the Trumpets it is evident enough,
that there is a great distinction betwixt the Judgments of God in the Trumpets
according to the several Parts of the Roman Empire, which they ruined. Thus the
four first which did ruin the first Western Empire, are manifestly
distinguished from the three last, the two first of which did next bring the
Eastern Empire to its ruin, and the last the new Western Empire restored, with
the Church Rule of it.

The seven Vials therefore are very properly called the seven last Plagues,
because they fall upon the last remaining Part of the Roman Empire in the West,
or the Jurisdiction of the Beast; Which because it is a Church Rule of a much
different nature from those civil Jurisdictions of the Empire, that had been
destroyed before, and especially because the first beginnings of its decay
began before the last end of the sixth Trumpet, therefore are the Vials (which
give an account of the gradual decays of it from its first declining state)
very properly called the seven last Plagues, as those which brought the last
remainder of the power of Rome to its final ruin; And as the civil state of
the Empire, had seven Plagues allotted to the ruin of it by the Trumpets, so
was it but suitable that the Church power of it, which makes almost all the
figure of the Beast, should have the same number of Judgments to bring it to
its last End by the Vials.

Thus may we find all the objections against dating the Vials from the
beginning of the Reformation fully answered; As 1. That of the great concinnity
of placing the seven Vials under the seventh Trumpet, as the seven Trumpets are
in the seventh Seal. 2. That against dividing page 280.
the Vials betwixt the Time of the sixth and seventh Trumpet, 3. That of the
agreement of the name, and page 279. page 278.
nature of the seven Vials, with those of the last woe. 4. That of the
inconsistency of the Vials, as Plagues upon the Beast, in the time of the
flourishing State of the Beast, and the miseries of the Church at the Death of
the Witnesses. page 273.
RIbera on v. 3. c. 1. Apocal. Things which must shortly come to pass. How
shortly, when most of the things in the Apocolypse were not to be fulfilled,
till about the end of the World? This we may say, that which is begun is now
done. The common way of speaking confirms this, and the usage of Scripture.


CHAP. XIX.
Conjectures about the particular applications of the Harvest, and Vintage
Chap. 14. The Vintage cannot contain in it all the seven Vials. The Millennium
to be upon the Earth: But after the conflagration of this Earth. Many Countries
inhabited after the beginning of the Conflagration from Dan. 7. 12. A middle
State of the Church betwixt the end of Antichrist, and the Millennium during
the Conflagration.

FRom the Knowledge that is now had of the third Woe, and of its Parts, the
three last Vials, It may be concluded, that the Harvest and Vintage are nothing
Rev. 14. 15, 18. Jerem. 51. 33, 34. with Lament. 1. 15.
but the work of the last Woe. a For according to the use of those expressions
amongst the Prophets for the judgments of God upon a Nation, they must here
signify the final judgments of God upon the Roman Church in the last ruin of
it. And since they are both known to be after the time of the Resurrection of
the Witnesses (by Theor. 38, and 41.) what can they be but the work of the last
Woe?

But yet it must be acknowledged, that the Harvest and Vintage are represented,
as two distinct Parts of the last destruction of the Roman Party by the two
distinct Angels, which had the charge of them; And by that, the Harvest and
Vintage seem to denote two very signal Rev. 14. 15, 18.
Judgments immediately consequent upon one another to the last destruction of
that Interest.

And then, the intimation of two remarkable comings of Christ to Judgment at
the end of the sixth and seventh Rev. 16. 15, and 19, 11.
Vials do thereupon seem to challenge the Application of the Harvest and
Vintage to themselves. For the Harvest is described to be performed by one on a
cloud like the Son of Man, as Christ is elsewhere described; And the Rev. 14.
14.
treading of the Wine Press after the Vintage is said expressly to be done by
him whose name is the word; and Rev. 19. 15.
what fairer ground can there be desired to judge the Harvest and Vintage to be
the effect of these two Vials? especially when it is considered, that the fifth
Vial, which only can pretend to have a share in this, seems evidently Rev. 16.
10.
to be no destroying judgment. The Beast is after that in the sixth Vial
represented to be in great power with the Kings of the Earth and of the whole
World. And V. 12.
therefore does the fifth Vial seem to be incapable of being a Part of the
Harvest, which is always used to signify Jerem. 51. 33. Matthew. 13. 39.
a destroying Judgment.

This would extremely well agree with the Harvest and Vintage in the Prophet
Joel, from whence the use Joel 3. 13.
of that and of the Vintage in this place seems manifestly to be fetched; For
the Harvest and Vintage are there used to signify the destruction of the
Enemies of Gods Church, in the valley of Jehosaphat at the deliverance of his
People from them; And the Plague of the sixth Vial is just the same thing, in
HARMAGEDDON, which signifies the same with the periphrasis of that in Joel,
that is, THE VALLEY OF CONCISION. And the Kings of the East in the sixth Vial,
are generally judged to be the Nation of the Jews returning toward their own
Land from beyond Euphrates, where they are said to be in very great numbers.

Thus would the Harvest be the Victory of the Jews over the Roman Party, and
the Vintage the triumph of the Gentile Christians over them. And it may be
observed all over the New Testament, that the Church of Christ is represented
by these two as the constituent Parts of it. And thus would the distance of the
end of the sixth Forty days.
Vial from that of the seventh be very properly signified by the distance of
the Harvest from the Vintage, which is not much above forty days, and would
very well answer the forty years betwixt the ends of those two Vials.

But when we see that the seventh Vial consists of Rev. 16. 17. and chapter 18. 2.
ch 19.
two distinct destroying judgments, one upon Babylon, and the other upon the
Beast, and that that upon Babylon is represented to be of general influence
upon the whole Party, and that all along the 14th chap. before the Harvest and
Vintage, Babylon and the Beast are set out as the two great distinct Objects of
the Plagues of God, there is ground enough to think, that the Harvest and
Vintage may be nothing but the two Parts of the Plague of the seventh Vial upon
Babylon and the Beast; And this would very well answer the nature of the
Harvest and Vintage, as they are the two parts of the last continued
Destruction of the growth of one year.

It may indeed at first be imagined, That the last Destruction of the Power of
the Beast in the Harvest and Vintage, may be the same with the Plagues of the
seven Vials; For those Plagues do at the beginning of the 15th. Chapter,
immediately follow the mention of the Vintage Chap. 16. 17.
at the end of the 14th. Chapter, as the particular Judgments by which the last
Destruction of the Beast (signified by the Harvest and Vintage) is executed;
just as the last part of this Destruction is set forth in general in the
seventh Vial, and does appear to be afterward executed by the ruin of Babylon,
and the Beast in particular, in the 18th. and 19th. Chapters; And, as the
Vengeance for the Blood of the Martyrs promised only in general in the fifth
Seal, is specified afterward in particular, in the account of the Plagues of
the seven Trumpets, (by Theor. 13.)

There is this farther ground for such an apprehension; The Wine Press is
called, (Chap. 14. 19.) The great Wine Press of the Wrath of God. And Chap. 19.
15. The Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of God. And the seventh Vial
which is agreed to be concerned in the Vintage, is said, Chap. 16. To be the
Cup of the Wine Press of the fierceness of Gods Wrath. It Rev. 15. 1, 7.
cannot therefore be questioned, but that the seventh Vial is certainly of the
same nature with the treading the Wine Press. Now the rest of the Vials have
much the same Character with that of the seventh. For they are said to be the
Wrath of God filled up, and Vials full of the Wrath of God.

It must be acknowledged, That if there were nothing else against it, these
concinnities might be listened to.

But there are several Considerations, which show it to be necessary for the
Vials to begin before the time of the Vintage or Harvest, as particularly that
of Theor. the 47th. And the eminent Vexations of the Roman Party ever since the
Reformation, especially that Ocean, and those Rivers of Blood, which was shed
from the beginning of the Dutch Commonwealth to the end of the Swedish War in
Germany, which were as eminent Plagues to the Party of the Beast, as the first
Trumpets were to the Roman Empire; And which must be signified by either the
seven first or the seven last Plagues: And it is not to be doubted, but that
they are no ways signified by any of the Theor. 41.
Plagues of the Trumpets, which are the seven first Plagues, and therefore must
be signified by the Vials; And then must the time of the Vials begin long
before the last destruction of the Party of the Beast in the Harvest and
Vintage, because that time is certainly not yet come; whereas those Eminent
Judgments since the Reformation, are long since past.

It may also be observed, That there is no such exact Agreement betwixt the
Character of the Wine Press and that of all the seven Vials. The Wine Press is
said to be the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of God, and is indeed the
same with the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of Gods Wrath mentioned in the
seventh Vial. But that Expression of the seventh Vial, does plainly distinguish
it from the rest of the Vials, as a very extraordinary Expression of the wrath
of God, far beyond those in the rest of them: And therefore does rather
distinguish the Vintage, (which has also the same Expression,) as well as it
self, from the rest of the Vials, then prove it to be the same with them.

The like may be observed from the 14th. Chapter, v. 10. where there is almost
the very same particular Character of the Vintage that has been found in the
seventh Vial; it is called the drinking of the Wine of the wrath of God, which
is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, which is the
same with the Cup of the wine of the fierceness of Gods wrath in the seventh
Vial, and do both of them denote the highest point of the Fury of Gods Wrath
in the last Act of Destruction (which is certainly so in the seventh Vial,) and
therefore do thereby distinguish the Vintage and the seventh Vial, from all the
preceding Expressions of Gods wrath in the rest of the Vials; According as we
see the drinking of the wine of the wrath of God in the 14th. Chap. 10. Quite
another thing than the Hour of Gods Judgments in the 7th. Verse before it; And
refers plainly to the Vintage that was to come, as the Hour of Gods Judgments
does refer to some Vengeance of God just then begun. And thus the one of them
represents the time of the Vials just then begun, and the other the last end of
them with the seventh Vial.

It is plain enough (from Theor. 36.) That the Hour of Gods Judgments must
signify the beginning of the last Chap. 14. 7.
Plagues of God upon the Roman Party; And since the first of the Vials is also
the first of the last Plagues of God upon the same Party, it must be
contemporary with the Hour of Gods Judgments. And then must it as certainly
Theor. 39. Verse 12.
be before the Harvest and Vintage, which are after the great Persecution.

THIS was the farthest Progress of my Design, when I received the late Learned
and Ingenious Discoveries about the future State of this Earth, from my
Honored Friend, The Author of the New Theory of the Earth. Dr. Burnet.
I cannot sufficiently express the satisfaction I took in the Choice, and very
surprising Entertainment that I there met with; And I think my self obliged
thereupon to communicate some of mine own Reflections in confirmation of what
he has there advanced. If I chance to differ from Him in some small Matters, I
am so well acquainted with the great Ingenuity and Freedom of his Spirit, that
I think it not worth the while to excuse it.

I do wholly subscribe to his Opinion about the necessity of the literal
Acceptance of the first part of the 21st. Chapter of the Apocalypse,
concerning the Resurrection of the Saints: And from thence do acknowledge the
unquestionable grounds we have for a Blessed Millennium here upon Earth. Ever
since I first learnt it from Mr. Mede, I have extremely admired, How it was
possible for it to stand suspected for an Heresy for so many Ages together,
and even before the Times of the Degeneracy of the Church, ONLY because some
inconsiderable Heretics had made a sensual Application of it.

It is certain, That the Chiliasts have had very unreasonable Charges upon them
by their Adversaries, from the first times of Imperial Orthodoxy; And nothing
but such a kind of Injustice could have made so fair and modest a Writer as Mr.
Mede, break out into such a Passion against St. Jerome upon such an occasion, as
we find him page 898. Os Hieronymi! says he, and so goes on in expostulating
with him.

For it is now almost generally agreed, That the most Eminent Fathers of the
Church for the first 300 years, were of that Opinion. The Jesuit Petavius, and
others of his Society and Communion, as well as the most Learned of
Protestants, do take it for a thing that cannot be denied.

Justin Martyr alone is a sufficient Witness for the sense (...), etc. Justin
Martin dial. cum Tryphone, page 307. Edit. Paris.
of all the considerable parts of the Christian Church in his Days, which were
the nearest the Apostolic Times of almost any remainder of Antiquity after
them. In his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, He tells him, That he himself, and
All else that were then Orthodox Christians were of that mind, that is, that
there should be a Millennium of the Saints upon Earth.

The evidence that there is for this Opinion from the 21st. Chapter of the
Apocalypse, must convince All that will hold to the true Rule of all
Interpretation, which is, Not to leave the literal sense of the words, where
there is no clearer grounds for another.

For to make it unquestionable, That the Persons that were chosen to Reign with
Christ for the space of a thousand Verse ^. 9
years, were to enjoy this Privilege upon Earth: It is expressly said, That
their Enemies God and Magog went up upon the breadth of the Earth, and
compassed the Camp of these Saints.

They themselves are also said to live again after they were beheaded, in
distinction to the rest of the Dead, who did not Vere 4, 5.
then live again; which shows, That the Life that they enjoyed was a real
Corporeal Life, and not that in which All Souls are said to live to God after
Death.

Therefore also is it, That this New Life is called by the same Name of a
Resurrection, that is used to signify the return Verse 4, 5.
of departed Souls into their Bodies again; And this is called the First
Resurrection in distinction to the other, which is called the Second; Which
denotes this living again of the Martyrs in the Millennium, to be the same kind
of bodily Life that is promised at the last Resurrection.

The further confirmation of this from other Authorities is so well performed
by the Author of the Theory, that it needs no further concern about it of that
kind.

The first Epoch of the Millennium, seems to be more difficult to determine,
viz. Whether it begins before the Conflagration or after? And if after it,
Whether only after the first Effects of the Conflagration in some particular
parts of the Earth, or after the end of the general Conflagration of the whole
Earth.

It seems to be past all question, That the Millennium does not begin before
the first Appearance of the Conflagration. For both Babylon and the Beast, are
represented in the 18th. and 19th. Chapters, just before, to have been consumed
by Fire: And in the account of the fourth Beast of the seventh Chapter of
Daniel, which is unquestionably the same with the Beast in the Revelations, at
the 11th. Verse, PART I.
The Body of the Beast is said to be given to the burning Flame; Where by the
Body of the Beast all will allow, must be meant the Body of that particular
Kingdom: Which is a sufficient Proof of its being a very remarkable beginning
of a general Conflagration.

For the Territories that must be signified by the Body of the Roman Kingdom,
must be a considerable part of that which is to be destroyed by the last
Conflagration; And therefore cannot but be accounted the beginning of it.

We do also find the General Conflagration of the Earth, to be frequently
represented as one continued Event, and fixed to one set time, which is called,
The Day of the Lord, The last End, The coming of the Lord. And this is
frequently fixed to the burning of the Seat of Antichrist, as its first
immediate Effect; Which is a manifest proof, that this burning of the Beast,
and of Babylon, is the first beginning of that General Conflagration, which
from the beginning of it to the end of it, is represented as one continued
thing.

Thus does St. Peter call the time of the General Conflagration, The coming of
Christ, The Day of the Lord, in which 2 Epist. 3, 4, ^ 1^
the Heavens and the Earth should pass away, and be burnt up; Now these same
terms of the coming of Christ and of the day of the Lord, are by St. Paul given
to the first appearance 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
of Christ from Heaven in flames of Fire, to the destruction of the Man of Sin.
So also is the first appearance of Christ in flames of Fire, made to be the
same with the time of the general destruction of all those that obey not the
Gospel of Christ, and called by the same name of the day of the Lord, and his
coming, 2 Thessalon. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.

It may then now be concluded, that the Millennium cannot begin before all
appearance of the general Conflagration.

But it may be questioned whether it is not to begin immediately after the first
effect of it upon Babylon, and the Beast.

That which gives the fairest occasion for this doubt, is the intimation we
have after the relation of the burning of the body of the Beast, in the seventh
of Daniel, that there will after that remain a considerable Part of the Earth
entire, and inhabited. For it is there said at the 12th V. that the rest of the
Beasts had their Lives prolonged for a season and time, though their dominion had
been taken from them. The least that can be apprehended to be meant by the rest
of the Beasts, must be, that the three other Kingdoms, the Babylonian, Persian,
and Grecian, which had been represented by three Beasts just before, were not
destroyed by Fire, as the Roman Territories, represented by the Body of the
fourth Beast, are described to be: that they had indeed lost their ruling
power, or their dominion, but that the People in them were still alive; This
seems to be the true, and genuine sense of that verse, because it follows
immediately after the account of the slaying of the fourth Beast, and of the
burning of his body; And therefore ought to be understood of the same time, and
in opposition to what the other is said then to suffer.

If this should be interpreted only of the continuance of the three Kingdoms,
(signified by the rest of the Beasts) for all the time, that they were made a
Part of the Roman Monarchy, that was no more than what was before signified v.
23. in the Scheme of the fourth Beast. For v. 23.
that it is said of him, that the Kingdom represented by that Beast had
devoured the whole Earth, out of which the v. 17.
other three are said to arise; And this was represented in the description of
that Beast long before this exception of the rest of the Beasts.

This then would incline any to apprehend that Greece, and Asia, were here
signified to continue still inhabited, after the Burning of the Western Part of
the Roman Territories.

And this apprehension would be fortified by what may generally be observed of
the great judgments of God upon the World. They are ordinarily executed by the
concurrence of the natural disposition of things at those times. This does the
Author of the Theory observe in his explanation of the Deluge, which is every
where made the great Parallel of the destruction of the World by Fire.

According to this one would expect, that the Conflagration of the Earth should
not be all at one time. For it is incredible, that the Seas about the Earth
should be evaporated in any short time, if the Conflagration were carried on by
the natural course of things; Besides, that it must require great distances of
time to carry on so great a work through all the resistance, that it is to
overcome in the body of our Earth.

This consideration, I say, does fortify the other; But I would not have
propounded it alone, because there are manifest intimations, that there will be
the immediate hand of Heaven, for the beginning of this destruction in the
Territories of the Beast.

To this may also be added the consideration of the distinct, and separate
accounts of the burning of Babylon, and the Beast; As if it were but the first
earnest of the general destruction. Thus we see it, in Daniel, and the
Apocalypse about the Beast, and 2 Thessalonians. concerning the last end of the Man of
Sin.

And the Wine Press which does the most fully express the last end of all
things in the Apocalyptick Scene, and as this Author observes, seems to be
nothing but that Lake of Fire and Brimstone, which is the natural effect of a
Conflagration, we see it restrained only to a certain number of furlongs out of
the City Babylon, or to some Chap. 14. 20.
certain bounds of the Roman Territories in Europe.

These may be some inducements to apprehend, that there may be many Countries
entire for some considerable time after the ruin of the Antichristian Powers
by Fire. And then, the Prophecies every where representing the next State of
the World after that to be the Universal Reign of Christ in the World, they
seem to invite us to begin the Millennium there, when all the Enemies of the
Christian Church are represented to be destroyed; especially when we see no
distance made in the Prophecies, betwixt the end of the Beast and the beginning
of the Millennium; And this would place the beginning of the Millennium within
the time of the Conflagration, in those Parts of the World which were yet
untouched and entire.

But this is inconsistent with the Characters of the Persons, who are designed
for this Blessed State. They are said to be those, that were beheaded for the
Word of God, and which were to rise again from the Dead; And therefore are the
remaining Inhabitants of any other Part of the World incapable of this
Character.

It might indeed be replied, that those, who are described as risen from the
Dead for this end, are only that Part of these Inhabitants, which were to sit
upon Thrones, and to judge the rest, upon which account they are said to Reign,
or to be the Kings in this World together with Christ; Which supposes, that
there must be others besides, whom they were to Reign over, and to judge.

That therefore, which does the most clearly determine the first point of the
Millennium is the Characters of the New Jerusalem.

Immediately after the thanksgiving for the destruction of Babylon chap. 19. 6.
It is said that the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns; And that the Marriage of the
Lamb was v. 6, 7.
come, and that his Wife had made her self ready.

1. It is unquestionable, that by the Wife of the Lamb in this place is meant
the same thing in substance with that which is called the New Jerusalem, chap.
21. 2. For, as her being only ready for Marriage, in the 19. chap. does
signify her to be yet but a Bride, so has the New Jerusalem the same names in
the other Chapter, of a Chapter 21. 2, 9.
Wife, and Bride to the Lamb, in reference to this.

2. It is as manifest, that the reason why this intimation of the readiness of
the Lambs Wife, comes in immediately after the account of the burning of
Babylon, is to signify the succession of the true Spouse of Christ, in the
room of the WHORE that was destroyed.

3. By this then it appears, that that State of the Church, which was to be
afterward the New Jerusalem, was to succeed soon after the destruction of the
Beast; For it was said to be in a readiness just before the last Fight of Chapter
19. 2, 11.
the Armies of Christ with those of the Beast.

4. From hence does it appear, that the New Jerusalem, and the Millennium are
the same state of the Church of Christ. For that state of it which is called
the New Jerusalem could not either end before, nor begin after the Millennium.

1. It could not end before the Millennium: Because there was a New Heaven, and
a New Earth, and the former Chap. 21. 2.
were passed away before the Appearance of the New Jerusalem; Which shows, that
this State of the New Jerusalem was after the general Conflagration; And then,
it has the privilege of having no more death in it; And therefore V. 4.
must it always continue, and consequently be the same State of the Church with
that in the Millennium during those years, let the first beginning of it be
never so uncertain; Wherefore the continued State of the New Jerusalem could
not be past before the Millennium.

2. The State of the New Jerusalem could not begin after the Millennium:
Because it was in a readiness to come presently after the ruin of Babylon, and
before the burning of Chapter 19. v. 7.
the Beast, after both which the Millennium is described to be; Whereas if the
New Jerusalem were to come after the Millennium, it would not begin till above
a Thousand years after it was said to be in a readiness to come.

And further, it is expressly said, that the Enemies of the Saints in the
Millennium compassed their Camp, and the Beloved City, which is the same
peculiar Character of the New Jerusalem, with those of the Holy City, and the
Chap. 20. v. 9.
Wife, or Bride of the Lamb, in chap. 21. 2, 9. This shows, that the
Millennium, and the New Jerusalem were both at the same time. And this added to
the former part of the Proof is a sufficient conviction, that the New
Jerusalem, and the Millennium are the same State of the Church.

5. If the New Jerusalem, and the Millennium be the same state of the Church,
then are we no longer to seek for the first beginning of the Millennium. For
the New Jerusalem did not begin till after the general Conflagration, or not
till there was a New Heaven, and a New Chap. 21. 2.
Earth, and no more Sea.

This is sufficient to determine the beginning of the Millennium to be after
the general Conflagration.

But after all this, the difficulty about the prolonging of Dan. 7. 12.
the lives of the rest of the Beasts for a Season, and time, does still remain.
For if the Eastern Parts of the Earth, Greece and Asia do after a while
continue entire, as seems by those Beasts to be signified, there is all reason
to apprehend that the Christian Church will flourish there free from all fear
of its Enemies; And then there will be a State of the Church betwixt the ruin
of the Beast, and the Millennium, that does not seem to have any mention of it
either in Daniel, or the Revelations.

In answer to this objection, it is to be considered that the true Church is
described to be in a readiness for the Millennium, before the time of its being
actually in that state; Chap. 19. 7.
And the dress, that the Wife of the Lamb is said to be put into, in order to
the Marriage (Chap. 19. 8.) gives room enough for that pure state of the
Christian Church, which is to come in betwixt the ruin of the Beast, and the
last end of the Conflagration.

For these things seem to be prepared in the sixth Vial. For the matter of that
is a War betwixt the Beast and his Confederates, and the Kings of the East
beyond Euphrates. And the place of the Battle being said to be Harmageddon,
which by the best critics is determined to referr to some place in Palestine,
this does seem plainly to intimate, that all Asia will then be under Christian
Kings, who shall subdue all the power of the Beast in those Parts. For though
there be no express mention of a Victory in that Vial, yet since it must be a
Plague upon the Beast, as all the rest of the Vials are, the only Plague, that
it seems capable of inflicting upon them, is the conquest of that force, which
were gathered together in Harmageddon; The very name of Harmageddon does alone
evince this. For it does properly signify, a place of Concision or destruction.

Here then appears ground enough to conclude, that Asia will be the last Stage
of the Church on this side of the Earth; And this gives room enough for the
fulfilling of the Prophecies concerning the conversion of the Jews, and for any
of those Privileges, which by others may be thought to be necessarily confined
to that Country.

For in the first place the Air and Soil of that Country must in this way be
supposed to be much changed to the better. Whether such a change in the body of
the Earth, as the burning up of the Roman Territories must needs make, may so
change the Center of its gravity, as thereby to make it incline more to a
direct situation of its Poles to the Sun, which will make its seasons equable,
and healthful, as the first part of the Theory has observed, I know not; But
the Exhalations, and Vapors, that may come cool to those Eastern Parts from
the great Fire in the West, will make the Soil much more verdant and fruitful:
As it is every where observed of those grounds, that are near Mount Ae^na, or
Vesuvius. How the Ashes should fly so far, is easy to imagine from the
distances, that the eruptions of ordinary Volcanoes have reached to; It will be
as easy to apprehend, how the vapors should wander so far to congregate into
fruitful showers, if we consider, that the heat of the Western Air will drive
them into those quarters, that are farthest from the focus of it till they can
be cool enough to condense into Clouds.

This apprehension of the gradual, and slow Progress of the Conflagration, and
of the continuance of the Christian Church for some while after the first
beginning of it, is further confirmed by the different Ends of the Beast, and
of the Kings of the Earth, that were confederated with Chap. 19. 20, 21.
him. The Beast and False Prophet, are said to be cast alive into the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone; But All the rest of the Confederates to have been slain
with the Sword that proceeded out of the Mouth of him that sat upon the Horse.

The Sword of him that is there called the WORD Verse 13.
OF GOD, and which is said to proceed out of his Mouth, is generally concluded
by Interpreters, to signify the same with the Sword of the Spirit, which is
said to be the Word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. The Effect ascribed to this Sword
going out of the Mouth of the WORD, viz. that with it he should smite the
Nations, does also confirm Verse 15.
this. For it is the same kind of Expression, that is used to the Church in
Pergamos, That he would fight against Rev. 2. 16.
them with the Sword of his Mouth; Which therefore in both places, must denote
the terrifying Power of the Word of God in the Conscience, in order to an
inward Conviction; Just as it is described in the 4th. Chapter of Hebrews, v.
12. with the same peculiar Epithet of a Rev. 1. 16. and Chap. ^. 12.
Two-edged Sword, that is here the Scheme of it, and in two other Chapters of
the Revelations; And the Effect of it as a Two-edged Sword in that place of the
Hebrews, is said to be, To pierce to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit,
of the Joints and Marrow, and to be a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of
the Heart; All which is but a Description of the Terrors of an Evil Conscience,
by the Power of the Word of God awakening it.

Wherefore when the Confederates of the Beast are said to be slain with the
Sword coming out of the Mouth of the Word, nothing can be understood by it, but
the terrifying Power of the Truth made known to their Consciences. And then the
slaying them must be understood in that sense, which killing and slaying
without mention of Blood, is in several places of these Visions known to have,
that is, of having lost a former State, by which things were distinguished from
the rest of the World.

Thus is the killing of the Witnesses known to signify nothing but the
Suppression of that outward Profession of the Truth, which made them Witnesses,
and not possible to signify a litteral Death, (Conseq. 1. Theor. 28.) And
their Death and dead Bodies there mentioned, are to be understood in the same
sense. So also is the killing of the third part of Men in the sixth Trumpet,
found to Rev. 9. 15.
be nothing but the loss of that Roman Name and Power, by which they were
before distinguished from the Turks. For it is a most incredible thing, That
the third part of Men should be really killed, nor was it ever verified in
History.

In the same sense have the Expressions of killing and dying, been found to be
taken in the fifth and second CHAP. IV.
Trumpet; As also at the Ascension of the Witnesses, where 7000 are said to be
slain, and the rest to be converted. For slaying must either signify in that
place, only the Suppression of the Profession of the Roman Religion, or else
the Kingdom there described to be converted must not have one real Romanist in
it, which is absurd to imagine of it at that time, to which this is fixed, that
is, long before the last end of the Roman Church.

And in this sense does Mr. Mede explain this very place, page 907. and quotes
Hosea 6. 5. to back it, where it is said, I have slain them by the Words of my
Mouth.

This is then a sufficient warrant to conclude, That by the slaying of the
Kings and their Armies with the Sword, that proceeded out of the Mouth of him
that sat upon the Horse, is to be understood nothing but the terrifying
Conviction of the rest of the Romanists, after the burning of the Roman
Territories; Whereas the Beast and False Prophet are said to be cast alive into
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to signify, That they were cut off in their
Impenitence, and without Remorse or Change of their Profession. It is certain,
That if the Sword out of the Mouth of Christ, should be interpreted of any such
fiery Blast, as was to destroy so many Confederates of the Beast, it must much
more have first struck down the Beast and False Prophet themselves, before the
time of the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

From hence then, there is another ground to apprehend, That the Christian
Church shall not only continue but increase, after that particular
Conflagration of the Roman Territories.

Against this distinction of the end of the Beast and his Confederates, it may
be suggested, That the Beast is also Verse 11.
said in the 7th. of Daniel to have been slain, and his Body to have been given
to the burning Flame.

But it is plain, That this is a manifest Contradiction to what is affirmed of
him, in the 19th. of the Revelations, if what is said of him in both places
should be understood of the same time of him in the litteral sense. For in the
seventh of Daniel, he is represented as slain before he was thrown into the
burning Flames. And in the 19th. Chapter of the Revelations, as thrown into the
Fire alive. That place therefore in the 7th. of Daniel, must be so understood,
as to make it capable of being consistent with the other.

Now it is certain, That in the 19th. Chap. Revelations, Rev. 19. 20.
it is expressly said, That the Beast was cast alive into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone: And in what sense soever the Beast be said to be alive, when he was
thrown into the Flames, it must at least signify, That he was not then
literally dead; The most then that can be signified by his being slain, and
having his Body cast into the Flames in Daniel, is only this, That he was not
only slain, which the rest of the Beasts are said not to have been, but also
was burnt: There is no necessary order of things imported in those two
Characters. They are capable of being understood of the same last end of the
Beast; And so are to be interpreted to reconcile it with the other Account of
his end, which is not capable of being otherwise taken.

But then it must be owned, That the term of Slaying the Beast in Daniel, must
there be literally taken; And that upon this very good reason, viz. Because
there is no use of that Expression in the Prophecy of Daniel in any other than
the litteral Sense, whereas it is most commonly taken in a Figurative Sense in
the Revelations, as has been already observed.

A further ground for this is, The intimation that is given of the Marriage
Supper of the Rev. 19. 7, 9.
Lamb, just after the Ruin of Babylon, and of a Blessing pronounced to all
that should be called to it; And thereupon follows the mention of a Cry with a
loud Voice, to call all the Fowls of Heaven to the Supper Verse 17.
of the great God. This would incline any to determine, that this which has so
peculiar a Name, as that of the Supper of the Great God, must be the same with
what was before called the Marriage of the Lamb, when it appears to have the
same kind of Circumstances joined with it. Now this Supper is described to
consist of the Flesh of the slain Kings and Captains, etc. which compared with
what has been already found to be the Signification Page 298.
of slaying them, does naturally invite one to determine, That the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb must be the Conversions of the rest of the World after the
Ruin of the Roman Church. For since their being slain is found to be a
Figurative Expression, neither the feeding upon their Flesh nor the Fowls of
Heaven, can be understood in a litteral sense. Nor can it be understood in the
litteral way, Why the eating of the Flesh of Kings and Captains, should be
called the Supper of the Great God, with any Reference to the Marriage Supper
of the Lamb; which must upon that account, denote some Relation in it to the
beginning of the Universal flourishing State of the Church, and its nearer
Union with Christ the Spouse of it; And then this Supper being described to be
just about the burning of the Beast, and before the Millennium, and to consist
of those same Persons that were confederated with the Beast upon this present
Earth, it must be interpreted of some flourishing State of the Church after the
beginning of the Conflagration, and before the end of it.

This middle State of the Church before the last end of the Conflagration, is
also intimated in the Show of the Holy City, that the Evangelist is called to
at the 9th. verse of the 21st. Chapter; He is invited to that sight by one of
the seven Angels with the seven Vials, just as he was to the sight of the
Judgment of Babylon, by an Angel of the same Character, Chap. 17. 1. Who by the
Plague of the seventh Vial upon Babylon, just before that Show, appears to be
the seventh Angel; And then the immediate consequence of that Judgment upon
Babylon, being the Freedom and Deliverance of the Christian Church, That Angel
of the seven Vials who calls to the sight of the Holy City, ought in all reason
to be judged to be the same seventh Angel, And consequently to call the Apostle
to a sight of the Holy City that was to begin upon Earth, as well as the other
of the Judgment upon Babylon. But this I mention only as an intimation
concurrent with the other.

Thus may the first Earnest of the Universal Reign of Christ begin with the
Conflagration upon the Stage of our Earth; And so may the immediate Effect of
the third Woe upon the Beast in the seventh Trumpet, be as it is described, The
Conversions of the Kingdoms Rev. 11. 14, 15.
of this present World, into the Universal Kingdom of the Lord and of his
Christ. And from that time may Christ be said to begin to Reign with his Father
for ever, tho the Millennium will be his more peculiar share of that Reign. And
thus may the Lord God Omnipotent Rev. 19. 6, 7
be said to Reign, while the Lambs Marriage Supper is eating, and his Bride
preparing Her self to be READY Chap. 21. 2.
in this World, before it comes to descend from Heaven, as the New Jerusalem.

The Conflagration may indeed at the first thought of it, seem to be but a very
improper Scene of Things for so refined a State of the Church to be constantly
entertained with. But it is to be considered, That those Flames of Vengeance
that they will have continually before their Eyes, will be only the means of
keeping them in a more constant and strict observance of their Duty. It is
certain, that this partial Conflagration would give reason enough for the
Conversion of both Jews and Heathens in all parts of the World, which is
difficult to find a place for in any other way.

CHAP. XX.
The three Great Revolutions, that are to happen very shortly, considered
singly, and with Relation to one another. How they strengthen the Proof of one
another. Why the three last Vials are distinguished from the four first. How
the time assigned to the Vials, proves the first Rise and last End of the
Beast. The time of the first Rise of the Beast further evinced from the Event.

UPON a Review of the Explication of the Trumpets and Vials, it appears, That
there are three remarkable Revolutions relating to these present Times that are
fore-shewn in them.

The first is, The Return of the Profession of the Reformed Religion in some
Eminent Kingdom where it is now suppressed; This is signified by the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 11, 12.

The second is, The last end of all Turkish Wars against the VVestern Empire,
signified by the passing away of the second woe, Chap. 11. 14.

The third is, The General Mortification of the Ruling Power of the Roman
Church, signified by the pouring out of the fifth Vial upon the Throne of the
Beast, Chap. 16. 10.

These Events seem to have very fair grounds for each of them, independent of
the proof of the other two. But the full strength of the Application of them,
does depend upon the Relation that they appear to have to one another.

Thus may it be observed of the first of these, That the Resurrection of the
Witnesses considered apart from

The Resurrection of the Witnesses is after three days and an half of the Death
of the witnesses in Sackcloth.

Now the Witnesses in Sackcloth being agreed to be the Suppos. 4.
Representatives of the whole true Church in subjection to the Roman Church,
Their Death must be the total Suppression of the Profession of the true
Religion in all considerable Countries, that are under the Domination of the
Roman Church.

This is still further confirmed by the place, where the dead Bodies of the
Witnesses are said to lie; And that is, in the Theor. 21.
Streets of the Great City, or within the Territories of the Roman Church.

If after this we look into the present posture of the Protestant Churches all
over Europe, it will appear too sadly plain, That the Protestant Profession has
within these thirty years been totally suppressed in all the considerable
Countries where it was under the Roman Church; And the last Act of this
Suppression was either at the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, and the
Military Execution of it all over France presently after the publication of
that Edict, or at farthest at the conclusion of the Persecution in Savoy the
year after. But that of Savoy seems not to be considerable enough to come into
this account.

It appears however from hence, That the Prophecy of the Death of the
Witnesses, must have been fulfilled at the end of one of these particulars,
unless we can imagine, That there will be two Deaths of the Witnesses in
Sackcloth, which has nothing to countenance it in the Prophecy. For the present
total Suppression of the Reformed Religion, and all Suppos. 4. Theor. 29.
considerable Countries that are under the Roman Yoke, must be accounted one
Death, according to the Signification of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and the
Death of them.

Wherefore the Resurrection of the Witnesses being described to be three years
and an half after their Death, signified by the three days and an half, (Theor.
27.) Their Resurrection cannot be far off this present Time. And as their Death
was the Suppression of the Reformed Religion, so must their Resurrection be the
Freedom of that Profession returned again; And this is restrained to one
Kingdom only, where that Profession was suppressed, under the Character of the
fall of the Tenth part of the City, (Conseq. 2. Theor. 21.) The whole of which
City is represented by Babylon, and Babylon is found to signify the whole
Dominion of the Roman Church, and that Dominion is Divided into ten Kingdoms,
and signified by the ten Horns of the Beast.

Here is therefore good ground to expect the return of the Protestant
Profession in the Kingdom of France within a very short time, and not only
that, but the Conversion of the whole Kingdom of France soon after the grant of
a Free Exercise of the Reformed Religion; because the Ascension of the
witnesses, and the Repentance of the rest, follows soon after their
Resurrection, Chap. 11. 12, 13.

THE Grounds for applying the end of the Turkish Wars Turkish Affairs.

For the time allotted to the continuance of the Woe, is an Hour, a Day, a
Month, and a Year; And these parts of Time have Rev. 9. 15.
been proved, to signify so many Years as there are Days in that Sum, or more
than 390 Years; (CHAP. VIII. of this Part.) It has been also made much more
sure, That that woe of the sixth Trumpet is the Turkish Hostilities against the
Roman Empire, (Conseq. 2. Theor. 19.) The beginning of this length of Time has
also been shown to be fixed to some beginning of the Reign of Ottoman, (CHAP.
IX. of this Part.) And from the beginning of any Date of Ottomans Reign to this
present time, there are already run out 390 of our common Years.

But from some Examples in this Prophecy, it is possible, That the account of
Time may here be by Chaldaick or Babylonian Years, that is, 360 Days only to
the Year; And then the whole Sum of the Years assigned to the continuance of
the second Woe or the Turkish Hostilities, amounts to but 391 of our common
years: Which therefore must be now at their conclusion if those two accurate
computers of Time, Mr. Mede, and Petavius, be in the right, who date the Reign
of Ottoman from a little before the Year 1300.

However, let the Day, Month, and Year, of the second Woe, be accounted by
Roman Years, which was the received way of Calculation in St. John's time, as
the other portions of time in his Prophecy that were taken out of Daniel, are
according to the Babylonian Account in the time of Daniel; yet there is ground
enough from the History of Ottomans beginning, to think them capable of
expiring very shortly. For it has been found (CHAP. IX. of this Part,) That
Ottomans Victories against the Roman Christians began seven or eight years
before the year 1300; And then there is space enough left from that Date for
the expiration of the Day, Month and Year, at this present time, tho they
should be accounted to be 396 Years according to the Roman Calculation of the
number of Days in a Year, when this Prophecy was delivered.

As this does sufficiently show, that which soever of the Calculations be
taken, the time assigned in the Prophecy is capable of expiring about this
present time: so does the present posture of the Turkish Affairs extremely
concur to strengthen our Expectations of the last end of all the Turkish
Hostilities against the VVestern Empire, by a lasting and general Peace.

THE Application of the third Event to these present Roman Church, is grounded
upon the Date of the first beginning of the Vials; Which compared with the
Events that have since happened, and that have been applied to the four first
Vials, does make it seem requisite, That the fifth Vial should be now just at
hand; The effect of which is, To fill the Kingdom of the Beast with Darkness.
And this Ground for it is independent of the Characters of the other two Events.

BUT NOW if we come to compare the Proofs of these Events for the confirmation
of one another, They will appear to have a much stronger Foundation for their
Application.

For Example, The first of these Revolutions or the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, does appear to be much more closely confined to these present Times,
by its Relation to the second and third.

For if the Turkish Hostilities (the second of these Events,) Rev. 11. 13, 14.
Theor. 21. and Conseq.
must be very shortly at an end, then must the Resurrection of the Witnesses be
much sooner. For there is the Conversion of an whole Kingdom of the Roman Party
to be performed, betwixt the Resurrection of the Witnesses and the passing away
of the second Woe, or of all Turkish Hostilities. And the present posture of
the Turkish Affairs gives a further presumption of the likelihood of this.

The nearness of the time of the Resurrection of the Witnesses, will be still
more confirmed by the Grounds Roman Church, which is the third of these
Revolutions before mentioned.

For if the Plague of the fifth Vial which is found to signify this Event, be
so near at hand with the general Humiliation of that Party, the Death of the
Witnesses must very shortly be over, and their Resurrection begin in one at
least of the Kingdoms of that Party, before the general Advance of their Power
in All the Territories of the Roman Church, which is the business of the fifth
Vial; Theor. 65.
But especially, if the fifth Vial be the first part of the third Woe, which
brings on the Universal Kingdom of Christ Rev. 11. 15.
in the seventh Trumpet, (Conseq. 2. Theor. 66.) For the third Woe comes
quickly after the second; And the Witnesses must be risen again before that
time, according to the order of the Prophecy.

THE second Revolution, or the end of all Turkish Vexations, is also much more
certainly confined to these present Times, by the Relation of its Schemes to
those of the first and third of these Events.

For if the Resurrection of the Witnesses be now very Chap. 11. 13, 14.
the Ascension of the Witnesses, which is described in the Prophecy to be much
about the same time with their Resurrection.

And next, if the third Event or the Plague of the fifth Roman Church, then All
the Hostile Power of the Turks must be soon at its last end: Because the Plague
of the fifth Vial begins the third Woe, (Conseq. 2. Theor. 66.) And therefore
must the passing away of the second Woe, or the end of the Turkish Hostilities
be before it.

THE third Revolution or the general Mortification of the Roman Church, is much
more certainly fixed to these present Times by the Relation of its Characters
to those of the first and second of these Revolutions.

This need no long proof. For the fifth Vial, which (Conseq. 2. Theor. 66.) And
it is said to come quickly Rev. 11. 14.
after the passing away of the second Woe: If then the passing away of the
second Woe (which is the second of these Revolutions,) be near at hand, the
general Mortification of the Church of Rome which begins the third Woe in the
fifth Vial, cannot be far off.

So also, if the Resurrection of the Witnesses be at hand, Roman Church,
(Theor. 58.)

And this according to the order of the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and of
the third Woe in the Prophecy, seems to be nothing else but an immediate Sequel
of the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses; For it seems to be nothing
else but the immediate Progress of the Power of the true Church in all parts of
the Dominion of the Beast, after its recovery from a State of Death in one
particular Kingdom where it first revives. And so the third VVoe is nothing
else but the continual increase of that Recovery of the Church from the first
Appearance of it from Death, at the Resurrection of the VVitnesses. Therefore
the Plague of the fifth Vial being the first beginning of this third VVoe, must
follow very soon after the Resurrection of the VVitnesses.

From hence may it easily be discerned, why the three last Vials are
distinguished from the four first, and made so many parts of the third VVoe.
That which makes the difference betwixt them, is, That the four first fall upon
the Party of the Beast from the time of the first general Decay of his Power.
But the three last come upon them after a new recovery of that Party, and their
Triumph over the Witnesses, And so are the three last Woes upon that party
after the last flush of their Power; As the three last Trumpets are
distinguished by the same name of three Woes from the four first, to denote the
different Judgments, that were then to come upon the account of the recovery of
the Roman Tyranny at the new Rise of the Beast, which had been much humbled by
the Fall of the Western Empire.

AND NOW it may be observed, that the proof of the Applications of the
Trumpets, and Vials does stand upon its own bottom, without any other
suppositions about the first date of the appearance of the Beast, then that it
was before the year 620, which all considerable Suppos. 3.
Protestant Interpreters do agree in. And from thence it is easy to observe,
what a new demonstration a posteriori, these Applications do offer for the
fixing the first date of the 1260 years of the Reign of the Beast.

For, in the first place, if the date of the Vials be the first times of the
Protestant Reformation, and the fifth Vial be but just now at hand, then the
three last Vials, which are now still to come, must require about an 100 years
to be fulfilled in, to hold any proportion to the four first, which are found
to have been past since that date; And it appears to be a common Rule in this
Prophecy, to observe some proportion betwixt the Parts of every number in it,
which are of the same kind with one another, as also to signify the
disproportion, that there is betwixt such parts of numbers, when there is
really any disproportion in the events to which they are applied. This has been
already observed in the marks, that are set upon the three last Trumpets, to
distinguish the length of that continuance from that of the four first; And
this note of distinction betwixt the different Trumpets is a probable
confirmation of the equal proportion, that there is betwixt the equal parts of
other numbers, which have no such mark of distinction betwixt them. For
Exceptio firmat Regulam.

It is therefore very reasonable to conclude from hence, that the end of the
time of the Vials will not be much sooner, or later than about an 100 years
hence.

And then since the last Vial ends with the destruction of the Beast, this is a
new confirmation of that which has been elsewhere advanced, viz. that the first
appearance of the Beast was at Justinians recovery of the Western Empire, from
which time to about the year 1800 will be about 1260 years. Conseq. 4. Theor.
5. Conseq. 2. Theor. 66.


THIS is very agreeable to the nature of the third Woe in the seventh Trumpet,
which brings the Beast to his ruin, and is found to be just now at hand by the
execution of the fifth Vial. For it is one of those three Trumpets, which are
distinguished from the four first for the length of their Rev. 8. 13.
continuance under the name of the three last Woes; And according to the length
of the continuance of the other two Woes before, it must continue for a
considerable time to hold any proportion with them.

And that which remains for the ruin of the great City Babylon, after the fall
of the tenth part of it just before the third Woe, does seem to require as
considerable a length of Chap. 11. 3^.
time to finish that work in. For it is the conversion of all the Roman Church,
except a tenth part of it, which is thereby signified to remain for the work of
the third Woe in the seventh Trumpet, and which therefore cannot require less,
than such a proportion of time for it, as is allotted to the three last Vials.

The coming quickly of the third Woe (chap. 11. 14.) is of no weight to hinder
the length of its continuance, as has been elsewhere observed. Coming quickly
does generally signify in Scripture, and every where else the sudden
appearance of a thing, and not the sudden going of it away; But more especially
in this place, where it is used to signify a succession only to another thing,
that is said to be passed away.

This Epoch of the end of the Reign of the Beast, may be also thus further
confirmed from the event. The Reign of the Beast is supposed now in being, and
that the continuance of his Reign is for the space of 1260 years. The Reign of
the Beast then could not begin muchbefore the year 450. For there are very near
1260 years passed since that time. There wants now but 20 years of that whole
space of time. And besides, there is certainly some part of the time of his
Reign still to come. For the two Witnesses are certainly not yet risen, nor the
second Woe passed away, after both which must come a third Woe of some
continuance, to be able to make an end of the Beast with the three signal
successive judgments of the three last Vials in it; Especially when the Plague
of the 6th is described, by a great War betwixt several great Potentates.

Now there was no appearance of any remarkable event, fit to signalise the
first Rise of the Beast by, betwixt the year 450, and the time of Justinian.
That which is chiefly urged for this purpose, is the new appearance of the Ten
Kings in the Roman Empire about that time, amongst whom that Empire was shared.

But is is certain, that the Ten Kings were in possession of their share of the
Empire some while before that time; and therefore must the Beast have been
risen before the year 450 according to that account; And then would he be at an
end before any such long execution could be done upon him, as the three last
Vials, or the third Woe do represent.

Besides, the Beast in the Revelations is known to be the same with the little
Horn in the seventh chapter of Daniel. And the Ten Kings are there supposed to
have been risen before the appearance of the little Horn. For it is said, that
he came up after them, and that Dan. 7. 24. v. 8.
he came up among them.

The first of which does plainly express the preceding appearance of the Ten
Horns, and the latter the existence of them all, when the little Horn appeared
amongst them. It is also said, that the little Horn had three of the first
Horns plucked up by the roots before Him.

Those first Horns had been before named the Ten Horns; Which is a clear
signification, that the ten Horns were all arisen before him, who had three of
them plucked up v. 8.
for him.

There is therefore no force from the pretended simultaneous v. 7.
Rise of the Beast with the ten Kings to fix the Rise of him to about the year
450, or to any time after it, before the Reign of Justinian.

THAT which is the chief mark to know the first appearance of the Beast by, is
the New succession of a King, who was one of some other seven, that had been
before him; The Beast -- is the eighth, and is of the seven; Rev. 17. 1^.
And it being agreed, that all the seven Kings are so many different
appearances of the supreme Government of the Romans, it must be enquired,
whether there were any such new appearance of the ruling power of Rome, betwixt
the year 450, and the time of Justinian.

It is certain that the Imperial Government was about the year 450 the Ruling
Power, and that it received no change till the conquest of Rome and Italy by
the Goths and Heruli.

But it was impossible for those Barbarous Kings to be the Beast, because they
were in that Age made an end of, whereas the Beast is agreed to continue to
this day.

Nor could it be any new appearance of the Papal superiority, which could about
that time be called the Rise of the Beast. For all the increase of the Papal
Power would concern the False Prophet only, who is the second Rev. 13. 11. 12.
Beast; Whereas there is a manifest distinction betwixt that which is every
where in this Prophecy called the Beast, and Him, who is called the False
Prophet; For the latter is on purpose represented by a second Beast, to show
the difference betwixt him, and the first.

By this then it appears, that the first Rising of the Beast, could not happen
before the return of the Imperial Government again to the City of Rome with
Justinian; Which as it was a new change of the Ruling Power of that place after
its Conquest of the Goths, so was it very properly qualified to bear the Name
of the eighth King, who was one of the seven; For it was the Imperial
Government, which had been the sixth King before, But upon its restoration
after the ruin of the Goths, whose Reign was the seventh King, was an eighth,
which had been one of those seven, that were past, and gone before it.

Thus does it appear, what a confirmation there is of the first appearance of
the Beast with Justinian, from the grounds that have been given for the
applications of the Trumpets and Vials, independent of any particular
supposition concerning the first Rise of the Beast. And now on the other side
it may be observed, what a confirmation it is of the applications, that have
been made of the Trumpets and Vials, that the first appearance of the Beast,
has been proved to have began with Justinian. PART. I.


That which does receive the greatest advantage by this is the application of
the Vials. For if the first time of the Beast was at Justinians recovery of the
City of Rome, then must not it end till a little before the year 1800. And then
since the last Vial is to bring the Beast to his end, The last Vial must also
end about the same time.

Wherefore since the three last Vials have been found necessary to be contained
in the third Woe, (Chap. 16.) which is certainly yet for to come, and that the
Vials are found to begin with the Reformation, The fourth Vial cannot be still
to come. For then there would be no proportion betwixt the three first, and the
four last; The three first would have taken up about 160 years, and the four
last would be finished in an 100 years at farthest, and this without the least
intimation of any such difference betwixt them in the Prophecy, which yet is
found to signify any considerable difference betwixt the parts of the same
number when really it is so; As in the mark of distinction, that it has set
upon the three last Trumpets, and in that of the seventh King, Rev. 17. 10. to
signify his short continuance

This demonstration of the first Rise of the Beast does also confirm that
remarkable difference, that the Prophecy makes betwixt the four first Trumpets,
and the three last. For according to what has been found to be the
unquestionable interpretation of the fifth Trumpet, the three last Trumpets
begin soon after the first appearance of the Beast, and the four first end a
little before his appearance, which gives a very sufficient reason why the
three last should be judgments of so much heavier a nature than the four firsts
as to be introduced with so dreadful a cry of Woe, Woe, Woe, and to be followed
with such dreadful Representations answerable to it. The provocations of the
Beast were of a much higher malignity, then those beginnings of the Roman
Tyranny, that ushered him in, and were therefore to be answered with judgments
suitable to them.

But then the sealing of the 144000 before the marking of the Party of the
Beast did show, that the main body of the Christian Church was corrupt enough
before the appearance of the Beast to have the Vengeance of the four first
Trumpets executed upon it.

The length also of the time assigned to the execution of the third Woe upon
the Beast, is by the same means further confirmed. For the third Woe ends not
before the last end of the Beast; It is that, which ruins him; And by its
character of coming quickly after the second Woe, and by the known end of the
period of the second Woe (from the day, month, and year assigned for the
continuance of it) the third Woe must necessarily begin within a very few
years; Wherefore the continuance of the execution of that Woe upon the Beast
must be about an 100 years, that is, from a few years hence to about the year
1800.

BEfore we take our last farewell of these considerations, it will be no
unpleasing Entertainment of our minds to reflect a little upon the strange
concurrence of Events, that come now to crowd into be accomplished about these
present times.

All that dreadful War, and slaughter of the Witnesses in the eleventh chapter,
has happened within the compass of the last forty years. And the whole Plague
of the fourth Vial has been executed within the same time.

The last end of the slaughter of the Witnesses, Their not being suffered to be
buried, Their Resurrection from the dead, Their Ascension into Heaven, The fall
of the tenth part of the City, The general Repentance of it, And the end of the
second Woe, are confined to a very few years, some past, and the rest at hand,
And signify the most remarkable Events, that can be found in many Ages, viz.
The utter extinction of the profession of the truth in all the considerable
Territories of the Roman Church, the preservation of it in the Consciences of
the denyers of it, the revival of the outward possession of it where it was
suppressed, the advancement of the Protestant Religion into a Popish Throne,
The Revolt of the Government of that Kingdom from the Roman Church, the
conversion of that whole Kingdom to the Reformed Religion, and then the final
end of all Turkish Wars, either by a general peace or the ruin of their Empire.

Presently after this is to be expected the beginning of the fifth Vial, which
is the most remarkable Plague of any that had happened, and at the same time
the beginning of the Third Woe, set out by the eminent circumstances of the
sounding of the last Trumpet, and to be soon fulfilled by the beginning of a
general mortification of the Interest of the Roman Church in all parts of its
Dominion, which is to continue for about forty years.

These Reflections compared with the happy earnest, that we have already had in
these Nations, of the speedy accomplishment of the lightsome part of these
Events just now at hand, must make us with all pious gratitude acknowledge,
that, BLESSED ARE THE EYES, THAT SEE THE THINGS, THAT WE DO, AND SHALL SEE.

FINIS.
Letters wrote, when there was the greatest Apprehensions of the late Dangers.
To Henry Plumptre, Esquire
DEAR.......
YOU have made a true guess at the cause of my long silence. Indeed I have been
almost buried in my Apocalyptical Thoughts for these several Months, and
several times have resolved to find leisure enough to write to you, and yet
have been again diverted from it -- for which I beg your Pardon. But to show
you, that I have made some Improvement by it, I do now acquaint you, that I am
in a condition to write Prognostications of the Affairs of almost all Kingdoms
for these Hundred Years next following. I will endeavor here to give you an
Account of some of the Particulars of them in order.

1. I make account, that it is demonstrable, That the Woe of the sixth Trumpet
is the Turkish Encroachments upon the Remains of the ancient Roman Empire.

2. That the last end of their Hostilities is determined in express terms in
the Prophecy to the time of Three hundred ninety six Years at most, from the
first rise of the Ottoman Family.

3. That they will either begin a perpetual Peace, or have an end of their
Empire within these Eight Years at farthest, but there are grounds enough to
expect it sooner.

4. But yet that there will be neither a general Peace with the Turks, nor the
Ruin of their Empire before about the Year 1690. -- And very probable,

5. That the Two Witnesses were killed at the Revocation of the Edict of Nants
in 85.

6. And therefore improbable, that there should be any Persecution or
Suppression of the True Religion in England, where the Witnesses are not so
much as in a Sackcloth state. The same may be apprehended of the Palatinate. --
But much more certain,

7. That the True Religion will revive again in some very considerable Kingdom
before the general perpetual Peace with the Turks, or the Ruin of their Empire.

8. And from the first flourishing return of it in that Kingdom, it will
continue advancing upon the Ruins of the Roman Church, without any
Interruption, for about an Hundred Years, or till the last end of that Church.

9. That the Church of Rome will begin to be in that uninterrupted, or gradual
decay of its Power, presently after the general Peace, or Ruin of the Turkish
Empire.

10. That the first Humiliation of the Roman Interest after the end of the
Turkish Hostilities, will be some Troubles in the Imperial Countries, or in the
Lands of the Papacy, which must be within very few Years.

11. That those Troubles will continue till about the Year 1720 at least, if
not some years after.

12. That those Troubles will be an Humiliation of the Power of the Roman
Church, most probably by a New Reformation getting ground among them, but
without much Effusion of Blood. They will be a great Eclipse of the present
flourishing appearance of the Imperial, or the Papal Power.

13. That the present King of France will be not much longer active against the
Spanish Netherlands, or the Imperial Interest.

14. That betwixt the Year 1720, and 1760, there will be a very eminent War
betwixt some Eastern Princes on the other side of Euphrates, and the
Confederate Princes of the Roman Party.

15. That in the latter part of that War there will be some eminent Judgments,
that will make way for a particular advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord.

16. That betwixt the Year 1760 and 1800, Rome will be destroyed, and soon
after, the chief Supports of the Roman Church, Ecclesiastical and Civil, or the
Imperial Roman Power, and the Papal will be destroyed.

17. I had forgot to add in its place, That it is most unquestionable, that the
Two Witnesses Rev. 11. can never have yet been risen again from the Dead; Nor
can their Resurrection be deferred till after either the end of the Turkish
Empire, or the conclusion of the general Peace with them.

But whatsoever becomes of all these Particulars, my main Demonstration about
the time of the Rise of the Beast, and the fixing it to the present Heads of
the Roman Church stands still unshaken.

If you meet with Dr. Patrick, pray tell him, That his Encouragement was the
great Motive to me to enter into the more obscure and uncertain parts of the
Prophecy; But I think I have done it with so much Caution, that I am confident
I shall be allowed to proceed upon acknowledged Grounds, and not to be very
loose in my Deductions and Connections. -- God grant I be not deceived in any
thing material to the Comfort of his Church. -- I believe all may be finished
before Christmas.

November. 22. 1687. I am, etc.

To the same.
At the first Change of Corporations to get the Test off.
I Was very much pleased with the divertisement which you made your self in
your last. Whatsoever pity others may meet with, the New Chartermen will find
none. The present Revolutions I look upon to be the beginning of the
preparations for the universal Kingdom of Christ upon Earth. Whatsoever others
may intend, or design by this Liberty of Conscience, I cannot believe, that it
will be ever recalled in England, as long as the World stands, and so may be,
and is very likely to be of much surer, and more lasting continuance than Magna
Charta. But yet, though vastly tempted to concur with the Court in the Persons,
that are recommended to be chosen for Parliament, I cannot in Conscience
comply. I look upon this Parliament as wholly designed for the composure of a
Difference betwixt the King and the Nation, and therefore ought to consist of
Persons wholly independent upon the favor of the Court, to be able to keep to
their intentions of a lasting security for the Nation. -- So that I, who could
do it more according to these Principles, than any else, do now stand alone by
my self to be the only Object of a Storm. But I hope that Liberty of Conscience
will be faithfully observed. -- New Matter coming into my thoughts, or new
strength of Proof for the old, has kept my Work still upon the Anvil. But I
hope to have quite done with the Second Part within these three Weeks, or
Month, and to send it to Doctor Patrick, and while he is perusing that, I will
endeavor to finish the First. The Bishop of St. Asaph has a desire to see my
Papers, having a design himself to Print something on that Subject. I desire
you to correct one part of the Conclusions in my last Letter, and that is
concerning the Troubles of Germany Imperial, or the Papacy in particular, and
instead of them to understand it of the great Diminution of the power of the
Roman Church in general. For it must necessarily be the Dominion of the Roman
Church in general, which is meant by the Kingdom of the Beast in the fifth
Vial, and which is very shortly approaching: But yet Imperial Germany, or the
Papacy may be the chief sufferers in it.

I am more and more confident, as Apocalyptical Men use to be, of the strength
of my Conclusions; And from thence send you the News of a continual increase of
the flourishing State of the Church very shortly to begin, and to continue to
the end of the World; And therefore desire you to take special Care of your
Health, and to desire all good People to do so, that they may be so happy as to
live to see a full confirmation of this Prediction; -- But the next Year seems
in all probability to be a Year of Wonders for the recovery of the Church. My
Pen runs before I am aware of it; For my Head is full, and I think I have got
one to ease my self upon, and so I desire you to bear it patiently; It is
nothing but a great confidence in the interest I have in your Friendship, that
is the cause of it, and therefore is to assure you how much without reserve I am

Feb. 21. 1687/8.
AS to your demand about my Opinion of the Year 89. I must own that I am of the
mind of Monsieur Jurieu about the Resurrection, though I think that which he
makes a chief ground for it, to be weak -- I think such a thing to be highly
probable to happen that Year in some eminent Kingdom of the Roman Party where
the Reformed Religion has been suppressed, and upon comparing the circumstances
of other Kingdoms with the Characters of the Text, I cannot imagine where it
should be but in France. For the Ascension that follows, may, I think, be
demonstrated to signify an advancement to an Earthly Throne. And where can
that be the next Year amongst the Kingdoms of Poland, Bohemia, Silesia,
Hungary, France? Upon this occasion I cannot but mention to you, That the King
of France either has not long to live, or must be really made The Most
Christian King within these few Years. But pray do not imagine that I affirm
these things upon so fanciful a bottom as Monsieur Jurieu's grand place is,
which besides other defects, is a wrong Translation, and has no clear known use
of the Greek word in that sense either in the New Testament or the Septuagint.

Feb. 28. 1687/8.
FINIS.

