seal or coat of arms showing the cross of St George on one side and a harp on
the other O. P.
By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Of His HIGHNESS (by and with the A^vice of
His Council) for putting in Execution the Laws against Transportation of
Woolls, Wool-fels, Fullers-Earth, and other things.
WHereas several Complaints have be^^ made unto His Highness, That great
quantities of Woolls, Wool-fels, and Fullers-Ea^^h, are daily transported out
of the Dominions of this Commonwealth into the Parts beyo^^ the Seas,
notwithstanding the many good and wholesome Laws and Statutes heretofor^ made
and provided (and yet in force) against the same, to the great inhauncing of
the Rates and Prices of those Commodities, and the apparent hurt, detriment and
prejudice of the State And His Highness having taken the same into due
consideration, and (with the advice of ^^s Council) weighing the evil
consequences thereof, both to the Manufactures of this Nation And also
considering the prejudice that may happen to the Commonwealth in general, if
some timely course be not t^en for preventing the same: And whereas by several
Acts, Statutes and Ordinances heretofore made, the transp^^^ing the same is
prohibited under sundry great and severe penalties; and to the intent none may
pretend ignorance (...) the same, as also to quicken His Highness Officers and
Ministers, and others, to whom the execution of those ^aws, so advantageous and
necessary to the Public, is entrusted, to do their duties therein, His
Highness (by ^^d with the advice of His Council) has thought fit to publish
this His Proclamation, letting all the People (...) this Commonwealth know,
That His Highness shall expect and require a due and exact obedience to the
Law^ ^n that behalf made: And His Highness likewise signifies His pleasure,
That he intends a full and effectual ^^osecution against all offenders and
transgressors against the said Laws, and that the utmost rigor and extrem^^
thereof shall be required, without any hope of mitigation or moderation: And if
any extremity shall happen to any one therein, his Highness shall account it
Justice, having discharged His duty in giving notice. And yet ^ a further
manifestation of His care, has thought fit to publish the effect of the last
Law made for suppressing t^^ ^ame; (viz.) That by an Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, published the Nine^^^nth day of January, in
the year our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty seven, It is Ordained, That
it shall n^^ ^e lawful for any person or persons, to lade, ship, or carry in
any Ship, Barge, Boat, or other Vessel, or otherwise any Wool of the growth of
England or Ireland, or the Dominion of Wales, or any Woollen Yarn, Woollen
Flox, ^ool-fell, Fullers Earth, Clay, Tobacco-pipe-Clay, or any other Earth or
Clay which may be used in the Art o^ Fulling, of intent to transport or carry
the same into any place or places of the parts beyond the Seas, or into
Sco^^^nd, by Land or by Sea, or to carry the same to any Ship or other Vessel
whatsoever to be transported, upon the ^in of the forfeiture of the said
Woolls, Woollen-yarn, Woollen Flox, Wool-fell, and Earth or Clay so laden,
sh^ed, carried or transported, and three shillings for every pound of such
Wool, Yarn, Flox, and Earth or Clay; ^^d for every pound weight of the said
Earth or Clay three shillings, to be forfeited by the owner or owners thereof;
and also the owner of the said ships or vessels, knowing of such offense, to
forfeit all their interest in the said ships or ^essels, with all their apparel
and furniture to them and every of them belonging; and the Master and Mariner^
knowing of such offense, to forfeit all their Goods and Chattels, and to have
Imprisonment by the space of o^^ whole year without Bayl or Mainprize. And it
is by the said Ordinance further Ordained, That if any Me^^hant, or any other
person or persons should transport, or cause to be transported any of the said
Earth or Clay, Wo^^^, Woollen-yarn, or Woollen Flox, or Wool-fells, contrary to
the intent of the said Ordinance, That then he should ^^e disabled for
requiring any Debt or Account of any Factor or others, for or concerning any
Debt or Estate, prop^^^y belonging to such Merchant and Offender, to his own
use. And that if any owner of the land where such Clay ^ Earth should be dug
or gotten should be privy unto, or know of such Transportation by any person or
persons, and should not discover the same to some Justice or Justices of the
Peace, within three months of such his kno^^edge, he should for every such
offense forfeit Five hundred pounds of lawful Money of England: And that i^
^uch Justice of Peace to whom such discovery should be made, should not
certify the same under his Hand and S^^l to the Barons of the Exchequer, or
one of them, within three Months following, he should for every such o^^^nce
forfeit One hundred pounds of like lawful Money. Now to the intent
transgressors may not be encouraged (...) the negligence of Officers and Courts
of Justice, His Highness (by and with the advice of his Council) does ^^point,
Authorize and Command, as well the Barons of the Exchequer, as the Attorney and
Sollicitor-Genera^^ That they and every of them do speedily and effectually put
in execution the aforesaid Ordinance of Parliament and all and every other the
Laws and Statutes made against transporting Woolls, Wool-fels, and
Fullers-E^^th; and that they and every of them do likewise in their several
places effectually prosecute all and every such pe^^on and persons, whose Names
have been already brought, or which shall hereafter be brought to them, or any
of ^^em, and who have offended, or that shall hereafter offend against the Law,
in transporting Woolls, Wool-fels, and Fullers-Earth (in Our Courts of Justice)
and every such person and persons so offending, to punish accordin^ to their
and every of their demerits, and according to the true intent and meaning of
the several Statutes, Law^ and Ordinances in that case made and provided, and
of his Highness Pleasure herein declared. And his High^ess does further (by and
with the advice of his Council) Will and Require, and straightly Charge and
Comman^ the Commissioners, and other Off^cers of the Customs in the several
Ports of England, and in the Town and ^^rt of Barwick, That they and every of
them respectively in their several places, do take very good and sufficient
^ecurity, That all Goods carried into Scotland, be accordingly delivered and
landed at some Port there; and that ^uthentique Cert ficates be thereof
returned to the Commissioners and other Officers of the Customs, within ^ll and
every the Ports in England, out of which the said Goods were exported, before
any Bonds be cancelled or delivered up by the Officers of the Customs within
any of the said Ports. And further, His Highness (by and with the advice of his
Council) does Will and Declare, That if such Certificate and Certificates so to
be returned in manner aforesaid, be not returned within six Months next
ensuing the time to be limited in every such Bond, for the return thereof to
the said Commissioners and other Officers of the Customs in the several Ports
in England, out of which the said Goods were exported as aforesaid; That then,
and in all such cases, the said Commissioners, and other Officers of the
Customs within the several Ports of England, in whose hands and custodies such
Bonds shall be, at the expiration of the said six Months, shall return, or
cause to be returned the said Bonds, and every of them, into the Court of
Exchequer at Westminster, there to be proceeded upon accordingly. And His
Highness does further (by and with the advice of his Council) straightly Charge
and Command the said Commissioners, and other Officers of the Customs in the
several Ports of England, and in the Town and Port of Barwick, That they, and
every of them, by themselves, their Servants, or Agents, do hereafter use their
utmost care and diligence, to hinder and prevent the exportation of Woolls,
Wool-fels, and Fullers-Earth, under any color, pretense or means whatsoever;
And that the said Commissioners, and other Officers of the Customs within the
several Ports of England, and in the Town and Port of Barwick, by themselves,
their Agents or Servants, do enter into all and every Ship, Barque, Hoy, and
other Vessel, wherein suspicion shall be of any Wool, Wool-fels, or
Fullers-Earth, and therein to make search for all such Wool, Wool-fels, or
Fullers-Earth there concealed, and the same being found, to take and seize for
his Highness use, as forfeited, and shall return the Names of all and every
such person and persons from time to time so offending, unto the Barons of the
Exchequer, or the Attorney or Sollicitor-General, to the end they may be
proceeded against, and punished according to their demerits, and the true
intent and meaning of the Laws and Statutes in that behalf made, and of his
Highness Will and Pleasure herein declared, And his Highness does further
straightly Charge and Command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
Headboroughs, and other Officers and Ministers within the several Ports, Cities
and Towns Corporate, and other places within England, and also within the Town
and Port of Barwick, That they and every of them in their respective places, be
ayding and assisting to the Commissioners, and other Officers of the Customs
within the several Ports of England, and in the Town and Port of Barwick, in
the searching out and seizing of all such Wool, Wool-fels, and Fullers-earth
so concealed as aforesaid, and in the due execution of all and every the
premises.

Given at White Hall the Eighteenth day of November, in the year of our Lord,
One thousand six hundred fifty six.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1656.


