TWO SERMONS. One on the Subject of Justification, The Other on The Imputed
Righteousness, and Imputation of Faith to Righteousness, by which we are
Justified. Preached Occasionally at the Merchants-Lecture in Pin-makers-Hall in
Broad-street. And Printed at their Desire. By Walter Cross, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by and for John Astwood, at his Printing House behind St.
Christophers-Church in Thred-needle-street, the backside of the Royal
Exchange. 1695.

SERMON I.
ROMANS IV. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly --


THese words are to be considered both relatively and absolutely, that we may
in order comprehend their full sense and importance. The relation they bear to
the Apostle's scope and design, is that of a proof and confirmation of the
grand Doctrine of the Gospel, which is, That no man is, nor can be justified by
his own Works or Righteousness, the only way of being justified is by the
Righteousness of God. The Apostle on very good ground supposes such an
opposition and disjunction between them two as admits no medium, for we cannot
be justified without a Righteousness; and that Righteousness must be either our
own or another, God's or Man's. It is the Negative branch of the Doctrine the
Apostle does earnestly contend for in this 4th. Chap. without any appearance of
Carnality, but disputes with strenuous dint of Argument, and closely connected
Topics with the terms of his proposed Doctrine, whereof this in the Text is
one; either an immediate Argument thus, He that works not, or is ungodly,
cannot be justified by his own Works, but he who is justified by Grace is one
that works not, or is ungodly, Erg. Or rather a Confirmation of an immediate
Argument before brought, thus, Maj. He that is justified by Faith, is not
justified by Works. Min. But Abraham was justified by Faith. Erg. Abraham was
not justified by Works.

The Assumption being confirmed from Scriptures Testimony, Genesis 15. he proceeds
to prove the grand Proposition thus, Maj. He to whom righteousness is imputed
of Grace, cannot be justified by Works. Min. But to him that is justified by
Faith, righteousness is imputed of Grace. Erg. He that is justified by Faith,
cannot be justified by Works.

The assumption is frequently asserted in Scripture, v. 16. It is of Faith,
that it might be by Grace. The grand Proposition he supposes evident from the
opposition between Grace and Debt in v. 4. for when a person is dealt with on
the account of Works, i. e. any thing in him, or done by him, it is debt, his
due, I mean the reward; but when a Man is dealt with of Grace, the reward is
proportioned to the Favor and Good Will of the Donor or Judge; the Goodness of
the Judge on the Bench, and the arraigned Person at the Bar, are very opposite,
therefore to be treated according to this opposite goodness, must be an
opposite treatment.

This opposition or repugnancy in v. 5. he illustrates and confirms thus, Maj.
Where the subjects, causes, effects, or manner of efficiency, are opposite,
there the things themselves are opposite. Min. But in Justification by Works
and Faith, of grace, and of due, the subjects, causes, etc. are opposite. Erg.
The Nature of the Justifications are opposite.

The grand Proposition is a Maxim in Logic, or Natural Light, taken for
granted. The assumption is illustrated and confirmed in these four Verses. 1.
The Subjects, to wit, a godly and an ungodly Man, a righteous and an
unrighteous, a Worker and a Non-worker. 2. The Causes, the grace, favor and
good will of the Governor, and the merit, labor, obedience and righteousness
of the Subject. 3. The immediate effect of this Free Grace, or way of its
efficiency, which differs from the Method of Justice, measuring its
distribution by Law; for the former imputes a Righteousness, or as in Chapter 5.
gives a Righteousness, viz. in a way of account and reckoning, that by virtue
thereof, and its satisfaction to the Government, it may consist with governing
goodness to bless the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works. The latter finds an inherent righteousness in the
person, and therefore his Justification is only an Authoritative declaration of
what he is, a surrender of the Honor that is his due; and he proves this by
David's Testimony, asserting the former Justification to be a Pardon or
Forgiveness: As if he had said, It Is called a Justification, because that
Pardon is the effect of an Imputed Righteousness. Free Grace first gives by way
of Account an Interest in Christ's Righteousness, and conveys the Right or
Interest thorough Faith. Secondly, Pardons on the account of that
Righteousness, which gives just ground for the denomination of Justification,
and this Name is entertained as the proper Name for our Pardon in the Gospel,
that it may be a constant Memorial of our Obligation to Christ for our Pardon,
and of the difficulty that there was to render a Pardon consistent with the Law
and Honor of the Lawmakers and Governor. One chief end of this added
Testimony of David's to the Example and Pattern of Abraham, is to prove that we
are not justified by Works, from the Nature of Gospel-Justification, viz. David
says it is a Pardon; though it is a Justification in respect to Christ's
Righteousness, it is a Forgiveness with respect to our own Unrighteousness. This
proves the Subject also of Gospel Justification to be ungodly, for we need and
receive a Pardon, not as righteous or godly, but ungodly: And the reason why
the Apostle gives the sense of David's words to be the Imputing of a
Righteousness, is because it was inconsistent with a necessary just Law, and a
just Governor and Judge, who cannot do violence to a righteous Law, to pardon
or not to impute sin, until there be first a Righteousness imputed; and by
showing this to be the sense of it, he thereby proves that our Justification is
of Grace, because Free grace is the only cause of the Imputation of that
Righteousness. It is not for Christ's sake that his righteousness is imputed,
for that were to say, that the same thing was for the sake of it self, his
Merit for his Merits-sake, and Righteousness for his Righteousness-sake: But as
Christ is the Free Grace of God's Gift, so is his Righteousness, without any
interveening Merits; and that has made me think, the influence of Christ's
Merit, to use the accustomed Phrase, terminates on the Law, or Legal
constitution, not on the Divine Nature. God is the God, Author and Owner of all
Grace, nothing has changed his mind into a more gracious temper, and hence the
Imputation of righteousness is only ascribed to Grace, but Justification is
ascribed to Grace, not immediately as imputation is, but at second hand:
Justified by his Grace thorough the Redemption, Chapter 3.24. Hence something may
be said for an Imputation of Righteousness from Eternity, though not for
Justification from Eternity; and may be this is the reason why another Phrase
is made use of for the transitory, temporary Act, viz. Faith imputed to
righteousness; for that denotes God's Act as Judge, in passing the absolving
Sentence, i. e. thorough the Gift of Faith he conveys a right to that
Righteousness, which from Eternity was assigned in the Book of Life to all that
shall ever enjoy its blessed Fruits. Thus much for the coherent and relative
sense of the words, as they are subservient and useful to prove that we are not
justified by Works.

I shall now consider them absolutely: And I must say this of them so
considered, that they are as pure Gospel-Language-Expressions, as full of
encouragement to Sinners, and comfort to Penitents, as any I know in Scripture.
Indeed they are not alone, for the same Apostle says Historically of himself,
what he asserts elenctically here of Free Grace, 1 Timothy 1.15. viz. That he was
a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and injurious Person, when abundant grace, together
with Faith and Love prevented him, i. e. justifying and sanctifying grace; the
one in Faith and Love, the other in the abundant grace conveyed thorough them;
and v. 16. he shows, this was no singular favor, for Christ made a pattern of
him to them who should hereafter believe; as Artists hang out a piece of their
Workmanship to bring in Customers, so Christ hangs up Paul for a sign, that all
who hear the Gospel may count Christ (who came to save sinners) worthy of
Acceptance, by all who are sinners. The Language of St. Paul's Conversion is
the same with that of his Doctrine: Grace finds us sinners, and makes us
righteous, and then blessed. Neither is Paul the only Pattern; Levi is another,
Mat. 2.14. Sitting at the receipt of Custom, serving a Tyrannical Government in
its heavy Taxes; Christ calls him powerfully and effectually into the service
and glory of his Kingdom, and makes an Offer to the rest of the Publicans and
Sinners; That he came not to call the righteous, (who did repent) but sinners
to repentance: His Office was to be a Physician to the sick: And Zacheus a
chief Commissioner is a third, who by false Methods had aggravated the Burden
of Tribute, and robbed honest subjects, under the Notion of Caesar's due; yet
Christ tells him, salvation is come to his house: For that was his constant
Employ, To seek and to save that which was lost: But here we have it
doctrinally, what is there historically, here universally asserted, what is
there illustrated by Examples and Parables; here in strict Logical Terms, what
is there under Rhetorical Flourishes, that when a man is ungodly and without
works, then Faith is imputed for righteousness.

Note, I shall divide them in these two parts: 1st. As they set forth the
condition of a sinner, antecedent to justification. 2ly. In what method God
brings them from that condition into blessedness through an Imputation of
Righteousness, and imputation of Faith to Righteousness.

The First Part affords us this Doctrine.

Doct. That the Object of Justification, antecedently to it, is a person
without works of righteousness, an ungodly man. When in our blood he bids us
live, the day of our Enmity was the time of his Love, the Condition of our
Adamical Nakedness was that he cast the skirt of his beautiful Garments over;
when aliens, he entered into a Covenant of Grace with us, ordered for the
salvation of sinners; when in our filthiness, he puts his Comeliness on us,
Ezekiel. 16. The plain Gospel sense of these Prophetical Figures is, To him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness.

There are three Limitations put on this Text, by Inteepreters of differing
Opinions, from what is the old and common road of them called Protestants, who
usually distinguish the case thus, as Altingius considered in himself, he is
ungodly and unrighteous, but considered in Christ he is righteous; or Dr.
Tuckney, finds him unrighteous, but leaves him not so.

1. Some distinguish as to time thus, was ungodly, not is; they reckon some
little time before for the exercise of Faith and Repentance, before he can be
justified. A Priority of Order between the Gift of Faith and Justification I
willingly grant, but a priority of time is pregnant with Absurdities: The
former does not serve their turn, who make the Exercise of faith and repentance
Conditions of justification; for it requires no time; as the Sun is in no time
before its Beams, nor the Ring before the relation of Man and Wife: Relations
result immediately from their foundations, but the mind of Man, though it needs
less time for the nimble succesion of its swift thoughts, yet time it does
require. (2.) Man must be regenerate, effectually called, before faith and
repentance, for the tree must be good before the fruit: Now its repugnant, to
think one regenerate, a son of God, can be in a state of Condemnation; and it is
as inconsistent, to think that any are out of a state of Condemnation before a
pardon. But to suppose any time between regeneration and forgiveness, for the
exercise of faith and repentance, is to suppose a time when we are neither in a
state of Condemnation or Justification. (3.) There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ: Now we are united to Christ by a double Cement, the Spirit
working faith, and faith therefore where that Cement is there is no
condemnation but pardon. (4.) The Scripture says, We were reconciled when
enemies, Romans 5.10. The difficulty here is, if this be meant the price for
peace paid, or the application of it in justification, v. 9. shows the latter;
being now justified by his blood, either we are justified at Christ's death,
which the party denies, or else we are enemies when justified; and indeed
reconciliation signifies a mutual peace, the hatred removed on on side by
pardon, and on the other by regeneration; a new temper of Mind. It is true.
Col. 1.21. it is said, Who sometime were enemies, but now are reconciled; yet
that supposes the same time to continue until the reconciliation, which Romans
5.9. says was the time of Justification. A (5th.) Argument is from the oneness
of time, by Scripture Connection between regeneration and justification, Col.
2.13. You has he quickened, together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses, 2 Pet. 1.3. We are called to glory and virtue at once, and 1 Pet.
1.3. are begotten again unto an inheritance incorruptible, Tit. 3.5, 7. 2 Cor.
6. ult. A (6th.) Argument is from Romans 6. Where the Apostles solution to the
objection of Libertines, is, from the near connection between justifying and
sanctifying grace. (7.) I see nothing in the context to favor this
distinction, but e contra would overturn the Arguments and Doctrine too.

A 2d. Limitation is, from distinction of Laws; they own he is an ungodly man,
a Non worker, as to the righteousness of the Law, strictly so called, (which
requires perfect, perpetual and personal obedience) who is the Object of
Evangelical Justification. But they think there is a necessity of a
righteousness to another, new, distinct Law; for as Legal Justification
requires Legal Righteousness, Evangelical Justification requires Evangelical
Righteousness, i. e. Faith and Repentance, in sincerity and perseverance: And
this last qualification comes in, least they should be under a necessity to
hold a man pardoned one time of his Life, and yet be afterward condemned
thorough after backsliding and falling from Grace. Some of them hold final
falling away, and so an once justified man may be eternally damned: Others
total, but not final, and so may be in a state of Condemnation and
Justification alternatively a hundred times: But a third, to prevent this
Absurdity, adds perseverance, by which a man is excluded from justification
until his last breath, which excludes the Doctrine of Assurance during life,
and pardon too, which is a strangely new Doctrine; yet I have heard some more
cautious persons say, they think there are some degrees of Grace, at the
attainment of which they escape that danger; may be that is it they allot for
the time of justification. This Limitation seems unacceptable to me on these
grounds,

1. This Law countenances iniquity, indulges transgressions; for since the
first Law is holy, just and good, what Law requires less, is so far unholy,
unjust, bad; and shall we suppose an holy God, that is of purer eyes than to
connive at iniquity, to establish iniquity by a Law? was our corrupt natures,
or imperfectly renewed to his image, the Original to this Law? as his own
Nature gave birth to the first, it seems reasonable to say that God accepts
imperfect obedience on his account who performed perfect obedience in our stead
as surety; but that the office of the Mediator should be to obtain of God to
lay by that glorious manifestation of his Holiness, and change that perfect Law
into a Council and Directory, and to yield so far to us, as to take a penny of
the pound of obedience from broken debtors, seems to me pregnant of
difficulties and absurdities. We deny our Obedience comes to be accepted as the
obedience the Law requires, or under the Notion Adam's righteousness was
accepted, viz. that which gave right to Indemnity and Life, but is accepted as
the way to the Kingdom, and preparation for the possession of a place in these
mansions, where all the inhabitants are holy: It is the righteousness of our
Lord Jesus Christ alone, by which that Law is fulfilled; he is the end of the
Law for righteousness, and his righteousness gives right to remission and
blessedness.

2ly. I am informed, this Notion of the Evangelical Law was the principal error
of the Antinomians; for they said, since Faith and Repentance was all that was
necessary to salvation, what was the need of any other Law? Alas, it is a sad
mistake; for the Moral Law is the rule of true Repentance: Let him that stole,
steal no more; that has broke the first, second, or third Command, etc. ought
to do so no more; that is true Repentance, New Obedience: The Law that did
forbid stealing once, forbids stealing always, else it were not perfect. Indeed
the Gospel has such an influence on this Law, and our obedience to it, that it
is a new Law to what it was; but that ever God should lay that by, and make
another, or make any that requires not perfection, is to me unconceivable: If
any duty belongs to this New Law, it is patience, and God commands that it be
perfect; Let patience have its perfect work: Or, for the same God to have two
Laws, so contrary, that we may condemned by one, and justified by another.

3ly. As it introduces Antinomianism, so a christianiz'd Pharisaism, which was
the error the Apostle is refuting: He is not disputing against Pagans, who
denied the Messiah, or owned many Demons, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one
God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things: Nor against the Jews, who denied he was come in the flesh; for he
tells them, their Faith was famous thorough the World, Romans 1.8. But against
some that believed, and pleaded the necessity of Circumcision, Romans 3.28. That
pleaded, We were justified by Faith and Works; for the Thesis, shows the
Antagonists Opinion, which is, we are justified by faith, without the deeds of
the Law, and Romans 9.23. They sought after a righteousness, as if it were by the
works of the Law, i. e. by the works of the Law in some sense and measure; this
may be more evident by considering the Jews Doctrine about the way of
Salvation, and add to it the belief of a Messiah come, and we may find the
opinions too much alike: They reckoned that there were three ranks of Men, with
respect to Heaven; the lowest were sinners; of Publicans and Sinners we read
frequently; the highest were perfect men, and that they thought hardly
attainable it seems, Mat. 19.21. That was the young man's doubt he brought to
Christ; If thou would be perfect, sell all thou have, and follow me; in me
the Laws perfection is to be obtained, thou must entirely be denied to all
things else; the middle sort was called Beninim, Middle-way-men, Men of
sincerity, that should go to eternal Life, either by a praeponderation of good,
or repentance of evil: Hence, say they, the Life of man in the Precepts is
according to his intention, who performs one of the least Precepts, for love of
the Precept, shall merit everlasting life, Cant. 5.2. Open to me, my Sister, my
Love; i. e. Open to me one crevice of Repentance, and I will open to thee the
wide gates of Glory, Zach. 9.1. The Land of Hadrach, i. e. Emanuel's Land, who
leads men to God by (...) the way of repentance. The gates of Prayer are shut
sometimes, but never the gate of Repentance: If Israel would repent one day,
the world would be redeemed, and the Messiah would come. But they did not think
these Boninim went straight to Heaven; No, Abraham, and all the Prophets went
to Hell in their Opinion; though the best went thorough the fire like a
Salamander, it is only the Messiah can deliver from that. Herein then seems
their Error to consist, that the Messiah supplied the want of perfection, so no
need of going to Hell for sincere ones; this the Apostle, Gal. 1. calls a
perverting of the Gospel, a composing of another method of Salvation, a
counterfeit Gospel, a corrupting of the pure method of Grace with mixture and
allay of works.

4ly. It supposes two Justifications, Baxter against Cartwright, p. 11. It is
one thing to be accused of treason, and another thing to be accused of
Nonperformance of the condition on which remission for treason is promised; an
absolution from the first makes the one justification and absolution, from the
latter the Gospel Justification. Resp. By this Doctrine the neglect of Faith
and Repentance is not Treason. 2. That the justification by Christ's
righteousness is not complete. 3. That we must be justified, before we can have
an interest in Christ's Righteousness, and so we have Faith and Repentance
without an interest in Christ, for antecedent to an interest in him; and we
cannot be evangelically justified until our Faith and Repentance be sincere,
and persevere, so no interest in him till death. The Scholastic Pit^arne,
Provost of the Old College of St. Andrews, weeps over this Opinion, and its
Reverend Author, thus, p. 285. O Reverend Baxter, for what end, or to what good
have thou wrote so many Volumes, for thy conditional justification by Faith and
Obedience? to how many contentions have thou given occasion? how many precious
hours have thou lost to thy self and thy Reverend Brethren? into an Abyss of
how many Anti-Gospel Errors are they now sunk, who glory in thee as their Guide
and Patron? who after they have once left the way of Truth, scarce know where
to stop, and yet thou still tellest the world, all thy disputes are about the
wool of a dog, for thou differest only in words and names from thy Brethren.

5ly. The Context and Scope is the best rule of interpreting this text, whether
righteous by one Law, and unrighteous by another, or not; for Chapter 3. tells
us, he is a Non-worker as to all works, that any Oracles of the Old Testament
did discover to be duty; for v. 2. this was the Jews advantage, that unto them
were committed the Oracles of God, about which these two things are certain,
that these Oracles were the Old Testament, and that the Old Testament contained
the same way of justification the New does; v. 19. He adds, whatever the Law
says, it says to them that are under the Law: v. 10. These Oracles say, There
is none righteous, No, not one: v. 19. All the World is guilty, before God
every mouth stopped: The Argument runs thus, The Old Testament contained all
Laws, wherein a sinners justification was concerned; but as to all these Laws,
all men were found Non-workers, and ungodly, therefore there is no place for
distinction of Laws and Righteousness in this place, that inheres in us. 2ly.
Abraham's Condition, antecedent to his effectual call, instructs us, that the
distinction of Righteousness to be admitted in this place, is that of our own
and another, made ours by imputation; not of our own, with respect to
different Laws; for Josh. 24. Abraham was an idolater, inconsistent with faith
and repentance, or Gospel-righteousness, and yet Isa. 41. He is called a
righteous man, and the friend of God; this must be thorough Christ's
righteousness imputed, not his own: Who called the righteous man from the east,
he was righteous in Chaldea. 3ly. Romans 5.9, 10. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: The Argument is thus, If we are
reconciled when enemies, we are justified when guilty, I mean actively and
antecedently; but the Apostle affirms the former: The Connection is evident, for
they are but different Metaphors of the same case, the one representing it as
the happy conclusion of a fair Trial at Law, the other as a Quarrel more
friendly and privately composed; the one represents it as a public crime
pardoned, on a satisfaction and mediation, the other as a misunderstanding,
made up by an arbitration; the one expresses the remission of the guilt, but
the other the removal of enmity, to a cordial renewed Peace and Love on both
sides. Reconciliation comprehends Justification and Sanctification too; Two
cannot walk together, except they be agreed. This is further confirmed from v.
9. where by Reconciliation is understood and expressed Justification, the
former is described by the latter, and this justification, v. 1. said to be
that which is by faith. Dr. Hammond to shun the dint of this Argument, grants
in this place a justification on Christ's Death, but v. 8, and 9. the one is
distinguished from the other by (...) and (...), yet and now, i. e. Then he
died for us, now we are justified. 4ly. We may take one step further into the
Context, Romans 6.1, 2, 6, 7. where the Apostle proposes an apparent Objection,
but impertinent, if that were the case, no justification until sincerity, and
perseverance in faith and repentance: Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? and if their Mind and the Apostle's had been one, he had answered like
them, though Legal Obedience is not necessary to make us vessels of Grace, Gospel
Righteousness is; but his Solution is founded on the necessary connection
between justifying and sanctifying grace, being given at once both together:
How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein, v. 2. This supposes
a mortal stroke given to the body of sin in the ungodly man when justified, v.
7. He that is dead is justified from sin; so is the word in the Original; and
Gal. 5. They that are in Christ Jesus, have crucified the flesh with its
affections and lusts. Thus Dr. Tuckney, God's justifying act finds us ungodly,
but does not leave us so; he justifies the ungodly, but the ungodly are not
justified; and this obviates an Argument that is brought out of the text to
confirm this Opinion; for, say they, how can he be ungodly that has faith? its
true, he cannot, but Faith may be given to him that is so.

The 3d. Objection is this, he may be a Non-worker as to true gracious works,
the effects of a regenerate state, but not a Non-worker as to preparatory
works, that may make us meet and fit for it: Or, according to the old terms,
without meriting works, but not congruous works. It is necessary to give some
Characters of these, before any thing be said against them, or rather against
their necessary antecedency to justification; for I doubt not, pardoning grace
finds many so endued. The Original of these works is supposed to be man's
natural conscience, excited by some common influence of the Spirit, and may be
awakened by some extrordinary or afflicting providence, or some convincing
truth. 2. The Properties of the Works are three, (1.) Good for matter and end.
(2.) Done freely. (3.) When we are in the way for convictions, or sorrow in
Hell, are not preparatory works. 3. The degrees they differ in from gracious or
meriting works are two, (1.) The person is not in a state of Grace. (2.) God
has made no promise that he will pardon or justify such; thus Bp. Abelly, edit
11. Medulla Theol.

I answer, 1. These Characters make these Works more a counterfeit of Grace
than preparation for Grace, they describe a Pharisee or Hypocrite, that is
further from the kingdom of Heaven than a Publican or Harlot; for, Christ tells
them, the harlots went into the kingdom of Heaven before them; the Publican
went home rather justified than the Pharisee, with his formal thanks to God for
his distinguishing Godness: Most of such deceive themselves with that vain show
of Godliness, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; when
they are poor, miserable, wretched and naked, they think they need nothing,
with the lukewarm Church of Laodicea: These are the foolish Virgins that have
no Oil in their Lamps.

2ly. The foundations this Opinion are grounded on, are not very sure: As, 1.
They say John Baptist's Ministry was to prepare the way to Christ, by the
doctrine of Repentance. Respon. The Baptists Ministry is to be considered
either in general, with all Ministers, to prepare and make meet for the
inheritance, Luke 17.6. To prepare his ways, to give knowledge of Salvation
unto his people, by the remission of their sins, thorough the tender mercies of
our God: His Work was to fit for Heaven, not to make Hypocrites, though he did
make many. 2. His Ministry was to be considered, in relation to that peculiar
dispensation which was to raise and awaken peoples minds, in expectation of the
Messiah, and fulfillment of the great promises about the incarnation of the Son
of God, his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Constitution of his Church,
which was peculiar to himself.

A Second Foundation of these preparatory Works is Christ's Expressions,
preferring one People to another as such, with whom the means that others
enjoyed in vain, would have prevailed for their true Repentance, Matthew. 11. to
this purpose Christ prefers the Tyrians and Sidonians to the People of Chorazin
and Bethsaida. For Answer, I shall give Camero's Sense of these Expressions,
who counts it a popular Hyperbole to upbraid the Unbelief of these People, who
had seen so many of his Miracles; as if one should say, he is as bad or worse
than the Devil, and these things seem to confirm this sense. 1. It would seem
to reflect on the Bowels and Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would not
walk two or three Miles to work a Miracle, among a People who wanted nothing
else to secure their Salvation, and yet continue to Preach and work Miracles,
where he knew the event would be only the Aggravation of their Sin and
Punishment. 2. To attribute the Conversion of a People to any external means,
and not the efficacy and energy of the Holy Ghost, is contrary to the sense of
the Holy Ghost, for Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God gives the
increase; and yet these words taken literally would imply this, if in Tire and
Sidon the Miracles had been done, which have been done in thee, they would have
repented long ago. 3. The Letter of this Scripture would arrogate the power of
Conversion to Miracles, which certainly is not the Sense of the Scripture, for
Abram in the 16th. of Luke is brought in, saying in that Conference with the
rich man, that if they heard not Moses and the Prophets, they would not believe
one that rose from the dead. 4. Such Hyperbolical Language Christ frequently
used, as Matthew. 18.8, 9. If thy Hand or thy Foot offend thee, cut it off; if
any man smite thee on the right Cheek, turn to him the other; when thou do
Alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does: And of this kind
seems Moses his Wish to be, who prayed that God would rather blot him out of
the Book of Life, than destroy that People: The import of it, was only to
express the earnestness of his desire.

A Third Foundation is Christ's commendation of the young Man, Matthew. 19.15.
Mark 10.21. Luke 18.18. where it is said, Jesus loved him, and that he lacked
but one thing of the Kingdom of Heaven. Resp. (1.) The same Scripture gives no
account of his coming there, but rather of the impossibility of it, and that
'twas easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for such a Man
to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and farther, that 'twas a thing only
possible to God: And in more plain terms, he describes him to be one who
trusted in his riches, and what can more unfit Man for Heaven? God and Mammon
are at greatest distance. As to that Expression of his loving him, I think it
may be best explained by that distinction that is used about Christ's Tears,
when he wept over a dead Lazarus, or sympathiz'd with his Sisters, that they
were expressions of his Humanity; and that though he had not the like Passions,
yet the like Affections with us, and could love what is useful and in its kind
beautiful amongst men, and such are all these Moral Virtues, that renders a Man
amiable and useful in the Society where he lives.

A Fourth Foundation is, that an Appetite and desire is antecedent unto
enjoying Christ or his Benefits, Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, come
ye to the Waters. Resp. That is every one; there is a great difference between
a desire, and the determination of it, Psalm. 4. many say, i. e. all, or all
unconverted, Who will show us any good? but, Lord, lift thou up on me the light
of thy countenance: It is the termination of their desires on Christ, on
stable, lasting, heavenly, spiritual good things the Prophet exhorts to, he
blames them for terminating their desires on what did not profit. A (3.)
Argument against preparatory Works seems to be their inconsistence with the
Nature of Conversion; for Creation, Regeneration, Resurrection and Victory,
have no antecedent predispositions; all the preparation in order to be
conquered and overcome, is to oppose with the greater force to prevent it; the
others imply a Divine Omnipotency, working upon nothing, or what is unfit for
the produced effect. (4.) It being granted that there is no necessary Connection
between preparatory Works and Pardon, I see no reason why some may not be
pardoned without it, as well as some have it, and not pardoned. (5.) The design
of the Gospel being to exalt pardoning Grace, Ver. 15, 16. It Is of Faith, that
it might be of Grace: The less the Preparation appear, the more Grace is
exalted and manifested.

Obj. Should then a Man do nothing until he be justified? Resp. 1. Many are
justified who know it not. 2. Our Privileges are not the Rule of our Duty, but
God's Command. 3. That is, without doubt, we should do all we can, few if any
do what they may, be always trying whether God gives ability or not. 4. To all
under the means of Grace, at least God gives common Grace, and by that they may
live a sober, just and honest Life among men, and they may and ought to attend
on Ordinances, Phil. 2.12. Work in and about your own Salvation, as Camero
excellently translates it, wait there until God works effectually, he does it
of his own good pleasure, where and when he will. Let fear and trembling
therefore accompany thy attendance, lest thou miss the gale of that Wind that
blows where it lists: Here is no room for Idleness to a Non converted and
unpardoned Soul: Faith comes by hearing, be thou a diligent hearer. 5. God
gives Life thorough the Command of the Law, he speaks a Pardon thorough the
Precept; it is that makes the Law evangelical, when he commands the dead to
arise; Lazarus, come forth; Lame Cripple, rise and walk; Bed rid man, carry
home thy bed, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Having removed these Limitations, with the grounds of them, I shall establish
the Doctrine more positively: And, (1.) By Testimony: Sclater on this Verse
reconciles it with Prove. 17.15. where it is said, He that justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord: It
were an abomination to justify a wicked Man, without a satisfaction, but not
where a satisfaction to the Government is given, which is the Case of the
ungodly Man in the Text. Who Is justified through the righteousness of Christ, and
this he quotes out of Pareus on the place: Wilson, another English Commentator,
with great plainness gives it thus, At their justification he finds them
ungodly, and makes them godly, and he does it both by taking away the guilt
and filth of their sin. The Righteousness of Christ is reckoned the
Righteousness of that Person who does by Faith embrace him. Pitcairn says,
Ungodly here is taken in the same sense as when God raises the dead, and calls
that which is not, to be, it being the term of alienation from which they are
removed, from whence he bids farewell to all antecedent Causes, which some call
inferior, others in some manner or measure, others administrating, others sine
quo non, others Causes of possession though not of right, for all Holiness comes
in as a way to the Kingdom, not as Causes of Rule. Die thus, Justifying Grace
finds him so in himself, but leaves him not so; For whom he justifies, them he
sanctifies. God Justifies us not as Holy in our selves, but as wanting
righteousness he imputes a righteousness to us. The Anger of Abraham, Genesis 15.
for want of Children, wanted a Pardon, even then before this declaration about
him, that his Faith was imputed to him for righteousness. Theodore Szuingerus,
whom Hottinger commends, and notwithout reason, as the best Commentator on this
Epistle, compares the Text with 1 Kings 8.2. condemning the wicked to bring his
way on his Head, and justifying the righteous to give him according to his
righteousness, and solves the difficulty these two ways, 1. That the one is a
Justification of a man's Cause, and the other a Justification of his Person,
which is that in the Text. 2. This Justification of the Ungodly is not against
a Law, but according to a Law; not without a righteousness, but without his own
only: Besides, says he, Though it finds him ungodly, it leaves him not in his
ungodliness. Bucer thus, If God should not justify the Wicked, none should be
justified, for the Lord find us all wicked before we are justified. Greneus,
Though Man may not justify the ungodly, God may, who has Power to forgive above
Law. Pareus, Though they are justified who are wicked in themselves, yet not
without Cause, and against Rule, since there is a satisfaction in Christ.
Marlorat's Ecclesiastic Exposition is thus, The first Blessing of Salvation is
Pardon, and our Pardon being a Justification, it must be a justification of the
Ungodly: What can they say to this, that are Slaves to their Belly, and yet
brag of their Works? are they better than Abraham, who left his Country,
redeemed his Brother, and offered his Son, and Hoped in his God against all
Hope? but God in justifying leaves us not ungodly: Such therefore ought rather
to fear they are not justified, because they want the fruits of Justification,
than brag they have the Causes of it in themselves. Calvin thus, It Is
observable, the Discourse is not about the way of living, but about the Causes
of Salvation: He argues from contraries, and as Bucer says, not from words but
sentences. This Sentence is full of Energy, Believes on him that justifies the
ungodly; wherein both the Nature of Faith and Righteousness are contained. In
short, no body can come to the Righteousness of Faith, but who is in himself
Ungodly, for Faith adorns us with another Righteousness, which it beggs of
God; hence God is said to justify, when he freely forgives, and vouchsafes to
love them with whom he may be justly angry, Ver. 6. without Works they merely
cavil, who think all Works are not excluded, for he says not Works of the Law,
but simply and without restriction, Works of all kinds.

Beda venerabilis, Anno 700. says on this Text, What can he be but ungodly,
until he be justified by Grace? for what Grace gives, it gives freely. -- I
dare not determine which of the two is the greater work, to make a just man, or
to justify an ungodly man, both require equal power, but the latter greater
grace or mercy: Boast not of thy works before faith, for faith found thee a
sinner: -- Man works not righteousness until he be justified, and that begins
with Faith.

Tho. Aquinas, 1260. on this Text, To believe is the first act of Righteousness
which God works in us; by this man does not merit righteousness, but subject
himself to God's justification, and so thereby receives its effect: This (says
he) the Apostle proves, (1.) From David's sense, v. 6. He is a blessed man to
whom God gives a righteousness without forgoing works. (2.) From David's words,
proving he had no righteousness, for he needed for Orignal, Actual and Venial
sin, for the guilt of the Offense, Fact and Penalty of sin.

Ambranat, a late Papist, 1665. Paris. The Apostle before acted an Orator by
interrogations and frequent Questions, but now a Philosopher, with clouds of
Arguments; before he opposed Gift and Works, now he opposes a Believer and
Worker, a believer in him that endues the ungodly with his own righteousness;
Patiatur ergo si non operatur, when he is not a doer, he is made a receiver,
(...).

Erasmus says, Ungodly here comprehends all kind of Unrighteousness, there is
no kind that is excepted. But there is no end of humane testimonies, for within
my Cognizance I can reckon an hundred Interpreters of this Epistle. I shall add
two more of greatest Authority in England: 1. The Westminster Assembly, I shall
not quote the Annotations bearing their Name, but as I am informed on far less
ground than Anthony Burgess his book of Justification, which was examined and
approved by them; one of his Titles is, That gracious works are not so much as
the condition or cause, sine qua non, of justification, and on this Text, p.
288. God does account him as righteous, though a sinner in himself: p. 290.
While looking into our selves, we see nothing but matter of death and
condemnation; and he has another Sermon, to prove that the Act of Faith is not
imputed to justification, which the Assemblies Catachism expressly mentions. A
Second Authority is the Articles and Homilies of the Church of England: But Dr.
Wallis has done that in a Sermon ex preposito. I shall conclude with these two
noted Fathers, Ambrose and Augustine, the former defines a worker to be not a
transgressor of the Law, and a Non-worker a Transgressor; the latter in his
Propositions on this Epistle, Tom. 4. p. 1193. Qui justificat impium de impio
pium facit justificatus est, ut justus sit: Where I cannot omit, that the
Fathers use the word justify, for making just, though the usual Scripture
sense is to acquit, absolve; and the reason is evident, from the strict union
between them, Romans 6.7. He that is freed from sin, says our translation;
justified, says the Original; absolved, or purged, says Basil. M. delivered,
says Theophilact. which still confirms to me that the same grace which
sanctifies, justifies, though in different manners; the one by efficiency, the
other relatively; the one by positive influence, the other by institution; and
Aug. p. 1195. shows this to be his sense, opus enim gratiae est, its the work
of grace, i. e. Gratiae donantis et dimittentis, pardoning Grace; ut moriamur
peccato, that we dye to sin; and indeed the Apostle supposes it, Romans 6.2. How
can we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? He had been speaking of
Justification, not Mortification; the Apostle supposes it to be one grace that
did both, and that these two effects are twins of the same birth, though not
both born one way, which may be for an argument to prove that justifying grace
finds us Ungodly and Non-workers, since sanctifying grace does: And August.
Tom. 6. in his Book de remissione and meritis, 'twas of Justification, as that
which comprehends in it Sanctification and Pardon both, for his Argument is
thus, p. 659. etc. What way we are justified in Christ, that way we are sinful
in the first Adam; but we are justified in Christ thorough pardon and
sanctification, Ergo, In Adam by guilt and pollution; and his Words thus we
read, They are justified in Christ who believe in him, by reason of a secret
communication and inspiration of spiritual grace, by which every one cleaves to
the Lord, and is one spirit with him, -- Adam thorough his own sin begot guilty
persons, and Christ by his grace begets pardoned persons. This was wrote
against Pelagius, who said, We sinned only in Adam by imitation: And the
success is observed by Jansenus in his Augustinus, p. 103. that he brought
Pelagius to own pardoning grace to be free without conditions, but not
sanctifying grace: Great is the blessedness, says Pelagius, to obtain grace, i.
e. (the grace of remission) without the works of the Law, and exercise of
Repentance; for Romans 11.29. The gifts of God are without repentance; He that
believes in Christ in that day, becomes as he who has fulfilled the whole Law:
And the same Author, Tom. 3. p. 33. Who knew well Augustines mind, and said,
without that owning of grace which Austins doctrine contains, Christian
Humility is not attainable, having read him all ten times, and such Books
thirty times, says, that the grace of remission of sin belongs to the gift of
habitual grace, not to after actual helping grace; which, says he, my Author
delights to call medicinal grace to nature, in its sick, yea, dead state. Fewer
words are about this grace, because Pelagius owns nature guilty, but not hurt
or wounded by sin, and so needed pardon, but not grace to regenerate. But 2ly.
A greater than Augustine is here, the Spirit of God constantly unites them two,
and who dare separate them, Psalm 32.2. Whose sin is covered, and in whose
spirit there is no guile: The Scriptures the Apostle quotes on the Text, Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, 2 Timothy 1.14. Pardoning grace was abundant toward a persecuting
Saul, together with Faith and Love, 2 Pet. 1.3. All things belonging to life
eternal and godliness, -- He calls to Glory and Virtue at once, by that call
are given precious promises, Tit. 3.5. By the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, -- being justified by his grace, Gal. 5.24. They
that are in Christ have crucified the flesh, with its affections and lusts, 2
Cor. 5.27. If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 6.11. But ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc. I cannot but take Notice of what
gave birth and occasion to the Popish Errors, who make justification and
sanctification one and the same; or, that the one is the other, viz. The
Fathers expressions, who understood them still of distinct natures, but given
at once. A ring may enrich a Woman by its native value, and marry her by legal
constitution; a King may arm a Man with a Sword, and signify his royal favor
by its gift. The Grace that does justum facere, does gratum facere, makes him
just in himself, and signifies his guilt pardoned, and his person accepted in
favor.

3ly. As Humane Testimony and Divine, so reason unites them, can a man have
faith, that is, justifying and saving, and not be regenerate? faith and love
being the two first branches of the root of Grace, the Heart and Head of the
New Creature, and can a man be regenerate, and not justified? can he have the
greater privilege, and not the lesser? can he be a Son, and not a free Subject?

I might bring a 3d. Argument from the nature of the Subject, viz. That before
Conversion and Regeneration man can do no spiritual good thing, there is no
action of ours acceptable to God but thorough Christ, which supposes an
interest in him, and union with him; without faith it is impossible to please
God; the sacrifice, the plowing, the praying of the wicked is sin; and the
foundation of it is, We are dead in sins and trespasses, until the minute that
God quickens us, Ephesians. 2.1. and what can come from stinking Carcasses in the
graves, but savor of death, a loathsome smell. We cannot have faith, until God
gives it, its the Gift of God, a faith of the operation of God, and he gives it
thorough Christ, Heb. 12.1. Christ is the author and finisher of our faith: I
know no Commentator that denies his merit to come in for its proper influence
to the gift of Faith. Can an evil tree bring forth such fruits, or a branch not
ingrafted in the true vine? when we have no spiritual discerning, 1 Cor. 2.14.
and having our hearts alienated from the Life of God, thorough the ignorance
that is in us, Ephesians. 4.17. What good can we do? Now no gist less then quickening,
regenerating grace, can do this. The answer given to this usually by Arminians,
and men tending that way, is, that Regeneration, Creation, Resurrection, are
but Metaphorical Terms; and one thing they fail in likeness is, that the one is
wrought by degrees, the other instantaneous; the one is on passive matter, that
yields according to the power put forth on them, but this is on the will of Man
that can resist a sufficient grace, to bring forth such effects. Resp. This the
Scripture favors not, for it says, God works to will as well as to be able;
and it says, When we were dead he quickened us. 2. This was the Pelagian Error,
that God gave grace to be able, but not to be willing Jan. Aug. To. 3. lib. 2.
c. 9.
. 3. It would be Grace restoring to Adams condition, to be able to do good or
evil: 4. This distinction of sufficient and efficacious grace, Jansenus says,
Augustine nor none of the Latin Fathers knew, nor any general Council ever did
determine To. 3. lib. 2. c 29.
. About 5 for grace to have its efficacy from the corrupt will of Man, is
enmity, to be the Author of Love from sufficient grace, it is not; that brings
not forth the effect, there is nothing else in the will of Man: If it be
another addition of grace, the former was not sufficient; and indeed where its
not able to conquer the will of man, and bring forth its effect, to make man
willing, it is not. But this were to leave the Question about justifying grace,
and to dispute about sanctifying grace.

A 4th. Argument, is from the nature and the kind of justifying acts: As to its
Original, it is gracious, as to its Object, it is pardon, put these two together,
a gracious pardon, and it supposes the Object under great guilt and misery:
For, (1.) Grace is goodness in all its variety and fullness; when the Lord
proclaims his own graciousness, Exodus 34.6. He describes it by abundance of
Goodness and Truth, tenderness of mercy, and longness of suffering, and this as
the spring of pardoning grace; Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
and transgression, and sin. Where the person is just by a constituted Law,
there is no need of such amplifications of Goodness; for if it be an easy Law,
the grace was in making law, and not in justifying by the Law. (2.) Grace is
goodness flowing from the Heart of the Giver; its called gratia gratum faciens,
because it renders the person acceptable and lovely in the sight of God; hence
it bears the name of Love, thorough the Book of Canticles, Chap. 8.6. Set me as
a seal on thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm: So is every object of
Free Grace, his Love is fixed on them, and hence the arm of his Power protects
them: But this Love of Grace is incomparable, its stronger than Death, for at
once it delivers from a legal and spiritual Death, the guilt and the power of
sin, and him that has the power of Death, that is the Devil; as cruel as the
Grave, that devours all before it; The Coals thereof are coals of fire, no
waters can quench it, nor floods drown it: And as its full, so its free; If a
man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would be utterly
contemned. A (3.) Ingredient of grace, is mercy, pardoning grace and mercy are
but different names of the same thing, and suppose the Object in a miserable
condition, Romans 11.32. God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might
have mercy on all: And this mercy is preventing mercy, for the Apostle speaking
to the very same purpose, Romans 10.20. says, I was found of them that sought me
not, I was made manifest in them that asked not for me: And yet farther, Romans
9.11. He shows, that all the causes, conditions and motives of Mercy, are to be
sought for in the disposition of the Author, and not the disposition of the
subject: That the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
Works, but of him that calls. But the Name grace seems to import somewhat
higher than all this, it speaks exclusiveness of conditions, Romans 3.24. Being
justified freely by his grace; that is, says the Neat Witsius, without any
cause or condition. (2.) It speaks fullness, John 1.16. Of his fullness we have
received grace for grace: Colos. 2.10. In him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him: And it speaks perseverance, for the
Covenant of Grace contains the sure mercies of David, Psalm 89.33. Though I
visit their iniquities with stripes, nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from them. It speaks the Object in a most wretched condition, Isa.
57.1, 7. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; though my
anger has an end, my mercy hasn't; for the spirit would fail before me, and
the souls which I have made; as they cannot convert themselves, so they cannot
bear my endless wrath: For the iniquity of his Covetuousness was I wroth, and
smote him, I hid me, and was worth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart: A most desperate Condition; the easiest law in the world could speak no
comfort to him, but grace can: I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will
lead him, and restore comforts to him: Though there be no matter in the subject
to bring Comfort out of, my grace has a creative power; I create the fruit of
the lips, peace to him that is far off, etc. (Lastly,) Soveraignity is an
ingredient in grace: We read of grace upon the Throne, a Throne of Grace, all
pure grace: Where the Transactions and Dipensations are according to Law, there
is no place for overruling Soveraignity, but this justification is a
dispensation from a Throne of Grace, and the very end of it is to glorify that
grace, verses 16, 17. It is of faith, that it might be by grace: All Laws, and
transgressions of Laws, all Dispensations of Providence, and Permissions, all
Manifestations of other Attributes, are for the discovery of the height of this
Throne: All is for the praise of the glory of his Grace: And the whole of this
grace receives a luster in its first preventive act toward a sinner; for as he
is God of all Grace, he calls us into his eternal glory. If all the other
streams of grace finds us in our sin and guilt, elective grace, redeeming
grace, calling and converting grace, why should it be supposed or conjectured,
that pardoning grace does not find us so to? when the very formality of the
object is sinfulness: The Text tells us, it is a covering of sin, a not imputing
of sin, a forgiving of Iniquity, a blotting out our transgressions, a removing
of them from us as far as the East is from the West; an act that renders God a
Peerless God, and therefore supposes our condition worst; Who is a God like
unto thee? Micah 7.18. that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant rf his Heritage, he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy; he will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all their sins into
the depth of the Sea.

The only Use that I shall make of this is to linners, who are in their
Ungodliness, and without Works, and whose Consciences tells them so; the
doctrine speaks this to you, that you have as great reason, and as great
encouragement to come to this throne of Grace, and to sue out for a pardon in
the Name of Christ, as any others. There was an universal command to the
Apostles, to preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16.15. And that
commission stands a Directory to every one, that is a Servant of Christ in the
Office of the Gospel; and as Christ invites, so the Church of Christ invites
also; the Language of a sanctified Soul over a Brother or Sister, according to
the flesh, is like that of the Spouse, We have a little Sister, and she has no
breasts, what shall we do for our Sister in the day she shall be spoken for?
The Bride says come, and the Spirit says come, Rev. 22.17. And their joint
voice is, Whosoever will, let him come. Beware of being guilty of quenching or
provoking the Spirit; may be your Consciences bear witness, that there is a
higher Messenger sent to offer you a pardon this day than the voice of any clay
Trumpet; but, whether you find any such quickner and enabler, rendering you
willing and desirous to say, Whether shall we go? for thou have the words of
eternal life; in thee have we righteousness and strength, by thee only will we
make mention of thy Name: Thy face Lord we will seek; Cast the skirts of thy
Garments over us: I say, whether you feel this influence or not, it is this
external offer, that both gives you right to come to a pardoning God, for
forgiveness of sins, thorough the righteousness of Christ only, and makes it
your duty, however torn the Garments of your own Righteousness are; or your
consciences thereby, to depend upon our Lord Jesus Christ and his
Righteousness, by which the Law gains its end, and the Government full
satisfaction, and in this trust and dependence to come to the Throne of Grace,
and sue in his name for the forgiveness of your sin, and justification of your
persons: I say, the offer gives you a right. In other transactions with men,
there are these three ways of conveyance of a right, (1.) The Offer of his
Estate, or Goods, or Privilege. (2.) The price that I pay him for it. (3.) The
Writings that contain its Extent and Title. (4.) The Ceremonies of seizing, or
taking possession; all these go to complete the right, but if we had to do with
an Unchangeable Person, full of goodness and kind designs toward us, he would
never go back from his first Offer, that would bring him on to complete the
Title in all the rest. Now here you have the offer of a Pardon, and the offer
of a Sonship, and Inheritance with it; the God that cannot lie nor change has
made it: Here you have the tenor and extent of the blessing in the Covenant of
Grace, the Spirit of God has penned it, and you may see the blessing is great,
and the tenor so ordered, that it may reach you sinners: He tells you, the
price is paid already, it is 1600 years since 'twas laid down; the invitation
is, All things are ready, come unto the feast: The Question is only, Whether
the World or this is worth your Choice? Is not a Pardon desirable? Have we no
longings to come out of this prison, where there is no water? will we adventure
the paying the utmost farthing our selves, rather than to be obliged to Christ
for a full payment? but this offer comprehends a Command in its bosom; if our
Unworthiness renders us ashamed, and our Guiltiness afraid, and makes us apt to
say, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; Let conscience of duty oblige us to
draw nigh, for this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ: And none of us can say, but this command reaches us, else
unbelief would not be the condemnation of the World. Christ was grieved for the
hardness of their hearts that believed not, and wept over an obstinate
jerusalem, saying, Oh if thou had known at least in this thy day the things
which belong unto thy peace! Now which of these two does your Hearts conclude
will be the issue of this offer, either They would not come to me that they
might have life; or, Thine they are, and thou gave them me, and they have
kept thy Word: I have given to them the words which thou gave me, and they
have received them; Holy Father, keep through thine own Name those whom thou have
given me. The grand Offense that we stumble at commonly, if our Consciences
answer one another, is the particular circumstances and aggravations of our
particular sins: And yet it is a very unreasonable Objection, it savours rather
of the darkness of Hell than the light of Heaven above, or Faith below. Should
we delay the looking after a Pardon, because we are very guilty? should sinners
not accept of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, because God sent him to bless us,
in turning us from our Iniquities? did we ever read of any that Christ threw
off as incurable, because his Satisfaction or the Tenor of the Gospel could
not reach them? is our Condition worse than Manasse's or Readiness? has our delay
been longer than the Thief on the Cross, or our filthiness viler than Mary
Magdalen's? There are these four Conditions that Christ has specified in his
Gospel to prevent Exceptions. (1.) Profane Persons, Mat. 21.32. The Publicans
and the Harlots believed in him. (2.) Secure Persons, like lukewarm Laodicea,
that was insensible of her own misery, yet he stands knocking at their door,
and offering, that if any of them, the worst of them, would open, he would come
into them, and sup with them: His fullness should have a feast of Glory and
Honor, and their emptiness should sup on his fullness. (3.) The Hypocrites: Of
all Conditions that seems to be the most dangerous; such were the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23. Hypocrites; yet how often would Christ have gathered these
under the Wings of his Righteousness, Ver. 37. Yet these Invitations were not
altogether fruitless. Saul was a Pharisee, Nichodemus was a Pharisee: The Balm
of Gilead is a Medicine can cure this desperate distemper, and the Blood of
Christ can cover the guilt of it. Another gauling circumstance to a tender, or
a wounded conscience, is backsliding, falling away from first Love, and walking
unsuitably to pregnant, preventive mercies; but in Isaiah 1. Jer. 3. How many
invitations to a backsliding-Church, backslidden from the greatest Privileges
ever Church received in the World, backslidden into the vilest abominations
that ever people were guilty of, Idolatry, worshipping a Stock or Stone for
their God, and yet with what earnest entreaties, and what persuasive arguments
does he plead with them: How shall I give thee up Ephraim, I remember thee
still! the love of thy espousal was pleasant to me: O Israel! I am married to
thee, why should there be a divorce? Come, and let us reason together, though
thy Iniquities were as crimson, and thy transgressions as scarlet, I will heal
thy backslidings, I will love thee freely, and receive thee graciously. To
expect to come any other way, or upon our delay to come on better terms, were
to pervert the very Nature of the Gospel, and say, we would not be saved in
God's method, but our own; Not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy has he saved us. Will we reject the way and method
that all the cloud of witnesses were saved in, and will we be saved in that way
never one was saved in? they attain not unto the Law of righteousness, because
they sought it, or as it were by the works of the Law. Christ is the true and
living way; is there any fault we can find in him? is he not able to save to
the uttermost? is there any righteousness like his? it is everlasting: Can we
give any satisfaction to divine Government like what he has given? Can we bear
the Curse and drink the Cup that he did? is he not altogether lovely in
himself, and altogether fit for us? infinite Wisdom and infinite Goodness,
fitted and prepared him and is he not willing that we should share of his
righteousness? does not his offer speak it? Come unto me all ye that are heavy
laden; does not his tears and his sorrows over them that refuse and defer speak
it? does not that eternal Cheerfulness he undertook his Work with speak it? Lo,
I come, in the volume of thy Book it is written of me; thy Law is within my
Heart, the bent of my Heart is to do thy will; and that desire left him not,
nor ever was abated under the heat of the day, and heaviest of the curse: I
have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightned till it be
accomplished? with desire have I desired to eat this passover; having loved his
own, he loved them to the end: And will not all this Love toward us kindle
some sparks of desire in our frozen breasts? don't we think they deserve an
Anathema Maranatha, that love not this Lord Jesus Christ? The depth and height,
the breadth and length of his Love passes all knowledge, he was full of Love,
as he was a man; he loved Lazarus so, and he loved the young man in the Gospel
so; he was full of love, as he was a Mediator: Such was that love, whose
dimensions our narrow minds cannot span, but he was more full of love as he was
God: God is love, and God so loved the World to give his Son; is not this
Emanuel worthy of our acceptance? Gods infinite Wisdom found him, can we find
a better, or do without him? have we no self-love for our souls? what will
become of us without a pardon? can we bear the curse of the Law, or wrath of
God? is it not worthy acceptance on any terms? but what terms can be better,
it is come to God and beg Repentance; the Almighty makes the heart soft; I will
pour down the spirit of Grace and supplication, and they shall look on him whom
they have pierced, and mourn: Obj. But coming to God is believing, and I cannot
believe until he gives me faith, which is not yet? Resp. Put that to Trial,
what if the Spirit of God be now directing and quickening thy conscience to this
Work? and the Language of thy heart is, stay until time for Prayer at night, or
to morrow; you will think of it; Alas, Alas, this is the common answer to Gods
Spirit himself, what wonder the Prophets cry, To whom is the Arm of the Lord
revealed? Lord bless this for better fruits.

SERMON II.
ROMANS IV. 5, 6. -- His Faith is counted for Righteousness.

Even as David also describes the blessedness of the Man unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works.


IN the Former Discourse you have an account of the condition and disposition
of the subject of Justification, in this I propose an account of the
Gospel-method, how God justifies the ungodly; it is a different Question from
that of the convicted Jews, Acts 2. Men and Brethren what shall we do to be
saved? This is, What does God do to save a sinner that has contemned his
Authority, brought disorder into his Government, violated his holy, just and
good Laws, and goes on frowardly without repenting of what he has done? the
Rebel does not, will not yield, shall the Governor yield? does God need us?
how is it possible to reconcile God's justice and Man's enmity? how can a just
God justify an ungodly person? The Apostle makes but two sentences of the
Answer: 1. He imputes his Faith to Righteousness. 2. He says, that
Righteousness is imputed to Blessedness. The nature of the Discourse is
didactick, instructive, and there are these three Questions that are matters of
no small Moment nor mean Contraversies: 1. Whose this Righteousness is: 2. What
is the importance of the imputation of righteousness to a man for blessedness:
3. What is the meaning of Faiths being imputed to righteousness. I shall only
propose what I am most persuaded of to be the true sense of them, and what
persuades me to be of that mind, without using means to confute others: I shall
leave them to the same liberty I presume on. As to the first there are but two
general Opinions, viz. Either Christ's or our own, though each are subdivided,
in what righteousness of Christ's it is, or of ours. My Business is to confirm
and establish this truth, that this Righteousness in the Text imputed for
blessedness, is the righteousness inherent in our blessed Mediator, and if this
one Character of being without works were to be understood abstracted from the
Apostles design, which is not to exclude works from righteousness, but our
works and our righteousness, I should think it a distinguishing Mark between
Christ's righteousness and any man's else; for the righteousness of Works
consists in a conformity to the preceptive part of the Law, but Christ's
Righteousness consists also in a conformity to the sanction of the Law: He was
made a curse for us, and that is not to work in the Scripture phrase, but to
suffer, though in it self hard work, even Soul-travel; but doubting the
solidity of this, I shall propose others of greater stability. (1.) That
Righteousness that is the cause of Blessedness, and whose fruit is the
remission of sin, is the righteousness of Christ, for there is no other name
given under Heaven, and therefore no other righteousness by which a Man can be
saved; but the righteousness in the Text is the cause of blessedness and
pardon, there must be some near connection between pardon and imputation of
righteousness, else the Apostle did mistake the Prophets sense, saying, he
meant imputation of righteousness unto blessedness, when he said, Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven; the connection is either pretended to be
that of the cause to the effect, or some kind of requisite condition. They who
say, this is our own righteousness, are for the latter, who say, its Christ's,
are for the former, and with reason; for our own righteousness wants not works,
our justifying faith is not without works, but this is. 2ly. The righteousness
of Christ and our pardon are more necessarily united than our faith, for pardon
is as soon given as it: These are more likely senses, when David said, Blessed
is he whose sin is forgiven, to mean, blessed is he who has an interest in
Christ, and his satisfaction, than to mean blessed is he who repents: Nay, the
Prophet adds that as another thing, Blessed is he in whose spirit there is no
guile, i. e. Blessed is the pardoned man, and the sincere man. 3ly. He is
ungodly when forgiven, therefore his righteousness is not the condition of it.
4ly. C. 3. v. 25. To declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that
are past, why should we think the Terms connexed, other than what before he
unites as cause and effect? this is to unite what the Apostle separates, our
Works and Justification, and separate what he unites, Christ righteousness and
remission. (2.) It is not supposable to think, that Christ's righteousness or
satisfaction should be no where mentioned in this dispute about the causes of
Justification, when its confessed that that is the grand and only meriting cause:
It is strange, that he should dispute about the cause of pardon, and yet never
mention the true cause; but instead of it, always a little petty requisite
without any causality at all, and the more strange, that he should so
frequently mention that cause under the name of Christ's blood, and his being
delivered for our offenses, the matter of his righteousness in the context, and
seldom ever the effect without it; but when he calls it by the name of
righteousness, the proper name by which it saves us, for his blood saves us as
it is a righteousness, a conformity to the law of Redemption, that wherein the
Law obtained its end, then it should not be esteemed his, but our own: (3.) We
may learn whose righteousness it is that is mentioned in the dispute, by what
was proposed in the These or Doctrine to be disputed, which he proposes both
negatively and affirmatively, viz. Justified not by our righteousness or works,
but God's; we are justified by Gods righteousness, this he proposes Romans 1.17.
as the grand end of the Gospel; Therein is the righteousness of God revealed
from faith; surely God's Righteousness and Faith by which its received, are
distinct things, from thence to v. 21. c. 3. he proves, that all our own
righteousness is entirely rejected from any interest in this affair, and again
v. 21. proposes thus, the righteousness of God to be that, which he now
undertakes to prove to be the only righteousness we are justified by: But now
the righteousness of God without the law is manifested; and that by God he
means Christ, Romans 10.3, 4. may be easily learned from his words, Unto the
righteousness of God, for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness; and
that it is not called the righteousness of God because his gift, we may learn
from Romans 1.8. Your faith is spoken of thoroughout the world: Faith is a work,
this is the work of God to believe on his name, and faith is a righteousness,
for there is a conformity to the Law in it, but it is ours, your faith; faith
differs from this righteousness as the act and object, Righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith: What unprejudiced man would call that
righteousness and faith the same? faith differs from it as the effect from the
cause, 2 Pet. 1.1. Have obtained the like precious faith with us, thorough the
righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ: Who would wish for a plainer
expression to prove that the gift of Faith is the fruit of Christ's merit? and
therefore this righteousness must be imputed to us, before that gift be
possessed by us. (4.) The Epithets of this righteousness speaks it to be
Christ's, Romans 3.21, 22, 24. 1. Its the righteousness of God; God was Author,
Owner, Contriver, Acter, Giver, Subject of this righteousness, it deserves the
name by way of Eminence; who could contrive it but his Wisdom, give it but his
Grace, bear it but his Patience, work it but his Power, possess it but his
Fullness? 2. Without the Law, on two accounts, both as to the person, and as to
the righteousness. (1.) The person, Gal. 4. Was made under the law; he came
under it by his own voluntary choice, not natural necessity, as we are, hence
without the Law. (2.) The Righteousness was, that no precept of the Law
required to dye or suffer, that was none of its duties or righteousness; it was
its penalty in case of Unrighteousness. (3.) Its a righteousness now
manifested; faith and repentance has shined in the practice of the Patriarchs
and Prophets ever since Adam, Heb. 11. Abel, Noah, Enoch believed; indeed
Christ's was a new kind the World never saw before. (4.) It was witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets; if we take the Law for the books of Moses, they bear
witness to it. Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness;
the bruising his heel, Genesis 3. witnesses his suffering the principal matter of
his righteousness: If we take it for the Typical Law, that witnessed to it, for
all the sacrifices were Types, and Types are visible Prophecies, and all the
Language is, the Messiah was to suffer in the room of others, to obey a Law for
others; and the Prophets witness, Isa. 45. Surely shall one say, in the Lord
have I righteousness, Jer. 23.6. The Lord our righteousness, Dan. 9. To bring
in everlasting righteousness: There are the Testimonies of three Prophets, --
To him gave all the Prophets witness. (5.) It was a righteousness conveyed
thorough faith, put on them that believe, v. 22. which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe. (6.) A righteousness that
consist in a conformity to a Law, which to us is a Law of Faith, not Works. We
are bound to believe his Obedience to all the Law in the Covenant of
Redemption, but not to work one bit of it: Hence we being justified by that
righteousness, our boasting is excluded, v. 27. (7.) A faith that consists in
shedding of blood, in suffering, v. 25. These two are to the same effect;
Thorough faith in his blood, and righteousness by faith. (8.) A righteousness
whose fruit is remission of sin, v. 24. To declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are passed; the same Coherence that is in the Text
between imputation of righteousness and pardon. (9) Romans 9.4. A righteousness
wherein the Law attained its full end, the Subject Life and Happiness, and the
Lawgiver honor and glory. (10.) A righteousness, the gift whereof glorifies
grace to the uttermost, the righteousness of an Angel is not such a gift as
this is. (5.) Its a righteousness that is made ours: As Adam's first offense or
unrighteousness was made ours, that never inher'd in us, but death came on us
by it, then it has some relation to us, and we to it; this is at large in C. 5.
where the Author of this righteousness is plainly called the second Adam, and
if that be not plain enough, v. 21. he is called Jesus Christ our Lord: And
that its made ours, 1. By a gracious gift; abundance of grace, and of the gift
of righteousness: 2. It still remained inherent in him alone, for justification
of life came upon all men, by the righteousness of one: If it were ours, there
must be as many righteousneses as justifications; but here, by the obedience of
one many are made righteous. 3. Its conveyed thorough a Law: The word made
imports a legal constitution, and the first Adam's case shows it; until the Law
sin was in the world; sin is not imputed when there is no law; wherever
imputation is there is a Law; the Hostage cannot suffer for his King or Country
but by some Law; Christ was made sin for us only by Law, and we the
righteousness of God in him by law. The Debtor is relieved thorough the
Sureties discharge by a Law, and this Law is the Law of Faith, that we ought
daily to study; the Law was, If thou as sponsor wilt dye for them, they shall
live; if thou will go under the curse of their Law, take their Law-place, for
thy sake they shall have the place of Sons. Its much harder to me to comprehend
how Adam's first offense should be imputed to us for death, then Christ's
righteousness for life; and it seems worthy observation, that the one
imputation is never very clearly revealed, until the other be set over against
it. The Apostle thereby tells us we are no losers, but gainers by it; an
imputed righteousness may well free from an imputed guilt, and commends that
righteousness imputed, for it frees from more than that, viz. from all guilt.
This 5th. C. gives account of the Original of imputation, how it comes that one
should be justified by another righteousness, or condemned by another sin.
Solomon, Eccles. 7.24. among his many learned Enquiries in his latter days,
enquires after the original of sin, how a righteous man should become a sinner:
One thing have I found, that God made man upright, but we have found out many
inventions. The Apostles enquiry is of a greater depth, how one man's guilt or
righteousness should be conveyed to another? Adam's sin or Christ's
righteousness. (6.) Its a righteousness made ours, as he was sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Isa. 53. which did never inhere in him. (7.) From the very Title of imputed,
but that will be made clear in the 2d. general head, to which I now come, and
whether I refer a considerable Question belonging to this, viz. What
righteousness of Christ is it that is imputed?

II. As to the second Question, What is meant by Imputation of righteousness? I
shall begin with the signification of the word, which as others is translated
from humane use to signify by similitude some divine thing. Putation, thinking
belongs to the Art of Logic, and in the Greek the words are Conjugates,
branches of the same root, and in Hebrew (...) is used for thoughts too; The
Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are vanity, Psalm. 94.11. (2.)
Computation belongs to Arithmetic, and Greek Authors explain this word by
(...) and (...), to calculate, number or reckon, and as the Art of Logic has
the name from the Greek, the Art of Arithmetic, Accompting, in Hebrew, has its
Name from (...), see Munster's Lexicon; and so the Scripture uses the word,
Lev. 25.27. Let him count the years of the sale thereof: Eccl. 7.26. Counting
one by one, to find out the account. (3.) Imputation is an applying of
Accounts, and the things valued and esteemed thereby; it is account, assign or
ascribe, by way of counting and reckoning to some particular persons. We have
here then the righteousness of Christ as a rich treasure of Grace in the bank
of God; it is one individual Jewel given of God for the redemption of slaves,
and its value is so great, and the way it is communicated being by Accounts, it
may be distributed to pay for the redemption of Millions, all at various times
and places. We have God represented as a great Merchant, with his rich Fund,
and his Books of Accounts, the Merchandise Prove. 3. Is better than that of
silver or gold: Rev. 3. the Naked may buy garments of Righteousness; and Isa.
55. they may buy without Money or Price. Among these Books Rev. 20.12. The
books were opened, and another book was opened: There is one Book that is
called The Lambs Book, Rev. 13.8. Whose Names are not written in the book of
Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. There are two Books of
Life, one for Angels by their own inherent righteousness, another for fallen
Man, who obtain it thorough the Death of the Lamb, his passive righteousness:
In this book Christ has Credit for the redemption of all, agreed for between
the Father and Son, and when a persons Name is put in that Book, Christ's
righteousness is transferred to him for Life, for a salvation from all evil,
Dan. 12.1. Thy People shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written
in the Book: Luke 10.20. Rejoice that your Names are written in Heaven: We may
then see what the Imputation of Christ's righteousness to us is, it was the
putting our Names in among the Number for whom Christ died, it is having all
Christ did and suffered put so to our account, that we may actually partake of
all the Blessings God's goodness and grace designed for us, but the
transgressed Law rendered it inconsistent with the Governor's Authority,
Honor and Wisdom to confer it upon us; the way this impediment and bar was
removed, was by the sufferings of Immanuel. Imputation is either the
application of that benefit from Eternity in the Elective Decree of God, or the
actual investing the Person with it in time: It Is my present Light, that the
Imputation of Righteousness to Blessedness was the eternal act, and the
imputation of Faith to Righteousness the temporal; the former was 2 Timothy 1.9. a
purpose of conferring this grace and gift of Righteousness upon us in Christ,
before the World began. There was a double Gift set down in that Book by him
that is God of all grace, sovereign Proprietor. 1. We were given to Christ;
Thine they were, and thou gave them me. 2. Christ's Righteousness was given
to us by his Consent, he became surety, his Name was put in our Book of Debt
and Death, and ours in his of Righteousness and Life.

Two things need proof here: 1. That Christ's Righteousness is transferred in
its Value and Virtue to us in way of account. 2. That that was from Eternity.
The first is manifest from the Text, for one cannot be justified without an
antecedent righteousness; the Nonworker and Ungodly person has no righteousness
of his own, it must then be another transferred, though it still inhere in him
only, yet its value may be transferred to us: Thus Money may still lie in its
old Chests, and yet be transferred in accounts thorough twenty several Men, as
in Amsterdam, and now in London's Bank of England. Land is never removed from
its place, and yet thoro' how many hands is it transferred, and its value is
proposed to be made as Current as Money by ingenious men, and imputation is
made use of to denote the way. The second I shall not treat on, but I desire
that I may not be misunderstood, for it is not my Opinion that we are justified
from Eternity, no, not until Faith. Justification presupposes a righteousness,
and a righteousness that we have some relation in, which is by imputation made
or founded.

2. This is the common use of the word in Scripture, Philem. 18. If he has
wronged thee, or owes thee, put that: The relative comprehends the antecedent,
that Debt, that Injury, that Theft, on my account, impute it to me: The Levites
are put in the room of the firstborn, and the Heave Offering for the Corn of
the Threshing-floor. The three famous Imputations in Scripture are Adam's sin
to us, our sin to Christ, and Christ's righteousness to us: Our Faith and
Religion are founded on them, and who denis one believes not aright any of
them. The Imputation of our sin to Christ is fairly set out in Lev. 16.21.
Aaron shall put all the Iniquities, sins and transgressions of the People of
Israel upon the head of the live Goat.

I shall propose it thus, If our sin be imputed to Christ, his righteousness is
to us; but our sin is imputed to Christ, Ergo.

The Proposition is a Majore, for it is more credible that Privileges be
imputed than Penalties, a man may give of his own at pleasure, but cannot
punish another so: The assumption is expressed in Scripture, The Lord has laid
on him the Iniquity of us all, Isa. 53. 1 Pet. 2.24. Heb. 9. last. Psalm. 31.10.
40.12. 69.5. as he groaned under our sin, we may rejoice in his righteousness.
In 2 Cor. 5.21. we have both Propositions, He has made him to be sin for us
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: The
Question is, Whether sin or made be the words that are to bear the
Interpretation? if sin for sacrifice, or made for imputed? I am for the latter:
1. Else sin would be used equivocally in different senses, and the Apostle
would bring a So phism instead of an Argument; He knew no sin properly, Ergo,
made sin; so he never knew any of his own, ours he knew. 2. Sin is in
opposition to righteousness; it is not meant the effects of righteousness, a
pardon; a pardon and righteousness are not usually put for one another. 3. That
righteousness is still implied to inhere in him: Of God in him; and indeed made
a pardon is not good sense. 4. Made is used for imputed, Romans 5.19. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, and by ones obedience many were made
righteous. 5. Critics distinguish between (...) and (...), and say, the latter
is used for a Sacrifice, not the former; and I find this distinction made Heb.
10.2, 3, 4. Conscience of sin, remembrance of sin, take away sin, there is
(...); but v. 6. Burnt-offering and sacrifice for sin, there is (...); and I
find it often in the seventy: Indeed the Hebrew (...) signifies to sin, and to
expiate or purify from sin, but that is by an usual rule in that language, for
the same word to signify contraries in different conjugations: I have observed
nigh twenty Instances in the Bible, the Greek does not so. I shall add to this
Argument this explication of it: (1.) Christ took on him the state and
condition of a guilty sinner, he was in albo reorum, he was taken from prison
and judgment, he was in their sordid form, and dead in Law, so the Believers
are put in the condition and state of righteous persons, so treated. 2. He had
on him the guilt of a Votee, that is, by his own consent undertook to suffer;
Lo I come, Psalm. 40. 3. Also the guilt of a Surety for his Votee's guilt, i. e.
his own consent put him in our place; a Votee's confinement and humiliation is
for themselves, not others; the Covenant of Redemption put him under the
Covenant of Works, his own consent brought him under the curse, and our sin
brought us under; we enter by different doors, but come to the same place, the
primitive Law. In opposition to this stands our freedom from that sanction; the
sanction of that Law cannot touch a Believer, nor debar him from life, or any
blessing God designed him: Now all this guilt inheres in Christ, and this
immunity and happy condition inheres in us: But, 4. Imputed speaks a relation
to what inheres not; there may be a just foundation of imputation in the
imputers Goodness and Grace, a man may give to another in his book of Accounts
as well as in his Will, and make the Title as sure. 2. There may be an
imputation when the ground of it is neither in the Imputer nor Imputee, as in
the case of Bail, Surety or Hostages, who is may be killed, tormented for the
treachery of his King, Country, or General; of this kind is the imputation of
our sin to Christ, and his righteousness to us, it supposes them not to inhere;
thus our sins and iniquities are laid on him, imputed to him, and his Blood,
his Death is imputed to us, his righteousness; this Dr. Tuckney calls
cogitative imputation.

3ly. The foundation this Translation is founded on is a proof for it, and that
is threefold: (1.) A contract between the Father and Son about it. (2.) An
union. And, (3.) An office by virtue of that contract. In the contract these
three steps seems distinguishable: First, Christ's person as God-man; it is not
acording to the rules of Wisdom, that the means should be more noble than the
end, and that this glorious person that is more excellent than Angels and Men,
put them altogether, should be merely a mean, or a tool, (to speak with
reverence) to deliver us from misery, and to make us happy; he would not in all
things have the pre-eminence, if he were Mediator and the Means only, and we
the end; the end is the most noble, the end is first designed; he would not be
the first born of every creature in the Womb of divine decrees, if his
existence was only thought on to save us: Nor could we be chosen in him, Ephesians.
1.5. If he had not some antecedent foundation in the thoughts of God, [compar'd
with a consulting deliberating man:] in order antecedent to our Election; the
ground is presupposed to the building: Let us then with the Schoolmen conceive
of such a person, designed of God as the last most perfect and glorious of all
the Creation of God, one in whom God glorifies the fullness of his sufficiency
and bounty of his goodness to the uttermost, and he both by due and fitness
becomes Lord and Governor of all the creatures. Secondly, To pass the Economy
of Angels above us, let us suppose by the conjunct Counsel of God the Father,
and this now supposed Immanuel, [existing only in the divine nature, but a
relative dignity and honor belonging to him as such a person, and in such an
office, which was a glory, John 17. Glorify me with that glory which I had
with thee, before the foundation of the World: viz. To be Lord and end of the
Creatures is a great glory, all others being made for him, Col. 1.16. All
things were created for him; but now as Mediator, and in a state of
humiliation, he is made a mean, and they the end] out of the species of men,
some designed and chosen to be the more immediate train and fellows of this
great Lord, and end of all, Psalm. 45.7. They are called Fellows; With the oil
of gladness above all thy Fellows: We may read the designs and contrivance in
Christ's intercession for the complete execution, John 17.24. Father, I will
that they also whom thou have given me be with me, where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me: How they do it, we may read Rev.
5.11, 12. etc. There being elect Angels as well as Men, renders this very
consistent antecedent to the fall. But Thirdly, These being in the loins of
Adam, and under the common Lot of Man as to their Creature state, are permitted
to fall with the whole mass of humane nature: Elective Grace and Love showed it
self in their redemption, but to Angels prevention, and their fall gives
occasion to a New Work and Office to this Immanuel, and New Discoveries of his
Love and Grace to these elected fellows, John 12.24. Except a corn of wheat
fall into the ground and dye, it abides alone, but if it dye, it brings
forth much fruit. He compares his death to seed; says he, if I dye not, I shall
lose all my fellows designed; my Company and Train in heaven will not only be
fewer, but I shall loose one whole kind of them, and that of next kindred to my
own nature; I will never suffer it, I have power over my own Life to lay it
down, and take it up, I am resolved to take their burden on my shoulders, the
curse they are under shall strike thorough my Soul, but I will redeem them; I
will give them a singular evidence of the goodness of their Lord and Master
they are to serve. On the other hand, God the Father, with whom I should have
begun, the God of all Grace, that he might manifest it in all its variety, and
render the difference between the Creature and Creator more lustrious, and the
degrees and steps of Happiness more numerous and tasteful, suffered them,
permitted them to fall, but knew of one among the number, a noble elect vessel,
that could not fall; yea, that could give satisfaction for their transgression;
to glorify his soveraignity, in showing what a subject was in his dominion, he
commands him, Psalm. 40. I come to do thy will; thy Law is within my heart; And
to glorify his goodness, he gives this Lord of all to be their Priest,
Sacrifice, Redeemer and Surety; the whole transaction we may read in the
Covenant of Redemption, Isa. 50.20. Psalm 89.3, 19, 20, 27. The Redeemer shall
come to Zion, -- This is my Covenant with them, my spirit that is upon thee,
etc. shall not depart from thy seed: It Is a Covenant with him concerning them;
I have made a covenant with my chosen, -- one chosen out of the people, -- I
have laid help on one that is mighty: Zach. 6.13. A Counsel of peace between
the Lord of Hosts, and the man the branch. By virtue of this Covenant the
Creditor may pursue him for his voluntary undertaking, and Christ may sue out
deliverance for his performance, therefore it becomes us to carry our petitions
first to him, that in his right we may be delivered. 2. By virtue of this
Covenant, and that relation that gave foundation to it, their arises a most
strict union between Christ and us: Now the more they are one, the more reason
for his righteousness to be imputed to us; they are one seed, Gal. 3.16, 29.
and to thy seed, which is Christ: You may pursue any of the Brothers that share
of the Fathers estate; any of the Members of the body may be punished for what
another has done: We are all Members of one body. When a Society would give
sufficient ground of Credit, they put it in their constitution, that you may
pursue one for all; here thorough the oneness of nature all became Bankerupt
thorough Adam; but much more united is that Society, one in Christ. Ruther,
par. 2. p. 251. (1.) One and the same legal party, the same object of justice;
he that pursues the surety, pursues the Debtor: (2.) The Debt is one; It Is but
one Debt that Christ suffered for, and sinners suffer for. (3.) The
satisfaction or payment is one; it cannot be required of the principal debtor,
what the surety has paid. (4.) The acceptance is one, if he accept of payment
from the Surety, he cannot pursue the Debtor; and the Discharge is one, as
Christ was delivered for our Offenses, he rose again for our Justification. If
a sinner was assured that he were an elect vessel, he might say, I have paid
all in my surety; but as we have the privilege of minors, so have we the
folly, and therefore are treated as them, who have not wisdom to manage their
own Estate. 3. The Office that Christ was put in thorough this Covenant for us,
is a just foundation for imputation, Heb. 7.22. He was made surety of a better
covenant: Whatever the word signifies there, it is for us as a Priest toward
God, that he exerts it, as to the signification of the word though its but this
once in the New Testament, yet several times the seventy use it as the proper
translation of Gharab, which Prove. 6.1. and 17.19. signifies surety, so Genesis
43.9. I will be surety for him, let me bear the blame for ever: 44.32. Thy
servant became surety for the lad: The end of suretyship is to be a ground of
Trust; Dum curant homines ut diligentius sibi cautum sit, I have laid help on
one that is mighty. (2.) One becomes so for another by contract, if in his own
power, Fidejussor fit per stipulationem; be not thou one of them that strike
hands, or that are sureties for Debts. (3.) It legally unites the persons,
Fidejussor, proprie dicitur debtor: He was made under the Law; Singuli in
solidum tenentur; each are bound for the whole; He was made sin, that knew no
sin. (4.) It Is of several kinds; either it may preceed or follow the Obligation,
it may either be for debt or for persons indemnity, or good behavior, or for
performance of condition, Isa. 36.8. Give pledges, I pray thee, to my Master,
the King of Assyria: There is something of each of these in Christ's Suretiship;
The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: Those that thou gave me I
have kept: All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: His Suretyship is
that of satisfaction for guilt past, in the Covenant of Works, and that of
caution in the Covenant of Grace: Thus Brinsley, Where there is a Suretyship,
there is just ground for legal imputation, but Christ's Mediatorial Office is a
Suretyship, therefore it founds a just ground of imputation to them for whom
'twas undertaken.

There are two Questions, the solution whereof might contribute a consiberable
light in this affair, one is, What kind of righteousness that is which is
imputed, and the second is, how far it is made ours by imputation, and the one
contributes light to the other, as to the (1.) There is righteousness in Christ
as he is God, his essential Holiness. (2.) A Righteousness as he is God-man,
abstractledy taken from the work of Redemption for us. (3.) There is a
Righteousness in his now present glorified estate, wherein he applies what he
did for us to us, which carries a conformity to the Covenant of Redemption, and
therefore is a righteousness. (4.) There is a twofold righteousness in his
performance of the mediatorial office for us here below, one by reason of its
conformity to the Mediatorial Law, which required the faithful discharge of a
King, Priest and Prophet, at his hand, the other in a conformity to the Law
that we were under, into which place that undertaking put him. As there are
four kinds of righteousness to be distinguished in Christ, so there are three
degrees of imputation; One is only for a persons good Profit or Honor, and
thus all in Christ is; it is an honor to mankind that there is such a glorious
person come of the family, he is the light that enlightneth every one that
comes into the world, he came to restore all things; that first relation I have
before mentioned as head and end of all the Creatures, which fitted him, and
rendered it proper and becoming that he should become our redeemer, was much
for man's profit and good: A 2d. Degree of imputation is for our sake; for
their sakes do I sanctify my self; when we become the end, and he the means,
and thus the whole Mediatorial Office was undertaken by him, the whole of that
work was the delivery of Mankind, especially the elect, although we are not
made Priest, Prophet and King, we reap the benefit of these offices, all their
causality combined in our salvation, and so does his intercession unto this
day: 3d. There is a nearer degree of imputation, when what is done is done in
our name, room and place, which Brinsley calls the office of an Attorney: I
shall give my thought of it by these two properties; When Christ does for us
what he was not obliged to do for himself as God-man. 2. When we who were
obliged to do it, are freed from the obligation by his doing often, and under
this Christ's passive righteousness is comprehended; but passive righteousness
may justly comprehend the whole state of his humiliation, from his Conception
to his Resurrection: He grew up as a root out of a dry ground, without form or
comeliness; he made himself of no reputation, and his first likeness to man was
in the form of a Servant, and in that fashion he became obedient unto death:
Great glory and dignity was the due of the humane nature from the first minute
of union. If a King should marry the poorest Beggar, she is Queen from that
minute, and has a right to share with her Husband in his plenty and honor, but
a deniedness to this, a being emptied of it, as it is in the 2d. of Phil. was a
great part of Humiliation, and a birth of this kind was meritorious; the
throwing such a thick veil over his proper glory, the obscuring of his
brightness by such a thick cloud. All righteousness has necessarily an active
obedience accompanying it, or rather is it, for a passive suffering without it
is not righteousness; for all righteousness consists in action and habit, and
has a relation to the preceptive part of the Law, so what had been to us merely
a curse, was to him obedience and righteousness, because he came under a Law to
perform it; for what was the penalty of the first Adam's Law, was obedience to
the Mediatorial Law, satisfaction to one, righteousness to the other: (3.)
Though Christ as man was bound to obey the Moral Law, viz. Not to bear false
witness, not to steal or kill, yet his obedience was in such circumstances that
rendered it meritorious; all his Sermons and his Death too was a bearing
witness to the truth, and so an obedience to the ninth Command, yet not such
obedience as he was antecedently obliged to, his restoring that which he took
not away, his being denied to that which was his due, was obedience he
performed to the eighth Commandment: His praising God in the Church here below,
his prayers and faith, with strong cries and tears, was an obedience to the
first table, that he was not obliged to as God-man: He might have been man
without being the seed of Abraham, and therefore he was not obliged to be
circumcised, which was a great part of suffering, for 'twas a great dishonor,
an acknowledgment and public confession of Original Sin. And if our Original
Sin thus on him, why not his Original Righteousness, not as man, but as man in
our likeness, born of a Woman, conceived in a Womb, and Beza so expounds, Romans
8.1, 2. Now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, -- For
the law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, the Holiness, the unspotted
Purity and habitural righteousness of Christ as man, being imputed to the
Believer, has made me free from the Law of sin and death: That convinces of
the one, and binds over to the other, viz. Death; thus Beza, Hemingius, Elton,
Parr, Streso, Downham: As he was the seed of the Woman, and our Brother, he was
bound to obey the moral Law as suited to this estate, but there was not a
necessity of being born of a Woman, he might have become man in a more glorious
manner, he might have assumed such a Manhood as he now wears; there is a great
difference to be made between the dues of Christ as Emanuel, and as Mediator:
The Originals are different, the one flows from his Actions and Sufferings,
Function and Investiture, the other nakedly from the Union, which last remains,
1 Cor. 15. when the former is laid down. (4.) Though the Scriptures point at
Christ's Death and Blood principally as the price and satisfaction, Acts 20.28.
Heb. 9.12. Rev. 1.5. and 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. yet that may well be understood by way
of eminence, it being the pinnacle of the penalty, and does instruct us that
the necessity of the satisfaction was founded in a holy, just and good Law, and
not in the nature of God: The satisfaction did not make any change in the
divine nature, to turn him out of an angry temper into a gracious, kind and
merciful one, for the gift of the Son flowed from the unchangeableness of his
Love, but God as Supreme King and Governor by a just Law, well and wisely
established, could not in Honor admit Rebels to the Privileges he designed
for them, without a satisfaction made to the Government, which must be what the
Law required, and that required Death; and as our Death begins with a mortal
nature, and increases thorough sickness and weakness, until it be completed in
a Death-stroke, or some violence prevent the gradualness, so Christ became like
us in all things, excepting sin; one drop of Christ's Blood, one day of his
humility, had dignity enough in in it, but he was to pay what the Law required,
and the Law obtained all its ends in him. This may help us to understand these
Phrases used very rudely, that God loves the elect when sinning as well as when
praying: Its true as he is God, for there is no change in him, but not true as
our God or Governor, and the Language of Scripture is in this latter sense, as
he manifests himself thorough Law or Gospel, these being Rules of his
dispensations, and glasses of our knowledge. (5.) On the other hand, though we
obey the Law in some measure, and have a measure of suffering, which is
acceptable to God thorough Christ, if we have faith in him, yet this comes in
as no satisfaction to that primitive Law, for we are not obliged to do what he
did for us; it comes in as a preparing us for a possession in a holy Society,
where no unclean thing can enter, so the imputation of Christ's obedience takes
not away the necessity of our obedience, more than his passive takes away the
necessity of our suffering or dying; It Is appointed for all once to dye, though
Christ died, and its appointed for all to obey, though Christ obeyed; neither
our suffering nor our obedience comes in as a part of that righteousness that
first Law required of us, as belonging to the covenant of Works; the breaking
of this clay vessel either by Death, or what is equivalent, is necessary for our
habitation in another Sphere, where this cannot enter; blessings of that would
be a torment to this constitution: Sufferings are necessary to make us sensible
what we deserve, and what our Savior suffered for us; Holiness and
Righteousness is necessary by precept, and as a means to fit and prepare for
that possession. (3.) Thorough a congruity, as a fruit and an effect of that
image of God begun to be drawn in us, by reason of which when in its
perfection, it may be said, The Law is not made for a righteous man; and we
read of no Law given to Adam, but Ceremonial Laws; the nature of God is the
first Law; the Moral Law revealed is but a Copy of that divine temper, and when
its perfectly writ in a Man's Heart without any blot, mistake or defect, to
live holily is to live as he list, and by reason of this disposition of Soul a
Saint can never be said to be without law, yet if we take law for an external
Command, swaying by the force of its sanction against the stream of
Inclination, a man is neither of the Law, nor under the Law. The 2d. and last
Head proposed, was about the sense of these words, Faith imputed to
Righteousness, about which there are these three Opinions: Some say that Faith
is taken objectively, Faith comprehending Christ's Righteousness is put for it,
or Faith in justification is always valued as comprehending Christ's
Righteousness. 2. Others say that God out of his Gracious Acceptance takes
faith for the Righteousness Blessedness is due to; we say Christ's
Righteousness comes in the room of that, they that Christ merited, that faith
should be taken for it. The 3d. Which my judgment embraces, is, that faith is
reckoned of God the mean of Application, or Instrument of conveyance of
Christ's Righteousness to us: Imputation applied to Faith is a note of
Distinction, implying a double use of Faith, the one is by inhesion, and so it
sanctifies us, the other is by imputation, and so it justifies us, because it
is the ceremony of Seisin, by which we are invested with, and entitled to the
righteousness of Christ; this suits best with the former Metaphor of imputation
in Books of accounts, for it is not only usual and necessary to transfer and
impute Estates in Books of Accounts, where great Funds and Banks are, but there
is given to the person who is made Creditor a Bank-bill or Tally, bearing the
value of the transferred sum, so that bit of Stick or Paper thorough
imputation, if we compare it with these Bank-Books, makes the Man worth so much
money as the transferred sum is; so in the Lamb's Book of Life there is not only
a transferring of his righteousness to us, but there is given out this Bill or
Tally of Faith to us, by which we are entitled to it: There are many Arguments
which may both prove and explain this. (1.) It is without doubt that all our
privileges are conveyed one way, Faith bears the same relation to them all,
Romans 4.16. It Is said the inheritance is of Faith, that it might be by grace;
now Heb. 11.1. Faith's called the substance of things hoped for; Substance,
says Tho. Aquin. is the beginning of a thing that necessarily at last infers
the whole, that is in our English an Earnest; now if Faith be an earnest of
Heaven, it bears the like relation to other privileges, as Rev. 2.17. We read
of a white stone, and in the stone a New Name; that was the stone of
absolution, the Judge anciently instead of speaking his Sentence conveyed it,
by the giving of a white or black stone; so if Faith be the earnest of our
hopes, it is the stone of our pardon, it is the Ring of our Marriage with Christ,
it is the Winte Raiment, Feast and New Name of our Manumission by justification;
out of Slaves we are made Freemen, and Faith is the mean and instrument of
Investiture with it. (2.) This sense of it removes a considerable difficulty
among Divines, the Question is, since Justification is a transitory act of God,
and terminates upon the Creature, what it is that he does when he justifies, or
what bears the room of the justifying sentence? most say, the Word of God, the
Gospel, but there is a great distinction between the voice of the Law and the
voice of the Judge; the Law says, Whosoever believes shall be justified, but
the voice of the Judge is, thou John or Thomas art absolved, its a particular,
positive and authorative Application of the Law. Mr. Baxter thinks, that God
proclaims some public Sentence among the Angels, but that is a groundless
Notion; this seems to me most reasonable, that the gift of Faith being such a
fruit of his special grace, that he gives to no sinner but whom he justifies,
its relative Language should be, I justify thee, I pardon or absolve thee, for
the same Gift may have two Uses, as a Ring in Marriage, it enriches and it
marries, the one by its own Inherent value, the other by constitution; so Faith
sanctifies by its own inherent virtue, and justifies by impuration. (3.) It
shows us what influence the Holy Ghost has in our justification; all the three
Person concur in all transient and external Acts, and in particular, this act
is ascribed to the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but you are
sanctified, but you are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God: There Is no more reason for derogating justification from the
Spirit of God, then from derogating sanctification from the Name of the Lord
Jesus: The verse contains two Blessings, Sanctification and Justification; two
Authors of them, the Lord Jesus and the Spirit; two ways of Application of
their virtue, the Merit of the one, and the Spiritual Efficiency of the other,
in name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of God: Some think the Spirits
Efficiency in Justification is to give the comfort and the knowledge of it, but
that is no causality that may come forty years after the effect, but this gives
an easy solution to the Text; the Spirit of God works Faith, which entitles to
Christ's Righteousness, therefore we are justified by the Spirit, and may be is
called the Spirit of Adoption upon the same account, for the Spirit of Faith
and Spirit of Prayer are one, and the Spirit of Adoption; Romans 8.15. is that
whereby we call Abba, Father; so he may be also called the Spirit of
Justification by his working, justifying faith, and this seems to be pointed at
1 Timothy 1.14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love:
There are two Blessings mentioned, and both Preventive, exceeding grace, with
faith and love: It is not said, and Faith, and Love, to import barely the
contemporariness of the Gift of Pardon and Faith, but the way of conveyance;
thus God gave me Faith and Love, when I was a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and
with Faith, or thorough Faith I obtained mercy, the Grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant in this blessing, in giving faith, and a pardon thorough
faith. (4.) Christ's justification is a pattern of ours, Romans 4.24. He rose
again for our justification: 1 Timothy 3.16. He was justified in the Spirit; the
work of the Spirit in raising him from the Dead was a justifying act upon him;
in the World he was condemned as a mere man, and thereby a deceiver, saying, he
was God, but Romans 1.3. He was declared to be the Son of God with power, by the
spirit of holiness in his resurrection: His state of Humiliation was status
reorum, he was in the condition of a guilty man, in prisonand judgment, Isa.
53. He was condemned, that he might condemn sin in the flesh, and that there
might be no condemnation to them that are in him; he could not be punished
under God's Government without sin inherent or imputed, Isa. 50.8. He is near
that justifies me; he justified him in his raising him from the dead, and
setting him at his right hand, so condemned him in humbling him; at the
resurrection his justification and vivification was one and the same thing in
different relations, 1 Pet. 3.18. He was put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit; when the Spirit quickened him, he justified him; his
death was consequently a condemnation, not only by man but God, as by his
determinate counsel under his Government. Sydenham and Brinsley say, in his
resurrection, as Attorney he took up the bond of the old Covenant in Court for
his Clients, John 16. The spirit now in the Gospel bears witness to his
righteousness as our Head and Surety, because he goes to his Father, i. e.
witnesses he was justified as our Surety, and therefore his resurrection is our
acquittance or solution, he had never gone to Heaven else. (5.) No punishment
can be justly removed before the Person be justified or absolved; the removal
of our Spiritual Death by the gift of his Spirit, is a removal of our greatest
punishment, therefore it carries absolution in its bosom, and by it we may
easily answer the Papists, who argue our justification and sanctification to be
one, because the Scripture mentions a relation certainly above a bare connection
of time, Romans 8.1, and 2. in v. 1. a connection, but in v. 2. some causality.
This place, says Stapleton, Ant. p. 625. is a torment to Beza and Calvin, but
Calvin's Comment frees himself, for though he yields inherent holiness to be
the sense of the 2d. v. the (...) or for the influence it has on, no
condemnation in the v. 1. is thus, Non assignari caasam a paulo, sed modum quo
so^vimur a reatu, Sanctification contains a way of our being freed from guilt
as well as filth of sin. I argue against the Papists thus, there could be no
Argument to prove the one from the other, if both were one. 2ly. This
interprets the relation, such texts as this, and more evidently Tit. 3. 1 Cor.
6. implys between these two twins, viz. the same grace sanctifies as a
principle of efficiency in the Believer, and justifies as a foundation of
relation it raises between the Believer and God, now let the Papists find one
Scripture to torment a Protestant Interpreter with this key in his hand, or any
advantage to their side who say justification is, justification is the
ornamental or enriching value of the Ring, its marriage virtue? or the relation
between man and wife? (6.) The being put in Covenant is also a relative
blessing, and we are brought thereinto by God's pouring out his spirit on us;
This is my covenant, Heb. 8. There is a very obvious objection against this,
viz. The Scripture commonly attributes Justification and Pardon to the exercise
of Faith, Abraham believed in God, and 'twas counted to him for righteousness;
but this Doctrine about it lays the stress of its justifying virtue on the gift
of it, and the same objection may be otherways proposed, the Scripture lays the
justifying virtue of faith on the object of it, it is not a miraculous faith,
believing I shall be cured, nor an Historical Faith, believing the truth of a
particular relation in the Scripture, but a Believing on him that justifies the
ungodly for justification, a believing on him that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead; thorough the belief of his being delivered for our offenses, and
raised again for our justification. And (3.) The like objections may be raised
against these, Ephesians. 2.8. That we are saved by grace thorough faith, and that
not of our selves, but as the gift of God: For we are his Workmanship, Tit.
3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, that being justified by his
grace: Thus we see the Scripture lays an Emphasis on each of them, the gift of
Faith, the nature of Faith, the object of Faith, and indeed this Bill would be
but a counterfeit one, if it wanted any of these Properties or Relations. 1. It
must be received from him that has the power, or else it is not valid; By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. 2. It must be in true form,
rightly dictated, that is its nature, or not valid. 3. The divine constitution,
the Law of Heaven has made it have such a relation to Christ's righteousness,
the riches of his Grace, and the Wisdom of the constitution shines in the
fitness of the instrument, for our Souls are an open begging hand, a vast
Appetite, It cries daily, who will show us any good? some good things I want,
some more good, and this Faith clasps the hand on Christ offered, determines
and centers the desire, as on an Object that has all fullness in him, full
satisfact^on, and ^o build a relation and union of right upon an union of
nature; a Communion upon a cement of Union honors the Wisdom of the contriver:
So we see all these three must be in a valid Bank-bill; it is not worth a
Farthing in it self, a bit of Paper ink'd, but relatively to such a Sum,
suppose 1000 l. it is worth so much, its very form consists in relation to that
sum, that is its Object, it signally bears it, and if rightly drawn, and
received from the right owner, their Constitution and the Law will make me
Possessor in due time: If any of these qualifications be wanting, it is not
worth a Farthing: 1. Drawn in true forms. 2. Bearing relation to its proper
Object. 3. Received from him who has the riches in his power to give: And I
find our Catechim and Confession insists as much on this as any; Conf. c. 11.
-- Nor by imputing it self the act of believing, or any other Evangelical
Obedience, but by imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto them,
they receiving it by Faith, which is the Gift of God. 11. Thus its the alone
Instrument of Justification, i. e. they are not justified until the Holy Spirit
does in due time actually apply Christ unto them. Our lesser Catech. Q. How are
we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ? R. By the effectual
application of it to us by his Holy Spirit; for which they quote Tit. 3.5, 6,
7. Q. How does the Spirit apply the Redemption, etc? R. By working Faith in us,
and thereby uniting us to Christ in our effectual calling. I may from thence
form this Argument, Maj. When Christ and his benefits are applied to us, we are
justified. Min. But when God effectually calls, Christ and his benefits are
applied to us. Erg. When effectually called, we are justified. It is granted,
that Faith is the fruit of effectual Calling, and it cannot be denied that
relations, viz. Justification, Adoption, flow as suddenly from their
Foundations as effects can from their efficients. Or thus, Maj. The imputing
Faith to Righteousness is an application of Christ and his benefits: Min. But
the Spirit by working Faith applys Christ and his benefits: Erg. The Spirit by
working Faith imputes Faith to Righteousness. But I need no other Testimony but
Scripture, that way the Faith of Miracles temporally saved, that way saving
Faith justifies; but by the Spirits working the Faith of Miracles, when he saw
their Faith, it was certainly a miraculous Gift, distinguishing and
characterizing the persons to be healed; to give him that Faith, was to say,
thou art to live to be cured, there was no cooperation of the creature to a
Miracle. Further, compare C. 4, and 5. and we find imputing Faith to
Righteousness, and giving a Righteousness, are the same; but Objections are not
to be answered as Bullets in war, with the like, but explication and
distinction: For the 1. The reason, the nature or exercise of faith is insisted
on in Scripture so much, is for our instruction; if the faith that God has
given be that which entitles to Heaven and Happiness. 2. The reason the object
is so much intimated, is to prevent a most dangerous error that the World is
most liable to, viz Leaning on our own righteousness; such fools, to take the
Bill for the Sum: But its certain the owner and proprietor must be the
conveyer, I challenge to show what he does else that looks like it. For the 2d.
I propose these two Distinctions: 1. Between the state of justification and
particular acts of pardon, or between the state of adoption, and particular
blessings in possession; the former is conveyed thorough the gift of faith, the
latter thorough the exercise of faith; a man gets right by the receiving of a
Bill from the Proprietor, but when he comes for such a part of it, he brings
his Bill and shows it, and writes a receipt on the back of it. Though we are but
once justified, we daily pray, Lord forgive my debts; and once adopted, we
daily pray for more enjoyment of what is due to that title. 2ly. With Mr.
Frost, I propose a double instrumentality of Faith, one on the givers part,
another on the receivers; so it is with Bills too; the Proprietor conveys his
right, and the Receiver afterward pleads his right; so it is with faith, God
conveys Christ and his Righteousness thorough it, and we plead for the benefit
and use of it, as we need daily. But this I shall retain, that from the first
gift of saving Faith, which turns us from ungodly to godly, we are justified
and adopted persons, which entirely throws out that legal conditionality that
among Socinians has thrown out Christ's satisfaction, and among Arminians has
impaired and delayed its virtue toward sinners, until they come with something
in themselves, a conformity to a new Law: And also Antinomianism, which is a
denomination that comprehends all Errors, dishonorable to the Law or Law
giver, and whatever Doctrine is against the necessity, stability and perfection
of the Law of God, is of this kind; whatever Doctrine removes the necessity of
the Law, removes the necessity of Christ's satisfaction, and what Doctrine
removes perfection from the Law of God, removes the Glory from God's Holiness;
but to suppose one under the Law saved, and that Law neither fulfilled nor
satisfied by the personor his Surety, is to suppose the Law changeable, not
necessary; if Christ only fulfilled the mediatorial Law, and not that we were
under, then that Law and Government bult on it was removed and changed without
satisfaction. If the grand influence of Christ's righteousness by the
Mediatorial Law was to get it changed for an easier and less perfect, we must
either say, the influence of Christ's satisfaction did terminate on the nature
of God, and make a change in his temper from anger to mercy, and perfection of
holiness to indulgence in carnality or say; that the Father and Son were of two
different minds, but the latter thorough his obedience gained him to his mind;
for what has influence on God, as Govenrour, has influence on the Law,
(Administrations of Government must be ruled by the Law) and what has influence
on the Law for our good, must fulfill its precepts or satisfy its sanction.
The Law has no other Language, and if Christ did neither, the influence must
not terminate on the Government, but on the nature God, or Fathers person in
the Godhead. But the Scripture informs us, That God sent his Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us: In us, says Vastius, by application, but in Christ by inhesion; in us by
imputation, but in Christ personally, says Calvin, Muscus, Beza, Rollock,
Fulke, Cartwright, Elton; says Dr. Jacomb, all Protestants; he adds, his active
and has passive as if they had obeyed it in their own Persons, the Law is
wholly fulfilled in him, and that very righteousness is ours in a Law sense,
and so fulfilled in us. 3ly. It overthrows Libertinism, for if the same grace
sanctifies that justifies, they can never pretend to the one that want the
other. 4ly. Popery, that makes justification and sanctification one, that
differ as far as the Category of Quality and Relation. I have no place for
futher use, than to entreat every one as they love their own souls, and long
for pardon of sin, not to quench or provoke the Holy Spirit of God, for that is
his Errand as well as sanctification. 2. As ever they would enjoy this free
spirit, be diligent and conscientious in all Ordinances, that are ministrations
of the Spirit; he is to be reciev'd in the bearing of Faith. 3. Study this
imputed righteousness of Christ, until thou experience most deep humility and
most sweet comfort from it, Romans 11.19. Thou stand by faith, be not high
minded, but fear; thou depends entirely for faith and righteousness on another,
thou wast prevented in thy ungodliness, when thou received that gift. 2. How
much will God do for thee, when thou art his Son and Servant, if he did so much
for thee when an eremy, Romans 5.9. Much more then being now justified by his
blood, we shall be saved; thou have now given to thee at once a perfect and an
everlasting righteousness, a total forgiveness of all thy sins, a work of
holiness God has engaged to perfect.

Vale.
FINIS.
Grant me this, there was never any thing so well done by man, wherein there is
not room for further industry,

Calv.

