A DECLARATION of the people of GOD in scorn called QUAKERS, TO ALL MAGISTRATES
AND PEOPLE.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased God in his wisdom which is Infinite, and by his
power which is mighty, by a way to the world unknown, within these few years to
raise up and redeem to himself in this Nation a people to serve him in his own
way, and according to his own will, that amongst them he might make his Name
known, and do for them great and terrible things amongst the Nation where they
should come, their Laws, Worship, Manners and Language being diverse from the
laws, worship, manners and language of other people; By reason whereof, and of
the false reports which the enemy of God, the lying spirit, which is in the
mouth of the false prophets and ministers of unrighteousness, they have been
rendered odious unto the people, and loaded with reproaches and false
accusations, as that they denied the Scriptures of Truth, the Church of God,
the Wo^ship of God, the Ministers of Christ, and the maintenance belonging to
the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ordinances of Christ, the Magistracy and
Magistrates, and would destroy all government, and civil relations amongst men,
with many such false aspersions; yea, so far did that lying spirit (for a time)
prevail with many, that they thought if they killed us they did God service;
yea, so far has it prevailed with many in places of authority, both Civil and
Military, that they have counted us the offscouring of the World, not sit for
any thing, except it were to be the subjects upon whom they might exercise
their cruelty, as our many cruel sufferings in this Nation and others adjacent
do manifestly declare, nothing almost befalling us in most Cities, Towns,
Villages and Steeple Houses, where we have come, but bonds, abuses and
imprisonments, insomuch that scarce any Goal within this Nation into which some
of us have not been cast; besides our being haled before Magistraces and
Rulers, and our being drawn before the Judgement-Seats in this Nation, by whom
we have suffered the imprisonment of our bodies, many till death, and the
spoiling of our goods in such an excessive manner as scarce has been heard of
before; And much of this suffering has been occasioned by those men called
Ministers of Christ, which their fruits have n^w made them manifest not to be
the Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist; And for Tithes, a Popish
institution, brought in by the Apostates in the Apostasy, since the days of
Christ and his Apostles set up, as more largely has been in several papers
published and declared for the good of all people whose hearts and desires are
after truth. And these things have we suffered in our Native Country by our
country men, not by Bishops and high commission courts, but by and from such as
had a hand in putting down those, as enemies to the peoples liberties, as men
and as Christians, and since have set up themselves and one another in high
places; but the Lord has made them as slipperie to them as they were to the
persecutors before them; neither have their things before mentioned been done
unto us for any evil we did unto them, but for conscience sake have we thus
suffered, not for any transgression of the Law of God, neither in truth of any
wholesome law of this Nation, as may appear by the things for which in the
general we have suffered; that is to say, many of us have suffered
imprisonment, and other abuses, for appearing in the Courts of this Nation in
our own persons, being thereunto commanded by Writs out of the said Courts upon
a great pain, to wit 100. l. a man, and because we could not with freedom
appear by an attorney; many more of us have been and are imprisoned in this
Nation, for no other cause, then in truth our obedience to the command of
Christ, who says, Mat. 5.34.35.36.37. Swear not at all, neither by Heaven for
it is Gods throne, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool, neither by
Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King, neither shall thou swear by
thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black, but let your yea,
be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil;
And Mat. 23.22 it is said, He that swears by Heaven, swears by the throne
of God, and that sits thereon; Now it is God that sits in Heaven, which
is his Throne, therefore Christ Jesus, forbiding to swear by Heaven which is
Gods Throne, forbideth to swear by God, or any other oath; then such judges or
others that (...) persons to swear, are in plain contradiction to command of
Christ, and in so doing, they do not judge for God, but for men. Neither have
those called Barons of the (...) any known Law of this Nation to warrant such
their actings, there being no law of this Nation, that requires any man to give
his answer upon oath, to what his accuser shall lay to his charge, neither is
there any known Law in this Nation that does give that Court of Exchequer any
cognizance of such causes as are for detention of Tithes; For it is said, No
plea shall be holden or pleaded in the Exchequer, except it do specially
concern us and our Ministers of the Exchequer. The statute of Rutland made, May
14. Anno decimo, Edw. And whereas it is alleged, that it is the Rule or
Custom of that Court, that people must answer upon oath; It is answered, that
that Rule or custom which is contrary to Law is void, and amongst the Churches
of Christ there is no such custom as swearing; and therefore must needs be a
Heathenish custom which is vain, being contrary to the command of Christ, and
another, from the Law of the Nation, or that maxim which says, No man is bound
to accuse himself. Many others of us have been unreasonably fined, imprisoned,
and otherwise persecuted (for that is persecution, when any man does suffer
for doing that which is good in obedience to God, and for refraining from that
which is evil) for keeping their hats on their heads in a Court, or before a
man called a Justice. Now there is no Law of God, or of this Nation requires
such a thing as the putting off the hat, at the command of a Judge or Justice;
for the hat as well as a cap is a covering for the head, not only for the
woman, but for the man also; and where there is no Law, there is no
transgression: And if it be said, It is due to the Magistrate by custom or
usage of the Nation; It is answered, The customs of the Nations or people are
vain, (...), and Israel was commanded of God, not to learn the customs or
manners of the Nations or Heathen whom the Lord cast out of Canaan before them;
and all customs or usages which are contrary to reason are void in Law; and
amongst the Churches of Christ there was never such a custom, neither is it
according to the Scripture (which the Judges and Justices and others call the
Rule for Christians to walk by) to put off the hat in a Court or before a
Magistrate. And if it should yet be stood upon, The putting off the hat as a
thing indifferent. It is answered, He that is offended when the hat is not put
off, when he expects it, or requires it; to him, and in his account, it is not
a thing indifferent; For then is a thing truly indifferent to a man, when a man
regards not whether be have the thing done to him or not. And others of us
have been imprisoned for speaking that which was to us revealed, and required
of us by the Lord God (the highest power) unto a man called a Minister, or to a
people in a Steeple-house or Temple made with hands, wherein God dwells not;
but in his people, whose bodies are his Temple, God does dwell, and is known in
his Sanctuary, where his voice is heard, and his will and word obeyed rather
then men who would limit the Spirit of God to times, places, and persons; but
their neither was, nor is any such custom amongst the Churches of Christ;
where, If any thing was or is revealed to him that sits by, the (...) to hold
his peace, and so all may prophecy one by one; for the (...) of the Prophets
is subject to the Prophets. Again, many of us have suffered many ways for no
other cause then meeting together in the fear of the Lord, to wait upon him and
to worship him, upon the first days of the week; Others of us have been turned
forth of our employments in the Nation, both civil and military, and rendered
incapable of such (...) employment in a Commonwealth, upon no other account,
but because we were Quakers (so called) or could not deny the people called
Quakers, although we had in faithfulness served this present Parliament, and
our Country in our several employments whilst we were permitted to continue in
them; And of late in the great Assembly and Counsels of this Nation, we have
been represented (by some) to be a people, not only to have unchristian'd, but
also unmanned our selves, as if we had made our selves incapable of any
employment wherein we might be serviceable in the Nation, thereby endeavoring
to render us not only odious, but also useless in a Commonwealth.

But for the clearing of the truth of God, as it is in Jesus, and for the
manifesting of the secret deceits of our enemies, and pretended friends, in
humility and meekness of mind, we do declare unto all; That by the receiving
the gift of God, the Light (...) Jesus, and it obeying in our hearts, which
gives knowledge and understanding to the simple, we are not thereby made
incapable nor unwilling to serve our Country and Countrymen in the lowest
employments and places that are any ways tending to the thing that is just, and
to the suppression of that which is evil, or to the procuring good unto our
Country, Contrymen and Neighbors amongst whom we sojourn; Neither do we
deny, but bear our witness too, and of the Scriptures of truth, and the Church
of God, and the Worship of God which is in the Spirit and in the Truth; and the
Ministers of Christ we own, and their maintenance, which is free, and the
Ordinances of Christ they are established amongst us, all which are known by
the Light of Christ that shines in the heart, and the higher powers we are
subject unto for Conscience sake, and Magistrates and Rulers who are not a
terror to good works but to the evil, are by us owned and honored in the
Lord, which honor stands not in flattering titles, or bowing the knee, and
putting off the hat; but in due and ready subjection to all just Commands,
according to the Apostles Doctrine, Honor all men in the Lord, and submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord sake; Now that which stands in
the Lord, and is done for the Lords sake, must be in that which is good, and
not in that which is evil, for evil is not in the Lord; for he that does evil,
he hates the Light, which is good, and he that hates that which is good, does
nothing for Christ's sake; and by the Light of Christ which shines in our
hearts, we are taught of God to love as Brethren, to obey our Parents after the
flesh, husbands are taught to dwell with their wives according to knowledge,
and wives to submit themselves unto their husbands as unto the Lord; servants
to be obedient to them that are their Masters, and all to submit themselves one
unto another in the fear of God. Neither do we desire that to our selves, which
we do not freely give and allow unto others; to wit, Liberty of Conscience;
knowing that every man must give an account unto God for himself, yet we desire
the good of all men, which we know cannot be enjoyed by any man whilst he lives
in sin and wickedness; Neither dare we practice, nor allow that in our selves,
which we witness to be evil in others; Neither do we withdraw our shoulders
from the yoke, or lay burdens upon others to ease our selves, but are made
free in the Lord, and in our spirits to serve our Country and Contrymen in
all things that are Just, in the things that are honest, in the things that are
equal, and in the things that are of good report, amongst those that truly fear
God; so we are not straightened in our selves by the Spirit of the Lord, nor
limited by the truth; from being serviceable in our generations; but we are
straightened by unreasonable men, and limited by that spirit that rules by
unrighteous laws, popish customs, and men's own wills, which stands upon oaths,
hats, cringings, and against plainness of speech; and will not suffer the
servants of God to exercise their gifts, and reprove sin in the gate.

So it is not we that have either lost our reason, unmanned or unchristian'd our
selves, being known in our Countries to be men having reason and understanding,
(though we have laid aside childish things) living and walking in a good
conversation as men and Christians, by whose example many have been turned unto
God, and have blessed God for us in the day of their visitation.

Therefore let all tongues be silent before the Lord, and his people, who are
no oppressors, nor imposers upon men's Consciences, nor devourers of Gods
creatures upon our lusts, nor time servers, nor men pleasers, neither for
advantage do we admire men's persons, nor after earthly honors or preferment do
we covet, which whilst some have coveted alter, they have made shipwreck of
Faith, and of a good conscience: But the good of all people do we seek after,
and truth and justice, and sincerity and a holy conversation, and a pure
Religion and Worship of God, which is in the Spirit and in the Truth, which the
Devil and will-worshippers are out of) and in that we are to glorify God, and
serve our generation; And all in justice, and oppression and oppressors,
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, and all false ways and false worships,
and false ministers, and false maintenance, and false churches and false
tongues we utterly deny, and bear our Testimony against with one accord, mouth
and spirit, and all persecutors who abuse the power of God, which is for the
praise of them that do well, and turns the sword backward, strengthening the
hands of the evildoers, such were always blind, and were suddenly ouerthrown
by the hand of God, which comes upon them when they are high and proud, and in
their ambition forgets God, the Lord by his hand suddenly overturns such, and
lays them low with the valleys, and sets the valleys above them. Read this in
this Nation, and do not forget the hand; for who does, by that hand will be
laid low again; But they that rule and stand in the power of God, they answer
the just principle of God in every man.

Subscribed in the behalf of our selves and the rest of our friends, who are of
one heart and mind with us. John Crook Edward Byllynge Dennys Hollister Will.
Gandy Rich. Ward Antho. Pearson John Hodson Robert Duncon Amor Stoddart Tho.
Moor. Richard Hodden Geo. Benson Geo. Watkinson Tho. Aldam John Pennyman. John
Fry.


THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


