THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD CUTTS His SPEECH TO THE MAYOR and Corporation of
Newport; AT HIS Majesty's Castle of Carisbrook In the ISLE of WIGHT, Upon the
Swearing of Captain THOMAS READ Into the Office of MAYOR, According to the
Ancient Custom and Charter of that Corporation.

LONDON, Printed by William Redmayne in Jewen-street, School.

THE Right Honorable THE Lord Cutts's Speech, etc.
Mr. Mayor and You Gentlemen,
IT is with a great deal of Satisfaction that I meet you here to day, there
being such a Union Established between Me and the Gentlemen, as well as other
Inhabitants of this Island, as surpasses that of our Predecessors, and will be
a just cause of Emulation to those that shall come after us; which is to be
attributed to the Blessing of God, and the Serene and Auspicious Reign of King
WILLIAM. I may say it with Justice, and therefore I ought to say it, no Prince
that has sat upon the English Throne has been more Successful, and no Prince
ever used his Successes with greater Moderation.

I have done every thing that is fit for me to do, to settle Matters upon a
lasting Foundation of Peace and Unity within this Island; I have examined
Records and Living Witnesses, I have advised with some of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, with several of the most Experienced and Knowing
Members of the Late Parliament, as well as with the prudentest and most
considerable Persons here in the Country; and upon this Advice and Mature
Deliberation I have endeavored to redress all Abuses, that either by Violence
or any other Methods have been introduced, and I have put all His Majesty's
Subjects of the Isle of Wight upon the same Bottom, upon which His Majesty has
been graciously pleased to put the rest of England, in which my Duty and not
any private Interest has been my Motive and Direction. And I am sure in this I
have done that which will be pleasing to the King my Master, who has done me
the Honor to commit to me the Care of this Island.

To these endeavors of mine I must confess I have met with suitable Returns
from all the Gentlemen, in the greatest Marks of Respect and Affection that are
possible, accompanied with the deepest Expressions of Duty and Loyalty to His
Majesty; and if some Discontents and Animosities (which have lately happened in
Your Corporation) were removed; I could say, to the great Reputation of this
Island, that (as to the Concerns of the Public) we were all of one Mind, and
in Peace and Unity within our selves.

I shall not intermeddle (however) with any Differences that have happened
about the Affairs of your Corporation (though I have heard something of it;)
But thus much I am obliged to say, not only as your Governor, but as a
Christian, and an English Man, that every good Man, and every honest Man,
should have his Eyes upon such Persons (if any such should be found) as
Sacrifice the Affairs of the Public to their own private Interest or Passions,
or as love Contention for Contention's sake, such Persons whenever their Party
grows to any strength are more dangerous than public Enemies.

Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen,

There is one thing which I do most earnestly recommend to your serious
consideration and diligent care, and that is the suppressing (as much as
possibly you can) Profaness and Immorality. The unspeakable Disorders and
Extravagancies of this Age, and the Impudence with which Men of ill Principles
do every day attack the very Foundation of our Religion, have made the KING
think it necessary to recommend these matters from the Throne to the great
Council of the Nation His Parliament; The Parliament have expressed their Sense
of it in an Humble Address to His Majesty, and by passing an Act Pursuant
thereunto; and it is indispensibly your Duty to God and Man, to your King and
Country (and of every Member of your Corporation) to be Serious, Vigilant, and
Active, on this Occasion. It will be no new thing to tell you (and therefore I
only put you in mind of it) that the Accounts of all Histories, as well as the
Experience of all Mankind, agree in the Confirming of this Truth; that Religion
and Virtue promote the Happiness and Reputation of every Body-polltick, and
that Irreligion and Debauchery are the Causes of their Misfortune and Disgrace.
Let us make use of our Authority; and (every one of us) add the force of our
own Example to it; and I pray God enable me always to show you the way.

FINIS.

