A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Sufferings and Relief OF A YOUNG GIRL; Strangely
Molested, By Evil SPIRITS and their INSTRUMENTS, in the WEST: COLLECTED From
Authentic Testimonies there-anent. WITH A PREFACE and POSTSCRIPT

Containing Reflections on what is most Material or Curious; either in the
History, or Trial of the SEVEN WITCHES who were Condemned to be Execute in that
Country.

JOB 2.6. And the Lord said unto Satan, behold he is in thine hand; but save
his life.

MATH. 15.22. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my Daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil.

ROMANS 16.20: And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly.

EDINBURGH, Printed by JAMES WATSON in Craig's Closs, on the North-side of the
Cross. M.DC.XCVIII.

PREFACE.
WISE Men do justly suspect, and are hardly brought to credit, the Accounts of
extraordinary Stories; especially anent Witchcraft: Because the frequent
impostures which the Romanists have obtruded on the World in their Miracles and
Legends; the many Relations of odd things as done by Demons or Wizards, which
yet, were either false, or the product of simple natural causes; the ignorance
of several Judges and Juries, who have condemned silly Creatures ^eerly upon
their ridiculous Confessions, or other slender proof; and the difficulty of
conceiving the Manner or Philosophy, of some Operations and Appearances, tho
undoub^^dly true in Fact; are good prejudices against a Sudd^n belief, and
precautions for an exact Inquiry.

But they are Men of weak Souls, destitute of distinct thoughts; who deny all,
because they have discovered Error in some; or condemn as false, all facts,
which they are ignorant how they came to exist: By the same rule of reasoning
that, there are no Enthusiasts, because the best Men have been some times
mistaken for these; nor are there any Criminals, in respect severals have
suffered who were not truly such: considering, that many Historys are
fabulous, therefore none is to be trusted: And all the Phaenomena's in Nature,
whose invisible causes they cannot comprehend, are mere Delusions.

The following narrative, as to the truth of Fact, is the best attested piece
of History of this kind, that has occurred in many Ages: the most of the
matters therein represented having gained the assent of private Scepticks; and
been proven before public Judges. So that it is more surprising than the
strange things of Witchcraft that any should seriously deny the Being thereof,
and from thence discredit such useful Providence at a distance, when Notoriety
has dispelled all Objections in the places where they did exist.

Many Authors have proven, at large, that there are Witches and witchcraft from
Reason, Scripture, Antiquity, and Experience or all Nations and Ages in the
World: And they have solved the difficultys which might obstruct the belief of
this positive proof, by possible Hypotheses of Philosophy: Where it is to be
observed, that tho any such explications of the natural manner of Phenomena's
are subject to cavil, yet the existence of a thing which has so certain
positive Evidence cannot be denied in sound Reasoning; because, Angels, and Men
not being made for civil converse together in this World, and all communion
with Devils being interdicted us, the Scripture needed to unfold little of
their way of acting; and still the next Age, may discover what this could not
reach, As this has already unveiled what was thought unextricable in the Last:
Unless Impossibility were presently demonstrate.

Herefore such a short hint, as may somewhat Illustrat the Events in the
subsequent discourse, may suffice in the present Case: Especially since
Providence does, by eminent occurrences, rather design our practical
instruction, then a Subject of national Speculations.

The Devil can assume a corporeal Shape, and bespeak Man out of it: As he did
to Eve, with our SAVIOR, and in some Heat^^^ Oracles: So that there is
Capacity for their entering into Contract. Satan is willing thus to ensure
mortals of being enemies to Heaven, Earth, and their own Salvation; by his
indefatigable malice against all the three: As Curiosity in Wits; Reve^ge, and
Disclosure of Secrets in the great; covetousness in the Wordling or ^o^r, and
^^^ures in all whom he thinks n^^^full (they being impregnable otherways) and
is permitted by GOD, to att^que in this manner; does sufficiently blind them,
to be Susceptible of his Proposals thereanent. We see daily, how Criminals
^^sts inflamed by Satan, divert their Horror no^ only of ^ternal, but also of
temporal i^^mmene^t Torments: Perverting these instincts of Nature which might
fright them from su^^ender. But further, he does commonly facilitate his
conquest on Witches, by decoying them Piece-ma^e to his Lure, through the
mediation of Others from among Mankind that are already embarked, till they
be prepared and he get an opportunity of making with them an explicit
Transaction.

That accordingly he has defacto prevailed in making Sorcerers and Witches,
appears from the Testimony of the Wisest and ^est, in all States and Times.

The Heathens, by Nature and Practice, discovering this truth, made Laws
against Male^^^^ and Mathematic^'s (these last tho they assumed the name of an
art much ^^couraged by the Legislators; yet were known, under the Cloak
thereof, to consult the Devil anent the fates of Men and States) which the
Roman Senate and People did ex^cut^: And even the P^rsians, in some good
Reigns, did the like. Under the Old Test^ment, the Magi^cia^s of Egypt and
Babylon, who were baffled by Moses and D^niell; Balaam and the VVitch of ^^d^^,
with the success of both; yea, Jesabel, Manasseth, and the ten Tribes their
just Judgment for their Sorceties and VVitchcrafts amongst other Crimes; and
the Laws made ^^ainst such, as distin^^ ^om other Guilts: Under the New
Te^ament, S^mon Magus who bewitched the People of Samaria; Elima^ the Sorcerer
that was struck blind at Paul's R^buke; the Pyth^nisse who seems to have been
possessed of consent, because she was not Tormented, but g^t profit thereby; and
such as confessed, showed their Deeds, and burnt their Books in Ephesus: Are
undeniable instances hereof. Finally there are prophesies of False-Christs with
sigu^ and wonders, able to deceive, if posible, the very Elect: General
Councils have made Canons against these VVretches: And the
experimental-K^owledge of injured Mortals, with the public Sentences which
did vindicate the same; in subsequent Ages, are delivered down to us by the
VVriters thereof.

Hence Gulielmus Linensis, a Popish Doctor, was justly put to Death, even though
he dyed penitent, he having confessed VVitchcraft (whereof the written Covenant
was found in his pocket) and that his share of the Devils Service was to
persuade and preach that Witches were only silly deluded Melancholians,
whereby their Confessions were no proof. His success was such in this work of
Darkness, that the People and Judges did Slack, and Witches were va^^ly
multiplied in few Years. vid. Pet: Mamorius de Lamiis, who gives an account of
the Process, from authentic Records.

Through these periods, it is observed, that Satan has often shifted the Scene,
and turned himself to many Shapes, as he found it most accomodat to his
purposes: Whereby the manner of Apparition of Devils has been different,
according to the state of the times. So of old, Satan appeared, and was
worshipped, as such for deprecating his Mischief: which is said to be retained
in some of the most barbarous places of the Indies to this day. In the darkness
of Popery he transformed into a more innocent Spirit (that pretended to fortell
Deaths, reveal the Defuncts will, discover ocult mur^ers, do other friendly
Offices, etc. Which were subtle means of ^^ducing to him, and relying on him)
in the Br^unies and Phairies. These were then very frequen^, he having
impuden^^ thus to appear openly propo^tional to the knowledge of Men, over whom
his reign was so universal: As ^t is related to continue in the more Northern
Regions at this day. But since Light has broke out in our Horison, he oft^er
works externally by Magicians and Witcher, and internally on the lusts of Men,
being now mostly restrained to his own Sphere or Subjects. Yet still he
ensnares ^e^erals, partly, by ^ping the Ordinances of GOD; especially as they
are corrupted in the Romish Church, whence so many Monks and Nuns as already
prepared, have been found overcome. So he keeps with them public Assemblys in
the Night as of extraordinary m^^it* They formally worship him by many mimicall
Gestures: He imprints on them a kind of Sacrament: He inflicts dreadful
Penances on such as have not execute the commanded mischeifs: He teaches them
odd words and signs, upon repeating of which Exorcisms, he (it being his
interest) effectuats the fore pa^ti^ned Op^rations etc.

But though what he does of himself, or on the Watchword or Ensign of
Sorcerers or Witches, may, by collection, and artful disposal of Matter and
Form; appear surprising: Yet he cannot work against Nature; or so apply Actives
to Pas^ives, as to overturn the Course thereof; since that is only competent to
its Author who alon can do true Miracles, or know immediately, the thoughts of
Man. ^ea, after the Fall it is like, that even Satan's natural Powers are come
down below those of good Angels; and it is certain, that he is often befoole^
in his Designs by Providence: Notwithstanding whereof, he retains so much as
(being permitted) is sufficient to bring about, by unseen natural Means, most
of the extraordinary Appearances, that the Generality of the Learned have
attributed to him: And particularly those in the subsequent Narrative: Many of
which, though they are beyond the Efficiency of Disease, Decert, or any visibl^
Cause; yet may be the Effects of some such unperceived Means as follow.

There is no difficulty in Satan's transmitting in a short time an Account of
Things which are past; since it is known he goes to and fro in the Earth: Ye^,
he may have certainly fore told some future Events, as ^lexander's Succes^
against Persia, etc. seeing he understands and may steal, the great Revolutions
of the World, out of the Prophets; wherein they are so graphically
circumscribed* Or he may discover his own Resolutions whenever he is
commissioned or or perm^tt^d to execute a Judgment; which is the case of those
whom, for seeking their Horoscops, GOD gives over to him to whom they do apply;
and of Saul, who got so exact an account of his own End by the Philistines. But
without some such aid, Satan can only guess like the Phisician by the V^ine, or
Politician by the Crisis of States: which is the Cause that most of his Oracles
are ambiguous.

His transporting of Witches is elsewhere explained. He can raise Hurri^anes
(as appears in Job) which are known to carry over Tracts of Sea and Land, very
ponderous Bodies: As it is easy for him to Condense a part of the Vechicle: which
may pro^^ct the B^eathing and yet cut the Air; like the Fence of Dyvers, and
beak of a Sloop: In which also he affects the magnifying of his natural Powe^^
to be no less than of good Angels, who transported Ezekiel and Elijah. His
covering of the Witches from si^ht, at some times, is also cleared, from the
difficultys which seem to attend it, in another place: Where it appeats v^ry
p^ss^^^ that his skill in Optics, Reslection and Refraction of ^ight etc. To
which his Power and Agility as a Spirit Subministrats Materials: may effectua^
all that can be proven to be true Fact in the Case.

But Glanvil, More and others lay an other H^pothesis in both. viz. That the
Soul is s^parable from the Body in some Cases, without Death. When by God's
Permission, Satan, of the parties Consent, gets power over Soul and Body;
whereby he may carry away the ^ne from the Heim of the other, and set it back
again in it is Seat; providing the vital S^irits which make the Body a fit
Receptacle, be well preserved by Ointments, that c^^strict the Pores, till the
return of it is Guest: But Death ensues from a Separat^^n when the Organs of the
Body are rendered ^ltogether ^^^pt to obey the Sou^^ Commands in its ^unctions
If such an opinion could be true, Sat^^ might place this captivated Spirit to
actuat any shape he thinks fit. But there needs not so much Metaphy^cks to
unridle the Appea^ances of Witches as Beasts, and the like: Since their real
^ers^ns may be ^^vered with a Vehicle; which by d^sp^sal of the Rays coming
therefrom, may fascinat the Eyes by the same Impres^ions that come from the
true sight o^ such. His power of representing another thing indien of that
which is truly present; is so certain that its found he may make up the Image
of persons who are not present at all: For it is undoubted that Spiritual
Devils may some times be permit^ed to represent by Phantom* the most innocent
and praise worthy Men, as Devils inca^nat do traduce them. He that accuses the
Brethren and imitats an Angel of light, may likeways personat the Children of
Light by his Delusions: Yet the Ame^^dents, Concomitants, and Cons^quents, of
such providence, do readily pr^p^le the Falsbood; so as the just man, for the
most part, shall not perish in his Righteousness, and GOD, in his ordinary
Providence, will not la^gh at the trial of the ^nnocent; tho sometimes it fall
out, that the Sons of Belial may swear away the life of an inn^cent N^both.

There are several other things of less difficult Explic^tion. Particularly,
the Devil, or Witches might have been heard in ^onverse by the Maid and not by
Others; the some way as a sound directed through a spea^ieg Tr^m^et does reach
the Ears to which it is aimed without dispersing toward the intermediat, that
are not in a straight line betwixt. The confederated Devil may, upon the W^ches
desire, infuse poiso^ous Humors, extracted from Herbs* of the same ^^v^sib^e
Op^r^ti^n with the Steem of Madd-dogs, or the Pest^lence; which being joyn^d to
the rapidous course of the Patient's own Spirits, Humors, and B^ood, that
Satan, by i^gyring himself thereunto, may, through the natural Means of
Puls^on, set in Ca^reer: Can very well produce these extra^rdinary Motions
which are mentioned in the following Acount. They delight ^uch in the Torture,
or destruction, of young Children, in envy of CHRIST, who is tender of such*
Little Ones; and because the Crime is the greater the less the Patient has
offended, or can re^ift. They use, or make others to repeat, Scripture-w^rds,
for g^ining Credit, or ^llov^ating the Terror, or to disgrace the Word, by such
a Mock-use^ as they did in time of our SAVIOR, and therefore their Testimony
was rebuted. It Is observable from many passages; that he hastens, sometimes,
and effects their Discovery; by his Malice against their pr^sent temporal
Enjoyments; uncertainty of their Continuance; and unsati^ble Desire for their
sull wreck: Yet some of them, who, are most maliciously bent, he thinks fit to
keep here, as useful instruments; and Providence permitts others to Live, that
they, wilfully filling up their measure, under Means, may be finally
inexcusable.

As to those whom, in secret Judgment, the Devil is permitted to torment; but,
in Mercy, not to overcome: He may be carried thereunto from his design of
perverting them by Terror, whereof he is at last disappointed: And however, the
defacing of GOD's Image, and especially in despite of JESUS CHRIST Who
honored that Nature by assuming it, is his chief Delight: or he is constrained
to make such stupendous Appearances against his Will (because he is most
successful when he is least known) for a visible Testimony supe^added to the
greater Gospel-proofs, in gross times, that there are Spirits and a Devil to
torment them, as it is observable that this was denied by Mr. Alkenhead (tho he
died in full Conviction thereof) at the time when these things fell out in the
Country. Or Providence may tollerat such Sufferings, that they* though intended
by ^he Devil for an instance of Malice, may, by their N^ttoriety, be a mean of
moving the ^iscovery, and bringing to Justice these Miscrea^^, whom he made ^se
of as his Instrument^ in them; and who may have lived long in Rebellion against
Heaven, and Destruction of Mankind by Malefices of the same sort; which fell
out in this Case. Fin^lly, the abundant and efficacio^^ Grace of God
^^^onspicuous in ^^^bling a young Girl to resist the bestlaid Assanl^^ of the
evil Orie to the utmost. As it is certain that he shows the greatest Malice in
Countries where he is ^^ted and hates most; and the nearer his Reign be to an
End.

There are many other pr^sitable Instructions which arise from this wonderful
Providence, for such Dispensations have their own Language, and the Man of
Wisdom shall see GOD's Name.

The ^sag^s of Charme^ for Men or Bea^^, certain Characters, Words, Verses, and
Spells: The observation of Times and Seasons as lucky, or u^lucky: The ^ele^^
of having S^^cers by car^ying about some Herbs, Plants, or branches of ^^ees:
And many the like S^p^rstit^^ns; which can have no natural Causali^y (...) the
effects desired, are the very R^diments of Witchcraft, and an implicit^
application to the Devil for virtues which GOD has denied to things: Whence
they are to be abhored ^ored as sinful in themselves, and introd^ctory to
explicit engadgment. So gross ignorance, profane looseness, stupi^
forgetfulness of GOD, and neglect of his worship in Closets and Familys;
Malice, Envy, Reve^ge, Disco^tent, oppressive sear of want, and distrustful
anxiety of Spirit: Finally, a Libidi^o^^ ^emper, Curses, Imprecations, and
sinful Cu^iosity, art to be cyited as paving the way to the same mischief.

Let none enveigh against a pr^fession of Religion, because some under that
specious covert have been found in League with the Devil. It Is because of the
glorious Luster and Excellency of our Holy Faith that these Miscreant^ paint
themselves with it; whereby like wise they may be less suspected, and most
able, subtily to gain on others, and do their Masters work: So it was no s^^in
on the Apostles that O^e of their number had a Devil, was a Traitor and Cheat:
Nor that Satan transformes himself into an Angel of Light, of design that the
good ways of the LORD may be evil spoken of Neither let us be under a ^^arish
F^^r and Terror of that Hellish T^ibe, in truckling to their Humor, least they
should do Harm, which savours of worshipping and paying homage to the Dev^^;
whereas we ought only to make the Lord of Hosts our Fear and our Dread.

There is no just ground to reflect on particular Persons or Families upon
account of such troubles. For no Man k^^weth either Love or Hatred by All
that is before them: All things come alike to All: And suppose ye that these
were Sinners above all the Gu^r^ea^s, or above all that dwelt in Jerusalem? The
infinite wise GOD may thus try Faith, Patience, and Christian Fortitude Job and
our SAV^OU^ were ass^^lted; and seven Devils cast out of Mary Magdelen a chosen
Vesiel unto the LORD. A Daughter of Abr^ham was bound by Satan for eighteen
Years; and his Messen^er was sent to Buffer the great Apostle of the Gea^^les.
The Woman of Can^an, ^ath. 15 c. 22. v. And the godly Man. Mark 9.24 v. Had
their nearest Relations vexed in this manner: And blessed be the LORD that has
left such instances in Record for Prevention of stumbling; though it must be
confes^ed that the same C^arity which judges well of all things, cannot but
alter it is r^^ark when it is proof is s^fficiently clear from the way in which
the person affected did formerly walk, since presumptions do alway^ cede to
Truth, and Lawiers have a Maxim, that in re clara non est locus conject^^is.

The deaf Adder that stope^ the Ears at the charming voice of a Sun shine
Gospel, will, one way or other, fall into the charms of Satan or his
instruments When Men will have none of CHRIST, he gives them up to their own
Lusts, and power of their spiritual Adversary; as, when Israel had f^rthook
their GOD, he gave them up to worship the Host of Heaven. But how much ought we
to be humbled, and how great Diligence ought to be used in the discovery, of so
many hid Ath^ns that are in the Camp of Israel! And what holy caution and pious
use of out Baptismal Covenant, ought we to improve as the best Amulits against
being either Entysed with the snares of the Devil, or affected by the attempts
of his Instruments. Yet Poverty, Age, or Features, of any; yea nor simple fame
or the like slender grounds, which could not be worthy of being represented to
a Magistrate; ought not to move us to Suspicion, much lest to defa^^^: Since
Charity hopes all things, and we ought to do to others, as we would be done by.

These things may meet with a very different Reception, especially in this
unhappy Age and place of the World, where Britain may be termed the unfort^^^^
Island, Af^^ck never having been more Fertile in the production of, Monsters:
since it is observed that through All the Successions of Me^, there was never
before, any Society or collective Body of Atheists* till these dr^ggs of time;
though there might have been here and there some mishappen Births. But wisdom
is justified of her Children, and it is the Season for S^^s^^ to awake when
Delilah gives the Alaru^, that the Philis^^ns are upon him* What peace? so long
as the Who^^domes of Jesebel and her Witchcrafts are so many. But good things
are hoped of our Magistrates, who have already so happily begun.

The Apostle said of Job's Trials, ye have heard of the patience of Job, and
have seen it he End of the LORD. So in this Narrative, you have a deplorable
Schem of this Maids formidable Fitts, and of the powers of Darkness that
combined, not only for ruining her Body; but also for murdering her Soul. In
the mean time, the Hearts of many were bleeding for her, and much Application
was made to GOD in her behalf: Diverse solemn Fasts were observed, both in her
Fathers Family, in the Paroch, and throughout the hounds of the Presbitry* and
elsewhere, her Case was expressly minded in public Addresses to the Throne of
Grace: Till at length there was a general Fast Reilgiously kept in most parts
of the Sy^^d; that GOD might give an effectual Check to Satan's Rage and
Dominion in the Country. Boasting of Prayers is to be abhorred, yet it is our
Duty with all Gratitude, to acknowledge GOD the hearer, and to proclaim to the
World, the Excellency, of them; upon this very occasion: For He has not turned
away his Ear from Us; it being the comfortable Result of this History, that the
Girl^ has been perfectly well for many Months: And is not this a Brand plucked
out of the fire; and have not the splintres wherewith the Witches thought to
have destroyed her, recoiled back upon some of themselves; and we wait
execution of justice on the rest.

The Devil could not enter the Herd of Swine, nor touch one Hair of Job's Head,
without Permission from Him Whose Kingdom rules over all: Whence though our
Enemies be very Indefatigable and Invisible, yet we are under the Conduct of
the Watchman Who neither slumbers nor sleeps; to Whom Darkness and Light are
both alike; and greater is He that is in us, than he that is in the World: So
that unless we wilfully forfeit our Privileges, there is no fear of
Counter-^oising the wicked Ones, throwing down the Gantlett to all their
Projects and Machin^tions; since neither Angels, Principa^i^^es, nor ^^^e^,
shall be able to separat us from the Love which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD:
And though no Algument can be d^wn from any Merit in^ns; yet we'll carry the
day against all the Militia of Hell under the Captain of our Salvation; since
he will rest in His own Love. Is this the manner of Man, O Lord God? yet a
little while the Devil and his Accomplices, will be cast into the bottomless
Pit, and we transported into Imanuel's land.

It will not be a natural sturdiness of Temper, nor a lifeless Menti^ning of
the Name of GOD or CHRIST, that can shelter us from those ^evourers, as appears
in the Seven Sons of Sceva, Acts 19. but if the LORD o^ GOD then follow Him;
for who is he that will harm you if ye be Fol^o^ers of tha^ w^^^h^^t go^^: he
shall give His Angels Charge of thee to keep thee in all thy Ways: Great ^eace
have they that love Thy L^w, and nothing shall offend them: And they wrestle
most success^ully against Principalities and Powers* who f^ght upon their
Knees: As resisting of the Devil is the way to make him flee frou^ us.

Yet whom Satan cannot obtain to be tortured hereafter he will (when permitted
torment in this side of time; hence if obsessions of Bodies be so gre^t^ plag^e*
how much worse is it to have him reign Master of our Souls: Where^o^e let us
watch and pray against every Sin, the least of which is more Pleasing to Him
and worse to Us then the being so corporally tormented.

If Satan as a Spint may insinuat himself into our Humors; no wonder that by
having such advantage in the temper, he can influence the Phlegmatic to Sloth,
the Choleric to Anger, the Sanguin to Lust and sinful pleasure, the
Melancholic to Despair, etc. So they who think that they stand have need to
take heed lest they fall: And to pray* that the Watchman of Israel may make an
Hedge about them and their House and about all that they have on every side

Let this not only rouse our Diligence and stir up our Gratitud^ for not being
affected alike: But let it also recall our Admiration and love of JESUS CHRIST
who has freed our Souls and B^dys from the power and Slavery of Satan: And
finding our selves too weak for him in awarding these deluding pleasures which
procure our being deserted by GOD, and are Satan's Baits to this fearful
Thraldom; let us run to the Rock of Ages for Protection and support, our
Sufficiency being only of GOD.

Seeing there are Witches and Devils, there are also immortal Souls of the
first* since the last does contract for them, and takes such Pains to ^^tain
them: So that the Soducce's tho they have a judicial blindness in their reason,
are hereby rendered inexcusable by very sense Evil Books which stir up and
ensnare curious Fantasi^s, that are seldom accompanied with accurrat Judgments
(the Soul's looking out ward diverting it from dyving into the deepth of truth)
are to be restrained: And also such ridiculous ^amphlets as ^o doubt by the
Instigation of Satan, have lately been sent abroad, of design to frustrat any
good use which might be made of such rare Providence as are contained in the
ensueing Narrative, by Forging Others, or Disguising thi^,

This has been delayed so long to be published; partly, that there might be the
more narrow Scrutiny made into the Matters of Fact; and partly, by some
Accidents which did retard it. In it the Reader is not to expect any Accuracy
of S^ile; because the designed Curtness did occasion the wraping up of much
Matter in small ^ounds; and the punctual Exactness of Truth in every
Circumstance was the chief ^im: So that other Defects ought to be the less
quarrelled.

THE NARRATIVE
IT was about the end of August One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, when the
first Rise and Occasion was given, (so far as can be known) to these strange
Things that befell the Child, who is the Subject of this Narrative; and the
Manner was thus.

Christian Shaw, Daughter to a Gentleman of good account called John Shaw Lord
of Bargarran, in the Parish of Erskine, within the Shire of Renfrew; a smart
lively Girl, and of good Inclinations, about Eleven Years of Age, perceiving
one of the Maids of the House, named Catharine Campbel, to steal and drink some
Milk, she told her Mother of it; whereupon the Maid Campbel (being a young
Woman of a proud and revengeful Temper, and much addicted to Cursing and
Swearing upon any light occasion, and otherways given to Pur^oining) did, in a
most hideous Rage, thrice imprecat the Curse of GOD upon the Child; and at the
same time did thrice utter these horrid words, The Devil harle (that is Drag)
your Soul through Hell. This ^ast upon Monday, August 17. in presence of several
Witnesses, who afterward made Evidence of it.

Upon the Friday following, being August 21. about Sunrising, one Agnes
Naismith, an old Widow woman, ignorant, and of a Malicious Disposition,
addicted to T^reatnings, (which sometimes were observed to be followed with
fatal Events) who lived in the Neighborhood, came to Barga^^an's House; where
finding the Child Christian in the Court with her younger Sister, she asked How
the Lady and young Child did, and how old the young sucking Child was; to which
Christian replied, What do I know? Then Agnes asked, How her* self did, and how
old the was; to which she answered, that she was well, and in the eleventh Year
of her Age.

On the Saturnday-night thereafter, being August 22. the Child went to Bed in
good health; but so soon as she fell asleep, began to struggle and cry, Help,
Help: And then suddenly got up, and did fly over the top of a Refting-bed,
where she was lying (her Father, Mother, and others being in the Room, and to
their great Astonishment and Admiration) with such violence, that probably her
Brains had been dashed out, if a Woman, providentially standing by, and
supported by a Door at her back, had not broke the force of the Child's motion;
who being laid in another Bed, remained stiff and insensible as if she had been
dead, for the space of half an Hour; but for Forty eight Hours thereafter
could not sleep, crying out of violent Pains through her whole Body* and no
sooner began to sleep or turn drowsy but seemed greatly affrighted, crying
still Help, Help.

After this the pain fixed in her left Side, and her Body was often so bent and
rigid, as she stood like a Bow on her Feet and Neck at once, and continued
without power of Speech, except in some very short intervals, for eight days;
during which time, she had scarce half an Hours intermission together, the Fits
taking her suddenly, and both coming on and going off by a Swerff or short
deliquium, but appeared perfectly well and sensible in the Intervals.

But about the middle of September, her fits returned in a manner differing from
the former, wherein she seemed to fight and strugle with some thing that was
invisible to spectators, and her Action appeared as if she had been defending
her self from some who were assaulting or attempting to hurt her, and this with
such force that four strong Men were scarcely able to hold her; and when any of
the People present touched any part of her Body* she did cry and schreek with
such vehemence, as if they had been killing her, but could not speak

Before this time as she was seized with the trouble, her Parents had called
for Physicians from Pas^^y, viz. John White Apothecary a near relation, and
afterward Doctor Johnstoun; who took Blood and applied several things both at
first, and afterward, without any discernable Effect upon the Patient either to
the better or worse: And she all the while of these Later Fitts being afflicted
with extraordinary ^^^ings and fallings of her Belly; like the motion of a pair
of Bellows! and such strange movings of her Body as made the whole Bed she lay
on shake, to the great consternation of Spectators.

Some days thereafter was an alteration in her Fitts, so far, that she got
speaking, during the time of them; and while she was in the fits, fell a
crying, that Katharine Campbel and Agnes Nasmith were cutting her side, and
other parts of her Body; Which parts were in that time violently Tormented And
when the fit was over she still averred, that she had seen the same Persons
doing the same things which she complained of while under the fit (it being
remarkable that in the intervals she was still as well and sensible as ever and
would not believe but that others present saw them at well as she! In this
condition she continued with some but not very considerable variation either as
to the fits or intervals, for the space of a Month.

After which time she was con^eighed to Glasgow, where Doctor Bir^bane a
Phisician deservedly famed for skill and experience, did by Mr. Henry Mar^hell
apothecary apply Medicine to her; after which having stayed in Glasgo^ about
ten days and being brought home to the Country, she had near a fortnights
intermission But then her fits returned, with this difference, that she knew
when they were acoming by a pain in her left side, which she felt before they
come, and in these Fits her Throat was prodigiously drawn down toward her
breast, and her Tongue back into her Throat; her whole Body becoming stiff and
extended as a Dead Corpse without sense or motion: And some times her Tongue
was drawn out of her Mouth over her Chin to a wonderful length, her Teet^
setting together so fast upon it, that those present were forced to thrust
something betwixt her Teeth for saving her Tongue. And it was often observed that
her Tongue was thus tortured when she essayed to Pray. And in this condition
she was for some time, with sensible intervals wherein she had perfect health,
and could give a full account of what she was heard to utter while in the Fit.
For several days these Fits continuing with some variation, her Parents
resolved to return her to Glasgow, that she might there have the more
convenience of being under the Doctors Oversight and Care, for further
discerning the nature of her trouble and making use of the most probable
natural remedies. But being on ^er ^^y in her Grand-mothers house at Northbar,
she did thrust or spit out of her mouth porcels of Hair, some curled, some
plaited, some knotted, of different colors, and in large quantities: And thus
she continued to do with several swooning Fits every quarter of an hour, both
in her passage to Glasgovv which was by Boat on Thursday, Nor. twelfth: And
when she was in Glasgovv for the space of three days ensuing ^^e put^s
frequently hair out of her Mouth and in as great quantities, as the first day;
her former swerfing or swooning Fits recurring as often t^orow out the day as
before: And thereafter from Monday to Thursday following she put out of her
Mouth Coal-cinders about the bign^ss of Chast^uts, some whereof were so hot
that they could scarcely be handled, one of which Dr. Birsbane being by her
when she took it out of her Mouth, felt to be ho^e^ then the heat of any ones
body could make it. Then for the space of two days in these swooning Fits, as
formerly, there was put or taken out of her Mouth straw in great quantities,
tho but one straw at once folded up together which when put out returned to its
length, was found to be both long and broad, and it was remarkable that in one
of them there was a little small pin found. Thereafter were put out of her
mouth bones of various sorts and sizes, a bones of Fowls and small bones of the
heads of Kine and then some small sticks of Candle firt (a sort of Fin in this
Country th^^ burns like Candle) one of which was about three or four inches
long; which, when any, upon sight of either bones or sticks took hold of to
pull out, they found them either held by her Teeth set together upon them, or
for^ibly drawn back into her Throat; particularly ^^^chibald Bon^ati^e of
Kelli^ younger observing a bone in her mouth like a duck shank or le^ bone, and
essaying to pull it out, he declared be found something drawing it back into
her throat; so that it took a deal of force to get it pulled out. It is to be
noticed that she never knew how these things were bro^ght into her mouth, and
when they were got out of it she immediately recove^ed of her fit, for that
time. After this she put out of her mouth some quantity of unclean Hay
intermixed with dung, as if it had been taken out of a Dunghill; which was so
stinking that the Damsel could not endure the nauseating taste and vile relish
those things produced in her mouth, which did necessitate her still to rinse
her mouth with Water after the putting of that sort of matter out of it. Then
for more then a days space she put out of her Mouth a number of wild fowls
feathers; after that a gravel-stone which in the judgment of beholders had been
passed by some person in a gravel fit; with some small whitestones and a whole
nut gall (wherewith they use to dye and to make ink) together with lumps of
Candle grease, and egg-shells; during which time she continued as formerly in
her recurring swooning fits with some intervals wherein she was in perfect
health: Of all which there were many Famous Witnesses who in that City (besides
those who were continually with her) came frequently to visit her.

It is to be noticed, that the Damsel at the time of the putting out of her
Mouth the Sticks abovementioned being in Bed about eight a Clock at Nig^t,
told, she was to be grievously tormented with sore Fits that Night, which
accordingly fell out: For a little thereafter, she fell into along swoon,
wherein she had no use of any Sense, either of Hearing, Seeing, or Feeling, so
as the often times the Beholders called to her with a loud Voice, moving also and
tossing her body, all was to no purpose, and when the Lord of Kelly younger
abovenamed, to try the Truth, gave her a very sore pinsh in the Arm, she had no
Sense of it in the time After recovery from the Swoon! but yet continuing in
the Fit) she fell a reasoning with Katharine Campbel after this manner, Thou
sit'st there with a ^uck in thy Hand to put in my Mouth; but through GOD's
strength thou shall not get leave: Thou art permitted to Torment me; but I
trust in GOD, thou shall never get my Life, tho it is my Life thou design'st And
at the time call^ng for a Bible and Candle, said, come near me Katie, and
I'^^^^t he see where a godly Man was given up to Satan to be Tormented: But
GOD kept his Li^em His own Hand: And so I trust in GOD, thou shall never get
my Life, and all that thou shall be permi^ted to do unto me, I hope through
GOD's mercy, shall turn to my Advantage. This Man was Robbed of All, and
Tormented in Body, and had nothing left him but an ill Wife. Come near me
Ka^^e, and s'lread it to thee "And teaching that Passages (...) Job. when she
came to the place where hu Wife said to him Curse GOD and Die, that Damsil
considering these words a^^tle, said? O! what a Wife has this been, that bids,
her Good man Carse God and Die? she who should have been a comfort to him in
his Trouble, turned a Cross to him? Then after reading of the Chapter to the
end, she ^^kt toward the foot of the Bed and sa^d. No^ Katie, what think
thou of that? Thou see, for all the power the Devil got over Job he gained no
Ground on him; and I hope he shall gain as little on me. Thy Master the Devil
deceives thee, he is a bad Master whom thou serv'st, and thou shall find it to
thy Smart, except thou Repent before thou Die; there is no Repentance to be had
after Death: I Will let thee see Katie, there is no Repentance in Hell, And
turning over the ^ook ^^^ng ^uk: 16. Chap. n^ar the letter end thereof, and
reading the samen over, said, Katie thou see there is no Repentance in Hell,
for this Rich Man besought Abrabam to testify to his five Brethren, that they
come not to the place of Torment, where he was; but Repent and turn to the
LORD, for there is no winning out if once they come there; no Katie, thou
hear'st this, what think thou of it I Will le^ thee hear another place which
should pierce thy very Heart, And turning over the Book, sa d ^h^ would re^d
about Adam and Eve t^h^r, thou know Katie, the serpent the Devil thy Master,
thought to have ruined Mankind at the beginning, his Malice was so great at
that blessed State wherein they were then, seeing himself cast down from all
hopes o^ Mercy, used all means possible for him to subvert their happiness, by
suggesting to them fair Promises, and a prospect of Advantage to them before
their Eyes, in causing them Eat of that forbidden Fruit; whereby they and their
Posterity fell from that Estate wherein they were; and were made Subject to
GOD's Curse for ever: But GOD did not suffer them to be at this stance, but of
his infinite Mercy showed to them a better way, whereby they might have Life
Eternal by revealing to them that blessed Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Hea^ of a the Serpent. Now Katie, what think thou of that
Promise? But have mind of this, thou it get no Advantage by it, it is not made
to thee, who have renounced GOD's Service, and taken on with the Devil; thou
art his Slave, thou deny'st this; but I know thou art a Hypocrite; for I
remember, when thou wast in my Mothers House, thou bought a Catechism, upon a
pretense to learn to Read, to cloak thy Sin: Will It thou hear me, know thou
the reward of the Hypocrit? I Will let thee hear it; I remember Mr. W lliam
Gill^es was Lecturing the other day upon the 23 of Matthew, where many a woe is
pronounced against the Hypocrit, Eight dreadful Wo's here, Katie, and some of
them belongs to thee: But I Will tell thee more, know thou the reward of the
Hypocrit, they shall be cast into the Lake that burns forever, that is their
Portion; do thou hear this now? Thou turn'^ thy Back to me, when I am
telling the truth; if I were reading a Story-Book, or telling a Tale to thee,
thou would hear that. Remember it will be thy Portion too, if thou do not
Repent, and Confess, and seek Mercy. Again turning over the Book, she read
about Pilat saying, Pilat he made a show of cleansing himself of CHRIST'S Blood,
he washed his Hands and declared himself Innocent; but for all his washing, he
had a foul Heart; he would not loss his Office for the saving of CHRIST'S Life:
He knew well enough that CHRIST was an innocent Person; but he preferred his
Honor before CHRIST; Therefore to please the Jews, and to quench the
struggling in his Conscience, he washed his Hands, and then delivered CHRIST to
be Crucified by them. Thus she continued for more then two Hours space;
reasoning at this Rate, and exhorting her to Repent, quoting many places of
Scripture through the Revelation and Evangelists. And when any offered to pull
her Bible from her, she uttered horrid Schreeks and Out-crys, saying, She would
never part v^ith her Bible as long as she lived, she would keep it spite of
all the Devils.

Before we pass from this, it will be needful to give the Reader advertisement
of some things. 1. That while she called for her Bible and a Candle she neither
heard nor saw any of those Persons who were then actually and discernably
presenting he Room with her, and that Katharine Campbel to whom she directed
her speech was not discernably present to any other Body but her self. And that
pinch she got in her insensible fit, she found and complained of the pain of it
in that part afterward, but knew not how she came by it, nor blamed any of her
tormentors for it. 2. That these words set down as spoken by her, were the very
same both for words and order as nearly as they could be gathered and remembered
by the hearers, without any addition of their own. 3. That although she was a
Girl of a pregnant Spirit above her age, and had much of the Scriptures, and
withal had pretty good understanding, above what might be expected of one of
her years, of the foundamental principles of Religion taught in the Catechisms;
yet we doubt not but in so strong a Combat, the Lord did by His good Spirit
graciously afford her a more then ordinary measure of Assistance, both now and
at other times in the like debates.

Sometime after the putting out of her mouth the trash abovementioned she fell
into extremely violent fits, with lamentable crying; four Persons being hardly
able to withhold her from Climbing up the Walls of the Chamber, or from
otherwise doing her self hurt, mean time having no power of speech, while in
the fit, but her back and the rest of her Body grievously pained: In which
condition she continued four of five days with the usual sensible intervals: In
which she declared, that four men Alexander and James Andersons, and other two
(of whom she gave particular and exact marks, but knew not their names) were
tormenting her. It was observed that many of these she named were known to be
Persons of ill-f^me, as these two Persons last named were: It is also
remarkable, that for some time she knew not the name of the said Alexander
Anderson, till one day he came a begging to the door of the house, where the
Damsel was, whom she seeing, immediately cried out, that was be whom she had
seen among the Crew.

After this she fell into other Fits, wherein she saw the forenamed Persons
with some others, and heard and saw several things that past among them.
Particularly, she sometimes told when she was to take the fits, how often she
would take them, (which fell out accordingly) with some discourses that were
among them relating to her self and others.

About the eight of December, being brought home again from Glasgovv, and
having had six or seven days respite from her ^^ts, she afterward fell into
fright full and terrifying fits: The occasion whereof she declared to be, her
seeing the Devil in prodigious and horrid shapes, threatening to devour her, and
then she would fall dead and stiff with all the parts of her Body distended and
stretched out as a Corpse without sense or motion; which fits as they came
suddenly on without her knowledge, so she did as suddenly recover and grew
perfectly well; and they usually came on when she essayed to pray. In which
time also other fits took her more sensibly, she knowing when they were a
coming, how long they would continue, and when they would return: In which fits
her eyes strangely altered, and turned in her head in the admiration of
Spectators, with a continual painful working about her heart, sometimes her
joints were complicat and drawn together, and her fore head drawn forcibly
about toward her shoulders; which fits she took by first falling into a Swoon,
and after her violent fits in^^^ntly recovered after the same manner. During
this time the fits altered again as to their times of coming and continuance;
in which she sometimes endeavored to b^^^^er own singers, or any thing else
that came in her way, also when she saw the Persons before mentioned, one or
two of them about her, pointing them out to the Persons present with her, tho
by them unseen, and sometime declaring that she had hold of them by their
Clothes. Particularly. December, 17, She being in a fore fit she cried out of
several Persons that were tormenting her; and being in the bed, grasped with
her hands toward the foot of it, and cried out, that she had got a grip of the
sleeves of one J. P's. Jerkin (or Jacker) which was, as she said, duddie, (that
is ragged or tattered) at the elbows: And in that very instant the Damsels
Mother and Aunt heard the sound of the rending or tearing of a Cloth, but saw
or felt nothing, only found in each of the Damsels hands which were fast closed
when they got them opened, a bit of red Cloth, locking as torn off a Garment;
of which kind of Cloth there had been none in the Room at that time nor in the
whole house nor near it, that any kn^w of. Another particular she told was,
that there was such an one among the Crew going to prick her Tongue, which
thereupon was instantly pulled back into her Throat, she lying dumb for a
considerable space. Sometimes upon her recovery from her Fits she told that she
heard several things spoken and communed among her afflicters, but durst not
make them known; because they threatened to Torment her after this, or the other
mann^r, if she should make them known, and accordingly when by her Mother or
others she was prevailed with to begin to tell them instantly the Torment fell
out as was threatened. She told further that her Tormentors appeared to her
usually with Lights and strange sorts of Candles, which were frightful to her
to look to.

Thus she continued till the first of January. 1697, not only in the fits
forementioned with some alterations, but fell likewayes by swooning into light
^its, wherein she continued for two or three hours together, sometimes more,
sometimes less, with very short Intervals, in which Fits she did not much
complain of pain; but had a great palpitation in her breast, and sometimes in
other parts of her Body strange and ^naccountable motions, which continued in a
greater or lesser degree during the whole time of the Fit, wherein she was
somewhat light, and not so solid in her mind ^s as at other times; tho in the
Intervals of these, as of all other fits she was sufficiently composed; which
Fits, (...) all the rest, came suddenly on and went as suddenly off b^ a Swoon
or Swe^f.

Before we proceed further in the Relation, les it be noticed first, that the
foresaid, Agnes Naism^^h, being brought by the Parents a second time to see the
Damsel* did (^^o not desi^ed) pray for her, viz. that t^^ Lord God of Heaven
and Earth might send the Dams^th^^ h^^^th and try out the Verity: After which,
the Damsel declared that t^o the said Ag^e ha^ ^o^^e^ly been very troub^e^ome
to her; yet, from that time forth she did not more appea^ to ^er, as her
Tormentor; but upon the contrary, as she apprehende^, defe^ding her from the
fury of the rest. 2. It is further here to be noticed that the fore named
Katharin^ Campbel, could by no means be prevailed, with to pray for ^he Dam^el,
but upon the contr^ry when desired by some, c^rsed them and all the Family of
Bargarren, and in particular the Damsel and all that belon^ed to her, withal
adding this grievous Imprecation; The Devi^ let ^er n^ves grow bette^, no^ any
concerned in her, be in a better cond^tion then she was in, for what they ^ad
done to her. Which words she spoke before diverse famous Witnesses. 3. That
Bargarren having ^revailed with the Sheri^ deput of the Shi^e, to imprison the
said Katha^ine Ca^phel; she from the time of her Imprisonment, never appeared
to the Damsel (tho formerly she had ordinarily appeared as one of her most
violent Tormentors) except once or twice, at which times it was found upon
after enquiry, that she wa^ not in the To^booth but either in the ^aylors
house, or had liberty granted her to go out to Church. 4. That at the time when
the Damsel did put out her mouth the hair and other trash as above related.
Katrin^ Campbel being taken into custody, the^e was found in her po^ket a ball
of hair of several colors, which was afterward thrown into the Fire, after
which time the Damsel put no more ha^^ out of her Mouth. And it is to be
further noticed that she said, she heard amongst the Crew, when tormenting her,
that Katharine Campbel made that Ball of ha^r found in her po^ket, of the hair
of the Damsels head which had been cut when he^ trouble began, and which did
agree in color, etc. when compared.

Upon the first day of Ja^uary about ten ^clock at night, she fell by swooning^
into Fits differing from the former, in that, after the swooning fit was over,
she lay quiet, as if she had been dead, making no motion at all with her Body
in the Bed; yet at the same time these present heard her mournful talking, but
with a low and hardly audible Voice, and repea^ing several Storys in meeter
which they ^hought to be Expressions of the Rise and Progress of her own
trouble; and thus she continued (still withal naming some of the forementioned
Persons) till her Parents and others offered to Rouse her, by Touching and
Moving her body. Whereupon instantly she uttered horrid Schreeks, and cried at
if she had been pierced through with Swords, and assaulted for her Life. After
which she fell a Singing, Leaping, and Dancing for a long time, laughing with a
loud Voice, in an unusual manner, tearing down the Hingings of the Bed, and
pulling off her Head-cloaths and Ne^k clothes; in which Extravagances she was
acted with such Force and Strength, that her ^ather and Minister tho joining
their whole Strength together, could not get her Dancing and Leaping hindered.
But after Prayer, the Minister finding her Composed, enquired if she remembered
what she had done in time of the Fit; to which she replied, That she disti^ctly
remembered her miscariages, and in special her Singing and Dancing, saying
withal, that the Witches enclosing her in a Ring (or Circle) and Dancing and
Singing about her, was the occasion of her Dancing, which ^he then gladly
performed with the rest. For some days after she had Fits much after this
manner, with some vari^tion: In one of which ^its, as she was tearing off her
Head-dress clothes, her Parents resolving to see what would be the event, did
make no hinderance to her: Whereupon she stripped her self of all her Clothes
that were upon her, not leaving so much as her Smock upon her Body, if that had
been per^itted.

After this toward or about the Eleventh of January, she fell into Fits
different from the former, in which she was suddenly carried away from her
Parents and others that were about her, with a sudden flight, and in the first
of these (to their great amazement) through the Chamber and Hall down a long
winding Stair toward the ^ower-gate, with such a swift and unaccountable
motion, that it was not in the power of any to prevent her, her Feet not
touching the Ground, so far as any of the Beholders could discern, being heard
in her motion to laugh in an unusual manner: But by Divine Providence the Gate
being shut, her motion was ^^opt till such time as some of the Family could
overtake her, who endeavoring to carry her back, found her instantly fall as
one dead and become stiff: In which posture, being brought back to the Chamber,
she lay for a considerable space. And being recovered she did declare, that
there were about the number of Nine or Ten Persons who had carried her away in
a Shue (as she termed it, that is as one swinging upon a Rope) wherein she then
took pleasure, her Feet not at all touching the Ground, to her apprehension.

The Night following she was suddenly carried away, as before, from her Parents
and others who were about her, through the Chamber and Hall, and sixteen large
steps of a winding Stair up, toward the top of the House! where she met with
Apparitions of strange and unaccountable things, but was carried down again as
she thought in a shue or swing, asserting after her ^ecovery that she met upon
the Stair the number of six Women and four Men, and by them was carried toward
the Gate again, where accordingly she was found, and was carried up as
formerly, all the parts of her Body distended and stiff as one Dead; in which
posture she lay for sometime, and when recovering, declared, that both now and
formerly, she had endeavored to open the Gate, and that those she saw about
her were helping her, with a design to get her to the Court to drown her in the
Well, which she said she heard them saying among themselves, they intended to
do, and that then the World would believe she had destroyed herself. It is
observable that (these kind of Fits continuing with her for some few days) in
one of them she wa^ stopped at the Gate, and found in the forementioned Posture
which was neither Locked nor Barred; yet could they not get it oppened tho both
^^e and her Tormentors endeavored it.

Before we proceed in the Relation, it is not to be omitted that as soon as the
Damsels affliction was observed to be extraordinary and preternatural there
were (besides times formerly set a part in a more private way) at the desire of
the Parents and Minister, and by the Presbytries special order, a Minister or
two appointed to meet one day of every Week at the house of Bargarra^ to joy a
with the Family, the Minister of the Parish and other good Christians of the
Neighborhood, in Fasting and Praying which usually fell to be on the T^^^day*
And upon the 12th of January it being the turn of Mr. Patrick Simp^^^^ a
Neighbor Minister to be there; when he came to the house he found both the
Minister of the Parish; and the Brother who was to join with him had been
necessarly withdrawn; yet resolved to carry on the Work with assistance of
three Elders, some other good People being present. When he first saw the
Damsel after he came to the house, he found her under some lesser Fits which
came and went off quickly, and when Prayer began she was quiet and sober during
the same, but in time of singing the 93 Psalm, she fell into a sore Fit, of
greater continuance, first Laughing then making some sound like Singing, after
that pulling her head Cloath^down over her Face, and lastly turning so
outrageous in her ^otions that her Father could scarce get her holden with his
whole strength, but beloved to ly over upon the ^ed with her in his Arms until
the Fit abated: After her Recovery from which, she was quiet and composed all
the time of Prayer* and while the Minister Lectur'd on M^^^, 9. from 14 verse
and forward to verse, 30. was very Attentive, carefully looking in her Bible
the Scriptures quoted, so all along both in time of Prays and Singing until
the whole Religious ex^rcise was ended, and some Refreshment after the same
taken, at the end of which she told the Company* she had something to tell
which she heard some among her Tormenters saying, which she durk not reveal;
But the Minister and her Mother urging her to befree and not to obey the Devil,
she said, she would tell it her Mother in her ear. Then coming from the other
side of the Table, and placing her self betwixt her Mother and Aunt she began
to Whisper in her Mothers Ear; but before she got a Sentence fully pronunced,
she fell into a violent Fit, so as her Mother and those next her could scarcely
hold her till the Violence thereof began to abate, and then her Mother told
that she was speaking of a Meeting and a Feast they had spoken of in the
Orchard of ^argarran, but was able to say no more* and after Recovery, her
Mother desiring her to tell the rest of it, and she beginning to Whisper in her
(...), as before, could not get one word uttered till she was seized again of a
Fit, as violent as the former. Whereupon the Minister perceiving her Torment,
desired them ^o forbear any further troubling of her. Notice, that accordingly
there was a Feast and Meeting in that Orchard about that time, of the Crew*
acknowledged, and declared afterward^ by three of them that Confessed
themselves to have been there. viz Elizahath Andersen, James and Thomas
Lindsars they not knowing what either the Damsel had Spoken, or one of them
what another had Confessed relating thereunto.

About or within a little after this time, she was again suddenly carried from
them in the former manner down a Stair, which goes off from a Corner of the
Chamber to a Celler just below it* where her Brother and Sister were
providentially gone down a little before, to bring some drink from the Celler,
and already near the stair Foot, with a lighted Candle, which she soon put out:
But they crying and holding her by the Head-Cloaths, qui^kly discovered to the
rest where she was. Upon which Mr. Alexander King Minister at Bo^nil (being
then in the Chamber) made ha^^e down Stair^ where he found her* bu^ her Brother
and Sister had lost hold of her, she having loosed her Head-cloaths and let
them go; yet Mr. King having caught hold of her, keept her in his Arms till a
lighted Candle was brought, and endeavoring to bring her up Stairs, did declare
that he found something forcibly drawing her downwards, but he still keeping
his hold, she fell stiff as one Dead upon the Stair and was in this Posture
carried up and laid in Bed, where she lay a considerable space. And when
recovered of the Fit, she declared that the Occasion of her going down Stairs
with such Force, was, that the Crew had suggested to her while she was in the
light Fits, that the Devil was in the Meal Chist in the Celler, and that if she
would go down and put out the Candle, she might force him out of it. Notice
here first, that when some Fits of this kind were ready to seize her, she
sometimes gave advertisement thereof to these present with her, giving signs of
her earnest desire of their help to prevent her Motion, which usually proved to
be of good effect, wherein the Divine Mercy toward her is much to be observed.
2. It is also to be noticed, that about the time when she was in these flying
Fits, she used to utter horrid Screek^ and Out crye^ not like those of Rational
Creatures: In which time there was heard for three nights together, when the
Damsel was a sleep in Bed, Sc^reeks and O^t-cryes of the same kind in the
Court, when none of the Family was without Doors, to the great afrightment of
those who heard them, being that they exactly resembled the Cries and Skreeks
the Damsel used to utter in the Fits; who afterward in one of her Intervals
hearing some of the Family talking of those Cries and Skreeks, and alleging
they had been uttered by some wild beast or other, said to them, they were
mistaken* for it was Margare^. And two others of the name of Margaret called by
the Crew their Maggi's, had uttered these Skreeks, the Devil having promised to
them at that time to carry her out of the House to them, that they might drown
her in the Well, where there were eighteen more waiting for her.

After this she fell into freting and angry fits (as she termed them) in which
her humor was cross to all that those about her could either say or do* nothing
proving to her satisfaction, but every thing displeasing, (her former fits
withal now and then seizing her) but when restored to a right composure of
mind, she declared that her Tormentors about her did still suggest to her and
advise her to go to such and such remote places of the house her alone^ and
bring with her a Snood (which is a head-lace such as Women ty up their hair
with) or a Cravat or some such thing, promising her rough Almonds or some kinds
of swe^tmeats which they named to her, and for that end, to bring her apron
with her to hold them in, and accordingly when seized again with fits of this
nature did resolutly endeavor to repair to these places, having a Snood or
Cravat and her Apron with her, and would suffer none to be in her Company,
which put her Parents and others to a necessity of detaining her by force, and
she being thus prevented, utteted hideous schreeks and outcryes, of which in
this sort of fits she was seldom free.

Thursday, January 14th* at night a young ^ass or Girl apper'd to her with a
scabbed face amongst the rest of her Tormentors, relling her she was to come to
the house to morrow about ten a clock, and forbidding her to reveal it.

The next day being January 15th, in the afternoon the Damsel earnestly
enquired at her Mother and the rest of the Family what Beggars had come to the
gate that day, and of what Countenance and visage they were* But the Family not
knowing her design in such a question, gave no heed unto it; yet she still in
fisting and being in Company with her Mother and another Gentlewoman, about
four a clock at night said to them, she thought she might tell them somewhat
(the time being now pa^^) the was forbidden to reveal; but beginning to tell
she presently fell a crying that she was tormented and pricked th^row her whole
^ody; yet recovering from the fit, went on and told it; the thing the had to
reveal was, that a scabbed faced ^ass appeared to her y^^er-night and was to ^e
at the gate this day at ten a Cloak. Whereupon the Servants being enquired at,
what sort of beggars had been there that day, did declare among others, there
had been a beggar Wife at the door and a younger Woman or Lass with her who had
Scabs on her Face, and received their Alms.

January, 16th, and 17th, When recovered of her swouning Fits, she put^ u^ of
her Mouth a great number of Fins, which she declared J. had forced into her
Mouth, and a Gentlewoman who had been always one of her most violent Tormentors.

January, 21. Her Fits altered again, after this manner, she would fall in them
with heavy Sighs and Groans and hideous Outeryes, telling those about her that
Cats, Ravens, Owls and Horses were destroying and pressing her down in the
Bed: And at the same time her Mother and another Gentlewoman, being in the Room
with her, did declare that immediately after they had taken the Girl out of her
Bed in this condition, they did see something moving under the Bed-cloaths as
big as a Cat.

The same Morning in the interval of her Fits, she said, she heard her
Tormentors Whisper amongst themselves, and suggest to one another, (naming J.
P. the Andersons and others) that the Devil had promised and engaged to them,
to carry her over the Hall Window, to the end they might Drown her in the Well
which was in the court; and then they said the World would believe she had
destroyed her self; and the same day and several days thereafter, when seized
with her Grievous Fits, did attempt with such force to get her self over that
Window, that Spectators could scarce with their whole strength prevent her.

About this time, nothing in the World would so discompose her as Religious
Exercises, if there were any discourses of God or Christ, or any of the things
which are not seen and are Eternal, she would be cast into grievous Agonies;
and when she assayed in her light Fits, to read any portion of the Scriptures,
repeat any of the Psalms, or answer any Questions of out Catechisms (which she
could do exactly well at other times) she was suddenly struck Dumb and lay as
one stiff Dead, her Mouth opened to such a Wideness that her Jaw appeard to be
out of joint, and anon would clap together again with incredible Force. The
same happened to her Shoulder blade, her Elbow, and Handwrists. She would at
other timely in a benum d Conditions, 2nd be drawn together as if she had been
tied Neck and Heels with Ropes; yet on a sudden would with such Force and
Violence be pulled up and Tear all about her, that it was as much as one or two
could do, to hold her fast in their Arms: But when Ministers and other good
Christians (seeing her in such intolerable Anguishes) made serious Application
by Prayer to God, on her behalf, she got respite from her grievous Fits of this
kind, and was ordinarily free of them during the time of Prayer, tho seized of
them before; and albeit usually when Ministers began to Pray she made great
disturbance by idle loud talking, Whistling, Singing, and Roating, to drown the
Voice of the person praying. Particularly January 22. She was more Turbulent
then at other times she used to be, and continued some space after the Minister
began to Pray, Singing and making a hideons Noise, ferening furious Blows with
her Fist, and Kicks with her Feet at the Minister, uttering reproachful Talk of
him, and calling him Dog, etc. Yet she being Composed, and her Fits being over
before Prayer was ended, and the Minister when he had done, finding her Sober
and a right Composure of Mind, enquired why she made such disturbance? To which
she replied, she was force to do it by the Hellish Crew about her, and that she
thought they were none of her own words that shouttered.

January 24th. She said some things relating both to herself and others had
been inggested to her by her Troublers; but that they had threatened to Torment
her, if the should offer to make them known. And accordingly she Essaying to
express her Mind, was cast into two grievous Fits, in which she cried out of
violent pains; all the parts of her Body becoming Rigid and extended like a
Corpse, her Head was twisted round, and if any offered by force to obstruct
such dangerous Motion she seemed to be upon, she would roar exceedingly so
menmes her Nec^ bone seemed to be dissolved; and yet on a sudden became so
stiff, that there was no moving of it; and when those grievous Agonys were
over, she again Essayed to express her Mind by Write, but to no purpose; for
instantly she was cast into other two very grievous Fits, wherein she was
struct Dumb, Deaf and Blind, and her Tongue drawn a prodigeous length over her
Chin. And when the Fits were over, declared, the Andersons J. P. the
Gentlewoman, and I. D. with the rest of the Hellish Crew, some of whom she
could no shame, had been Tormenting her in the Fits, and that there has been
fifteen of them about the House all the last Night; but were now all gone, save
one, who was to sta^ about the House till her Fits were over. And accordingly
her Brother and Sister did declare; they saw that Morning a Woman in the Garden
with a red Good about her Head, sitting at the Root of an Aple-Tree; but
Bargarren with most of the Servants being abroad, the Matter was not further
searched.

The same day about Six at Night, she was seized with variety of grievous Fits
again, in which sometimes she lay wholly Senseless and Breathless, with her
Belly swer'd like a Drum, as like a Woman with Child, her Eyes were pulled into
her Head so far that Spectators thought she should never have used them more,
sometimes when she was tying her own Neck-cloaths, her enchanted Hands would ty
them so strait about her Neck, that she had strangled her self if Spectators
had not given some Relief unto her; sometimes she was in hazard of burning her
self in the fire, offering with violence to throw her self into the same.
Diverse time she did strick furious Blows at her near Relations in her Fits,
she would maintain Discource with her Tormentors; and asking Questions concerning
her self and others, received answer from them; which indeed none but her self
perceived: Reasoning particularly with one of them after this manners; O what
ailed thee to be a Witch! thou sai'st it is but three Nights since thou wast a
Witch, O if thou would Repent, it may be GOD might give thee Repentance, if
thou would seek it, and Confess; if thou would desire me I would do what I
could; for he Devil is an ill Master to serve, he is a Dyer from the beginning,
he promises but he cannot perform. Then calling for her bible, she said, I Will
let thee see where he promised to our first Parents, that they should not Die.
And reading the passage, said, now thou see he is a Liar; for by breaking of
the Commandment, they were made liable to Death here and Death everlasting. O
that is an Uncouth word; long Eternity never to nave an end, never never to have
an end: Had not GOD of his infinite Mercy ordained some to Eternal Life throught
JESUS CHRIST. The Devil makes thee believe thou will get great Riches by
serving him; but come near, and having uttered this word she lost power of
Speech, her Tongue being drawn back into her Throat; yet beckning with her Hand
to the Spectre to come near her, and turning over the Book, kep't her Eye upon
that passage of Holy Scripture. Job. 27.18. And pointing with her Finger at the
place' and shaking her Head; turned over the Book again. And recovering Speech'
said, I Will let thee see where GOD bids us seek and we shall find, and reading
over the place said, it is GOD that gives us every good Gift, we have nothing
of our own, I submit to his will tho I never be better; for GOD can make all my
trouble turn to my Advantage; according to his Word, Romans 8.28. which place the
then read, and thus continued Reasoning, for the space of an Hour.

Sometimes she cried out of violent pain, by reason of furious Blows and
Strokes she had received from the Hands of her Tormentors, the Noise of which
Strokes by standers distinctly heard, tho they perceived not the Hands that
gave them. One Night the Girl fitting with her Parents and others cried out.
something was wounding her Thigh. Upon which, instantly her Mother putting her
Hand in the Damsels pocket, found her folding Knife opened, which had been
folded, when put in her Pocket, but her Uncle not trusting the thing; did again
put up the Knife and leaving it folden in her pock't on a sudden she cried out
as before, the Knife was cutting her Thigh, being unfolded by the means of I.
P. and others, as she said: Upon which her Uncle searching her Pocket, again
found the Knife opened as formerly. This happened twice or thrice to the
Administation of the Beholders, tho they took special Notice that she nor any
other visible Hand opened it.

January 25th. She was again seizd with her Swooning stiff Fits, with this
remarkable Variation; her Throat was sometimes most prodigiously extended, and
sometimes as strangely Contracted and Convel'd, so that she appeard in palpable
danger of being Choked, and through the violence of pain in her Throat and
difficulty of Breathing struggled with her Feet and Hands, as (...) some had
been actually Strangling her, and could Speak or Cry none; with which kind of
Fits she was frequently seized for several days; and in the intervals did
declare that the forementioned persons, and other (whom she could not get then
nom'd) were strangling her, and that the occasion of her not having power to
speak or cry in the Fit, was a Ball in her Throat, which also was visible to
spectators; for they did clearly discern a Bunch in her Throat (while in the
Fit) as bigg as a Pullets Egg which had almost Choked her.

Sometimes she was kep't from eating her Meat; having her Teeth set, when she
carried any food to her Mouth. Diverse times also she was kept from Drinking,
when at Meat; for no sooner could she taste the Drink, but she was in hazard to
be Choked thereby, and her self sometimes would have held the Cup so hard
betwixt her Teeth, that it was not in the power of those with her to unloose
it. And when any thing had fallen out amiss in the place where she was, as the
falling and breaking of a Cup, and Body's receiving harm, and such like. She
would fall a laughing and rejoice extremely; which kind of Jollity was for from
the Girl's temper when at her self.

February 1st. She Essaying to tell some things she had been forbidden by her
Tormentors to make known, was handled with intolerable Torments. At the
beginning of her Fits usually she would be kep't odly looking; sometimes toward
the Chimney, sometimes toward other particular places in the Room, but could
not always tell what she saw; yet for ordinary she would Name such and such
Persons, who, she said were then come to cast her into Fits. And when any
desired her to cry to the LORD JESUS for help, her Teech were instantly set
closs, her Eyes tuisted almost round in her Head, and she was thrown upon the
Floo with the stiffness, and posture of one that had been some days laid for
Dead: And on a sudden recovered again, and would weep bitterly, to remember
what had befal'n her. The same day, when her Fits were over, she said, she now
perceived it was by the means of a Charm, that such Restraints were laid upon
her that she could not tell what the Witches had forbidden her to make known,
but the Charm might be found out (as she said) by searching for it beneath the
Bed where she lay; and she having quickly done this her self, found (to the
apprehension of Spectators) beneath the foresaid Bed, an inteir Egg-shell open
in the end, which being in stantly thrown into the Fire, did melt away after
the manner of Wax. without any such Noise as Egg-shells use to make when
burning in the Fire. After this the Girl said, she would not now be handled so
severely, upon Essaying to make known what the Witches had forbidden her to
tell, only her Tongue would be drawn back into her Throat, which accordingly
happened. She did like ways inform her Friends of many things she had not
liberty to do before the Charm was found out, particularly that her Tormentors
had frequently solicited her to become a Witch her self, and promised her great
Riches, and perfect Health also, to induce her thereunto. Which Tentation, she
through the infinite Mercy of GOD still resisted, reasoning with them after this
manner The Devil promises what he cannot perform, and granting he could fulfill
his promises; yet I am sure from the Scriptures, Hell and the wrath of GOD will
be the final reward of all such as yield to this Wickedness. To which the
received this reply (which indeed none but her self perceived) that Hell and
the wratch of GOD so much talked of, was not so formidable as was represented.
She also said, the Witches had Importunately urged her to give them her
Consent, to take away the Life of her young Sister, who was at that time upon
her Mothers breast; which Tentation also she was enabled through the Grace of
God to resist. She told her Parents likeways, there had been a Charm laid upon
the top of the House where her young Sister was (the Child having been sent out
a nursing, by reason of the continued Affliction of the Family) and that the
Charm had been placed upon the top of the House by pinched Maggi, who thereby
did design the taking away of her Sisters Life; and that this was the Cause why
she had so often for some Weeks before desired her Mother to bring home her
Sister, constantly affirming, that the Child would daily decay as long as she
stayed there: Whereupon her Parents observing the daily decay of the Infant;
even to Skin and Bone, brought her home, where she recovered. And the Girl
being asked how she came to the knowledge of these things? Replied, some thing
speaking distinctly as it were above her Head, had suggested these and other
things of that Nature to her.

February 2d. The Girl being in the Chamber with her Mother and others, was on
a sudden struck with great Fear and Consternation; and fell a trembling upon
the sight of John Lindsay in Barcloch, talking with her Father in the Hall. She
said to her Mother, the foresaid Lindsay had been always one of her most
violent Tormentors, and that she had been threatened with extreme Tortures, if
she should offer to Name him; whereupon she was desired to go toward the place
where he was, and touch some part of his Body in a way unknown to him, which
she having done with some Aversation, was in stantly seized with extreme
Tortures in all the parts of her Body. After which Lindsay was put to it, and
Interrogat thereupon; but he giving no satisfying Answer, was desired to take
the Damsel by the Hand, which he being unwillingly induced to do, she was
immediately upon his Touch cast into intolerable Anguishes, her Eyes being
almost twisted round in her Head, and all the parts of her Body becoming Rigid
and stiff, fell down in the posture of one that had been laid for some days
Dead, and afterward got up in a sudden, and tearing her Clothes, threw her
self with violence upon him, and when her Fits were over, Spectators did also
take the Damsel by the Hand; yet no such effect followed.

About Six at Night there came an Old Highland fellow to Bargarran, who calling
himself a wear traveller, said he behoov'd to Lodge there that Night, but the
Servants refusing him Lodging, gave him something be way of Alins. At this time
the Damsel being in the Chamber with her Mother and another Gentle woman, said
to her best apprehension there was one of the wicked Crew in or about the House
at that time; whereupon her Mother made haft with her Daughter down flaars
toward the Kitchen. And finding there unexpectedly the Highland fellow, whom
the Girl then accused as one of her Tormentors, she desired the Highland
fellow to take her Daughter by the Hand, which he being urged to do, the Girl
immediately upon his Touch was grievously Tormented in all the parts of her body
And this falling out in divine providence, Ba^garran caused secure him. The
next Morning the Minister having come to Bargarran to visit the Damsel, and the
matter being imparted to him, called for the Hi^hland fellow, and having
questioned him to and again about this Matter without any satisfying Answer,
brought the Child our of the Chamber covering her Face, and almost her whole
Body with his Cloak, and giving signs to the Highland fellow to touch her in
this posture, as he had ordered him before, without the Damsels knowledge,
which he having done with ^reat Aversion the Girl not knowing of his touch,
was instantly cast into intolerable Agonys as formerly; yet others afterward
touching her, no such event followed. And when her Fits were over she besought
the Highland fellow to allow her the Liberty for to discover and tell Persons
that Haunted and Molested her, whom he had forbidden her to make known: Upon
which the old Fellow looking at her with an angry Countenance, her Mouth was
instantly stopped, and her Teeth set: But being desired by those present to
speak her mind freely; whether he would or not, at length replied, she feared
to do it. And when through the importunity of the Lairds of Dargavel and
Porterfield of Fulwood, and some other Gentlemen there present, the Essayed to
declare her mind, she was seized with her Fits again.

Before this time, the lamentable Case of the afflicted Damsel and Family had
been represented to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, who, upon
serious Application made to them, worthily and piously granted a Commission to
a Noble Lord and some worthy Gentlemen, to make enquiry into the same. By
virtue of this Commission some suspected persons were seized; particularly
February 4. Alexander Anderson (an Ignorant, Irreligious Fellow, who had been
always of evil Fame, and accused by the afflicted Damsel) by a special Order
from the Commissioners for Enquiry, was apprehended and commined to Prison; as
was also Elizabeth Anderson his Daughter, upon flagrant Presumptions of
Witchcraft; for the other Year Jean Fulton her Grandmother, an old scandalous
Woman, being cited before the Kirk Session, and accused for hideous Cursing,
and imprecating Mischief upon several ^ersons, which had been followed with
fatal Events; the forementioned Elizabeth Anderson her Grandchild, who lived
in the House with her, did declare before the Session, she had frequently seen
the Devil in company with her Grand mother, in the likeness of a small black
Man, who usually did evanish on a sudden within the Walls of the House, when
any Body came to the Door. Upon this Presumption was the said Elizabeth
Anderson seized with her Father, and committed to Custody; but at first most
obstinatly denied accession any manner of way to the Sin of Witchcraft, until
afterward, when seriously importuned and dealt with in the Prison by two
Gentlemen, did, before she came to Bargarran's House, confess her Guilt,
without Bargarran's knowledge at that time. And that she had been at several
meetings with the Devil and Witches, and amongst others, she did delate her own
Father, and the forementioned High-land Fellow to have been active Instruments
of the Girle's Trouble; and gave, before she was confronted with him, exact
marks of this Highland body, and tho she declared she knew not his Name; yet
when confronted with him did accuse him, and affirm he was the person she spoke
of.

February 5th. A Quorum of the commissioners being met at Bargarran, and the
persons then delated by Elizabeth Anderson to have been at Meetings with the
Devil, and active instruments of the Damsels Trouble, Viz, Alexander Anderson
her Father, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fultoun, James Lindsay alias Curat, John
Lindsay alias Bishop, Katharine Camphel, were all of them (excepting John
Lindsay alias Bishop, who was not then apprehended) confronted with Christian
Shaw before the Lord Blantyr^ and the rest of the Commissioners at Bargarran,
and several other Gentlemen of Note and Ministers then present. and accused by
her as her Tormentors. And they having all severally touched her i^ presence of
the Commissioners, she was at each of their touches seized with grievous Fits,
and cast into intolerable Anguishes, others then present also touching her the
same way, but no such Effect followed. And it is remarkable, when Katharine
Camphel touched the Girl, she was immediately upon her touch seized with more
grievous Fits, and cast into more intolerable Torments then what followed upon
the touch of the other accused persons, whereat Camphel herself being Damped
and Confounded, tho she had formerly declined to Blessher, uttered these words;
The Lord God of Heaven and Earth Blesithee, and save that both Soul and Body;
after which the Damsel when the Fits were over, in which she had lain a most
pitiful Spectacle did declare she was now loosed, and that the might freely
touch any of the accused persons, or they her after this without trouble, which
accordingly upon trial fell so out, and being enquired how she came to the
knowledge of that, answered as formerly in the like Case, That some thing
speaking distinctly as it were above her Head, suggested this to her; And
likewise, usually gave her the knowledge of the Names of her Tormentors, and
Places in which they lived.

February 6. The Girl being sez'd with sore Fits, some thing was seen in her
Mouth, to the Judgdment of Spectators like pieces of Orange Pills invisibly
conveyed into her Mouth, which she seemed in her Agonys to be Chewing, and
having got down her Throat, as those present apprehended, she did fall down
Dead and stiff, as if she had been Choked struggling with her ^eet and Hands,
as if at the last Gasp, her Throat swelling in a Prodigious manner; to the
affrightment of Spectators, and when recovered, but yet in the light Fit; she would
say, O it was a very sweet Orange Fill which I got from the Gentlewoman, and
did constantly affirm the same, declaring also that there had been others there
present with the Gentlewoman, particularly Margaret L. or pinch't Maggi, whose
Surname she had neither Power nor Liberty to express, neither durst she offer
to do it, lest she should be Tormented as was throatned, and always fell out
when she Essayed to do it, either by speaking or writing, which had appeared
the day before in presence of the Commissioners.

About this time, Thomas Lindsay a young Boy not yet Twelve Years of Age, was
sez'd, upon slagran; Presumptions of Witchcraft; he had said before several
credible Persons, the Devil was his Father, and if he pleased he could fly in
the likeness or a Crow upon the Mast of a Ship, he sometimes caused a Flough
stand and the Horse break the Yoke upon the pronouncing of some words, and
turning himself about widder-shins; that is a turning himself round from the
right hand to the left, contran to the Natural course of the Sun. This he would
do upon the desire of any Body who gave him a halfpenny. Upon these and there
like flagrant Presumptions he was apprehended, who at first tho he continued
most obstinat in denial; yet afterward confessed to the Minister in his own
House before famous Witnesses, compact with the Devil, and that he had received
the insensible mark from the Devil, which is visible upon his Body: As also,
that he had been at several meetings with the Devil and Witches, where he said
were present, his Brother James with others, and particularly those who had
been delated by Anderson. This he confessed, with some other wickedness of this
kind before he was committed to Custody in Bargarran house.

After this Bargarran made diligent fearch for James Lindsay, elder Brother to
Thomas, having been all along accused by the afflicted Damsel as one of her
Troublers, whom she called the Glei'd, or squint Eyed, Elff (as he was indeed)
for that was the Name the Crew about her gave him, who when he was brought upon
the place, though he did at first most obstinatly deny his Guilt, yet at length
through the Endeavors of Mr. Patrick Simpson, a Neighbor Minister, ingenuously
confessed the Guilt he was charged with, and in his Confession did agree in
every material Circumstance with the other two, tho he knew not what they had
confessed, he having not seen them before his Confession, not had he any occasion
of Information in conference with others there-anent, being immediately brought
to the place from the Tolbooth of Glasgow, where he had been some Weeks before
that time in Prison as a vagabond Beggar, upon a design to have sent him to
Foreign Flantations.

A more particular Account of what they freely Confessed and Acknowledged
before the Commissioners for Enquiry, we have for the satisfaction of the
Reader subjoined to the Narrative; with an Abstract of the Report made by the
Commissioners, to the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
concerning the whole Affair.

February 11. There was by the Presbitry's appointment a public Fast kept upon
the Damsels account in the Church of Eriki^e, in which Mr. Turner Minister of
the place begun the Work with Prayer, expounding Rev. 12. from Ver. 7. to Ver.
13. Mr. James Hutchison Minister at Killellan took the next turn of Prayer, and
did preach upon 1 Pet. 5.8. and Mr. Simpson concluded the Work, preaching upon
Mat. 17.20, 21. where the Girl was present all day; but before she came to
Church that Morning she told, that while she was in one of her Fits the Night
before, she heard the Devil speaking of that public Fast, and what Ministers
were to be there, and that old Man Mr. James Hutchison should stumble, and his
Peruick fall off as he went up to the pulpit, and all the people should laugh
at him, and he should break his neck in going home. And when she came out of
the Church after the Fotenoon's Work, she said, the Devil was a Liar, for no
such thing fell out as he had threatened. She was all day very quiet in Church;
although being in some of her light Fits some Specter appeared in time of the
public Work, which she told of thereafter.

About six at Night there were present in the Chamber with the Damsel, Mr.
Simpson with his Wife, Lady Northbarr and others, discoursing and conferring
about her Case; and while they were thus conferring together, she told them,
she would gladly make some things known if she durst for her Tormenters; and
afterward essaying to do it, was instantly seized with a violent Fit; in which
she leapt straight up, and appeared as if she had been choked, so that it was
as much as one or two could do, to hold her fast in their Arms: And when the
Fit was over, Mr. Simpson going about Family Worship, did expound Psalm 110.
and speaking of the limited power of the Adversaries of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
from the latter part of Ver 1 she was on a sudden seized with another grievous
Fit, in which she put out of her Mouth some Blood, which raised Grounds of Fear
and Jealousy in the Minds of Spectators, that something in her Mouth hurting
her had been the occasion of it; yet they could not get her Mouth opened, tho
they used means to open the same, her Teeth being closs set. And in the
interval of the Fit she being asked, if she found any thing in her Mouth that
had been the occasion of her putting out of Blood; she replied, she found
nothing, not knew the Cause thereof; but opening her mouth, those present found
one of her double Teeth newly drawn cut, but knew not what became of the Tooth;
for though search was made for the same, it could not be found: After which the
Minister proceeded upon the same subject, but was again interrupted by her
renewed Fit, yet closed the Exercise with Prayer, after which, without more
trouble, she was taken to her Bed.

February 12. Margaret Laing and her Daughter Martha Semple, being delated by
the three Confessants, and accused by the Girl to have been active Instruments
in her Trouble, came of their own accord to Bargarran's House, and before they
came up Stairs the Girl said, she was now bound up, and could not accuse
Margaret Laing to her Face: And accordingly the Giri's Mother having desired
some of those who were sitting by her to feel some parts of her Body, and they
having done it, found her Body so stiff and inflexible, that there was no
moving of it, and immediately again found some parts of her Body contracted and
drawn hard togethe, as if by Cords; after this Margaret Lang and her Daughter,
having gone to the Chamber to the Girl, did in presence of the Ministers and
others, desire the Damsel to come to her; for she would do her no Harm, and
laying her Arms about her, spoke very faisly to her, and questioned her if ever
she had seen her or her Daughter amongst her Tormentors, to which the Girl did
positively reply, she had frequently seen her Daughter; but declined through
fear to accuse her self, saying faintly No; after which Margaret and her
Daughter returning into the Hall, and the Minister enquiring at her why she
said No, seeing she had accused her before, she answered, take me contrar, upon
which she was seized with a grievous fit; yet after her recovery being urged
again by those present to tell her Mind freely, whether or not Margaret Lang
was one of her Tormentors the Child thereupon Essaying to say Yes, and having
half pronounced the Word, was cast into unexpressible Anguishes; and again in
the interval of the Fit, she Essayed to express the same thing, and saying only
the word Tint (that is lost) was on a sudden struck with another fit, and when
the fit was over, and the Child returned to the Chamber, Margaret Lang who was
sitting near the Hall door, spoke these words after her. The Lord blessthee,
and ding (that is beat, or drive) the Devil us of thee. A little after which
words, Margaret going down stairs, the Damsel came to the Hall and said, her
Bonds were now loosed, and that now she could accuse Margaret Lang to her Face,
and declared the occasion of her being so Restrained and Bound up while
Margaret was present, was her letting fall a parcel of Hair at the Hall door as
she came in; being a Charm made by her for that end, which also had been the
occasion of her uttering the word Tin^ in the former fit: And accordingly a
parcel of Hair had been found at the Hall-door, after Margaret Lang had gone
straight from the Hall to the Chamber, which immediately was cast into the Fire
and burnt. And its remarkable, that it could be attested that there was no
Hair, or any other thing else in that place before Margaret Lang came in, and
the Girl being enquired, what way she knew Margaret Lang had laid the
forementioned Charm upon her, replied, something speaking distinctly to her as
it were above her Head, had suggested that to her.

About Eight at Night she was severely handled in her Fits, much after the
former manner, and while she was in her swooning Fits, there was seen in her
Mouth a Pin, where with she seemed almost Choked; but by divine providence it
was with great difficulty got out. After this she was somewhat composed, and
did not much complain of pain; but was distinctly heard to entertain discourse
with some invisible Creatures about her, and the Reply's given by her, and
he^rd by those who took care of her, gave them ground to conclude she was
tempted to set her Hand to a Paper then presented to her, with Promises that
upon her yielding thereunto she should never be troubled any more; as also that
^ue should get sweet meats, a drink of Sack, a bonny handsome Coat with silver
Lace: She was also distinctly heard say, resisting the Tempter, Thou art a
filthy Sow, should (...) obey thee; this was not the end of my Creation, but to
Glorify GOD and enjoy Him for ever; and thou promisest what thou can not
perform: Art thou angry at me for saving thou Sow, what should I call thee but
thou filthy Sow? Art thou not the filthy Devil, for as brave as thou art with
thy Silver and Gold Lace? Would thou have me Renounce my Baptism? Do thou
promise to give me brave Men in Marriage, and sine Clothes, and perfect Health,
if I should consent thereunto? Do thou say my Baptism will do me no good,
because thou alledgest he was not a sufficient Minister that baptized me? thou
art a Liar, I Will be content to die cre I rendunce my Baptism. O thorovv the
Grace of GOD I Will never do it. And thus she continued Reasoning, being both
Blind and Deaf, for the space of two Hours; and when she came to herself did
declare it was the Devil, who first presented himself tempting her in the shape
of a Sow, to Renounce her Baptism, as is hinted; and that he did chide her when
she called him, thou Sovv, and immediately appeared to her again in the shape of
a brave Gentleman, as having Gold and Silver Lace on his Clothes, still urging
her to renounce her Baptism, which Tentation she through the special assistance
of the Grace of GOD effectually resisted: she also said, that it had been
suggested to her by the Spirit, speaking to her as it were above her Head,
after the Combat with the Tempter was over, that one of her Tormentors would be
at the House the Morrow.

February 1^. She was seiz^d with a sore fit about Twelve a Clock of the day,
in which she continued for more than two Hours space, both Deaf and Blind.
Those in the Room with her crying to her with a loud Voice, and pinching her
Hands and other part of her Body; but all to no purpose. And in this po^ure was
hurried To and Fro with violence through the Room: And when any ^o^y by force
offered to hinder the daugerous and violent Motion she seemed to be upon, she would
Roar exceedingly, sometimes she would desire her Father and Mother and others ^o
come and take her Home (supposing her self not to be in her Fa^he^s House) when
the G^^ie was in this deplorable Condition, Margaret ^oger who lived in the
Nig^bour-hood, came to the House of Bargarran enquiring for the Lady; and
having come up stairs, the Parents of the Damsel remembering what the Girl had
said the Night before, that one of her Tormentors was to come that day to the
House, brought Margaret Roger to the Chamber where the Gitle was, and so soon
as she entered the Door; the Damsel tho she could discern none of these who
were present with her, nor answer them when they cried to her; yet presently
saw her and ran toward her crying, Maggi, Maggi, where have thou been? will thou take me with thee, for my Father and Mother have left me. Whereupon
Spectators being astonished, caused Margaret speak to the Child, which she
having done, the Girl distinctly heard and answered her every word. After this,
the Three Confestants were also brought up to the Chamber where the Damsel was,
and as soon as they entered the Door, she ran also to them laughing as if she
had been overjoyed, answering them when they spoke to her: and Margaret Roger
there present, being confrented with the Confessants: They did declare, that
she had been at Meetings with the Devil and Witches in Bargarrans Orchard,
consulting and contriving Christian Shaw's ruin.

The LORDS Day following, being February 14. After some short intervals she was
again seized with her fits, in which she said, Margaret Lang and her Daughter
Martha Simple, were Tormenting her and cutting her Throat; which words through
violence of Pain, and difficulty of Breathing, she-uttered with a ow and hardly
audible Voice, and upon the naming of Margaret Lang and her Daughter, she was
tost'd and dreadfully Tormented in all the parts of her Body, being made
sometimes to stand upon her Head and Feet at once, sometimes her Belly swelling
like a Drum; and falling again in a sudden, and sometimes her Head and other
parts of her Body were like to be shaken in pieces, so that Spectators feared
she would never speak more. And when the fit was over, she declared, Margaret
Lang said to her while in the fit, That she would give her a T^s^y (which
imports hot and severe handling) for naming her.

At this time she was seldom free of her light fits, which for most part were
all the respite and ease she had from the unexpressible Agonys she e^dur'd in
her more grievous fits; unless when asleep: and while she was in these fits, no
Body could persuade her to pray, yet when in a right composure of Mind and
perfectly at her self, she would weep bitterly to remember this, espressing her
fears, left that might be any evidence GOD would for sake her.

February 18. About two in the Afternoon, she being in the light fit, said, The
Devil now appeared to her in the shape of a Man; whereupon she being struck
with great Fear and Consternation, was desired to Pray with an audible Voice,
The Lord rebuke thee Satan; which she Essaying to do, instantly lost power of
speech, her Teeth being sert, and her Tongue drawn back into her Throat, and
she Essaying again, was immediately seized with another grivous fit; in which
her Eyes being twisted almost cound in her Head; she fe^^ ^own as one Dead,
struggling with Feet and Hands, and again getting up on a sudden, was hurried
with violence Too and Fro through the Room Deaf and Blind; yet was speaking with
some invisible Creatures about her saying, with the Lords strongth thou shall
neither put Straw nor Sticks into my Mouth. After this she cried in a pit^ful
manner, the Bumbee has sting'd me, then presently sitting down and loosing her
Stocking, put her Hand to that part which had been Nip't or Pinch't, Thereupon
Spectators did visibly discern the lively marks of Nails of Fingers deeply
imprinted on that same part of her Leg. And when she came to her self* she did
declare, That something speaking to her a^ it were above her Head; told her it
was M. M. in a Neighboring Parish (nameing the place) that had appeared to her,
and pinch't her Leg in the likness of a Bumbee. She likewise did declare, that
the forementioned M. M. instantly after this had been suggested to her,
appeared in her own shape and likness as she used to be at other times. Shortly
after this being still seized with her light fit, she whispered in her Mothers
Ear. The Devil was now appearing to her again in the shape of a Gentleman: And
being instantly seized with her fits, in which she was both Blind and Deaf, was
distinctly heard arguing after this manner. Thou think to tempt me to be a
Witch; but through GOD's strongth thou shall never be the better: I charge th^^
in the Name of GOD to be gone and thy Papers too, in the LORDS strength I Will not
fear thee, I Will stand here and see if thou can come one step nearer me, I think
thou fear^st me more th^^^ I fear thee. Then turning her self again, she was
hurried To and Pro with violence through the Room, as formerly saying, she was
Bitten or pinch's very sore in the Hands with Teeth, and Nip't with Fingers,
above Twenty four times; which constrained her to horrid Schreeks, and out cries
at every time she received them, showing and pointing with her Finger on these
parts of her Arm and Leg which had been Pinch't and Bitten; but neither savv
not heard any about her. And accordingly Spectators did visibly discern the
evident marks of the Teeth and Nails of Fingers upon her Arms and Legs. In this
posture the Girl continued from two to five in the Afternoon, and when her
Miserys were over, she said M. M. told her in the Fit, that Margaret Lang then
in custody, had ordered her to handle her after that manner. And that Margaret
Lang had a commanding power over her.

Friday and Saturday thereafter being February 19. and 20. she was frqeuently
seized with the forementioned fit^ and being violently Bitten Pinch't and Nip't
in her hands neck and other parts of her body, so that the clear marks of the
nails of fingers and steeds of teeth both Upper and Lower, with the spitle and
slaver of a mouth thereupon were evidently seen by spectators. About this time
when seized with her Blind and Deaf fits, a crooked fellow appeared to her
having his two feet deformed his two heelis wrying inward toward one another,
and the fore parts of his feet outward from one another, so than the broadside
of his feet moved fotemost, and upon the appearing of this fellow her feer were
put in, the very same posture during the time he tormented her. It is to be
noticed that there is a fellow in one of the neighboring parishes, whose feet
are exactly in that manner derform'd, who has been of a long time of evil fame,
and given up by the confessants to have been seen at meetings with the Devil
and the rest of the crew in Bargarrens Oxchard.

Saturday being February. 20. The whole family being gone to bed, they had left
a great quantity of Peets (or Turf) beside the hall Chimney, which the next
morning they saw them burnt to ashes, tho there had been no fire in the Chimney
nor near them, so that the plaster and stones of the wall where the Peets or
Turfe lay were in a great part turned to rubbish through the violence of the
fire but no other damnage followed, the hall floor being laid with stones, and
the Peets lying within the bosom of a large Chimney brace.

February 27th, The Chamber fire having been covered with ashes in the Chimney
when the family went to bed, the next morning tho a good quantity of ashes had
been left; yet they found all clean sweept away, and no appearance of ashes nor
fire there at all, albeit none in the family that night nor next morning had
been thereafter the fire was gathered, before this was observed.

In fits of this kind she continued for several days thereafter, haming the
forementioned crooked fellow. J, R. and M. A. living in the neighboring
parishes, which two Women were delated by the three confessants to be amongst
her tormenters, and particularly upon the Lords day being February 21. and the
Monday following, the said J, R, appearing to her grievously vexed her, withal
telling she was commissionated so to do. The Gentle woman M. M. having a pain
in her head at that time, and so not able to come forth. Concerning which it is
worthy of remark, that the Damsel declared M. M. to have appeared to her about
two days thereafter with her head bound up with a Napkin (or handker chief) in
which like habit or posture, she did not formerly appear.

Upon Thursday thereafter being February 25 She continued in the former fits,
weeping bitterly and complaining of pain in both her sides, she also told in
the interval of her fits, that she was that night to be in very grievous and
sore fits, her tormenters being resolved to choke her, by putting pins in her
mouth, which (tho she emptied her self of all that were in her Clothes) yet
accordingly came to pass: In which she was both Blind and Deaf, leaping up and
down in an extraordinary manner, pulling down what ever came to her Hand, and
this continued for some days putting out of her Mouth a great quantity of small
broken Pins, which she declared J. R. had forced into the same.

Upon the Lords day being the last of February, about five a Clock in the
Afternoon she fell into grie^ous fits, accompained with Hideous or loud
Laughing, Leaping, and running with violence to and fro, and thereafter vveept
sore, crying out of Pain, that alittle Highland Man, (whom she knew to be such
by his habit and speech) was now breaking her Leg; which (because of pain) she
scarce could get told in the fit, and putting her Hand to the part of her Leg
affected, Spectators untying her stocking, distinctly observed a sore bruise in
her Shin-bone; which when touched did so pain her, that she uttered horrid
Schreeks and Cries; and when recovered did declare, that the little Highland
fellow had given her that bruise. After this, she put out of her Mouth a
crooked Pin, by which she told the fore said Highland fellow having forced it
into her Mouth, designed to Choke her.

The first eight days of March she continued in her former fits; with little
Variation, putting out of her Mouth a great number of small Pins, often
fainting and falling as Dead upon the ground on a sudden, again struggling with
Feet and Hands; by all which her Natural Spirits were much Weakened and
Exhausted; sometimes also she Essayed to go into the Fire. About this time when
Ministers and other Christians met in the Family for Prayer, she used at the
beginning of the work to make great disturbance, particularly March 2. which
day being set a part for Fasting and Praying in the Family, prayer begun, she
was for some time very composed, until of a sudden, a strong blast of Wind
forced open the Windows of the Room; upon which she was instantly seized with a
violent fit, the Minister in the very same time supplicating GOD that she might
be delivered from Satan's Bonds: In which fit she being both Blind and Deaf as
to All, except her Tormentors, was hurried with violence to and fro the Room,
sometimes falling down as one Dead, sometimes Singing and making a Hidious loud
Noise, sometimes nameing M. M. and others, who she said, were there present
Afflicting and Tormenting her, withal, nameing the particular places of the
Room where she, saw them standing and sitting. After all which, when recorered
out of the fit, she told that a Gentlewoman woman and a little Highland fellow
came in with the blast of Wind, which forced open the Windows. This falling out
upon the Tuesday, she continued in the light fit without any Intermission, till
the Sabbath thereafter, not being seized with any of her sore fits: And having
gone to Church the Lords day following, was perfectly well for the most part of
the day; yet affirmed she saw Janet Wagh and others in one of the Windows of
the Church, tho invisible to all others.

Tuesday, being March the 9th. Her Mother and Margaret Campbel her Cousin took
the Damsel to walk with them in the Orthard; and returning back to the house,
her Mother entering the Tower gate first, the Damsel being at her back and
Margaret Campbel tarrying a little while at the gate; her Mother going into the
Kitchen, supposed they had both been with her, whereas the Damsel was of a
sudden carried away in a flight up Stairs with so swis^ and unaccountable
motion, that her absence was nor in the least suspected, but her Mother turning
about and missing her, cried whither is Christian and Margaret Campbel? And
instantly running up Stairs to look for the Damsel heard a noise and following
the same, found the Damsel Leaping and Dancing upon one of the Stairs being
seized with fits, out of which when she had recovered she told, that J. P. had
carried her away from her Mothers back as she entered the Kitchen door (her feet
not touching the ground to her apprehension) and that with a design to strangle
her in an high wardrob with Ropes on which the Linning used to dry, but that
the said J. P. could carry her no further then the place where she was found,
and did therefore leave her in such a Violent fir,

Upon the Lords day thereafter being March 14. Her fits again altered, in that
her Mouth and Nose were prodigiously distorted and turned about while in the
fit, herface being thereby strangely and horridly deformed. That same day she
being in Church in the Forenoon, her Glove falling from her, the same was again
put into her Hand by some invisible Agent, to the Amazment of beholders. To
which we may add here, as that which is worthy of remark, that all this while
an Invisible being, haunted her on all occasions, suggesting many things unto
her, both concerning her self and others; but yet never heard by any but her
self.

The same day betwixt Sermons, she told that she was to be violently Tormented
in the Afternoon; which accordingly came to pass, and when in her fits she
named one J. K. a Woman living in the Neighboring bounds of whom she said, that
she had seen her in the Church. As also, that she was Master of these kind of
fits she was now afflicted with; withal asserting, that if the said I. K. were
not sent for, she would grow worse and worse; which her parents finding to be
true, sent in the Evening for the said. I. K threatening her, if the Damsel was
any further troubled with her, that she should be apprehended as others had
been; after which the Damsel being in the mean time in a very sore fit, the
forementioned I. K. prayed (tho not desired) that GOD might send the Damsel her
Health; whereupon the Damsel was no more troubled with these kind or fits; but
did instantly recover, by failing into a swoon as she used to do before
recovery out of any of her fits.

Tuesday being March 16, she was again seized with her other kind of fits, all
the parts of her body being Stiff and Rigid; and sometimes in them was heard
conversing with the Gentlewoman (as she called her) vindicating her self of
what the Gentlewoman alleged against her, Viz. That she had accused some
innocent persons as her Tormenters. To which the Damsel distinctly Replied,
That she was a Liar, saying, it was you your self, and none other ever
mentioned any such thing.

Thus she continued until the Friday thereafter, being never free of the light
fits, now and then also falling into swoons, and appeared to be almost choked
by the means of some Charms and Enchantments, invisibly conveyed into her
Mouth; which to the apprehension of Spectators, were as if it had been pieces
of Chastnuts, Orange-pills, Whites of Eggs, or such like, all which were
distinctly observed, when occasionally in the fit she opened her Mouth; and
when Spectators Essayed to get them out, she kep't her Mouth and Teeth so
closs, that no strength could open the same. And when recovered out of the fit,
she told L. M. a Woman living in the Neighboring bounds had put them in her
Mouth.

Upon Friday being March 19. She was violently Tormented with sore fits, in
which her Neck was distorted, and bended back like a Bow toward her Heels,
struggling with Feet and Hands, sometimes Stiff, Blind, and Deaf, putting out of
her Mouth a great number of small Pins; which she said the forementioned L. M.
had put in her Mouth. And about six a Clock that same Night being violently
Tormented, fell a crying, That if the Gentlewoman was not apprehended that
Night, it would be in vain to apprehend her to morrow: For, said she, I have
much to suffer at her Hands betwixt Twelve and One a Clock in the Morning.
After this the Damsel lifting up her Eye lids with her Hands, and looking
upwards, said, what art thou that tells me that the Sheriff and my Father are
coming here this Night? After which the Sheriff, her Father and James Guthry
Meacer to the Justiciary Court instantly come up stairs, to the Amazment of
those who remembered what the Damsel just now had said. The Damsel continuing
all this while Blind and Deaf; yet was heard (the foresaid persons being
present) distinctly to discourse with some in visible Being near to her,
saying, Is the Sheriff come, is he near me? and streaching out her hand to feel
if any were about her, the Sheriff put his hand in here is; notwithstanding of
which, she said to the invisible Being discoursing with her, I cannot feel the
Sheriff, how can he be present here? or how can I have him by the hand as thou
say, seeing I feel it not? Thou say he has brown colored Cloths, red
plush Breeches with black strips, flovvred Musting Cravat, and an imbroidered
Sword Belt: Thou says there is an Old gray Hair'd Man with him, having a Ring
upon his Hand; but I can neither see nor feel any of them? what are they come
to apprehend the GentleWoman? Is this their Erand indeed? And the Gitle being
enquired how she came to the knowledge of these strange things? Replied as
formerly in the like case, something speaking distinctly as above her Head,
suggested them to her. It is very observeable here, that the foresaid persons
had that same Afternoon got an order from the Commissioners of Justiciaty to
apprehend the same Gentlewoman, and were so far on their way to put it to
Execution against the next Morning; but being witnesses to the Damsels trouble,
and hearing what she had told, to wit: That a delay in that matter would prove
to her exceeding dangerous, they went straight on in their Journey that same
Night to the Gentlewomans Habitation, and put their warrant to Execution.

As the Damsel still continued to be violently Tormented, sometimes lying with
her Neck and other parts of her Body upon the Ground; as if they had been
disjoynted, sometimes also Essaying to throw her self into the Fire. About Ten
a Clock the same Night she continuing in the Fit, her Father (who had not gone
with the Sheriff) beginning to read a part of the Word of GOD, she repeated the
Words after him tho Blind and Deaf in the mean time, which made Spectators
apprehend, that the Damsel had the sense of Hearing in these sorts of fits, at
least when the Word of GOD was read: To find out the truth of which, her Father
did cease from reading, which tho he did; yet the Damsel continued to repeat
the following Verses of the Chapter, while none in the Room were reading, and
she her self had no Book: withal being heard say to some invisible Being about
her, Will thou teach me a part of the Old Testament as well as the New.

The Damsel still continuing in the fore mentioned Fits, said unto the Persons
present, that now it was Twelve of the Clock; Oh it is now past Twelve,
sometimes lying as one dead through the violence of pain and decay of her
natural Spirits, sometimes again recovering, essayed to express somewhat, but
could not; withal putting out of her Mouth a great quantity of crooked Pins,
and the parts of her Body being prodigiously distorted, she complained of great
pain: Thus she continued until half an hour after Twelve a Clock at Night; when
on a sudden she recovered, to the admiration of Beholders, telling them, She
might now go to Bed, being told by some invisible Informer, that the Sheriff
and the other Gentleman, to wit the Macer, had now entered the Gentlewomans
House; and accordingly going to bed, was no further troubled that Night. It is
worthy of remark here, that the Sheriff and Macer at their return did declare,
that it was just about that time they entered the Gentlewomans House, which the
Damsel condescended upon.

Saturday being March 20- About Ten a Clock in the Forenoon she was of a sudden
seized with fits falling down as dead, her eyes quite closed, sometimes again
opening and turning in her head, she saw nor heard none about her, but was
hurried with violence to and fro through the Room, crying with a loud voice when
any by force would hinder her motion. She being in this posture and deprived
thus of her senses, James Lindsay one of the three Confessants was brought into
the Room, who no sooner entered the door but was perceived by her, and she
smiling ran toward him, saying Jamie where have thou been this long time; how
is it with thee? And answered him distinctly to every word he spoke, tho at the
same time she neither heard nor saw any other in the Room, nor could converse
with them albeit tried by several experiments for that purpose, particularly a
Tobacco Box being held before her Eyes by a person present in the Room, she did
not see it, but as soon as it was put in the hand of James Lindsay she
instantly enquired at him, "Where he had got that Box; she continuing in this
posture, the Sheriff, her Father being present, thought it fit to confront M.
M. who was now come, thereby to try if the Damsel would hear or see her as she
had done James Landssay, which accordingly they did. And as soon as M. M.
entered the door the Damsel (tho still in the fit) presently smiled and said, I
see the Gentlewoman now, tho formerly she had never seen her personally but
only her spectre in the fits. She likewise heard her when she spoke to her
answering distinctly some questions proposed by M. M, such as, When it was she
had seen her tormenting her. To which she answered, she had seen her the other
night in her fits, and further challenged her, Why she had restrained her from
making known the Highland Wifes name, as also saying unto her, Thou pretends
thou know not what I say, thou know well enough. Upon all which; the
Gentlewoman on a sudden (without being desired) prayed, That the Lord might
send the Damsel her health saying, "Lord help thee poor daft Child and rebuke
the Devil. Which words were no sooner uttered then the Damsel fell down as
dead, and being in this posture carried to another Room instantly recovered of
the Blind, Deaf, and also of the light fit becomeing perfectly well and
continued so for sometime, and being thus recovered and M. M. removed into
another Room, the Damsel was enquired at whom she had seen in her last fit. To
which she replied, she had seen the Gentlewoman, tho in the mean time she was
altogether ignorant of the Gentlewomans ever being personally present in the
Room with her.

The same day the Commissioners of Justiciary having come to Bargarran. M. M.
and the Damsel were again confronted, upon which the Damsel (being in the light
Fit) upon the first look of the forementioned M. M, was suddenly seized with
sore Fits, out of which when recovered, she accused her as being one of her
most violent tormenters, particularly mentioning such and such times in which
she had in an extraordinary manner afflicted her, as also what words she spoke
in her hearing while in the Fit, and which is yet more remarkable, did question
the Gentlewoman if she did not sometime in December last when she was
tormenting her, remember how she went away from her in great haste, saying, she
could stay no longer being obliged to attend a Child's burial at home. In
confirmation of which it is very credibly informed that W^ R, a near neighbor
of hers had a Child burried that same day, and that the Gentlewoman came not in
due time to attend the Corpse to the burial place, but the Corpse being near to
the Church yeard ere she reached the House from whence they came, she returned
again to her own lodging, and so did not accompany the burial at all.

The Lords day following being March 21, she fell into Swooning Fits
complaining of no pain, except near to her heart, falling down as dead not only
when the Fits seized her, but also when she recovered, sometimes Singing after
an unusual manner, withal informing Spectators that J. G. constrained her to
that kind of Music, her own Lips not at all moving in the mean time, which
beholders saw to be true, only her Tongue, for preventing of which she
frequently put her hand into her Mouth. And at this time when either the
herself, or those about her, offered to read any part of Scripture, she was
violently. Tormented, declaring if she did but so much as hear the word of God
read that day, she would certainly be extremely Tortured, in Confirmation of
which when some essayed to read Hebr. 11.2, 4.6. Isa. 40. Psalm. 3. She uttered
horrid Schreeks and Outcries, Complaining that She was Pinched, in evidence of
which, the Prints or Marks of the Nails of Fingers were distinctly seen on her
Arms, and being thus pinched or bitter four several times with great violence
and pain, the Skin it self was seen to be torn from off these parts of her Arms
and Fingers where the Prints of the ^eeth and Nails were observed; so that from
the deepness of the Wounds the foresaids parts affected fell a Bleeding, which
Blood was bot^^ seen and handled by Spectators. Moreover the Damsel while in
this sad and ^^mentable condition seemed to be extremely affected and oppressed
with sore Sickness, as one in a Fever, ^^ying sometimes to Remove these Dead
Children ^^t of her Sight; which she frequently repeated from six to nine in
the Morning, and she fall continuing through the reft of the day, it was
observed that some Charms and I^chantments were put in her Mouth as formerly,
of which the Damsel being very sensible, fell down on (...) Sudden on the
Ground putting her hand to some Spittle which she had put out of her Mouth, and
lifted some Trash which she again cast down to the Ground, it making some
Norse, but yet neither seen in her Spittle, nor else where by Spectators, tho
while in her Mouth they distinctly observed something like Orange Pills, Whites
of Eggs, and pieces of Chasn^ts.

Monday, Being March, 22, the fore mentioned L. M. or J. G. came to Bargarrans
house, and being confronted with the Damsel, questioned her if ever she had
seen her in any of her Fits, withal alleging that she viz. L. M. or J. G could
be none of her Tormentors, because the Damsel was not now seized with a Fit,
tho looking upon her as she used to be, when she looked upon any of her other
Tormentors when Confronted with them; upon which the Damsel being for sometime
silent. L. M. or J. G. did again propose the same question to her, to which the
Damsel distinctly replied Yes, upon which L. M. replied, perhaps, you have seen
the Devil in my Shape.

As to this Conference there are several things exceeding remarkable, as first,
that the Damsel upon her Answering, Yes, was immediately seized with a Fit.
2dly. That however after Katharine Campbel had touched the Damsel in presence
of the Commissioners, upon the 5th, of February last, she had ever since that
time freedom to touch any of her Tormentors without being seized with her Fits,
as has been hinted, yet true it is, that in the room of that Charm a new one
took place, viz. When any time she looked upon her Tormentors in the Face, at
the very first look she was seized with her Fits; which Charm she declared was
laid by the means of the forementioned L. M. or J. G. And also taken off again
by her that very Morning before she came to visit the Damsel, and this she said
was suggested to her by some invisible being, speaking distinctly as it were
above her head; and that therefore the Damsel now had freedom to look L. M. in
the Face without being seized with Fits, which for a considerable time before
she could not do when confronted with any of her Tormentors 3ly, It is yet more
observable, that in the same Morning before ever L. M. came to visit the
Damsel, it was told by the Damsel to several Persons in the Family, that L. M.
had taken off that Charm, of her being seized with Fits when looking any of her
Tormentors in the Face, but withal that she had laid on another in its room, to
wit, that as soon as the Damsel should by words confer with any of her
Tormentors, so soon should she be seized with a Fit, which accordingly was
verified when she spoke to L. M. or J. G.

Tuesday being March. 23d, The Damsel being asleep in the Bed with her Mother
about three aclock in the Morning was on a sudden awakned (having for sometime
Struggled in her Sleep) in great fear and consternation, and being seized with
her Blind and Deaf Fits, took fast hold of her Mother, declaring to her Father
and her, that the Devil was standing near to the Bed assaulting her, upon which
she cried suddenly: God Almighty keep me from thy meetings. I Will die rather then
go to them, I Will never through the Grace of God Renounce my Baptism; for I Will
certainly go to Hell if I do it: Thou say I Will go to Hell however, because I
am a great Sinner; but I believe what the word of God says, tho I have many
Sins; yet the Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin, and I will not add that
great wickedness to my other S^ns, which thou art tempting me to do. It Is no
wonder thou lie to me, seeing thou wast bold to lie in Gods Face. I know thou
art a Liar from the beginning; and the red Co^t thou promisest me, I know thou
can not perform it. And although I should never Recover, I 'm never resolved to
renounce my Baptism, It is God who has kept me all this time from being a
Witch, and I trust, he will yet by his Grace keep me, not because of any thing
in me, but of his ^^n great Mercy, and that he who has kept me hitherto from
being devoured by thee, I hope will yet keep me. This Conference continued near
the space of an hour, her Father Mother and others being ear Witnesses to the
same. And after recovery the Damsel declared that it was the Devil, who (in the
shape of a naked Man with a Shirt, having much hair upon his hands and his Face
like Swine Bristles) has appeard to her tempting her as aforesaid.

Until Sabbath following she continued in the light Fit, but withal every
Morning and Evening was still seized with her sore Fits, continuing still to
name M, M, (who was at this time set at liberty) the forementioned L. M, E. T.
an Highland wife, and others as being her tormentors. It is more then
remarkable here that M, M. being set at Liberty upon Bail, the very day after
she went home, she again appeared to the Damsel tormenting her in her fits, and
continued so to do several days thereafter, particularly upon the Saturday
being March 27 after she was set at liberty: The which day the Damsel was heard
name her in the fits and say to her, will thou say God help me poor mad or
foolish child as thou said the other day before the Judges: art thou wishing
the Devil to take me? where is the Habit thou was clothed with the other
day.

On Sabbath Morning, being March 28. the Damsel through GOD's great Mercy
toward her, was perfectly recovered, both of all her Sort and light Fits;
becoming as Well, Sensible, and Composed as ever.

If it shall be questioned, how the Truth of all these strange Things is
attested? There is none of those Particulars mentioned in the Narrative, but
had in the first Draught the Witnesses insert at the end of every particular
Paragraph, and attested before the Commissioners for Enquiry at R^nfrew, by the
Subscriptions of the respective Witnesses. But seeing the placing of them so
now, would have occasioned the repetition of several persons Names over and
over again, and would have made this Narrative swell too much in bulk;
Therefore we judged it fittest now to set down the Names altogether ar the end
of the Narrative; and the rather that seeing these things fell not out in a
private Corner; but Thousands in this Country have been Eye and Ear Witnesses
thereof to their admiration and raising of their Sympathy, and been fully
convinced beyond all debate of a Diabolical influence upon the Affliction of
the Damsel: We shall only now make mention of a few, Viz, beside the Father,
Mother, Grandmother, and nearest Relations of the Damsel, and servants of the
Family, who were always present with her in her Fits: such of the Commissioners
for Inquiry, and of Justiciary as had occasion to be on the place of the
Events, particularly the lord Blantyre, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir
John Ma^Well or Pollock, Sir John Houston of That ilk, Alexander Porterfield of
that ilk, the Lord of Black hall younger, the Lord of Glanderstone, the Lord
of Craigens, Porterfield of Fulwood, John Alexander of Black house, Mr. Semple
Sheriff of Renfrew: And several other Honorable persons of good Sense and
pr^ing Wits; such as the Noble Earl of Marshal, the Lord of Orbiston, the
Lord of Kilmarnock, the Lord of Meldrum, the Lord of Bishopton Elder and
Younger, Gavin Cochran of Craigmure, William Denneston of Colgrain, Dr. Matthew
Brisbon, etc. And many Ministers, who kept days of Humiliation and Prayer
weekly in the Family, and sometimes in the Parish Church with the Congregation,
Viz. Mr. James Hutchison Minister of the Gospel at K^^ellan, Mr. Patrick Simson
at Renfrew, Mr James ^tirling at Kilbarchan Mr. Thomas Blackwal at Paisly, Mr.
James Brisban at Kilmacolm^, Mr. Rebort Tailor at Houston; and of Neighboring
Presbytries, Mr Neill Gillies; Mr. James Brown, Mr. John Gray Ministers of the
Gospel at Glasgow; while the Damsel was there; Mr. John Ritchie Minister at Old
Kilpatrick, Mr. Alexander King at Bonnil, Mr. Archibald Wa^lace at Cardress,
Mr. John Anderson at Dryramen, Mr. Andrew Turner Minister of the Place, who was
frequently there: besides; Mr. Menzies of Camme, and Mr. Grant of Cullen,
Advocates: who were Eye and Ear Witnesses to several important passages of the
Damsels Affliction, and the convincing evidences of it is flowing from the
Operation of the Devil, and his Instruments. The Truth whereof is further
Adminiculat by the Progress and Issue of the Trial, at which were present at
several Occasions, not only Sir John Hamiltoun of Halcraig one of the Senators
of the College of justice, Sir John Shavv of Greenock, Commissar Smollet of
Bonnill, Mr, James Stevvart Advocat, who were concerned in the Commission with
these others before mentioned: But also a great confluence of several Nobility
and Gentry out of the Country, such as the Earl of Glencairn, the Lord
Killmares, the Lord Semple, etc.

And now we are sure, that after all the pregnant evidences of the truth of
this Relation as to matter of Fact, they must be persons very hard of belief
that can allow themselves to deny credit thereunto: And must needs conclude,
that there is nothing credible in the World that ever has been delivered to
Mankind or posterity; and that they resolve to believe nothing though never so
fully attested which they do not see with their own Eyes, and perhaps there are
some hardened in their prejudicat conceits that will not believe even these so
far as they may have influence to convince them of their Errors; but wisdom is
and will be justified of all her Children. And among all Ingenuous and sober
Persons, We are hopeful this Narrative (which plainly relates things as they
fell out without any kind of disguise) will obtain such entertainment as it is
truly designed for, Viz. That we be hereby more and more confirmed in the
Faith of the being of God and invisible Spirits, and admire and adore the
wonderful works of God in the Depths of his Judgment, and that there is really
a Hellish Hierarchy and Combination of Infernal Spirits enemies to God; and
working all the mischief they can to Men; whereby also, there is an evident
Testimony given to the Truth of what is related in the Scriptures concerning
the same, and withal to lament, that through the just displeasure of our Holy
and Righteous GOD, those Devils get leave to break forth with so much Rage and
Fury, and gets so many among professed Christians into a hellish confederacy with
themselves to be the instruments of their Malice, and the actors of so many
Tragedies in the Christian World: To stir us up also to bless and magnify our
GOD that those Devils and their Instruments are chained and limited that they
cannot work all the evil they would, and as long as they will: and therefore to
join in Thanksgiving to GOD for His deliverance of that afflicted Family and
Damsel. Finally as we are to submit to such Afflictions as the LORD may think
fit to measure out unto us, by whatsoever instruments as in the case of Job; so
we are called to Watch and Pray that we enter not into Temptation while we have
such Adversarys going about still seeking to devour us, and to rejoice that we
have a strong protector the blessed Captain of our Salvation, the LORD JESUS
CHRIST who has obtained the Victory over all the Devils in Hell, and has
promised all his Saints a share in His Victory, which they begin to have even
in time, 1 Epistle Job. 4.4, And he has given us hope through Grace of a
speedy and certain accomplishment thereof. Romans 16.20. And therefore when we
see all these things come to pass. Luk, 21.28, "Let us lift up our heads
because our Redemption draws nigh.

FINIS.
An Abreviat of the Precognition and Report made by the Commissioners appointed
by His Majesty's Privy Council for Enquiry: And of the Confessions of Elizabeth
Anderson, James and Thomas Lindsays, transmitted by these Commissioners to the
Council before granting of the Commission for the Trial. To which is subjoined,
the sum of the Confessions of Margaret and Jannet Rodgers, who did confess
during the Trial of the rest, beyond Expectation. Together also with an account
of the Confession and Death of John Reid, who made a Discovery conform to the
former Witnesses, after the Trial was over. And finally, there are added some
passages which fell out at the Execution of the Seven Witches who were
Condemned.
THE Commissioners for Enquiry having met at Bargarran in February 1697, did
choose the Lord Blantyre Praeses, and took the Confession of Elizabeth
Anderson, aged about 17 Years, as follows.

That about seven Years ago she stayed with Jean Fultoun her Grandmother, and
playing about the Door, she saw a black grim Man go in to her Grand-mothers
House: After which, her Grandmother came to the Door, called her in, and
desired her to take the Gentleman (as she named him) by the hand; and which she
did, but finding it very cold, became afraid; and immediately he evanished.
About a Month thereafter, her Grandmother and she being in the House together,
the said Gentleman (whom she then suspected to be the Devil) appeared to them,
and fell a talking with her Grandmother, by rounding in one another Ears:
Upon which the Grandmother desired her to take him by the hand, being a friend
of hers; but Elizabeth refusing, the Grandmother threatened, that she would
get none of the Clothes promised to her, unless she should obey: Yet Elizabeth
withstood, saying, The Lord be between me and him; whereupon he went away in a
flight, but she knew not how. Elizabath was not trouble for a long time
thereafter, till her Father desiring her to go with him a Begging through the
Country; and she saying, that she needed not seek her Meat, seeing she might
have Work; her Father pressed her to go along, and took her to a Moor in
Kilmacome, where were gathered together, at that and other subsequent Meetings,
Katharine Campbel, Margaret Fulton (her Grand Aunt) Margaret Lang, John Reid
Smith, Margaret and Janet Rodgers, the three Lindsays (beside the two
Confessant ones) etc. and severals whom she did not know, and the foresaid
Gentleman with them. He came to Elizabeth, bidding her renounce her Baptism,
promising that if she would consent thereunto, she should get better Meat and
Cloths, and not need to beg. But (as she declared) she would not consent. Then
he enquired what brought her thither, she answered, that she came with her
Father: Whereupon the Devil and her Father went and talked together apart, but
she knew not where about. Declares, that in that Meeting was conferred the
Tormenting of Mr. William Fleeming Minister at Inner^ipp his Child. Elizabeth
Confesses she was at an other Meeting with that Crew above the Town of
Kilpatrick, with the foresaid Gentleman whom they called their Lord: And that
she went with her Father to the Ferrie-boat of Erskin; where the Devil with the
rest of the Band overturned the Boat and drowned the Lord of Brighouse and the
Ferrier of Erskine, with several special Circumstances thereanent; particularly
that some of the Crew would have saved the Ferrier, but one of them, Viz. His
Mother in Law gainstood it, in regard he had expelled her out of his House
alittle while before the Meeting. Acknowledges she was present with them at the
destroying of William Montgomeries Child, by strangling it with a Sea Napkin:
where they having entered the House lighted a Candle which was some what
Bluish, and Agnes Naismith saying, what if the People a wake, Margaret Fulton
replied, ye need not fear: As also declares, that about five Weeks before the
date, her Father brought her on foot to Bargarrans Orchard, into which they
entered by a slop in the Dyke, and where were present the persons before named,
etc. and the Devil, who told that no Body would see them, at which they
laughed. At this Meeting they, with their Lord, contrived the Destruction of
Christian Shaw: Some being for Stobbing her with a Touck, others for Hanging
her with a Cord, a third sort for Choking her, and some intended to have her
out of the House to Destroy her; but fearing they might be taken before the
next meeting to that effect, their lord (as they called him) gave them a piece
of an unchristned Child's Liver to eat, (but the Declarant and the other two
Confessants slipped the eating of it) telling them, that though they were
apprehended they should never Confess, which would prevent an effectual
Discovery: And further, severals of them being afraid that the Declarant would
Confess, and tell of them as she had done formerly on her Grandmother, they
threatened to tear her all in pieces if she did so; and particularly Margaret
Laing threatened her most. After two Hours, or thereby, they disappeared in a
flight, except the Declarant, who went home on her Foot. Confesses likewise,
That one Night her Father raised her out of her Bed, and they having in a
flight; from whence they went on foot to Dunbritton, and in Mr. John Hardy
Minister his Yeard, the crew and their Lord being met, they formed the Picture
of Mr. Hardy, and dabed it full of pins, and having put it amongst Water and
Ale mixed, roasted it on a Spit at a Fire. etc, After which her father and her
self returned in the same manner as they went. Declares the particular persons
that were employed, and most industrious in the several Facts beforementioned,
etc,

James Lindsay (aged 14 Years) declares, That one day he met with the decast
Jean-Fulton his Grandmother at her own House, where she took from him a little
round Cape and a plack; but being grieved, he required them from her again, and
she refusing he called her an old Witch and ran away, upon which she followed
him and cried that she should meet him with an ill turn. About 3 days
thereafter he being a begging in the Country he met his Grandmother with a
black Grim Man, etc. Whom she desired him to take by the hand, which James did,
but found it exceeding cold and was straightly griped, whereupon the said
Gentleman (as she termed him) asked the declarant if he would serve him, and he
sho^^d have a Coat, Hat, and several other things, to which James answered yes,
I Will do it, and after this the foresaid Gentleman (whom the declarant knew
thereafter to be the Devil) and his Grandmother went away but knows not how.
Acknowledges he was frequently thereafter at meetings with the Devil and
Witches, particularly these mentioned in Elizabeth Andersons confession: that
their Lord came to James at the first public meeting, took him by the hand,
and forbade him to tells that they contrived before hand at the said meeting
the dtowning of Brighouse, and concurrs with Elizabeth Anderson anent the
design of saving the Ferrier which his Mother in Law did divert. He being
Interrogat, declared he did not see J. K. and J. W. at committing of the
foresaid Fact; (And indeed they were then in prison) that they with a Cord
strangled Matthew Park's Child; and that the Person who waited on the Child
finding it stifled, cried out Matthew Matthew, the Bairn is Dead: Elizabeth
Anderson concurrs in this particular; and tells that when they had done, they
took the Cord with them. Declares, that he was present at strangling William
Montgomeries Child with a Sea Napkin, and heard Agnes Naismith say dravv the
L^^p etc. That about five Weeks since he was carried to them in Bargarrans
Orchard, and concurrs with Elizabeth Anderson in what was treated there, anent
distroying Christian Shavv, and the Charm against Confessing. Likeways the
Meeting in Dunbritton anent Mr. Hardy, is acknowledged by him: And that he has
several times appeared to Christian Shavv both in Glasgovv and Bargarran, with
the others that did Tormen^ her and put in her Mouth Coal-cindets, Bones, Hay,
Hair, Sticks, etc. Intending thereby to Choke her: That he and they did often
times Prick and Stob her in this manner, Viz. He had a Needle which if he put
in his Clothes, her Body would be pricked and stobed in that place where he
fixed the Needle, and if he put it in his Hair, that part of her Head would be
Tormented: That he saw her put out the Pins they had put in, at which time he
cried these words, He^p J. D. who was also then present: That when the
Ministers began to pray in Bargarrrans House at several occasions, the Devil
and they immediately went away etc.

Thomas Lindsay being below pupillarity, declares the same Jean Fulton his
Grandmother awaked him one Night out of his Bed, and caused him take a Black
Grimm Gentleman (as she called him) by the Hand; which he felt to to be cold:
And who having enquired if Thomas would serve him and be his Man, and he would
give him a Red Coat, the declarant consented: And the Gentleman (whom he knew
thereafter to be the Devil) gave him a Nip in the Neck which continued sore for
Ten days. Thereafter one day after his Grand-mothers decease, coming by her
House, he thought she appeared to him clapping his Head, and desiring him to be
a good Servant to the Gentleman to whom she had gifted him, and forbidding him
to reveal it. Declares, that one Night lying in Bed in the house of one Robert
Shavv, he was awakened out of his sleep and carried in a flight to Matthew
Parks House, where were present the particular persons named by him, and
concurrs as to the manner present the particular persons named by him, and
concurrs as to the manner of strangling of the Child with James Lindsay his
Brother: And that another Night being in the House of Walter Alexander; he was
brought to the strangling of William Montgomeries Child, and agrees likeways in
the manner of it with his Brother; only he says the Sea-Naphin with which they
committed the Fact was specled. He likewise concurrs as to the Meeting in
Bargarrans Orchard about five weeks ago, and what was acted therein: As also
anent Mr. Hardy; with this Addition, That himself turned the Spitt whereon the
Picture was roasted, etc.

It is to be noticed, that as the three Confessants were separatly apprehended
upon several occasions, so they (after the obstinacy to discover was abated)
did in it these confessions in several distinct places without Communication
with, or knowledge of, one another confessions in manner mentioned in the
preceding Narrative. The Commissioners did examine them upon other trying
questions that were new, thereby to make experiment of their co^sonancy or
disagreement: But still found them strangely to accord. The Facts did fall out
in the manner declared by them, particularly the strangling of the Children,
death of the Minister, drowning of those in the boat, and torture of Bargarrans
daughter mentioned in the Confessions before expressed. Further, the
Commissioners did confront them both with Christian Shaw the afflicted Girl,
and the Confessants did accuse these to their Faces, and bind them in
circumstances with great steddiness and congruity tho separatly brought in. The
Commissioners did also try some experiments annent the Girl her falling in
Fits on approach of the accused, as is expressed in the Narrative; and examined
her, with these who stayed commonly about her upon the particulars of her
Sufferings: they tried to cause her write (since she could not say out) the
name of a person whom she first called Margaret or pinc^ Maggi^ and asserted to
be one of her chief bourriers; yet upon writing Margaret and the letter L, of
her Surname the Girl was persently taken with a fearful convulsion, the pen
being struck out of her hand and her self falling as dead, with groans heavier
and sorer then ordinary: After some recovery whereof some Ministers pointed to
her a passage of the bible, but upon essaying to cast her eyes on it, she fell
into vehement pangs; till one of the Commissioners desiring the Book might be
closed, and that being done she immediately came to her self, etc. Lastly, the
Commissioners called before them those presons who had signed the passages of
the several days in the written Journal of this Girls sufferings: and having
examined them thereupon, transmitted the same with the Declarations of the
three Confessants, and several of the passages that occurred in the
precognition, to his Majestys Privy Council by whom they were appointed for
that effect

Besides this, the fubfcrived attestations of Doctor Matthew Brishant Phisician,
and Mr, Henry Marshall Apothecary in Glasgovv, did influence the belief of an
extraordinary cause of these events,

The Doctor on the 31. December 1696 tells, that at first sight when he was
brought, the Girl appeared so brisk in Motion, so florid in color, so
cheerful, and in a word every way healthful, that he could hardly be
persuaded she had need of a Physician: But whithin Je^ Minutes he found himself
obliged to alter his thoughts, for she rose from her Seat, and advertised she
was instantly to be seized with a fit, according whereunto he observed a
considerable distention in her left Hypochondre, which in a Trace falling, she
was forth with taken with horrid convulsive Motions and heavy Groans at first;
which afterward as soon as she was able to frame words, turned into
Expostulatery Mourning against some Women; particularly. Campbel and Nasmith.
Yet he thought those Symptoms were reducible to the Freaks of H^pochondriak
Melancholy, and therefore put her in such a course as was proper against that
kind of Malady. Upon which being freed, for some time: he was alarumed that the
Child was returned to Town worse then ever for having his assistance He then
was frequently with her, and observed her narrowly; so that he was confident
she had no visible correspondent to Subminister Hair, Straw, Coalcinders, Hay,
and such like trash unto her; all which upon several occasions he saw her put
out of her Mouth without being wet; Nay rather as they had been dried with
Artifice, and actually Hot above the Natural Warmth of the Body; sometimes
after severe fits, and other times without Trouble when discoursing with him.
When she had not only light Convulsive Motions, but to a high degree, such
Rigidity of the whole Body, as we call (...) she did not fancy as at other
times, that she saw these persons already named about her: But the upcasting of
the Trash abovementioned did no sooner cease, then in all her fits when she was
able to speak any, she always cried out that they were pricking or pinching
her. He saw her also when free of fits suddenly seized with Dumbness, etc. And
this he solemnly declares himself to have seen and ^andled, and were it not for
the Hay, Straw, etc. He should not despair to reduce the other Symptoms to
their proper Classes in the Catolague of humane Diseases. And in respect of
these and some other Specialitys, the Doctor thereafter being adduced upon Oath
in the Trial, Depones, that in his Opinion these things did not proceed from
Natural Causes arising from the Patients Body.

Mr. Marthali the Apothecary, concurres with the Doctor: And gives some
particular instances of his own Observation: And amongst the rest, That the
Girl having fallen Headlong upon the ground, as she had been thrown down with
violence, fell a reasoning very distinctly thus: Katie what ails thee at me,
I Am sure I never did thee wrong, come let us 'gree, let there be no more
difference betwixt us, let us shake Hands together (putting forth her Hand as
if she would take another by the Hand, then taking in her Hand again, she said)
well Katie I cannot help it, ye will not 'gree with me: And immedatly she
cried, fell into a Swerff, and out of that into a Rage, wherein she continued
without intermission for about half an hour; and perfectly recovered. Then she
told him, that she saw Katie Campbel, Nanfii Nasmith, etc. and many more;
Campbel was going to thrust a Sword into her side, which made her so desirous
to be aggreed with her; and when the Girl told him this, she instantly fell
into another fit as formerly, in which she continued another half hour, etc.
Dated 1 January 1697.

During the Dependence of the Trial, Janet and Margaret R^dgers confessed in
this manner, The Commissioners had adjourned for two several dyets; and though
they were to meet on the Third. yet it was not expected that they would proceed
till providence might clear the prisoners guilt by further testimonys of those
who might come to confess. The very morning of the third Term, the R^dgers did
confess, which was a Surp^yse to every one that came up to attend the Court,
since these, as they were a Women, and were not formerly noticed as others
were; so they confessed of free motion without any persons desiring it of them
at the time; they had not such means of instruction as were administered to
others: And the conjuncture of many circumstan^es were altogether Singu^ar,
Their confessions did coincide as to the Mestings and things acted therein,
with the three former confessants, and the other evidences of the visible
matters of Fact. Only they were so pointed as to condescend upon some of the
pannals whom they did not see at these re^devouze^; and great care was taken to
^ompare their Testimonys with what had been already discovered, and to
expiscate their certain knowledge by new interrog^tors when they were sep^rate
from one another etc. The whole Crisis had such an evidence that now the Com^
mis ioners, with the general approbation of the most intelligent of the
Country, who came in to attend the Court, allowed the going on of the Process
to debate o^ the Relevancy, and putting seven of ^he best known criminals, for
whom an Advocat appeared, to the knowledge of an ^nquest: According whereunto
there were some days allowed for the Pannals giving in their Informations upon
the relevancy: and at the Term; there was a great time spent in adducing the
Probation an account whereof is referred to another place.

Upon the 21 of May 1697. After trial of the Seven Witches, there is an
Attestation Subscrived by Mr. Patrick Simpson Minister at Renfrevv, Walter Scot
Baillie there, etc. of this import. John Reid Smith at Inchennan prisoner, did
in presence of the said persons and some others; Declare, that about a Year ago
the Devil (whom he knew to be such thereafter) appeared to him when he was
traveling in the Night time, but spoke none to him at the first encounter. At
the second appearance he gave him a Bite or Nipp in his Loyn; which he found
painful for a Fortnight. That the third time he appeared to him as a Black
Man, etc. Desired him to engage in his Service upon assurance of getting Gear
and Comfort in the World; since he should not want any thing that he would ask
in the Devils Name: And then he renounced his Baptism, putting the one Hand to
the Crown of his Head, and the other to the Sole of his Foot; thereby giving
himself up to Sat^ns Service: After which the pain of the Bite or Nipp ceased.
He told that hitherto there was none others present; but thereafter he was at
several Meetings, particularly that in Bargarrans Yeard, about the time when
there was a Fast for Christian Shaw, where the Devil appeared in the same kind
of Garb as he first appeared to him, and they consulted Christians Death either
by Worrieing or Drowning her in the Well; and the Devil said, he should warrant
them, that they should neither be Heard, Seen, nor Confess, to which end he
gave every one of them a bitt of Flesh, that the Declarant got, but let it
fall, and did not Eat it. Thereafter in presence of the Lord of Jordanhill the
Minister, Mr. Andrew Cochran town Clerk, and Baillie Paterson, he owned his
former Confessions: And being enquired of Jordanhill how they were advertised
of their Meetings, he said that ordinarily at their Meetings the time of the
next was appointed; but for particular warning there appeared a Black Dog with
a Chain about his Neck, who tinkling it, they were to follow etc. And being
enquired by the Minister if he did now wholly renounce the Devil (for he had
formerly told how Satan had not performed his promise) and give himself to
JESUS CHRIST, and desire to find mercy of God through Him: he assented
thereunto. It is to be observed that John Reid after his Confession had called
out of the prison Window, desireing Baillie Scott to keep that old Body Angus
Forrester, who had been his fellow prisoner, closs and secure; whereupon the
company asked John when they were leaving him on Friday night the 21 of May,
whether he desired company or would be afraid alone, he said he had no fear of
any thing: So being left till Saturdays Forenoon, he was found in this posture.
Viz. sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth of the Chimney, with his feet
on the floor and his Body straight upward, his shoulders touching the lin^el of
the Chimney, but his Neck tied with his own neck-cloath (whereof the knot was
behind) to a small stick thrust into a clift above the lintell of the Chimney;
upon which the Company, and especially John Campbel a Chyrurgeon who was
called, thought at first in respect of his being in an ordinary posture of
sitting, and the neck cloth not having any run-loup but an ordinary knot which
was not very strait, and the sticks not having the strength to beat the weight
of his Body or the struggl^; that he had not been quite dead; but finding it
otherways and that he was in such a situation that he could not have been the
ac^or thereof hims^^f, concl^ded that some extraordinary couse had done it,
espe^ially considering that the Door of the Room was secured, and that ^^e^e
was a ^oard set over the Window which was not there the night before when they
^^it him.

There shall little be added anent what past at the Execution of the seven
Witches, because there is no Subcribed Attestation there anent: And the design
of the Publishers has been to advance nothing but what stands Warranded by
Testimonies of known Credit beyond Contradiction. Yet this much is Nottour;
that when they were going to the Stake, one of the Lindsays was overheard to
say-to the other, Now Brother it is time that we should Confess, since our
keeping it up vviill serve us to no purpose, or the like Expression; To which
the other Answered that they should never do that, etc. And Margaret Lang,
before and about Execution, let drop at Minutes of the Devils Inadvertance, That
when the Devil first appeared she knew him not to be such till afterward; that
he gave her the insensible Marks found upon her Body: She yielded to engage her
self his Service by a Covenant, and besides public meetings she had been above
80 times in private Conferences with him. Being enquired by a near Relation of
her own anent her being in Bargarrans House Tormenting Christian Shavv,
Answered in these Words, the Devil having an absolute Power and Dominion over
me carried my shape wither he would; and it is known how she Confessed
unnatural Lust, and profound Hypocrisy, etc. Tho truly it did appear from her
concurring Mein and Circumstances, that these things fell from her at Seasons,
when Natural Ingenuity and the vigor of Truth got the Start of Satan's
Manacles. So Agnes Naismith etc. Frequently told the Minister, that their Heart
and Tongue were bound up in such manner, that they could not express what they
would: And sometimes it appeared by ocular Inspection of their visage, that
convulsive Dampts did seize their Heads upon getting out the initial words of
any such attempt.

There are two remarkable instances in the Case of Katharine Campbel, who was
chief Instrument and Author of the Girls trouble. Viz. An Eminent Minister
discoursing before famous Witnesses to Katharine, and enquiring if she did not
distinctly remember the Godly Counsels, and gracious Admonitions; which
Christian Shaw while in a fit mentioned in the Narrative, Page, 13. gave her at
a certain time, and instancing some particular thereof: Her answer was with
heavy Groans, Yes I Remember. But being urged wherefore she would not Confess
the rest as well as that passage; and finding herself thereby to be Gravelled:
She began to Retract and seemed Dampt, not being able to Extricat her Answer
before mentioned. This occurred while she was in prison, before the trial: And
after it, she in presence of several Witnesses, did get out these words, That
the Doom pronounced on her was most just, and that she could not free her self
of Witchcraft: But upon such attempts she fell down Dead, strangly distended,
and that six or seven times Successivly, with a Suddeness, that was both
Surprising and Convincing to the Spectators: At which occasion it was observed,
that immediately before her falling into these fits; and upon her Essaying to
speak when there were Charges laid Home on her Natural Conscience; her Mouth
seemed to Contract* And she uttered heavy Moans; whereupon did follow her
Convulsion: but after raising out of them, she turned to be Obstinat and
Inflexible: And whenever there was any appearance of her being more Pl^ant, the
foresaid fits did overtake her.

There is one thing further; which does astruct the Credibility of what these
Confessants averred, viz. That there are some others, both Men and Women in the
Country, who have confessed and told the same things before some of the best
Gentry and others, whose Care could proceed no further for want of Authority,
which in due time will, no doubt, not suffer these Witches to live, whom Divine
and Human Laws have so justly ordained to be cut off. Wherefore till the Event
of a further Discovery, there ha^l only be added some passages which were
omitted in the Narrative, tho they be attested by some of the same persons that
were Witnesses to the other Matters mentioned therein.

Particularly, the Girl declares, that in one of her Conflicts with the Devil,
he told her how a certain Minister (for whom she had a special respect) did
Compile his Sermons through the Week what Books he chiefly made use of and
several other Matters anent his Method of study in his Closet that no. Mortal
could know by ordinary Means: By which, no doubt, Satan did partly design tho
by a ver^ false Argument) to raise the esteem of Books above Sermons collected
out of them: Concealing in the mean time, both the Gift of improving Helps, and
the Blessing promised to the Hearer of the word preached. When the ^ad Bargarran
received the two pieces of Red Cloth, that the Girl had tor^ ^^om one of the
Witches Sleeves as is above-narrated; she locked up the same and kept the Key
Notwistanding of which Caution, some Friends having come to Visit the Girl,
and being desirous to see the foresaids ^ieces of ^loath; she being in one of
her fits, laughed, and told has her Mother needed not to seek for them in the
place where they were locked up; the Witches having taken them away, and laid
them in a Corner of the Celler; and accordingly being searched for, they were
found in the particular place condescended on. There was another like passage
which occurred to a Friend, who came in with Bargarran for soliciting an
Commission from the Council: For he having brought along with him those
pieces of Cloth, and buttoned his Pocket on them at Night; and put it in
security as he thought; behold they are amissing in the morning; but after
search are found in a good distance from the P^cket; though none visible had
been in the Room to open it and carry them off. Finally, this Girl did in
discourse, discover a reat Sagacity; yet accompained with extraordinary
Modesty: And amongst other instances, the did observe the Doors and windows
open and shut again, upon the Witches entry thereat: There was at no time such
a number of them about her as ^he Room might not very well contain, with the
visible persons that were present therein: She ob^erved them to shift their
place with a great Agility, when any other came into it o^ attacqu^d upon her
poin^ing them: And she often averted from the instance of the spirit that spoke
to her above her Head, ^old their Na^es, and gave her other means of
discovering of them, etc. That Satan does often contrive their R^ine, by the
most undiscernible Methods he can, because an open D^ed would scar others to
undertake with so faithless a Master etc.

An Account of TWO LETTERS Which contain a SUMMARY Of what appeared most
MATERIAL or CURIOUS In the Trial of the SEVEN WITCHES Who were Condemned to be
Execute in the West.
THE Truth of the strange Things mentioned in the preceding Narrative was at
first, carefully searched into only by private Persons: But at last became so
nottour, that, upon Application founded on a Journal of these extraordinary
Events, attested by many of the Gentry in the Country; the Council gave a
Commission for enquiring thereanent.

The Honorable Persons to whom this was recommended, did, with great
Impartiality and Exactness, make a Report: which, in Providence, proved a Mean
of moving the Government to notice the Execution of Justice on some of these
Witches, who otherways, might have lurked without being discoverered.

For, hereupon, the Council directed a second Commission, for Trial of those
who appeared to them to be most loaded by the preliminary Probation adduced on
the first. Several of these Judges were not only persons of Honor, but also of
singular Knowledge and Experience: Conform whereunto they did proceed with
singular Caution, and were so far from Precipitancy in the Affair, that, after
several Diets of Court, they adjourned to a long Term, that, in the mean time,
the Prisoners might be provided of Advocates.

Accordingly an Advocate compeared for them, and managed their Defense with all
the Accuracy that could be expected. There were above Twenty Hours employed, at
one Diet, in Examination of Witnesses: And the Inquest being enclosed, did
consume about six Hours in comparing the Probation-Whereupon Seven of the most
notorious Criminals were Convict and Condemned.

The Crimes libelled and found proven against them, were not mere spectral
Imaginations; but open and obvious Facts: viz. The Murders of some Children,
and Persons of Age; and the Torturing of several Persons, particularly
Bargarran's Daughter: And both these, not at a distances, but contignously by
natural Means of Cords, Pins, and the like. Besides the other ordinary Works of
Witchcraft, such as Reouncing Baptism, entering in Contract with, and Adoring
the Devil under a Corporeal shape, etc. which could not but be sustained
Relevant in Scotland, since there is an express Stature Parl. 9. Act. 73: Queen
Mary, appointing the pain of Death to such.

To make the Probation the more convincing, it was adduced orderly in three
Periods The First consisted of unsuspected Witnesses, who proved Fact: From
whence it was necessarly inferred, That there was Witchcraft in the Case. The
Second did include, also unexceptionable Witnesses, who deponed upon Facts;
which made it probable, if not necessary, that the Pannals were the Witches.
The Third did comprehend six positive Testimonies, of these who did See and
Hear these Witches committing the Malefices libelled.

The only valuable Subject of Debate, was anent the Import of these last
Testimonies; five whereof were by Confessants, who had been at the Meetings in
which were committed the Crimes libelled; and the sixth of Bargarran's
Daughter, who was one of the Persons maleficiat. The antecedent part of the
Probation was by Witnesses beyond exception: And the Judges upon a long Debate
did sustain Four of these Six only cum nota, and two of them to be Examined
without Oath. So nice were they in favors of the Pannals Lives, since some of
these Witnesses might have been admitted in such a Crime without any quality,
by the most scroupulous Judicatory in Europe. But all things were carried on in
this Procedures with Tenderness and Moderation: For even the Advocates. who
were sent to prosecute the Endytment by His Majesty's Council and Advocate, did
not act with the Bias of Parties; but on the contrary, showed an equal Concern
to have the Pannals assoilaied, if it could be found compatible with Justilse

This is the Reason for which the Publisher doubts not, but the two following
Letters (the one whereof gives a Compend of the Advocates Speech to the Jury,
and the other, of their Answers to the Objections against the Confessant
Witnesses) will afford a satisfying view of the chiefest part* of the Trial:
since the Objections which were, or might have been made are therein Stated and
Answered, or Anticipat and Prevented; and the intended Brevity would not permit
to printet this time the whole Process, which being extant upon Record, any who
are Curious may have easy access thereunto.

There is scarcely need to take notice of a late Scurrilous Pamphlet, that has
been printed in England, and pretends to give an account of those proceedings:
For any who reads it may easily find, that the Author has been either. Fool,
Know, or both, there being neither good Language, Sense, or Truth in the most
part of it.

LETTER FIRST.
SIR,
YOU having told me, that the odd Passages which occur in the West, have put
many of your Neighbors and your self; upon reading all the Books you can get
treating of Witchcraft: And therefore desired me to transmit to you my
Observations at the Court: I shall not pre-occupy your Opinion by giving them
in my own Form; but herein I send to you the exactest Duplicat of the Advocates
Speech to the Inquest that I could obtain; and by the next Post you shall have
something more Curious: viz. A Collection of their Answers to the Objections
against the Six last Witnesses, that were adduced for concluding the Proof:
Having these, you will want little that could be agreeable to such an accurat
Gust as yours is.

The SPEECHES to the INQUEST Were of this import.
Good Men of Inquest,
YOU having sitten above Twenty Hours in over hearing the Probation: And being
now to be enclosed, where, it is like, you will take no small time to
Re-consider and Compare it: We shall not detain you with summing up the same in
particular; but shall only suggest some Things, whereof it is fit you take
special notice in your perusal of it: viz. 1mo The Nature of your own Power,
and the Management thereof: 2do. The Object of this Power which lies before
you; wherein you are to consider, in the First place, Whether or not there has
been Witchcraft in the Malefices libelled? And, in the Next place, whether or
not these Pannals are the Witches?

As to your Power, it is certain, that you are both Judges and Witnesses, by
the Opinion of our Lawyers and Custom: Therefore you are called out of the
Neighborhood, as presumed best to know the Quality of the Pannals, and the
Notority of their Guilt or Innocence. Your Oath is, That you shall all Truth
tell, and no Truth conceal; which does plainly imply, That you are to Condemn
or Assoilzie, conform to your proper Conviction. Such is the excellent
Constitution of Juries in England: and ought to hold more specially in this
Circumstantiat Case, where there is such a Chain of different Kinds of
Probation concurring against the same Pannals, as will appear by the Review
thereof in its proper place

We are not to press you with the ordinary Severity of threatening in Assyse of
Error, in case you should Absolve; but wholly leaves you to the Conduct of GOD
and your own Consciences, and desire that you proceed with all the Care of the
Pannals Lives that is possible for you, as the Honorable Judges have set to
you a desirable Pattern, in their great Caution thereanent.

As to the Probation it self; you see, that it is divided in Three Parts, viz.
The extraordinariness of the Malefices: The Probability of the concurring
Adminicles: And the Clearness of the positive Probation.

As to the First part, The Malefices, or Corpora delicti, are proven by
unexcepable Witnesses, to have fallen out in such an odd and extraordinary
manner, that it ^oints out some other Cause, than the ordinary course of
Nature, to have produced these Effects.

For clearing of this, particulatly in relation to the Torments of Bargarran's
Daughter, you may consider not only the extraordinary Things that could not
proceed from a Natural Disease, which ly proven before you; but also several
other Matters of Fact, which is nottour; have been seen by some of your selves,
and ly here in a Journal of her Sufferings: Every Article whereof is attested
by the Subscriptions of Persons of entire Credit, before the honorable
Commissioners appointed by His Majesty's Privy Council, for making Enquiry
there-anent

This Girl's throwing out of Hair, Pins, and Coals of greater heat than that of
her Body or Blood; as also so dry, that they appeared not to have come out of
her Stomach; nor had she any press of Vomiting at the time, that she declared
the same to have been put in her Mouth by her Tormenters: Is deponed by Doctor
Brisban, in his Opinion not to proceed from a Natural Caul.

She was not Tormented by any of the Pannals after their Imprisonment: Except
two Nights by Katharine Campbell; which being a Surprise, it was thereafter
discovered, that these two Nights the Jaylor's Wife had got out Katharine
Campbell to Spin in her House.

She having been speaking to one of her Tormenters as present (though Invisible
to the Bystanders) and asking how her Tormenter had got these clouted Red
Sleeves; she suddenly gets up, takes hold of them, the Company hear a shreid,
and she pulls away two pieces of red Cloth, which all the Bystanders beheld
with amazement in her Hands: Nor was there any other piece of this kind of
Cloth to be found in the Room at that occasion.

She told, that her Tormenters were giving her a Glass of Sack, an Orange-pile,
etc. (thereby ensnaring her to accept of a Favor from them) and accordingly
she was seen to move her Lips, and to have the Orange-pile betwixt her Teeth;
though there was no visible Hand that could have done it.

She advertised before hand, that one of her Tormenters was to be at the Door
at a particular Hour: And that another of them was in the Kitchen; before any
did tell her thereof: which accordingly fell out: And these being brought to
her presence, became obnoxious to the ordinary Means of Discovery.

When her Glove fell down from her, at a time that several persons were about
her: it was lifted again by a Hand invisible to them.

She was not only transported throw the Hall and down Stairs, without
perceiving her Feet to touch the Ground: But also was hurried in a flight up
Stairs: And when a Minister endeavored to retain her; he found a sensible
weight, besides her own Strength, drawing her from him.

When she complained, that her Tormenters had bitten and scratched her; the
Steads of the Nails and Teeth were seen upon her Skin, with Blood and Spittle:
about the wounds, which were above Twenty four; while neither her own, or any
others Teeth that were visible, could have done it.

She was most vehemently distorted, upon attempting to Tell, or even Write the
Names of her Tormenters: yet that ceased as to any of them, how soon that
person was aliunde delated; and particularly she had liberty, after many
painful Attempts, to Accuse Margaret Laing, how soon a Charm of Hair to
restrain her, which Margaret had left behind the Door, was found and burnt; the
Girl having told it to have been tim, in manner mentioned in the Depositions.

She did thr^w out no more Hair after the finding of a Ball of Hair, of the
same Color and Kind with that thrown out by the Girl, in Katharine Campbel's
Pocket, with Pins in it, and the Burning of it.

After Agnas Nasmith had prayed for her, she did appear to her, but not tormen^
her.

She foretold, that her Tormenters had conserted to throw her in a Fit,
(whereof they did premonish, of design to fright her to Renounce her Baptism by
the terror) at a certain Hour, and had left one of their Number to execute it:
According whereunto, there was a Woman with a Red Coat seen under a Tree in the
Orchard, and the Torment was brought on at the time appointed.

When she told, that there was something tormenting her under the Clothes; the
Spectators saw, the Bed-cloaths move in an extraordinary manner, after the
Girl had been raised out of them.

When she complained that she was Beaten: the Bystanders heard the Noise of
the Strokes

She cried out at a time, that her Theigh was hurt: And one of the Company
having searched her Pocket, found a Knife; but unfolded: However, having folded
up the same, and put it in a second time; she cries of new: And upon the second
search, it (though secuted by the Spring) is found open, to the great wonder of
the Beholders; since they did watch, that no visible thing could have possibly
opened it.

She told of a Charm under the Bed: And accordingly it was found in the the
shape of an Egg, which melted away being put in the Fire: She told also, that
her Sister that was boarded abroad, had Charms put above her in the House, and
would not recover of the decaying Sickness till she were brought out of it:
According whereunto, the Child being brought home, she straight way recovered.

She told of their meeting in the Yeard of Bargarran, for Consulting anent the
destroying of her: And accordingly the Confessants have deponed, That they did
meet and consult her Ruin in that place.

The Story anent her telling, That the Commissioners, though at three Miles
distance, had granted a Warrant to the Sherriff, to apprehend one of her
Tormenters: Her telling so perfect an account of the Sheriff, and of Mr Guthri^
who was with him, while her Eyes were cieled and fast: Her being in excessive
Torments (as she foretold) till that Person was apprehended, and immediately
thereupon, though at many Miles distance, her telling that her Tormenters were
now taken, betwixt Twelve and One a clock in the Morning; and the Sheriff when
he returned, did declare the Seizure to have been about that time: Is so
nottour and so well attested, that we need only to put you in mind thereof.

Her falling in Fits upon the sight, or touch of her Tormenters, was no effect
of Imagination: For she was fully hood-winked with a Cloak, so as she saw no
Body whatsomever; yet upon the approach of her Tormenter, she immediately fell
down dead: Whereas she remained no ways startled upon the touch of any other:
Which Experiment was tried for ascertaining this Mean of Discovery.

Finally, she is naturally Saggacious and Observant: And discovered her
int^grity in face of Court* For when the President asked, Whether or not she
knew one of the Pannals Name that was to be pricked? She answered, That though
she knew her well enough of her self; yet one had told her the Name of this
Pannal, when she was sent for to be confronted with her: So far did this Girl
discover her aversion from any thing that might seem intended to aid unfairly
the natural Evidence of Truth; and her Firmness to the outmost against
Temptations of becoming a Witch; particularly against the last Assault of
Satan, wherein he persuaded her at least to go to their Meetings; and she
answered, that she would not follow such a base fallen Creature: And he
rejoining, that she would go to Hell however for her other Sins; and she
answering, that he was a Liar from the beginning, and the Blood of JESUS would
cleanse her from all Iniquity: Whereupon he disappeared, and she perfitly
recovered upon the Sabbath thereafter, was an happy End put to this fearful
Tragedy of Witchcraft, and confirms to Conviction, the Reality of it.

As to the Murdering of the Children and the Minister libelled; you may observe
several extraordinary things appearing in them; particulatly the Witnesses
depone, the Minister to have been in excessive Torments, and of an unusual
color, to have been of sound Judgment; and yet he did tell of several Women
being about him, and that he heard the noise of the Door opening, when none
else did hear it. The Children were well at Night, and found Dead in the
Morning, with a little Blood on their Noses, and Blaes at the roots of their
Ears; which were obvious Simptoms of Stranglings: Besides that it is testified,
that the Mother of one of them, cried out, Matthew, Matthew, the Chi^d is dead-
And the House of the other was Whitened within, with sifting of Meal the Night
before. Both which Particulars were told and discovered, by the Confessants,
before the Witnesses which now concur with them, in it, were examined.

2do. The Second part of the Probation consists of several Adminicles, proven
by unsuspected Witnesses, which lead us to suspect those Pannals to be Witches,
as so many Lines drawn from a Circumference to a Center, and as an Avenue to
the positive Probation thereafter adduced: And these either strick at the whole
Pannals in general, or some of them in particular. In general we need not
enumerat all these Adminicles, but remit you to the Probation, which is so full
thereanent; only you will be pleased to notice, that it is clearly proven, that
all the Pannals have insensible Marks, and some of them in an extraordinary
manner: That most of them have been long Reputed Witches, and some of them
delated in 1687. by a Confessing Witch, whose subscribed Confession has been
produced. You see that none of them do shed Tears, nor were they ever
discovered to do it since their Imprisonment, notwithstanding of their frequent
Howlings: So that it is not a sudden Grief or Surprise. And finally, that the
Girl fell in Fits of Torment upon the Pannals approaches to her, and that she
did name them all frequently, either out of, or in, her Fits.

In particular, you see how Katharine Campbell was provoked by this Girl's
discovering her Thift; whereupon she has brought in the rest of her Confederets
to act the following Mischiefs: How thereupon Campbell did Curse and Imprecate
in a terrible manner: How she stayed out of her Bed at Night, and was
frequently drousie in the Morning: How she was named by the Girl, particularly
the two Nights that she was out of Prison: The Ball of Hair was taken out of
her Pocket and burnt; whereupon the Girle's throwing out of Hair did cease: She
could not express one word, even when on her Knees, of Prayer, for the Girl's
Recovery: And the insensible Marks on her, were very remarkable.

Agnas Nasmith did not torment the Girl after she had prayed for her: She was
repute a Witch, and has the Marks. She came early in the Morning to
Bargarran's Closs, when by her refusing to go in, it appeared she had no
business. Yea, it is plain. that she had a Resentment, for her not getting a
greater Alm's the last time she was there. The Girl declared ex incotinenti,
that Nasmith asked her Health and Age; which in these Circumstances was a
shrewd Presumption of her evil Design: And she acknowledged herself to have
done this, when she asked the Age of another Child; wherein by Providence the
was befooled, since that which she thought would have been an Excuse, tended to
discover her Gurlt. And lastly, after this appearance of Agnes Nasmith, the
Girl did take her first Fit, and nominat her amongst the first Tormenters.

Margaret Laing, that great Imposter, has been a Master-peice of the Devil: She
has confessed unnatural Lust, which is known to some of your number: She sat
near the Door where the Charm of Hair was found which the Girl declared did
keep up her Tongue; and upon burning thereof it was loused. The Girl fell in
Fits upon her approach: She has notable Marks; particularly one which the
Confessants declare she lately received; and by Inspection it appears to be
Rec^^t When she came from her private conversation (no doubt with the De^^l.)
she Raged as if she had been possessed, and could not but declare, That she
expected a violent Death: She looked in the face of James Millar's Child, and
asked her Age, whereupon that Child sickned the same Night, and named Margaret
Laing on her Deathbed: It appears she was ready to show to Janet Lord a sight
of her Mother, who had been three Years Dead. And finally, She has been taken
in several Lies and gross Prevarications; particularly you may remember, how
six hours ago; when the VVitnesses were examined on the Ball of Hair found with
Katharin Campbell, a Gentleman (Mr. Stewart of (...)) heard her say to Katharin
in the Ear; This is well waird on you because ye would not put it away when I
desired you etc. Which the said Mr. Stewart did openly testify in Court upon
Oath; notwithstanding whereof this impudent Wretch had the confidence to deny
it, the Katharin Campbel also Confessed, That she had pulled at her, and had
spoke some what to her, to which she did not advert. This was no wonder, the
VVitnesses deponing at the time being closs against Katharin.

Margaret Fulton was repute a VVitch, has the Mark of it; and acknowledged in
presence of her Husband, that she made use of a Charm; which appeared full of
small Stones and Blood. That her Husband had brought her back from the Faries;
and her Repute of being a VVitch is of an old date; besides her being named
often by the maleficiat Girl.

As to the Lindsays they all have the Mark: And were all of a long time reputed
to be Witches. John Lindsay in Barloch was accidentally discovered by the
Girls taking a Fit upon his coming to the House. John and James Lindsays; were
dilated by a confessing Witch in Anno 1687, Which Confession is publicly read
before you: And there was Money given to the Sheriff-depute for delaying of the
pursuit. James Lindsay appeared to William Semple suddendenly, and Flew about
like a Fowl, for an opportunity to strick him, in revenge of the quarrel
mentioned in the Deposition, and at last prevailed to strick him dead over a
Dyke. And finally which is a remarkable Indication both of Truth and
Providence, the very Witnesses adduced in the Exculpation for the Lindsays,
deponed so clearly against them, even beyond the Pursuets Witnesses, that their
Advocate was stunned thereat; and thereupon desisted from ^^aving any more
Witnesses to be examined on the Exculpation,

It is true, some of these Indications may be in One, and others of them in
A^^ther, ei^^er from Nature or Accident; and yet that person not be a Witch:
But it was never heard or read, that all these indications, which are so many
discoverys by Frovidence, of a crime that might other ways remain in the dark,
did ever concur in one and the same Indi^^^^^^ Person that was innocent: Yea on
the contrary, they, by the* Wisdom and Experience of all Nations, do als
convincingly discover a Witch, as the Symptoms of a ^eptosis confirmed by all
Physicians, do unfold the Person affected with the same to be Leprous. (...)
Esto, They are not sufficient of themselves, yet their Tendency and Moanning,
being cleared and applied to their proper cause, by a liquid and positive
Probation: There wants no more to determine you anent the Pannals guilt. And
therefore,

3tio. As to the Third part of the Probation, were (...) the Positive
Depositions of the Confessants, and against whom they do concur, wholly to
your own Perusal and Examination: Only you would be pleased to notice. ^m^.
Some things which very much Sustain the Credibility of their Testimonies,
arrising from their examination in Court. 2do. We shall explain to you the
import of the word N^t^, which is added to the Interlocutor of the Judges
admitting these last Witnesses.

As to the First,

Elizabeth Anderson is of sufficient Age; being Seventeen; yet so young and
pointed, that her Deposition appears no effect of Melancholy; She accused her
Father to his face when he was a dying in the prison, as now there are two of
her Aunts in the Pannal, which certainly must proceed from the strength of
Truth, since even Dives retain (...) natural affection to his relations. She
went on foot to the Meetings with her Father, except only that the Devil
transported them over the Water of Clyde, which was easy to the Prince of the
Air who does far greater things by his Hurri-canes; she tells that Montgomeries
House was, Meallis when his Child was strangled: And she declares that she
never renounced her Baptism; but was carried along by the Concussion of a
Parent: So that nothing can be objected against her testimony in any Judgment,
much less in an Excepted Crime,

James Lindsay it is true, is of less import: yet by his Weeping when he came
in and was admonished of the greatness of his guilt, it appears that he had an
Sense of it: he has a natural Precipitancy in what he speaks, yet that is
commonly the concomitant of Ingenuity, as importing his Expressions not to
before-thought. He Concurrs in most things with the others, and yet he has
declared, that he saw Not Margaret Fulton at Dumbartoun. etc. Which implys that
he does not file the Pannals all at Random, but tells what occurred to his
Senses. etc.

Janet and Margaret Rodgers are instances of a singular providence, for they
did confess the same Morning that the Court did last sit, of their own proper
motive, there being neither Ministers nor Judges beside them at the time. Agn^s
Nasmith is Janets Relation, and she tells that she never saw Katharine Campbel,
as Margaret declares that she did not see John Lindsay in Bartech: which
plainly demonstrats that they tell only the dictats of their Natural Conscience
arrising from discretion and knowledge of the true matters of Fact: They both
professed their Repentance last Sabbath in the Church: And do persist with a
great Firmness, as you see their Department in deponing to be Congruous and
Exact.

Thomas Lindsay and Christian Shaw, being under Pupillarity, we did not press
their being put to an Oath; yet you saw that they did declare in Court against
these P^^nals in such an Harmony with the rest of the Deponents, and gave such
an cause of their knowledge. That it is certain their own youngness in years
Adds, extremely to the Credit of their Testimony: Because thereby it is
incredible, that they could have contrived or executed the acting of concert.

As to the Second,

Since these Witnesses are admitted by the Judges; it necessarly implies, that
they meant them to be probative; only they adjected the words Cum nota: That
is, you must notice, or Notandu^ est, That there must something else concur to
prove the Guilt of the Pannals, by and attour the Depositions of any two such
Witnesses: But so it is, that all the Adminicles on which you have seen
Probation led, for more then Sixteen Hours of your time, are strenghtening
evidences, of those Witnesses Credebility, and cannot but have been Notticed by
you as Illative of the same things which they depone. Whereby the Nota is fully
taken off by the concurrence of four other positive Testimonys, agreeing with
that of two of these VVitnesses: by the Extraordinaryness of the corpora
delicti: by the Probability of the Adminicles: And finally by the whole Chain
of this Affair, and the Sparkles of an Infernal Fire, which in every place have
broke out of it.

It is true there are some few of the Adminicles that are proven only by one
VVitness. But, as to this, you may consider, 1mo. That a VVitness deponing do
facto proprio, is in Law more credited than any other single VVitness. And this
is the present Case as to some of the Adminicles. 2do. The Antecedent,
Concomitant, and Subsequent, circumstances of Fact, do sustain the Testimony
and make the Semi-plenary Probation to become full* But 3tio. The other
Adminicles undoubtedly proven by concurring Witnesses, are perse, sufficient:
And therefore you saw us, at the desire of the Judges, forbear to call the far
greatest part of our Witnesses; because the time had alreadyr^^ to so great a
length, and it was thought that there was already enough proven of
presumptions: For it may als reasonably be imagined, that the most Regular and
Curious Scheme had emerged from the fortuitous concourse of Atoms roving
without Rule, as that so many indications should Concenter against each of
these Pannalls, and yet they remain Innocent of Witchcraft.

Now upon the whole, you will take notice, that Presumptions being vehement
make a more certain Probation then Witnesses: Because Presumptions are Natural
Emanations of the thing it self, which cannot be brybed. Whereas Witnesses are
obnoxious: So in our Law there was one condemned for Thift, on other for
falsehood, and a third for Murdering of a Child, merely upon Presumptions, as is
related by McKeinzie in his Criminal Treatise: much more may presumptions
astruct the faith of, and take off the Nota from, positive Witnesses: For it is
a gross mistake, that several proofs, which have each of them some Import, may
not be joined to make a full Evidence, the same way as two small Candles in a
Dark room, will not suffice; yet several others being added to them, will make
a sufficient light, to discover the murderrer: Two Boys will be able to carry a
Weight which one of them would (...) be able to sustain; as two units make a
full number: One Witness of whatsoever dignity proves nothing; yet out of the
Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Truth shall be established. And finally,
Tho one Coal make nor a Fire that can do the work; yet several Coals added to
it increase the Flame; which is hoped will be sufficient for the operation.

We shall therefore leave you with this Conclusion, That as you ought to
beware to condemn the innocent, and ought to incline to the safest fide: so if
these Pannals be proven legally guilty; Then quoad bygones, your Eye ought not
to spare them, nor ought you to suffer a VVitch to Live: And, as to the future;
you in doing otherways would be Accessory to all the Blasphemies, Apostacys.
Murders, Tortures, and Seductions, etc. Whereof these Enemies of Heaven and
Earth, shall hereafter be guilty, when they have got out. So than the question
seems simply to come to this whether upon your Oath de fideli, you can swear,
That the Pannals, notwithstanding of all that is proven against them, are not
guilty of Witchcraft? In the Determination whereof we pray GOD may direct you
to the right course.

The Inquest being enclosed near six Hours, brought in their Verdict to Court,
that they found the Libel proven.

I am etc.

LETTER SECOND.
SIR.
I Have Collected, according to my Promise, what appeared to me most Specious
in the Reasonings, either in Court, or private Conversation, anent the
receiving of the Confessants as Witnesses. You are not to imagine, that the
Pannals were Condemned on the Faith of these: For I do believe the Probation by
unexceptionable witnesses, led antecedent to this last, was so pregnant, that
the Pannals might have been Condemned on it, though these last had not been
adduced.

I may have missed the Energy of the Argument sometimes, in a Case which in it
self is so abstruse: However, you have it in such manner as I was able to
penetrat thereunto; as follows.

IN order to the more satisfactory Answering of the Objections made against
these last Witnesses, we shall first, lay before you the State of the Case:
And, then, clear up the Determination of it.

As to the First. The Question is not, whether Partners in the Crime, or others
mentioned in the Objections, can be a Concluding Proof of themselves, though two
of them would concur as to the same Act of Witchcraft: But whether the Corpora
delicti appearing already to imply Witchcraft, and the extrinsick Adminicles
being so pregnant, to infer that these Pannals are the Witches: there
concurring such Characters, as by observance of all Nations and Ages, are the
Symptoms of a Witch; particularly the Marks, Fame, not shedding of Tears, etc.
which are Discoveries of Providence of so dark a Crime, that like Avenues lead
us to the Secret of it. And finally, when six persons of different Ages and
Stations, five Confessants, and the Girl, do, when separatly examined, agree in
their Answers to every material Question that is put to them, even though it be
New; so that it could not be concerted: We say, whether or not in such a Case
may Witnesses be received to put the Cape-stone on the Evidence by a positive
probation, of a Matter of Fact which is the Object of Sense, though otherways
they be liable to exception, if such Extraordinariness of the Corpora delicti,
Clearness of the Adminicles, and of the Diagnosticks of Witches; did not
preceed them; as you have seen proven before you that they do?

The Case is not, whether these VVitnesses would be Habile in an Ordinary
Crime, which commonly falls to be exposed to other VVitnesses, then those
concerned in it: But whether they can be received in this Extraordinary,
Occult, and Excepted Crime of VVitchcraft; wherein there are two special Cases
to be noticed; viz. Sometimes the Acts thereof are open, and admit the choice
of VVitnesses; such as Charms used in the Daytime, when the Actor is visible.
But that part of VVitchcraft; whereby Witches meet in the Nightime, Adore
their Lord, contrive their Malefices, and accordingly thereafter execute them,
when other VVitnesses are asleep, or the Witches themselves are covered from
sight: We say, that this can be no otherways proven than by these that are
Intimat to it, joined to the positive Proof and Adminicles beforementioned.

We do not allege, that Persons altogether destitute of Knowledge and Natural
Conscience are to be admitted in any Case, such as Infants, Furious, Fatuous,
etc. Neither do we contend. That Thomas Lindsay and Cliristian Shaw, who are
under Pupillarity, should be put to an Oath; for they are only to be examined
separatly before the Court, upon interrogators, by which it may appear, whether
or not they coincide with the four other Confessants, that are to depone before
them; and this is the Pannal's Advantage in case of Disagreement: But we
insist, that any Person above Pupillarity; giving Evidences of considerable
Knowledge and natural Conscience (which is a sufficient Fond for all the Credit
that we need in this Case, that is already almost fully proven) is to be
received as a VVitness.

As to the 2d. we shall make this as clear as Noon. 1mo. From Reason and the
Nature of the thing. 2do. The unanimous Judgment of Lawiers in all Nations and
Ages. 3tio. Our own Customs and Decisions. And 4to. The Singularity of this
Circumstantiat Case.

As to the First. The going to, and coming from Meetings, especially on Foot;
the falling down, and worshipping the Devil there, under a Corporeal shape
(which he had when he tempted our SAVIOR to doit) The actual Murdering of
Children by a Cord and Napkin; and the Tormenting of Others by Pins, etc. Are
plain Objects of Sense: And therefore the Senses are to be believed anent them.
For as Reason has Things Intelligible; and Faith Things Supernatural; so the
Senses have Things Corporeal for their Object, whereanent they are to be
trusted, ay and while it be Proven, that the Appearance is Impossible, or that
the Witness of it, is an Impostor. It is an part of the Witches Purchase from
the Devil, that they cannot be seen at some occasions: So that the Abominations
committed then would remain unpunished, if such VVitnesses were not admitted. It
cannot be thought that Witches (who of all Criminals are the most obstinat to
Confess) would venture the loss of their own Lives, by deponing against Others,
against whom they have no special picque; yea, for whom they have particular
Affection, as several of the Pannalls are some of the VVitnesses Relations. Nor
has the Devil any peculiar interest to Instigat them thereunto: For severals of
the Pannalls have confessed other execrable Crimes: Whereby it cannot be
supposed, That Satan would be divided against himself. GOD in his ordinary
Providence has taken such care of public Judgments, that the Enemy of Justice
his special Power ceases thereabout, as appears by the Witches not being able
either to do more Harm, or escape, after GOD's Ministers begin to counteract
Satan's Instruments by Imprisonment. And finally, the oddness of the Malefices,
the Concurrence of the Adminicles; and the existence of Matters of Fact,
wherein these Confessants (though not knowing the same otherways) do agree with
other unexceptionable VVitnesses, etc. Do sufficiently astruct their
Credibility: For as Falsehood being a Crime, is never presumed; so a person
found true in many things, is still presumed to continue such, till the
contrary be evinced.

As to the second, Socius crimicis etc. admittitur fidelictum sit nefandum Men:
A J: Q: l. 2d. i. C. cas: 474. N. 27. seq: auto c^ltum and veritas aliunde
haberinon p^sit Mas: vol: 1. Con: 466. N. 6. aut difficilis probationis Farin:
lib. 2. Op: Criminali^m. Tit. 6 Q. 63. N. 28. Mas: vol. 3d. Con: 1360. N. 4th.
Menoch. l. 2d. Cas: 216. l. 1st. Q. 58. nocturno tempore comissa quae dificilis
dicuntur probationis B^er: decis. 6^ N. 6. Menoch D. Cas: 116. N. 14. Ideoquo
non solum presumptiva and conjecturata probatio sufficit, verum etiam in
habiles admittuntur sarin. l. 2d. Tit: 6. Q. 55. N. 40. Masc. l. 2. Con: 112.
N. 13. idem in dilictis commissis in Eremo, Nemore, Moute aliove loco secreto,
Gomez: Var: res, Tom: 3d. C. 12. N. 21. Far: D. Tit: 6. Q. 62. N. 55. sed
occultum non dicitur quod actu non intervenerint, at quod de Natura delicti vel
ratione loc^ and temporie ali^ testes habitu intervenir^ non potuerint: is it est
Maleficium in quo socius criminis etc. admittitur. Men: l. 2d. Cap. 5. Cas.
474. N. 33 Campeg: te test: Reg. 86 Fallen. 6. C^otus de Test. part 4th. N. 97.
Oldindorp. de Test. Til. de personis testtum N, 21. In a word all Lawiers who
wrote particular Treatises on Witchcraft in Germany, Italy, Loven, France, and
Spain, etc. Do conclude, that inhabile Witnesses; and particularly Socii are to
be admitted in Witchcraft; only the strictest of them do think, that this
Admission is to be c^m nota; or as Delrio in the place cited for the Pannals
expresses it ex his solis, the Judge is not to Condemn, nor do we require it.

As to the Third. we have the Testimony of our Famous K. Ja: 6th. Demon: lib.
3. C. ult. telling us, That it is our Law, that Boys, Girls, infamous Persons,
etc. Are not to be rejected any more in Witchcraft, than in human lose Majesty,
even though they assert others to have been present at Imaginary Meetings:
Because this Supposes their having entered into a Pre-contract: He says that
Satan's Mark, and the want of Tears, are pregnant Aids to the Discovery, Quod
Dens prater natura ordinem voluit esse secret a imanitatis judicium, and ^o non
permittenes ut fecissimi criminis pertinatiam dissimulent. He gives an instance
of a Girl, who having named several Witches in her Fitts; they were all
Condemned upon other concurring Adminicles. This is not a common Author, but a
Man who as Curious, was Exact: As Prudent did not publish such things without
the Approbation of the best Divines and Lawiers; as a Prince, is to be Credited
anent the Law of His own Country; and as a King has determined any Dubiety
that might have remained in this Point, also far as the Law of our Government
will permit.

But further our Judges and Lawiers have followed His Majesty: For in all the
Processes in the Journals; Fame, and Delation, and the Mack, are still
sustained, as most pregnant Presumptions; whereupon, and a very small Probation
besides, Witches have been frequently Condemned. So in the Processes against
the Bewitchers of Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, and Hamilton of Barns, Anno,
1677. Socius criminis, though under Age, is sustained to be a Witness: And
witnesses are adduced before the Inquest for proving, that the Mark was found
upon some of the Witches. Women and Minors have been received by multitudes of
Decisions cited by McKen^ie. Tit. prob: by Witn^sses, and Tit: Witchcraft. And
he also cites Decisions, where, in parallel Cases, Socii Criminis and others
inhabile, were admitted; particularly in Treason and in Falsehood: And all
Lawiers conclude, That witchcraft is as much an excepted crime as these.

As to the 4th. What ever inhability these witnesses might be under, it is
fully made up, and they rendered unexceptionably Habile by the Chain of this
whole Business It is true one Man throw the concurrence of corrosive Humors,
may have an insensible Mark; another be enviously defamed: A Third may through
sudden Grief or Melancholy, not be able to weep, etc. A Fourth may be loaded
with suspicious Circumstances, when extraordinary things fall out in the
Country: And a Fifth may be deponed against by two false witnesses, though
neither of these separatly be truly witches. But by the known Observation and
Experience of Mankind, none except witches have had the unhappie Medley and
Concurse of All or Most of these Indicia, and ordinarily, and for the greater
part, Witches have them: So that since the Rules of Judgment are established
upon that, Quod plerumque fit, which does obtain till an exception be apparent
in a special case, the Conjunction of these in one person, does as plainly give
his Character, as the most certain symptoms of the plainest Disease, being
universally concerted in all parts of the World, points out to us that the
Haver of them is a person truly affected with that Desease, whereof he has
the concurrent Diagnosticks. In a word, one or other of these may concur, in
the Innocent; but no Writers do Attest, that all of them have concentred in any
other person in the World but a witch: And on the other hand, they taking place
in Witches, through all parts of the World, must proceed from a common, and not
from a peculiar Humor or Cause.

The specific Aptitude; of some of the nicest of the Indicia, which appeared
from the Probation already led, to discover a Witch, do serve to clear the
ground of the Worlds Observation anent them. Particularly the Devil, as Aping
GOD, imprints a Sacrament of his Covenant: Be^^des that, commonly this mark
being given at the first Meeting, does by its intolerable Pain, force the Witch
to a second Randevouz for curing it, at which the poor wretch being under this
furious necessity, fixes the Paction by renewing it with ^eliberation, having
been diverted in the mean time from considering the Horridness of the first
Engagement by the Pain. The inability to shed Tears may be a Charactristick of
Hardening, though not always in the case of Christians; yet in these who have
ceased to be such; left the Devil giving them such words of Scripture and
Prayer as many have, it should be impossible to discover their Hypocrisy; and
that is not Satan's own interest, since by this Discovery occasion is given to
Buffo on the Profession of Holiness. A Report often arises without ground, but
a Constant Ropuce that keeps footing, implies for the most part a surer Cause;
especially when it is of Persons below Envy; and by Persons above Calumny. The
Girls falling in fitts at approach of the Pannalls might proceed from
Antipathie, arriseing from the poisonous Steems of the witch accustomed to
produce that Effect through a virtue affixed thereto by the Devil, by
Conjunction of natural Causes (the same way as the invisible Pestilence does
operat) or his promise of casting the Girl in Fitts at the Witches presence,
might have been General; where by the Witch was eventually befooled and
discovered, as it often falls out: For Satan envies even their temporal
Felicity, and fears lest by continuing here, they should be rest out of his
hands by Conversion. When they come to perceive the Delusion of his Promises to
make them rich and the like, etc.

There was one thing further which was tried before your Lordships, viz. None
of the Pannals that were tried (though most Saggacious and Knowing, and perfect
in Memory, so that it could not proceed from Ignorance or Forgetfulfulness)
could make out the attempt of saying the Lord's Prayer; which may either be a
secret Judgment for Renuncing their first LORD, after whom it is peculiarly
Denominat, or by restraint of their new lord, who may think that too special an
Homage to his Adversary. But we have hindered you too long with that which is
not necessary: For this being incontravertible Law and Custom, there needs no
Philosophy to support it: Since Legislators do Reason, but Subjects must Obey:
And both the Fool and the Lazy (who have neither Read nor Thought enough to
understand this Subject) are to be left to their own Chimera's: Yet lest they
should insult, we shall Answer in their fashion, such of the Objections as the
Pannals Advocate thought any ways worthy to be repeated in this place.

Whereas it is objected, that Delrio Sect. 5. 4. says, That Socii are not to be
admitted witnesses ad condemnandum; especially considering, that the Probation
ought to be luce meridiana clarior.

It is answered, that the place it self confutes this Inference in the present
Case: For it says, Ex his solis non est procedendum ad condemnationem, scio
contrarium communius teneri and in praxi obtinere, etc. So that it is evident,
1mo. That the common Opinion and Custom is in the contrary, even when there is
no other probation, but by the Partners of the Crime. Yet, 2do. we are not so
straightened but subsume in his very words, ex his solis we do not desire the
Pannals should be Condemned; but your Lordships see these Witnesses we are to
adduce are not soli or alone; for the Probation led these last Sixteen Hours,
are so many Concomitants and Discoveries of Providence, which astruct and make
up any defect in their Credit that can be desiderat. Hence, 3tio. The Meaning
of that Maxim (which is Metaphorical, as appears by the words, Clarior luce
meridiana, an equal Clearness being sufficient) is fully Answered, and takes
place in the present Case: For the Extraordinariness of the Corpora delicti,
Pregnancy of the Adminicles, and Pointedness of the positive Probation, being
conjoined; there is not a Clearer Proof upon Record in any Nation, than that to
which, it is hoped, these will amount.

Whereas this Alledgance is enforced, by pretending it were of dangerous
consequences to allow such witnesses to prove meeting with the Devil, since
Satan might have represented others by their false shapes.

It is Answered.

1mo That we are not straightened in this; because there are many other Articles
proven, which could not have been falsified. But if we give some scope to
Reasoning even in this point; it is to be considered, that the Rules of
Judgment are established upon that which for the most part does still obtain;
and Rules are to be followed, till an exception be proven in a particular
circumstantiat Case. But so it is, by the Experience and Observation of the
wisest Divines, Lawiers, Philosophers, Phisicians, Statesmen, Judges and
Historians, at Home and Abroad (that are too wise to be imposed upon, and too
Ingenuous to deceive us, when they all concur in the same matter of fact)
beside the Testimony of Witches themselves every where; makes the Apparitions
of Witches to be commonly and mostly real; so Delrio tells us lib. 5. 16.
Illusio rarissime contingit, ita Jaqerius, Comensis, Sprengirus ^ienffeldus.
etc. And therefore the Testimony of the Senses is always to be credited anent
them, ay and while it be canvelled. For single or few instances of false
Representations to the Senses esteeming them to be true, or a possibility of
Appearances being false, can no ways invalid at the Rule established upon
Experience, which is common, and for the most part, whereby no exception is to
be presumed till it be proven in a special Case; since a Wonder does not
subvert the Proof drawn from the common course of Nature; Logic admits not to
argue a Particulari, or from possibility to Existence; Law puts the burden of
proving Simulation on the Affirmer, and that which seldom occurrs, is not
considered by the Legislators.

For illustrating of which, it is further to be considered, that for the most
part and ordinarily, the Witches are personally existent in the places where
they appear; because it is more easy for the Prince of the Air to transport them
in his Hurricanes which he can raise, as is plain in the instance of Job (who
was put in his power, i. e. his natural Power without Delegation) forming a
Fen^e upon their Face, whereby the violence of the Air may be diverted from
chocking them: Than to form the curious Miniatur of such various Transactions
on their Brain: The difficulty whereof is the greater, that all their Fantacies
are not disposed at all times the same way; and they have not the Seeds of this
work, unless they had once acted it in reality. It is both the greater Crime
and Pleasure to act in Truth; which therefore the Devil and Witches do rather
choice (unless the Place be far distant, or the Party indisposed,) and this de
facto is attested ^o be ^o, by the Writers and Witches in all Nations and Ages,
as said is.

2do. Notwithstanding that the Rule must hold, till an Exception of Exculpation
be evinced, qu^ ad a particular Person, by evidencing that the real Appearance
was in that special Case a true Mistake: yet this Exception is sufficient for
safty of the Misrepresented; since the same providence which permitted the the
Affliction, will order the Out-gate and Exculpation; either by the Aeriall
Bodies not byding the toutch, or some other distinction, as Providence commonly
allows the Devil to personat only with cloven Feet; or that the Apparition was
solly to one single Witness, who cannot be a Proof; or that the Innocent can
prove alibi; or Finally the Notour Charracter of a Samuel, will purge and
dispel the Aspersions of Satan, contrived of purpose to discredit the Evidence
of Sense, by which alone his Instruments can be discovered. Especially this
Charracter being joined to the other Circumstances of the providence; such as,
when good men are disguised they are mostly pussive in the Scene and out with
thereof: Whereas Witches are personally active in their common Life by such
Words and Deeds as (in conjunction with these Appearances) conspire to make us
know and distinguish them from the truly Good; since these Witches open
Profanity, Naughtiness, or unvailed Hippocrisy, being cleared by Fame, sealed
by the mark, and confirmed by the other discoveries of the Adminicles that ly
proven before you, do still make an Land mark betwixt the Children of Darkness
and Light. So Delrio lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. tells of Athanasius and St.
Germanus, against whom Probation was adduced for Sorcery, but Providence did
canvel it. It Is a famous instance of Susanna, represented by the Elders; which
tho not in the Case of spectre, yet agrees in the Rationale. The Representation
by Pharo's Magicians had Concomitants, by which they were discovered and
confounded. But lastly, suppose that GOD in the deepths of His Wisdom (to
Convince the Error of Nimious self Confidence) should permit all necessar
Probation to concur against an Innocent; yet the Judge following the Faith of
Proofs established by Divine and Humane Laws, is altogether Innoxious: Since
this Case being very Ra^e, the Evil is less than the establishing a Principle,
by which most of all these Monsters could not be cut off.

Upon the whole, It is certain, That as though often times false Witnesses set on
by the Devil, have taken away an harmless Life, by accusing it of other Crimes;
yet the Testimony of Witnesses must still be credited till they be redargued;
so these Appearances of Witches with the other Specialities before expressed,
being proven, ought to be esteemed Real, till the fallacy be established.
Especially seeing there are Examples in Ancient and Modern History of Satan's
Representing the best of Men, as committing Murder, Ruggrie, etc. In effigy;
so Delri^* lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. relats, That St. Silvanus was represented by
the Devil, as committing a common Capital Crime: And the like of a Monk:
whereof there are several Modern parallel Instances; yet this cannot enervat the
Rule and Faith of public Judicaturs, founded on no more but upon the sight of
the like Appearances; and any Argument against the Probation in Witchcraft,
will equally hold against the Probation of any other Crime whatsomever:
Wherefore the Rules of them both must be common, as to beleiving the Se^ses
fortified, ut supra; till their Error be Individually discovered.

Finally, the Certainty is no ways diminished by the extraordinariness of the
Appearance to the Senses: For in Law and Nature Reality and not Si^^lation is
presumed, till the contrair be made appear by proving the thing not possible in
Nature, or though it be possible, that it is actually false. This is answer
enough to those who place a great part of their small Wit in nonsensical
arguing against all Divine Authority: But writers further illustrate that the
extraordinariness of a Matter of Fact, does not exclude it is Reality's being
the Subject of the Testimony of Witnesses, in our Saviors Miracles.
Transfiguration, Walking on the Waters, standing in the midst of the Disciple^
while the Doors were shut, and arguing Assurance by Their Senses, That a Spirit
had not Flesh and B^nes, though indeed the surer Word of prophesy did put these
beyond doubt.

Nor could it be alleged for the Pannals (tho they had the last word, as
perhaps they have not, in Objections against Witnesses, since therein rei fi^^t
actores by attacq^ing the Witnesses presumed Hability) That it is not
conceiveable, how the Girl or VVitnesses could see what the bystanders could
not behold: Beside the impossibility of the real Bodies entering at closs Doors
and Windows, or not intercepting the sight of what is at its back.

For to this it would be answered,

1mo. Proven facts must not be denied, though Philosophers have not yet ^^tainly
reached the Invisible manner of their Existtence: So in Nature, the Lodestone
draws the Iron, the Compass turns always to the Poles, etc. In Scripture the
Angels (and the Devil was once such, retaining as yet his Natural powers) smote
the Sodomites, that they could not see the Door; tho they saw the House.
Baldam's Ass perceived the Angel that stood undiscovered to himself; and the
Rod thrown down by the Magicians of Aegipt, was no doubt seen by themselves,
tho invisible to the bystanders Which bolding of their Eyes, Interpreters
explain to have been done by natural Means; and yet the Manner thereof is
certainly difficult.

However, it is also certain, that if a possible way can be proposed, tho
Reality of a proved Fact is not to be contradicted: Aod this can be done in the
the present Case: For,

2do. Satan's Natural Knowledge and acquired Experience, makes him perfect in
the Optics and limning: Besides that, as a Spirit he excels in Strength and
Agility; whereby he may ^^sily bewitch the Eyes of others; to whom he intends
that his instruments should not be seen in this manner as was formerly hinted:
viz. He constricts the Pores of the Witches Vehicle, which intercepts apart of
the Rays reflecting from her Body; he condenses the interjacent Air with
grosser Meteors blown into it, or other ways does violently agitate it which
drowns another part of the Rays: And lastly he obstructs the optic Nerves
with ^umors stirred toward them: All which joined together may easily intercept
the whole Rays reflecting from these Bodies, so as to make no impression upon
the common ^ense; and yet at the same time, by refraction of the Rays,
glydeing along the fitted sides of the Volatile Couch, wherein Satan
transports them, and thereby meeting and coming to the ^ye, as if there were
nothing interjacent, the wall or chair behind the same Bodies may be seen; as a
piece of Money lying out of sight in a Cup becomes visible how soon the medium
is altered by pouring in some w^^er on it. Severals of your number do know,
that the Girl declared, that she saw and heard the Doors and Windows open at
the Witches en^ry, when no doubt the Devil had precoudensed a soft stopage on
the Eyes and ^ars of others, to whom that was unperceived.

So Ap^l^^^ic escaped Domitians sight; and Giges became invisible by his
Magical Ring. John of Sarrisberrie tells us of a Witch, that could make any
thing not to be seen: and Mejerus relates another, that had the like power.
Some Italian Witches of greater then ordinary wit confessed to Grillandus the
Devils opening Doors and Windows for them, tho the more Ignorant, by a
Fascination, think themselves, Actors of this, Whence it ought not to be
doubted by any reasonable Man what in all Times and Places is so unconte^^ible,
Fact.

Finally the Pannals could not insist, that these Confessants are to depone
only on their Imagination, which can prove no more against themselves or others
them a Dream

For still its to be minded, that there are other Proofs to which this is only
necessary as a consonant adminicle. But further Arg. causa It is answered, that
the alledgeance is a mistake; seeing they declare plain matters of fact obvious
not only to (...) but several of their Senses: viz. Some of them went the
grea^est part of the way to these meetings on foot: they there saw and touched
their confede^ts; they heard their Combinations to Destroy and Torture the
Infants, Girl and Ministers.: They returned on foot again: and even when they
were carried fore or back they knew on the next day that it was no Dream, the
same way as all other Mortals discover the difference. But moreover this is
adminiculate by some real effects of a personal Presence, as you have seen in
the probation: And it is yet further cleared by the journal of Barg^^^ens
daughters Sufferings; which was arrested before the former Commissioners, and
is nottour in the Country; particularly the Glass of Sack and Orange pile; the
pieces of the clouted Sleeves; the words expressed by the Keeper on the sudden
Murder of the Child; which are ^onstantly told by some of the Confessants; as
also the Houses being Meallie that Night. The Girl tho hood winked, her
falling in Fits at their approach, etc. And others, which shall be pointed at
to the Assyse, conjoined together, can be ascrived to no other cause then the
real existence of the Witches persons in the places Unless it be said, that
Satan might possibly. have foisted and suborned all these; and thence it be
concluded, that the Devil did actually so, in which case the Objectors (...)
the Persons that bottom their Opinion on Imagination without a (...) positive
ground of the real^^ of what they fancy; ye^ against positive grounds of belief
in the contrary; which arguing from Possibility to Existen^e it already
suffi^^ently exploded.

Whereas for sustaining the Objection it is likewise alleged, That the
^^^fessants having been in the Devils service, and renounced Christ, they are
not Capable of the Religion of an Oath,

It is answered,

1mo, In the rules of Charity etc. The Confessants tho once Witches. yet now
they, at least the Majority of them have ceased to be such, having had the use
of means by the Ministers and Word, and actually declared their Repentance* and
the Devils ceasing to molest them; particularly Elizabeth Anderson was only
carried along violently by her Fa^^er, and stood out to the last against her
renouncing to f^er baptism, or consenting to these Crimes which were contrived
in their meetings. Janet and Margaret Rodgers do testify a great remorse and
avowed he same last Sabbath in the face of the Congregation. So those three are
sufficient whatsoever might be said against the other two, especially if we
join the improbability either of hazarding their own lives or the Devils
sending them out against these Fannals, or their destroying their own
relations: as was remarked before, But.

2do, Whether they remain Witches or not; It is certain by Reason and
Experience that the Devils peculiar influence cease in and about judgment:
by the common course of providence: And therefore the Authors before cited
admit Witches whether penitent or not.

3tio. All the defects of their hability is supplied, and the intireness
thereof complea^ed, by their testimonies being so wonderfully adminiculat;
particularly the confessants are constant from the first discovery; uniform in
so various circumstances not only with themselves, but with the Girls They
declare nothing but what is probable, most of the Pannals having been reputed
Witches, all of them having the Mark; and one or other of them (to whom the
associa^^ delight^^ un mischief, never missed to join) having had particular
Irritations to take reaenge by the torture and deaths libelled; Besides the
other adminicles of guilt already proven before you. The confessants were
threatened to retract by the Pannals themselves and their Friends: besides the
bad usage from others in the Country. They concur with the maleficats
testimony, and amongst themselves, even when interroga^t singly; and upon new
things: as severals of your number have tried the experiment; on this head
Detrio, lib 5. 16. N, 5. wisely observes, quamvis tam facile foret demoni
pluresdecipere quam unum tamen non est censendus Deus hoc aque permittere ne
^mnis rati^ pr^bandi talia delicta occulta judicibu^ adimatur; hoc enim est
dissentanium providintiae divinae. The Reiteration of the Acts which they
declare anent some persons whom they never saw except in these congresses, and
yet whom they know now on the first sight, is unaccountable if they were
falsarics: And that they are not such is further astructed by some of the
Pannals being delated by a confessing Witch in Anno 1687, And you know that
others delated by these confessants were lately brought in guilty by the
Verdict of a former Inquest. etc. which are so many joint proofs of these
witnesses integrity, and makes an chain of evidence and moral demonstration
both against Error in themselves and delusion in relation to others, etc,

There were some things objected out of the Law of Scotland, of which also I
shall give you some touch.

Whereas it was alleged, That irretiti criminibus capitalibus, and so under
the Pursuers power, cannot be admitted to be Witnesses; Conform to a stature in
Regiam Majesta^em,

To this it was answered, That we need not say, that these statutes have not
the force of Law, except in so far as they are received by Custom; unless
conform thereto. A Laik cannot Witness against a Clerk, or e contra, etc. Not
need we make use of that which is Obvious, Viz. That these Statutes are only
common Rules in ordinary Crimes; which have their Exception in all Occult and
excepted Crimes, such as Witchcraft, etc. Nam omnis regula subverti potest, and
particularly this Rule is actually so restricted in the Case of Witchcraft, by
the Opinion of Lawiers and Customs beforementioned, which are the best
interpreters of Laws: For if this Application should hold, socius criminis
could never be admitted: But we positively deny, that those Confessants are
under o^^ Power or Influence; seeing Elizabeth Anderson is not Guilty of
Witchcraft, for any thing that does appear: The Lindsays were never indicted
for it; and the Diet was deserted against the Rogers; as the whole Commission
is to Expyre against the first of June, betwixt and which time, they are to
proceed no further then this particular trial. So that this Objection evanishes
to smoke.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Rogers cannot be received, because not given
out in the List of Witnesses; conform to the Regulation, whereby the Pannals
might have proven their Objection by their Exculpation.

It was answered, 1mo. This Objection ought to be repelled; because, besides
that the Act speaks only of Criminal Lybells, and no^ indictments, which with
the List of the Witnesses may be given in far shorter time then the Additional
List has been given to the Pannals, being Prisoners: This Act is interpreted by
the common Custom of the Justice Court; of giving additional Lists after the
first, upon shotter time then this has been given. As is particularly attested
by James Guthry Macer, who has given them, and who being a Person in Officio,
his Testimony is to be Credited in what relates to his Office: so that the old
Custom confirmed by a Decision. 3. August 1661, where Alexander Forrester was
cited apud acta against a Witch, continues quoed this point, as is related by
McKenzie, page 529. But 2do. Any Objection that the Pannals pretend against
these Witnesses, is injure, or may instantly appear. 3tio. The Case is
altogether extraordinary and Circumstantiat: For these Witnesses had not
Confessed: And so were not existent under that Reduplication when the
principal List was given out whereby the Act of Parliament can only be
understood of Witnesses, that w^^e then existent. And finally the Pannals got a
general warrant of Exculpation for citing of any Witnesses they pleased, and
they have had several Days since they got this additional List, so that they
might have cited Witnesses to prove their Objections, were it not the truth is;
they have none^ besides these that are common and before Answered.

Thus I have given you hints that your own re^soning (which I know to be
refyn'd) may improve and apply, so as to dissolve the quibles which the
petry^^^^ts, who have not Soul enough of themselves to penetrate into the true
light of what is recondite; may raise against it: It being their common talent
either to Sk^pp over the Surface of Minas, or, otherways, to tear assunder some
appurtenan es of a Scheme, and then presently pronunce it Mortally Maimed

I must confess that none co^ld be more scept call a ^ent the Truth of such od^
things as I had heard; nor in^uisitive for canvassing the Reality and
Explications of them; then I was before my attendances at Bargarrans house, and
the reveral dyers of Co^^t; and in (...) Cen ^orsation with some or these
concerned therea^^^^. But now, after all that I have seen, reasoned, and heard,
I do acknowledge my self entirely captivate by the dictats of natural
under^^anding and common sense, into a sound mind and persuasion, that, as
there ^s such a thing as Witchcraft, so it was eminent in its forementioned
Effects; and the seven Pannals were some of the Witches.

I have tr^^bled you little with my proper Observations; yet lest you should
think me either too Lazy or Peevish, I shall make one, and it is, that I do
not think the greater part of the condemned prisoners will ever fully Confess:
Of which Conjecture I have two chief grounds, Viz. That they are neither
Ignorant nor Melancholic; but on the contrary, some of them would seem to have
been once enlightened before they fell away, so that if this be a Sin unto
Death, there is no appearance that they will glorify GOD by acknowledgment.

Severals of them are of singular Knowledge and Acutness beyond the common
level of their Station: Particularly Margaret Lang did make Harangues in her
own defense, which neither Divine nor Lavvier could re^sonably Mend: Yet I
thought that when they spoke in a matter of any concern, their Eyes stood
Squint and ^ix^d, as if they had been turning their Ears and attentive to a
Dictator. Their answers to the trying Interrogators put to them, were
Surprisingly subtle and Cautious. Tho indeed, by the industry of some of the
Judges and Lawiers, they were at occasions involved in Lies, Prevarications,
and Contradictions; which might have proceeded either from Natural or
preternatural Causes. Some of them were esteemed in the Country very Sagatio^^
and Exact in their Bussiness: Margaret Lang having been a Mid-vvise, and one of
the Lindsays having acquired a considerabl^ Fortune by his Tillage and Trade:
Yet it was noticed, that there did commonly break out of their covered Course,
something Odd either of Iniquity or Affectation; and Lindsay did finely enough
get off from the sherriff when he was formerly accused in 1687.

Melancholians are lovers of Solitude; Witches of Society, and Feasts: Those
are commonly Pale and Heavy; many of these Corpulont and Voluptuous. Witche^
are Hard to Confess as knowing their Guilt; Melancholians delight to discover
their horridest Dampts, because they think them no Crime: The ones Confessions
Every-vvhere are Uniform; the other's Phantasms are as various as their Humors.
Finally, Witches teach their Trade; whereas Conceits would Die with them, and
could be no more conveyed then the Humor which is the Specific cause thereof.
As these distinguishing Characters do hold in the General, so in this
particular Case there are several others: Such as, most of the Pannals were of
M^d^le-age, one of them not much above Twenty; and the first Confessa^ts are
known to be Young: Whereby Dottage or Melancholy are less to be ^uspected; yea
was morally ^mposs^ble in many of the Cases. For the Facts which the
Confessants had for^erly declared before the Commissioners for Enquiry were
sworn (...) other unexceptionable Witnesses before the Commissioners for the
trial; and the Circumsta^^es were such, that the one c^uld not know what was
to be depo^ed by the other: As it is already manifest, that the real Effects in
several passages of Bargarrans Daughter were no^ possibly producible* by any
imagination or Humor; and (...) spec^all in this Case, that neither the Pannals
nor Coufessants were Distempered by being keept from Sleep* tortured, or the
like, which were too usua^^ in ^ormer t^me^; out all the Measures were strictly
observed, that are the, requ^^ts o^ a t^uely imparti^l Judgment.

(...) n^^ded not ^o ^ave sent unto you the Doubles of the Depositions
them^el^es* Beca^^e it is not de^y'd that the Deposi^ions are such as they ^re
represente^ (...) ^he Pleadings; the chief question being a^ent the Hability of
the last Depo^^^^s. Neither was you to expect the Defenders part of the Debate,
separatly by itself, in respect that what was dispers^d here and there for them
is faithfully rep^^^ed or employed in what yo^ have: As to those poi^ts which I
thought worth the Notti^^.

Upon the whole I do believe; that there is scarcely a more rare providence of
this nature in any true History; a more exact caution in any enquity or Trial
of this kind: A ^ore clear probation, without confession of the Pannals
themselves, or, a more just sentence, putting together all circumstances, upon
record.

I am, what you have made me, Yours, etc.

FINIS
ADVERTISEMENT
AFter printing of what preceeds, there came Intelligence from the Country,
that a Person who is Rich, and stays in a public place, d^signed in the
Natr^tive by the first Letters of her Name, has upon hearing that the Narrative
was coming abroad, hired an Hackney to bring off her Repute: whereby the
Undertakers (who are of the Brutal Cabal of our puny Wits) are to take occasion
of obscuring the Truth of the whole History. There was such regard had to the
Fame of those whom, as yet, there has not been opportunity to bring to their
Trial, that commonly, there are only initial Letters for their Names: And there
is such incontestible Evidence for the Facts here Narrated, that it is
impossible, without the most effronted impudence and falsehood, to contradict
them: Yet if the Root of all Evil, and Spite, against Truth, shall so far
prevail over natural Ingenuity, as to advance barefaced Lies against Realitys,
and give the World foppish Banter in place of good Reasoning, thereby to delud^
the Opinion of those who were not Eye and Ear Witnesses; the Authors (whose
Names, though told, are not here insert, because the Information may faill) may
expect to be Uncharacterized, and otherways taken notice of, according to the
demerit of such a Villainous project.

The Reader is entreated to excuse such Errors in the Printing, occasioned by
the indistinctness of the written Copy; which are easily corrigible by the
Context.


