MENSALIA SACRA: OR, MEDITATIONS ON THE Lord's Supper.

WHEREIN The Nature of the Holy Sacrament is Explained; and the most Weighty
Cases of Conscience about it, are resolved.

By the Reverend Mr. Francis Crow, late Minister of the Gospel at Clare in
Suffolk.

To which is prefixed a brief Account of the Author's LIFE and DEATH.

London, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry, 1693.

A Brief Account of the late Reverend Mr. FRANCIS CROW, Author of the ensuing
Treatise.
IT has been a Custom (I cannot say whether more Laudable or Ancient) to
transmit to Posterity some Account of the Lives of such persons as have been
eminently Great or Good. Our Piety toward our deceased Friends ought not to
terminate at their Graves. How fond are we even of the Pictures of those who
either by reason of their Alliance to us, or their invulgar merit, claim a
large share in our Esteem and Affections? Alas, these can but faintly represent
the Lineaments of their outward Vizage; but Biography expresses their better
and more noble parts. Many of the Hero's of Antiquity had been bury din
Obscurity, as well as covered with Dust, were we not beholding to the Pen of a
Plutarch, or a Cornelius Nepos, who (by letting us know what in them was worthy
of our imitation) have rescued their Memories from Oblivion, and crowned their
Names with Immortality. It is the privilege of the Righteous, that they shall
be had in everlasting Remembrance. And such a one, I think, I may venture to
call Mr Crow; For if a holy exemplary Life, and a no less Pious and Instructing
Conclusion of it, can (justly) confer that Character upon any Man, certainly it
was his due.

It was not my happiness to be acquainted with him in his Adolescency, the
paucity of my own years prohibited that; therefore this brief Account of what I
observed of that blessed man has its Scene laid much later, and only
comprehends a short Tract of Time. But in that (as in a curious piece of
Miniature) we have (in some measure) a prospect of the rest. I shall consider
him in two Capacities, as a Minister of the Gospel, and as a private Christian;
In both which respects his Eminency was conspicuous to all judicious and
observing Spectators, that either sat under his Ministry, or were admitted to
any Intimacy of Acquaintance with him. As for those Gifts and Abilities that
were more immediately requisite to qualify him for his Honorable and
Important Function, they were such, and so many, as very rarely unite and
center in any one Man; His Judgment was great, his Fancy rich, his Memory
retentive, and his Elocution correspondent.

The Hebrew and Greek are the Two Spectacles (not to say Eyes) of a Divine;
because the Holy Scriptures were written originally in those Cryptick
Languages. And in both of these his skill was such as others may sooner admire
than imitate.

I my self have seen amongst his Manuscripts (which were full as excellent as
numerous) a judicious Collection of most of the Etymologies, or Derivations of
the Hebrew words used in the Old Testament. A work of great Industry and
Usefulness, especially to such as labor in the Lord's Vineyard. Nor was he
meanly versed in the copious Delicacies of the Noble Greek Tongue. It was one
of his learned Recreations (as indeed I knew of none others that he used) to
propound Questions to young Scholars that came to visit him, concerning the
meaning of some difficult Greek words, and after they had given their sense of
them, he would (with a grave sweetness peculiar to himself) charm their Ears
with a Learned Discourse of the Depths, and Mysteries that he had observed in
them. Indeed, I know but few that may be reckoned his Equals in Sacred
Philology.

His preaching, (...).
the proper work of a Minister, was sufficient to demonstrate what a
concurrence there was of the Divine Blessing with his Sedulous Endeavors. He
did not (as too many do) starve the Souls of his Hearers with Empty Notions and
Flashy Conceits (which can have no further tendency than a barren unimprovable
Speculation], but what he delivered was both serious and solid, weighty Matter
coucht in apt Expressions.

For he did not studiously affect a lofty unintelligible Jargon, which some Men
are apt to miscall Rhetoric; But only conformed himself to such a modest
decency of Style, as was sufficient to preserve him from the contempt of those
who (principally] regard the Form (not the Substance) of a Sermon. And no
wonder if such a Ministry had its Seals. I suppose many a poor Soul, in and
about Clare, may (upon his account) use the Language of Augustine to God, upon
his going to Millain to hear Ambrose preach; I come not to him as to an
Instructor; Non ad illum ut ad Doctorem veni, per te en^m ducebar nescius, ut
ad te per illum sciens aducerer. Possid. in vita D. August.
Thou broughtest me to him ignorantly, that he might bring me to thee knowingly.

A most singular Dexterity had he in expounding Obscure and Difficult Texts of
Scripture. He was (in this respect) like Joseph, Zophnath Paaneah sive (...).
a revealer of hidden things. And this was (to his great honor) remarked by a
Worthy Minister that preached his Funeral Sermon.

His Catechizing of Children (and some of Riper Years) was so well intended,
and so successfully prosecuted by him, that, tho I should be silent, many of
those who have been educated at the Feet of this so great a Doctor of the
Divine Law, are yet alive to trumpet forth his praise. And his Memory will even
for this be precious to succeeding Generations.

But hitherto I have spoken of him as an Ambassador of Jesus Christ, as a
Workman that needed not be ashamed: And tho much more might be truly said of
him as such, yet it no ways comporting with my present Design, I shall wave
that, and descend to the other part of his Character, which is to consider him
as a Private Christian.

But before I make any progress in that, I judge it convenient (in two or three
Lines to premise, that his Life and Doctrine were exactly parallel; and what
was said of Origin may (with no less reason) be applied to him; As he lived,
Quemadmodum vixit, sic docuit, and quemadmodum docuit, sic vixit.
so he taught; and as he taught, so he lived.

His sincere Piety, and real Holiness deserves particularly to be taken notice
of. This alone is capable of repairing the defects of our Nature, contracted by
Adam's Fall. (...) Greg. Nyssen.
And it is nothing else but an imitation of the Divine Nature of God. And how
closely did he walk with his Creator? Could the Walls of his Study speak, they
would tell you how often he was upon his knees, secretly worshipping of, and
praying to him. (...) Damascen. lib. 3. Orthod. Fid.
Prayer is an Elevation of the mind to God. An Invocation of the Adorable
Trinity. Without this Preparative all our Studies and Endeavors will turn to
little Effect. (...). Orig Comment. in Johan. V^l 2. Tom. 8. p. 124.
For the Divine Assistance is absolutely necessary to all Humane Undertakings:
This, (...).
Mr. Crow well understood, and often watered with his Tears in private that
Heavenly Seed he had been sowing in public.

Nor less careful was he to preserve the Worship of God in his Family; And when
engaged in that Sacred Duty, he behaved himself like one that had an awful
Reverence of that Tremendous Majesty, in whose Presence he appeared. And his
manner of expressing himself was Pathetical and Affecting. (...). Basil. Conc.
9. de Orat.
He did not (generally) at such times use many Words; I believe out of an
unwillingness to make so very necessary a part of God's Worship looked upon as
Burdensome.

A great concern did he express for the eternal Welfare of all those that lived
under his Roof; instructing his Son, according to his Young Capacity, and his
Servants as he had Opportunity.

His Language and his Actions were so many Lectures of Virtue and Christianity.
And they must be bad indeed that did not come from him Wiser or Better than
they went to him. Examples are more prevalent than Precepts. Man is (as
Jamblicus observes) of all Creatures, (...).
the most prone to Imitation.

And it is Lactantius's Advice, Si Praecipientem sequi non potes, sequere
Antecedentem. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 24.
If you cannot conform your self to Rules, endeavor to eye those that take the
best Courses. In hoc homine nunquam peccavit Adamus.
Now tho I dare not say of Mr. Crow as the Papists (falsely) did of Bonaventure,
That Adam never sinned in him; yet I may venture to declare, That the greater
part of his Conversation seemed to be a lively Comment upon the Holy Writ.

And as he was a conscientious Observer of his Duty to God, so he still took
care to be just and equal toward Man, (...). Phil. jud.
as all that profess Christianity ought to be.

(...). Epictet, Stoici dictum. Non est minus malum refer injuriam, quam
infer. Lactan.
His Charity, both in Giving, and Forgiving Injuries, was very extensive. His
Natural Temper, Genius and Disposition was tender and sympathising. (...). (
i.e.) multorum viscerum.
But it was much improved by his being so long educated (and so good a
Proficient) in the School of Christ. The blessing of him that was ready to
perish came upon him, and he made the Widows heart sing for joy.

The next illustrious fruit of Regeneration that I shall take notice of in him,
was his singular Humility, and mean extenuating thoughts of his own worth. For,
notwithstanding his being so great a Scholar, so good a Preacher, and so
eminently serviceable to the Church of God, (...).
he was not tempted to think better of himself than he ought. Tho he delighted
to communicate his Notions to some particular Friends (whose Advantage he was
solicitous for) yet he was content to court Wisdom in private, and to enjoy
Light in the Dark. And he labored as much not to seem eminent as really to be
so For as that glorious Source of Light, the Sun is then slowest of motion when
highest in the Zodiak, so the Virtue of Humility generally accompanies men of
the greatest merit. And this extraordinary modesty of his brought it to pass,
that as the World was not worthy of him so neither did it know his Worth. From
this so rare a principle, he did in the Pulpit use plain and Familiar Words,
(...). Mallem ut me reprehendant Grammauci, quam ut non intelligant Populi. D.
August.
that his Country Hearers might the better comprehend his Drift. Tho still he
was as far distant from vulgar meanness, as from elaborate Periods. And hence
(I conceive) it was, that he did not much affect a popular way of preaching;
which often captivates the Affections, but seldom reaches the Heart. He desired
not to advance himself in the Esteem of any, but to preach up Jesus Christ and
him crucified. Indeed in this loose and degenerate Age we have too many amongst
us, who (out of an unreasonable and immoderate desire of Applause, or some
other Temporal Emoluments) do trick up discourses with great art and care; but
with no other design or intention than to be had in Admiration of those to whom
they preach. Not considering that if their reward were only in this Life, they
were of all men most miserable.

Of such Methodius (a very ancient Writer) elegantly complains. (...). Method.
apud Epiphan. Haer. 64.
The Doctors ( says he) no longer regarding an honest, plain and sound way of
teaching, begin [now] to endeavor to please, and to be favorably received by
their Auditors, just as Sophisters are wont to do, who reckon their Labors
well rewarded by their Auditors applauding their learning, selling themselves
at this so cheap a rate. For as for the Ancients, their Expressions were always
very brief, their Ambition in those days being not to please, but to profit
their Hearers.

His unwillingness to let his Friend's Faults pass unreprov'd, deserves a very
great Encomium. He was a mighty lover of Freedom of Speech, (...).
and would be sure to use it to those that had the greatest share in his
Affections, if he had any good Reasons to conclude that they needed an
Admonition. But his Reproofs were always tempered with that Moderation,
Gravity, Sweetness. Compassion to the Soul, and carefulness of the Reputation,
as rather tended to engage the Affections, than exasperate the Passions of
those whom he took in hand.

His Industry and Diligence were incredible; but the delight he took in his
Intellectual Improvements, made sufficient amends for the pains he was at to
attain them. The Arabians have a Proverb, That the Riches of the Understanding
are most rich. Ditissimae sunt intellectus divitiae. 3 Pro. 14. v.
To be sure the Merchandise of Wisdom is better than the Merchandise of Silver,
and the Gain thereof than fine Gold. To be Owner of this inestimable Treasure
did Mr. Crow (not unsuccessfully) macerate his Body, by a severe course of
Study. The fruit and effect of it was that he did obtain a good Understanding
in all things. Nihil sine magno labor mortalibus tribuit Deus. Senec.(...)
This through the blessing of him that is the Author and Giver of all true
Wisdom rendered him so skilful rightly to divide the word of truth. (...), 2 Timothy 2 cap. 15. ver.
The Gospel is (indeed) dispensed to us in Earthen Vessels, or Vile Oyster
shells, as the Original word signifies. (...), 2 Cor. cap. 4. ver. 7.
But still God has all along put a remarkable difference betwixt these. And
some by being diligent to accomplish themselves for their Master's Work, are
(thereby) rendered much more capable of doing him service than others are. And
such a one [certainly was he. He has left but few Equals, I think, scarce any
Superiors. This Pains taking of his he would hardly be persuaded to intermit,
even when the crasie infirm state of his body (which began to give place to the
impetuous Assaults of Old Age) seemed to require it at his hands. But was
resolved (Taper like) to give the greatest blaze at his Departure. (...).
Dictum Solonis. Senesco, non Segnesco. Hoelus, Anglus.
That Good Old way he had so long walked in (with a most inexpressible
satisfaction) he would not now leave, tho he was going to a place where all
knowledge comes by Intuition.

The Object of his Studies, I must confess, was always Noble and Excellent.
'Twas not a Trivial, Frothy Book, (tho adorned with never so many ga^dy
Trappings of Rhetoric and Language) that could induce him to spend a quarter
of an hour about it. No, it must be somewhat truly masculine, and edifying that
he judged worth his consideration. (...). Arist. Metaph lib. 11. cap. 1.


Nevertheless, what he had acquired with so great expense of Time and Spirits,
he as freely communicated to young inquisitive Learners, imitating therein the
glorious Jehovah, one of whose Attributes is Omniscience, and whose great
delight is to convey Knowledge and Happiness to his poor creatures. And this I
mention (not only to illustrate his Excellent Disposition, but also) in
testimony of my own Gratitude, Ingenuum est fateri per quos profecerimus. Plin.
having often had the Happiness to partake of such Advantages.

Yet did not that vast variety of Learning he had made himself Master of, cause
him (in the least) to neglect his Theological Studies, as it did with Funcius,
that celebrated Chronologer; who might have lived longer as a Divine, but died
a Prince's Counselor. Disce, meo Exemplo, mandato munere fungi; and Fuge (sen
pestem) (...).
But he still strenuously applied himself to the Work of the Ministry, as his
chief business; using the others only as a by-work. (...). Vir bonus cito fieri
nec intelligi potest; Nam, ille (alter tanquam fortaste Phoenix) in anno
quingentesimo nascitur. Senec.


To sum up his Character in one word: He was a Laborious Student, a Great
Scholar, an Able Minister, a Kind Husband a Tender Father, a Faithful Friend, a
Good Master, a Useful Neighbor; and (which crowns all) a Real Christian.

The Distemper that deprived the Church of so great a Light, (and us of a
vigilant Pastor) was the Stone. He had often been troubled with it before; but
God's Blessing upon the Physician's Art, had (as often) given him ease. But now
his decreed time was come, and his Divine Master would no longer spare him out
of his Heavenly Kingdom. Both his Ureters were stopped, which (of course) impeded
Nature in her regular motions. Yet can it not be said, that any heard him using
unbecoming Language, or charging God foolishly. His patience was very
extraordinary, Licet pereat Saeculum nihil moror, si lucrifaciam patientiam.
Cyp. de Patien.
and no less exemplary. As he found his End drawing nigh, he addressed himself to
leave this World, with the same serenity and composure of mind as he had many
times done upon going a Journey from home, Mors iis solum terribilis est,
quorum cum vita extinguuntur omnia, Cic.
taking a solemn leave of such of his Congregation as came to pay their last
respects to him. Soon after this, selecting some particular Friends to tarry
with his mournful and disconsolate Widow, and to behold the last act of his
Life, Et nunc quasi jam mundo senescente, Rerum, atque Hominum, decrementa
sunt. Aul. Gel. Noct. Artic. lib. 3. cap. 10 (...). Clem. Alex Poedag. lib. 2.
cap. 1. p. 104.
he (without any great Conflict or Agony) surrendered up his Spirit into the
hands of his faithful Creator. He is now entered into that blessed place of
Rest and glory, where he shall never know Sin or Sorrow more, and where all
Tears will be wiped from his Eyes. (...) Muns. ex Rabin. in Thalamo Justorum.
I can hardly with any Moderation, reflect upon the greatness of our loss; but
am ready to use the Language of Basilius Amberbachius, when he heard of the
Death of the incomparable The odorus Zuingerus; Piget me vivere post tanrum
Virum, ^ujus magna suit Doctrina, sed exigua, si cum Pietate conferatur.
Melchior. Adam. Vit. Germ. Medic. p. 304.
It grieves me (says he) to live after so extraordinary a man, whose Learning
was very great, yet but small, if compared with his Piety.

When Elijah was translated, Elisha cried out, My Father, my Father, the
Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. (...) currus Israel, 2 Reg. 2.
cap. 12. v.
That is (as the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds it, Tu, qui plus Juvabas Israelem
precibus quam Currus falcati, and Equites. Vattab. in loc.
) Thou who more helpedst Israel with thy Prayers, than all the Chariots, or
Warlike Supplies that she had belonging to her.

The Righteous are taken away from the evil to come. And their Death is a sad
presage of approaching Calamities. Astrologers say, Quum Luminaria patiuntur
Eclipsm, m^lum omen est mundo. Gassendi Astron.
When the Lummaries are eclips d it fore bodes mischief to the World. God has
been pleased to call many of his Servants the Prophets, out of our Land, within
this few years Oh! that we would learn Righteousness, then his Judgments are
walking abroad upon the Earth. Possidonius in the Life of St. Augustine^ tells
us, that he was removed by Death when the Goths and Vandals had just begun t^
besle^e Hippo. Thus of good King Josiah it is said, that he should be gathered
to his Grave in peace; and not see all the evil that God would bring upon
Jerusalem. Hidelburgh could never be taken so long as Paraeus the Palladium of
the place) was a ive May the Death of Mr. Crow, and diverse other Godly
Ministers that are lately snatched to Glory, a^raken us all to a timely
Repentance, that so Destruction may not be our rort on Let us all be
endeavoring to live the Life of these righteous men, that our Latter End may
be like theirs.

Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori.
MENSALIA SACRA: OR, Sacramental Exhortations and Preparations.
1. THAT we may not stumble on the Threshold, and miss the Mark, it wi l be
needful to understand the proper Ends of this Ordinance of the Lord's Last
Supper; which are, 1. To commemorate Christ's Death till he come again. 2. To
be a solemn renewing of the holy Covenant first entered into by Baptism,
consenting to the Covenant, we are there to renew. 3. To be a living means to
exercise and increase Grace, by representing the evil of sin, and the infinite
love of God in Christ. 4. For a solemn profession of our Faith, love and
Obedience. 5. For a sign and means of Unity and Communion of Saints.


Christ has appointed their consecrated representations to be in the eye of
the Church, in their manner and measure to supply the room of his bodily
presence, while he is in heaven. The table in the tabernacle Exodus 25.23, 24.
May represent this Table of the Lord, overlaid with pure gold, and a crown of
Gold round about it because of Holiness becoming it, and a King sitting at it.
At this table should we be asking our own Souls, what our thoughts are of
Christ, and what we have for him, that it may be no idle visit you make, or
fruitless view you take of him; but let your requests and great askings be
ready on the string for more grace to your selves, or true grace to your
Relations; what is upon your hearts for your Soul, child, yoke fellow or son,
the Church of God?

Make sure you have grace before you come, if you can: I say if you can, for
every worthy communicant cannot profess himself certain of his sincerity: but
so far as he can discern, by observing of his own heart, he is truly willing
to have Christ and his benefits on the terms that they are offered: i. e. To
take Christ in all his offices as King to rule him, as Prophet to teach him,
and as Priest to pardon and save him.

And next we must be careful to exercise grace given. They who have no grace
can act none, and therefore mustly by and sit idle here, gazing on an unknown
Christ And if any be here who know themselves to be ungodly ones; I think they
had best rise and run from their own damnation. Some feed without fear, or
remorse for sin; yea perhaps resolve to keep up some lust they know of. To what
end is this ordinance for you? It Is a day of Darkness, and no Light.

2. The great voice of this Ordinance is, Behold me, Behold me. We are called
here to look on a pierced Lord Jesus. And what shall we see in him? See the
maker of all things bowed down under the burden of our sins, and weight of Gods
wrath. Look on him whom you have pierced and mourn, Look on his wounds and
weep. Look on his Love and wonder. Look on his satisfactions and Believe. Look
on his Victory and rejoice. Look on his purchase and contemn your earthly
interests. Here is the best and brightest glass in all the world God gives us
to behold his son in, and we may come as near him here as any ordinance can
bring us.

When you look on the Elements, stay not there, till you ascend, and see him
who is invisible. When by faith you come to see him whom your Soul loves,
prostrate thy sinful Soul, with a holy wondering, that sinful dust and ashes
may draw so near. Study to get the fixed eye on him, as loath to take it off,
being so well pleased with his beauty and worth. Learn to think the less of
other objects after you have seen the Lord. As Mahometans put out their eyes
some of them, after they have beheld Mahomets tomb, that they may never defile
their eyes with an other sight after so goodly and glorious a one.

The name of the Lord being so eminently engraven on all we are about, should
strike a dread and holy reverence on all our hearts the day, the table, the
supper we are at, are all the Lords; but what if we be not the people of the
Lord? truly, if we be not, he bids us not welcome: and what if we be here and
the Lord not with us? Then we had far better be else where. But how may we
know, if we have him present, even his sweet society and blessed company? It Is
his table we sit at and that is no small honor, for he is a ^ing; and that is
not all, he will sit with us himself and give us his own company, and we may
know it by this; when the King s^tteth at his table, my spikenard sends forth
the smell thereof, Song 1.12. Whence Obs. 1. Believers w^ll observe what others
do not, viz. When Christ is at the table and when not, and it will be empty to
them, when he is absent. 2. That Christ's own presence must be depended upon
both for sensible comfort to believers, and for reviving their graces and
making them lively. It Is the exalted King o^ glory's own presence that makes
his own grace in our hearts livel^ and savoury. It Is our keeping near him, and
his condescending to keep near us makes all his gracious work in us to bud and
blossom.

3. O the great condescension of God to sinful mortals that when he was
invisible, by reason of that infinite distance between the divine nature and
ours, he made himself to be seen in the flesh; and now by his ascension, having
made his flesh also invisible, by reason of the vast distance between his place
and ours, he has made his flesh in a mystical sense, even to be seen and
tasted in the sacrament. O if he has humbled himself thus far unto our senses,
let us not by an odious ingratitude humble him lower, even under our feet and
trample on this precious blood of the Covenant, by rushing on this so solemn
and sacred a thing with a careless and unprepared frame, taking no pains to get
a broken and holy heart to intertain him with.

To take this sacrament into an earthly dirty heart, is to take this heavenly
bread, and throw it into the dirt. O does any of you think to come hither, and
take these holy mysteries into your covetous, proud, lustful unrenewed hearts?
It Is plainly to resolve upon laying up his richest treasures in a noisome Sink;
and what an indignity is this? Christ is in heaven himself, and will not enter
into any but an heavenly heart here. And he who exposes himself so much to the
view of your senses, calls you to Spiritualise your earthly senses: let that
mouth that cateth at this table, never speak vanity nor lies: that hand which
is reached out to receive him, be no more a right hand of falsehood or injury to
any: these eyes which look on your Lord here be no more gazing on Vanity or
forbidden objects.

But to raise your hearts above beggarly Elements which you see this day with
eyes of flesh; consider this ordinance signifies and seals Christ and his
Covenant, with all his rich promises of grace and glory. The body of our blesed
Lord is really in heaven, for he is risen and ascended; but his body is as
truly sacramentally here, as really in heaven, making the most clear
representation of his death and solemn commemoration of it that the earth
bears, or we are capable of in the flesh. If there had been a more proper and
better way, we are bound to believe, our Lord would have left it with us. And
since this is a token left with us to remember us of his dearest love in dying
for us and washing us in his own blood, let us receive and celebrate it with
the liveliest affections and the heartiest acceptance we are capable of. Still
considering with our selves, that though it be good to be here, where much more
of Christ is to be seen to day, than many places of the earth can afford; yet,
that it is far better to be in heaven, where the vail of our mortality shall be
rent, and the vail of this infirm flesh of ours shall be made spiritual and
glorious, the shadows of Sacraments fly away, and the glass of all Gospel
ordinances be removed as useless, even the pitcher be broken at the fountain
and the great Riddle of our salvation fairly un^olded to us, all clouds and
vapors of sin and darkness dispelled, and patience, and prayers, and o edience
we l rewarded. And in a word where a more immediate and princely presence of
Christ shall be intimately and constantly enjoyed without any o^lowing fears of
parting.

Now the hope and assurance of all this we come to seal. Trifle not with so
sacred a thing, but set your heart to the receiving of your Lord here with all
his sanctifying, quickening and comforting virtue, which our sinful sinking
souls need so much. Now for this end he meets us here to day.

4. Here is the staff of bread, and wine that makes glad the heart of man. The
Communion both of the body and blood of our Lord christ. Lo, here is both a
peace offering for you and an offer of peace to you under heavens broad Seal.
How many burdened and weary souls have unloaded at this port?

O let not weakness so much deterr, as wants drive us hither: for sense of
wants and weakness, and unworthiness and wrath, all fit for him, who has all
fullness, strength, worth and merit; and who bare the wrath of God for them that
flee to him for refuge. And think it not enough to make your appearance here
without some fitness for so solemn an action. It is not so incongruous to sport
and laugh at your Father's Funeral, as to sit here restless and unconcerned at
the commemoration of our blessed Lords death, yea bloody death and bitter
passion. Shall we see the head wounded here, and the members have no feeling?
That we see the bread broken which represents the breaking of Christ's precious
body for us, and have no broken hearts? Yea, shall we be called to Contemplate
the wrath of his provoked Father, poured into his Cup, and drinking the dregs
thereof, and crying out under the weight of our Sins, which brake the very rock
of our Salvation, and made the Stones of the Temple to rend in sunder? Was his
Body broken to let out his Blood? And shall not our Souls be broken to let in?

Look well to three things, if you would be worthy Communicants, viz. To have
Grace ere you come to exercise Grace here, and to increase it by coming. Now
for you that have Grace, but it runs low, and is not lively, as you would have
it, to entertain your Lord withal: Know there is smoking Grace as well as
flaming Grace; and Christ will not quench the smoking flax: and what if he
suffer thy Graces to keep low to day, that thy Heart may be lowly for it?

But for them that are at high water, and Springtide, let him that stands
take heed lest he fall. Sensible Enjoyments are but slippery things here; Man
in his best estate in this Life is altogether vanity: but while the Lord allows
them on us, let us be careful to improve them well

But what if all within lies still, and an heavy heart stir not yet for all
that is said? Then look unto him that can remove Mountains, and raise the dead.
The warm breathings of Heaven must be fetched in by believing Prayer, Song 4.
ult. And when thou have called on thy Soul to awake and work, and yet nothing
within thy rebellious Soul will obey, then call on him whom Seas and Winds
obey. When we cannot fetch Life into our dead Souls, then remember the Prince
of Life quickens whom he will.

5. A sight of sin, and a sight of Christ who suffered for it, are our fittest
Objects at such a time; and in the sufferings of Christ we see most of sin's
evil. The death of all the creatures under the Law for man's sin, was nothing
to the death of Christ for it. As God looks on Believers through a dying
Christ, and loves them, so let us look on sin through a dying Christ, and hate
it.

Thy sin is indeed the Object of God's hatred; but thy misery that comes by it
will God pity, and so pardon sin, and show thee mercy, if thou can hate thy
sin; and in token of thy hatred of it, flee far from it, and cry to God
mightily for grace and strength against it.

And if a poor soul has been laboring last night and this morning for a more
humbling sight of sin, than yet has been granted him, he must never think to
see sin so exceeding sinful, as in seeing Christ a sacrifice for sin; and if it
had not been for our sin, all the other enemies would never have slain the Lord
of Glory. And when the worst of sin is in Christ's sufferings for it, we must
not only make use of Christ as a Glass to see sin in, but as a Physician too to
cure it. And when he has showed us our sin, we must not go to King Jareb with
our wounds; but the same hand which broke us must bind us up. And be your sins
what they will, if you can penitently and believingly plead pardon, in the
mediation of a broken Redeemer, there will be found Balm enough to cure, and
Blood enough to wash, yea drown them all in the depths of divine mercy; tho we
must not sin that grace may abound, and go and sin to make work for the Blood
of Christ, and go about profanely to pose his mercy; for tho the Blood of
Christ for fullness and efficacy be a Sea, yet for tenderness it is a Sea of
Glass, and mingled with fire to burn up our Lusts. We come either to God as a
Physician or a Judge: for either we bring Souls full of sores to be cured, or
full of sins to be damned.

To meet with Christ and not to part with sin is sad and dreadful: as Christ
came into the world to destroy sin, so should we come now to Christ for the
same end. O the sin of our natures, that old man, the ill habits, the strong
lusts, the ill haunts our hearts have got; venture to set Christ against them
all to day. We cannot speak good of Christ but ill of sin too. How sad to see
the desires of sin obeyed, and the commands of Christ slighted? and yet these
are the most common sights we see on earth. O! what pride, self conceit,
passion, prejudice, revenge, wor^dlynes, spiritual sloth and slumbering about
salvations work is there among us? These we oppose not as the enemies of our
souls: who thinks that a sweet lust is the poison of his soul, the disgrace of
our nature, the cause of our unhappiness, bereaves us of true delight, subjects
us to Vanity and Satan tyranny, and Gods wrath? We hide and smother sins
deformity and damnableness under the mask of pleasing and pitying our selves. O
might Christ prevail this day with our hearts to persuade us to be up and doing
even acquitting our selves li^e men in this matter, to assault our corruptions,
like them who are really allarmed from heaven against our mortal enemies. O
that ye would resolve to give your selves no rest till you be rid of them
Except not against this counsel, by saying that they stick too fast and are too
good friends, and the work too hard, and they too strong I answer all hell can
put in against mortifying of lusts, with this one word, viz. Where eternal
salvation is concerned, there is no excuse to be taken ( Romans 8.12) It were
better to pluck out your ey s, yea bowels, than spare your sins and perish

Be not afraid of hurting your self by parting with sin no, no; could we fall
upon our sins and cut them off, O what free lives might we live? what noble
Lords and brave conquerours were we? And for their strength fear it not. Go
forth against them in the faith of this Lord you see crucified for them, and
invites you to partake of the life purchased by the death this ordinance calls
us to remember. It ill becomes us to complain of the strength of this enemy
that Christ has overcome. All sin's strength consists in our cowardice. Fight
and ye shall overcome, conquer and ye shall be crowned.

6. If we eat of the sacrifice, let us have faith that we may partake of the
Altar and have Christ in it. We may say to you in this sacrament as Philip to
the Eunuch in the other, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may,
Act. 8.37. At all times we have need of faith, for we must live and walk by
faith; but in no step more need than in this: John. 6.56. We cannot eat his
flesh unless we dwell in him; now Christ dwells in our hearts by faith Ephesians.
3.17. Faith is the eye to discern the Lords body here, the hand to receive him,
the mouth to feed on him. We do neither see, receive, nor feed here without
Faith.

Now it is an easier matter to look with a bodily eye on bread and wine, than to
behold the slain lamb of God bruised for us. The world think it easy to
believe, who never had a true sight of their sins, nor sense of Gods wrath, nor
were ever sifted or shaken by Satan's temptations, nor troubled with terrors of
Conscience, nor acquainted with natural weakness, and Christian infirmities,
and our own insufficiency for so much as a right or good thought of God. Is it
easy for a proud heart to deny it self in the point of salvation? And wholly to
take a Righteousness from Christ, heartily submitting to a Gospel salvation in
says and patience? Is it easy to see Christ's humiliation and look for
exaltation out of it? and to look for pleasure by his pain, Riches by his
poverty, strength by his weakness, and life by his death, and a blessing by his
curse.

There is a kind of bastard faith is easy to come by, you will find every where
too much of it; but the Faith of Gods elect, peculiar to them, even the spirit
of Faith, which purifieth the heart, and works by love, and makes the soul
live, is not so common.

Now 1. this faith is never without heart humiliation for sin, even a looking
on him whom we have pierced, with a tender sense of the dishonor and wounding
of him by our Rebellions and Unbelief. O! here the soul sees its baseness, and
weeps that so blessed a Redeemer should bleed for the sins of such a wretch and
be still so insensible of this love.

2 And then it wonders at infinite mercy and mourns more misery and mercy pierce
the soul, and make it even exceed in tenderness and tears, to think of abuseing
such inestimable treasures of grace.

3. And it wonders at the glorious freedom of love that it should choose such
objects; and this even confounds a sinful soul, and makes it with a holy shame
lie down in the dust and open its mouth no more. Ezekiel 16.63.

4. It renounceth carnal reason and a rebellious will, and now gives up all to
him, who has won its heart, and paid its Ransom and therefore it is called the
obedience of faith.

5. It abandons a vain world and tramples on all its glory. Psalm. 119.96.

6. And now resolves to trust in Christ for all other things, since it sees a
sufficiency in him for saving its soul. 1 Timothy 4.8 Romans 8.32. Luke 12.32.

7 I am afraid some come hither to seal a Covenant who never knew to make or
keep a Covenant Isa. 19.21. Even to enter into a perpetual Covenant with
Christ, to be wholly and unreservedly devoted and resigned to him in love and
obedience, and who have taken him to be all that the Father have given him to
be to the souls of his E^ect i. e. Not only to be a high priest to ransom their
^ouls from sin in hell, and to appear for them before God in heaven; but
likewise for their great prophet to ^each them the w^^le will of God, and a
King to conquer their lusts, even a leader and commander to the people, in all
the ways of his revealed will. Now whosoever comes hither short of this, at
best the seal is but set to a blanck, and so stands them in no stead; for they
receive not Christ and carry none of his benefits with them: yea it is well if
it seal not their damnation. And I Am likewise afraid of another sort that may
come hither, who formerly might have covenanted with Christ; but for want of a
lively and well exercised faith grow blind and see not astar off, and have
forgotten that they were purged from their old sins; and so turn formal and
customary. And readily such Consuetudinaries who follow the drove can give
little other account of their coming, but that it is the way other good people
go in, and it they should not come, they might be missed by good neighbors;
and how could they keep up a name to live, if they cast themselves out of good
company? It Is to be feared many such things are with us. But if so, such may
eat and drink Judgment to themselves, temporal Judgments in stead of spiritual
enemies. For such things many were weak, some sick and others fallen asleep in
the Church of Corinth. 1. Cor. 11.30. And if such belong to God he will find
out the way to awaken them and not let them sleep the sleep of death, but will
show them wherein they have exceeded and a wake them to their work, out of this
Lethargy, either by renewing some terrrors of Conscience, or turning his hand
upon them by some torturing tribulation. And there is a third sort I fear may
come who are almost well resolved never to come up to the terms of having
Christ, because of some beloved lust they are so loath to part with: and go
away with the young man in the Gospel, sad, from every discovering ordinance,
whereby he finds all must be left to follow Christ if he have treasure in
heaven; which his hypocritical heart could never yet comply with; and so finds
no sweetness in sacraments nor Sermons, nor never can in this condition, for
the consolations of God are small because of some secret thing with him. Job
15.11. But as ever you think to be happy, be advised, whatever it be, hang up
that Idol before the sun this day, look but to Christ, and see whither thou
durst lay it in the balance with him, who is yet wooing thee to win t^y soul
by parting with thy sin. Let it wither under Christ's curse for the many good
days and far sweeter embraces of a better beloved it has kept thee from.

8. Such a day will either be one of our best or worst days. It will either
further salvation and bring you nearer God, or harden your hearts and heighten
your Judgment. A hot summers day ripens the corn, so do these seasons of grace
ripen faster than any thing can for Judgment, when not improved but abused.
Would it not be sad that any of us should be worse at last, than if we had
never been here, nor seen the Lord in these precious ordinances? Neglecters of
the great salvation are in a worse condition, than if the new Covenant had
never been made; for they must answer not only for breach of Law but abuse of
mercy.

Now that this Fea^t hurt ^ou not, you must be careful that you be not unworthy
partakers. To eat and drink unworthily is to eat and drink unsuitably. So that
the best way to examine this matter is by a due consideration of the nature and
use of this ordinance. Here is bread, that calls for hunger: and wine for
thirst, and both for strength and refreshing. Here is bread broken, and wine
poured out, which calls for a broken heart and pouring out of our souls to him
whom we pierced and put to pain. Here Is consecrated Bread and Wine, come as
Consecrated Persons to Consecrated Elements. Here is a Feast, then come as
confederated Friends to take a fill. Here is a Seal of a Testament (called the
Cup of the New Testament in his Blood) come and take a Legacy. And as it is full
of Mysteries it calls us to come with a Piercing Eye to discern the Lord's
^ody, and its worth, under the meanness of outward Signs.

Now you see, to come unsuitably, is to come unworthily. And may we not tremble
to think on the doom of that Guest that came in without the Wedding Garment?
and that it is not one or a few that come so, but very many, appears from Matt.
22.11. and 1. v. compared. In the application of that Parable they are said to
be many that are called, but sew chosen ones. The King took no exceptions
against his guests when he came to view them, because of being poor, halt, or
weak but offended with them that refused to come and with them who came without
the wedding garment. Many refuse to come, that are utterly careless to be in
any condition to meet Christ in this ordinance, and make nothing of a life time
of refusing an offered Christ therein. For which so gross a contempt of his
grace how shall many answer? And others come without the wedding garment, and
with these he is angry, intimating that many weaknesses he could pass by,
provided we make conscience of preparation and putting on the wedding garment,
which I take to be a good state in Christ through his righteousness imputed;
and a spiritual frame; lamps trimmed and in good fashion for feasting with
Christ, minds spiritual and graces active, Repentance, faith, hope and love in
exercise.

9. I am afraid our familiar and frequent conversing with such sacr^d things
does great hurt to carnal hearts, and hardens hypocrites in their sins, and
seares their consciences more to obduration. Thus Judas received the sop and
Satan entered. Abuseing these sacred, spiritual things with careless and carnal
frames, makes way for Satan's entering and possessing men more strongly, whereby
they become twice more the children of wrath than before: For who eat and drink
unworthily eat and drink damnation, i. e. Reprobates thereby bring eternal
damnation to themselves, and it brings to Gods own, temporal punishments as 1
Cor. 11. Now to prevent this danger beware of Hypoctisy in sacred things.
Double dealing here will undo us. I mean a heart and a heart; or a sacrifice
without a heart. The work is the Lord's, have you a heart for him? I wish our
case be not Jehu's, who had a great pretended zeal for God, but had no care of
his heart in Gods ways. 2. Kings 10.16 31. What says God of this service? did
he accept and reward it? No, he avenged it upon his House, Hos 1.4 Though he shed
blood in Gods cause and quarrel yet he did it not with a right and sound heart.
O look to it that you reap not his reward for a rotten heart. We say by our
coming hither, come and see my zeal: but if the heart be not right with him the
blood of Christ will be required at our hand; it is a great guilt to be guilty
of the body and blood of Christ. O take care that things be all right in our
dealings with Christ and particulary in our sealing Covenants with him, Isa.
61.8. It Is a precious promise that in making an everlasting Covenant with them,
he will direct their work aright or in truth, and that is, when their heart is
directed into the love of God 2. These. 3.5. Now may we ask for love in this
action: If it have a root now is the season of its putting forth. We may say as
the Rulers of Israel, spring up O well. Let your love be carried out according
to the vastness of his loving kindness; that we may love him in our measure,
who has loved us with a love that has neither bounds nor bottom; let their be
some risings of love; some returns of love; an entertainment of love in this
feast of love.

But when we have said all, it is the Spirit that quickens and gives life, and
where its power is wanting, there the word is a dead letter, the Sacraments
dead Elements, and we dead creatures: Now since the spirit works all in all,
grieve not the spirit, resist it not but walk in the spirit, and look to Christ
for a heavenly mind, for as Christ is now bodily in heaven, so will he not be
spiritually and sacramentally in any, but a heavenly mind; the doors must be
list up, before the King come in.

10. Look on Christ your Passover, Sacrificed for you, and be humbled 1. That
you were worthy to dye. 2. That you live by the death ^f another. 3. That your
sin should Crucisy the Lord of ^^ory. What a humbling sight is it to ^ee Christ
thy Sacrifice fall before the Altar, and laid upon it, and burn, yea, consumed
by the Fire of God's wrath for thee? O sigh and say, alas! Was not this for my
sake? should not I have lain there suffering and satisfying for ever, if he had
not interposed and bore my Burden? Shall he sweat and bleed for me, and I not
grieve for him?

But t^ make the remembrance of Christ's Death for me, the more affectionate,
consider first, it was the Death of the humblest and worthiest person that ever
appeared on the Earth, the Son of God, the Lord of Glory, the eternal God, the
Heir of all things; on Earth was never his like. Secondly, He was no greater
than Good, the innocent and spotless Lamb of God, that Holy thing who knew no
sin, and yet he suffered Death. In his Life was no spot, and in his Death was
no complaint or murmuring. This Noble and Just One died for us, was our ransom
and atonement. He who knew no sin, made sin, i. e. a sacrifice for ours, our
sin imputed to him who had none of his own; our sorrows made his, and by his
stripes we are healed. We live by his Death, Gal. 2.20 He is taken, and ^^e
^^ape If ye seek me, let these ^o their way le^^^n ^e^^r he charged on mine
Elect: My s^^ep I lay down my life for, tho they b^ under a ^^aw condemnation
for breaking of it, yet let them be ac^^^^d for my ^eeping of i^, par^oned on
my account, and all their scores reck^ned for with me.

Look on the blessed Surety of the Covenant, and be hold him obeying and dying
for us. For albeit the Law be not now a Covenant Believers are under: yet the
meaning is not, that perfect Obedience is not required even of believers; but
not being sound in them it is performed by our Surety the Second Adam; for the
exchange is only of the person, not of the righteousness. Thus was laid on him
the Iniquities of us all; and if it had been laid on us it had sunk us for
ever. But that love that delivered him up was unparalleled: Whatever Satan,
Sin, Conscience, or the Law charge upon you, show you here the Lord's Death.

11. Every Sacrament is a Certificate of Christ's Death; and hereby we tell the
world, we believe our Lord was cut off out of the Land of the Living. Now to
show forth this death are we come hither; he would not have his Death
forgotten; but to remember it, as we often do, without lively affections, is
next door to a total forgetting of it. Without an affectionate remembrance of
the death of Christ, and a Soul inflamed with love to our Ransomer, we partake
not of his body: we may be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, when we
put forth polluted hands to take it, and take all with unbroken is hearts. And
indeed the sweet of the Pas^ver is lost for want of the bitter herbs of godly
sorrow for sin that slew the Lord of Glory.

Now let the remembrance of our Lord here, not only affect us, but change us
into another temper and disposition, to be his, and for him, to conform to him,
to carry a way better thoughts of him, to live a life of remembering of him, to
give him alone the Glory of so wonderful a work as our Redemption by his death,
to love him that has so loved us, and to hate sin that so offended his Father,
and crucified him If we weep not over him we have no fellowship with his
sufferings; if we wash not here we have no part in him; if we carry not away a
better remembrance of him, we come here but to mock him; if we prefer the World
to him, we show our selves unworthy of him; and if we can go away and live in
our sin, we do but seal our own damnation by coming hither. What is it to
undertake a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and to weep a tear over the holy Grave?
but to return with a new heart, and another life, is the business.

And to affect you further with this Representation, by his accursed, but
blessed death to us, he seals the Testament and confirms a great Legacy to us,
that he may not only keep the condemned from going to prison, but settle a
Revenue on the poor and needy, and make them rich for ever, and set them with
Princes, even with the Princes of his people, that had nothing but rags and
poverty; and now he lives for ever to see his Legacies bestowed.

12. The Gospel-Proclamation is Christ's Invitation, Whosoever is a thirst let
him come. Desires are the Soul's hunger after Christ; they are the best sauce:
they add a sweetness to the bread of life. A man that ^ath lost his stomach,
and can taste no sweetness in the choicest food, is not fit to sit at this
Feast, who has no desires after Union and Communion with Christ. He that is
the desire of all Nations will be sought after, and found of all that do desire
him. Not to desire him is to despise him ( Is 53.2, 3.) and to hide our face
from him. Will he disclose his Secrets to them who hide their face from him? If
we desire him not we shall never enjoy him. The same thing that is the Saints
desire now, will be his satisfaction for ever. Let us not think a desire of
Christ a light thing: In the Gospel a poor man's hunger is his blessing, Mat.
5.6. in the world it is his misery. God accepts of our appetite as much as if
we paid ready money for his Graces, and their hunger is instea^ o^ a price,
Is. 55.1 There was never Soul miscarried with longing after Grace. O blessed
hunger that ends always in fuln^s^. The woo^e ife of Christian is but a holy
desire, says Austin And the soul desires Christ absent, but t^ese desires are
raised in the Soul by Christ present We burn with a desire to settle our
selves, but mistake the way, and build Castles in the air* but the Sum of
^anctified desires is unutterable groans for the ^ull application of good
things promised, and eager thir^ting for a larger communication. and before
Christ has per^ected his Grace in the Desires of the Soul, it will find it
self so inflamed with them, that if Hell should stand between its Beloved and
it, he would wi^lingly pass through its very flames to embrace his dear
Redeemer. And seeing it is to him we come to seal his Covenant, by
Soul-resignation, let the matter admit of no dispute or de^ay, but be
dispatched with all haste and speed ( Ps. 119.60.) (as all spiritual purposes
are to be managed) but yet le^ it be done with greatest seriousness and fullness
of consent, it being a bargain never to be broken, a covenant never to be
forgotten, and doing a thing never to be undone again.

If the desires after Christ you make this Covenant with, be true, they will
make worldly desires, in a good measure, dye, and run low. Sometimes you desire
a thing so that all other things are so little, they scarce come into your
thoughts for that same thing you love so ^uch. Such a desire had Christ to
redeem us, that even Sufferings were desirable in order to its accomplishment*
I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished?

13* ^o seal our covenant are we come, even that C^venant he ma^e with his
Christ, the everlasting Covenant, the sure and ord^red Covenant, wherein lies
all our salvation hereafter and all our consolation here. O let our hearts be
carried out according to the loving kindness of the Lord showed in it. Consider
all the mercies of this Covenant, and labor to taste in every one of them that
the Lord is gracious. This is the Salt of the Covenant, without which our
Mor^el will be unsavory. There is something in the Covenant better than
Salvation, better than Heaven, and that is the Lord our Righteousness, and
Jehovah our God. He is not ashamed to be called our God, let not us be a shame,
but a praise to him. To have him for your God is to have all in God for your
good: and O then let all that is in you be for God.

Christ is here sending us by the hands of his Commissionated Officers the
Cluster of Grapes, as the first fruits of the Land of promise, and commanding
you to take and eat the Bread of Life. He is reaching unto the thirsty Soul the
fruit of the Vine, turning it Sacramentally into his Blood bidding you drink it
in remembrance of him till he come, and feasting you with his fullest Love, and
satisfying you with the pleasure and presence of his glory.

Great and glorious things are so^nd here under the plainest dress, that the
eye of faith may be most exercised. The glory of their Ordinances under the Law
was a stumbling block to them; for they rested in the Cabbinet, and over-looked
the Jewels: The meanness of our Ordinances are so to us; for we look not for
the Treasure in earthen Vessels. The Types were rich, and our Memorials poor;
they had finer Spectacles, we better Eyes. If their Tree had more shadow, ours
has more fruit. Christ in commanding us to do this in remembrance of him,
builds a Monument of himself before he dies plain and simple to the eye, but
firm and lasting, to continue till he come again; and all that is said of him
in the Gospel, is here to be seen in this Sacrament. Here may we see him dying
and paying our Ransom, the Lamb of God lying bound on the Altar, heated with
his Father's wrath. On the Table we have a fair prospect of the Cross with the
sacrifice of the Son of God set before us. And let us say, Lord if thou
remember our sins, we will remember thy Christ* For in remembering his death we
must by all means mind that as our sins slew him, so his death conquers sin,
and expiates guilt; and this is the food of the sacrifice that our souls must
live upon. And if this be rightly apprehended, you see the great benefit by
Christ here represented, confirmed and participated. And it is easy to perceive
how far they forsake their own mercies that for the sake of sin come not up to
the terms of the covenant. I^ ye think good, give me my price; it not forbear.
Any that come hither thinking to ^old ^ast their sins, receive not Christ in
the ^acrament, but Satan recei^es them, as he did Ju^as after he had received
the Sop Such be all these who come not hither to repent of sin, but to c^ver it.

14. When we look into our Bibles we f^nd the Death and sufferings of Christ
represented here, a far greater matter than many make of it, bearing so great a
part in the ^criptures, and making so great a figure there. ^or we find the
sufferings, and satisfaction of Christ the chief thing manifested by the Spirit
of God to the Prophets, together with the Glory that should follow thereupon to
him, and his redeemed ones, 1 Pet. 1.11. which shows us, their prime study was
taken up in this. And this was likewise the end of all the discoveries of sin,
and threatenings of God's wrath in the Law, even to point out the necessity of
his s^tisfaction, Romans 10 4. And lastly, the very substance and sign^^^^^m of
all Type^ and s^cr^fices was but to point out the suffering^ of Christ, and the
glorious effects thereof, He^. 20.1.

Now no hing we hear of his S^ff^rings in the World, or see thereof in
Sacraments, makes any saving impression upon us, till thereby si^ b^comes
exceeding si^f^l, and Christ exceeding pr^cious; among the many things we have
seen in the World, and works we have done, when shall we begin to see sin in
its own colour^ viz. To s^e it the only thing that bre^ks the Law* and so
dishonors the Law giver, Crucified Christ, Grieves the Spirit, gratifies
S^^an, debaseth human nature, d^stracts the world and damos Souls. And yet for
all this men cannot hat^ s^n beca^s^ it is o^r ^o k Hell* 4.10. O monstrou^
sinful s^lfish^ess! that f^r all the inconceivabl^ ev^l in sin yet cannot hate
it, because it is ours, when ^o t^^t we should hate it more than all the (...)
the whole wo^ld.

Now this due sense of S^n (...) ex^lt Christ, and make him ^^^^^ous, who is
the ^^^ha and Omega ^n the bus^^^ss of Rel^gi^n; without him you c^n do
nothing, and lok for nothing. It'^ by h^s ^tre^g^h (...) mu^t w^^k, and by his
Righteous^ess you mu^t be ^cc^pted Isa. 45.24. For indeed we cannot for sin
^hink of any mercy till God turn our eye on Christ, in whom he is g^acious.

And the end of all we see Christ to be for ^s, is to oblige us to love and
obedience. We have new representations of the favor of God, and grace of
Christ daily in these Ordinances, that our obedience may be new, our hearts and
liv^s ^^larged, and consecrated to the service of such a Savior, who has
Redeemed us with the blood we come here to commemorate. I^ Faith ^ake these
things real to our minds* we shall be affected now and reformed hereafter. If
unbelief reign, and we abide under its Power* we shall be dead still, and
worldly as we were, But look to him for a share of Heavenly Grace to ^xc^te our
minds and thoughts to a Holy Ze^l, and higher ^ctings than we are usually
acquainted with in the lower regions of our converse.

15. Having given up our names to Christ in Covenant, we are obliged often to
renew it, to show the ^^^c^rit^ of our heart, that tho we fa^l in many things,
yet our heart stands to it, delighting in the Law according to our inward man;
to show that a man does not repent, but his engagement is still pleasant to
him, as if it were to do again, a man would do the same thing, if it were every
hour; to let the world see there is not a heart drawing back from God; and that
the heart that is naturally unstable, may become fixed for God.

And yet, tho this making and renewing Covenants by this Ord^nance be so
useful, Christ has not tied himself to Sacramental Seals, for that Faith that
eats and drinks the Blood of Christ without a Sacrament does save. And that
Covenant ( wh^s^^ver believes in Christ shall be saved) passes the s^als
effectually to a believer, tho there were never an occasion of seali^g i^
s^cram^ntally. Creed and manducasti, B^lieve, and tho^ h^st eaten, says
A^stin. God needs no Seal to b^n^ himself, but to secure and settle u^.

Yet since we are graciously allowed the opportuni^y of contempla^ing a
crucified Savior here, these two th^^gs, among many others, ought to be
wondered at, viz the price and the purchase. And this adds to the wonder of
bestowing Heaven on us, that it comes as the reward of our service tho
purchased by Christ. All Heaven to them who had little or nothing on Earth; all
Christ's blood for them who had nothing of his Spirit or Grace by Nature. O
wonder, that a Heaven full of pleasures should be at last the portion of them
who have had hearts full of sin, and lives full of blemishes. If a poor Beggar
came i^to the King's Treasury, and saw all the bags of Gold and Silver, and one
should tell him, they are all laid up for you; what would the man think? It
would strike him with a strange astonishment But wh^t are these to Bags that
wax not old, and Treasure in Heaven laid up for you, where of, if we had once a
believing sight, would make u^ for ever think less of earthly riches; nay, you
would be ready to go home and throw your bags of Gold and Silver to the Moles,
and to the Bats, and say get ye hence ye stumbling blocks of mine iniquity. But
again, wonder at such a price paid for us so worthless; worth nothing, and yet
cost him so dear. Good Lord, what do we for him that laid out so much for us?
If we have nothing, he needs nothing, yea, he requires nothing but to accept
his bounty, and be ravished with his love. Tho we be utterly unable to pay,
being broken debtors, yet let us even be ready to praise, and be thankful
debtors. For this very End is this Eucharistical Feast instituted. At this
Festival Commemoration let the Founder of the Feast be remembered with praise
and honor. And here take we hold of the most solemn occasion, for the most
passionate and thankful remembrance of that love that gave us so great a gift
as Christ, to do and suffer for us. And without this affectionate frame of
heart, we now frustrate the very end of the Institution.

16. Here have we the Beloved standing and knocking and putting in for entrance
at the door of our hearts, saying, open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled one. Here is my divine lasting love that for all her sinful sloth
and sleepy temper she was fallen into, yet he never chang^th her name, but
courts her love with kindest compellations still. But the motive he presteth
his acceptance by is melting and convincing above all, open to me, f^r my head
is filled with dew and my locks with the drops of the night. He begs a place in
our hearts by all inconveniences he suffered for us. O the dark and dismal
night of his undergoing the wrath of his holy Father when our iniquities were
laid on him. Thus stands our Lord now knocking and begging our good will and
likeing, our Love and fellowship, by all the wounds he received on the Cross
for us. Here are we called to behold, they pierced my hands and my feet and
shall not this pierce our hardest hearts to see the anguish of his Soul? The
rejected and slighted obtestations of a crucified Jesus will rise up aginst
many in the day of their distress, that they were besought to mortify their
lusts and live to God, by every drop of Christ's blood shed for them, but they
would not hear.

That the requests of a suffering Savior may have their due influence is this
ordinance appointed, bringing all his pain, shame and sorrow to our
remembrance. We see he has a good mind to be in our eye and thoughts. If you
see a Criple lay out his sores, they beg though be hold hi^ peace. And if our
suffering savior this day be unlapping his w^^^^d and laying his s^res open to
view, shall not they beg more powerfully and prevail? and remember all the
wounds of our Lord, he had in the house of his friends.

Now the very great voice of all his wounds are.

1. Repent. Look on me whom you have pierced and mourn.

2: Believe when you see your ransom and sacrifice slain. If Justice say I have
enough and am satisfied, why do not we think it enough, even apply it and rest
in it? Take peace and content, yea rejoice in God through Jesus Christ by whom
you have now received the atonement.

3. The voice of Christ's sufferings is, my Son ^dive me thy heart. If I have
loved thee and washed thee in my blood, It Is reason I have love again.

4. It says (...) bey and hearken to thy High pri^st. Hear him in all he has
to say, he has de^^ly bought your obedience and attention to all his motions
and Instructions Prove. 8.31, ^2. The force and stren^th of that t^erefore is
never to be studied and unde^^^ood enough. Get Christ's Cross to give your lusts
a deadly wound, rest not till you see him and feel th m thereby, disabled and
miled to his Cross. As for your Darling the world in its profits, pleasures and
honor, hear Christ saying, It frowned on me, and will my ransomed smile on it?
It was despised and a little thing with me, who knew so well a better, and
shall it be great with you? Remember that to take Christ in and put Christ on
are the two great Calls of Heaven in the Gospel. And since your suffering
Redeemer i^ taken into heaven (these gates of Glory flew wide open to him at
his Ascension) shall he be kept out of our hearts? Are they better than it? No,
but there was he better known, and here his own received him not; for they knew
him not: nay not only ^eaven has received him and therefore so should our
hearts, but there has he entered for us, which also has its own weight for his
entering into our hearts here.

17. Here come we to get more grace and strength to re^^st the Devil, and stand
against his temptations. Now our encouragements to encounter this enemy of
ours, that roaring Lion. 1. He is spoiled by Jesus christ; Col 2.15. 2. More
power is implo ed for Believers, than can be against them, 1. John 4.4. 2 Kings
6.16. 3. Victory over him is sure and near to Believers, Romans 16.20.

Qu. But since we must be strong in the Lord, and in the power o^ his might, if
we wou d overcome may we not question with our Selves (^s once the ^hilistines
with Dalilah concerning Sampson wherein lies the great strenth of a Christian?
This case Satan studies that he may know how to deal with us.

1. The great strength of a Christian lies in his Covenant Relation to God, and
Union with Christ his head for tho weak in our selves, yet a strong head have
we in Heaven. The Church is a weak Woman, b^t has a Redeemer mi^hty to plead
her Cause. A Christians strength lies in his Confederated Friendship in Heaven;
the improvement of this is the laying out of that strength, Psalm. 44 4. Tho
Jacob was des^itute for outward help yet was he well befriended in Heaven; and
the blessed God whom he sought did his business for him against his Brother.

2. In the gracious qualitie^ brought into the Soul at C^nversion* without
which, in a natural unrenewed State, we are said to be without strength, Romans
5.6. So that Grace is a new party, or Spiritual Power brought into the Soul for
Christ, to oppose sin and appear for God.

3. In Divine Assistances; for every Christian is weak or strong as ^ssisted,
as God girds or loosens us the girdle of his Loins; wherefore we had need to
keep in good terms with Christ, that we fall not under his withdrawings of
Gracious aids so needful, for our Spiritual Warfare.

4. In a careful retaining the impressions of O^dinances. O! pray that God
^ould stamp these glorious apprehe^sions of himself on your minds that you have
sometimes here) and may not t^^e in other Images to bow down unto Let the
impression of these Ordinances of Word and Sacrament wear off, and you are weak
as others. Peter had forgot Christ s work and so forgot himself ( Luke 22.61
and his M ster too. Had Evah's thoughts been intent on the word the Lord has
said) and not diverted to sensual Motions, it had been sufficient to put by all
the passes Satan could make against her.

O Christians! be first sound that ye may be strong, Job. 17.9. The way of the
Lord is strength only to the upright: but the more a Hypocrite does in
Reli^ion, he is inwardly the weaker. And for your encoura^ement, let never a
found heart despair of higher measures than ^ommon seize ^or your helps,
viz. The love of Christ, and hope of Heaven, are greater than your hindrances
can be.

18. We say times of Trouble and great Afflictions, are trying times, but I say
Sacrament seasons ought to be trying times with us. Now in the trying of the
truth of Grace we must labor to find out the habitual temper and disposition
of hearts, by the quality of their Acts. 1. If they be free and cheerful, not
constrained, or such as we had rather not do, if we could help it, Psalm. 119
108. 2. How frequent opportunity offering, Psalm. 55.17. 3. Thorough and
serious, else they prove neither habit nor disposition, Romans 12.11. 4. We must
try the Soul by the acts, which make after the end as desire and love to God,
Christ and Heaven, and this is more than to try our hearts by the Acts that
make after the means only.

I know all gracious hearts would fain know their own sincerity, 1 It is
willing, if sincere, to know all its sin, Job 13.23. even the worst of its own
heart, to come to the light, that it may be made manifest to its self, yea, had
rather a l the World should know it, than its rottenness should be hid from it
self; it loves the most discovering Ordinances best; but a Hypocrite had rather
have a rotten Heart, than be searched and repent. 2. It Is willing to part with
every sin it knows of it self; when one is more willing to part with a sin,
than to keep it, that puts the Soul out of danger by it. 3. And then the best
way to know our sincerity in this parting with sin, is by serious endeavors in
the use of all appointed means to oppose sin, and carry on the spiritual
Warfare against the Body of Death 4. And is obtaining some success and Victory.
The Spirit of God repeat, that prom^se to all the seven Churches of Asia ( to
him that overcomes 0^ (...), vincenti, every sincere Soul is in the way of
overcoming, the honest use of means gives some check to the prevailing of
Iniquity; where no Conflicting with sin, there can be no sincerity, and every
honest heart will be helped of God to some Victory; and what ever men make now
of other Victories, this is that which you will have only cause of triumph in
at the last; as Valentinian the Emperor said on his Deathbed, That of all his
Victories, one only comforted him, and that was his overcoming his own naughty
heart.

And that we may finish this Trial we are upon, in examining of our selves if
we can find our sins, and be humble^ for them, and judge our selves with a
righteous Judgment impartially and severely, we may warrantably partake of the
Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, tho we cannot discover our Grace^ as
we would; For such examination as issues in self-judging, has the promise of
not being judged of the Lord for unworthy receiving, 1 Cor. 11.28 31. Now our
sins, which are the proper ca^se of Self judging, are the object of
Self-examining, rather than our Graces.

19. Rom 8.3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh* Obs. 1.
God's sending is a great Mystery. It Is the Grandeur of Earthly Princes that
their Subjects send to them; and a wonder if Rebels have access, if they come
in the humblest manner; but he sends to us, and sends for us that we may come
an^ be pardoned, come and be saved. 2. He sends his Son, not an Angel, 1 John
4.9. 3. In the flesh he sen^s his Son, which is but gross, in the state of
Beggar to bring in the Blind and the Lame, Heb. 2.16. 4. In likeness of sinful
flesh, (as like a sinner as might be, not to be a sinner, that he might save us
from our sins) i e. with infirmities and necessities that attend sinful man,
that no eye could descern a difference, Isa. 53 4. As the brazen Serpent was
like a Serpent, but had not the Venom of a Serpent. This Incarnation of God is
a Subject of the highest Admiration, and fountain of the sweetest Consolation
that the World affords. O! the wonder of God's coming down to man to be
handled, seen and tasted of us; a contract even for the wonder of Angels, as
the welfare of Man. O wonder of wonders! that ever it should be heard in Heaven
or on Earth, (Let one of us become Man.) A Redeemer could never have suited our
condition only in our Nature; as Man, he was too feeble to assure us, and as
God only, too high to attract us; so that our Elect and Chosen one, has a
Nature for our Comfort, and a Nature for our Confidence. And now by Christ's
Incarnation, a ne^rer approach is made unto us by the Divine Nature, than ever
could have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive: Some say the Spiritual
Glorified Body of Christ, is the Medium of the Beatificial Vision to Saints and
Angels above: That the Godhead shines through it, in all its brightness, as
the Sun shines through clear Crystal. And, lastly, Wonder that two Natures,
infinitely distant, should be more intimately united than any thing in the
World and yet without confusion. The Flesh of Chri t is the Vail Heb 10.20.
alluding to the Temple, where the Vail hid the glory of the Sanct^m Sanctorum
and gave entrance to it: So (...) we draw near by Christ's Incarnation, which
rebates the edge of the Divine Glory and Brightness, that Creatures may
converse without Terror. Who can behold God out of Christ? And what could we do
with a Christ but in our Flesh? How hopeful to ^o^k to a Savior in our Flesh?
This is the sight this Ordinance gives us of Christ In our preparations we are
chiefly to look to our Selves, to see whether we have a right to Christ, and be
fit for him; but in this Action we are chiefly to look to Christ, and as a
blind Man cannot look to the Sun, shine it never so brightly, so cannot we,
without Faith, look to Christ. Run your Race with Patience, looking unto Jesus,
Heb. 12.1, 2. They who would run well, must keep their Eye to Christ; and
indeed man^ run not well, they look so little to him: Some look back to the
World, they are left behind, with Lot's Wife; others too much to discouragements
and difficulties, and too little to Christ and his Promises; and some look to
sin, and not to Christ. If the wounded Israelites had only looked to their
wounds, and not to the brazen Serpent, they had never been healed. But the
Command of Christ is look unto me, and be saved. Quest. What is the
well-disposed eye for looking unto Jesus, or rather, Who gets the right look of
Jesus in such an Ordinance as this? Ans. 1. A discerning-look, 2 Cor. 3.18.
many go forth to Ordinances that know not whom they go to see, Whom went ye
forth for to see? Matt 11 7. few take up Christ in his Natures, Offices and
Excellencies, a King, a Savior, a Physician, a Peacemaker, etc.

2. Seek a tender look of Christ, to look upon him whom you have pierced and
mourn, Zach. 12.10. Song. 7.4 Seek a heart-melt^ng look of Christ, such a one
as he gave Peter, Luke 22.61.

3. A love look, Song. 4 9. Isa. 17.7. Look upon him till you Love him

4. A transforming look 2 Cor. 3.18. look upon him till you be like him, in
some measure here; and long for that perfectly assimilating look, 1 John 3.2.

5. A self-denying and sin-forsaking look of Christ, expressed by going forth
and beholding him, Song 3.11.

6. A steadfast look. Get a believing look of Jesus here, that will make you
follow your look when you are gone, so as your blessed Jesus may be more kept
in your eye in all your work, in all your way even running your race with
patience, looking unto Jesus, as ever you would hold out unto the end, and not
be wearied and faint in your mind.

20. Here come we to renew our Covenant, and remember Christ's Merit, and God's
Mercy.

Qu. What is the Covenant we come to renew?

Ans. The same you entered into at Baptism; to take God to be your God; to
submit your self to his Laws for your Rule of Life, and to his Righteousness
for your Salvation; that you will Love him and serve him, and having Sanctified
and saved you from the dominion and damnation of sin, you will still strive
against its remainders through his grace and strength in the use of all
appointed means.

Qu. How are Covenants to be renewed?

1. We must look what sad breaches have been in this Covenant, since it was
last renewed; how careless we have been of many duties; how unkind to Christ;
with how little zeal for his Glory, and hatred of Sin has he been served?

2. When you have seen your Sore, repent and seek pardon, resolve on new
obedience; if you know of any sin you purpose not to forsake, it is certain you
come unworthily; and your sin you can never forsake till God show you cause to
hate it; and then no man is willing to abide with what he hates.

3. It ought to humble us deeply, that no bounds (even most sacred) can hold
us, and that he is even mindful of his Covenants in giving out the mercies of
it, and we so unmindful of performing the Duties of it.

4. We must make and renew Covenants in Judgment ( Hos. 2.19.) with a right
understanding of the Terms of the Covenant; even Christ and you becoming
mutually one another in a Marriage Covenant, now no more your own, but his, as
bought with a great price: Read ( and understand) the Articles of the New
Covenant frequently, for no wise man will Seal an Obligation he knows not the
Conditions of.

5. It must be expressly with resolution to break with strange Lovers, ^osh.
^4.23. Cords of Vanity, and Bonds of Iniquity must be broken, and if resolution
be right, you will instantly set about the Practice of what you intend, you will
make haste and not delay, Psalm. 119.16.

6. We must bind our selves in the highest manner to obedience, even under the
Curse threatened upon our breaking, as well as expecting the Promise, if we keep
it, Neh* 10 29. There the Covenant was sworn, and else where written and
sealed, chapter 9.38. See also Isa. 44.5.

7. Renew your Covenant with earnest desires to God for Grace to keep it, with
humble acknowledgment of our own inability for any part of it, knowing that the
God we Covenant with must perform the Promise of Grace, before we can perform
our promise of Service, Psalm. 113.32. Hos. 14.8. John 15.5.

And above all, depend on Christ the surety of the Covenant by Faith, and
importunate Prayer* that be see all may be made good on both hands; that when
he has, by his good Spirit, helped thee to hearty endeavors and sincere
performances, thou may see thy self infinitely obliged to his grace and merit
for covering the defects of thy best duties, and pardoning all short-comings,
Psalm. 119.122. Christ is the surety of the Covenant for paying our Debt, and
undertaking our Duty.

Q. What are the benefits of renewing Covenants? We ought to have them now in
our eye.

1. Heart-establishment, and clea^ing to God, called the Bo^d of the Covenant.
Our unstable souls need engagements not to go back. We give up our heart to God
entirely here, to perform duty, and avoid sin and snares; and this, by God's
blessing, becomes a means of fortifying and fixing the heart.

2. Renewing Covenants are of great use to recover us out of backslidings,
after which we are to put forth the same acts again in Covenant way by closing
with Christ, which we acted and put forth at first conversion.

3. It Is of great use to revive our declining delight in God. And certainly, if
we make a covenant with all our heart as Asa and Israel did, 2 Chr. 15.5. It Is
almost impossible not to rejoice in it, considering the great ends and purposes
it is made for: and the Noble Person, Christ, that Plant of Renown we make it
with; a Marriage covenant with the King's Son, a new Wedding Day, in bringing
back the Soul from its sinful wanderings unto its first Husband, with whom it is
much better than with any elsewhere.

21. We come hither professing our selves Christ's Disciples, sitting at his
Table, as they did that night he was betrayed: whereby we say, we are his sheep
who hear his Voice, receive his Grace, and follow him; yea, that we are his
Spiritual House, to offer up spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to God through
Jesus Christ. But yet Grace received had need to be strengthened and quickened,
and therefore are we come. Had not Repentance and Humbling work need to be
quickened and renewed by considering our sins and miseries? Faith, by Meditating
on the Promises; Love, by the sense of his mercies, even his tender-mercies in
Christ, we come to taste of to day, and to pay the Tribute of Praise for
bestowing such special favor upon us. O! let us magnify that Mercy, that has
Redeemed us at so dear a rate; that all his humblings were to raise thee to
Honor; his Sufferings to keep thee from Perishing.

All this tends to bring home our Hearts to him that has bought them so dear
Now Love has no such incentive in all the World, as the Cross of Christ; it
grows out of it; it lives in it, and we are Crucified by it to all other Lovers
that would seduce us from the Loyalty we owe to our own Lord: Alas, what can
these silly pretenders say? Were they Crucified for us? Hereby perceive we the
Love of God (or else we are very Blind) for he has writ his Love in capital
letters on his cross, laying down his Life for us when we were ^nemies (seek
the world over for such Love, and it cannot be found.) Now the very Publicans
love those that love them, and will ye be worse? And shall our love be so faint
and lukewarm, when his is so flaming and passionate? Look up to him that can
warm thy heart at his own Table with his sacred Fire.

And now, when Love to your Lord begins to revive, think what Lust you
harbored last and this is the time to get above it, yea, to Kill and Crucify
it, tho it has been rampant and raging, hitherto despising all opposition;
offer it now as a Sacrifice to him who was a burnt Offering for thee. Shall
ever sin, that slew the dear Husband, becomes the Wises Darling? If ever you
think of dwelling with Christ, give it a Divorce, and that the rather, your
Lord has drawn the Bill with his own hand. ( All ye that Love the Lord, hate
evil) Love Christ and hate Sin are the two great lessons this Ordinance
teaches. Love Christ that suffered for you, and here sin that flew him. Now
here he is who descended, the same also who asended, follow him thither, but
while here, look to the Grave where he lay, and then to the higher House he was
taken into above; and leave not off looking for him, till he come again.

22. Here are we come to our great Physician of Souls. And among our many
Diseases we had need to seek cure of these two, viz. Christians
faint-heartedness in sufferings, and dead-heartedness in Duties. Now a look of
Christ would cure both. What is the reason Christians faint under Sufferings,
but because they mind not their suffering Lord, who endured all so patiently
overcame all so powerfully, and has Sanctified all so comfortably to us?
Consider him lest you grow weary and faint in your mind; that is the Remedy
prescribed; and so we are dead hearted and formal in Duties, because we
consider not Christ that is to come with Salvation at the last. It Is his first
coming to suffer must sweeten our Sufferings; and his last coming with
Salvation that must quicken us to Duties; look more to the recompense of reward
for ginding your Loins to the word of God, Isa. 35.3, 4. And that you may meet
with something that may do you good amidst the waverings of an unsettled mind,
labor to fix something on thy thoughts that may help to stay thy mind on God;
such a principle as this; men cannot make me miserable, not the world make me
happy; my true misery is my sin bound up, and a hard unbroken Heart for it. My
happiness is not my thriving in Health and Wealth but my interest in the
Covenant, and partaking of the Divine Nature Let thy heart be breathing how
happy should I go home, if I might be but more Holy, and live more to the
honor of my Lord, and be in some better condition for his, blessed Service!
Has not God said, Behold, I will make a new thing on the Earth? How many such
new things has he done on the earth, as to give us all new hearts and new
thoughts of the things of God to Day? Our Lord is saving to sinners, Mind your
Souls, and make much of my Salvation: Your Souls are precious, and my Salvation
is great; and if ever your Souls enjoy my Salvation hereafter, they must be set
a longing after it now, Psalm. 119.81. Neglect it not for it cost him dear; and
if you miss of it, it will cost you dear; For how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation?

23. There be three things that commend Christ most unto any viz. His personal
excellencies, his usefulness and his love. As for the last, love lies at the
bottom of the whole work of our Redemption. The midst thereof paved with love
for the daughters of Jerusalem. Song 3.10.

We have the Father loving his Son for laying down his life for us, Job. 10.17,
and and shall not we love him for it? And as the Father loves the Son for this
love to us, so he loves us for loving his Son, John 16.27, the first pleads
for our love to the Father in loving the Son for our sake in the undertaking of
our Redemption; the other pleads for our love to Christ, since our loving of
the Son commends us to the Fathers love. O unheard of wonders of divine love?
That as the Father loves the Elect in Christ, and for Christ, so he should
seem to love him for our sake being so forward in our cause to suffer for us
and save us from our sins. It Is this love, that this ordinance brings to
remembrance, you see it is a feast of love and love must keep the feast, or all
is nothing^ for the unparralleled pattern and spring of all love is here
represented to the life; believe his love and let him have love again; you may
well believe it, for he that loved us so as to lay down his life for us when
enemies, how will he delight in us when washed in his blood, and renewed to his
likeness? and if Christ have his due he will have love again: And if true love,
it longs to see him, and can deny it self to please him, it will desire to know
his will and delight to do it. We must prove our love as our Lord did his,
John, 14.^1. A soul in love with Christ reckons him chiefly worthy of his love,
endeavors the nearest Union with him, and is still going out after him. Hence
spring Langour and melting to enjoy him and receive his impressions, resignment
of will to him and a concern for his interests.

Love the Lord all his Saints, for he keeps their souls. Love him once, and
all he says and does will be more acceptable to you; and all that you do in
love will be pleasing to him. Love him and you will be loath to offend him,
^esirous to please him and satisfied in his love. Love God and you are sure of
love again, Prove. 8.17. Now that you may love him, contemplate his goodness,
and see him in the face of Christ, and behold his love in the design of our
Redemption, in the person of our Redeemer, in the promises of grace and in all
the benefits of R^demption. Yea if you would love him, look to the sin he has
pardoned. Luke 7.47, the spots he has washed, the Covenant he has made, the
Adoption he has bestowed, the Hell he has redeemed you from, the Heaven he
has appointed and prepared for you. And now get some further preparations for
him and it too, by loving him better and loathing your selves more. We might
all love God more, (...) we could love our selves less. Could holy Mr. Pradford
sit and weep at dinner till the ^^^rs ^^ll on his trencher, because he could
love Christ no more and we sit dry here at his own table with hearts void of
Love to him?

24. Here have we our gracious Redeemer with died garments, glorious in his
apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength, staining his raiment with
the blood of his enemies and ours, trading the wine press of Gods wrath alone,
mighty to save, ready to pardon. This ordinance of the supper ^ives us the best
occasion of airing our selves in the sweet and spacious field of our Lords
sufferings, And we cannot be good Christians, if we do not heartily embrace the
opportunities the Gospel gives us of calling his Cross to remembrance. The bent
of every believers mind stands this way, else how can we be said to live by the
faith of the son of God who gave himself for us? And if we be not led by a
natural complacency to converse with a crucified Savior, how dwells the Love
of God in us? Or how can we clear an interest in his Death for us? Has he the
heart of a Christian that cares not to meditate on the death of Christ? Did the
Apostle bear always about the dying of the Lord in his body and should not we
do the same in our hearts?

Now since our great business here is about Christ crucified let us enquire a
little what does the Lord require of us. The sum of all is in three words.
Behold me: Receive me and Walk in me. First, observe how that great
Gospel-invitation of the Gentiles Isa. 65.1, 15. is doubled. Behold me, Behold
me. 1. To show how serious a suitor Christ is for our souls, 2. to show our
natural aversness from looking unto Christ. 3. To show how much of a Christians
work lies in looking unto Christ. 4. To take in and comprehend all kinds of
people and sorts of sinners. 5. To hold out the delectably variety of sweet
Sights a soul may have of Christ in his Natures, Person, Offices, and Excel
encies and Usefulness. 6. To teach that though the first look of Christ should
not please, yet to look again and not to leave looking till we can find
something in Christ to a^lure us. Secondly Receive me, rest in me and build
upon me. Receive him that is come so far to you and suffered so much for you.
When I was abundantly well with my Father always rejoicing before him, and was
daily his delight, yet my delights were with the sons of men. And down came I
to be clothed with your flesh (a course garment for the Lord of Glory to go
in) ^^at in your nature I might bear your curse and die the death you deserved
to die, and to redeem you from that misery you must have groaned under for ever.
And should such a Comer not be welcome. Be summoning up all the powers of your
souls to give him the hastiest Reception.

Lastly, as you have received him so walk in him by a constant depending on
him, drawing virtue from him and keeping Communion with him; yea farther we are
to walk in Christ as we have received him i. e. with the same freshness of
affections, bent of will, satisfaction in him, and obsequiousness to him, daily
repeating that consent and renewing that Covenant we made at first with him.
Thus are we to behold him with an eye of faith, receive him with a hand of
faith, and walk in him by a life of faith; and so shall we have the blessed end
of our faith, the salvation of our souls.

25. The sanctuary of the Lord may be profaned by us when we little think of
it. The truest notion of profaneness is a contempt of sacred things, Heb.
12.16. Now we show our contempt of them, not only in keeping far from the
things of Christ and salvation, but by setting about them with an ordinary and
common frame, careless in preparing to meet our God in them, with a broken
heart, becoming best an ordinance that sh^ws forth a broken Christ for us.

In common providence we cannot know love or hatred by all that is before us.
But here is something before us whereby we may see Gods love to our souls and
his hatred to our sins. If we could by this Sight be stirred up to hate our
vile lusts and love our dear Savior more, then were we fit guests for the
table of the Lord. Let us not look off this precious attonment here
represented, till our hearts be turned against the sins that put our Lord to
all the pain and shame he suffered for them. Let never any of us love our
selves till we can heartily loath our selves for sin and then Christ will love
us and delight in us. Next to our considering what sights shall we have of
Christ, our thoughts should be taken up with what a sight is he like to have of
us. We come hither to see Christ. And be sure the King comes in to see his
guests, if there be ever a one that wants the wedding garment. The best sight
Christ could see of us here, were to see us, as once he saw Nathaniel sitting
under the fig tree, an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile. Joh. 1.47.48. Or
as once he saw Mary (and so taken with that sight that he points her out for
others to see. Luke 7.44.) weeping for sin and exceeding all the company in
showing love to Christ. As the people would not eat till Samuel the Prophet
came to bless the sacrifice unto them, 1 Samuel ^.13. We can have no better
proof of our High Priest's coming and blessing a Sacrament unto us, than to be
found with Mary at Christ's Feet in Penitential Tears of Love toward our
Pardoning Redeemer. But alas! how dead lie we by the Ark of the Lord as is said
of Vzzah, 2. Sam. 6.7. whom God struck in his Anger with Death, for a wrong
touch of the Ark at a Time? Here was God's severity showed on a Man who meant
well, but gave the Ark a touch that he should not: Now what wonder of God s
Patience is it that some remarkable Judgments are not more frequently upon us
for our untender touching of his most Holy things on Earth? How often take we,
and touch we the Body of Christ with hard Hearts and unclean hands? O! let us
lament over our insensible Souls, and say with David, till better prepared, How
shall the Ark of the Lord come to me, 2 Samuel 6.9.

26. Luke 23.48. And all the people that came together to that sight, smote
their breasts and returned. That sight! that strange sight! that sight of
Christ on the Cross* Bleeding and Dying, such another sight was never seen in
the World; Creatures Murdering their Creator; The Church of God, purchased with
his own Blood* no wonder then all the people returned amazed. They smore their
Breasts, O! that it might break our hearts, for that is the heart-affecting
sight we come to see this day. O! the Heart-humbling sight of Christ's
Sufferings; the Son of God suffering for the sin of Man And as the Death of
Christ is held out as the most wond rful Object; ^ that sight!) so is it
recommended to us as the most excellent Subject to be Discoursed of, not only
as it was the great Subject of the great Apostles Preaching, 1 Cor. 2.2. but as
it is the only Subject mentioned of Conference between Christ, Moses and Elias,
Luke 9.30, ^1. A Subject most w^rthy of the most excellent persons that can
appear on Earth. And our Savior recommends the sayings of his Sufferings to a
deeper impression on their Hearts, than all the Miracles he wrought to their
amazement who beheld them. Luke 9.43, 44. Now if Wisdom has furnished her
Table with the representation of so rare a thing, yea with the Bread of Life
from Heaven, and the Cup of Salvation, even the Cup of the New Testament in
Christ's Blood; let not so rich a repast be received as a common thing. Our
blessed Lord comes not with an empty offer, but a full-hand and a free-heart to
confer all his benefits and purchases; the dispising of which by continued
unbelief will be the worlds greatest condemnation. It was charged on the
Israelites as the great aggravation of their sin, that they provoked God at the
red sea, even at the red sea; the place where their miraculous salvation was
wrought: But how will it aggravate our sin to provoke God with a hard
unprepared heart at the red Sea of his precious blood here represented, by
which we are Redeemed. Let us never be friends with our own hearts, till we can
love our Savior bet er and hate our sin more. If Namaan when cured of his
Leprosy went away resolved to serve no other God but the God of Israel; what
should we do whom Christ has cured of many f^r more desperate and dangerous
diseases? Labor to be that ground which drinks in the rain which comes upon
it, and brings forth herbs meet for him that dresseth, and receives blessing
from God. Heb. 6.7. Now what rain comparable to a shower of Christ's blood in a
sacrament? Where we either receive great blessing, or are brought nigh unto
cursing.

27. The Persians had a Festival day in the year they called Vitiorum
interitum, whereon they slew all Serpents and Venomous Creatures: And suffered
them to swarm till that day of year came about again. It Is to be feared some do
so at sacrament times who by some Confessions and formal humblings think to
clear old Scores and then go away and take on new ones; but if so such may look
the unclean spirit will return with 7 worse and take a stronger Possession than
he had formerly. And sinners must know their Confessions and humblings are
hypocritical if one Lust, or known sin be left. As (1 Samuel 16 11.) Samuel said
to Jesse, are here all thy Children? So when we leave some sins, Christ says
are here all: Jesse answered, There was one more; says Samuel ^ill that one
come I will not sit down. So says Christ as long as there is one be ^ind I will
not sit down with thee, sit where thou will. It Is dangerous to boast with the
moral young Man in the Gospel, I have done this and the other thing, and yet one
thing be lacking. To have our door lock t up still, to keep Christ and
salvation out, as a Covetous heart for the world, a sensual heart for the
flesh, a proud heart for the Devil will mar all, cannot be fit for heaven (if
the door were open would not go in) where no fuel for such a lust. And
therefore let us make a diligent search and take great care ere you come to
ransack well all the corners of a deceitful heart, and truly repent of all
sin, viz. when our sorrow springs from the root, and are affected with the seed
of all sin, even our corrupt nature and inclinations: and when we repent of all
known sin, on the common account of sin. as contrary to Gods holy Law and
Nature. And tho the heart be not always affected with a high degree of sorrow
intensively, yet is Repentance true, if it be appretiative, accounting sin the
only thing to be sorrowed for; and it we be displeased with our selves, that
the heart is not answerable to our light and convictions, in the exercise of
Repentance. And think not that all your sorrow for sin, without Faith in God
through Christ, will suffice. The weeping eye must look upon Christ, whom thou
have pierced with thy sin. We must look for all good from him against whom we
have sinned, take up our rest in him; and it is faith and hope in God must
purify our heart for him, make our soul despise the world, desire heaven, loath
self, love the Lord, and venture all on a word of promise, trusting God with
all the most dangerous like events of providence, and consequences of duty.

28 Two things had need be minded about this business, viz. to prepare
diligently; Take pains with a dull heart, cleanse a polluted soul compose a
distracted mind. Consider so great a presence, and lift up thy heart for a
blessing ere thou eat knowing that even the best partake unworthily if his
Graces be not excited and exercised. But again, beware of resting on
preparations; for never more unfit than when proud of fitness, like poor
children that grow proud of being a little finer than ordinary; but considering
how far short of what God requires and Christ deserves, there is cause of
humbling. Never are we more fit than when humbled under and ashamed of
unfitness. If ashamed of our selves, we are most like to have a sight of
himself, Ezekiel. 43.11. And at our best there will still be room left for
Hezekiah's prayer, 2 Chronicles. 30.18*19. The good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his Fathers, tho he be not
cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary: But beware of abusing
God's Grace, in allowing or regarding in your heart any sin you seek pardon or
with your Lips. Seek to be sanctified wholly, and get of God no less than his
own allowance, of a new heart and a new spirit; for God will not put his new
wine into your old bottles, nor his precious Liquors into unclean Vessels, but
his secret is with them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant.
Sensual hearts that savor nothing but of the world, cannot feed here on
Christ, and eat of the hidden Manna. For the carnal mind can neither be subject
to the Law of God, nor suit the Gospel of Christ.

And here being high set, let us labor to be such as may be well served with
the best. Now to perform high duties upon low motives, argues a heart full of
flesh. The Noblest Motives to Duties are to be found in God, especially as
revealed in Christ. And unto the service of this exalted Lord should we be
engaging all that is within us; for he is worthy for whom we should do it.

But if any be questioning if so great a Majesty will give man a meeting: But
will God in very deed dwell with men? Ye, he will Tabern^^le it with man. And
if any come hither sensible of sin and with a broken heart for it, and well
resolved to break away from sin, and all that may hinder this happy meeting, he
will no^ fail to meet yo^, yea, to dwell with you too, Isa. 5^.15.

Again, must you meet with him, and cannot be refused this Request, whatever he
say you nay in (...) I dare promise such a soul a meeting this day, if with
Jacob you cannot be contented to go without him.

And yet again, ^^st thou sh^t thy Eyes on all preparations and performances,
as Mediators in the meeting, and fixed them on Christ for merit and mercy, then
will he come and commune over the mercy-seat and no where else.

If thou be'st so addicted to his fellowship as no Joy is to those banquets
Isa. 64.5. And if strong desires from fervent love can be maintained there is a
visit a coming Hos. 6.3. Song. 2.5, 8.

29. The title of this Ordinance of the Lords last supper is the same with some
Psalms, To bring to remembrance. Christ is here to be remembered in his death at
the best advantage for his love to sinners; and where Faith is best
accommodated with an object to feed upon, above what all the earth can afford
it. Christ crucified is the great doctrine of the Gospel, and the great sight
in this ordinance. Its a dying Christ we come here to remember; which has
something in it beyond all his life in doctrine, miracles and obedience And
this memorial is appointed to be kept up of him, till he come again; not that
afterward he shall be more forgotten: but that there will then need no such
help to remember, when we shall be ever with the Lord and Immediately behold
him. But till we come to see him as he is, we can have no better sight of him
than through the glass of this ordinance we have now at our eye. For here are we
under the view of a pierced Lord Jesus, to mourn and rejoice, to believe and
love; for no other ordinance can give so fair an oceasion to exercise a Gospel
grace at once, as this does. For here have we matter of mourning in our eye for
sin that sacrificed our high priest himself. And no small matter of Joy in God
through Jesus Christ by whom we have received the atonement; and then let us
look on our suffering Lord and believe in that sacrifice offered for Grace and
peace. And love him that has loved you and washed you in his own blood, so the
Capital Graces (in stead of the four Cardinal Ver^ues) may all here be most
eminently employed and exerted. And how can we partake but unworthily if we
neglect the exercise of graces in and about the Action? And no Wonder then one
guilt draw one another, viz. We exercise not Grace in the Action if we
neglected to prepare for it before our coming hither. And let no Christian
think, that our examining for all will serve no at every approach be seeing how
it is with faith in Christ, how lively strong and well grown since last
occasion of looking on your Redeemer in this Ordinance.

30 This is the most solemn memorial of Christ crucified, that his Church on
Earth is blessed with. Now it is appointed for remembering of Christ; implies,
1. That for all Christ has done for us yet his people are apt to forget him
(...). That Christ is careful to help his people's weakness. 3. That there is
that in Christ's death which is worthy of a perpetual remembrance. 4. It points
out the easy ^^k^ of Christ, and reasonable service of Christianity, that for
all his death and purchase he requires but a thankful remembrance of what he
has done for his Elect. 5. It speaks the desire of Christ to be in his peoples
thoughts, and shows how much his de i^hts are with the sons of men still 6. It
shows forgetters of Christ can be none of his Disciples: and that no frame can
fit this ordinance without heart affecting thoughts of our blessed Redeemer.
Think never so much of sin and duties and of all other divine truths, if you
think not much on your suffering Savior you answer not the end of this
ordinance. 7. That if you can by the help of this ordinance, keep up a due
remembrance of Christ here, you shall not need to fear for getting of him
hereafter where we shall for ever look this Lamb of God in the face.

Qu. What are we to remember of Christ's death in this Ordinance.

Ans. 1. The bitter Agonies and bloody Passions of his Death. How pained,
pierced, buffeted reviled, tempted, betrayed, denied, deserted by his own
Desciples, and which is more than all, bruised and forsaken of his Heavenly
Father. And who can declare the sufferings that he endur'^ in his generation?

2. The unspeakable patience with which he suffered all; when his Enemies, like
Lions roaring upon him; he, as a Lamb opened not his Mouth When you are
afflicted, remember your Lord, and learn Patience.

3 And how willingly and cheerfully did he undergo all. It was written of him,
I will delight ^o do thy will, O God! and that in the work of our Redemption as
a Sacrifice for us, as appears from Psalm. 40 6, 7, 8. with what wonderful
desire did our Blessed Lord run this race that was set before him! enduring the
Cross, and despising the shame, for the Joy that was set before him; and this
Joy was to save us from Perishing. O! that he should more rejoice in our
sufferings, than we in his Salvation.

4. Remember these sufferings were all expiatory for our Sin, otherwi^e all our
remembrances would want Life For our transgressions was he wounded, and the
chastisement of our peace was laid on him.

5. Rem^mber who it was that suffered all this for us. Who, but the Lord of
Glory descending from his Throne of Glory and debasing himself to the meanest
condition imaginable. O! see what a Throne he stepped from into the lowest
posture of sinful likeness, to become our surety, and make satisfaction to
justice.

6. Remember the Love that lay at the bottom of all, for nothing but Divine
Love and i^created Kindness could take us up, and wash us in his preciou^
Blood, when we lay polluted in our Blood and Go^e. Remember th^^ I (...) more
than ^^^^e.

Q^. How sh^^l C^rist's Death be remembr^d?

^^s. 1. ^^nit ntly, with broken, b^eedin^ Hearts for th sins that P^er^^d h^^.

2. Sinc^r^ly a^^ real* not (...) ^^^ward appearance ^nl^ by (...) at his
Table. Many (...) to him (...), that want true (...) him.

3. Affectionately and heartily, with bo^^ls s^^ring tow^^ds your suff^ring
Savior, and glor^fied ^^tercess^r.

4. Most joyfully glorying in nothing but in the Cross of Christ, b^ which we
are reconciled to God and mortified to the world.

5. Most thankfully with a praiseful ^rame of heart, Ps 72.15.

6. Maintain it with some constancy. Be remembrin^ Christ not on^y till you
come hither again, but until the Lord come again to fetch you to himself.

3^ As the Lord will more liberally let out his Love in this Ordinance to the
broken hearted believer, than in any other; so must the abuser of it by a
common carnal frame look for Christ's avenging himself more severely for this
abuse than any other. F^r, says Bernard, In hoc sacro non solum aliqua gratia,
sed ille in quo omnis gratia. One of Gods greatest grounds of Controversy with
his own, I am apt to think, is unworthy and unsuitable sitting down with the
Lord at this Table. The Papists have the Ordinance unsuitable to Institution,
and all, as we, have Communicants unsuitable to the Ordinance.

Wherefore, instead of coming hither to meet the Lord, it is to be feared the
Lord man meet some with that ^^^rtling question, Friend* how cam^st thou in
hither, not having the Wedding Garment? which may either strike the sinner with
astonishing silence, or (if C^nscience speak its own language) put to this
tr^mbling answer, H^w came I hither? Wretch that I am, I came rushing unduly
upon so sacred a service, compassing thy Altar with unwashen hands, and an
unbroken heart; I was bold to come without any self-examination, humiliation,
or pre-meditation of what is before me. I came hither with no more remorse for
sin, nor serious thoughts of Christ than I use to have at a common Table. I
came as careless and unconcerned about Christ, or my own heart, as if it had
been the Table of an Idol, that could neither see nor understand. I came as I
use to do about other business* with a worldly, carnal* covetous, proud and
sensual heart. Then, bind him hand and foot, and throw him into utter darkness,
will be his Doom, and all such impudent bold comers, who discern not the Lord's
body, and have no fitness for this spiritual Banquet. For the hipocrite; that
looks no higher than to have a Name to live, has the Serpents curse, even in
Sacraments and best duties, not Christ but dust does he eat.

Little do many think what account they have to give of eating and drinking at
the Table of the Lord. Under the Law, Exodus 12.4. every man, according to his
eating, was to make his account for the Lamb; so much more under the Gospel, at
Christ's holy Table, every soul shall account according to his eating, how,
with what frame and fruit he did eat there? There is a greater reckoning on
this score than many dream of: It may be said of many eaters here as of those
eaters in Genesis 41.21. when the Lean Kine had eaten up the Fat ones, it could
not be known they had eaten them, being still so ill-favored as at the
beginning. Alas! can it be seen a while hence by the most discerning eye, that
we did eat this day with Christ?

32. Genesis 24 33. And there was meat set before Abraham 's Servant; but he said,
I will not eat till I have told mine errand. So has God set meat before you
here, but I think you are all willing to forbear till I have spoken my word, as
it is in the Hebrew there. And now all your eyes should be upwards that the
great Master of the Feast should direct a right word unto you, even a word upon
the Wheels. The word I have to speak at present is that precious saying of our
blessed Savior concerning himself, Joh. 6.35. I am the bread of life. O to
understand and believe this word! That the bread of God is he that comes down
from heaven, and gi^eth life unto the world, v. 33. Now the Manna Israel had,
was a Type of our heavenly bread, which they gathered not when it first fell;
and they wist not what it was, until Moses told them, It was the bread of God
given them from heaven; and then they gathered, ^xod. 16.15, 17. So will no m^^
care to meddle with Christ till they knew him to be bread to their souls, given
them from heaven for eternal Life. And every man gathered the Manna according
to his eating, v. 18. nothing over or under. So indeed there is nothing here
but for ^our eating, all is lost you feed not on, your time, your pains, this
bread, this wine, the truths you hear, the things you see, the preparatians
both you and we make, is all lost, it there be no feeding on this bread of
Life. The whole (Apparatus) Action is lost, and all that belongs to it, which
comes not up to feeding and refreshing; viz. if Graces be not quickened,
Corruptions weakened, hearts warmed, minds enlightened, wills renewed, life
reformed, souls sanctified, and sin pardoned.

But while you hear of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, and making
food of Christ in this Ordinance, we must abhor the gross and literal
understanding of this, with Capernaits of Old and Papists of late contrary to
Christ's true meaning, and his own interpretation of believing in him, v 47 and
my words are spirit, v. 63. So that all must be understood spiritually, and
done in Faith.

Then there is a feeding here by faith on Christ* 1. when the soul finds rest
in him, as it could never do in self, or any other, now being come to Christ
finds rest in him, and sees its saf^ty by building on the Rock. 2 when
refreshed with the lively hopes of the purchased p^sess^^n: 3 when it receives
spiritual strength for service, and his Love girds its loins: 4 when his
sensible presence makes glad the soul: 5. when sights of Christ mortifies the
mind to the world; then feeds the Christian by faith on Christ.

33. Christ says to none, eat and drink and his heart is not with them. Nay
this is the bread of him that has an evil eye, we are forbid to eat of, Prove.
2.3.6, 7. ^ut our liberal Lord says, eat and drink abundantly* O Beloved.
Song. 5.1.

Q. What is it to eat and drink abundantly in Gods house, or at Christ's table?
Ans. Its the same with being filled with the spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. Q. What is it
to be filled with the spirit.

Ans. 1. To be eminent in Grace and ripe for Glory. To be under rich anointings
of the spirit, above our fellows, abounding in the fruits of the spirit.

2. A sowing to the spirit, full of spiritual projects and designs. Act 10.38.
a forward activity and doing our outmost to advance the Kingdom of God among
men.

3. To abound in spiritual thoughts, and be spiritually minded, Psa. 139.17,
18. Magis Dei ^neminisse debemus quam respirare. Omne tempus, quo de Deo non
cogitasti cogita te perdi^^^^^.

4. To be filled with spiritual desires, still breathing after heaven. Psa.
101.2. Rev. 22.27.

5. To be filled with holy zeal and boldness for Christ and his cause.

6. To be well furnished with all spiritual abilities for the work and worship
of God.

7. To be ^illed with spiritual Consolation Acts. 9.31. The Joy of the Lord to
be our strength. Alas! with what stant measures take most of us up in Religion
and the matters of God.

Qu. What are the marks of these fuller measures of eating and drinking
abundantly with Christ, or being filled with the spirit?

Ans. 1. A constant drawing, and ever bringing our empty buckets to his well to
be filled. A Saint that cannot be contented to stand always at the bottom, but
teaching forth to get up to the top of the hill, for a fuller view, and getting
new discoveries of the holy land, bringing out of his treasures things new and
old.

2 When spiritual receivings have greatly quenched our thirsts after temporal
things.

3. When we can rejoice in our Lords work and find a delight in Gods ways.

4 The well is full when it runs over in praises to God for his communications,
Ephesians. 5.18 19. And in commending Christ unto others, Song. 5.

Qu. What shall we do for fuller measures

Ans. 1. Keep a good Stomach; fervent desires and spiritual hungrings are the
best preparations for plentiful partakings. Psa. 81.11.

2. Beware of self conceit and creature fullness that will hinder being filled
with the spirit. God gives more grace to the humble. Jam. 4.6.

3. Be very thankful for measures received, Col. 2.7. We can never abound in
Grace but by thanksgiving. Prize a little grace above all Gods gifts, and he
will not fail to give you more.

4. Put in for larger measure, and let thy heart tell God that if he will but
fill thee with grace and Godliness, you will be content with the less allowance
in other things, Joh. 16.24. Song. 2.5.

5. Sue out thy fill out of the promises. Joel. 2.28. Zech. 9.12. Ephesians. 3.19,
20. And tell God that he put it out there, that it should ly there, but in thy
heart.

34. Qu. By what motives may Christians be stirred up to eat and drink
abundantly, and to richer participations of the spirit?

Ans. 1. There is no other fill recommended to us but to be filled with the
spirit, not with wine or any nature else. Other things are commended to us in a
Moderation, to be used soberly and sparingly.

2 Because in these spiritual enjoyments there can be no excess, Surfeiting as
in earthly things. Ephesians. 5.18. Other things may cloy you and you loath them as
Ammon did Tamar and Solomon his Worldly Vanities But not so with Christ and
Grace, rich receivings begets greater hungering after richer and full
participations.

3. It Is set in opposition to sinful sensuality It is not a light tincture but
a double die of Re^igion that will bring down some lusts and ast out some
Devils. What shou d be the reason that lust st nds as a Marble pillar again ^
all our partaking of ordinances, but that we eat and drink, but not abandantly?
Ephesians 5.18.

4. (...) best proportions a Christian for his work. He had need feed and gird
his loins w^ll (...), that has a great Journey to go. Much gr^^^ will fit us
for doing more servi^^. Cor 15 10.

5. (...) becomes a Gospel state, for Christ I come that we might partake more
abundantly than believers did under the law. Joh. 10.10.

6. Our emptyness reflects dishonor on the Fathers fullness, as if there were
not bread enough and to spare in his house. If the servants be seen poor and
meanly appareled, they will hardly believe the Master to be rich and bountiful.

7. The more Grace, the more Glory; and they lose m^re than the whole World,
that lose the least degree o^ Glory.

8. Lar^e receivings would make o^r passage at last far more easy and
comfortable, 2 Pet. 1.8 11. Acts 7.55. more of the Spirit would better assure
us of our Heaven^y Interest, so as to have the witness in our selves. If we
live poor, we cannot think to die rich.

9. The more of God in any Creature, he is the more delighted with it, Song 5.1.

10. It conforms us best unto our blessed Head, who received not the Spirit by
measure, and all for filling us. If we draw not from his fullness, we make it
void as much as we can.

11. We should labor to drink as deep of Grace, and Christ's Cup as we have
done of Sin, and the World's, Romans 5.2.

12. It would be matter of Praise in the Churches of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.5. 2 Cor.
9.11.

35. If Satan should accuse any honest comers as once Joseph accused his
Brethren, You are Spies. It were a good Answer, what they made to him, Thy
Servants are true men and for Good are we come. I this be our end, it is right
in Christ's Eyes, that we come for good to our Souls.

Q. What Arguments may we use with Christ for his feeding and refreshing us
^^^e?

A. 1. Say to Christ, as the Aneel to the Prophet, The Journey is too great and
therefore thou must have that thou may be refreshed, 1 Kings 19.7. Thou
can not go on thy way without it.

2. It Is sights of Christ here that will make Saints go on like Lions against
sin and Satan.

3. Has he not past his promise for feeding his own, yea, to eat and be
satisfied, Psalm. 22. 6. Psalm. 111.5. Prove. 10.3.

4. Has he not made them worse than Infidels that feed not their own Family?

5. Did he feed the multitude, because he had compassion on their Bodies and wi
l he not have compassion on the Souls or his own?

6. Does he feed young Ravens, and will he starve Believers?

7. Have we not his own invitation to the Feast, and will the Master of the
House make it a Fast?

8. Shall we ear of the Tree of Life and hidden Manna in Heaven? Surely he n
ver meant to starve such by the way, but allow t ^m some cau^^r: of the first
ripe Grapes to refresh them in the Wild^rness.

9 May we not plead with our loving Lord thus? Lord I hear thou keep a good
House, having bread enough to spare; give me such a Portion as may commend it
unto me, and I will commend it to others.

10. We may say, How many have thou refreshed of thy poor and needy? Have not
thou said, Whosoever will let him come and Drink freely; upon thy call I come
to drink of Wisdom's spiced Wine; of this consecrated Cup, that I may here and
hereafter remember thy Love more than Wine.

11. I plead my own necessiti^s and wants, where should the poor be filled, and
the hungry feed but at the gates of the Rich and Full? If thou have not enough,
send me away empty; but I make a Virtue of Necessity. I must live by my Food
(as other Creatures do) and is not Christ the food of a hungry Soul?

12. I plead thy Glory for my feeding here, will this commend thy bounty and
compassion to send away from thy Fullness, a starving Beggar without supply?

Let us cast an eye on that Miraculous Feast Christ made the Multitude, Luke
9.17. And they did eat and were all filled and the fragments gathered up far
exceeded the poor provision it was made of. O! but it had Christ's blessing and
that made much of a little. And when we are Christ's Guests, we should not only
eat, but look to be filled. And gather up the Fragments, incomes and expenses
of Divine Love and Favor.

Now that we may take this Feast up aright, it is not a Sacrifice, but a
Sacrifical Feast, or Covenant Feast of Peace and Friendship; a Feast after a
Sacrifice, and by our eating here, is declared our interest in that Sacrifice
of Christ's Flesh, offered to reconcile us to God, even as they under the Law
did ^^t of the Sacrifice, and so partake of the Altar, to show it was theirs
that the Priest offered, as if they had been at the Altar with the Priest.

And further, this is a Feast of God's providing, as Abraham to Isaac: God will
provide himself a Lamb for a burnt Offering; and therefore was the Sacrifice
accepted, because it was of his providing, for known unto him alone it was,
what would satisfy his own Justice And str^ng^ it was, that this Sacrificeing
of his Son should be a sweet smelling Savor, a more wonderful word was never
written, Ephesians. 5.2. How dear must our Salvation be unto God, that made the
greatest Sufferings of Christ so pleasing to him, which other wise the Lord
would have abhorred* Wherever the Sacrifice is said to be a sweet Savor, its
said to be made with Fire, Number. 28. and 20 chapters, showing that nothing but
Christ s Sufferings can Satisfy for our sin, For all the Sacrifices only
signified Christ, but could not satisfy God

36. Our proper exercise here, consists of Meditation, Petition and Resolution.

For Meditation; the thoughts of the righteous are right; it is no small part of
our work to have right and proper thoughts at present. 1. Think how unworthy I
am to appear here, and have place among them that stand by, tho I were not
admitted to sit down with my Lord himself. I, who to Natural Corruption, have
added such a heap of actual Transgressions; inward enmity, and outward
contrariety to God: Ignorance, unbelief, apostasy, despising of grace, and
abusing of patience, have so filled up my measure, and made so great a part of
my wretched days and unworthy Life. 2. Think how worthy and honorable is
Christ, to whose holy Table I presume to approach. He who is the Fathers
dorling and delight, the light of Heaven, and the great Blessing of all
Nations; who has obtained a name above every name, at whose name every knee
must bow, and whom the Angels of Heaven all do Worship. He whose Table I am now
sitting at on Earth, sits highest in Heaven, at this very moment. 3. Think
again how good it is to sit here with a sound Heart, we cannot be better set on
Earth: But if a Hypocrite; how ill I am set, having not on a Wedding Garment: I
mock God, harden my own heart, heap up wrath, eat and drink damnation by
Crucifying the Lord afresh. 4. Think, what is my business here, but to meet the
Lord Christ by his own appointment, that I may get more acquaintance, and grow
more in Love with him, and to be more obliged to him, by a new sight of my
Redemption by him, and receiving some Spiritual gift. 5. Think what is prosered
me here. His Love, his Grace, his Peace, his Pardon, his Covenant and Kingdom.
6 You have never a right thought here, if you think not of a bleeding Christ, a
suffering and satisfying Redeemer, hanging on the Cross, and all your sins
hanging on him. For what else could ever bring him there; having no sin to
suffer for of his own and all power to avoid suffering by any? And think again
how he was dealt with on terms of Justice, that we might be dealt with on terms
of Mercy. And ^^^t which would have been in so many drops of an Eternal Hell to
us, was made to meet on him in one great Sea, drinking up Dregs and all O!
think, ransomed, Saved Sinner, if Christ had not drunk thy Cup of Wrath to free
thee; thou must had such a Cup put to thy head as if brought to a great Sea
filled with Gall and Wormwood, and Justice say to thee, Now sinner, thou that
likedst so well the Cup of sin, ^o here is the Cup of wrath, drink and never
leave Drinking while one drop is left Now see your obligation to Christ, and
despise him if you can; And see how sad it had been to be without him.

37. As for Petition and Resolution that belongs to this purpose in hand.

Q. What Petitions are here to be preferred?

A ^. For much of Christ's gracious and powerful presence, a clear day without
clouds; that he would not hide himself at such a time and disappoint the
Expectation of the needy, but so countenance his ow^ work, as we may com^^^d^^
unto others 2. For a heart humbling look of your dear dying Lord O how should
it humble us to see how my sins humbled the Lord of glory! 3. Put in against
prevailing Iniquities, and predominant Corruptions, that your jea ous Lord and
Husband may give Idols a deadly blow at such a time. 4. For the (...) spirit of
Jesus to make Graces lively that (...) ^pikn^rd may send sorth the smell
thereof, and the Spices slow out. 5. For growing in all grace* that Gods own
work in the heart may be s^t forward by our waiting on Christ in his so
precious appointment. 6. That he would suspend quarrels, yea, ^^move the ground
of all, by forgiving grace, and send away poor penitents comforted with a
sealed sen^e of it in their own bosoms. 7. For further manifestations of God's
Love, and clearer F^^^dences of an heavenly Interest. 8. For a more fruitful
Life of Godliness, to the praise of the g^ory of his grace. 9 For Families and
Relations, that it might please the Lord to bring ours h^me to Christ, make
them his by grace, and build them up to glory. 10. For poor Zion, that he would
pity her desolations, heal her breaches plead her cause, pardon her sins, help
her to improve her mercies, and prepare her yet for greater deliverances from
Evil, when ^er gr^cious God shall see good to grant them 11. That God would
pity the ^^rk corners of the Ear^^ and open the Eyes of bold and blind sinners
among us.

Q. What he the Resolutions this solemn occasion should pu^^^^ pon^

1 To love Christ ^^re (...) ^^tly. 2. To remember him more frequently* (...)
we (...) to remember him here, th^^ we may forget him when gone. 3 To perform
all duties more spiritually. 4. To watch our hearts more narrowly. 5. To walk
more tenderly. 6. To follow him more sully. 7. To renounce and deny self more
freely. 8 To trust in Christ more entirely. 9. To take his part more boldly.
10. And to keep Covenants more faithfully.

38. Here have we the most amazing Instance of love that ever was given in the
world; and when you have traveled the Universe over, to seek for Love, here
lies the richest and rarest manifestations of Love, that God gave his Son, and
Christ gave himself: This is the height, depth, length and breadth of the love
of God, that passes knowledge. So great a ransom, so rich a purchase; so great
a one become so low to set thee on high, make himself so poor to enrich thee,
empty himself to fill thee, and to do all this, yea, God to lay out his All on
such unworthy and undeserving ones! others love for some worth, or good quality
but God loved us when lying in our blood. Now what ^an we do less for all this
but make heart* returns of love again, Love being the very heart of the new
creature? and he that has most love has most grace, and (...) the best
Christian. And to provoke your love to this Beloved, you may assure your
selves, (...) he would never have died for you if he had not loved the meanest
of you better than the highest Angel in Heaven can love him. And besides, if
you can but love him, his love will breed you more delight and hear^ ravishing
pleasure than all the love of creatu^es can. Read but that Song of Love between
Christ and his Spouse and see the unparalleled delights of divine love between
Christ and his Church.

Well, if you love him, keep his Commandments, be careful to please him, be
tender of his honor, deny your selves for his sake, account all loss to win
Christ, thirsting after his communion, longing to be perfectly free from sin,
that grieves his good Spirit, and keeping your selves in the love of God,
looking, or the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life. No such
motive to love God as studying his love to us; and surely he must love us that
sent his Son from his bosom to fetch us thither.

But why should a little love of creatures affect us so much, and the great
(...) God affect us so little? A^^. Merely b^^^us. ^e are ^^ore ^^esh than
spirit, and have al^^ (...) s^ns^ then faith. Weak faith makes (...)
impressions of all spiritual things; (...) faith, and better rooting, would
make ^^^^^^ions ^a^ more ^^^^y, Pet. 1.8. Now if we love Christ, we will prize
the ^^ast token of his ^^ve before all (...) can give us, and will thi^ (...)
sight of him.

39. Its recorded of the Qu^^^ of ^beba, that when she had seen the sitting of
Solomon 's Servants, there was no more spirit in her, 1 King. 10. How much more
may this sight of our sitting confound and amaze us? That Christ's sinful
servants should be set with himself at his Table, considering. 1. That he has
not a higher board on Earth than we sit at now and the Lord himself speak, of
stting with us, Soag 1 12 Rev. 3.20 2 That tho it becomes ^s to stand when the
King sits, yet this glorious King came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister to us, to gird himself as a Servant, and mash the feet of his poor
disciples. 3. Wonder that we who deserved to lie in Hell should sit so high
here 4. And the greatest wonder of all is, that we should be fed at the King's
Table with his own flesh (allude to Job 31.31.) Job 6. Shepherds use to eat the
flesh of their flocks, but here the good Shepherd gave his life for his sheep,
and feeds them with his flesh and blood. And wonder also that we sit at peace a
midst so many enemies that envies our feeding? but it is of the Lords great
power and bounty both that he prepares us a Table in this Waldern^ss, and fills
our cup in the presence of our enemies.

Now at this sacred so ^emnity is represented unto us the weightiest things of
our. Soul-concerns, viz. Our sins and Christ's sufferings, we offending and he
punished for our offenses, something in his Sufferings answering to our sin, we
a life of sinning, and he a life of suffering, we a load o^ sin and he of
suffering; as our sin was God's provocation, so is his suffering Gods
satisfaction He was taken and we se^ ^ree, his death was our release, Josh.
20.6. there was no release nor returning in safety for the Manslayer till the
death of the High Priest. We have been light-hearted in suning but our Surcty
groaning and heavy, even unto death for our sin. We contracted the debt and he
taid the score sor us.

Now charge your Souls with Love, Repentance, Faith and Obedience; with love to
so friendly an ^nde^taker, who valued nothing, whatever it cost him, if he
might but ransom thy soul and set thee ^^ee^ (...) p^nt^ ance for those bloody
^^^s that ma^^ him sweat and weep. Faith in that blood that made so perfect
satisfaction, and is so ^ull of Virtue to purge thy pe^ssured and guilty soul:
And Obedien^e, even a w^^le Life of graceful Obedience to him that has
redeemed thy soul from H^^^.

40 The upper end of this Holy Table of the Lord, is to get hearess^^ Chrish,
at the K^s own Elbow when he (...) t^^^^ ^t his Table.

Q What sha^^ we do to get this app^^ end?

A. 1 Love (...) an in^^^^^ing thing. He that Loves most, gets ^^^^st Christ,
John 14.23. And if we Love, God d^^e^^eth in us. It was the be oved Discipie
that leaned on Christ's Bosom. 2. The farther we keep from sin, the nearer we
get to Christ. 3. Faith and Hope in their lively actings bring us near to God.
It Is said, That by the better hope the Gospel brings in, we draw near to God,
Heb. 7.19 It hinders ^^r approaches much to keep off from Christ by estranging
unbelief, and keeping the Affairs of our own Soul unsettled. 4 To have Zion much
on our Hearts, might bring us nearer sometimes, than all our own affairs can;
even when Abraham became an Intercessor for Sodom, he drew near; much more we
for Zion. If the things before us here rightly understood, work not upon us, we
may conclude nothing will, or ever can, that comes from Heaven. If God's good
word, and Christ's Seals of Love, left with us, make not Hearts stir toward
him, there is no hopes of Life in our case, tho one should be sent from the
Dead to Preach and Administer among us. To get the Heart above to God, by his
Ordinances blessed of God, is to have part in the first resurrection, that the
second Death may have no power over us. Look to it, that ye be none of them to
whom Christ will say I never knew you, even when you have pleaded by your
eating and drinking in his presence. For many may never come to taste of the
Supper of the Great King at last, for all their ^^ting here. And that you may
not miss of the blessed Entertainment of that Supper take heed that in Sealing
Covenants here with the Lord you be truly devoted unto Christ; and see the
danger (by Ananias and Saphira) of keeping ba^k any thing from God, that is so
solemnly once made his; let heart and life be his and for him, since the Lord
Jehovah makes himself yours, and all he is, for you. And after you have
Covenanted to be his, let your great care be, to be meet for his Communion, and
fruitful for his Service, even to abound in the work of the Lord. And let never
your Heart grudg any pains in preparing to meet your God, since one lock of
God's reconciled Face by Ch is it Sacrificed for ^s, will abundantly compence all
the pains of your Preparation, and charge of Service, Lev. 9.4. where God's
gracious appearing to his people is made their encouragement of costly service.

41. Luke 22.20. This is the New Testament in my Blood. The Old was the Blood
of Beasts; the New is the Blood of God, Acts 20.28. The Church of God purchated
with his own Blood. Nothing without Blood can profit us in the New Covenant No
remission nor purging and washing without Blood; no converse with God, nor
access to Heaven without it, Heb. 9.12.10.19. For Christ enters in by his own
Blood, or he could make no entry for us. All is done by Blood, but no worse
Blood could serve than God's; which shows our loftness and his Love: We lay in
our Blood and Filthiness; Christ brings his t^ wash us (other Blood defiles,
this makes white, Rev. 7.14.) O! Precious Blood, and rich love! it is strange
that this ^east of Fat things should in some respect be a Banquet of Blood. We
know that in the Treacherous and cruel Worlds Banquets and Feasts of pretended
Kindness have been finisned with the Blood of the Guests themselves: but no
such thing here; it is the Master of the Feast entertains the Guests with the
purchase of his own Blood. Moses's Wife said to him in a pet, A Bloody Husband
have thou been to me, because of the Circumcision; but a Bloody Wife has the
Church been to Christ, by ^eason of sin Redeeming us from it with his own
Blood. Now that Advice, Acts 20.28. belongs to us, Take heed to the Church of
God, purchased with his own Blood Now if the Ministers, the Shepherds, a^e to
take heed to the Flock, because purchased with ^hrists Blood, then, 1. Let us
take heed to our own Souls, for the same reason, because they we^e so dear
bought. I ne^lect them not, let them not live to sin, be estranged from God,
nor guilt lie upon them and drop into Hell at last. 2 Take heed unto the Souls
of one another that were purchased with this precious Blood: Do nothing that
may tempt them to sin, and think light of Christ. 3. Take heed to this
Ordinance, for the Blood of Christ is in it. 4. Take heed to Christ himself for
the sake of this Blood shed for your Sins, to purchase your Souls. Hear ye him
that has redeemed you, turn not away from following and hearing him, who,
justly might have turned you into H^ll for your sins, but has blessed every
one of you in turning you away from your Iniquities, and to take you away into
Heaven. Now this great sight of this precious Blood are we come hither to
behold in the Glass of this solemn ordinance. Great Solemnities call for great
Preparation and Observation, especially what is represented, and for what end;
come and behold the Works of the Lord, Psalm. 46.8. even the glorious work of
your Redemption by the Death of Christ: A work greater than that of making the
world, yea, the greatest work that ever was done in the World; nay more, one
great end of making this goodly Fabric of Heaven and Earth, was that it might
be a stage upon which that glorious work of our Redemption should be Acted; a
work wherein Man's happiness lies, wherein Gods attributes are Glorified to the
height; and for which, the Church Triumphant shall think Eternities leisure
little enough to sing forth their Heavenly Hall ^llujah's.

42. Many things commend this Ordinance of the Supper above all others.

1. It Is settled in the Church for all Christians to remember Christ unto the
world's end, even till he come again while the Sun and Moon endure, will Christ
have the kindest commemoration in this Ordinance. 2. It was that wherein Christ
had his last Fellowship with his Church on Earth. Now we please our selves by
calling to mind our last meetings with our dear deceased friends; their last
words and actions have their special remarks most commonly. ^et Christ's last
entertainment have the best impression. It was this shut up all his sweet
converse with his own before his death. 3. Divine Wisdom hach suited this
Ordinance to our weakness and capacities, accommodating heavenly things to our
outward and natural senses; for as we hear of a Savior in the Word, so here we
see, taste and handle him in the same meat. Mary was forbid to touch our Lord
as not ascended, but now this ascended Lord allows us to touch, taste and
handle him in those appointed figures of him. 4. It has the greatest fitness
and advantage of awaking our affections, representing his dearest love in dying
and redeeming us, in suffering and satisfying for us. There is nothing to be
conversed with in the lower world that may compare with this, to stir up dead
hearts to serve a living God. It Is by beholding a bleeding dying Christ for us,
that we become a ready, obedient and zealous people for him, Tit. 2.14. 5. Here
have we the best occasion for exercising every Grace, Love, Faith, Hope,
Patience, Prayer, Praise, forgiving injuries and bestowing kindnesses. 6.
Herein get we the best advantages against sin, by seeing what sin cost Christ,
and by sealing most solemn Covenants against it. 7. This is all the Picture
Christ has left of himself; no Image or Crucifixes. 8. It offers Christ and
conveys him with all his Treasures most expressly, Take eat, take drink. 9.
There being so much of Christ in it, and nothing but Christ, showing forth
nothing but his Mercy and Grace, his Merit and Fullness, his Love and Pity, his
Grace and Righteousness. 10 It Is a feasting it with God at a heavenly Table on
Earth, where he bids all his children welcome, and gives the best entertainment
in the whole world, Rev. 3.20. Song 5.1.

43. Our great business here being to remember Christ, our suffering Savior
and Redeemer, Qu. What in particular are we called to remember at this Table of
the Lord?

A. 1. That love that laid the first Foundation-stone of our Redemption by a
dying Christ; and let us here praise the Lord from the Fountain of Israel, even
for electing Love, choosing us in Christ.

2. Let us remember how the heart of God was set on man's Redemption, who, like
one that dearly loves the purchase, says, I Will rather give more than it is worth
than go without it. God says, I Will give my All for the redemption of my Elect.
Christ says, I Will give my best blood. Shall the Father and the Son be so
zealous for my Redemption, and my Soul be so little affected with my own
Salvation, and my Redeemer's Service?

3. Remember here the difficulty of man's Salvation, none but God could do it,
Isa 45.21. It Is no easy matter to save a soul: If any other in Heaven or Earth
could have done it as well as Christ, it is reasonable to think that God would
have spared his dear Son, but such a High Priest became us, and best suited our
circumstances, as was separated from the whole creation for divine qualities
and perfections. I have found a ransom, said God. There was nothing could be
thought on to any purpose, by Angels and Men for our relief: Only Divine Wisdom
contrived, Divine Love bestowed, and Divine Power did effect and execute this
whole work, and of all the People there was none with him.

4. Bear in mind how gloriously God's Grace is advanced by our Redemption, and
what Honor and Glory redounds to the wise and gracious contriver of it; never
such a rent of praise was raised as this brings him in. This is that Glory of
praise that is said to be above the Heavens. The Glory of making and
beautifying and enriching of Heaven and Earth, is nothing to this Glory that
excels, of Saving Sinners by such a Savior.

5. Nor is there any thing more pleasing to god in all the World, than a due
Remembrance of the Death of Christ in this Ordinance; which may be gathered
from his Displeasure against a Church that did it, but unduly, 1 Cor. 11.

Now all Duty must take its rise from this Principle and Motive of loving God
for Christ, and acknowledgments of Divine Goodness in giving his Son O!, never
think he has dealth hardly with you in keeping or taking any thing from you,
if he has given you a part in Christ. And this is a point of such Affinity
with the Vitals of Christianity, and of Graces thriving in the Church of God,
that even here should we desire to dwell, viz. To learn and look on all things
in Christ, Ephesians. 4.21. To be taught the truth as it is in Jesus. There is
nothing rightly taught or known, but as it is in Jesus. 1. The Types and
shadows of things to come, are all opened in Jesus. 2. The Prophesies and
Predictions are all accomplished in him How dark are many Prophetical passages
of the Old Testament, till they face Christ? and then the Vail is taken away,
as Calvin Expounds that of 2 Cor. 3.16. 3. We must see our sin as he did bear
it on the Cross, as a most accursed thing, that laid such load on his blessed
back. 4. And you must see your Soul in Jesus, as he has purchased it from Hell
with his own Blood. O! then how precious is my Soul, that was so dearly
ransomed? 5. See your Selves in Jesus, your new Covenant-state in Christ. You
never see your safety nor dignity till in him. 6. And all the great and
precious promises of God to you must you see, yea and Amen in Christ, all made
to Christ our Head first, and in Jesus unto us. 7. And lastly, You must see
your good conversation in Christ, Pet. 3.1. A^l your perform^nces in the
re^^^^^ce to him, and for him and by him, (...) to the Lord Christ, as grateful
recor^^ to your Redeemer.

And Christians ought to labor after this feeing all things in Jesus Christ.
For, 1. This is to see all thin^s in the tr^e light, whereb^ much contu^^on is
cleared, and many shadows fly away. We are bid come to Christ, and he will ^ive
us light, Ephesians. 5.14. And in his Light, we shall see light. 2. The great
Gospel-Command and Invitation is, Behold me, behold me, Isa. 65.1. 3. The
Father is no further pleased than all i^ seen and done in him. 4. This makes
all sweet and easy, when we see all his yoke we bear, and his work we do, and
his purchase we shall possess, that is, one so tender of our concerns, as to
pay our Debts, and undergo our Curse.

And now show your selves worthy partakers by resolving on this, That you will
meddle with nothing in Religion, but in Christ, you will walk in his Steps,
you will pray in his Name, you will Suffer for his sake. In a word, you will to
Christ's Cross for all you want; you will take Life from his Death; Hope from his
Resurrection; Pardon from his Merit, and expectation of all good from that Love
that parted with Christ: And on these Terms, I am sure Christ is well contented
to give you a kind meeting at his Table, and to Seal his everlasting Covenant
with your immortal Souls.

44. Q Why are we generally so little affected with ^^e great concerns of God
and our Souls, here represented?

A. I because of Unbelief, which turns all the precious concerns of Salvation
to a romanti^k Story. The greatest matters you can speak of do no more affect
than they are believed, Isa. 53.1. 1 Pet. 2.7.

2. We want a lively sense of our Natural Bondage. Sin and Misery are not laid
to Heart, and therefore what signifies Christ and his Sacrifice?

3. God Mammon blinds our Eyes and corrupts our Hearts. The cares, pleasures
and profits of this present world seduce many Souls from their Allegiance to
Christ, and the care that is due to their Salvation. How are most deceived with
the specious appearances and painted Slavery of the world to make us happy
enough without Christ? The covetous Pharisees mocked at Christ; and Farms and
Business do still excuse worldings from a serious and hearty embracing of
Christ's glorious Offers.

Q. What shall we do that we may not betray Christ, and prove false to our
Covenant and Profession in times of Trial?

A. 1. Leave not a root of bitterness behind, no beloved Lust unmort fied: this
was Judas his bane, the love of the world he kept up under a profession; and
this betrayed him into Satan's hand, and he stuck not to betray his blessed
Master into his Enemies Hands. 2. Rest not on doubtful Evidences of your
Heavenly Interest, but get things better cleared between God and your
Consciences. It will be a dreadful snare to you, when sufferings come to the
loss of Life and Estate, and not be sure of Christ and Heaven. 3. Keep your
selves in the Love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal Life. Love, if alive, will be strong at Death, all the floods of
Affliction cannot drown it. 4. Keep up a close Communion with God constantly in
secret. If you slack in secret Prayer, and wear out of personal acquaintance
with the Fountain, you will wither, and your strength dry up like a Pot-sheard,
and your foot soon slide. 5. Let never a day go over your head without actual
Faith on some promise, that this may keep you from fainting under
discouragements, Ps. 27.13. 6. The most refined formal lifeless Religion will
not always secure you from being scandals on Earth, and being cursed wretches
in Hell eternally.

45. That your minds may not be empty and wandering, doubtful what to fix upon,
enquire,

Q. What does this Ordinance call for.

A. 1. A Crucified Christ calls for Crucified sins. 2. Be saying to thy self,
did this Blood satisfy God, and shall it not satisfy me? Why then, O my Soul!
do not thou rest more entirely in this ransom, and possess more of that
rich Legacy his word has left us, and his Death has purchased? My peace I
leave you, my peace I give you, and in me ye shall have peace, and this man
shall be the peace. 3. Think whose Body, and what a Body is here represented.
The blessed Body of the Son of God that was our Sacrifice broken, bruised, and
bleeding on the Cross for us. That same body that his Father gave him who
needed it not, but for us to receive our buffering in that Body that Devils
envy to this day, even that the Human Nature should be assumed into a personal
Union with the Divine. An honor denied the Angels. That Body that hung on the
Cross, a spectacle to men and Angels for shame, pain and a curse due to us.
That same Body that was laid in the Grave, and raised up unto Glory God in our
Nature, appearing in Heaven for us preparing a place for us, perfuming it with
his Glorious Possessions and Presence. 4. Think how due it is I should remember
him in my Life, who remembered me so kindly at his Death, especially having made
a Law for it in this Ordinance, and making the remembrance no more costly nor
painful than you see it this day. He might have sent us a Jerusalem Jou^^^y to
the holy Grave, and appointed some costly Offerings there* But let us bless our
Merciful Lord and Law giver that has spared us these expenses and is content
we should remember him in this plain Gospel Simplicity. 5. Think you are now
remembering your best and dearest Friend in Heaven or Earth, who loves you be^^,
and has done most for you. Wherefore with what affections should he be
remembered, and how precious should every thou^h^ of him be to your Souls? Song
1. 4 Psalm. 139.17. 6. Think how miserable you had been to eternity if he had
not remembered us in our low estate. And what you have deserved that needed such
a surety and Sacrifice.

Q. How may we know, if our remembering of Christ in this Ordinance has been
good and right.

A. 1. If we have here a remembrance of the right stamp, we leave not off
remembering of Christ when we are gone; but the life of a Christian in hearing,
reading, meditating and praying will be much more a remembering him in his ways
than others attain to. 2. We will cause others remember Christ with us as we
can Psalm. 45. ult. 3. It will leave a las^ing desire of remembering him here
again, Psalm. 42.2. 4. (...) right, its Virtue will run through g^^all our Di^^ies
and Actions till we come again; (...) th^ll find is more easy to perform every
duty, and ^bey every precept. As we sind sin that Dago^ fall before this Ark of
the Lord temptations resisted, and services Spiritualized, we may j^^g of this
case. 5. A right remembrance of Christ will make a Sanctified Soul even forget
the best and most needful things on Earth, to remember him now in Heaven. 6. It
will humble thee for former forgetting of him, and stir up a holy hatred
against vain thoughts that kept Christ out; a few moments of a Sanctified
remembering thy sweet Savior here, will send thee away with a sad Heart for thy
forgeting of him days without number.

46. Q. What came we hither to learn at the Table of the Lord?

A. 1. Humility from a meek and lowly, humbled suffering Savior, Phil. 2.57.2.
Patience from this Lamb of God that opened not his Mouth. Learn here to possess
your Souls in Patience, and suffer not every trifle to provoke you. 3. And here
may we learn to Love where it shines out so gloriously. 4. Self-denial, and a
public Spirit, who not regarding his own ease and pleasure, glorified his
Father in Redeeming us. 5. See here your strong rock, and learn to live by
Faith. A sight of a Crucified, Sanctified Savior should give us confidence,
both in Duties and Dangers. In Duties this sight should lift you up above all
your doings, when you see what your surety has done and suffered for you. And
in Dangers, your great help to believe he will not let your temporal evil sink
you, is his delivering your Souls from eternal Miseries and Hell and the second
Death. 6. We can no where at a better advantage learn with them that are
Redeemed from the Earth, the new Song of Promise, than here at such a solemn
sight of our Suffering Redeemer.

But that we may learn our Lessons the better, let us be considering where and
with whom we are sat. Solomon says, Prove. 23.1. When thou sit with a Ruler
consider what is before thee. It Is a great Ruler we sit with, and a great Feast
ser before us. Now let us consider we sit at the Table of the Lord and we eat
the Supper of the Lord. If this be the Table of the Lord what wonderful
condescension is this, that I who have sat so long at the Table of Devils, by
feeding my Lusts, and serving Satan, should be advanced to feast it with the
Lord of Glory. Even I who deserved the lowest place in Hell, should here be
sat in the highest place on Earth. Let the thoughts of such wonderful love
lead you into his Banqueting House, and suffer your Souls to be overcome with
this Banner of his love, that unparalleled love that loved you, and washed you
in his own blood.

Again, consider it is the Supper of the Lord he sets us down unto. This is
that we eat and drink, even our Lord's Last Supper on Earth. This was the
parting-Cup, after which he was not to drink till he drunk it new in the
Kingdom of God. For preciousness; Cleopatra's Cup was nothing to this, tho
filled with dissolved Pearls. O the love that lay at the bottom to sweeten this
Cup to us, tho the bitterest to him that ever was put to the head of any
Mortal; and the more Gall and Wormwood to him, the more Love and Good Will to
us for whom he drank it.

This Last Supper on Earth is a Emblem of an after-Supper in Heaven And truly,
that large and long sumptuous Supper of the Lamb's preparing above, may make a
Saint sit down satisfied with a short Dinner on Earth. Let the Heirs of Glory
never grumble at a dish of green herbs, the poorest and meanest Morsel, wi^h a
Cup of cold water, since the finest of the Wheat and Honey out of the Rock, are
too low expressions of thy Heavenly Commons a coming.

And for what our blessed Lord allows you here, you have it with the heartiest
welcome. Christ says to none of you, Eat and drink, and his heart is not with
you. That you are forbid to eat of, for it is the ^^e^d of him that has an evil
eye, Prove. 23.6, 7. But this you are commanded to eat; we offer it in his Name;
take it in obedience and believe a blessing.

47. My sighing come before my eating, says Job. So must ours do^^w before we
can comfortably eat and drink here; many a sigh and groan the body of death
will cost us, many a sad heart for sin. Sigh, says the Lord to the Prophet, to
the breaking of thy Loins, 1. That thou should have been so unhappy as to
have hand in cutting off the Messiah, and slaying this Lamb of God; that thy
sins nailed him to the Cross and pierced his si^e, yea, his hands and his feet,
wounding the Son of God even to death with thy sins. 2. That his Love has been
neglected so long and so much, that the offers of his redeeming Grace has met
with so little hearty entertainment, that his sufferings for our sins have been
so faintly resented, that we have carried so strangely to him that was so
deeply concerned for us. 3. That he has had so little honor by us for whom he
has made so rich a purchase; that we have laid out our selves so sparingly for
him that spared not to pour out his blood for us; yea, that we should ever
prove treacherous to him that was so true to our Interest. 4. That now we can
love him no more when his Banner of Love is so fairly displaved over us in this
Ordinance of his own Sup^er, this Feast of fat things. Oh that such choice
entertainment should meet with so sorry welcome, and such dull affections. That
our ordinary food should more refresh us than this heavenly Manna; That we can
meet our suffering Lord with so little remorse for sin, and so little delight
in his Love. But tho grief preceed, and go before, yet let Joy take its own
place, and enter his Courts with praise. Let transports of heavenly joy fill
our redeemed souls, that ever the glad tidings of the great salvation sounded
in our ears, that ever we heard of that great gift of God, Jesus Christ, and
that he has been at any time recommended to our heart with power; that the
holy Trinity has so well contrived our Redemption, in that ancient Covenant
wherein the Father gave his Elect to Christ to be redeemed, and the Son most
readily undertook the Work, and went through all its steps with such heroic
and hearty resolution and good acceptance. Rejoice, O righteous ones, that the
Father laid help upon one so mighty, able to answer all his demands, and to pay
our debts. Rejoice that Heaven sent to the Earth by so sure a hand, and has
made with us so sure and well-ordered a Covenant in all things we can be
concerned in for life and Godliness; that the Gates of Paradise (which our sins
shut are now so open unto us, that sinners through their High Priest in Heaven
have so free and bold access to this exalted Throne of grace. but alas for our
brutish stupidity and unbelief! that have carnal minds much more taken with a
vain World, and empty dying comforts, than with all the Treasures of Grace, and
Mansions of Glory.

48. This Feast of fat things here presented, who can feed upon it? Do we know
the entertainment of this Table? Here is represented the singular and wonderful
love of a dying Savior: The great Mystery that Angels desire to look into: The
Lamb of God Sacrificed for sinners. Can we behold it with dry eyes and dead
hearts.

Qu. What impressions should it make upon us and leaves us under

Ans. 1. I Will never give sin a good look again (through the grace of God) that
cost my loving Lord Jesus so dear. 2. I Will despise the love of creatures, never
lay it in the balance with Christ's: Whether they smile or frown I Will be little
affected. For here is a love puts all love down A love who can comprehend, in
It Is matchless adventures and transcendent exceedings? 3. My love should be a
constant, careful study of some answerable returns of love again. 4. I Will never
like my self again Farther than I may be serviceable and suitable to this
loving Lord that bled for me.

My members shall all be servants of righteousness unto Holiness: my soul shall
ever magnify the Lord my thoughts shall be captivated unto him. I shall know no
Friends, nor Enemies but his. My prayers shall be to him. My Joy and my delight
shall be in him. My faith shall firmly rest in his righteousness and
satsfaction my patience shall be employed to bear his Cross; my heart shall
stand ever open to his Calls. The zeal of his house shall eat me up. My life
shall be a transcript of his Laws, and my death a desired dissolution to be
with him. In a word the Covenant I now renew with him, at his own holy table, I
am willing should be laid against me for Conviction, Accusation and humiliation
in all my departings from him.

But knowing that without him I am nothing and can do nothing all my
expectation is from him: and amidst my best purposes, sensible of my sin and
weakness, I do with holy David say, O Lord when will thou come unto me, that
is, for my assistance and help to make good my promises to God? Psa. 101.2. Let
my songs of praise be all of him here until I come where I shall be able to
tune them higher, than my sinful imperfections will now permit.

49. Qu. Have I heavens permission? Yea have I the Masters Invitation to be
here?

Ans. Any that are weary of the worlds Vanity and laden with the sense of sin,
looking out for Health and cure, and come for a Physician sensible of soul
diseases and heart distempers, have Christ's own Call to come. Mat. 11.28. 2. If
thou durst not come for a World without his Invitation, and that the best
encouragement of thy approach is his Calls of Grace, such a sinner may draw
near. Mar. 10.49. 3. Reconciled Friends are invited to come and eat. Song. 5.1.
And we are Gods Friends no further than we keep his commandments. Job. 15.14.
4. What warm Invitation have you given Christ for coming and blowing on your
garden to prepare all for himself, to make way for his inviting you? Compare
Song. 4 Ult. with chapter 5.1. 5. Solemn humiliation and secret personal
examination must go before our Lords allowance to eat and drink here 1. Cor. 11.

Do we come to employ Christ in the exercise of his offices upon your souls,
for grace and mercy to purge and pardon? come ye for favor and forgiveness? Do
you come for power and virtue to kill your lusts, and cool your affections to
a vain world? to draw you that you may run after him? come you for the things
of the Kingdom of God, for Righteousness, peace and Joy, the choice
entertainments of wisdom's house? Do you com^ with your Bills in your hand?
Black Bills of your own indictment for the red lines of his Cross to blot out?
Bills of Grievances to be Redressed? Bills of Wants to be supplied, especially
Church-grievances and Soul Grievances; Satan making havoc of the one without,
and daily inroads upon the other by prevailing Temptations, that makes you
groan for Heavens Care, and better keeping of you than your own.

Q. Faith being so necessary to right receiving, may they adventure to come,
who doubt whether they have true Faith or no?

A. 1. Tho we have not such a full persuasion as exempts us from all doub^^^g,
yet if on a due examination ^our See (...) our Hearts accuse us not of
^^^^cri^^ (...) double dealing with God, (...) may ^^^ture to come, yea, when
(...) found much dros^, and can j^dg and ^^hor our selves for it in dus^ and
as^es, and betake our selves humbly and sincerely to the blood of Christ for
Peace and Pardon, w^ are allowed to com^. But if any come, (...) ^hers may not
take them for unbe^evers, and yet are unwi^^i^; to believe indeed (and wholly
give up themselves to be ruled by Gods Laws, and saved by Christ's
righteousness) had better forbear than mock God and drink Damnation to
themselves. Happy Soul, that can keep a ^ingle eye on Christ in coming hither,
to partake of his Gracious Spirit and Merit, himself, and all his blessed
benefits; to get Grace and Strength to oppose sin, and serve God better, and to
walk more worthy of the Christian Vocation; such comers may come and have
Christ's Welcome.

50. In Prove. 31.27. we read of eating the bread of Idleness. And as our
painful Redeemer eat no such bread when he was here traveling in the greatness
of his strength for us, so must we beware of turning this to eating of the
Bread of Idleness, i. e. to be guilty of the want of a diligent and serious
examination of heart and way, ere we come hither, and not walking worthy of the
profession and privilege of our appearing here.

Q. What walk will best bec^me our being here.

A. 1. A walk of tenderness toward him, who was so tender of us as to say down
his Life to save ours. It ill becomes us to yield to any thing dishonorable to
him, that has espoused our best int^rests at so dear a rate.

2. A w^lk of Holy Communion and Heavenly Fellowship with him, that s^rs you
down here with himself. That the result of Feasting with Christ here may be a
Life of Following hard af^^ ^im; and going away and remembering hi^ (...) Wi^^

3. A Life and (...) of F^^^^lness, ^^ounding in all the fruits of the Spirit,
wh^re think we to be filled with the S^iri^, if not her^? It Is (...) pity when
we are gone that it shoul I not be seen ^^re we have been. It Is said of the
lean King, that when they had ^^^en up the s^t Kine, it could not be known that
they had ^at^n them, they ^^re still ^^ill favored, Genesis 41.21. I wish there
were no such eaters found among us (...) day. (...) we be Marri^d to Christ^
It Is meet we bring f^r^h Fruit unto God.

4. A Life of Faithfulnes^ in re^^ing sin. ^o we sit where we have seen our
Lord ^^^eding a fresh for our Sins, and shall we ever plead for sin, or listen
to Satan any more? Have I seen the Lord w shing me in his own blood, and will I
ever wallow again i^ the mire? O! his never to be forgotten Agony; and his
dismal groans in the Garden! The V ne^ar and Gall my sin put to! is Head on the
Cro^! The B^ft^tings and Spittings my sin laid on his s^^r Face! The cruel
Piercings of his blessed Sides, hi^ Hands and his Feet for my sins! Shall I
^v^r refuse res^sting unto Blood striving against Sin. Jerome tells of a Woman
that re^^ll^d all temptations with this, I am a Christian, (...), B^ptised, and
shall (...) sit at his Table, and lift up the heel against him. And now go away
resolving to ^on^ y^urselves no more in the dust of this dirty World, being
^nce rolled in the precious Garments of your ^lder Brother.

51. Q. If thou would m^^t with Christ, what is thy business with him?

A. I. I come to pay the ^ebt of Thankfulness, and to Celebrate his praise in
this way of his appointment for Christ's Unspeakable love to my l^st Soul, the
Ordinance being Eucharistical. 2. As Joseph's Brethren came to Egypt, so for
Food am I come to eat and drink abundantly, Song. 3.1. 3. I am counseled of
Christ to come for all his rich Supplies, Rev. 2.18. And for these very ends
an^ come, for his tried Gold, his whire raiment, and his eye S^lve, that I may
be rich with his Gr^ces, clothed wi h his ^igh^en^sness, and enlightened by his
Spirit to know the ^hing^ (...) given ^e of God. 4. For what end com^s the
C^^ld to the Fathers House, the ^^ngry to the Full, the (...), the Bride to the
Bridegroom, but to Marr^ a^^ ma^e Merry? Why comes the Prodigal home, but to
R^pent of his Folly, and to live with his Father in better Fashion? And that
thou may leave the ^^^^ling, and like better of thy Fathers House take a
promise for it, Jer. 3.19. Thou shall call me my Father, and shall not turn
away from m^, 5. Wherefore comes the Diseas^d to the Physiti^n, but for health
and ^ase? 6 And wherefore comes the oppressed Subject to the King, but for
Relief against his Enemies? I come for help against a hard heart, I come for
Power against a strong Lust, a mighty Goliath, that threatens the Life of my
Soul. 7. I am weary and heavy laden with sin, and therefore I come for rest and
Peace. My sins are my greatest Burden, my ignorance, sloth and slowness,
earthlyness and lukewarmness; the indwelling body of Death pains my Heart, and
the guilt of Sin stings my Conscience, and I come for purging and pacifying by
Christ. 8. I come for mutual Communication of Love Tokens to give and take. I
would have my Faith Confirmed, my Love more Fervent, my Heart more Enlarged,
more weaned from Earth, and more set upon Heavenly Glory. I come to condole
with Zion, and put in for Songs of Deliverance, and for restoring of a decayed
work of God among us, that the right Arm of the Lord may put on strength, and
encounter his Enemies on their high places, that Christ may be great in these
Nations, and the reproach of his People he may take away, and prosper his
Gospel in Conquering sinners, and converting the Elect.

Q. In what Posture or Condition must we come to Christ.

A. 1. In a praiseful posture must we come to meet our Redeemer. We begin the
new Song here that will never be ended in Heaven. 2. As Subjects to pay our
homage to our Prince, Psalm. 45.11. He is the Lord and Worship him. 3. As
Servants to receive their Masters Orders and Commands, Psalm. 123.2. Lord what
will thou have me to do? 4. As Scholars to their Masters to be taught. 5. As
Children to their Father for a blessing. 6. As Beggars for an Alms, poor and
needy, but think upon me 7. As Pa^ien^s to a Physician for Health and Cure.
Like a Mal^^^ (...) ^ath pleagu^y sores needs a Physi^^^, a (...) as ^^ll as a
Pardon.

52. If the quest^^^ (...) asked* what do thou here? or how came (...)
hith^r? A. The Master calls come. Q. But h^^r kno^^^ (...) ^^lleth thee? A.
1. I. have exa^^ed (...) my self, and (...) ^re allowed to co^^* 2^ly (...)
^^eth his Call, saying, behold I come a^to thee. (...) in my Heart that I am
the ^erson called (...) from the call, Whosoever will, let him come and drink
of the Water of Life freely. First, A great latitude in (...) [ ^^^soever] and
why may not I be one among so ma^y (...) But 2ly, [ whosoever will] I find he
has made me one of his Willing ones; my Heart is here, and I never went to eat
and drink for my outward man more willingly. 3dly. I am called to drink, and
truly I find my Soul a thirst, and wants its refreshing ^ere. 4thly. It Is
^^ater of Life that is offered; and it is the same my Soul c^mes for, that I may
have life, and have it more abundantly. And 5thly, I am called to take it
freely, and so do I take it as the sweetest gift of m^ dear Redeemer, witho^t
any plea of my own righteousness. But yet, tho called, let thy soul say, He
that calls, must carry me too, for no man can come, except the Father draw. O!
be looking up for Divine drawing; for heart^ will faint and draw back, if
Christ draw not ^ear. Our S^v^^ur said to Peter, come; but if he that called
him had not bore him up, he had sunk for all his call. Learn to look to Christ
for all, without him we can do nothing. Law not the great stress on thy coming
hither, but on Christ's coming to thee in the Ordinance; for it is our Lords own
presence, which is the master-wheel of all spiritual M^tions. I will come in,
that made the Feast. Rev. 3.20. ^^eme^ber ( John 11.28.) when Martha told her
Sister Mary f^^retly ( the Master is come) she arose quickly and came unto him.
All our inward motions to him, depend upon his coming first unto us; and
therefore le^ your heart be saying Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, until the day
break and the shadows flee away.

We read of a deferred Christian after much sad So^l exercise, crying out, he
is come, he is come. Q. How may we know he is come? A. 1. How did Elizabeth
know that Mary brought Christ in her Womb when she came to see her? but by some
inward unusual em^^ions; thy heart will not be without its own transporting
ecstasies of love and wonder, saving (with Eliz^^^th) Whence is it that the Lord
of Glory should come and (...) k on me; and will not fail to ^^ave i^superable
ties upon thy ^^art to entertain his fell ^ship, and attend his service.

53. Concerning the Jews hearing of John, our Savior asked, What went you out
for to see? and else where to enquiring Disciples, come and see. You have been
hearing, but now come and see. That will be the sense in Heaven that will be
most sa^^^fied, when we shall see him as he is: There a Glorified Christ, and
here a Cru^^^^^d one. Here you man s^e the true Is^^ laid on the bl^^k, and the
bloody knife at his throat. H^re is the Sca^^^^^ over whose Hea^ Is^ael
confessed their (...), ^^nt into the Wil^^^ness, carring our sin in^o a l^n^ of
forgerfuln^ss, ^^^e you s^e the Church of God purchased which (...) own (...).
Here your sacrifi^^d (...) surety payi^^ your de^t (...) ^ou must have been
paying to all ^^^nity, and (...) d^ne paying. Here is the most high Go^ (...)
to ^^ke our blows, our Heaven (...) of his H^^^our Healing by his Wounding.
(...) the ^nowle^g of sin shining forth in God's Holiness and h^^r^d of (...).
For all the threatenings of the Law and (...) of them on others could never
preach it fo^th ^s exce^^ing of them on Christ has done. And here new you see
the treasure hid in the field. Let none (...) this (...) because brought in
earthen Vessels. This offers injury to Divine Wisdom and Goodn^^s, who
condescends to make such familiar r^pres^^ra^ions of our Redemption, adapted to
our infi^^^es here on earth, who cannot conceive heavenly things but in an
earthl^ manner, and the meaning is, that the excellency may be of God, and not
of man. Learn, O Believer, to glory in nothing but in the Cross of Christ,
whatever else we glory in, will be our shame another day; and why should we
glory in any thing so much, as in that whereby God h^th his greatest glory?
John 13.31. God's Glory and our happiness center in a Crucified Christ.

Q. What benefit have we by the Cross of Christ?

A. 1. Without it we must ^ave (...) all that he suffered for us. 2. ^o mercy
for u^ bu^ th^^^ (...) Christ's merit, our surety was (...) of strict justice,
that we man^ be (...) with on (...) of (...). 3. Christ being ^ast i^^o the
F^^^^ce of (...) W^^th ^^^ched the (...) ^^^mas, the type, being can in^o the
raging Sea, (...) the stor^^; he made his Soul an Offering for sin. No ma^^^
(...) me d^^^ be, if Christ be the surety. The Ocean c^^ drown a M^un (...)
^ole^^^^ll; and yet pres^^^e ^ot to (...) because of eith^r mercy or merit; who
(...) their cond^n^^^ion was or^ ^^^ed of o^^. (...) ^ot be (...) plain^ ma^k
of ^^^pro^^, ha^ and ng the riches of Gods Grace and (...), Jude 4.4. ^e brings
us b^^k to G^d again. After we had b^enest out and put away, he has brought us
into favor ^ith God again. As all we have from God streams through his Flo^d,
so all we give to God a^cends by v^r^^ of his M^r^. 5. I^ crucifies the World
to u, and la^s all it g^ory in the ^ust. If I had not this to mor^ly my hear^,
I had ^^en as ^ond of earthly shadows as ever deceiv^d (...) was.

54. The command of God laid on us leaves us not at liberty wha^ to do in this
matter; for he has said, eat, and he has said, drink, yea d^ink (...) ^^^tly,
O beloved! What, the (...) of God. David ^efused to drink the water that was
purchased with the (...) of the lives of three (...) God has made it our duty
to drink the precious (...) f Christ as an ^^speakable priveledg, and the most
wond^rful expression of Divine Love.

What shall we ^ay to this gift of Christ? O wonder of wonders in be^^owing of
him on us!

1. Considering he h^^ ^^hing ^^tter, ^ay, nothing near so good, his price is
above ru^^es, and nothin^ (...) be compared to him. 2. God (...) Man (...), but
here he gives God, even man^ Creator to him. 3. When he gave Creatures into
Adam's ^^^nd at first, he gave them to a holy and righteous man* but Christ is
given to depraved sinful man. 4. To glorify God's grace yet more, he takes
occasion from so great an evil as sin to manifest such exceedings of Love. 5.
And all this moving from himself and not another. 6. If Angels and Men should
busy their thoughts to eternity, they could not imagine any thing greater, nor
half so great as this love, that has glory and Communion in a Heavenly
Paradise with God himself for sinners, and all by the Death and Sufferings of
Christ his Fathers Darling. Hence see what a liar Satan was that insinuated God
to be an enemy to man's happiness, as if he envied the good fruit forbidden; and
yet has the world seen how dear he was willing to recover man out of his lost
condition, even at the amazing expense of the bl^od of his beloved Son. O^^he
shooting the arrows of God into his Son, rather than into the R^bel, is the
highest point his Compassion could mount to Could we but ^^nd you away with
more hatred of ^in and more love to your Savior, the work were done, and the
and of this Or^^nance obtained: But behold another wonder st^rts ^p when we
speak of Love. What wonder that God sho^^d highly and dearly court our Love? 1.
Considering it is so imperfect, not as these burning Ser^phims, or perfected
Saints above. 2. So polluted is our love, he might have disdained and refu^e^
to be embraced, by such a^^ections as have defiled themselves so much with
(...) as^ ^dols and sinful Vanities. 3. He comm^nd^th my love, and makes it my
greatest duty, and become ^y gr^^^^s;t sin when God is ^light^^. (...). He so
Am^^b^^^, (...) we so Ugly. (...). That he should be the first ^^d most ^^^^si
suitor for it.

55. Q. Who have a right t^ this (...) ^^^ce?

A. 1. Holy things are ^^^dogs and ^wi^e that ^^llo^ in the mi^e of sin an^
lu^^. 2. ^o^^ (...) ^^^^ching ^^d s^^^-j^dging sin ^s, I Cor. 11.28.31. 3.
No^^^ (...) ^e^ry (...) lad^^ s^^ers that are (...) to p^rt ^ith their (...).
4. N^ne but they who are willing to ^^ke Ch^^^^ y^k^ on their neck, and
s^n^^rely coverant and resign th^mselves to Christ for a leader and commander.
5. Name but they who desire Christ and Salvation above all the World: that can
sell all to purchase the ^^^l of Price. Having cleared your right, consider
your work and business when about it, viz. Remembering of Christ in his death
and sufferings. It Is very instructive therein to compare the memorial of our
High Priest for us, Exodus 28. with our Memorial of him here in this Ordinance.
Go to particulars thus: v. 9. The Names of Israel were to be engraven, and have
a deep impression with Christ; and that on stones, to m^ke it more legible, and
less subjest to obliterating. And all for a Memorial, v. 12. And every one with
his Name. v. 21. That there may be no suspicion of his forgetting any one of
his poor Children. And all their Names must he bear on his he^rt, that it may
not be a faint and formal remembrance. But when shall this memorial of Israel
be? but when the High Priest goes in before the Lord; then shall they be on ^is
heart, at his most solemn appearing at the right hand of Majesty on high.
Lastly, to consumate and perform our blessedness in this Metrorial, it is a
perpetual memorial, continually, even to make intercession for ever, v. 3. No
length of time nor emergent of Providence can possibly wear out, or ^ut off
this happy memorial of us by Christ. Now but think what answerable returns you
are to make in a hum^ble, ^earty and constant r^mem^r^nce of him, who r^m^mbred
us in our low ^s^^^e here and leaves not off remembering us in his ex^lted (...)
^bove. This memorial, is a memorial of love. Joh. 3.35. The F^^^^r ^^^^^h the
Son, and has given all thin^s in^^ his hand. Now ^y your Love by this what can
y^u entrust him with (...) Th^r^ i^ great trust in Love, if it be true. Can you
(...) ^ll thi^^^ in^o his h^^^^s. 1. The F^ther that (...) ^im best, i^^^^^ed
him most; and they t^^t know (...) will word ^^^st, P^^l, 9.10. 2. The F^th^r
trus^^ (...) ^ith (...) the Souls of his Elect, and durst not (...) with one?
3. He (...) tr^^ to his tr^st; (...), Joh. 17.4. which makes our (...) of
(...). 4. Never any Soul in^rus^^d (...) ^o ^i^ hands, (...) ^^de a^^^d acc^^^t
th^^^^f, (...) to the end, 2 Ti^ 1.12. 5. ^^^v^^ a soul did well at l^^^ ^ut
that ^as intrulled into his ^ands, John 3.13. 6. ^^vi^g tru^ted ^im ^ith your
Souls, cannot you trust him w^t^ ^^dies a^^ s^^s^^on? Now let a S^ng of Praise
(...) ^^lude this sacred (...), a^ our bl^ss^d S^^iour went before us with his
Di^^^^^ in ^^^^ing a (...) ^he conclu^ion of the S^. (...) 30. ^^r up (...)
^^lves to it with Deb^ra^h, ^^dg. 5.12. saying, awake, awake, O my Soul, and
all within me awake, awake, to utter a Song to the Savior of sinners.

56. Let no Christian think that Conversion and a new state in Christ is enough
for your ^eing here; or that one examination may serve for all. Indeed many
come short of this, but as often as you eat, the duty of examining must be
repeated, ^s the word enjoins, Let ^t man examine h^^self, and ^o let him eat;
so that eating at an^ ^^m^ without it be ^^es our sin and ^ransgresseth th^s
Scripture Canon. Besides, a vessel of Honor, in resp^ct of (...), ^^r^ and
fashion, may b^ fit for u^e; ^ut in r^g^rd ^f ^^^ness contracted, may not be
immediately (...) for some ^oole service ^ill a new sc^uring. Q. But ^^y such
pre^a^ation and examination before Celebr^ti^n and Participa^ion? A. 1. The
greatness of the So^ema^^^ calls for ^^i^'s the Table of a great K. and the
greatest Festiv^l the G^^p^l knows. Let none presume to come to so holy a ^able
wit^ their common habits. And therefore ^h^t i^ may be seen that we make some
account of the Master of ^he Fea^t, and of the food set before us, let us be
c^reful to grace this Table with a w^dding-garment. 2. Without consci^n^^o^*
(...) p^ra^ion there is seldom l^fe in Cel^b^ati^n, (...) ^ru^^s in the
Conversation after. 3. N^ne are called to (...) without this q^alification, 1
Cor. 11.28. an^ if we come without Christ's Call, we may go without his
blessing* so that much of the bene^it and comfort of Communica^ing may depend
upon a due preparation for it, Job. 11.13, 14, 15. Ezra 6.21, 22. 4. The danger
is g^^a^ to come unprepared, and rush rudely unto the Table of the L^^d, he
receives unworthily, th^^ comm^s unp^eparedl^* it will be a b^^^er bre^k-fast
to eat and d^ink our own damnation b^ being guilty of the B^d^ and Blood of
Christ, Matt. 22.12, 13. 5. The ^^^^d Jesus has a very jealous eye upon us at
that action; and therefore we had need k^^p a strict watch and j^^l^us eye upon
our selves; he comes down how to s^e h^w the Vine s^^uri^heth, how the
Spikenard s n ^^^h forth i^s smell, and whither there be any without his
Wedding garment among us. He is come to see his Guests, and if there be but one
in his rags, he finds him out, and judges him for coming unworthily. 6 None
can be so fit to help others in preparing work, as they who are sanctified and
prepared themselves first. Sanctify your selves, and prepare your brethren, go
together in Jos^ah's Passo^er, 2 Chro. 35. 6. And the Lamb for the Passover w^^
(...) be taken out of the Flock three d^ys before it was ^o be sacrificed, that
so the People ^^ght ^e ^^eparing themselves in that ti^e, Ex. 12.3.6.

57. Q. (...) must we ex^mine our selves in for a right receiving of the Lord's
Sufer. (...). 1. We ^ust ^^^ndue our kno^l^dg of Spiritual things; ^^m^ly, in
discerning the Lord (...), i.e. the worth and pr^cious^^^^ of that Sacrifice,
(...) over and lapped up ^n the El^ments of Bread and Wi^e. And our kn^wled^ in
(...) p^in^^n u^^ be tried 1. Wh^^^^^ it be appropria^^ng* i e. ^^^king ^n
i^terest in the things k^^wn, ^^b. 15 27. 2. If ^^^retiatin^ (...) well as
approving* Romans ^.18. 3. If p^^ct^cal, (...) order to and pe^fected by
practice* Ps. 119.34. 2. (...) ^xamine our s^ns, which is the principal point
of our ^x^mination in th^s business, 1 Cor. 11.2^. co^p. with 31. where we are
bid to judge our selves f^r our s^ns. Esp^cially find out what be your
predominat^^ sins, and whe^^er you be freed from s^ns d^^inion. 3. We must
exa^ine our spiritual state, whither w^ b^ in Christ; f^r only in him is God
w^ll pleased with us. 1. All in Christ through illumina^ing grace h^ve got a
f^ght of sins l^athson^ness and d^nger. 2 To p^^^^^ C^^^st ^^ove ^ll the worlds
dross, Phil. 3.8. ^ Th^^ ^^ve h^^ ^^irit to ^^^^^ll in them* 4. They (...). 5.
(...) from Christ; their li^e is ^^d ^i^^ hi^, and t^^ir (...) depend on his
appe^^^^g, (...). 3.3. 4. We must ^^^^^e our Graces, 1. If they b^ true, and
^o^ count^^^^^ Co^^; for this Feast ^ust not (...) ^it^ the (...) of
Hypocris^e, but with the unleavened bre^^ of ^^nceri^y and trut^. 2. Whether
Grace ^e strong, and God's work and V^ne-yard in a flouris^ing and ^^riving
con^i^ion^. 5. We must examine our du^i^s and p^^for^^^^es as ^o their
^onstancy, Fervency, Communion. 6. And our Conversation, how regul^r uniform
and h^^v^nly.

Q. What Di^^^^^i^n^ may be given f^r pr^m ting this great work ^f
self-examination? (...). 1. ^et not the search be slight and sup^rfici^^, (...)
d^li^ent, (...) and ac^urat; as we se^rch for E^^^^^ (...) let u^ s^^r^h for
Sin with such a c^r^s^l dis^^^^itio^. (...). 64.^. as the righteous Judge will
search Jeru^a^em with Cand^es, so let us, Zeph. 1.12. And as David did, Ps.
57.6. 2. Take you he^rt in one hand, and your Bible in the other, making God's
Word the Test by which all is tried: judge, reject or approve, as the Word does.
3. Be not soon satisfied in the search; and give not over for what you find at
first; for the heart is a great deep, but turn in again and see yet greater
abominations than these, Ezekiel. 8. 4. Call in help from Heaven for so great and
difficult a work, Pf. 139.23. He rests not on the single testimony of his own
Conscience, in v. 22. without God's help he seeks not in this matter. 5. Inure
thy self to a greater frequency of the work; custom would make it more easy,
and bring us to better skill about it

Be very thankful for any discoveries God graciously makes to you in time, of
your selves. For what if God had hid our own hearts from us u^t^l he had
revealed us to all the world. In 1 Cor. 1 (...) 25. we have the Convert falling
down and worshipping God out of thankfulness, that the Secrets of his heart
were made manifest. Self-searching might prevent dreadful discoveries which God
is put to make of us by falling into some soul and scandalous sins, because we
were backward to know our selves better in the use of Gods appointed means, 2
Chr. 32.31.

7. Let Memory be active in the search, and be calling to mind old reckonings.

8. Let examination be in order to execution; Rest not in the discovery, but
let seeking to find out Grace and Corruption, be in order to the cherishing the
one and destroying of the other. If we examine, let us also judge, pass
sentence and execute upon the hidden up Idols of a base heart. The Voice said
to Peter, Arise, kill and eat. Truly we must not eat here, unless we arise from
our humblings and searchings, and kill Lusts and not sp^re.

Q. But upon examination, how may we be helped to make a right Judgment of our
selves?

Ans. 1. Consult seriously with Conscience, and let it have liberty to speak
its own Language; for what m^n knows the things of a man, s^ve the spirit of a
man which is in him? 1 Cor. 2.11. 2. Observe well what Verdi^t the Word gives
of thy condition, and discov^ry it m^kes in its most powerful outgoings, and
most spiritual dispensings; and let that be well remembered, and made much use
of under, after darkness, desertions and Temptations. We must not look that the
beams of Divine Light will always with the same luster and brightness shine. 3.
Try not thy self so much by some extraordinary motions and good mood after, or
at a powerful Ordinance, as by the more constant bent of the heart, and
continued course of life. 4. Try thy self more by Closet-communion than by
public duties; for what one is in secret that he is indeed. 5. Take the help
of faithful Ministers and judicious Christians about thy condition, when it is
too hard for thy self. 6. Lean much upon, and leave more than many do to the
discovering Spirit of Jesus in the use of all means, whose properly it is to
make known the hidden things of God, and of our hearts too.

58. If there be any Soul seeking Christ in this and other of his own
Ordinances, and yet meets not with (but complains with the Spouse of seeking)
her Believed, but found him not, Song 3. let such know there be more professors
in a worse than better condition. For 1. She was sensible of Christ's absence,
and knew her own condition, not as they Jer. 2.6.8. 2. She complained of it as
her present misery, that she went without enjoyment. 3. Under this desertion
Love and Desire were active. 4. She called not her Interest into question; ^o^
he is her beloved still. 5. She seeks Still, and cannot be are quiet till she
find her Beloved, and such a seeker cannot be long a finding.

Now the marks of a found Beloved in such an Ordinance, are clear in the
Churches Practice and Carriage, 1. A care to keep him, v. 4. I would (...) let
him go; and that he may abide, she shows her public Spirit in bringing him to
her mothers ho^^, and straightly charges, that to provocation may be given him
tolegene, v. 5. That if he depart it may be an act o^ mere Sovereignty. Now
nothing will more readily fur up Christ to be gone than unruly passions, so
contrary to a meck Lord Jesus, Isa. 42.2. Unmortified affections, and unwa^^^ed
hearts, when the soul grows secure and careless of such a Guest. 2. A fear to
lose Christ accompanies the enjoyment of him, v. 8.

And if you find your beloved here* go away with a holy fear in your hearts,
left you should not render again according to the benefit bestowed upon you.
Let not that Name be written on the sand, that has wrote yours on his heart.
They may go away with much joy in their hearts this day that have made a good
and sure bargain with Christ for their Souls. B^t you may eat of this s^iritual
meat, an^ drink of this spiritual drink* as the Israelit^s did of the Rock that
followed them, which was Christ, and yet God may not be pleased with you, 1
Cor. 10.4, 5. especially if after this eating and drinking ^here be ^ound with
us a careless heart, a carnal mind, and (...) fruitless l^fe. And whoever be
the poor m^^ of whom C^ri^^ has ^u^^. (...) this poor man will I look; Now if
^ou ha^^ (...) this kind and gra^^^^^ lo^k, go home an (...) rejoice, and r^^
in his love; but ^et re^o^c^ with trembling when you consider ^our sin and has
that may provoke him to be gone; and (...) you are most fr^id even of sinful
self an^ a de^^^^ ^^^rt, trust in him at all times, look unto him, an^ (...)
fea^^* Ps. 56.3 What time I am afraid I will (...) in t^e^. What Sweet
Experiences do many tre^^^^ (...) ^n^ ^e^ch from Gods speaking at a Serm^n, an^
(...) S^^ (...)? Bu^ let us by all m^^^, beware of goi^^ (...) of sprinkling at
a Sacrament, without i^s ^^ing (...) on (...) Consciences, lest it lead back to
(...), and b^ing us to the King of Ter^^rs* An^ i^ (...) Ki^^, sittin^ with
thee at his [ a^^^ ^^th mad^ G^^^^ li^^ly, ^o ^oy comfort, say of Grace^
^^^^ity ^s the (...) said (...) ^^nathan, He shall not die* for he has wr^ught
with G^d the day, 1 Samuel 14.45.

5^. 2 Samuel 9.3. D^vid enquires if there be any yet of the house of Saul, that
he m^^ ^h^^ him the kindness of God, i.e. by an Hebraism, great kindness, or
free kindness, as God shows to us who little de^^rv^ it, (...) Saul deserved
little kindne^s at the hands of David. Bu^ however, by our sitting and feasting
here, we have had the kindness of the Lord showed unto us, that ha^h provided
so comfortable a repast for poor Pilgrim^ ^n our Wilderness-condition. It Is a
Feast of Love and Kindnes^ to us, and he may reasonably expect Love again. Love
will but please him and ease us. For as Faith makes all things possible, sol^^^
makes all easy, 1 John 5.3. Now Love has its own pecul^ar outgoings for God,
saying, What shall I do for him that has ^one (...) much for me? And love will
readily answer its own question, 1. I will do more for him than others, he
having done more for me than for many. 2. I will do more for him than for all
my dearest friends, and nearest Relations. O that it were so in very deed with
us all. 3. I will do nothing against him to the best of my knowledge, whatever
it cost me. 4. I will (nay I can) do nothing without him. 5. I will do all for
him and eye his glory. And when by his help I have done what I can, it deserves
not to be named the same day with his doings for me, and is infinitely short of
what he deserves, and I owe, and therefore I see I must die in his debt, but
will be still doing as I can, and mend what has been amiss, by learning to
love more, and then I cannot but do better; for love is the fulfilling of the
whole Law. And Love's inquiries will be, 1. Whither is he gone that I may seek
him? 2: How shall I seek him that I may find him? O that I knew where I might
find him! that I might come even to his Seat, Job 23.3. 3. And when I have him
how shall I keep him? 4, And what shall I do to please him? 5. And that which
puts Love most to it, is, how shall I sufficiently praise him, Ps. 106.2. And
now let love lean on Christ's bosom at this Supper, and think the Master saying
to thee as Ahasuerus to Esiher at his Feast, What is thy s^it, and what would
thou have done? What H^man to hang? what lust to subdue? what grace to be
strengthened? But most may say of such things as David of Readiness Armor, I have
not been accustomed to them.

60. Ps. 4.4. Commune with your own heart. Heart-communing being so necessary
an exercise for Christians at all times, and so suitable to this Ordinance,
that requires the indispensable duty of self-examination to fit us for it.

Q. What should we chiefly commune about-with our own heart? 1. About sin and a
sinful corrupt state, that shows it self in an ungodly life. about secret sins,
pred^minant sins, what powerful sway they bear in the soul, or what repentings
are kindled within you, what relentings or renewings, and how preferable Grace
is to Nature, Luke 15.17. and how much better God would be to you than all
your. Idols and sinful or worldly pleasures, Hos. 2.7. Commune with your heart
about unruly passions, Soul-distractions and confusions, disorderly unmortified
affections. 2. About temptations, what res st^^^e you are helped to make, what
victory is obtained, how you strive against sin, and prosper in the spiritual
warfare. 3. What welcome you have yet given Christ it his most gracious offers,
what closure with Christ as Lord and Savior, Ps. 16.2. and how the heart
stands affected to him, or stands off from ^^m, as not well contented with him;
whether thy (...) has opened to him, making a free and full surrender ^o the
Lord of Glory, whose right it is to rule; and if thou have yet granted the
great request of God, My Son, give me thy heart, Jer. 3.22. 4. Be communing
with thy heart about its bearing up in Gods service, and what part it acts in
religious duties, for fear it should draw back unto perdition: and be often
looking up for further renewings and fresh assistances, to continue believing
to the saving of the Soul. 5. And about the returns that are made, or should be
made for remarkable mercies, 2 Chr. 22.25. 6. Ask thy heart, what preparations
are yet made for Death and Judgment by mortifying the mind, and clearing
Evidences, an unmortified mind and an un^etled conscience, being the chief
things that makes us so unwilling to die, be thinking with thy self often about
finishing thy work, and what is yet to be done, if thou be not undone for
ever. Ask thy eart, what deep sense thou have of another world, and what
careful preparations there be to g^t thither. This work of heart-communing
Christians find hard, partly because so little inured to it, partly because
it is so spiritual and we so carnal, and be^^use of the sli^pery inconstant
temper of our Spirits; for what Son of f^llen Adam ever served God one half
hour without distraction? But let its necessity and profit stir us up to attend
it more; for how can we know our hearts without communing with them? and
self-ignorance becomes the cause of most sins, and self-acquaintance is made a
great part of the wisdom of the just, Prove. 14.8. and spiritual profiting is
said to come by this, 1 Timothy 4.15. and where it thrives, no doubt becomes more
pleasant than was thought of, being one of the Galleries where the King is
held, Song 7.5. And how strange a thing that men commune so little with their
own hearts, being so near to our selves, and having so many opportunities for
it, that we should be so much without, and so little within, when our great
business lies with our own hearts?

FINIS.

