THE STRATAGEMS OF WAR: OR, A Collection of the most celebrated Practices and
wise Sayings of the Great Generals in former Ages. Written by Sextus Julius
Frontinus, one of the Roman Consuls. Now Englished, and Enlarged with a new
Collection of the most noted Stratagems and brave Exploits of famous and modern
Generals; and with a short Account of the Weapons offensive and defensive, and
Engines commonly used in War, with their Usefulness and Deficiency. By M. D. A.
B. D.

Licensed

July 28. 1685. To. L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for S. Heyrick, J. Place, and R. Sare, at Gray's Inn Gate, and
Furnivals-Inn Gate in Holborn. 1686.

THE PREFACE OF Sextus Julius Frontinus, TO HIS First three Books of the
Stratagems of WAR.
HAVING undertaken, amongst some other Lovers and Encouragers of the Art of
War, He writ a Book of the Art of War.
to prescribe and publish the Rules of that excellent Knowledge: I conceive
that I have sufficiently accomplished my Design according to my Ability: but to
this Work I judge also that I ought to annex the subtle Practices of great
Captains, which the Greeks in one Word style (...) or Stratagems, and to gather
them together in short and compendious Relations; for by this means Leaders may
be furnished with the Examples of Advice, Prudence and Conduct, which may
encourage their Invention, and direct them to the Imitation of the same
Exploits: and it will undoubtedly prevent their distrust of their own
Contrivances, when they have approved Examples before their eyes to spur on
their Resolutions. Now I am not ignorant, and cannot deny that the Historians
have also comprehended in their Writings the same Passages, and have delivered
to us all the most remarkable Examples; but in my Judgment, we ought in this
case to consult the Convenience of such as are reduced to the Necessity of
Speed and Action: for whom it would be then too tedious to run over all the
things which are scattered here and there in the large Volumes of Histories.
And it usually happens, that such as have gathered and taken notice of the most
noted things, do lose and forget them, as in a multitude of Matters which
confounds the Readers. Our Industry therefore shall here endeavor to exhibit
and lay down that which is required according to expectation as exactly as the
things will suffer, for to the general Heads which I have gathered, I have
prepared fit Advice and Counsel from Examples. And that those things which are
differing might be placed in good order for the variety-sake of things, we have
reduced them to three Books.

In the first shall be the Examples which belong to a Battle not yet begun.

In the second shall be the Examples which relate to a Fight, and the
concluding of a Peace.

The third contains the Stratagems teaching how to begin, carry on, and raise a
Siege.

Now under these general Heads I have placed certain Questions or Propositions,
as so many Species relating to them; nevertheless, I may with Reason crave
Pardon for this Work from him that shall find me not so curious and exact as to
set down every Example; for, Who is there able and sufficient to reckon up all
the Passages and Stories which are delivered to us in Greek and Latin?
Therefore I have purposely omitted many things, which such as have read over
the Books of others who have undertaken the same things, may understand to have
been done not without good cause. But it will be no hard matter to reduce every
thing to its own Species; for as I have undertaken this Work as well as others,
not so much for my own Commendation as for the Benefit of other Men, I shall
think my self assisted in my purpose by those who can add to it, but in no wise
disgraced. If there be any delighted with the perusal of these Stories, let
them remember the (...) and (...), the noble Actions of former Generals, and
their cunning Policies and Stratagems, that they may be able to discern and
distinguish the like Deeds; for all things that are performed by a Leader, in a
provident, useful, courageous, and a magnificent manner, may be styled
generally (...), but the (...), or Stratagems, are more particular Deeds. The
nature of them consists in that Art and Subtilty used in defending our selves
from an Enemy, or in overcoming him; concerning which things there have been
remarkable Consequences of excellent Sayings: therefore we have added to the
Examples of Actions some noble Expressions. Now the things that are to be noted
by a General before a Battle, may be reduced to these Heads.

THE INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. OF concealing Counsels. Chap. 2. Of discovering the Counsels of the
Enemies. Chap. 3. Of settling the state of War. Chap. 4. Of leading an Army
through a Country in the Power of the Enemy. Chap. 5. Of escaping out of most
difficult places. Chap. 6. Of Ambushes laid in the way. Chap. 7. How those
things which are wanting to us may be dissembled or concealed, and the use
other ways supplied. Chap. 8. Of streightning an Enemy. Chap. 9. Of pacifying
the Disorders and Seditions of Soldiers. Chap. 10. How to give a check to the
unseasonable Impatience of fighting. Chap. 11. How to encourage an Army to the
Battle. Chap. 12. How to expel the Fears which Soldiers may have conceived
from ill Omens.
THE FIRST BOOK Of the Stratagems of WAR OF Sextus Julius Frontinus, a ROMAN
Consul.
CHAP. I. Of Concealing Counsels.
Example. 1.
MArcus Porcius Cato, having a Jealousy that the Cities of Spain which he had
conquered would in time rebel, out of a Confidence that they had in the
strength of their Walls, writ to each of them that they should overthrow their
Fortifications, and threatened them with War, if they did not immediately obey
his Orders. The Letters he caused to be delivered to all the Cities in one day;
which made every one of them believe, that this Command was given to them
alone: for if they could have had all time to know that they were all threatened
and commanded the same thing, they would have united together, and resisted the
General's Orders.

2. When Himilco, the Carthaginian Captain, resolved to land in Sicily
unexpected, he never declared whither he was sailing, but delivered to all the
Masters of his Navy sealed Letters, wherein was written the place which he was
designed for; but commanded that no man should read them, unless by the
violence of a Storm they were driven from the sight of the Admiral's Ship which
carried him.

3. When C. Laelius went as an Ambassador to King Syphax, he took along with
him some of the Colonels and Captains of the Army in the Garb of Slaves and
Servants, with an Intention to serve as Spies: amongst whom, when L. Statorius,
who had very often been in the same Camp, seemed to be known by some of the
Enemies, he beat him with his Staff, and corrected him as his Servant, only to
conceal from them his Condition.

4. Tarquinius Superbus, the Father, resolving to have the chief of the Gabians
destroyed, would not entrust this Secret with any Person, and answered nothing
to his Son's Messenger that was sent to him, but with his Rod struck off before
him the heads of the highest Poppies, as he was then by chance walking in his
Garden. The Messenger, at his return without a verbal Answer, told the young
Tarquinius what he observed that his Father did. He understood that he was to
deal in the same manner with the most noted Persons of his Government.

5. C. Caesar being in Egypt, suspected the Egyptians Faith; but to make them
believe that he trusted them, he visited their chief City and Works, frequented
their merry Feasts, seemed to be much delighted with the convenience of the
Places, and to imitate the Customs and manner of living of the Citizens of
Alexandria: but during all this Dissimulation, he was providing his Succors
and Troops to take possession of the Kingdom of Egypt.

6. When Ventidius, in the Parthian War, marched against King Pacorus, and
understood that a certain Pharneus of Cyrrhestre in Syria, who was amongst his
Auxiliaries, did give Intelligence to the Parthian Army whatsoever was acted
and resolved in the Roman Camp, he took occasion to make an advantage of the
Traitor's Perfidiousness; for that which he most desired to be done he
pretended that he was afraid that it should happen, and that which he feared
would come to pass, he seemed to wish for. Therefore, fearing that the
Parthians would pass over the River Euphrates to fight him, before his Legions
could come up to him out of Cappadocia, from the other side of Mount Taurus, he
solicited the Traitor to a double Treachery, to persuade the Parthians to
carry their Army over that part of Euphrates that bears the Name of Zeugma,
where the River, leaving its strait Channel; turns aside; for if they came the
nearer way, he assured them that Ventidius would make use of the Hills to
defend himself and Army from the Parthian Arrows; but, that he was very much
afraid if they took the plain and open Fields. This Information obliged them to
march the under way, and to bring their Army round about. They spent above
forty days in siding along the larger Banks, in building of laborious Bridges,
and in the carriage of their warlike Instruments. In the mean space, Ventidius
had time to call together his Troops; and before the Parthians were in sight
they had been with him three days. By this means he overcame the Parthians in
Battle, and killed their King Pacorus.

7. When Pompey had begun to draw a Trench to compass in Mithridates with his
Army, he prepared himself to fly the next day: but better to conceal this
Design from the Romans, he caused his men to forage far and near, and to the
places adjoining to the Enemies Camp, and appointed a Conference the next day
with several of Pompey's men, and commanded more fires to be made every where
in his Trenches; but in the second Watch of the Night he led out his whole Army
along by the Enemies Camp, and escaped.

8. The Emperor Caesar Domitianus Augustus, surnamed Germanicus, having an
intent to surprise the Germans that had took up Arms, and knowing that they
would make a greater Preparation if they knew of the coming of so great a
Captain, he pretended, the Taxation, or the mustering of the Gauls, to be the
cause of his Departure. In this manner he overcame them by an unexpected War,
tamed the fierceness of barbarous Nations, and provided for the preservation
and safety of the Roman Provinces.

9. When Claudius Nero desired to cut in pieces the Army of Asdrubal before he
could join with his Brother Hannibal, he endeavored by hasty Marches to unite
with the other Consul Livius Salinator, who was appointed to oppose Asdrubal,
because he mistrusted the Forces that were under his Command: yet, would not he
suffer Hannibal, whom he was to oppose, to have any Intelligence of his
Departure. For that purpose, he chose ten thousand of the stoutest Soldiers of
his Army, and commanded his Lieutenants, whom he left behind, that they should
place the same Sentinels and Watches every where, keep the same Fires burning,
and observe the same order in the Camp as when he was present, that Hannibal
might not suspect any thing, nor attempt upon the small number that was left
behind: for his part, he went by secret ways into Vmbria, now called Spoletto,
and joined himself to his Partner, but gave Order that the Camp might not be
enlarged, that Asdrubal might not know of his coming, nor refuse to fight the
Forces of both Consuls. By this means he overcame him and his Army, and with
his increased Troops having overpowered him unawares, returned back to wait
upon the motions of Hannibal, before he could have any knowledge of the
Victory. Thus he dealt with two of the most subtle Generals of the
Carthaginians; the one he overcame by concealing his purpose, the other by his
Valor he destroyed.

10. Themistocles, the Athenian Captain, advised his Citizens to build up with
all speed the Walls which the Spartans had commanded to be pulled down: and to
the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors which were sent to interrupt the Work, he
answered, That he would go himself to Sparta, to give an account of this
proceeding, and satisfy the Citizens. At his Arrival he pretended himself
sick, and by that means spun out some time; at last, when he perceived that
they suspected, and understood his delays, he affirmed to them, that they had
heard false Reports, and desired them to send some of their chief men who might
give them a true Account of the Fortifications of Athens. And at the same time
he writ to his Citizens privately to detain such as should come until their
Works were finished, that he might then declare to the Lacedaemonians that
Athens was fortified, and that their Citizens should not be returned back,
unless they gave him liberty to be gone; which the Lacedaemonians easily
granted, for fear that one man's Death should be punished with the loss of many.

11. L. Furius, having brought his Army into a very inconvenient place, he
resolved to conceal the trouble of his Mind, for fear of giving an Apprehension
to others; and at the same time gave Orders to his Army to march aside a
little, as if he had intended only to take a compass about, and fall upon the
Enemy. In this manner he brought out his Army, ignorant both of the Danger and
of the Intent of his Orders, into a safer Post.

12. When Metellus Pius was asked in Spain what he would do the next day, he
answered, That if his Wastcoat could tell it, he would immediately cast it into
the fire.

13. M. Licinius Crassus gave this Answer to one that asked him at what time he
would remove his Camp; Art thou afraid that thou shall not hear the Sound of
the Trumpet, or the Signal.

CHAP. II. Of discovering the Counsels of the Enemies.
Example 1.
SCipio Africanus, taking an occasion to send an Embassy to King Syphax with
Laelius, he dispatched some choice Colonels and Captains in the habit of
Servants and Attendants, to spy out the strength of the Enemy. And that they
might more freely take a view of the Camp, they let loose a Horse for this
purpose, which they followed, and by this means went round the greatest part of
their Fortifications; of which, when they had given an Account to Scipio, he
made an end of that War, by setting Fire to their Camp.

2. Q. Fabius Maximus, in the Hetrurian War, when yet the Roman Captains were
not well acquainted with the wisest ways of discovering, ordered his Brother
Fabius Caeso, well learned in the Hetrurian Language, to take that Garb, and to
go into the Forest of Ciminia, unknown before to the Roman Soldiers; in which
Embassy he behaved himself with so much Prudence and Industry, that he drew the
Vmbri Camertes, a considerable People, who were not averse to the Roman
Commonwealth, to join in Society and League with them.

3. When the Carthaginians saw that Alexander's Power did so wonderfully
increase, and that he did threaten Africa also, they appointed a subtle Person,
one of their Citizens, named Hamilcar, of Rhodes, to go to the King in the
disguise of a banished Man, and by all means to insinuate himself into his
Acquaintance and Friendship; which when he had obtained, he revealed to his
Citizens all the Designs and Resolutions of this Conqueror.

4. The same Carthaginians sent some of their own Citizens as Ambassadors, to
remain a considerable time at Rome, that they might understand the purposes of
the Romans.

5. When M. Cato was in Spain, and could no other ways come to the knowledge of
the Enemies Designs, he ordered three hundred Soldiers to make an Assault upon
them in their Post, and to take one of them by force, and carry him into his
Camp; who being put to the Torture, revealed all the Secrets of his own People.

6. C. Marius the Consul, in the Cimbrick and Teutonick War, sent Letters to
the Gauls and Lygurians to know whether they continued faithful to the Roman
State: In the beginning he commanded them that they should not unseal nor read
what was closed up until a prefixed time. And before that time, he sent to
demand the same Letters; which when he sound to be unsealed, he understood that
they intended to join with the Enemy. There is also another way of Discovery,
by which Generals, without any outward help, have been able to foresee things
of themselves. For Example;

7. Aemilius Paulus, or rather, L. Aemilius Papus, Consul in the Hetrurian War,
being at the head of his Army to lead them into a Plane, saw a far off a great
number of Birds rise swifter than ordinary out of a Wood; by that he understood
that there was some Ambuscade hid, because the Birds were disturbed, and
because many rose up together; he sent out therefore Scouts, who brought him
Intelligence, That ten thousand of the Helvetians called Boii, were there ready
to receive the Romans, which News caused him to march with his Legions another
way than was expected to Attack them.

8. Likewise Tisamenes the Son of Orestes, understanding that the Enemy held
the top of a Mountain which was strong by Situation; he sent some to inquire
out the Truth, who brought word, that it was no such thing as he imagined: but
proceeding on in his way, he saw a vast number of Birds to fly together out of
that Mountain, that would not pitch; by them he perceived that the Enemies
Troops were there hid; he led therefore his Army another way, and escaped the
Ambushes that were laid for him.

9. Asdrubal, the Brother of Hannibal, understood too late, that Livie's Army
and Nero's were joined together, though they endeavored to conceal it by
lodging together in the same Camp, for he saw their Horses look thin with the
Journey, and took notice of the Bodies of them bearing the color of the
Highways through which they had traveled.

CHAP. III. Of settling or choosing the state of War.
Example 1.
ALexander of Macedon, having a lusty Army of stout men to follow him, did
always choose to fight his Enemy in a pitched Battle.

2. C. Caesar, in the Civil War, had an Army of old Soldiers, but he knew that
his Enemies were but raw and unexperienced; he endeavored therefore always to
give the Battle.

3. Fabius Maximus, being General against Hannibal, who was grown insolent and
proud with the Successes of the former Fights, resolved to avoid the doubtful
Hazards of a Battle, and only to defend his Country. He deserved therefore the
Name and Renown thereby of a wise General.

4. They of Byzantium shunned all occasions of fighting with King Philip's Army,
and forsook also their Borders to shelter themselves within the Walls of their
City; which caused the Macedonians, impatient of the Delays of a Siege, to
depart away.

5. Hasdrubal the Son of Gisgon, commanded an Army in Spain in the second
Punick War: when Scipio pressed upon him, he dispersed his Army, and sent them to
the Cities: by this means Scipio was forced to lead away also his Army into
their Winter Quarters, that he might not divide his by the Siege of many Towns
at once.

6. When Xerxes was entering into Greece with his Army, Themistocles judged that
the Athenians were not able to fight him by Land, nor to defend their Borders,
nor to maintain their Walls; he advised them therefore to transport their Wives
and Children to Troezenum and other Cities, to forsake their Town, betake
themselves to their Ships, and resolve to fight by Sea.

7. This was the same Advice that Pericles gave to the same City in War against
the Lacedaemonians.

8. When Hannibal was in Italy, Scipio sailed over with his Army into Africa,
and compelled the Carthaginians to call back Hannibal: by this means he removed
the Seat of War from his own Country into the Enemies Borders.

9. The Lacedaemonians having taken and fortified a Castle of the Athenians,
called Decelea, from whence they did much mischief to them, sent their Navy to
land, and spoil the Peloponnesus: by this means they obliged the Lacedaemonian
Army which was at Decelea to be called home, to defend their own Country.

10. The Emperor Caesar Domitianus Augustus, when the Germans, according to
their Custom, made sudden Onsets upon the Romans out of their Woods and secret
Retreats, returning immediately back in safety, in the bottom of their Copses,
he set Guards round at 120000. Paces from one another, and thus altered the
manner of War, obliged the Enemy to surrender themselves when he had deprived
them of their Retreats.

CHAP. IV. Of leading an Army through a Country in the Power of the Enemy.
Example 1.
AEMilius Papus, Consul, leading his Army against the Luceni, in a narrow
Passage where the Navy of Tarentum waited in Ambush to discharge upon their
Troops a shower of poisoned Arrows from their Engines, he covered them as they
marched on the side of the Navy, with their Captives; for whom the Enemies had
so great a respect, that they stopped their Arrows.

2. Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian, returning out of Phrygia laden with Spoils,
was closely pursued by his Enemies, who, taking the advantage of a certain
Place, fell upon his Troops, which made him to rank all his Prisoners on both
sides of his Army: while the Enemy spared them, the Lacedaemonians had time and
space to escape out of the danger.

3. The same General, when the Theban Army had possessed themselves of the
Streights through which he was to pass, he turned aside, as if he had been to
go directly to the City of Thebes; which so affrighted the Thebans, that they
forsook their Stations to defend their Town. This caused Agesilaus to return
back, and to proceed on the way that he had designed, without any Disturbance.

4. Nicostratus, the General of the Aetolians, making War against them of
Epirus, finding that the Passages into that Country were very narrow, made show
as if he intended to assault them in one place, where he left some few of his
Soldiers to maintain the Appearance of an Army, whilst he with the rest of his
Troops entered into the Country by another way where he was least expected.

5. Autophradates the Persian, marching with his Army into Pisidia, found
certain straight Passages possessed by the Inhabitants, which made him to
dissemble an Unwillingness to pass further, and to resolve to return back: the
Pisidians believed that he had been in earnest; but he in the night sent a very
strong Party to master that place, and the next day he passed through with his
whole Army.

6. Philip King of Macedonia, intending to go over into Greece, heard that the
Streights called Thermopylae were possessed by the Enemy: at the same time the
Aetolian Ambassadors, Lords of those Streights, came to him to treat about
Conditions of Peace. Philip secured them, and with all speed marched with his
Army to the Thermopylae, where he found the Guards secure, expecting the return
of their Ambassadors. Thus he seized upon those Streights, and unexpected past
through with his Army.

7. Iphicrates the Athenian General, fighting against Anaxibius the
Lacedaemonian Captain, in the Hellespont, about the Town Abydos, was forced to
pass with his Army through certain places which were guarded by the Enemy; for
in one side of the Passage were high and steep Mountains, in the other the
Waves of the Sea. He stopped some small time, till a day happened to be colder
than ordinary, and therefore most fit to conceal his purpose. He chose a select
number of his strongest Soldiers, whom he warmed with Wine and Oil, commanding
them to march along the Seashore, and to climb over the steepest Places. Thus
he surprised the Guards behind unexpected, and mastered them.

8. When Cn. Pompeius could not well pass his Army over a River because of the
Enemies Troops, he often brought forth his Army out of their Trenches, and as
often led them in again, that he might persuade the Enemy that the Romans could
find no way to march forwards. Then upon a sudden he gave an Onset, and gained
the Passage.

9. When Porus the Indian King stopped Alexander the Macedonian, with his Army,
from passing the River Hydaspes, he commanded his Greek Troops to run against
the Stream: and when by that Proceeding Porus was brought to take most heed and
care of the other side of the River, on a sudden he past over with his Army a
little higher than was expected. The same Alexander, being hindered in the
Passage of another River by the Enemy, he commanded that several Troops of
Horse should appear in several places on the sides of the Water, and offer to
pass over. By that means he kept the Enemy employed, and expecting his motion
there, whilst he got into his Power an Island at a distance, first with a small
Guard, after with a greater, and from thence he commanded them to pass over to
the other side of the River. When all the Enemies were marching to encounter
and destroy this small Party, he had the Ford at liberty to get over with all
his Army to join with his men on the other side.

10. Xenophon in his March found that the Armenians stood on the other side of
a River to impede his Passage; he therefore commanded his men to seek out two
Fords, and when he was opposed by the Enemy at the lower Ford, he returned to
the higher; when likewise he was encountered there by the Enemy, he went back to
the lower Ford, commanding a Party of his Men to remain there. While therefore
the Armenians continued to defend the lower Ford, he passed over at the higher;
but they imagining that all would come down, they were deceived by those that
remained, for these, when the Ford was at liberty, they got on the other side
without hinderance, and became a defense to all the rest of their men whilst
they marched through the River.

11. P. Claudius, Cons. in the first Punick War, being not able to pass over
with his Army from Rhegium to Messana in Sicily, whilst the Carthaginians kept
the Streights, caused a Report to be spread about, That he could no longer
continue in this War, because it was begun without the Consent of the People of
Rome, and that he would sail with his Fleet back into Italy when the
Carthaginians were departed, who believed that he was really gone; he returned
suddenly, and landed in Sicily.

12. When the Lacedaemonian Generals intended to sail to Syracuse, and were
afraid of the Carthaginian Fleet sent to intercept them, they ordered ten Ships
of Carthage which they had taken, to sail before, with others dragged and tied
behind and on the sides, as if they had been overcome in Fight; by which
Appearance, the Carthaginians that waited for them were deceived, and they
arrived safe to their Haven.

13. When King Philip could not pass over the Streights called Cyanea, because
of the Athenian Fleet which guarded that convenient place, he writ to
Antipater, one of his Generals, that the Province of Thracia, having destroyed
the Garrisons that he had left there, was in Rebellion; and therefore that
leaving other Business he should follow him: which Letter he caused to be
intercepted by the Enemy. The Athenians judging that they had understood the
Secrets of the Macedonians, sailed away with their Fleet; and Philip, without
resistance, freed these Streights from the Enemy. The same King, being hindered
in his Design upon Cherronesus, which was belonging to the Athenians, because
not only the Ships of Byzantium, but also of Rhodes and Chios were in the
Passage, endeavored to gain their Friendship, by restoring to them the Ships
that he had taken, offering to make them Judges and Mediators of the Peace
between him and them of Byzantium, who were the causes of the War. In this
Negotiation he spun out craftily a long time, always adding something to the
Articles, that he pretended was wanting; and in the mean while he fitted out
his own Fleet, to carry him and his Army on a sudden over the Streights, when
the Enemy was unprepared to hinder him.

14. Chabrias the Athenian, not being able to enter into the Haven of Samos,
because of the Enemies Ships that opposed him and guarded the place, commanded
a few of his Ships to pass by the Haven, imagining that the Enemies would
follow them, which accordingly happened: he by that means got into the Haven
with the rest of his Fleet.

CHAP. V. Of escaping out of most difficult places.
Example 1.
Q. Sertorius, being pursued by his Enemies to the side of a River which he was
to pass, caused a Bulwark to be cast up in the manner of a half Moon on the
Bank of the River, and furnished it with combustible stuff, which he caused to
be set on fire: by that means the Enemy was kept off, and he passed over
without any hindrance.

2. In the like manner, Pelopidas the Theban, in the War of Thessaly, obtained
a safe Passage over a River; for having shut in a large compass of ground
within his Camp, he placed upon the Rampires and Bastions round about, forked
Stakes, with much combustible matter; and whilst the Enemy was kept off by the
Fire he got over to the other side.

3. Q. Lutatius Catulus, having received a Repulse from the Cimbri, and seeing
no hopes of Safety but in the passage of a River whereof the Banks were
possessed by the Enemy, marched with his Troops to the next Mountain, as if he
had intended there to settle his Camp; but commanded his Men not to lay down
their Burdens, nor to loosen their Fardels, and that none should offer to
depart from their Ranks or Colors; and that he might better confirm the Enemy
in this Persuasion, he ordered some few Tabernacles to be raised in the most
conspicuous places, and Fires to be kindled, and that some few of his men
should cast up a Ditch, and others should appear to go out to fetch Wood. All
which Actions the Cimbri conceiving to be done in earnest, chose also a place
to pitch their Tents, and sent out several Parties to provide those things that
were needful for their abode: by this means they gave an opportunity to
Catulus, not only to pass over his Army, but also to streighten the Enemies
Camp.

4. When Craesus could not get over a Ford of the River Halys, and having
neither Ships, nor necessaries to build a Bridge, he caused a deep Trench to be
drawn in the upper part of the River behind his Camp, and so turned the Current
of the Water behind him.

5. Cn. Pompeius, designing at Brundusium to depart out of Italy, and transport
the War into Greece, because Caesar was likely to attempt upon his Troops when
they should endeavor to get on Shipboard, caused some streets to be stopped up,
in others he made Walls to be builded across, in others he caused Trenches to
be drawn, and sharp stakes, hardened in the fire, to be fixed in them, covering
them over with Hurdles hid under the Earth which was cast on the top. And some
ways that led to the Haven he stopped with Beams laid upon one another very
thick. When all this was done, he made show of a Resolution to defend the Town,
by placing some few Archers round the Walls. The rest of his Troops, without
noise, he commanded aboard, and when they were all shipped, the Archers
likewise, by known ways, hastened after him in small Ships that waited for them
in the Haven.

6. C. Duillius, Cons. entered into the Haven of Syracuse unadvisedly, for he
was shut in by a Chain cross the Entrance; he caused therefore all his
Soldiers to weigh down the Stern of his Ships, and when the forepart was
lifted up by the weight behind, he caused the Oars to row that part over the
Chain violently, which being done, all the Soldiers returned again to the
forepart to press that down: by this means all the weight of the Ships being
got over the Chain, caused them to escape over it.

7. When Lysander the Lacedaemonian was besieged with all his Navy in the Haven
of Athens, being oppressed with the number of his Enemies Ships, he ordered his
Soldiers to land secretly on that part of the Shore where the Sea has the
streightest Passage to flow in, and his Ships to be placed upon Wheels, and
carried over land to the nearest Port named Monoecius, or rather Munychias.

8. Herculeius, the Lieutenant of Sertorius in Spain, entered with a small
Party to march along a narrow way between two steep Mountains; and
understanding that a great number of his Enemies were at hand, coming against
him, he caused speedily a Ditch to be dig'd a cross between the two Hills, and
a Rampire made with combustible stuff to be set on Fire. Thus, while the Enemy
was kept off with the Fire, he escaped.

9. C. Caesar, in the Civil War, leading his Army against Afranius, and finding
that he was not able to retreat with safety, as he had designed, caused the
first and second Battalion secretly to withdraw themselves behind his Army, and
to apply themselves to dig a Trench of fifteen foot broad, into which, about
Sunset, he marched with his Army in Battle.

10. Pericles the Athenian, being driven by the Inhabitants of the Peloponnesus
into a certain place which was so surrounded with steep Hills that there were
but two Passages to escape out, caused a Ditch to be dig'd of a very great
breadth on one side, as if he had purposed to exclude the Enemy that side, on
the other he commanded a way to be made as if he had intended there to escape.
The Besiegers, never imagining that Pericles's Army would offer to escape over
the Ditch that he had drawn, resolved all to oppose him in the broad way. But
Pericles, having cast over his Ditch a Bridge with Planks that he had ready,
suddenly commanded over his Party that way where there was no resistance.

11. Lysimachus, one of them who succeeded to the Wealth and Command of
Alexander, designing to fix his Camp on a high Hill, by the Indiscretion of his
Officers was brought into a Valley, where he feared the coming down of his
Enemies from the upper Ground; he therefore dig'd three Trenches against them
within his Camp, and also round about all the Tents the like number of Ditches:
By that means he stopped the Enemies Passage, and by casting of Bows over the
Ditches, covering them over with Turf and Earth, he passed over, gave an
Assault to the Enemy, and got up to the higher Ground.

12. Cn. Fronteius Crassus, going out in Spain to plunder the Country, with
three thousand men, was surrounded by Hasdrubal in a dangerous place. He
communicated his Resolution and Purpose only to the first Ranks, and in the
beginning of the night, at what time it was least expected, he broke through
the Enemies Post.

13. L. Furius, having led his Army into a difficult place, he resolved to
conceal the trouble of his Mind that the rest might not be afraid, commanding
his Men to march a little aside, as if he had intended to assault the Enemy by
taking a greater compass about: but by turning his Army round; who knew nothing
of the matter, he brought them into safety.

14. P. Decius the Tribune, in the Samnetick War, persuaded Cornelius Cossus
the Consul, who was surprised by the Enemy in a dangerous Place, to command a
small Party to seize upon a neighboring Hill, and offered himself to command
that Party; for by this means, the Enemy being resolved to oppose this motion,
suffered the Consul to escape, but surrounded and besieged Decius: but in the
Night he also sallied out of those Streights. After some Contest, he arrived in
Safety with his Soldiers, and joined the Consuls Army.

15. The same Course was observed under the Command of Attilius Calatinus,
Cons. by him whose Name is variously written; some call him Laberius, some Q.
Caeditius, most write that he was named Calpurnius Flamma. This Captain,
finding that his Army was led into such a Valley that on every side the Enemy
had taken possession of the higher ground, desired and obtained of the Consul
three hundred men, whom he encouraged by their Valor to save the whole Army.
With this Party he marched into the midst of the Valley, and immediately all
the Enemies ran down upon them to cut them off: so that while he was busied in
a very fierce and long Combat, he gave opportunity and leisure to the Consul
to draw off his Army.

16. L. Minutius, the Consul, in Liguria, having led his Army into a straight
place, and every one did yet remember the sad Destruction of the Romans, called
Caudinae Clades, commanded the Numidians, his Auxiliary Troops, who were
despicable in regard of the Deformity of their Persons and of their Horses, to
ride up and down about the narrow Passage that led out of the Streights which
was defended by the Enemy; first, they fearing to be provoked to Battle, stood
to their Station, and kept their Post, but the Numidians endeavored to cause
themselves to be despised, by falling purposely from their Horses, and in
playing strange Tricks, as in sport. At this unusual sight, the Ligurians began
to open their Ranks, and to mind nothing but the seeing of the Play. The
Numidians perceiving this, drew nearer and nearer; at last clapping the Spurs
to their Horses, they broke through the neglected and open Ranks or Stations of
their Enemies, and then falling upon the neighboring Country, forced the
Ligurians to depart, and defend their Dwellings, and to suffer the Romans
quietly to march out.

17. L. Sylla, in the War of the Confederates, near the City Esernia in Italy,
was surprised in a straight place; therefore he sent to the Enemies Army,
commanded by Duillius, for a Parley, and began to treat of the Conditions of
Peace without any Success; but perceiving the Enemy to be grown more negligent
because of the Truce, departed in the night, leaving behind him his Trumpeter,
who was to divide the Watches as long as any should remain behind, and at the
fourth Watch should follow him. Thus he brought away all his Army, with all
their baggage and warlike Instruments, into safety.

18. The same Sylla, in the War against Archelaus, Mithridates's General in
Cappadocia, was worsted by the multitude of his Enemies in an incommodious
place; he therefore proposed to them Articles of Peace, and obtained a time of
Truce: by this Diversion of the Enemies Intentions he escaped out of the danger.

19. Hasdrubal, Hannibal's Brother, being not able to get out of a Wood,
whereof the Passages were stopped by Claudius Nero, began to treat with him, and
to promise, that if he might be suffered to depart, he would leave Spain.
Afterward he spent some days in finding fault with the Conditions imposed. In
the mean while, by certain narrow Paths which were therefore neglected, he sent
away his Soldiers by Parties, and at the last he himself escaped with the
rest, that were the compleatest part of his Army.

20. Spartacus marched over a little Trench with which M. Crassus had enclosed
him in by filling it up in the night with the Bodies of his Captives and of
Beasts.

21. The same Person being besieged in Mount Vesuvius, escaped over the
steepest and most craggy part, which was not therefore guarded, by twisting
together some Field Withies, of which he made Chains to slide down; and
afterward he so terrified Claudius on another side, that some of his Troops
were put to flight by seventy four Fencers.

22. The same Spartacus being shut up by L. Varinus the Proconsul, fixed Stakes
at some little distance from one another, at which he tied dead Bodies,
standing upright and clothed, with their Arms, that such as should look at a
distance might fancy it to be a Party in Guard, and caused besides Fires to be
kindled about his Camp every where. Whilst his Enemy was deceived with this
vain Appearance, he led out in the night all his Army peaceably.

23. Brasidas the Lacedaemonian Captain, was surprised about Amphipolis by a
great Multitude of Athenians, which he was not able to resist; he therefore
suffered himself to be shut in by them, that by extenuating their Body in a
round Circle, he might break out through some part of their Body where they
were thinnest.

24. Iphicrates, in Thracia, having placed his Camp in a low ground, understood
that the Enemy had taken the next Hill, from which a Party was come to cut them
off. He commanded his men to make many Fires, and left a few within his Camp in
the Night for that purpose. In the mean while he led out his Army, and placed
them along the ways on both sides, through which he suffered the Enemy to pass,
and caught them in the same disadvantageous place in which he was before. Thus
he cut off some part of their Rear, and took the rest in the Camp.

25. Darius, to hide from the Scythians his Departure, left behind him in his
Camp the Dogs and the Asses; which while the Enemy heard barking and braying,
they thought that Darius was yet there.

26. The Ligurians deceived the Romans with a like Subtilty. In diverse places
they tied to the Trees wild Bullocks, which being left behind, by their
frequent bellowing showed the appearance of an Army to the Enemy.

27. Hanno, being shut in by the Enemy, set on fire a great deal of light and
combustible stuff in that place which was fittest for him to sally out: And
when he saw the Enemy gone to defend the other Passages, he led his Soldiers
through the Flames, advising them to cover their Faces with their Bucklers, and
their Legs with their Cloths.

28. Hannibal, to escape out of an incommodious and barren place, being pursued
by Fabius Maximus, in the night tied dry Faggots of Wood to the Horns of Oxen,
which he set on Fire, and sent them out; the Flame increasing by the motion of
the Beasts, caused them to bellow, and run furiously over the Mountains where
they were driven, giving a great Light. The Romans that went out first to
examine the business, thought it a Prodigy, and a Wonder; afterward, when they
had given a true Account to Fabius, he kept his Men within the Camp for fear of
Ambushes. In the mean while Hannibal with his Army marched out without
resistance.

CHAP. VI. Of Ambushes laid in the way.
Example 1.
FVlvius, surnamed the Nobler, leading his Army out of Samnium against the
Lucani, understood by some Run-a-ways, that the Enemies would set upon his
Rear, which caused him to order his stoutest Legion to march in the Van, and
placed in the Rear his Baggage. The Enemies embracing this which was done on
purpose, began to plunder the Carriage; but Fulvius had appointed five
Companies of the forementioned Legion to be in the right side of the way, and
five in the left: so that when the Enemy was wholly intent and busy about the
Plunder, he shut them in on both sides with his Soldiers drawn up, and cut
them in pieces.

2. The same Fulvius was pursued close by his Enemy in the Rear, whilst he was
marching toward a River near at hand, which was not so great as to hinder his
Passage, though the swiftness of the Stream did stop him. On the higher Banks
he left one Legion in a secret place, that the Enemy might be more encouraged
to pursue after by the small number, which they would infallibly despise; which
accordingly happened; then the Legion which was placed on purpose came out of
the Ambuscado, assaulted and destroyed them.

3. When Iphicrates led into Thracia a long Army, because of the narrowness of
the way, and News was brought to him that the Enemy would assault the Rear, he
commanded some Companies to withdraw on both sides, and there to stand, and the
rest to proceed on, and hasten speedily their March; but when they passed by,
he kept with him every choice Man; so that when the Enemy was busy and
scattered about the Prey, and already weary, he came upon them with his
well-ordered and fresh Troops, routed them, and took from them all the Plunder.

4. The Boii, when the Romans were to pass through the Wood called Litana or
Latina, had so cut the Trees that they stood upright, supported by such a small
part, that at the least violence they would fall, they being hid in the Borders
of the Wood: when therefore their Enemies were entered in, they flung down the
first, and these fulling broke down the next; by this means they cast down a
great many upon the Romans, and crushed a considerable Party to pieces.

CHAP. VII. By what means the things that we stand in need of may seem not to
be wanting, or the use otherways supplied.
Example 1.
L. Caecilius Metellus, having no Ships to carry his Elephants over the Sea,
joined together some Hogsheads, and cast Boards over them, upon which he placed
his Elephants, and sent them into Italy over the Sicilian Streights.

2. When Hannibal could not oblige his Elephants to march through a deep River,
and had neither Ships, nor Boards to build any to carry them over, he commanded
the fiercest of these Beasts to be wounded under the Ear by one who should
immediately run away, and swim over the Water: by this means it happened, that
the Elephant being stirred up to revenge it self upon the Author of its Pain,
past over the River, and gave an example for the rest to follow.

3. The Carthaginian Captains having a Fleet to prepare, and wanting Tow and
Hemp, they shaved the Women of the Country, and with their Hair made Ropes.

4. Those of Marseilles and Rhodes have done the like.

5. M. Antonius, flying from Mutina, furnished his Soldiers with the Bark of
Trees instead of Bucklers.

6. The Bucklers of Spartacus and his Army were made of Withies covered over
with Skins or Hides.

7. It will not be amiss, I conceive, to relate in this place that noble Deed
of Alexander the Great, who marching with his Army through the desert place of
Africa, they, as well as himself, were grievously afflicted with Thirst, and
when a Soldier brought him some Water in his Headpiece, he spilt it upon the
ground in the presence of them all. This example of Abstinence proved to be
more useful than if he could have supplied them with Water.

CHAP. VIII. Of streightning an Enemy.
Example 1.
WHen Cariolanus undertook to revenge the shame of his Banishment by an open
War, he forbid the spoiling of the Lands belonging to the Noblemen of Rome,
but burnt and destroyed the Lands of the Common People; that by that means he
might cause a Discord between the Romans, and a division in their Consents and
Resolutions.

2. Hannibal endeavored to bring into Jealousy, and asperse with. Infamy,
Fabius Maximus, unto whom he was not equal in Courage nor in the arts of War,
by destroying all the Country, and leaving his Fields alone untouched. But he,
to preserve himself in the Reputation of his Citizens, that they might not
suspect his Faithfulness, had such a great and noble Soul, as to cause his
Possessions to be publicly offered to be sold.

3. Q. Fabius Maximus, being Consul the fifth time, when the Armies of the
Gauls, the Vmbri, the Hetrusci, and the Samnites, joined together against the
People of Rome, against whom he had fortified his Camp beyond the Apennine
Hills, writ to Fulvius and Posthumous, who were left to defend the City, to
march with their Forces to the Town of Sitium or Clusium. The Hetrusci and the
Vmbri followed them to defend their Borders, and left the Samnites and the
Gauls, whom Fabius, together with his Partner Decius, assaulted and overcame.

4. When M. Curious marched against the Sabins, who, having gathered a numerous
Army, left their own Borders, and entered into the Confines of the Romans, he
sent by private ways a Party of his Men to spoil the Fields of the Sabins, and
to burn their Towns here and there; which obliged the Sabins to return, to
prevent the spoiling of their own Country. By this means Curious had an
opportunity to waste the Borders of the Enemy, to drive away their Army without
fighting, and when they were separated to overcome them.

5. When T. Didius was afraid with the small number of his Men to encounter the
Enemy, and delayed the Fight till the coming of the Legions that were expected,
and hearing that the Enemy was marching against them, he made a Speech to his
Soldiers, and commanded them to prepare for a Fight, and purposely caused the
Captives to be negligently kept; so that some of them escaped, and carried news
to their Party, that the Remans were ready for the Battle; which made them, in
expectation of a Fight, to keep their strength together, and not march to meet
them for whom they designed to lie in Ambush. By this means, the Legions
arrived safe to Didius, without the loss of one man.

6. In the Carthaginian War, some Cities purposed to forsake the Romans and
join with the Carthaginians; but having given Hostages, they desired to recover
them first into their hands before they fell away: they therefore pretended,
that there was a Sedition amongst the Neighbors, which the Roman Ambassadors
ought to appease; whom being sent, they kept them in lieu of their Hostages,
and would not suffer them to depart till they had their own returned back.

7. When the Roman Ambassadors were sent to King Antiochus, who had with him
Hannibal, after that the Carthaginians were subdued, to make use of his advice
against the Romans; by frequent visiting and Discourses with Hannibal, they
made him to be suspected by the King, who otherwise would have highly favored
him, and to whom he had been very useful because of his subtilty and knowledge
in War.

8. Q. Metellus, making War against Jugurtha, prevailed with Money upon the
King's Ambassadors to betray their Master; and when others were sent, he
corrupted them also, and likewise the third; but the business succeeded not so
far as to get Jugurtha into his hands, for he desired to have him delivered
alive; nevertheless, many things happened from thence; for when the Letters
which he writ to the Kings Friends were intercepted, he caused them all to be
put to Death, whereby he was deprived of good Counsel, and could not get nor
procure to himself any other Friends.

9. When C. Caesar understood by a certain Waterbearer which he had
intercepted, that Afranius and Petreius would by night remove and march out of
their Camp; that he might without any trouble to his Men hinder the purpose and
intent of his Enemies, in the beginning of the night he commanded his Soldiers
to give the signal for the taking up and loading of their Baggage, and the
Mules to be driven along by the Enemies Camp with noise and hurry. This caused
them to keep in their Camp, for they imagined that Caesar was marching away.

10. Scipio Africanus, for the more convenient receiving of Supplies of Men and
Provisions, sent Venticius Thermus to Hannibal, to treat with him, while he in
the mean space went to help their landing.

11. Dionysius, the King of Syracuse, when a vast number of Africans were to
pass over into Sicily to fight him, sortified several Castles in many places,
and commanded the Garrisons to deliver them to the Enemy as soon as they should
come, and to return secretly to Syracuse. The Africans were forced to keep
Guards in the Castles that they had taken; so that when he saw the rest reduced
to that small number that he desired, he with equal Forces assaulted and
overcame them; for by this Policy he gathered all his Strength together, and
scattered the Enemies.

12. When Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian made War upon Tisaphernes, he pretended
to invade the Country of Caria, as the fittest place, being full of Mountains,
to encounter with the Persians, who were numerous in Horse. By the divulging of
this Design, he caused Tisaphernes to wait for him in Caria while he broke into
Lydia, where the chief City of that Government was. Having therefore overcome
such as were left there, he got into his Possession the King's Treasury.

CHAP. IX. Of pacifying the Seditions of Soldiers.
Example 1.
A Manlius, the Consul, understanding that the Soldiers who were in their
Winter Quarters in Campania, had plotted together to cut the Throats of their
Landlords, and to plunder their Goods, sent word that another Party should be
there in the same Winter Quarters. By this means he spoiled the Purpose of the
Conspirators, freed the Country from the danger, and took occasion to punish
the Offenders.

2. L. Sylla, when some Legions of the Roman Citizens broke out furiously into
a dangerous Sedition, restored them again to a peaceable Temper by this Policy:
He caused the News to be quickly spread, that the Enemies Army was at hand, and
a noise to be made to run to their Arms, and the Signal of the Battle to be
given: by this means the Sedition ended, and all joined together to encounter
the Enemy.

3. Cn. Pompeius, when his Army had killed the Senate of Milan, that he might
not cause any tumult by calling to him only such as were guilty, commanded some
that had no hand in the Crime to come together with the Murderers, who were the
less afraid, because they were not separated from the rest, neither did they
seem to be called out because of their Fault. They all appeared; and they who
were guiltless were careful to keep the Criminals from an Escape, lest they
should be blamed for their Flight.

4. C. Caesar, when some of his Legions were so furiously seditious as to
threaten the death of their Leaders, dissembled his fear, and went strait to
his Soldiers, who desired to be discharged, which he granted with an angry
Countenance. When they were at liberty; he obliged them to Repentance, to give
satisfaction to him their General, and to become more obedient for the future
in performing all the Duties and Works of a Soldier.

CHAP. X. How to give a Check to the unseasonable impatience and desire of
fighting.
Example 1.
Q. Sertorius, having found by experience that he was an unequal Match to the
whole Roman Army together, that he might make the barbarous and ignorant People
of Spain, who unadvisedly desired to fight, sensible thereof, he caused two
Horses to be brought, the one strong and lusty, the other very little and weak,
and put two Youngmen answerable to them, the one strong, and the other slender.
To the strong man he commanded to pull off the Tail of the weak Horse at once;
to the slender person, to pluck the Hairs off the lusty Horse one by one: when
therefore the slender Person had done what he was ordered, and the strong
Person did strive in vain about the Tail of the weak Horse; now, says
Sertorius to his Soldiers, by this example I have discovered to you the
Condition of the Roman Troops: they are not to be overcome if you assault them
together, but you may break and destroy them if you come upon them when
separated.

2. The same Sertorius, when he took notice that his Soldiers unadvisedly
demanded the Signal of the Battle, and judged that they would break out into a
Tumult if they did not fight, suffered one Troop of Horse to attack the Enemy;
when they were overpowered, he sent more to assist them: thus he received them
all safe in their Retreat, and without any loss. He discovered to them what
would have been the issue of the Fight which they desired. After this they were
much more obedient to his Orders and Command.

3. Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian, having pitched his Camp upon the Banks of a
River against the Thebans, and understanding that the Enemy did far exceed him
in number, was resolved to keep his Men from the desire of a Battle, by telling
them that the Gods had advised him to fight from the Hills; therefore, having
left a small Guard upon the sides of the River, he marched up to the Hills. The
Thebans judging it to be done out of Fear, passed the River with their Army,
and easily beat off the Guard, and hastily followed after Agesilaus, who routed
them in a disadvantageous place with a handful of Men.

4. Scorylo, the General of the Daci, understood that the People of Rome were
divided, and troubled with Civil Wars, yet he thought not convenient to venture
against them, because Citizens may unite together against a foreign Enemy. To
make his Countrymen sensible of this, he caused two Dogs to fight very eagerly
before them, and at the same time a Wolf to appear. The Dogs immediately left
their fighting, and run upon the Wolf. By this Example he kept back those
barbarous and ignorant People from attempting any thing against the Romans.

CHAP. XI. How an Army is to be encouraged to a Fight.
Example 1.
WHen M. Fabius and Cn. Manlius were Consuls, and Generals against the
Hetrusci, the Army, because of the Seditions, were very unwilling to fight of
their own accord, pretended a delay, until the Soldiers were forced and
animated by the Reproaches of the Enemies, to desire the liberty to fight them,
and to swear that they would never return without the Victory.

2. Fulvius the Nobler, being necessitated with a small Army to fight with a
numerous Army of the Samnites, who were proud of their former Successes,
pretended that a Legion of the Enemies had been by him corrupted, and persuaded
to revolt; and to confirm them in this Belief, commanded the Colonels and the
Captains of his first Ranks, to gather together all the coined Money, the Gold
and Silver that they had, and offer it to the Traitors, as their Reward:
withal, he promised them that should lend their Money, that when the Victory
was obtained he would gratify and reward them sufficiently: which Persuasion
and Belief gave such an Alacrity and Confidence to the Romans, that it obtained
for them a famous Victory, and the Conclusion immediately after of the War.

3. C. Caesar, marching with his Army to give Bartel to Ariovistus, told, in a
Speech, to his Soldiers, who were troubled with Fear, That he would employ
that day none but the tenth Legion to fight, that by this Testimony and
Declaration of exceeding in Carriage, they might be obliged to behave
themselves manfully, and the rest for Shame and Grief that others should carry
away the Glory and Esteem of Valor, might be forced to fight bravely.

4. Q. Fabius Maximus, who knew very well that the Romans were of such a
generous Disposition that they would be provoked by Contempt, and understanding
also, that there was nothing of Moderation or Justice to be expected from the
Carthaginians, sent Ambassadors to Carthage to treat about Articles of Peace.
They brought back such unjust Conditions, and so insolent, that the Roman Army
were thereby encouraged to fight rather than to yield to them.

5. Agesilaus, the General of the Lacedaemonians, having pitched his Camp near
the confederate City of the Orthomeni, understood that the most part of his
Soldiers were securing their most precious things within the Walls; he
therefore commanded the Citizens not to receive any thing which belonged to his
Army, that his Soldiers might fight more desperately when they knew that they
were to fight for the Preservation of all that they had.

6. When Epaminondas, the General of the Thebans, was to give Battle to the
Lacedaemonians, that his Soldiers might be encouraged not only by their
Strength, but also by their Inclinations, he declared in a public Speech, That
the Lacedaemonians intended, if they obtained the Victory, to destroy all the
Males, to lead away into Captivity their Wives and Children, and to demolish
Thebes. This Discovery so stirred them up, and made them so resolved, that at
the first Onset the Thebans got the Victory of the Lacedaemonians.

7. Leotychidas, the Lacedaemonian Captain, being to fight the same day in
which his Confederates had gained a Victory at Sea, though he was ignorant of
what had been done, published abroad, that he had received the News that his
Friends had got the day, that his Soldiers who were to fight might be more
courageous.

8. A. Posthumous, in the Battle against the Latins, encouraged his Army with
the Appearance of two Young Men on Horseback, whom he declared to be Castor and
Pollux come to their Assistance. By this means he obliged them to return to the
Fight.

9. Archidamus the Lacedaemonian, making War against the Arcadians, erected an
Altar in his Camp, and caused Horses to be led round about it in the Night. The
next Morning he showed their Footsteps, and told his Men, that Castor and
Pollux had rid round about, and would be assisting to them in the Battle.

10. When Pericles, the General of the Athenians, was to give Battle, he took
notice that there was a Grove in the view of both Armies, of an extraordinary
Thickness, and very dark and large, consecrated to Pluto: in this place he put
a Man of a large Stature, upon very high and big Slippers, with a purple Robe
and long Hair, upon a great Chariot, dragged by two white Horses, that when the
Signal for the Battle should be given, he might call Pericles by name, and
encourage him, and promise him the Assistance of the Gods; which so terrified
the Enemies, that before the casting of their Darts they fled.

11. L. Sylla, that his Soldiers might be more ready to fight, pretended, that
the Gods did discover to him things to come. And at last, in the sight of his
Army, before they entered into the Conflict, he would pray to an Image of a
moderate Bigness which he had taken from Delphos, saying to it, that it should
make good and hasten the Victory that it had promised to him.

12. C. Marius had a certain Magician Woman out of Syria, to tell him of the
Success and Events of Battles.

13. Q. Sertorius, having an Army of barbarous Soldiers, not governed by
reason, led about Portugal with him a white Hind, very large and beautiful, by
which he told them that he understood the things that he was to do, and avoid;
to the end that those barbarous People might obey his Orders, as commanded from
above.

We must not make use of this sort of Stratagems only, when we are to deal with
such as we judge unskilful and ignorant; but much more those things are to be
invented which may be of that kind that it may be believed that they have been
discovered by these things.

14. When Alexander the Macedonian was to offer Sacrifice, he caused to be
written with a Juice, in that hand of the Diviner, which he was to put upon the
Bowels of the Beast, such Letters as did signify that Alexander should have
the Victory; which Letters appearing upon the hot Liver, was shown by the King
to the Soldiers, to increase their Courage, as if the Gods did promise to him
the Victory.

15. Innides the Soothsayer, did practice the same thing when Eumenes was to
fight with the Gauls.

16. Epaminondas the Theban, encountering with the Lacedaemonians, did think to
increase the Confidence of his Men with a Trick of Religion. The Arms and
Weapons which were hung up to adorn the Temples, he caused to be secretly taken
away in the Night, and persuaded his Soldiers that the Gods had done it to
follow and assist them in their Fight.

17. Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian, having taken some Persian Captives, whose
Garb, when it was worn by them, did strike a terror to his men, was wont to
show them all naked, that they might behold their white Skin and their
groundless Fear together.

18. Gelo, King of Syracuse, having proclaimed a War against the Carthaginians,
and taken many of them Captives, was wont to produce the weakest of them all
naked, chiefly of the Auxiliaries, who were black and swarthy, that his
Soldiers might thereby learn to contemn them.

19. Cyrus, the Persian King, that he might stir up the Minds of his
Countrymen, wearied them a whole day in cutting down a certain Wood, and the
next day invited them to a most plentiful Feast, and asked them, which was most
pleasing to them; when they answered, that the present things were most
grateful, he replied, By this alone you may attain to these things; you can
never be free nor happy unless you overcome the Medes. By this persuasion he
encouraged them to the desire of fighting.

20. L. Sylla, fighting against Archelaus, a General of Mithridates, near
Pirea, had in his Army very lazy Soldiers; but by wearying them in working he
forced them to desire from him the Signal to fight.

21. Q. Fabius Maximus, fearing lest his Soldiers should have such a
Confidence in their Ships unto which they could fly for shelter, that this
might hinder them in fighting, commanded them to be burned before he entered
into the Battle.

CHAP. XII. How to expel the Fears which Soldiers may have conceived from ill
Omens, and contrary Accidents.
Example 1.
WHen Scipio transported his Army from Italy over into Africa, he fell down at
his landing upon the Ground, and saw that his Soldiers were thereat
astonished; but he, by the greatness and constancy of his Courage, turned it to
their Encouragement, by saying, you may now go to play, Soldiers, I have
already overcome and taken Africa.

2. C. Caesar, falling down by chance as he was landing out of a Ship, cried
out, I hold thee fast, O Mother Earth! By which Interpretation, he seemed to
return to those Lands from whence he was departed.

3. T. Sempronius Gracchus, Consul, having drawn up his Army against the
Picentes, the ancient Inhabitants of the Marca de Acona, there happened at that
instant a trembling of the Earth, or an Earthquake, which terrified both
Armies; but he by a Speech confirmed and encouraged his Men, to attack his
Enemies while they were frighted with Superstition, and over-came them.

4. Q. Sertorius, when the Bucklers of his Horsemen on the outside and the
Breasts of their Horses appeared in a prodigious manner on a sudden to be
bloody, he interpreted, that it was a sign of their obtaining the Victory,
because those parts used to be sprinkled, with the Enemies Blood in fighting.

5. When Epaminondas the Theban saw his Soldiers grieved because the Wind had
taken off from his Spear an Ornament that hanged down as a Ribband, and cast it
on the Tomb of a certain Lacedemonian; I would not have you, said he, be
troubled and affrighted, my Soldiers; this signifies the Death of the
Lacedaemonians, for their Sepulchers are adorned for their Funerals.

6. The same Epaminondas, when a Flame fell from the Sky in the Night and
terrified those that were present, told them, that this Light did discover the
Gods.

7. The same General, when he was ready to fight with the Lacedaemonians, fell
down in the Chair in which he was feated, which Accident was commonly
interpreted for an ill Omen; and his Soldiers being thereat troubled, he told
them, we are now forbidden to sit any longer.

8. L. Sulpitius Gallus, when an Eclipse of the Moon was at hand, that his
Soldiers might not mistake it for a Prodigy, gave them an account of it
before, with the Reasons and Causes of the Eclipse.

9. When Agathocles the Syracusan warred against the Carthaginians, there
happened a like Eclipse of the Moon the Night before the Battle: and seeing his
Soldiers troubled as at a great wonder, he acquainted them with the Reasons of
the Eclipse, and told them, that whatever should happen did relate to the
nature of things, and did not concern their Purpose.

10. When there fell a Thunderbolt into the Camp of Pericles, which terrified
the Soldiers, he gathered them together, and before them all he beat two
Stones one against another, and struck Fire, and by that means quieted their
Minds, telling them, that in the like manner, by the violent motion of the
Clouds the Thunder is produced.

11. It happened to Timotheus the Athenian, when he was to fight against the
Inhabitants of Corcyra, that the Master of his Vessel had commanded the Signal
to be given to stop the Fleet ready to set fall, because one of the Men at the
Oar began to sneeze; Do thou wonder, said Timotheus, that amongst so many
thousand men there is one man that shivers or sneezes for cold.

12. When Chabrias the Athenian was ready to fight at Sea with his Fleet, there
fell a Thunderbolt at the head of his Ship, which affrighted his Soldiers, who
looked upon it as a prodigious thing. Now, said he, we ought chiefly to begin
to fight when the greatest of the Gods, Jupiter, has given us a sign to our
Fleet, that he will be present, and assist us.

THE SECOND BOOK Of the Stratagems of WAR OF Sextus Julius Frontinus a ROMAN
Consul.
A Short Introduction.
IN the first Book we have already placed in order the Examples fit, in my
Opinion, for a Captain to understand, in relation to those things that are to
be performed before a Battle; we shall now give an account of what is wont to
be done in a Battle; and afterward those things that are acted in the
conclusion of a Fight or War. Now these are the Particulars which belong to a
Fight or Battle.

CHap. 1. Of the time to be chosen for a Battle. Chap. 2. Of the place to be
chosen for a Battle. Chap. 3. Of the marshalling and ordering an Army. Chap. 4.
How to disorder an Enemies Army. Chap. 5. Of Ambushes. Chap. 6. Of suffering an
Enemy to depart for fear that out of despair he should renew the Fight. Chap.
7. How to dissemble ill Successes. Chap. 8. Of restoring a Battle by Constancy
and Courage. Chap. 9. Of those things that are practiced after a Fight if all
things succeed, and of the finishing a War. Chap. 10. Of remedying ill
Successes if things happen contrary. Chap. 11. How to preserve such as are
wavering in their Fidelity and Allegiance. Chap. 12. The things that are to be
done about a Camp, if we have not Confidence enough in our present Forces.
Chap. 13. Of the manner how to make an Escape.
CHAP. I. Of the time to be chosen for a Battle.
Example 1.
P. Scipio, when he was in Spain, understood that Hasdrubal, the Carthaginian
General, had commanded his Army out to fight without their Breakfast; he
therefore kept in his Men till the seventh hour of the day, and ordered them in
the mean while to rest and refresh themselves with food: and when the Enemy,
tired with Hunger, Thirst, and waiting, were marching again into their Camp, he
led out suddenly his Army, gave them Battle, and routed them.

2. When Metellus Pius, General in Spain against Herculeius, saw that he
brought forth his Men by break of day, before his Camp, in the hottest Season
of the Year, he kept in his Forces within his Camp, till the sixth hour of the
day: and when they were tired with the fervency of the Sun, he easily overcame
with his fresh men such as were thus wearied out.

3. The same Metellus, having joined his Forces with those commanded by
Pompeius against Sertorius in Spain, often drew up his Army in order of Battle,
the Enemy in the mean while not judging himself able to encounter with both
Generals. At last, when he saw that the Soldiers of Sertorius demanded very
furiously to fight, lifting up their Shoulders, and stretching out their
Lances, he advised to give way for that time to their unusual Fervency, and to
retreat into his Camp with his men, and persuaded Pompey to do the like.

4. Posthumous, the Consul in Sicilia, encamped about three Miles from the
Carthaginian Army. Their Generals drew up every day their Troops in order
before the Fortifications of the Romans; but he entertained them always with
small Parties and light Skirmishes before his Works, until the Enemy began to
despise and grow insolent by this Custom. Then, having provided all things
needful in the night, according to his former Custom, he resisted the Onsets of
his Enemies with a few of his Men, and kept them in Play longer than ordinary.
When they were sufficiently tired out after the sixth hour of the day, and they
were ready to sound a Retreat being very hungry, with his fresh Men he soon
routed them that were overcome before with the forementioned Evils.

5. Iphicrates the Athenian, understanding at what time the Enemies were
diligently taking their Food, commanded his Men to dispatch their eating
sooner, that he might lead them out to Battle. And having assaulted the Enemy,
he so entangled them, that they could neither fight nor escape. At last,
toward the Evening, he retreated with his Army, but kept them in Arms. The
Enemies being weary with standing upon their Guard, and Hunger, immediately
hasted to refresh themselves with Rest and Food. Then did Iphicrates lead out
his Army, and assault the disordered Enemy in their Camp.

6. The same Person, being General against the Lacedaemonians, pitched his Camp
near to the Enemies; and when both Parties were accustomed to march out at set
times to bring in Wood and Forage, on a certain day he sent out a Party of
Servants and Scullions to perform this Office and kept in his Soldiers; and
when the Enemies were scattered to provide the same things, he took their Camp;
and when they ran back in haste at the noise of the Tumult, with their Burdens,
he easily cut them in pieces or took them Prisoners.

7. Veriginius, the Consul amongst the Volsci, when he spied the Enemy running
to them from far in disorder, commanded his men to rest with their Javelins
fixed in the Ground: then when they were out of Breath, he charged them with
the fresh Companies of his Army, and routed them.

8. Q. Fabius Maximus, knowing that the Gauls and the Samnites were used to
prevail in the first Onset, and that the Courage of his Men was not to be
wearied out, but increased the more by the delays of fighting, commanded them
to be content in the first Encounter, to defend themselves, that by degrees
they might weary the Enemy, which accordingly succeeded: he then came on to
assist them with the reserve, and in the first Battalion, with all his Forces,
he routed the oppressed Enemy.

9. King Philip, in the Battle of Cheronca, knowing that his Soldiers were
hardened by their long use of Arms, purposely drew in length the Fight that he
had with the Athenians, which was fierce indeed, but without experience, and
sharp, because of their furious Assault; but when the Athenians began to faint,
he advanced more speedily with his Colors, and cut them in pieces.

10. The Lacedaemonians, understanding for certain that the Messenians were so
enraged that they were come to fight against them with their Wives and
Children, delayed the Fight till another time.

11. C. Caesar, in the Civil War, when the Army of Afranius and Petreius was
enclosed in by him, and wanted Water, and therefore provoked to fight, when
they had destroyed all their Carriages to enter into the Battle, he kept in his
men, judging it no fit time to fight when he had provoked his Enemies to Anger
and Despair.

12. Cn. Pompeius, desiring to force Mithridates, who was flying, to fight him,
chose to encounter him in the Night, and to stop him in his Retreat: and thus,
being well prepared, he drove him suddenly to the Necessity of a Battle, and so
drew up his Army, that Mithridates his men had the light of the Moon in their
Faces, which showed to the Romans more plainly their Enemies in the night.

13. It is certain, that Jugurtha, not unmindful of the Romans Skill and
Courage in Arms, was always wont to begin a Fight toward the evening; that if
his Men were beaten, they might have the advantage of the night to hide
themselves.

14. Lucullus, General against Mithridates and Tigranes, in Armenia the
greater, near Tigranocerta, finding that he had in his Army only fifteen
thousand fighting men, and that his Enemies were an innumerable multitude, but
unexperienced and unfit for Fight, made use of their Weakness, encountered them
when they were out of order, and suddenly routed them, in such a manner, that
the two Kings were forced to cast away their Royal Ornaments, and to fly.

15. Cl. Tiberius Nero, fighting against the Pannoni, when those barbarous
People marched out furiously to the Battle by break of day, kept in his Men,
and staid till the Enemy was well beaten with Storms and Rain, which happened
that day to be frequent. At last, when he saw that they fainted both in Courage
and Strength by standing in the Rain, he gave the Signal, charged, and routed
them.

16. When C. Caesar was General amongst the Gauls, he understood that
Ariovistus, the King of the Germans, had resolved and appointed this as a Law
to his Soldiers, not to fight when the Moon was in its Decrecency. He
therefore then chiefly, having appointed the Battle when the Enemy was hindered
by Superstition, overcame them.

17. D. Augustus Vespasianus assaulted the Jews on their Sabbath Day, when it
was unlawful for them to act any thing of Moment, and overcame them.

18. Lysander, the Lacedaemonian General against the Athenians, at the Town of
Aegospotamos, resolved at certain times to break in upon the Athenian Navy, and
to retreat back again with his Ships; which having performed often, when the
Athenians after his Departure were scattered to gather their Forces together,
he, according to his former Custom, stretched out his Navy in length, and again
commanded them together. And when the greater part of the Enemies, according to
custom, were departed, he assaulted the rest, destroyed them, and took the
whole Fleet.

CHAP. II. Of the Place to be chosen for a Fight.
Example 1.
WHen M. Curious saw that he could by no means resist the Phalanx, or the Body
of ten thousand Pikes of King Pyrrhus, when they were joined together in an
open Field, ordered the matter so, that he was to fight in a straight and
narrow place, where being close together, they might be an hinderance to one
another.

2. Cn. Pompeius, in Cappadocia, chose a place for his Camp in the higher
Ground, that the proclivity of the Hill might assist the charging of his
Soldiers; so that by their running down he easily overcame Mithridates and his
Army.

3. When C. Caesar was to fight against Pharnaces the Son of Mithridates, he
drew up his Men in Battle on a Hill, which much facilitated the gaining of the
Victory; for the Roman Soldiers, casting their Darts from the higher Ground
upon the Enemy, quickly caused them to turn their Backs.

4. When Lucullus was to encounter with Mithridates and Tigranes in the greater
Armenia near Tigranacerta, he got possession in haste of a plain Ground which
was on the top of a Hill, with part of his Troops, and then assaulted the Enemy
which was under, charged their Horse in the Flanks, and having driven part of
them, and pursued them when they ran in and disordered their Foot, he obtained
a most famous Victory.

5. Ventidius, General against the Parthian Army, would not lead out his
Soldiers to the Fight till the Enemy was within fifty Paces, and then, by
running suddenly upon them, he closed in with them so near, that he frustrated
their Arrows which they made use of at a distance: by this proceeding he showed
such an appearance of Confidence and Courage, that he quickly overcame those
barbarous People.

6. When Hannibal was to fight against Marcellus at Numistro, he placed his
Army amongst the Pits and broken ways on one hand, and made use of the nature
of the place as a Wall and a Defense. Thus he got the Victory, and overcame a
most famous Captain.

7. When the same Hannibal, at the Battle of Cannae, understood that the River
Volturnus, beyond the nature of other Rivers, yielded strong Winds in the
Morning, which raised up great Clouds of Sand and Dust, he drew up his Army in
such a manner, that all the violence of the Wind beat upon the Backs of his
Men, and into the Faces and Eves of the Romans: by these Inconveniences, which
wonderfully incommoded the Roman Army, he got that remarkable Victory.

8. Marius, having appointed a day to fight against the Cimbri and Teutones,
placed before his Camp his Soldiers, strengthened with Food, that by the
little distance that was between them and their Enemies their Army might be
first overcome by their labor in gaining it: and besides their weariness in
running this space, he gave them another Trouble; he drew up his Men so, that
the Army of those barbarous People had the Sun, the Wind, and the Dust in their
Faces.

9. Cleomenes, the Lacedaemonian General against Hippias the Athenian, who was
the stronger in Horse, caused Trees to be laid along the Plane where they were
to fight, and rendered it unpassable to the Horse.

10. The Iberi were received by a vast multitude of the Enemies, and fearing
that they should be surrounded, marched to the sides of a River which in that
Country had high Banks. Thus being defended behind by the River, and excelling
the Enemy in Valor, they assaulted the first Ranks, and destroyed the whole
Army of their Enemies.

11. Xanthippus the Lacedaemonian changed the Fortune of the Carthaginian War
only by the change of a place; for when the Carthaginians were almost reduced
to despair, they hired him to be their General. When he took notice that the
Africans, who excelled and exceeded the Romans in Horse and Elephants, drew up
on the Hills, and that the Romans, whose Strength consisted in their Foot, held
the Valleys, he led the Carthaginians down to them, with his Elephants he
disordered their Ranks, and with the Numidian Horse he pursued the dispersed
Soldiers, and routed their Army, winning the same day a Victory both by Sea
and Land.

12. When Epaminondas, the Theban General, was leading his Army against the
Lacedaemonians, he caused a Party of Horse to ride up and down before, that
they might raise a great Dust before the Enemies eyes: when they expected the
Horse to fall upon them, he led about his Foot Soldiers from that side where
the Horse were riding against the Enemy, and fell upon them suddenly in the
Rear, and overcame them.

13. Three hundred Lacedaemonians held and defended the Streights called
Thermopylae against an innumerable multitude of Persians, because those
Streights would not suffer a greater number to fight at once near at hand: by
this means, they being equal in number to those barbarous People, but excelling
them in Valor and Courage, cut in pieces a great many of them: neither could
they have been overcome if it had not been for a Traitor named Epialtes of
Trachinia, who led the Persians round about upon their Backs, and overpowered
them.

14. Themistocles, the Athenian General, when he saw that it would be very much
for the Advantage of Greece to fight with Xerxes his numerous Navy in the
Streights of Salamini, and could not persuade his Citizens, by craft he brought
to pass that the Grecians were forced to comply with this Advantage; for,
pretending himself a Traitor, he sent to Xerxes to signify to him, that his
Countrymen were ready to fly away, and that it would be far more difficult for
him to assault every City by a Siege. By this means he brought to pass, that
the Persian Navy was first disquieted while they were watching all night:
afterward in the Morning he with his fresh men encountered with the said
Persians, tired with want of Rest, in a straight place as he desired, in which
Xerxes could not make use of his numbers, in which he did exceed.

CHAP. III. Of ordering and drawing up an Army in Battle, etc.
Example 1.
CN. Scipio, General in Spain against Hanno at the Town of Indibile, took
notice that the Carthaginian Army was so ordered, that the Spaniards were to
fight in the right Wing, who were indeed the stoutest Soldiers, but mercenary,
and warred not for themselves but for others; and that in the left Wing were
the Africans, a weaker sort of Men, but more resolved: he therefore changed the
left Wing of his Army for his right, which he had composed of the strongest and
ablest Men, and encountered with the Enemies Army a-thwart. At last he routed
the Africans, and easily forced the Spaniards, who in the Retreat stood still,
as Lookers on, to surrender themselves.

2. Philip King of Macedo, fighting against the Illyrians, saw that the Front
of the Enemies Army was very close together, and composed of the choicest men
taken out of the whole Army, which caused the sides to be but weak: he
therefore placed his best and stoutest Men in his right Wing, and with them
assaulted the left of the Enemies Army, routed and disordered them, and got the
Victory.

3. When Permenes, the Theban Captain, took notice of the Persian Army, that
their strongest Troops were in their right Wing; he drew up his Men in the same
manner, he appointed all his Horse, and the ablest of all his Foot to be in the
right Wing, and opposed the weakest of his against the strongest of the
Persians, and commanded them that at the first Charge they should save
themselves by Flight, and retreat into the Woods and rocky Places. By this
means he disappointed the strength of the Enemies Army, and with the best part
of his Troops, in the right Wing, he encompassed about the Persians, and
overthrew them.

4. When P. Cornelius Scipio, who was afterward firnamed Africanus, made War
against Asdrubal, the Carthaginian General in Spain, he led out his Army for
several days so ordered in Battle, that the Body or Battalion in the middle was
composed of his strongest Men; but when the Enemy also came forth constantly
disposed in the same manner, Scipio, that very day that he had appointed to
fight, changed the Order of his Battle, and placed his stoutest Soldiers,
namely, his Roman Legions, in the Wings, and his Men who were slenderly armed
in the middle, but something behind the rest. By this means, he assaulted with
his two Wings, that were strongest, and appearing like a half Moon, the weakest
part of the Enemies Army, and easily routed them.

5. Metellus, in that Battle wherein he overcame Herculeius in Spain, when he
understood that his Enemies Troops that were esteemed the stoutest were placed
in the middle, caused his Battalion that was opposite to draw back, that they
might not come to fight with the Enemy until their Wings were routed, and
their main Body enclosed in on both sides.

6. Artaxerxes, marching against the Grecians, who were entered into Persia,
because he exceeded them in number of Men, he stretched out his Army farther
than the Enemies, and placed his Horse in the Van, and such as were lightly
armed in the Wings; and thus he marched softly on purpose with his middle
Battalion, that he might encompass them: which when he had done, he cut them
all in pieces.

7. Hannibal observed a contrary order in the Battle of Cannae; for he caused
the middle Battalion to advance before, and kept back the Wings: by this means
he overpowered their Men at the first Charge. For this same General caused his
Soldiers to fight close together, and the Wings to wind about in the manner of
a Half Moon, and to march on at his Command; so that when the Enemy was earnest
in the pursuit, he enclosed them into the middle of his Army, fell upon them,
and cut them in pieces on all sides, for his Soldiers were well acquainted
with this manner of fighting, after a long experience. None but such Soldiers
as are well skilled and able to answer to every thing, can possibly perform and
observe this kind of Warfare.

8. Livius Salinator and Claudius Nero, when in the second Punick War Hasdrubal
was unwilling to fight, and therefore had drawn up his Army upon a stony Hill
behind a Vineyard; led their Forces up on all sides, surrounded him on every
hand, and without shelter assaulted and overcame him.

9. When Hannibal had been in many Battles overpowered by Claudius Marcellus,
at last in his Marches he so placed his Camp, that he had the Assistance and
Defense either of some Hill or Marsh Ground, or some other convenient place,
and did draw up his Army in such a manner, that when the Romans had the
Advantage he could retreat with them into his Fortifications with little or no
loss; and when they were beaten, it was in his power and choice to pursue them.

10. Xanthippus, the Lacedaemonian General in Africa against M. Attilius
Regulus, placed his Men slenderly armed in the Van, and the Strength of his
Army next to second them, commanding his Auxiliary Troops, as soon as they had
cast their Darts to give Ground to the Enemy, and when they were retreated
within their own Ranks, to run immediately to the sides, and to charge from
both Wings the Enemy that was at handy Blows with the Body of their Army, and
to surround them in.

11. Sertorius practiced the same thing in Spain when he was fighting against
Pompei.

12. Cleandridas, the Lacedaemonian General against the Lucani, drew up his Men
close together that they might appear but a small Body, and more contemptible
to the Enemy; but when the Battle was begun he caused his Men to open, and
having encompassed in the Enemy, he routed them.

13. When Gastron the Lacedemonian went to succor the Egyptians against the
Persians, and understood that his Grecian Troops were stoutest Soldiers and
most feared of the Persians, he caused them to change their Arms, and to march
in the Van; and when they encountered with the Persians with equal Advantage,
he sent a Party of Egyptians to second them: when the Persians, who were
fighting with those Grecians whom they thought to be Egyptians, perceived the
coming in of the Multitude, whom they esteemed to be also Grecians, they run
away for fear.

14. Cn. Pompcius, in Albania, because the Enemy was powerful in Horse and
numbers of Men, commanded his Soldiers to cover their Head pieces in a
straight place near a Hill, for fear they should be discovered by their shining
in the Sun; and he commanded his Horsemen to go down into the Plain and cover
the Foot, and at the first Onset of the Enemy, to give back till they were
returned to the Foot, and then to place themselves in the Wings; which being
accordingly performed, the Roman Army arose, encountered with those that were
unadvisedly got in so far, who meeting with an unexpected Resistance were cut
all in pieces.

15. M. Antonius, General against the Parthians, commanded his Men to stop when
an innumerable company of Arrows were discharged upon them, and to cover
themselves over with their Targets, upon which when the Arrows fell, did no
Injury to the Soldiers, and the Enemy was thereby exhausted.

16. When Hannibal encountered with Scipio in Africa, because he had an Army
composed of Carthaginians and Auxiliary Troops, some being come from diverse
Countries, and from Italy also; behind fourscore Elephants, which he caused to
march before his Army to disorder the Roman Ranks, he placed the Gauls, the
Ligurians, the Baleares, and the Moors, that they might not be able to fly
away, the Carthaginians being next behind, that they might in the first
encounter with the Enemy disturb or weary them; after them he placed his own
Men and the macedonians, who might receive the tired Romans afresh: and in the
Rear he put the Italians, whose Constancy and Courage he suspected, because he
had drawn many of them out of Italy against their Wills. Scipio, against this
Order, drew up the strength of the Legions in three Battalions in the Front,
dividing them into Hastati, Principes, and Triarii; that is, first, Spear-men,
next, such as were of a gentile and noble Descent, last, another sort of
Soldiers of the Roman Army, who did commonly march and fight in the Rear.
Neither were the Companies close together, but he left a space between every
one that the Elephants that were driven against them by the Enemy might pass by
without disordering the Ranks, and those Intervals he filled up with such
Soldiers as were lightly armed, and nimble in Onsets and Retreats. This he did
that his Army might not appear divided into several Bodies. He commanded these
nimble Soldiers, that at the first approach of the Elephants they should
retreat, and march to the sides of the Battalions. He placed next his Horse,
and divided them into two Wings: the right, being Roman Horsemen, he assigned
to Lelius; over the left, composed of Numidians, he appointed King Massanissa:
which prudent Order was, no doubt, the Cause of the Victory.

It will not be unpleasing to the Reader, to give here a short Account of the
drawing up of Scipio's Army, which procured him one of the most famous
Victories of Antiquity, together with the Honor of the Triumph, and to the
Romans the Dominion over their false Carthaginian Neighbors. T. Livius
describes this Battle, l. 30. c. 33. in the same manner as Frontinus. The
Strength and good Successes depended upon the good Order and Preservation of
the Ranks of their Army, which was made up of several distinct Legions. The
Legion in Scipio's time had in it 4200 Soldiers, 1200 Hastati or Spear-men,
1200 Principes, 600 Triarii, 1200 Velites, or lightly armed. The Legion was
divided into ten Cohorts or distinct Companies, in which were 120 Hastati, 120
Principes, 60 Triarii, and 120 Velites.

Scipio's Cohors belonging to every Legion is thus represented.
The Hastati 120 40 The Velites. The Principes 120 40 The Triarii 60 40

In every Cohors or Company were three Manipuli, or small Bands, each under one
Captain or Centurion. I find some difference in the Roman Authors in the
numbers of their Legions, and in their ordering of an Army. Romulus, their
first Founder, as he was but a little Prince, his Army was but small, and his
Legion less. With the increase of their Empire their Legions and Cohorts did
increase in number. The Legion, as in Caesar's time, had 6000 men in it; and so
proportionably their Cohorts were more numerous than formerly: but that which
gave them a great Advantage over all other Nations, was, their Skill in drawing
up of their Armies according to the Place and Enemy with whom they were to
fight. Scipio, in this Battle, appointed the Strength of his Legions to be in
the Front; whereas other Generals use to place their chiefest Men in the Rear,
or to keep them for the Reserve. Take here a Scheme of each Legion of Scipio's
Army, according to the Description of Frontinus and Livy.

The Legion of 4200 Soldiers divided into thirty Bands or Companies, under
their distinct Leaders or Captains, with that order and space between each
Company that was observed by Scipio when he overcame Hannibal in Africa.
1. The Battalion of Spear-men or Hastati. 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120
120 2. The Principes. 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 3. The Triarii.
60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 The Intervals or Spaces between, were filled up
and made good with Velites, or Soldiers lightly armed.

They had that excellent way, that let the ground be never so unfit for a
pitched Battle, they would bring them up in that order, that one Company was to
second another, and relieve such as were weary or overpowered, who could
easily retreat without damage, and fall in the Rear. And though the difference
of Arms now causes us to differ much from their way, yet the wisest Generals,
as Spinola, Prince Maurice, and others, have professed themselves to be
indebted to the Romans for some of their skill and cunning in ordering an Army.

17. Archelaus, fighting against Sylla, in the Front of the Battle appointed
Carts, armed with Sythes, to break and disorder the Roman Ranks; in the second
he placed his Macedonian Phalanx, or 10000 Pikemen; in the third Battalion
were, according to the Roman Method, the Auxiliary Troops, mingled with the
Fugitives come out of Italy, in whose Courage and Resolution he had a great
Confidence. In the Rear he drew up a Body of Soldiers lightly armed; and in
the Wings he placed his Horsemen, of whom he had a great number, and ordered
them to enclose in the Enemy. But Sylla, on the contrary side, caused a large
Ditch to be dig'd on each hand of his Army, and at the end of the Ditches he
raised a Bulwark to defend it, to this end, that he might not be shut in with
the vast numbers of the Foot, and chiefly of the Enemy's Horse, who were
stronger than his. Next, he divided his Foot into three Bodies, leaving Spaces
between for the Soldiers lightly armed: and for his Horse, he drew them up in
the Rear, that when time should serve he might send them out to charge the
Enemy; and commanded the first Ranks of the second Battle to fix fast in the
Ground many sharp Stakes, thick together; so that when the Carts armed with
Sythes drew near, he caused the foremost of the Romans to retreat within the
Stakes before their Cohors, commanding at that instant the whole Army to give a
shout, and the forlorn Hope to cast their Darts. By this means the Enemies
Carts were either stopped with the Stakes, or terrified with the extraordinary
Shout and sudden Assault, so that they turned back upon their own Men, and
disordered the Macedonian Array, which caused them to give ground, whereas
Sylla maintained his. Archelaus at that moment charged with his Horse; but when
the Roman Horsemen encountered with them they put them to flight, and
completed the Victory.

18. C. Caesar prevented in the same manner with Stakes fixed in the Ground the
Carts of the Gauls which were armed with Sythes.

19. Alexander, at the Battle of Arbella, fearing the numbers of his Enemies,
and knowing the Courage of his own men, drew up his Army so as to receive the
Enemy on every side, that in case he was encompassed in they might fight every
way.

20. When Aemilius Paulus marched against Perses King of Macedonia, he saw that
he had placed a double Phalanx or Body of Pikemen to charge in the middle,
surrounded with Soldiers lightly armed, and on both Wings the Macedonian
Horse. Against this Order the Roman General divided his Army into three great
Bodies, with some small Companies drawn up in the form of a Wedge; between them
he placed his Soldiers lightly armed: when he perceived that this did not
profit him, he resolved to give Ground, that by this means he might draw the
Enemy into stony and broken places, which he had chosen on purpose. But the
Macedonians mistrusting the Retreat of the Romans to be out of Design, marched
forward with their Body of Pikes in good order; then he commanded his Horse to
ride undiscovered out of sight of the Macedonian Phalanx, and on the left hand
of them, and to assault them with full speed, that he might by the Furiousness
of the Charge, and the goodness of their Army, break and turn back the Enemies
Pikes, which accordingly succeeded so well, that these Weapons were rendered
useless to the Macedonians; so that they were forced to turn their Backs and
fly.

21. When Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, assisted those of Tarentum near Asculum,
according to the Saying of Homer, which teaches to place the most Soldiers in
the middle of a Battle, he appointed the Samnites and his own Countrymen to be
in the right Wing, in the left the Brutii and Lucani, together with the
Salentini; but in the middle he drew up the Tarentini, and ordered his Horse
and Elephants to stand as a Reserve. But the Roman Consuls, in opposition to
him, placed their Horse excellently well in the Wings, the Legions in the Van
and Rear; and amongst them they mixed their Auxiliary Troops. In each Army, it
is certain, there was forty thousand men: Pyrrhus lost half his Army, and the
Romans about five thousand.

22. When Cn. Pompeius encountered with C. Caesar in the Fields of Pharsalia,
he divided his Army into three Bodies, and every Body had ten Ranks in
Latitude; the strongest Legions, according to their Valor, he placed in the
Wings, and between them, in the open spaces, he filled up with the new raised
Troops; in the right Wing he ordered only six hundred Horse because of the
River Enipeus, that overflowing its Banks had made Holes and Trenches on that
side of the Country. The rest of his Horse he drew up in the left Wing with all
his Auxiliaries, that he might encompass in on that side Caesar's Army. Against
this Array Julius Caesar appeared with three Bodies of an Army, having put his
Legions in the Front; and that he might not be enclosed in, he had on his left
side a marsh Ground: in the right Wing he placed his Horse, mingled with the
nimblest of his Footmen, who were used to fight with the Horse; behind them he
drew up some Companies of Foot to second them, and to be employed on sudden
Occasions; but the right Wing he caused to turn winding, that he might better
receive the Onset of Pompey's Horse: which Order contributed very much to the
getting the Victory; for when Pompey's Horse were broken in upon them, they
sallied out unexpectedly, turned them aside, and exposed them to the Fury of
Caesar's Foot.

23. The Emperor Caesar Germanicus, when the Catti, a People of Germany, fled
into their Forests, and assaulted the Romans only with their Horse, commanded
his Horsemen, as soon as they were come to the Baggage, to leap from their
Horses, and to fight on foot. By this means he brought to pass, that in every
place he obtained the Victory, not without Wonder.

24. C. Duillius, seeing that the heaviness of his Ships suffered the
Carthaginian Navy easily to avoid and pass by them, because of their Nimbleness
and Lightness, and that the Courage and Valor of his Men profited him nothing,
invented the iron Grapples, which as soon as it had taken hold of an Enemies
Ship, there was a Bridge cast over, and the Roman Soldiers encountered with
them in their own Vessels, and cut them in pieces.

CHAP. IV. Of disordering an Enemies Army.
Example 1.
WHen Papyrius, surnamed Cursor, the Consul's Son, saw that he encountered with
the obstinate Samnites with equal Advantage, he commanded Spurius Naucius,
privately and unknown to his own Men, to take with him a few Servants and
Mule-drivers riding on their Mules, with Branches of Trees, drawn on the
ground, in their hands, and to run down a Hill which was over against them,
with great noise; which as soon as he perceived, he cried out to his Men, That
his victorious Partner was come to his Assistance, and that now they should
prevent him, and get to themselves the Honor of the day. By this means the
Romans were filled with Confidence and Resolution, and furiously assaulted the
Enemy, and put them all to flight.

2. F. Rutilius, surnamed Maximus, being the fourth time Consul in the Country
of the Samnites, having tried all means to break through the Enemies Battle, at
last he drew off all his Pikemen from the Ranks, and sent them about with his
Lieutenant General Scipio, commanding him to take a Hill, from whence they
might break in upon the Backs of their Enemies; which being done accordingly,
the Romans took Courage, and the Samnites were frighted, and seeking to fly
they were cut in pieces.

3. When Minutius Rufus was General against the Scordisci and the Daci, being
likely to be overcharged by the numbers of their Men that exceeded his, sent
his Brother with a few Horsemen, together with all his Trumpeters, and
commanded them that as soon as the Battle was begun they should suddenly show
themselves in diverse places, with their Trumpets sounding in such places of the
Mountains as might return and increase the Echo. This Appearance of a vast
Multitude put such a Terror into the Enemies, that they turned their Backs and
fled.

4. Attilius Glabrio, Consul, marching against the Army of Antiochus, which was
coming into Achaia through the Streights of Thermopylae, had been stopped by the
Enemy with confiderable loss, because of the disadvantage of the place of
Battle, had he not sent round about M. Porcius Cato, who at that time being
made a Colonel by the People of Rome, was in the Army. He sent him with a
Party to assault the Aetolians, who held the Top of Mount Callidromus with a
Guard: so that on a sudden he appeared behind the King's Camp upon a high Hill;
which so terrified the Army of Antiochus, that they suffered the Romans to
break in upon them on all sides; they fled, and left their Camp to their
Enemies Pleasure.

5. C. Sulpitius Petreius, the Consul, warring against the Gauls, commanded his
Mule-keepers to go privately into the next Mountains, and from thence, as soon
as the Fight was begun, to show themselves to the Armies riding as so many
Horsemen. This Sight made the Enemy believe that some Assistance was come to
the Roman Army, which caused them to yield the Victory when they had almost
obtained it.

6. When Marius was to give Battle the next day to the Teutoni, a People of
Germany, near the Waters Sextiae, he sent Marcellus with a small Party of Horse
and Foot by night, to fall upon the Backs of the Enemy; and better to show the
Appearance of an Army, commanded the Servants and Cooks to go also armed with a
great part of the Beasts for Carriage, and Carts covered over with course
Coverleds, the better to show the likeness of Horsemen. He commanded them, that
as soon as they saw the Battle begun, they should come down upon the Backs of
the Enemy. This Appearance struck so great a Terror into the Enemy, that their
most valiant men immediately fled.

7. M. Licinius Crassus, in the War against the Fugitives, when he was to lead
out his Army near Calamarcum against Castus and Canimocus, Captains of the
Gauls, sent twelve Bands or Cohorts commanded by C. Promptinus and C. Martius
Rufus, his Lieutenants, round about a Hill; so that when the Battle was begun,
this Party came behind the Enemy with a great Noise, and routed them in such a
manner, that instead of fighting they all fled.

8. When Marcellus was afraid that the small number of his Men would be
discovered by their hollowing, commanded all the Followers of his Army to
increase the hollowing: by this means he used to fright the Enemy with the
Appearance of a great Army.

9. Valerius Levinus, in a Battle against Pyrrhus King of Epirus, having killed
with his Sword a certain common Soldier, held it up all bloody in the fight of
both Armies, telling them, that therewith he had slain Pyrrhus. Therefore the
Enemies thinking that they had lost their Leader, and troubled with this Lie,
retreated in fear into their Camp.

10. Jugurtha fighting in Numidia against C. Marius, having the Knowledge of
the Latin Tongue by his long living in the Roman Armies, advanced to the first
Ranks, and declared with a loud Voice in Latin, That he had killed C. Marius;
and by that means troubled many of the Roman Army.

11. Mynnides the Athenian, commanding in a doubtful Fight against the Thebans,
suddenly ran to his right Wing, and cried out aloud, That the left had already
got the Victory: by this policy he increased the Courage and Cheerfulness of
his Men, and so terrified the Enemy, that they fled and left him the Victory.

12. When Croesus was to fight against a strong Party of Horse, he caused a
great Company of Camels to meet them. The Horse were so troubled at the
strangeness of the Sight, that they cast down their Riders, ran upon the Ranks
of the Foot, and gave the Victory to the Enemy.

13. When Pyrrhus King of Epyrus was to fight for them of Tarentum against the
Romans, he made use of his Elephants in the same manner to disorder the Roman
Army.

14. And the Carthaginians also have often practiced the same thing in their
Fights against the Romans.

15. The Camp of the Volsci being seated near Bushes and Woods, Camillus caused
all that would burn to be carried to their Frenches, and there to be set on
Fire: by this means he drove the enemy from thence.

16. M. Crassus, in the War of the Confederates, was in the same manner
surprised with almost all his Army.

17. The Spaniards, in a Fight against Hamilcar, put before them, in the Front
of the Battle, Carts full of combustible matter and Brimstone, drawn by Oxen;
and when the Signal of the Fight was given, they set them on fire: then driving
the Oxen to the Enemies, they broke through and discomfited them.

18. The Falisci, and such as were of the Faction of Tarquinius, apparelled
many of their men in the Habit of Priests, with Torches and Snakes in their
hands, sending them in a furious manner to disturb and disorder the Roman Army.

19. The Vejentes and Fidenates, with lighted Torches, practiced the same
Policy.

20. When Atheas, King of the Scythians, was to fight against a greater number
of the Triballi than he had in his Army; he ordered the Women and Boys, and all
such as were unfit to fight, to drive upon the last Battalion of the Enemy all
the Oxen and Asses that he had, and to carry up an end Pikes in their hands: by
which Appearance, he caused a Rumor to be spread amongst the Enemies, That
Succors were come from the farthest part of Scythia to his Assistance; which
so discouraged them, that they were overthrown.

CHAP. V. Of Ambushes.
Example 1.
WHen Romulus went against the Town of Fidenae, he left a part of his Forces in
Holes and Caves, and by a pretended Flight caused the Enemy to follow
unadvisedly so far as his concealed Soldiers, who immediately rose up,
assaulted the unwary and dispersed Enemy on all hands, and cut them in pieces.

2. Q. Fabius Maximus, Consul, being sent to aid the Inhabitants of Sutrium
against the Hetrusci, obliged all the Enemies Troops to fall upon him, and
afterward in a seeming Fear retreated to a higher Ground; and when the Enemy
pursued in a disorderly manner to the foot of the Hill, he fell upon them, and
not only routed them, but took their Camp.

3. T. Sempronius Gracchus, General against the Celtiberi, a People of Spain,
pretended a Fear, and caused his Army to keep within their Fortifications, only
he sent out some of his Companies lightly armed to skirmish with the Enemy; but
upon a sudden he caused them to retreat in again; which caused the Enemy to
follow in pursuit: then did he assault them in good order, and made such a
slaughter of them, that he took their Camp.

4. Q. Metellus, Consul, General in Sicily against Hasdrubal, was more wary and
careful because of the Enemies vast numbers, and one hundred and thirty
Elephants which they had in their Army; he seemed to be therefore diffident of
his own Forces, and kept his Army within the Town of Panormus, having drawn a
Ditch of a very great breadth before his Army: but after, when he saw in
Hasdrubal's Army that in the Front the Elephants did march, he commanded the
Spear-men to assault them with their Weapons, and to retreat immediately back
again within their Fortifications. The Rulers of the Beasts being moved by this
offer of a Fight, and disappointed, drove the Elephants into the very Ditch; in
which they were no sooner stopped and entangled, but they were either killed by
the multitude of Darts cast at them, or driven back upon their own Army, which
they disordered. Then Metellus, waiting for this Opportunity, sallied out of
his Trenches with his whole Army, assaulted the Carthaginians on all sides,
routed them, and took their Elephants.

5. Tamiris Queen of Scythia, fighting with Cyrus King of Persia upon an equal
Advantage, by a pretended Fear led him into certain Streights, with which her
Soldiers were well acquainted, and then turned back on a sudden, and by the
Assistance of the place overcame him.

6. When the Egyptians were to fight a Battle in Fields in which two Marshes
met, they hid themselves in the Sedge: and when the Battle was begun they
pretended to fly; but in the Flight brought into their Ambush the Enemy, who
running furiously in unknown Ground, stuck fast in the Mire, and by that means
were circumvented.

7. Viriatus, who of a Robber turned General of the Celtiberi, a People of
Spain, seemingly fled before the Roman Cavalry, until he had led them into a
place full of Pits, and craggy, with which he was so well acquainted, that he
escaped with his Party through a firm Path: then did he fall upon the Romans
when they were fast in the mire, and in a ground which they knew not, and cut
them in pieces.

8. Fulvius, General in the Cimbrick War, having his Camp near adjoining to the
Enemies, commanded his Cavalry to ride up to their Trenches to provoke them to
fight, and then to pretend to fly and retreat back: When he had practiced this
Policy for certain days, the Cimbri followed them furiously, so that he took
notice that their Camp was not so well manned as before; therefore with part of
his Army he caused his usual Custom to be observed, with another Party of
light-harnessed Soldiers he marched to the other side of the Enemies Camp
undiscovered; and when he saw that they were gone out in Pursuit, as their
manner was, he suddenly assaulted them, broke through the Trenches that were
forsaken, and took the Camp.

9. Cn. Fulvius, when an Army of the Falisci far greater than the Romans was
entered into their Borders, caused certain Houses far from his Camp to be set
on fire by some of his Soldiers; and the Enemies thinking that they had been
done by some of their Men, in hopes of Booty marched out into several Parties,
which weakened the main Body.

10. Alexander marching out of Epirus against the Illyrians, placed a small
Party in Ambush, and caused some of his own Men, in the Habit of Illyrians, to
destroy and burn his own Country of Epirus; which when the Illyrians saw, they
began to scatter and to plunder every where; and the more confidently, because
the Spoilers served them as Scouts, who purposely decoyed them into an uneven
ground, and set upon them, and routed them.

11. Leptenes, also General of Syracusa against the Carthaginians, commanded
his own Country to be destroyed, and certain Villages and Castles to be set on
fire, that the Carthaginians might think that this was done by their own Party,
which caused them to march out to help, and to fall into an Ambush that routed
them.

12. Maharbal, being sent General against the Rebellious Africans, knew that
they were greedy of Wine; He therefore caused a Vessel of Wine to be seasoned
with Mandrake, that has a stupifying Virtue next to Poison. Afterward, when
he came to skirmish a little with the Enemy, he sounded a Retreat out of
design, and in the dead of the night, having left in his Camp some of his
Baggage and all his Wine, poisoned with that Ingredient, he pretended to fly.
When the barbarous Enemy had taken his Camp, they gave themselves over to
rejoicing, and to drink freely of the poisoned Wine; which caused them to lie
on the Ground stupefied as dead. At that Instant Maharbal returned with his
Army, took and slew them without resistance.

13. Hannibal, knowing that his own and the Romans Camp was in a place that
wanted Wood, lest behind him purposely in a desert place many Heads of Cattle
within his Camp; of which, when the Romans had taken possession, in this great
want of Wood loaded themselves with raw and unwholesome Meat. Then did Hannibal
return in the night with his Army, and finding them secure and distempered with
raw Flesh, he made a great slaughter of them.

14. When Tiberius Gracchus was General in Spain, he understood that the Enemy
was poor, and wanted Trade; he left therefore his Camp furnished with all
manner of Dainties for Food; which when the Enemy had taken, and filled
themselves without measure, he brought back his Army, and suddenly overpowered
them.

15. They who made War against the Erythraeans, took one of their Scouts
standing in an Enemies place, and killed him, giving his Clothes to one of
their own Soldiers, who made such Signs to the Erythraeans, as that they were
brought thereby into an Ambuscado.

16. Whereas the Arabians have a noted Custom amongst them, to signify the
coming of an Enemy, by day with Smoke, by night with Fire: they therefore
ordered this to be continually practiced, but when the Enemy was approaching to
forbear the Custom; who, when they saw no Fires, imagined that their Coming was
not known: they entering therefore too hastily into the Borders, were destroyed.

17. Alexander the Macedonian, when the Enemy had fortified their Camp in a
high Wood, took a Party of his Men, commanding those who were left behind to
kindle Fires as formerly, and to show the Appearance of the whole Army: in the
mean while he led that select Party by unknown ways round about to the higher
Ground, from whence he assaulted and drove away the Enemies.

18. Memnon King of Rhodes, being stronger than the Enemy in Calvary, and they
abiding on Hills for shelter, resolved to bring them down with this Policy: He
sent some of his Soldiers into their Camp, as Run-a-ways, to inform them that
Memnon's Army was already vexed with a sore Sedition, and that some part of it
was already gone: and that he might confirm them in that belief, he ordered
some little Forts in every side to be fortified in the Enemies sight, as if
they intended to refuge themselves there who were at variance: when they who
were in the Mountains heard of this, they came down upon the plain Ground, and
while they were assaulting the Castles and Forts, they were surrounded by the
Cavalry of Memnon.

19. Harridas, King of the Molossi, being at Wars with Ardies the Illyrian, who
had a more numerous Army, sent away all his weak People into the neighboring
Country of Aetolia, to disperse the same that he intended to deliver up his
Cities and Wealth into the hands of the Aetolians: in the mean while he places
all such as could bear Arms in Ambush in the Mountains and rocky Places. The
Illyrians, fearing lest the Aetolians should take possession of all that
belonged to the Molossi, hasted to the Plunder without order. Then did Harridas
come out of his Ambush, assaulted them unawares, and scattered up and down,
routed, and put them to Flight.

20. T. Labienus, while he was Caesar's Lieutenant against the Gauls, before
the Arrival of the Germans, whom he knew would come to their Assistance,
desired to fight with them, but made show of being jealous of his own Forces;
for that purpose he planted his Camp on the other side of the River, and
appointed to march away on the next day. The Gauls thought that he had fled
away; they resolved therefore to pass over the River that was between them. But
while they were busy in passing over the River, he had brought about his Army
upon them, and cut them in pieces.

21. When Hannibal understood that the Camp of Fulvius the Roman General was
negligently and ill provided, and that he was apt to attempt many things
without Discretion; by break of Day, when the thick Mists caused the Air to be
dark, he showed a few Soldiers to the Roman Sentinels, against whom Fulvius
immediately marched with his Army: in the mean while Hannibal assaulted and
took the Camp of Fulvius on the other side. By that means falling upon the back
of the Romans, he cut off eight thousand of their stoutest Soldiers, with
their General.

22. The same Hannibal, when the Roman Army was divided between the Dictator
Fabius and Minutius the Master of the Horse, and that Fabius waited for a fair
Opportunity, but Minutius desired earnestly to fight him, he placed his Camp in
a Plain that was between the two Armies, and hid a Party of Foot amongst craggy
Rocks, whilst he sent out some Troops to invite forth the Enemy, and take
possession of an higher Ground near adjoining: when Minutius led forth his Army
to cut them off, the Ambush which Hannibal had placed rose up on a sudden, and
had defeated and destroyed Minutius's Army if Fabius had not succored them in
their need.

23. The same Hannibal, when at the River Trebeia he had in fight the Camp of
the Consul Sempronius Longus, a River running between them, placed in Ambush,
in the coldest time of Winter, Mago, with a select Company, whilst he had
ordered the Numidian Cavalry to ride about the Roman Camp to work upon the
Credulity of Sempronius, commanding them at the first Assault of the Romans to
retreat back through the known Fords to his Army: when the Consul had
unadvisedly assaulted and followed them with his fasting. Army through the
River in a most bitter cold Season, which made the Roman Soldiers shake; then
did Hannibal encounter them with his Men, whom he had prepared with Fire, Oil,
and Food, when the Enemy was benumbed with Cold, and in want of Necessaries: and
Mago failed not to play his part, for he fell upon them behind in good order.

24. The same Hannibal, at the Lake Thrasymenus, finding a narrow way that led
to the Foot of a Mountain, and into open Fields, pretended to fly, and through
the Streights he escaped into the level Ground, where he encamped; but in the
night he appointed some Soldiers, and placed them about the Hill which was
over him, and in the sides of the Streights: the next Morning by break of day,
being favored by a Mist, he drew up his Army. Flaminius followed him as if he
had fled; but when he was in the Streights he foresaw not the Ambush till he
found himself encompassed in before, behind, and on all sides, and till his
Army was totally destroyed.

25. The same Hannibal, fighting against Junius the Dictator, in the middle of
the Night commanded six hundred Horsemen, divided into several Troops, in their
turns, without ceasing, to show themselves about the Roman Camp: by that means,
when the Romans were tired by watching all night, and standing upon the
Rampires in the Rain, which then happened to fall continually, and when Junius
began to sound a Retreat, then did Hannibal lead on his Soldiers well
refreshed, and assaulted the Roman Camp.

26. Epaminondas, the Theban General, when the Lacedaemonians defended at
Athmos the Peloponnesus with a Fortification in the same manner, he disturbed
the Enemy all night by a few light armed Soldiers, and afterward by break of
day he drew up his Men when the Lacedaemonians were retreating, and suddenly
with his whole Army, which he kept quiet, he broke through their Fortifications
naked of Defendants.

27. Hannibal, having drawn up his Army at the Town of Cannae, commanded six
hundred Numidian Horsemen to fly to the Romans, and for a greater assurance to
them, delivered to them their Swords and Bucklers, falling back into the last
Ranks: but when the Battle was first begun, they drew their short Swords, which
they had concealed for the purpose, and taking up the Bucklers of the slain,
they fell upon the Back of the Roman Army, and destroyed them.

28. Japyges, a People of Calabria, when P. Licinius was Proconful, delivered
up their Towns, as if they had yielded themselves to the Romans; but being
received, and placed in the hindermost Ranks, they fell upon their Backs.

29. Scipio Africanus, having against him two Camps of Enemies, one commanded
by Syphax, the other belonging to the Carthaginians, resolved to assault
Syphax's Camp in the night, and to set it on fire, for there was there much
combustible matter, that he might from his own Camp cut off the Numidians in
the Hurly-burly: and because he knew that the Carthaginians would adventure to
go out to succor their Companions, he laid an Ambush to receive them. All this
fell out according to his Expectation and Desire.

30. Mithridates, having been often overcome by the Valor of Lucullus,
assaulted him in an Ambuscado, when he had corrupted and persuaded a certain
man of great Strength, named Adathas, to fly to the Enemy. This Traitor
promised and engaged his Faith to the Romans, that he might perform his
intended Wickedness, which he stoutly endeavored, but in vain; for being
admitted by Lucullus into the number of his Horsemen, he was secretly watched,
because they did not give suddenly credit to a Runaway, neither was it fit to
discourage others from coming over to them: afterward, in many Sallies and
Encounters having done good Service, he got himself into Credit. He chose a
time when the Principes were sent away, and they were retired to the innermost
Rooms of the General's Quarters, and all was quiet in the Camp. An accident
favored Lucullus, for he found him at that time departed to his Rest, weary
with his evening Cares and Employments, having entertained Company very late:
when therefore he offered to go in, as if he would reveal some sudden and
important Matter, he was resolutely kept out by the Servants, who were mindful
of their Lords Health and Repose; which caused him to doubt that he was
suspected; he therefore took Horse, which he had ready before the Gate, and
returned, without effecting any thing, to Mithridates.

31. When Sertorius, in Spain, near the Town of Lauro, had his Camp adjoining
to the Camp of Pompey, and that there was but two Countries only there able to
furnish them with Fodder, one near, the other at a distance; he caused his
Soldiers lightly armed frequently to visit that Country that was nearest, but
forbad them so much as to enter into that which was at a distance: by this
means he made his Enemies believe, that the farthest Country was the safest;
which, when the Soldiers of Pompey went to visit, he sent Octavius Graecimus
with ten Companies armed in the Roman manner, and ten other Companies of
Spaniards lightly armed, with Tarquinius Priscus at the head of two thousand
Horse, to lie in Ambush for the Forragers. They punctually and courageously
performed their Orders; for having well understood the Country, they hid these
Forces in a neighboring Wood in the Night; so that in the Front they placed
the Spaniards lightly armed, and fittest for a sudden Surprise and Skirmish;
next to them such as carried Bucklers, and in the Rear, the Horsemen: and that
the neighing of the Horses might not discover the Design, he commanded them to
rest and keep silence until the third hour of the day. But when Pompey's
Soldiers were upon their return laden with Fodder and secure, and that such
as kept the Guards were invited by the Quietness of the Enemy to march out and
seek also for Forage, first the Spaniards sallied out, and fell furiously, as
the manner of their Nation was, upon such as were wandering up and down,
wounding and cutting them when they least expected it. And before Pompey could
resist and stop them, the Party armed with Bucklers broke out of the Wood, and
routed such as were rallying together in some order: as they were flying, the
Horsemen were sent out to pursue and slay them all that space that was between
them and the Roman Camp; and there was care taken that none should escape, for
the other two hundred and fifty Horsemen, being sent galloping before by a
nearer way, returned, and met such as were flying first, before they could come
to Pompey's Camp. As Soon as Pompey understood it, he sent out a Legion,
commanded by Laelius, to succor his Men; at whose approach, the Horsemen drew
up on the right hand, as if they had given place: afterward, they fell by this
means upon the back of the Legion, at the same time when such as pursued after
the Forragers met with it: thus was this poor Legion destroyed between two
Parties of the Enemy: and when Pompey led out his whole Army to assist and
relieve it, Sertorius also appeared with his Army on the top of the Hills,
ready for the encounter, and hindered Pompey from proceeding farther: so that
besides a twofold loss procured by the same Policy, he stopped and made him a
Spectator of the Defeat and Destruction of his Men. This was the first Fight
between Sertorius and Pompey. Ten thousand of Pompey's Army were slain, and all
their Carriages were lost, says Livius.

32. Pompey, in Spain, having appointed before such as should rise out of a
secret place to give the assault, pretended that he was afraid, and by that
means led the pursuing Enemy into difficult places: afterward, when he saw his
time, he set upon them before, and on each side, and cut them all in pieces,
and their Captain Perpenna he took Prisoner.

33. When the same Pompey was General in Armenia against Mithridates, who was
the strongest in Horse, he hid three thousand lightly armed, with five hundred
Horsemen, in the night, in Bushes which were between the two Camps. The next
Morning betimes he sent out his Horsemen as far as the Enemies Guards, so drawn
up in Battalia, that when he should begin to fight with all the Enemies
Cavalry, they should in good order give back by degrees, until such time as
they might afford time for the Ambuscado to rise behind, who were there on
purpose. All which happening according to his desire, with those Troops that
seemed to retreat he cut in pieces the middle Battalion of his Enemy which was
out of order, and with his Footmen that entered Pell-mell, he killed their
Horse; so that in that Battle he ruined the King's greatest Trust which he
reposed in his Horsemen.

34. M. Crassus, in the War against the Fugitives, near the Mountain Cathena,
fortified two Camps near that of the Enemies, but in the Night changed the
Soldiers of the one, and received them into the other, leaving still the
General's Tent in the greatest Camp, the better to deceive the enemy; he
himself drew out all his Forces and made a halt at the foot of the said
Mountain, and having divided his Cavalry, commanded L. Quintius with one part
to face Spartacus, but not to engage in a Fight with him; with the other part
of the Cavalry he encountered with the Gauls and Germans, that were of the
Faction of Castus and Gannicus, but ordered them to draw them by degrees, by a
dissembled Fight, to the place where he himself stood ready in Battle; whom,
when the barbarous People followed, the Cavalry fell into the Wings, and
suddenly the Roman Army opened, and fell on with a Shout; so that thirty five
thousand Soldiers were there destroyed with their Commanders, as Livius
writes, five Roman Eagles were recovered, six and twenty Colors, with much
Spoils, were taken, and amongst them five bundle of Rods with Axes.

35. C. Cassius, General in Syria against the Parths, put his Cavalry forth in
the Van, but hid his Infantry behind in difficult and steep places: afterward,
when the Cavalry began to retreat, and to save it self by known ways, he drew
the Parthian Army into the Ambush that was provided for them, and cut them in
pieces.

36. When the Parthians and Labienus were become proud of their Successes and
Victories, Ventidius the Roman General, by keeping in his Army together in
their Camp, drew them upon him: and when he found them in a disadvantageous
Post, he fell upon them in a Sally, and so overthrew them, that they forsook
Labienus, and departed out of the Roman Territories.

37. The same Ventidius, being General against the Parthians, commanded by
Pharnastanes, and having with him but a small number of Soldiers, perceived
that the enemies grew more bold because they exceeded them in number; therefore
he posted at one side of his Camp, in a dark Valley, eighteen Companies, and
behind the Foot he drew up his Cavalry: then he sent a very few Soldiers to
attack the enemy; who pretending to fly, drew the Parthians, who greedily
pursued after them beyond the place where the Ambush lay, which rising at that
instant, killed the Parthian General Pharnastanes, and put the Pursuers to
flight.

38. C. Caesar, when his Camp and that of Afranius stood in two Plains one
against another, and that it concerned either of them to be Masters of the
neighboring Hills, found it difficult to get them because of the steep Rocks
before him; he therefore began to retreat back, as if he would return to the
River Herda. The want of Necessaries persuaded Afranius that this was his
Purpose: but after a little while, he took a small compass about to get the
Command of the Hills; which when the Army of Afranius perceived, they were much
troubled, as if their Camp had been taken; they therefore in all haste ran
toward those Hills. Caesar foreseeing this, partly with his Foot which he sent
to meet them, and partly with his Horse which he appointed to fall upon their
Backs, he overthrew them.

39. Antonius, at a City of Italy, understanding that the Conful Pansa was
come, placed an Ambush in the Woods near the Aemilian way, assaulted his
Troops, and put them to flight, and gave him such a mortal Wound, that he died
a few days after.

40. King Juba, in Africa, in the Civil War, caused Curio the Roman General to
rejoice when he made as if he would return into his own Country. Curio being
deceived by that vain Confidence, pursued after Sabora the King's Commander so
far that he came into open Fields, where he was beset with the Numidian
Cavalry, lost his Army, and his Life also.

41. Melanthus, the Athenian Captain, when he was challenged by Xanthus the
Boeotian, the Enemies King, and came to fight him in a Duel; as soon as he drew
near cried to him, Thou do basely, Xanthus, and against our Agreement, for
thou art come followed by a Second to encounter with one single man: when he
began to wonder and look back who it was accompanied him, he run him in behind,
and killed him.

42. Iphicrates, the Athenian General, understanding at the Chersonesus of
Greece that Anaxibius the Lacedaemonian Commander led an Army by Land, took out
of his Ships a very strong Party of Soldiers, and laid them in Ambush, but all
the Ships he caused to sail away, as if they had been laden with Soldiers;
and when the Lacedaemonians were secure, and never dreamed of an Assault in
their March, he fell upon them in the Rear, and routed them.

43. When the Liburni, a People of Dalmatia, besieged certain marish and shelvy
Places by the Sea, they discovered only their Heads, and made the Enemy believe
that it was the wide Sea; by that means they took a Galley that in pursuit of
them stuck fast in the quick-sand or Bank.

44. Alcibiades, the Athenian Commander in the Heilespont against Numidarus the
Lacedaemonian General, having a numerous Army, and many Ships, landed a Party
of his Men in the night, and some of his Ships he caused to lie concealed
behind a certain Promontory or High-land, whilst he with a few only fit to
provoke the Enemies Contempt, fled before them till he had brought them into
the Snare: he then forced them to fly, and to save themselves on Land; but as
they went on Shore, he cut them off by that Party that he had landed on purpose.

45. The same Alcibiades, being ready to fight a Battle at Sea, fixed a certain
number of Masts in a High-land that advanced into the Water, commanding those
who were there to keep Guard, that as soon as the Battle was begun they should
hang out their Sails. By this means it happened that the Enemies imagining that
there was another Fleet coming to his Assistance, fled away.

46. Memnon of Rhodes, having in his Fleet two hundred Ships ready for a
Sea Fight, and desirous to draw the Enemies to a Battle, commanded that but a
few of his Vessels should have their Masts up, and that they should sail
before: When therefore the Enemies saw the number of the Masts, and by them
judged of the number of the Ships, they boldly came out to fight, but were
easily overpowered by the greater number of Vessels.

47. When Timotheus the Athenian General was to fight at Sea against the
Lacedaemonians, and that their Fleet came forward well provided for the
encounter, he sent twenty of his nimblest Ships, which by all means should sail
here and there, and weary the Enemy in the pursuit; which as soon as he
perceived was effected, and that they began to be heavy, he then set upon them,
and easily overcame such as were out of order, and wearied out.

CHAP. VI. Of giving the Enemy liberty to escape, lest he should out of despair
renew the Fight.
Example 1.
WHen the Gauls, after that Battle which was given when Camillus was General,
desired Boats and Vessels to pass over the Tiber, the Senate gave order, that
they should be furnished with Boats and Provisions for their Journey. And when
some of the same People fled through the Country Pomptinus, there was a way
allowed them which is now called Gallica.

2. L. Martius, the Roman Knight, whom the Army made General, after the two
Scipios were killed, surprised and overcame the Carthaginians; but, lest they
should fight more fiercely out of Despair, he caused his Ranks to be opened,
and gave them liberty to escape; and when they were scattered and fled, he
destroyed them behind without any damage or hazard to his Army.

3. When C. Caesar had shut in the Germans, and that they did fight more
stoutly, he gave them liberty to depart, and in the Flight he fell upon them
with more advantage.

4. Hannibal, at the Lake Thrasymenus, enclosed in a Party of Romans, who
resisted him most desperately; he therefore opened them a way to escape; and as
they were flying he cut them in pieces without any damage to his Men.

5. Antigonus, King of Macedonia, besieged a Party of Aetolians, and brought
them to so great a Famine, that they resolved to sally out, and dye valiantly.
He therefore gave them a way and opportunity to fly away; by that means having
disappointed their impetuous Resolution, he followed them in the Rear and
destroyed them.

6. Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian, fighting in a Battle against the Thebans, and
understanding that the Enemy, being shut up by the narrowness of the place,
fought out of Despair more furiously, opened the Ranks of his Army, and gave
them liberty to depart, but after he pursued them, fell in upon their Rear, and
routed them.

7. Cn. Manlius, the Consul, returning from the Fight, found that the Roman
Camp was taken by the Hetrurians; he ordered therefore all the Gates to be so
well guarded, that the Enemies when they were shut in were so furiously
exasperated, that they killed him in the heat of the Fight: which when his
Lieutenants took notice of, they caused on one side the Guards to be withdrawn,
and a Passage for the Hetrurians to escape; but they fell upon them in their
Retreat, and by the coming in of the other Consul they cut them in pieces.

8. Themistocles, when Xerxes was overthrown, hindered the Grecians from
breaking the Bridge, as they had resolved, because it was more Wisdom to expel
and shut him out of Europe, than to force him out of Despair to fight: he
therefore sent a Messenger to him to advise him in what danger he was in,
unless he made more speed to pass over into Asia.

9. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, having taken a certain City, and finding by the
shutting of the Gates that he had reduced such as were within to such Despair,
that they did fight the more desperately, he gave them liberty to depart.

10. The same Pyrrhus, amongst the other Directions given to a General in his
Book, he recommends this; That we must nor press nor pursue after an Enemy that
is in Flight too unmercifully, first, lest he should be driven, out of
necessity, to resist and stop a victorious Course; secondly, that thereby we
might oblige an Enemy at another time to yield the Day the sooner, and at an
easier rate, when he shall consider that the Conquerours will not pursue too
eagerly after the Lives of such as are forced to fly.

CHAP. VII. How to dissemble ill Successes.
Example 1.
TVllius Hostilius, King of the Romans, being engaged in a Fight against the
Vejentes, when the Albani forsook the Roman Army and withdrew to the
neighboring Hills, and that the Romans were much discouraged, he cried out to
his Soldiers, that the Albani were departed by his Command, to encompass the
Enemies about: which Policy terrified the Vejentes, encouraged the Romans, and
when the Victory was almost lost he recovered it by this cunning Lie.

2. When L. Sylla was in the middle of a Battle, and that a chief Commander of
his Army withdrew to the Enemy with a considerable Party of Horse, declared to
his Soldiers, that what was done was by his Order: in so saying the prevented
the Wonder and Trouble of his Men, and filled them with hopes of some benefit
that would follow that Contrivance and Policy.

3. The same Sylla, when his Auxiliary Troops which were sent by him were
surrounded by the Enemy, and overthrown, fearing that this Loss would terrify
his whole Army, he declared to them, that these Auxiliaries, who had a purpose
to forsake him, were by him brought in a difficult place purposely to punish
them. Thus with a pretense of Revenge he covered and concealed an apparent
Loss, and confirmed and satisfied the Courages of his other Soldiers by this
Persuasion.

4. Scipio, when the Ambassadors of Syphax came to him with this Message from
their King, That he should not, out of Confidence upon his Assistance and
Confederacy, pass over from Sicily into Africa; fearing lest his Soldiers
should be discouraged by the Denial of this foreign help, sent hastily the
Ambassadors away, and spread abroad the Rumor, That Syphax of his own Accord
had sent for him over.

5. Q. Sertorius, when he was in the middle of a Fight, killed a Soldier with
his Sword that came to him with the News that Herculeius his Lieutenant was
slain, that he might not give notice of that loss to others, and discourage his
Men that were yet fighting.

6. Alcibiades, the Athenian General, when he was beset in a Fight by the
Abydeni, and on a sudden saw a Messenger running to him with sad News, forbad
him to deliver his Message openly: afterward, being privately questioned by
Pharnabazus, the Kings Viceroy, he told him, that his Fleet was in danger to
be taken by the Enemy; which concealing from both Enemies and his Soldiers, he
ended the Battle, and immediately after had his Army to free the Fleet from
danger, and relieve his Men in distress.

7. When Hannibal was come into Italy, three thousand of the Carpetani, a
People of Spain, forsook his Army: and that the rest might not follow their bad
example, he published immediately abroad, That he had sent them away; and to
verify this Saying, he dispatched away a few home to their Houses, who were of
no great Use in his Army.

8. L. Lucullus, seeing the Macedonian Cavalry, who were come to his
Assistance, on a sudden to run away to the Enemy, commanded the Trumpets to
sound a Charge, and sent Troops to follow and second them: they thinking that
the Battle was begun, let fly their Darts at the cowardly Macedonians; who
seeing that they could not be admitted by the Enemy, and that their own Party
followed them close at the Heels, were necessitated in good order to turn and
encounter with the Enemy.

9. Dutames, the Persian General against Autophradates in Cappadocia, finding
that some of his Cavalry were ready to depart to the Enemy, commanded all the
rest to accompany him, and follow the Run-aways; whom, when he had overtaken,
he praised them highly, because they had gone before him to meet the Enemy so
cheerfully; he exhorted them therefore to assault the Enemy with Courage. Shame
made the Run-aways to repent, and to alter their purpose, which they conceived
was not discovered.

10. T. Quintius, surnamed Capitolinus, the Consul, when the Romans were
retreating, told them, That in the other Wing the Enemies were fled; by this
Lie he confirmed the Courage of his Soldiers, and got the Victory.

11. Cn. Manlius, fighting against the Hetrusci, when his Partner Fabius was
wounded in the left Wing, which he commanded, and that some of the Army
retreated because they thought that the Conful had been killed, met them with a
Party of Horse, and called out to them, that his Partner was yet alive, and
that in the other Wing he had beaten the Enemy. By this Constancy he encouraged
his Soldiers, and obtained the Victory.

12. When Marius marched against the Cimbri and Teutoni, and that the Officers
of his Army, who were appointed to choose a place for his Camp, had pitched upon
such a Place, through Indiscretion, that all their Water was in the Enemies
Power, and that his Army wanted and asked for Water; he showed to them the
Enemies Army with his finger, and told them, that they must fetch it from the
Enemies Camp: by which Intimation, he persuaded his Men to drive them
immediately from thence.

13. T. Labienus, after the Battle of Pharsalia, when Pompey's Party was
overcome, and he fled to Dyrrhachium, related the Truth with many Lies. He
confessed the Conclusion of the Battle, but affirmed the loss to be equal on
both sides, by a desperate Wound that Caesar had received. By this Invention he
confirmed such as remained of Pompey's side, and made them more bold.

14. When M. Cato unadvisedly landed at Ambracia in a little Boat, at the same
time that the Ships of his Confederates were assaulted by the Aetolians, though
he had no Forces with him, yet he began to make sign by his Voice and Gesture,
by which he did seem to call and command some of his Ships to follow him. By
this Invention he struck a terror into the Enemies, as if they were near at
hand, and in sight. The Aetolians therefore forsook the Asfault, that they
might not be overpowered by the coming in of the Roman Fleet.

CHAP. X. Of restoring and renewing a Fight by Constancy and Courage.
Example 1.
WHen Servius Tullius was a Youth, in that Battle in which King Tarquinius
encountered with the Sabins, perceiving the Ensign-bearers behaved themselves
slothfully and cowardly, he snatched the Colors and cast it amongst the
Enemies; for the Recovery of which they fought so fiercely, that with their
Colors they got the Victory.

2. Furius Agrippa, the Consul, when his Wing began to fall back, took the
Colors from an Ensign and cast it amongst his Enemies, the Hernici and the
Aequi: by this means he restored the Fight again, for the Romans fell on very
cheerfully for the Recovery of their Colors.

3. T. Quintius, surnamed Capitolinus, the Consul, cast a Colors amongst the
Enemies, the Falisci, commanding his Soldiers to recover it again.

4. M. Furius Camillus, a Tribune of the Soldiers, elected in the place of
Consuls, when his Army stood still in the face of the Enemy, caught a Colors
from an Ensign, and marched against the Enemies, the Volsci and the Latins, and
made all the rest to follow for shame.

5. Salvius Pelignus practiced the same thing in the Persian War.

6. Q. Furius, when his Army fled, met them, and protested, that he would
receive none of them into his Camp unless they returned with Victory; he led
them therefore back, and overthrew the Enemies.

7. Scipio, at the City Numantia in Spain, when he saw his Army retreating,
declared to them, That he would treat them as Enemies whosoever did return back
into the Camp.

8. Servilius Priscus, the Dictator, when he commanded the Colors to advance
against the Enemies, the Falisci, and that an Ensign delayed to obey him, he
commanded him to be killed. This example so affrighted his Soldiers, that they
assaulted the Enemy courageously.

9. Cossus Cornelius, Master of the Horse against the Fidenates, showed the
same example.

10. Tarquinius, in the Battle against the Sabins, when the Horsemen were loath
to fall on, took from them their Bridles, and commanded them to prick on their
Horses, and to break through the enemies.

11. M. Attilius the Consul, in the Samnitick War, when part of his Army fled
back to his Camp, marched against them with another Party, telling them, that
they must either fight with him and their good Citizens, unless they would
return against the enemy. By this means he led them all back into the Fight.

12. L. Sylla, when the Legions began to yield to the Army of Mithridates, led
by Archelaus, he drew his Sword, and ran into the first Battalion, and calling
to his Soldiers, told them, If any inquired where they had left their General,
they might answer, fighting in Boeotia: this made them so much ashamed, that
they all followed him.

13. When Julius Caesar saw his Men give back at Munida, he caused his Horse to
be led out of his sight, and cast himself on foot into the first Battalion: The
Soldiers being ashamed to forsake their General, returned to the Fight again.

14. King Philip was afraid that his Men would never be able to resist the Fury
of the Scythians; he placed therefore behind them his most trusty Horsemen,
commanding them that they should not suffer any of their Fellow Soldiers to
return out of the Battle, and that if any were resolved to fly they should kill
them: by this threatening he made the most timorous to choose rather to be killed
by the enemy than by their own men, and got the Victory.

CHAP. IX. Of the prosecuting the remaining part of a War if all things succeed.
Example 1.
WHen C. Marius had overcome in a Battle the Teutoni, a People of Germany, he
encompassed about the rest the next Night that followed the Fight, and caused a
few of his Army to fright them with continual Noise, that they might be kept
waking all night: by that means, the next Morning, they being tired with
watching, were more easily brought to yield to him.

2. When Claudius Nero had overpowered the Carthaginian Army, which Hasdrubal
led out of Spain into Italy, he cast the Head of Hasdrubal into Hannibal's
Camp: by which Action he sorely afflicted and discouraged him with the
assurance of the loss of his Brother Asdrubal, who was slain, and with the
despair of Assistance from the approaching Army.

3. L. Sylla showed openly, upon Pikes, to them of the City Praeneste, who were
there besieged, the Heads of the Captains that were slain in Fight, that he
might overcome the stiffness of the obstinate Inhabitants.

4. In the like manner Arminius, the Commander of the Germans, caused the Heads
of them whom he had killed in Fight, to be held up and showed near the enemies
Camp.

5. Domitius Corbulo, besieging Tigranocerta, perceived that the Armenians were
likely to bear the Siege a while; he therefore took a certain Man of Megistae
in Lycia, punished him with Death, and shot his Head with a Roman Engine into
the Walls of the Town: the Head by chance fell in the midst of their
Common Council, which was then met together; at the sight of which they were so
affrighted, that they immediately surrendered themselves.

6. Hermocrates of Syracuse, having overcome in Battle the Athenians, was
jealous that the great number of Prisoners that he had taken would not be well
guarded, because the Success of the Fight was like to oblige the Conquerours to
give themselves over to feasting and security; he therefore spread abroad the
Rumor, That the next Night the Enemies Cavalry would come upon them; which
Report made the Guards to be kept with more diligence.

7. The same General, having had good success in War, and for that reason,
because his Soldiers began to be too secure, and to give themselves over to
Sleeping and Wine; he appointed a Runaway to come into his Camp, and to
declare, That he was escaped thither by Flight to admonish them that there were
Ambushes laid for them in every place, by the Inhabitants of Syracuse: the fear
of them brought his Army to a condition of fighting; so that when they came to
assault him in his Camp, they were driven into the Ditehes, and were
overpowered.

CHAP. X. Of remedying ill Successes when things happen contrary.
Example 1.
TDidius, having had a very fierce Battle in Spain, which ended by the coming
in of the Night, and was remarkable for the great number of Soldiers slain on
both sides, caused many of the dead Bodies of his Men to be buried in the dark
Night; so that the next day, when the Spaniards, who went to perform the same
Office to their dead Soldiers, because they found a greater number of their
People slain than of the Romans, concluding from thence that they were
overcome, and yielded to the Articles of the Roman General.

2. T. Martius, a Roman Knight, who commanded the rest of the Army of the two
Scipio's who were slain, having near him, at a few Miles distance, two Camps of
the Carthaginians, encouraged the Soldiers to assault, in the dead of the
Night, the next Camp. He found them out of order, and secure, because of their
former Victories; so that falling upon them in that condition, he left none
alive to tell their woeful Destruction and Slaughter: and the same night, having
given a little time to his Soldiers to rest, he prevented the report of the
Execution, and assaulted the other Camp; so that he had twice the same Success,
and the Carthaginians were destroyed every where. By that means he restored to
the People of Rome the Countries of Spain which they had lost.

CHAP. XI. Of preserving such as are wavering in their Obedience and Fidelity.
Example 1.
WHen P. Valerius was afraid of the Perfidiousness of the Inhabitants of
Epidaurus, because he had but small Forces with him, provided, at a distance
from the Town, some Gymnick Plays: and when almost all the City went out to see
them, he shut the Gates, and would not suffer the Citizens to return in again
till they had delivered some of their principal Men as Hostages.

2. Cn. Pompeius, having a Jealousy of the Catinienses, and fearing that they
would not admit his Guards within their Walls, entreated them in the mean while
to receive his sick men, and suffer them to refresh themselves amongst them;
which being granted, he sent the stoutest of his Soldiers in the Habit and
Garb of sick men, and with them took the City, and kept it for his Use.

3. When Alexander had overcome and conquered Thrasia, and he was to pass over
into Asia, because he feared that after his Departure they would take up Arms
against him, he took with him, with an honorable Pretense, their Kings, their
Governors, and all such as did seem to be concerned for the Recovery of the
Liberty that they had lost; he left behind the common People, and appointed
them Governors out of the meanest of them. By this means he obliged their
Princes by many good Deeds, so that they would not rebel against him; and for
the common People, they were not able to do him mischief when they were
deprived of the Assistance of their Princes.

4. When Antipater saw the first Army of them of Nestos, which upon the News of
the Death of Alexander were gathered together to disturb his Government, he
pretended that he knew not the intent of their coming, but gave them Thanks,
because he supposed that they designed to assist Alexander against the
Lacedaemonians; and assured them that he would give the King an Account by
Letter of their Readiness to serve him. But because he had then no need of
their help, he advised them to depart home to their Houses. By this subtle
Speech he delivered himself from the danger of a Rebellion that threatened him.

5. Scipio Africanus being in Spain, had a Prisoner amongst the rest, a noble
Lady, and a Virgin, of a rare Beauty, brought to him, which ravished the Eyes
of all that beheld her: he caused her to be very well guarded, and to be
delivered to her Spouse named Luceius; and besides, he gave the Gold that her
Parents brought to him for her Ransom, to her Beloved, as an Addition to her
Dowry. By which several Expressions of his Bounty, the whole Nation was
overcome, and yielded to the Roman Empire.

6. It is also reported of Alexander the Great, that he very carefully
preserved a Captive, Virgin of a rare Beauty, which had been espoused to a
neighboring Prince, and would not so much as see her, but sent her to her
Husband: and by this good Deed he got the Favor and the Hearts of the whole
Nation.

7. When the Emperor Caesar Augustus, surnamed Germanicus, in that War in
which he overcame the Enemies, and purchased to himself the Name of Germanicus,
was in the Borders of them of Collen, and built certain Castles, commanded that
the Value and Price of the Fruits of those Places which he enclosed within his
Fortifications, should be paid to the right Owners: by the Report of his Equity
and just dealing he obliged and confirmed all that Country in their Obedience.

CHAP. XII. What is to be done in a Camp if we have not sufficient Confidence
in the present Forces.
Example 1.
T. Quintius the Consul, when the Volsci were ready to assault his Camp, kept
only a Company upon the Guard, and sent the rest of the Army to sleep and take
their rest; only the Trumpeters he ordered to ride about the Fortifications,
and to sound their Trumpets: by which Appearance and Dissimulation, he detained
and kept off the Enemy all night, and the next Morning, when they were weary
with watching, he suddenly sallied out and easily overcame them.

2. Q. Sertorius, in Spain, being too weak for the Enemies Cavalry, which was
wont to ride up to the sides of his Camp, caused in the night Holes to be dig'd
in the Ground, and drew up his Army before them: At last, when the Troops of
Horse returned according to their former Custom, he told his Men that he had
found that the Enemies had prepared an Ambush for them; and therefore they
should not depart from their Colors, nor forsake their Ranks: which being
observed according to the Discipline of War, he fell by chance into the true
Ambushes; which because he had foretold his Soldiers, they were the more
courageous.

3. Chares, the Athenian General, expected some Recruits, but was afraid that
the Enemy, in contempt of his slender Forces, would in the mean while assault
his Camp: he therefore sent a great many of the Soldiers that he had with him
on the other side of his Camp away in the Night, and commanded them that they
should return to him again in the most visible manner to his Enemies, and show
the Appearance of Recruits and fresh Succors. By this appearance of Recruits
he kept off the Enemy until he was really relieved according to his
expectation.

4. Iphicrates the Athenian, having his Camp in plain Fields, and understanding
that the Thracians intended to invade and plunder his Camp, and that they would
come down the Hills by one way that led from the top to the bottom; he
privately led his Army, and placed them on both sides of the way through which
the Thracians were to pass: and when the Enemy came running down to the Camp
where many Fires were purposely made by a few to show the appearance of the
Army continuing there, he assaulted them on both sides, and overthrew them.

CHAP. XIII. Of Escaping.
Example 1.
WHen the Gauls were to fight with Attalus, they delivered to certain Guards
all their Gold and Silver, and ordered them, that if they were put to Flight
they should scatter it in the way, that whilst the Enemy was busy in gathering
it up they might more easily escape them.

2. Triphon King of Syria being overcome in Battle, scattered in all the way
where he fled, his Money: by that means he detained the Horsemen of Antiochus
that pursued him, and escaped from them.

3. Q. Sertorius, being overcome by Q. Metellus Pius, and forced to a Retreat;
and not judging his Flight to be safe, commanded his Soldiers to scatter and
depart, and acquainted them with the place where he advised and ordered them to
meet all again together.

4. Viriatus, General of the Lusitanior Portugals, escaped from the Roman Army,
and out of a difficult place, in the same manner as Sertorius by scattering his
Army, and gathering it again together.

5. Horatius Cocles, when he was pursued by the Army of Porsenna, ordered his
Soldiers to return into the City over the Bridge, and to break it down, that
the Enemy might not follow: which while it was in doing, he exposed his Life,
as the Defender of his City, to keep off such as pursued after him. And when he
had heard the noise of the Bridge falling down, he cast himself into the River,
and passed over it laden, not with Arms, but with Wounds.

6. When Afranius in Spain, at the City of Ilerda, fled from Caesar who pursued
him at the Heels, he pitched his Camp; and when Caesar, had done the like, and
had sent out a Party of his Men for Forage, he suddenly gave a Command to his
Army to march.

7. When Antonius retreated with his Army, which was followed by the Parthians,
because that very Morning when he began to move forward he was sorely vexed
with their Arrows, and pursued by them, he delayed the time of his Departure
till the fifth Hour, and settled his People in their Fidelity, Resolution, and
Courage, which caused the Parthians to withdraw themselves; so that afterward
he could perform his Journey, and march the rest of the day without any Let or
Hinderance.

8. When Philippus was vanquished in Epirus, that the Romans might not press
upon him in his Flight, he desired and obtained a Truce to bury the slain;
which made the Roman Guards to be the more negligent, and give him an
opportunity to escape.

9. When Publ. Claudius was overcome in a Sea Fight by the Carthaginians,
because he could not avoid to pass through or hard by the Enemies Army, he
caused the remaining part of his Navy, being twenty Ships, to be trimmed and
adorned as if they had been victorious. At this sight the Carthaginians fancied
that the Romans had gotten the Advantage of them; therefore for fear they
suffered them to escape.

10. When the Carthaginians were overcome by Sea, they endeavored to put the
Roman Navy by, and to Sail from them, they made therefore a show as if they had
run their Ships upon banks of Sand; by this means the Conquerours fearing the
same mishap, withdrew, and gave them liberty to fly away.

11. Comminius of Arras, being overcome by Julius Caesar, and endeavoring to
escape out of France into Britany, arrived safe to the Sea side when the Wind
was favorable, but at low Ebb, so that his Ships stuck fast in the Sand,
nevertheless he commanded the Sails to be spread, which when Caesar saw afar
off in his pursuit after him, and that the Ships were already under Sail,
imagined it was impossible to recover him. By this Policy Comminius escaped out
of his hands.

THE THIRD BOOK Of the Stratagems of WAR OF Sextus Julius Frontinus a ROMAN
Consul.
The Introduction.
IF the former Books are so happy as to answer the Title of their Chapters, and
to deserve the Reader's Perusal, I shall now produce the Stratagems of War
which have been practiced in the Besieging and the Defense of Towns. I shall
not insist upon any Preface, but only deliver the Subtilties that have been
used in the taking of Cities, and Policies which may serve the Besieged in some
stead, setting aside all the Works and Engines which are sufficiently known and
found out; so that I see no possibility to deliver any new thing concerning
them. But in relation to the taking and defense of Towns we shall treat upon
these several Heads.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHap. 1. Of a sudden Assault. Chap. 2. Of deceiving such as are besieged.
Chap. 3. Of drawing and persuading some to Treachery. Chap. 4. By what means
the Enemies may be straightened with want. Chap. 5. By what Art the Besieged may
be brought to believe that the Siege will continue long. Chap. 6. Of the
destroying the Enemies Garrison. Chap. 7. Of the turning aside of Rivers, and
the spoiling of Waters. Chap. 8. Of striking a Terror into the Besieged. Chap.
9. Of giving an Assault in more places than is expected. Chap. 10. Of Ambushes
to draw out the Besieged. Chap. 11. Of the Pretense to raise a Siege.
On the contrary, the Contents that relate to the Defense of the Besieged.
Chap. 12. How to oblige a Party to Vigilance. Chap. 13. How to send out and
receive Messengers. Chap. 14. How to bring in Succors, and supply a Town with
Necessaries. Chap. 15. How those things that are wanting may seem to abound.
Chap. 16. How to prevent Run-aways and Traitors. Chap. 17. Of sallying out.
Chap. 18. Of the Constancy of the Besieged.
CHAP. I. Of a sudden Assault.
Example 1.
T. Quintius the Consul, having overcome in Battle the Aequi and the Volsci,
People of Italy, he resolved to take the Town of Antium: he therefore made a
Speech to his Army, and showed them how needful and easy it was for them, if
they went on without Delay. In that Heat and Courage which he had caused by his
Speech, he set upon the Town and took it.

2. M. Cato, in Spain, perceived that he might get into his Hands a certain
Town if he did assault the Inhabitants before they were aware; he therefore
performed in two days the March of four, through difficult and desert ways and
places, and came upon the Enemies before they feared him, and overcame them:
and when his Men had happily succeeded, and asked of him the cause of such an
easy Performance, he told them, that then they began to be Conquerours when in
two days they performed the March of four.

CHAP. II. Of deceiving such as are besieged.
Example 1.
WHen Domitius Calvinus besieged the Town of Luca, belonging to the Ligurians,
which was strengthened not only by the Situation and Fortifications, but also
by the Number and Courage of the Defendants, resolved to surround the Walls
many times with all his Army, and then to retreat as often into his Camp. By
this Custom the Townsmen were persuaded that the Romans did practice this only
to exercise themselves: and when they never feared any thing from this constant
March, the General turned the Walk into a sudden Assault, in which they took
the Walls, and obliged the Inhabitants to surrender themselves and their Town.

2. C. Duillius the Consul likewise by exercising the Soldiers and his Seamen,
he brought the Carthaginians into that Security, because his former Custom had
done them no harm, that suddenly he run upon them with his whole Fleet, and
took their Fortifications.

3. Hannibal mastered many Towns in Italy by sending before some of his own
People in the Garb of Romans, who had got the Latin Tongue by the long
continuance of the War.

4. The Arcades, besieging a Castle of the Messinians, made certain Arms in the
resemblance of their Enemies, and at that time that they found that their
Guards were relieved, they furnished some of their own Party in the Habit of
those that were expected, and by this Mistake, being received in as Companions,
they got Possession of the Place with the Slaughter of their Enemies.

5. Cimon, General of the Athenians, having placed an Ambuscado for a certain
City in Caria, set on fire in the Night unexpectedly a Temple of Diana, much
reverenced by the Inhabitants, with a Grove adjoining, which was without the
Walls: when therefore the Citizens came out to extinguish the fire, he took the
Town, being almost empty of its Inhabitants.

6. When Alcibiades, the General of the Athenians, besieged the City of the
Agrigentini, which was very well fortified, he desired to parley with them in
their Assembly: he discoursed a long time with them about common things in
their Theater, where, according to the Grecians Custom, is the usual place of
Deliberation. And while he entertained the multitude under a pretense of
consulting with them, the Athenians, whom he had provided for that Purpose,
took Possession of the City Walls.

7. Epaminondas, the Theban General in Arcadia, when the Women of the Enemies
came out of the City on a Festival Day, and wandered up and down in Companies,
joined to them some of his own Soldiers in the Garb of Women, who being
admitted in that Habit within the Gates, toward the Night mastered the Town,
and let in their own Men.

8. Aristippus the Lacedaemonian, on the Festival Day of the Tegeatae, when a
multitude were gone out of the Walls to celebrate the Services of Minerva, sent
Beasts laden and filled with Sacks of Straw instead of Wheat, into the City,
with Soldiers to drive them, who were under the Appearance of Merchants
admitted, and they opened the Gates undiscovered to their own Men.

9. Antiochus, in Cappadocia, took a Beast, which was come out of a Castle
called Suenda, to fetch Wheat; and having killed the Drivers, he sent with it
his own Men in the Garb of those Drivers, as if they had returned with the
expected Grain. The Guards being cozened with this Deceit, suffered them to
enter, and they made way for the Soldiers of Antiochus.

10. When the Thebans could by no means get into their Possession the Haven of
the Sicyonii, they built a very great Ship, and filled it with armed Men,
covering them with some Wares, that it might appear a Vessel for Trade; and at
the same time caused a small number of Men to appear at a very great distance
from the Walls, with whom, some few without Arms were to meet coming out of the
Ship, and to pretend and make a show of quarreling: which when the Sicyonii
saw, they went out to cause the Dispute to cease: in the mean while the Ships
of the Thebans entered into the empty Haven and City, and took them.

11. Thymarchus the Aetolian, having slain Charmades, the Admiral of King
Ptolomy, took on him his Cloak and Head piece, after the Macedonian manner; and
by this Deceit he was received into the Haven of the Samnii, and mastered it.

CHAP. III. How to entice and win Traitors.
Example 1.
PApyrius, surnamed Cursor, at Tarentum, promised to Milo, who defended the
City with a Party of Epirots, that he would save him and his Countrymen, if by
his means he might win the City: which Reward so prevailed upon him, that he
persuaded them of Tarentum to send him as an Ambassador to the Consul, with
whom he fully concluded the Agreement; so that at his Return he made the
Citizens secure, and delivered the City unguarded into the Roman General's
Power.

2. Marcellus, having won a certain Inhabitant of Syracuse, named Sosistratus,
to betray the City, understood by him, that the Guards, the next day being a
Festival, would be careless and negligent, and the rather, because Epicides was
to give them Plenty of Wine and good Cheer. He took therefore Advantage of this
merry Opportunity, and of the Negligence of the Guards, took the Walls, slew
the Watch, and opened to the Roman Army the Gates of this City, which had been
famous for several noble Victories.

3. When Tarquinius Superbus could not oblige the Gabii to yield to him, sent
to them his Son Sextus Tarquinius beaten with Rods: He exclaimed against the
Cruelty of his Father, and persuaded the Gabii to make use of his Hatred and
Displeasure against the King. They accordingly having chosen him to be their
Leader, betrayed them to his Father.

4. Cyrus, King of Persia, sent on purpose his Companion and Friend Zopyrus,
upon whose Fidelity he could assuredly relve, with his Face disfigured and
maimed, to the Enemies. He was thought by them to be highly provoked against
Cyrus, because of the Disgrace offered to him; and he did not a little
encourage this Persuasion, by adventuring himself much, as often as they went
out to fight, and aiming at Cyrus with his Darts: at last, when they had made
him Governor of Babylon, he delivered the City into the King's hands.

5. Philippus, being shut out of a Town of the Samii, won Apollonius their
Commander, to betray them, and persuaded him to place a Cart full of square
Stones at the very Entrance of the Gate. At the making of a certain Sign,
Philip suddenly came upon the Townsmen, who were busy in shutting of their
incomber'd Gate, and overpowered them.

6. Hannibal, when he besieged Tarentum, which was kept by Livius with a Roman
Guard, solicited a certain Man of the City, named Eoneus, to betray it, and to
practice this Subtilty; That he should under pretense of Hunting, go out in the
Night, because it was not likely that the Enemy would suffer him in the Day.
And when he was thus gone out, some did supply him with wild Boars, which he
carried to Livius, as if they had been of his own taking. When he had practiced
this often, and therefore was not narrowly observed, on a certain Night
Hannibal sent in with him Soldiers of his Army in the Garb of Huntsmen; who
being laden with Venison, which they had in their Hands, they were admitted by
the Guards, and suddenly they set upon them and slew them: Then the Gate was
broke open, and Hannibal was let in with his Army, that destroyed all the
Romans, except such as fled to the Castle.

7. Lysimachus, King of the Macedonians, when he besieged the City of Ephesus,
and that the Citizens had a certain Arch-pyrate, named Mandrones, come to their
Assistance, who did often go thither with his Ships laden with Spoils and
Prey, persuaded him to be a Traitor, and to take with him the stoutest men of
his Army with their Hands bound behind as Captives, to carry them into the
City; who when they were entered, they took up Arms out of the Castle, and
delivered the City to the King.

CHAP. IV. By what means an Enemy may be driven to Necessity.
Example 1.
WHen Fab. Maximus had wasted and spoiled all the Fields of Campania, that they
might not have any thing left to encourage their Resolution to maintain and
defend a Siege, he departed out of the Country in the sowing time, that the
rest of their Corn which was left the Inhabitants might employ it in Seed: but
at his Return he trod down all that grew up, and by reducing them to Famine, he
obliged them to yield.

2. Antigonus practiced the same Policy against the Athenians.

3. After that Dionysius had taken many Cities, and was resolved to assault
them of Rhegium because they had an extraordinary Plenty of Provisions, he
pretended a Peace with them, and entreated them to supply his Army with Food;
which when they had granted, they emptied for him the Granaries of the City:
then did he set upon it when it was in want of Victuals, and took it.

4. The same was done by him, as is reported, when he went against the Himaerei.

5. When Alexander was to take Leucadia, full of all manner of Food, he first
took the Castles that were about the Borders, and suffered all the Inhabitants
to retire and depart to Leucadia, that the greater number might sooner waste
and consume their Victuals.

6. When Phalaris of Agrigentum had a Design upon certain Places of Sicily
which were very well fortified, he pretended an Agreement with the Inhabitants,
and stored up with them all the Wheat that he said he had; but he gave order at
the same time, that the Tiling of the Granaries where the Wheat was put, should
be so broken that it might let in the Rain. The Inhabitants trusting to this
Provision which they had with them, were careless of their own Stores; so that
in the beginning of the Summer he assaulted them, and obliged them by Famine to
yield.

CHAP. V. How to persuade that a Siege will continue long.
Example 1.
WHen Clearchus the Lacedaemonian had understood that the Thracians had carried
all things belonging to Food into the Mountains, and that they were also fed
with the Hopes that for want of Necessaries he would be forced to depart; at
that time that their Ambassadors came to him, he caused one of his Prisoners
to be killed before them, and to be cut in pieces, with a Pretense that they
were to be distributed amongst the Soldiers for their Food. The Thracians
therefore believing that he would do any thing to continue there who would not
scruple to make use of such abominable Food, surrendered themselves.

2. Tiberius Gracchus, when the Lusitani or Portugals declared that they had
Food sufficient for ten Years, and therefore were not afraid of a Siege,
answered, Then I will take them in the eleventh Year: At this Expression the
Lusitani were so much afraid, that though they were well provided with
Victuals, yet they yielded to him.

3. When A. Torquatus besieged a Greek City, and that the Inhabitants boasted
that their Youngmen were well skilled in the use of Bow and Arrows and Darts;
answered, I will sell them the dearer when I shall overcome them.

CHAP. VI. How to destroy the Enemies Garrisons.
Example 1.
Scipio, when Hannibal was returned into Africa, found that there were many
Towns which in reason would be useful to him if taken, defended by strong
Garrisons of the Enemy: he therefore sent several Parties to block them up; at
last he went thither with his Army, as if he had intended to sack the Cities;
afterward he seemed to be afraid, and departed from them. Hannibal imagining
that his Fear was real, called together all his Garrisons, as if he intended to
engage in a Battle. By that means Scipio had what he desired; for by the
Assistance of Massinissa, and his Numidians, he took those Cities when their
Garrisons were gone.

2. P. Cornelius Scipio, understanding how difficult it was to take Delminium,
because it was defended by a Concourse of People from all Parts, assaulted
first other Towns, which caused every one to depart and defend his own City: by
that means Delminium was emptied of Soldiers, and forced to yield to him.

3. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, fighting against the Illyrians, when he earnestly
desired to get the chief City of the Nation into his hands, but not judging it
feasible, went to assault the other Towns. By that means he brought it to pass,
that the Enemies conceiving that their chief City was sufficiently fortified,
went to the relief of the rest. Then did he call together all his Forces, and
finding the chief City empty of its former Garrisons, he took it by force.

4. Cornelius Rufinus, the Consul, having besieged a little while the City of
Frotona to no purpose, because a resolute Party of the Lucani being entered
into the Garrison, defended it. He pretended to raise the Siege, and with a
great Reward persuaded one of his Prisoners to go to the City, as if he had
escaped out of Prison, to persuade them that the Romans were gone. The
Inhabitants imagining that this was true, sent away their Auxiliary Troops; and
when their Garrison had lest them, before they were aware he easily overcame and
took them.

5. Mago, General of the Carthaginians, having beaten Cn. Piso, and forced him
to fly for Refuge to a certain Tower, believed that some Forces would come to
relieve him: he therefore sent a certain Traitor to meet the Succors that were
coming, and to tell them, that Piso was already taken: by this means he
discouraged them, and completed the Victory.

6. Alcibiades, in Sicilia, desiring to take the City of Syracuse, sent out of
Catania, where he was with his Army, to Syracuse, a certain cunning Fellow; who
being brought into their Assembly, persuaded them that the Inhabitants of
Catania were grievously offended with the Athenians; So that if they could be
assisted by them of Syracuse, they would quickly overpower the Athenians with
their General. With this Persuasion they of Syracuse marched with all their
Forces toward Catania, and left their City, which Alcibiades assaulted another
way, and finding it empty as he expected, he soon mastered it.

Cleonymus the Athenian, assaulting the Traezenii, who held a Town with a
Garrison commanded by Cratenus, sent into the Walls some Arrows, upon which it
was written, That he was come to deliver their Commonwealth, and at the same
time showed himself kind to his Prisoners, whom he sent into the City to speak
ill of Craterus. By this Policy he caused them to fall out amongst themselves;
so that with his Army he overcame them, and took the City.

CHAP. VII. Of turning aside of Rivers, and the spoiling of Waters.
Example 1.
P. Servilius, having turned away a River which supplied the Enemy with Water,
forced the Town of Isaura to yield for Thirst.

2. C. Caesar, amongst the Gauls, reduced the City of the Gadurci to the want
of Water, though it was encompassed about with a River and had many fresh
Springs in it; for he dried up the Fountains by mining, and drove them away
from the River by his Archers.

3. L. Metellus, in the hither Spain, turned down a River from the higher
Ground upon the Enemies Camp which was seated in the lower: and when they were
disturbed with the sudden overflowing of the Water, he cut them in pieces with
Parties which he had appointed for that purpose.

4. Alexander, at Babylon, which was divided into two parts by the River
Euphrates, dig'd a Ditch, and raised a Bank, that the Enemies might imagine
that they were made for his own use; but suddenly he turned the River out of
his Course, and through the old Channel, which then being dried up, yielded an
Entrance, he marched into the City.

5. Semiramis is said to have practiced the same thing, by turning aside the
River Euphrates at the same place.

6. Clisthenes, the Sycionian, broke an Aquaduct or Conduit, which conveyed
Water into the Town of Crisa; and when the Inhabitants were vexed with Thirst,
he caused the Water to run again in the same Conduit, but poson'd it with
Hellebore, or the Juice of Bears-foot; of which they who made use, fell into a
Flux and Madness: so that by that means he took them and their Town.

CHAP. VIII. How to terrify the Besieged.
Example 1.
WHen Philippus could by no means take the Castle of Trinassus, he caused the
Earth to be cast up before the Walls, and made as if he had been undermining.
They that were within thinking that the Castle would be pulled down upon their
Heads, yielded it up to him.

2. Pelopidas the Theban, resolving to besiege two Towns of the Magnetes, which
were not far distant from one another, at the same time that he approached with
his Army to the Walls of one of the Towns, he commanded out of another Camp
four Horsemen, purposely to ride with Garlands upon their Heads, with a notable
cheerfulness, as if they came to give notice of the Victory. And to color the
matter the better, he appointed that a Wood which was between both Towns should
be set on fire, and show the resemblance of a burning City. And besides, he
ordered certain Captains to be brought in the Garb of the Country. All these
appearances so terrified the besieged, that judging themselves partly overcome
by the loss of the other Town, they yielded themselves.

3. When Cyrus King of Persia had shut up Craesus within the Walls of Sardis,
on that part of the City where a steep Mountain hindered the entrance into it;
he raised close by the Walls certain high Masts of Ships, equalling in height
the top of the Mount; on these Masts he put the Images of armed men in the
Persian Habit, and in the Night he brought them close to the Hill. The next
morning he assaulted the Town on the other side; as soon as the Sun was up,
those Images shined as if they had been armed Persians, which made the Townsmen
imagine that the City was taken behind them; therefore they fled, and yielded
the Victory to Cyrus's Army,

CHAP. IX. Of making an assault by that side of a Town which is least expected.
Example 1.
SCipio, at the City of Carthage, at the ebbing of the Sea, was wont to
approach the Walls with his Army, following, as he pretended, the footsteps and
leading of the God Neptune; but he broke into the Town through another quarter
where he was not expected, when the Waters of the Lake were abated.

2. Fabius Maximus, the Cunctator's Son, sent six hundred Soldiers in the dark
of the Night, at the City Arpus, held by a Garrison of Hannibal's, when he had
confider'd the situation of the Town, to that part of it which was best
fortified, and therefore least guarded, that they might climb up to the Walls,
and break open the Gates. They being favored by the noise of the falling
Water, which made the Garrison insensible of their approach, performed their
Orders; whilst he at the same time, at the giving of a sign, assaulted the Town
by another side, and took it.

3. C. Marius, in the Wars against Jugurtha, near the River Mulucha, besieged a
Castle seated upon a rocky Mountain; unto which there was but one only Path,
and that very narrow, that led to it; all other sides being as it were on
purpose made steep. It happened that a certain common Soldier, a Ligurian, of
the Auxiliary Troops, who by chance going out to fetch Water, fell a gathering
of Snails amongst the Rocks of the Hill, climbed up so high that he got up to
the top. At his return he gave an account of his Adventure to Marius, and that
the Castle might be taken on that side; he therefore commanded a few Centurions
with the nimblest Soldiers, and with them his best Trumpeters, with their
naked Heads and Feet, but with their Swords and Bucklers tied to their Backs,
that they might see about them amongst the Rocks and climb up the better; this
Party followed the Ligurian with Darts and long Nails in their hands to help
them up: when they were got up to the back side of the Castle, which was not
guarded, they began to Sound their Trumpets, and to make a great noise, as they
had been ordered. When Marius heard this, he encouraged his Men to press hard
upon, and assault the Guards more furiously, who being called away by the
weaker sort, because they thought the Castle had been taken behind, he followed
them so close that he took the Castle.

4. L. Cornelius, the Consul, conquered many Towns of Sardinia, by landing in
the Night some of his stoutest Soldiers, and commanding them to lie concealed,
and wait the time when he should think convenient to land with his Navy; and
when the Enemy should meet him at his Arrival, and be drawn at a distance away
by a pretense of Flight in pursuit of him, that then they should rise and
assault the forsaken Towns.

5. When Pericles, General of the Athenians, attempted upon a Town defended by
the unanimous endeavors of the Inhabitants, commanded the Signal to be given,
and the Trumpets to sound a Chargewith a great noise by Night on that side of
the Walls which was next to the Sea; and the Inhabitants, imagining that he
would enter in at that side, left those Gates unfurnished and unguarded, by
which he entered and took the City.

6. Alcibiades, another Athenian General, came suddenly upon the Town of
Cyzicum by Night, on purpose to assault it, and on the other side of the Walls
caused the Horns to be sounded, which made the Inhabitants run to defend only
that part of the Walls where they imagined that the Assault was given, whereas
they were able to defend all. By that means Alcibiades entered the Town by that
side where there was no resistance.

7. Thrasybulus, Captain of the Milesii, endeavored to take the Haven of the
Sicyonii, by making an Attempt by Land, and drawing the Enemy to that part
where they were assaulted. Then he suddenly entered the Haven and took it.

8. Philippus, in the Siege of a certain Sea-port-Town, joined together two
Ships with Boards, far from the sight of the Inhabitants, and built on them
Towers; At the same time he assaulted the Town by Land on other Towers, which
drew them all out of their Houses to defend themselves; Then did he suddenly
approach the Walls with his high Ships, and took them on that side where there
was no opposition.

9. When Pericles was to take a Castle of the Peloponnesus, unto which there
were but two Avenues, the one he shut in with a deep Trench, and resolved to
make his approaches at the other Avenue; the Garrison thinking themselves very
secure on the other side, minded to defend themselves on that only which they
saw most likely to be assaulted; Then did Pericles fling a Bridge, prepared on
purpose, over the Trench, and by that side that was neglected he took the
Castle.

10. Antiochus, in his War against the Ephesians, commanded the Ships of Rhodes
which were come to his assistance, to enter by Night, and assault the Haven
with a great noise, which drew all the Townsmen thither in haste. By that means
the rest of the Walls were unfurnished, and he made an attempt on the other
side and took the City.

CHAP. X. Of Ambushes to draw out the Besieged.
Example 1.
CAto, in the sight of the Lacetani, whom he besieged, kept back the rest of
his Army, and sent of the Suessani, some of his Auxiliary Troops, who were the
greatest Cowards, to assault the Walls; the Besieged made a Sally, put them to
Flight and furiously pursued them, but in the mean while he took the City with
those Troops which he had hid.

2. L. Scipio, in Sardinia, left the Assault of a certain City in haste, which
he had begun, and in his Retreat showed the appearance of a Flight. When the
Townsmen sallied out to pursue them unadvisedly, he took the Town with those
Soldiers whom he had hid near at hand.

3. Hannibal, when he besieged the City of Himera, suffered his own Camp
willingly to be taken, and commanded the Carthaginians to depart, as if the
Enemy had prevailed; which Policy deceived the Inhabitants, and caused them for
joy to leave their Town, and run to the Enemies Camp; then did Hannibal take
the Town empty by those whom he had placed for that purpose in Ambush.

4. The same General, to draw out them of Saguntum, marched to the Walls with a
thin Battalion, and at the first sally of the Besieged, made as if he had fled,
but he caused his whole Army to run in between the Enemy and the City, and
having closed them in, cut them all in pieces.

5. Himilco, the Carthaginian General, placed near the Town of Agrigentum part
of his Army in Ambush, and commanded them that when the Townsmen were come out
they should set some moist Wood on fire; afterward, he with the rest marched
to draw out the Enemy into the Fields, but at their first approach he
retreated, and seemed to fly away, to draw by degrees the Townsmen far from
their Walls; whilst they who lay in Ambush near the City set fire to the Wood.
When they of Agrigentum that were come out beheld the great Smoke, thought
their City had been burning, and when in a great fear they returned to defend
it, they met with the Party that lay in Ambush near their Walls, so that before
and behind they were shut in, and slain by them that followed them.

6. Viriatus, having secretly placed some Soldiers, he sent a small Party to
drive away the Cattle of the Segobrigenses in Spain; and when they came in
great numbers to recover them, and put the drivers to Flight, as they
pretended, they were brought into an Ambuscado and destroyed.

7. The Cavalry of the Scordisci, when Lucullus was General of two Parties of
Heraclea, made as if they had been driving of Cattle, and obliged him to sally
out; but they immediately fled, and brought Lucullus into an Ambush, where he
was slain with eight hundred Soldiers.

8. Chares, Captain of the Athenians, being to assault a Town near the Sea
side, left his Fleet behind a certain Cape, and ordered some of the nimblest of
his Ships to sail along by the Enemies Guards; which when they saw, they made
out of the Harbor with all their Ships that were to defend it, to pursue after
them. In the mean while Chares entered into the Haven with the rest of his
Fleet without resistance, and took the City.

9. Barca, Captain of the Carthaginians, when the Romans besieged Lilybeum in
Sicily, by Sea and Land, ordered a part of his Navy to appear at a distance in
sight; which caused the Romans to sail speedily to them. In the mean while he
took the Haven of Lilybeum with the rest of his Fleet, which he kept out of
sight.

CHAP. XI. Of the pretense of departing away from a Siege.
Example 1.
PHormion, the Athenian General, when he had spoiled the Fields of them of
Chalcis, and that their Ambassadors came to him to complain of it, answered
them mildly; and the same Night that he was to send them away, pretended that
he had received from his Citizens such Letters as required him to return home;
so having led the Ambassadors a little way with him, he sent them back; who,
when they returned, declared to their Citizens, that all was safe, and that
Phormion was departed. They, trusting upon his Humanity, and the return of his
Army into their own Country, neglected the guarding of their Town: then
Phormion suddenly marched back again, and so overpowered them, that they were
not able to make any resistance.

2. Agesilaus, General of the Lacedaemonians, besieged the Phocenses, and
understood that their auxiliary Troops were already weary of the War; he
therefore departed from them a while, as if he had minded other Business, and
gave them liberty to be gone. Some time after he returned with his Army, and
overcame the Phocenses, destitute of their Guards.

3. Alcibiades laid an Ambuscado for them of Byzantium, who kept themselves
within their Walls; and pretending to depart, returned suddenly upon them, and
overpowered them.

4. Viriatus, when he had made three days march away from them of Segobriga,
returned back in one day, and overcame them, when they were secure and busy
about a solemn Sacrifice.

5. Epaminondas, perceiving that the Lacedaemonians were come to the assistance
of his Enemies at Mantinea, imagined that he could take the City of Lacedemon,
if he did march thither privately. He commanded therefore many Fires to be made
in the Night, that he might conceal his departure with an appearance of his
continuance there; but being betrayed by a Runaway, and pursued by the
Lacedemonian Army, he left the Road that led to Sparta, and turned his
Resolution and Power against them of Mantinea; for having made as many Fires as
before, as if he had continued in that place, he deceived the Lacedaemonians,
and returned forty miles to the City of Mantinea, which he found naked of
defense, and took it.

CHAP. XII. How to stir up the Vigilance of a Party.
Example 1.
Alcibiades, when his City of Athens was besieged by the Lacedaemonians,
fearing the negligence and carelessness of the Guards, told such as stood Sentry
that they should take notice of the Light that he would show out of the Castle,
and when they saw it that they likewise should lift up Lights, and that he that
did neglect to perform this, should be punished. Whilst they waited for a Sign
from their General, they all marched carefully, and by that means he avoided
the danger of the Night that he feared most.

2. Iphicrates, the Athenian General, commanding in chief the Garrison of
Corinth, walked the Rounds a little before the coming of the Enemy, and finding
a Soldier who was to stand Sentinel asleep, he run him through with his Spear;
which deed when some blamed, as savouring of too much Cruelty, he told told
them, as I found him so I left him.

3. Epaminondas, the Theban, is reported to have done the same.

CHAP. XIII. Of sending out and receiving Messages.
Example 1.
WHen the Romans were besieged in the Capitol, they sent Pontius Cominus to
Camillus, who was in his Banishment, to desire his assistance; and that he
might pass by and escape from the Guards of the Gauls, was let down the Rocks
of Tarpeia; he swimm'd over the River Tiber, and came safe to the City Vejos,
and having delivered his Message, he returned by the same way to the Besieged.

2. When they of Campania were besieged by the Romans, who watched and guarded
all the Passages, they sent one, whom they persuaded to run away to the Romans,
and hid a Letter under his Belt; which, when he found an opportunity, he
carried to the Carthaginian Army.

3. Some have sown Letters in the Bodies of Beasts taken in hunting, and other
Creatures, which Letters were written in Parchment or thin Skins.

4. Some have driven Beasts on the contrary side, whilst they have been passing
the Enemies Guards.

5. Others have written their Letters in the inside of a Sheath.

6. L. Lucullus, when the Cyziceni were besieged by Mithridates, that he might
make his arrival known to them, tho the Enemies kept the entrances of the City
with strong Guards; He commanded one of his Soldiers, a little skilled in
swimming, and in the Art of Navigation, to lean upon two Skins or Bladders
filled with Wind, which had Letters stitched in the inside; having in the lower
part two strait Sticks fastened to them to keep the Bladders at a distance: and
in this manner to go over a Straight of seven miles, at that place where but
one narrow and small Bridge joined an Island to the main Land. Which was so
dexterously performed by this common Soldier, who steered his course with his
Legs hanging in the Water, that such as saw him at a distance, and that were
upon the Guard, thought him to be a Sea Monster.

7. Hircius the Consul sent often Letters to Decius Brutus, who was besieged by
Antonius at Mutina, written in Lead, and fastened to the Arms of Soldiers who
swam over the River Scultenna.

8. The same Hircius made use of Pigeons to convey Letters. He shut them up in
the dark, and suffered them to be very hungry; then did he fasten Letters to
their Necks, bound them with a big Hair, and from the nearest place to the
Walls of the City he let them fly. They being desirous of Light and Food,
mounted on high, to go to the loftiest Houses, where Brutus took them; and by
that means he was made acquainted with all Passages: for after that he put Food
for the Birds in certain places, and so made the Pigeons to sly thither.

CHAP. XIV. How to put in Succors into a besieged Place, and supply it with
necessary Food.
Example 1.
IN the Civil War, when Ategua, a City in Spain, that held for Pompey, was
besieged, Maurus, or Martius, the Viceroy, made as if he had bin a Trumpeter of
one of Caesar's Colonels, appointed to visit the Guards; some he roused up
with his Trumpet, others he shunned, and courageously went through the middle of
Caesar's Army, and led into the Town a Garrison of Pompey.

2. When Hannibal besieged Casilinum, a City of Campania in Italy, the Romans
sent down the stream of the River Vulturnus Hogs-Heads full of Meal to relieve
the besieged; which when Hannibal did stop with a long Chain over the River,
they scattered and flung Nuts into the Water, which the Current carried to the
Town; and by that means they supplied the wants of their Fellows.

3. Hirtius the Consul, when they of Mutina were besieged by Antonius, sent to
them some Salt, which they wanted, down the River Saniturnus, put up in Pipes.

4. The same Consul sent down the Stream some Cattle, which relieved the
besieged.

CHAP. XV. How to make such things as are most wanting, seem to the Enemy to
abound.
Example 1.
THE Romans, when they were besieged in the Capitol by the Gauls, and were in
the greatest want of Bread, were wont to fling some to the Enemy. By that means
they made them believe that they had plenty of Provisions, so that they
patiently endured the Siege till Camillus was come to relieve them.

2. The Athenians, besieged by the Lacedaemonians, are said to have done the
like.

3. They who were besieged at Casilinum by Hannibal, were thought to have bin
reduced to a great Famine, because that between his Camp and the City he had
spoiled all the Herbs that could serve for Food, by plowing up the Ground; but
they flung Seed into the Earth prepared and turned up. By that means they
seemed to have enough to keep them alive until the next Harvest.

4. They who remained alive after the Defeat of Varras and his Army, because
the Enemy believed that they wanted Bread, caused the Prisoners to be led round
about their Granary all Night; then having cut off their Hands, they sent them
away; who when they came to their own Men that besieged the Romans, they
assured them that there was no hopes of a speedy Surrender by the famishing of
the Romans, because they had such a great quantity of Food yet remaining.

5. The Thracians, besieged in a steep and high Mountain, unto which the
Enemies could not ascend, gathered from every Man a small quantity of Corn and
Cheese, with which they fed their Cattle, which they drove and sent down to the
Enemies Guards; when they had killed them, and found some signs of Wheat in
their Guts, they imagined that they had yet a great quantity of Corn remaining
seeing that they fed their Cattle with it: They departed therefore from the
Siege.

6. Thrasybulus, Captain of the Milesii, when his Soldiers were wearied with a
long Siege by Aliattes, who expected that they would be forced to a Surrender
by Famine, when the Ambassadors of Aliattes were coming, he caused all the
Corn of the City to be brought into the Market, and about that time appointed
Feasting to be in several places of the City, and the Tables to be covered with
Meats; by that means he persuaded the Enemy that he had yet plenty of Food to
help them to bear a longer Siege.

CHAP. XVI. By what means one may prevent Traitors and Run-aways.
Example 1.
L. Marcellus, understanding the Design of Batteus of Nola, who endeavored to
persuade his Countrymen to fall away to Hannibal, whom he favored, because by
him he had been cured of his Wounds received at the Battle of Cannae, and had
been sent home from his Captivity; and because he was afraid by his Punishment
to stir up them of Nola to Revenge, and dared not to kill him, he sent for him,
and told him, that he was a most stout Soldier, which he understood not
before, and that he desired that he would continue and abide with him: To his
Words he added an Honor, for he bestowed upon him an Horse. By this gracious
proceeding he obliged not only him to be true to him but also his Countrymen,
who were governed by him.

2. Hamilcar, General of the Carthaginians, when several of their Gallic
Auxiliaries did often run away to the Romans, and that they were wont to be
received as their Friends, he persuaded some that were most faithful to him to
pretend also to fly to them, who killed some that were sent out to receive and
rescue a Party of the Roman Army; which Policy did not only help Hamilcar, and
caused him to succeed in his present Design, but for the future it made all
true Run-aways to be suspected by the Romans as false.

3. Hanno, General of the Carthaginians in Sicily, understanding that four
thousand of the Mercenary Gauls had agreed to run away to the Romans, because
they wanted the Pay of some few Months, and because he was afraid to punish
them for fear of a Sedition, he promised that he would reward liberally the
injury of a Delay: Therefore the Gauls having returned him thanks, he delayed
the performance of his Promise for a while till he could send a most faithful
Servant to Otacilius the Consul, to run away to him for other Reasons, who told
him, that the next Night four thousand Gauls, who were to be sent out to
Plunder, might easily be surprised; Otacilius did not give credit suddenly to
the Runaway, neither did he think this News was to be neglected; he therefore
placed a choice Company of his Men in Ambush: By them the Gauls being received,
accomplished Hanno's two Designs, in destroying the Romans and themselves, for
they were all cut off.

4. Hannibal was revenged of the Deserters of his Army in the same manner, for,
knowing that some of his Men would run away the next Night, and that he had in
his Camp Intelligencers and Spies of the Enemy; He declared publicly that the
Soldiers which were sent by him to understand the Designs of the Enemy, ought
to be named most cunning Soldiers; what the Spies had heard from him, they
delivered to their own Party, which caused the Romans to take the Run-aways, to
cut off their Hands, and send them back to Hannibal's Army.

5. Diodorus, commanding the Garrison of Amphipolis with a Party, had a
jealousy of two thousand Thracians who had a mind to Plunder the City, he
pretended therefore that some few of the Enemies Ships were come near a
neighboring Shore, and that it was possible to take them; the hopes of this
Advantage so encouraged the Thracians, that they marched out of the City; then
did he cause the Gates to be shut, and would entertain them no longer.

CHAP XVII. Of Sallies.
Example 1.
THE Romans, who were in Garrison at Palermo, when Hasdrubal came to besiege
that City, caused on purpose very few to appear on the Walls to defend them,
the smalness of their number was so contemned by the Enemy, that Hasdrubul
assaulted the Walls, where he was slain in a Sally.

2. Aemilius Paulus, when all the Ligurians made an attempt unexpectedly upon
his Camp, he seemed for fear to keep in his Soldiers till the Enemy had
sufficiently wearied themselves; then did he sally out of his four Gates, and
overthrew and took them Prisoners.

3. When Velius, a Roman Captain, commanded the Castle of Tarentum, he sent
Messengers to Hasdrubal, that he would suffer him to depart in safety: By this
Pretense he made the Enemy so secure, that when he sallied out he defeated them.

4. Cn. Pompeius did not only deliver his Men besieged in the City of
Dyrrachium, but after a Sally which he made in a very convenient Time and
Place, he surrounded Caesar, who furiously broke out of a Castle which was
furnished with a double Fortification, and encompassed him in round, so that
between the besieged and Pompey's Army that was without, he was in the middle
in no small danger, and received a considerable loss of Men.

5. Flavius Fimbria, fighting in Asia against the Son of Mithridates, near the
Town of Rhyndacus, drew a Trench half way on both sides of his Camp, and a
Ditch before, keeping his Soldiers quiet on the Rampires until the Enemies
Horse were entered into the streightest place of his Works; then did he sally
out and cut off six thousand of them.

6. C. Caesar, amongst the Gauls, when the Forces under Titurius Sabinus and
Cotta his Lieutenants, were defeated by Ambiorix, and that Q. Cicero, who was
likewise besieged, sent him this sad News, made haste to him with two Legions,
but when the Enemy turned to meet him, he seemed to be afraid, and kept his
Soldiers within his Camp which he had purposely made streighter than ordinary;
the Gauls, as if they had been certain of the Victory, and were come to plunder
the Roman Camp, began to fill up the Trenches, and to pull down the Palisadoes,
then did Caesar send out his Forces on a sudden, and cut the Gallic Soldiers
in pieces.

7. Titurius Sabinus, when a vast Army of the Gauls came against him, kept in
his Soldiers within his Fortifications, and made them believe that he was
afraid. And that he might strengthen that belief, he sent out a Runaway to
tell them, that the Roman Army was in despair, and resolved to fly. The Enemy
being encouraged with the hopes of Victory, loaded themselves with Faggots and
Bones to fill up the Trenches, and with full speed ran up to the Romans Camp,
which was situate on a Hill; from whence, when Titurius had sent out his whole
Army, he overthrew the Gauls, and took many of them Prisoners.

8. The Inhabitants of Asculum, when Pompey came to besiege the Town, caused a
few old and sick Folk to show themselves from the Walls, which made the Roman
Army to be more secure and careless; so that when the Townsmen sallied out,
they put them to flight.

9. They of Numantia, when they were besieged, drew up none of their Forces
before the Walls, but kept themselves within, so close and quiet, that Popilius
Lenas had the Confidence to scale the Walls. And then suspecting a Design, and
an Ambush, (for at that instant he met with no resistance) he sounded a
retreat. Then did the Inhabitants sally out, and assaulted the Romans as they
were coming down, and drawing back.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Constancy of the besieged.
Example 1.
THE Romans, when Hannibals Camp was before their Walls, to express their
Confidence, sent out by another Gate a supply and a recruit to their Army,
which was then in Spain.

2. The same Romans, when the Proprietor of the Field where Hannibal had
pitched his Camp was by chance dead, sold it at a higher rate than it was
bought by him before the Wars.

3. The same Romans, being besieged by Hannibal, at the same time that their
Army besieged Capua, resolved and decreed, that their Army should not come away
from thence until they had taken that City.

THE FOURTH BOOK Of the Stratagems of WAR OF Sextus Julius Frontinus once a
ROMAN Consul.
The Introduction.
IN the three former Books, according to my promise, as I suppose, I have
placed in order, not without a great deal of Care and Diligence, the Stratagems
of War, which I have gathered from the perusal of many Histories. In this Book
I shall now set down those things which could not fitly nor properly be placed
under the former Heads, and which may be rather called the Examples of Generals
and Captains of War, than of Stratagems of War; which I have therefore
separated, because, though they be sufficiently known, they are of another
kind. And I have here mentioned them, lest any should meet with them by chance
in reading, and by the resemblance they have with the former Practices, should
unadvisedly think them to be omitted. Truly we must express them as belonging
to the former things, and, as before, I shall endeavor to place them under
several Heads in the same order.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHap. 1. Of the Discipline of War. Chap. 2. Of the Consequence of such
Discipline. Chap. 3. Of Continency. Chap. 4. Of Justice. Chap. 5. Of Constancy.
Chap. 6. Of Affection and Moderation. Chap. 7. Of various Counsels,
Resolutions, and Advices.
CHAP. 1. Of the Discipline of War.
Example 1.
P. Scipio reformed the Roman Army, spoiled by the Slothfulness of their former
Generals, by sending away a vast number of their Servants and Slaves, and
obliging the Soldiers to perform their daily Exercises and Offices. He
commanded them likewise to march very often, and to carry the Food of many days
with them; so that by that means the Soldiers were used to endure the Cold and
Rain, and to pass on foot through the Fords of Rivers. And the General did
blame and exclaim against Timorousness and Sloth, breaking all their useless
Vessels that were cumbersome in their Expeditions; which happened very
remarkably to C. Mevius the Tribune, unto whom Scipio is reported to have said,
Thou will be an ill man to me for a little while, but to thy self and the
Commonwealth always.

2. Q. Metellus, in the War against Jugurtha, restored again the Discipline of
War, which was likewise decayed, by imitating the same Severity, and forbidding
the use of any other Flesh to the Soldiers, but what was by himself ordered to
be roasted and boiled.

3. Pyrrhus used to say to such as he sent to gather Soldiers, Choose me the
ablest Bodies, and I will make them stout and courageous.

4. When L. Flaccus and C. Varro were Consuls, Livius names them L. Aemilius
Paulus, and Terentius Varro; then were Soldiers first made by taking an Oath,
for before the custom was for a Tribune or a Colonel to ask of them whether
they would devote themselves for the Service of their Country: Then did they
agree together, and promise with a Curse that they would never depart to save
themselves by flight or for fear; and that they would never go out of their
Ranks but to take their Weapons to strike an Enemy or to save a Citizen.

5. When Scipio Africanus saw a Buckler of a certain Soldier adorned more
beautiful than the rest, he told him that he did not wonder at his care and
diligence in beautifying it because he depended more upon it for his safety
than upon his Sword.

6. When Philip first made up his Army, he forbad them all the use of Wagons,
and would not suffer a Horsemen to have more than one Servant, and to ten foot
Soldiers he appointed likewise a Servant, who was to carry for them when they
went out into the Field their Meat and their Ropes, commanding them to bear
upon their Backs the Meal needful for thirty days.

7. C. Marius, to shorten the Baggage and Carts of the Army which did most
incumber it, fitted up the Soldiers Food and Vessels needful in bundels,
hanging them behind their Backs upon crooked Staves, which was easy for them
to carry and lean upon: from hence is derived the Proverb, Muli Mariani, Marius
's Mules.

8. When Theagenes the Athenian led an Army against Megara, he answered to
those that asked for their Ranks and Places, that he would appoint them one
there. He sent afterward his Horsemen before secretly, commanding them as
Enemies to assault their own Friends; by this means he approved those Soldiers
that he had to meet and encounter with the Enemy. And he suffered them to rank
themselves as they pleased, so that whereas the most timorous did fall back in
the Rear, and the stoutest were found in the Front. As he found every man
standing in that manner, he advanced them to the Military Orders and Places.

9. Lysander the Lacedemonian reproving a certain Soldier gone out of his way,
had this answer from him, that he had not left his Company to steal; but he
replied, I will not have thee give the least suspicion of Stealth.

10. When Antigonus heard that his Son was gone into a man's House, who had
Three Beautiful Daughters; I hear, said he, my Son, that thou have but a narrow
Lodging where so many Dames do command the House. Take, I advise thee, a larger
Dwelling; and he ordered him to depart out; withal made a Law, that none
should, under Fifty years of Age in the Army, lodge in a dwelling House.

11. Q. Metellus the Consul, though he was not hindered by any Law from
receiving his Son always in his Tent, yet he appointed him to fight, and to
live as the other Soldiers, and to endure the same hardship.

12. P. Rutilius the Consul, though the Laws suffered him to have his Son with
him in his Tent, yet he made him a Soldier in one of his Legions.

13. T. Scaurus forbad his Son to come into his presence, because he had given
back, and yielded Ground to the Enemy in a Wood near Trent. The young Man
oppressed therefore with Grief and Shame killed himself. The Romans and other
Nations anciently were used to pitch their Camps every where according to their
Companies, as so many distinct Villages, for none but Towns had Walls and
Fortifications. But Pirrhus King of Epirus was the first that entrenched in an
Army. Afterward the Romans having beaten him in the Fields of Arusina near the
City Beneventum, and taken his Camp, they observed the manner of his pitching,
and by degrees are now arrived to that perfection of Encamping which is now in
use.

14. P. Nasica being in his winter Quarters, tho he had no need of a Fleet,
lest the Soldiers should be spoiled by lazyness, or for want of Employment be
tempted to do mischief to their Friends, resolved to build Ships.

15. M. Cato has left upon Record, that some of his Fellow Soldiers were
condemned to lose their Hands for being taken stealing; and when a milder
Punishment was imposed, they were let blood before the Generals Tent.

16. Clearthus the Lacedemonian General, was wont to say to his Army, That a
Commander ought to be more feared than an Enemy. He meant by those who were
afraid to dye in the Battle; but if they run away, a certain Punishment and
Execution was to be their reward.

17. The Judgment of Appius Claudius was, that those who had been taken by King
Pyrrhus, and were sent home to the Senate, That the Horsemen should be reduced
to fight on Foot, the Footmen should be degraded, and that all should abide out
of their Trenches until each of them should kill, and produce the Spoils of
two men of their Enemies.

18. Otacilius Crussus the Conful, commanded those who had been forced to pass
under the yoke, in sign of submission, to continue out of the Camp and Works,
that they having no defense, might be used to the Dangers, and be the bolder to
encounter with the Enemy.

19. P. Comelius Nasica and Decimus Junius the Consuls, condemned such to be
publicly whipped with Rods, and to be sold as Slaves, as had forsaken the Army.

20. Domitius Corbulo in Armenia, caused Two Troops of Horse, and Three
Companies of Foot who had given back in assaulting of a Castle, to continue,
and lodge out of the Trenches, until by their continual Labor and happy
encounter they had wiped off their disgrace.

21. Aurelius Cotta the Consul, when out of necessity he commanded the Horsemen
to labor in the Works, and that some of them refused to obey him, he
complained of it to the Censors, and caused them to be punished. And afterward
he obtained of the Senate that they should lose all their pay that was then due
to them.

22. The Tribunes of the People likewise consulted them in this business, and
by a general consent this Discipline was established.

23. Q. Metellus. Surnamed Macedonicus, in Spain commanded five Companies, who
had been beaten back by the Enemy, to make their Wills, and sent them back to
recover the place, threatening them, that he would never receive them again till
they had got the Victory.

24. P. Valerius being Consul, the Senate commanded the Army that had been
overcame at Siris, to be led to Firmius, and there to fortify a Camp, and
abide in Tents all the Winter.

25. The Senate decreed when their Soldiers were shamefully put to flight, that
no assistance should be sent to them, till they had beaten and taken the Enemy.
And that those Legions which had refused to fight in the Punick War, should be
transported over into Sicily, and there remain seven years, and live upon
barley bread.

26. L. Piso condemned Titius the Captain of a Company, to stand every day
barefoot before his Tent when the Watch went the Rounds, with his Gown torn
about him, and a loose Cassack, and that he should abstain from bathing and
feasting, because he had retreated back, and given ground to the Fugitives with
whom he encountered.

27. Sylla, when the Enemy broke in upon a Company, and the Commanders were
upon the Guard, he ordered them to stand before the Generals Tent without Arms
and Belts.

28. Domitius Corbulo General in Armenia, condemned Aemelius Rufus
Leivtenant-General of the Horse, to have his Garments broken and cut by a
Sergeant, and in that shattered Habit to stand before the Generals Tent amongst
the Principes, until they were discharged, because he had given back, and
retreated from the Enemy; and because a party of his Horse was but ill
furnished with Arms.

29. Attilius Regubus going out of Samnium into the Country of Nuceria with his
Army, met with the Enemy that drove him back. He comcommanded therefore a Party
of his Men behind to kill all such as should offer to retreat, and deal with
them as with Fugitives.

30. Cotta, Consul in Sicilia, caused Valerius Nobilis a Colonel, descended of
the Family Valeria, to be punished, by whipping him with Rods.

31. The same Cotta condemned P. Aurelius his near Kinsman, whom he had left to
command in his absence at the Siege of Lipara, when he was gone to Messina to
enquire about the success of the War, to be beaten with Rods, to be listed
amongst the Common Soldiers, and to perform all their Duties, because some of
the Works belonging to the Camp had been fired by the Enemy, and the Camp it
self had been taken in his absence.

32. Fulvius Flaccus the Censor, put out of the Senate his own Brother Fulvius,
because he had, without the consent of the Consul, dismissed and sent away a
Legion, over which he was the Colonel.

33. When M. Cato was sailing away with his Fleet from the Enemies shore, where
he had remained some few days, having given, and hanged out before, the Sign of
his departure, and that one of his Soldiers being left behind, called out, and
made sign to the Ships to be taken in, he turned about with his whole Fleet,
took the Soldier and put him to death, and made him an Example to the rest,
rather than to leave him to be destroyed by the Enemy for his Negligence.

34. Appius Claudius was wont to take the Tenth Man of those who did offer to
give ground to an Enemy, by lot, and beat them with Clubs.

35. Fabius Rollus the Consul caused the lot to be cast upon two Legions which
had retreated from the Enemy, and those upon whom the lot fell, to be beheaded
in the presence of the rest of the Soldiers.

36. Aquirius took the third man out of the Companies that had suffered their
Guards to be faced by the Enemy, and caused them to lose their Heads with an Ax.

37. M. Antonius, when a Mount that he had raised had been burnt by the Enemy,
decimated two Colonies or Companies of Soldiers that were to defend the Works,
and punished likewise a Centurion or Captain of each Cohors; he sent away the
Lieutenant Colonel with disgrace, and commanded the surviving part of the
Legion to feed upon Barley Bread.

38. The Legion which plundered and destroyed the Town of Rhegium without the
Generals orders was punished in this manner, Four Thousand of them were
imprisoned, and there put to death. Beside, the Senate commanded that none of
them should be buried or mourned for.

39. L. Papyrus Surnamed Cursor, being Dictator, treated Fabius Rutilius master
of his Horse in this manner, because he had encountered with the Enemy against
his command, though with success. He required him to be beaten with Rods, with
an intention to strike off his Head with an Ax, neither could he be prevailed
upon by the Endeavors and Prayers of his Soldiers to remit the Punishment; and
when Rutilius fled to Rome, he pursued him, neither would he there forgive him,
until Fabius with his Father fell upon their Knees to him, and the whole
Senate and People spoke for him.

40. Manlius who afterward was Surnamed the Imperious, cut off his Sons Head
with an Ax, after that he had been beaten with Rods in the presence of the
whole Army, because he had joined in Battle with the Enemy against his Orders,
though he came off with Victory.

41. Manlius the Son, when the Army for his sake were ready to rise up in
Sedition and disorder against his Father, told them that no Man was of that
Worth, that for him the Discipline of War ought to be neglected; he therefore
obliged them to suffer him to be punished.

42. Q. Fabius Maximus cut off the Right-Hands of such as had run away from his
Army.

43. Q. Curio the Consul, in the Dardanick War, when one of his five Legions
about Dirrachyum rose up in Rebellion, and refused to march against the Enemy,
saying, that they would not follow their Foolish General in a dangerous and
troublesome Enterprise: He commanded the Four other Legions to march out, and to
stand in order, with their Arms ready, as for a Battle. Afterward he led out
the Seditious Legion without Arms and Belts, and in the view of the rest, he
forced them to but Straws, and the next day he obliged the Soldiers likewise
with Girdles to dig a Ditch, and could never be prevailed upon by the prayers
of the Legion, nor stopped from taking away their Colors, blotting out the name
of their Legion, and from distributing the Soldiers, as a supplement, and in
Recruits to the other Legions.

44. Q. Fulvius and Appius Claudiuus being Consuls, the Soldiers who where left
after the Battle of Cannae, and had been banished into Sicily, made request to
M. Marcellus, that they might be led against the Enemy. When he had informed
the Senate with their Petition, the Senate answered, that they did not like to
leave the Defense of the Commonwealth to them who had forsaken it. But they
appointed Marcellus to do as he judged expedient, upon condition that none of
them should be freed from Duty, nor be rewarded with Honor or Gifts, nor be
brought back into Italy, while any of the Carthaginians were there.

45. M Salinator, of the order of Consuls, was condemned by the People, because
he had not divided the Prey equally amongst his Soldiers.

When Q. Pecilius the Consul was killed by the Ligures in a Battle, the Senate
decreed that the Legion where the Consul was when he fell, should be disbanded,
deprived of a years pay, and all remembrances of that Legion should be blotted
out.

CHAP. II. Of the good effect of the Discipline of War.
Example 1.
IT is reputed that the Armies of Brutus and Cassius in the Civil Wars, when
they marched together through Macedonia, and that Brutus came first to a River,
over which they were to make a Bridge; nevertheless Cassius's Army made more
speed in building the Bridge, and in hastening to pass over, and got before the
Army of Brutus. This was the effect of their Discipline and good Government,
which caused the Army commanded by Cassius to excel those of Brutus's Army,
both in working, and in the encounter with an Enemy.

2. C. Marius having Liberty to choose his Army, either that which was commanded
by Rutilius, or the other under Metellus, which afterward was governed by
himself, desired rather to have that which Rutilius kept under Discipline and
good order, though the lesser of the Two.

3. When Domitius Corbulo had reformed the Discipline of the Roman Army with
Two Legions, and a few Auxiliary Troops, he encountered with the Parthians.

4. Alexander King of Macedon assaulted the whole World with 40000 Men, who had
been well trained up by King Philip, and overcame vast numbers of his Enemies.

5. Cyrus in the War against the Persians mastered many difficulties with
Fourteen Thousand armed Men.

6. Epaminondas General of the Thebans, with four Thousand Men, among whom were
but Four hundred Horsemen, overcame the Lacedemonian Army of Four and Twenty
thousand Foot, and Sixteen hundred Horse.

7. By fourteen Thousand Greeks which were sent to help Cyrus against
Artaxerxes; an hundred thousand Persians were overcome in Battle.

8. The same Fourteen Thousand having lost in a Fight their Chief Commander,
left the Care of their Conduct homewards to one of their Number, Xenophon by
name, who was of Athens; and they returned safe through difficult and unknown
Regions and Countries.

9. Xerxes was stopped by Three hundred Lacedaemonians at the Streights of
Thennopyle. And when he could scarce destroy them with all his Army, he
confesled that in this he perceived his own error, that in Truth he had many
men at his Command; but stout, and Valiant, and careful to observe the
Discipline of War, he had none.

CHAP. III. Of Continency.
Example 1.
IT is reported of M. Cato, when he was going General into Spain, that he drank
of no other Wine but such as was for the Saylors.

2. Fabricius, when Cyneas the King of Epyrus's Ambassador offered him a great
Sum of Gold, refused it, with this saying, That he had rather command such as
had Money, than to have it himself.

3. Attilius Regulus, when he was Chief Commander, was so poor, that he
maintained himself, his Wife and Children with a small Field which was manured
and managed by a Countryman, of whose Death when he had heard, he writ to the
Senate to send him a Successor, because his Family would be in want by the
Death of his Servant, and that his Presence was needful at home.

4. Cn. Scipio, after that he had many successes in Spain, fell into a very
great Poverty, and so dyed, that he had not Money sufficient left for the
Marriage of his Daughters, wherefore the Senate appointed them Portions out of
the Public Treasury.

5, The Athenians dealt in the same generous manner with the Children of
Aristides, who deceased very poor, after that he had excellently well behaved
himself in his Government.

6. Epaminondas the Theban General was so sparing in the Field, that there was
nothing found in the Field amongst his movables, but a Pot to boil Meat, and
one Spit.

7. Hannibal was wont to rise by night, never went to rest before it was dark,
at the dawning of the day he used to go to Supper,; and he never had more than
two Beds for him and his Domestics.

8. The same Hannibal, when he was at the Wars under Hasdrubal the General, for
the most part slept upon the bare ground with his Armor about him.

9. It is reported that Scipio Aemilianus was wont to eat Bread walking in a
Journey with his Friends.

10. The same thing is said of Alexander the Macedonian.

11. And we read of Massinissa, that when he was Ninety years old, he would
stand and walk before his Tent, and eat Meat.

12. When M. Curious had overcome the Sabins, and that the Senate, for his good
Services appointed for him a Portion of Land, which old Soldiers use to
receive, was contented with the share of a common Soldier, and said that he was
but an ill Citizen, when that would not suffice which was sufficient for others.

13. Remarkable also has the moderation bin of whole Armies; as that under M.
Scaurus. For Scaurus writes that in fixing his Camp, there was an Apple Tree
laden with Fruit within his Fortifications, which the next day when the Army
removed, was not so much as touched, and had lost no Apples.

14. When the Emperor Caesar Domitianus led his Army in the German War, which
Julius Civilis stirred up, the most wealthy City of Liege which revolted to
Civilius, was afraid, of Caesar's coming, the Soldiers would plunder them. But
when they saw contrary to their expectation, that nothing had been taken away
by violence, and that they had not lost any thing of their Goods, returned to
their obedience, and delivered to him seventy Thousand armed Men.

15. L. Mummius, when he had taken Corinth adorned not only all Italy with
Statues and Pictures, bat also all the Province; but of all the Spoils he
converted so little to his own use, that the Senate gave his Daughter a Portion
out of the Public Treasury.

CHAP. IV. Of Justice.
Example 1.
WHen Camillus besieged the Falisci, in their Town there was a certain
Schoolmaster that led the Children of some of the Falisci out of the Walls, as
if he had intended only to walk with them abroad; but under that pretense he
delivered them to Camillus, and for the recovery of the Children the City would
submit to him. Camillus abhorred his perfidiousness, and caused him to have his
hands bound behind, and commanded the Children to whip him back into the the
Town again to their Parents. By this just dealing he obtained the Victory,
which he desired not to obtain by fraud; for this Equitable Proceeding made the
Falisci to yield to him willingly.

2. The Physician of King Pyrrhus went to Fabricius, General for the Romans,
promising him that he would give his Master Poison, if beforehand he might
have the assurance of a considerable Reward. Fabricius thinking that he had no
need of such a foul Deed to get the Victory, discovered the Plot, and the
Author to the King. This caused him to seek and desire earnestly the Roman's
Friendship.

CHAP. V. Of Constancy.
Example 1.
CN. Pompeius when his Soldiers threatened to plunder, and take his Treasure,
which was to be carried in Trumph, and Servilus and Glaucia, two Romans,
advised him to divide it amongst them, to prevent a Tumult; he assured them
that he would not ride in Triumph, but rather dye than to yield to the
Licentiousness of his Soldiers. Having therefore reproved them severely in a
Speech, he cast down before them the Bundles of Rods carried before him, which
were crowned with Laurel, bidding them to begin their Plunder by the spoiling
of them. This proceeding made them so ashamed, that they continued in their
Obedience.

2. C. Caesar, in the Heat of the Civil War, in a Sedition of his Soldiers,
when they were therefore the bolder, disbanded a whole Legion, and cut off the
Heads of their Leaders with his Axes; but a little after, when they who were
disbanded petitioned for a Pardon, he received them again, and they proved to
him some of his best Soldiers.

3. Postumius, who had been Consul, encouraged his Soldiers to fight, and when
they demanded what he would order, he cried out, That they would imitate him,
with that he takes the Colors, and marched strait against the Enemy; they
likewise followed, and got the Victory.

4. L. Marcellus falling unadvisedly into the hands of the Gauls, rid round
about to spy out some way to escape; and when he found that the Enemies had
possessed all the Passages, he prayed to the Gods, and broke into the midst of
his Enemies, who were affrighted at his unexpected Boldness, and killed their
Leader; so that when there was scarce any appearance to escape with Life, he
overcame the General, and carried away his Arms.

5. When L. Paulus had lost his Army at the Battle of Cannae, Lentulus offered
him a Horse to fly, but he would not survive his ill Success, which had not
been occasioned by him, but continued upon that Rock where he had been wounded,
and against which he leaned, until the Enemy came, overpowr'd and killed him.

6. Varro his Partner showed a greater Constancy after that defeat. The Senate
and People returned him their Thanks, because he had not despaired of defending
the Commonwealth. He showed sufficiently that he preserved himself not out of a
desire of living, so much as out of a Love for his Country, for he let his
Beard and Hair grow out to a length, and never after would rest to take his
Meat. And when the People offered him Honors, he refused them, saying, That
the Commonwealth had need of more successful Magistrates.

7. Sempronius Surnamed Tuditanus, and C. Octavius, Tribunes of the Soldiers,
when all was lost at the Battle of Cannae, and they were besieged by the Enemy
in the lesser Camp, persuaded the Soldiers, with their Swords in their hands,
to break through with them, the Enemies Guards; assuring them that this was
their Resolution, though none should have the Courage besides themselves. There
were but Twelve, partly Horsemen, partly Footmen, of all the rest who had the
boldness to keep them company, and with these they came safe to Canusium, a
Roman Garrison.

8. C. Fontejus Crassus in Spain, going out to forage with Three Thousand Men,
was surrounded in a difficult passage by Hasdrubal. He acquainted only the
first Ranks of his Soldiers with his Design; and in the beginning of the Night,
when he was least expected, he broke through the Enemies Post.

9. P. Dicius the Tribune in the Samnitick War, when Cornelius Cossus the
Consul was caught in a difficult place, advised him to send a small Party to
possess a neighboring hill, and offered himself to lead that Party. By this
means he drew the Enemy to another place, and opened a way for the Consul to
escape; but in that Station they besieged Derius, and surrounded him. He in the
Night sallyed out of those Streights, and came safe with his Soldiers to the
Consul.

10. The same Policy was practiced under the Command of Attilius Calatinus the
Consul, by him whose Name is variously recorded. Some call him Laberius, others
Q. Ceditius, many Calpurnius Flamma. When this Man saw his Army led into such a
Valley, where all the Hills round about were possessed by the Enemy, he desired
the Consul to give him the heading of Three Hundred Men, which being granted,
he exhorted them by their Courage to save their Army; with this Party he ran
down into the middle of the Valley, and when the Enemies on all sides came to
destroy them, he detained them so long in a sharp fight, that the Consul had
time to draw, and lead out his Army.

11. C. Caesar marching against the Germans, and their King Ariovistus with his
Army, perceived that his Soldiers were terrified, he called them together
therefore, and told them that he would make use that day of none of his Legions
but only of the Tenth Legion. By this saying he encouraged the Soldiers of that
Legion to behave themselves most manfully, and the others were moved with shame
to fight, that the others might not carry away all the Honor and Glory of the
Field.

12. A certain Noble Man of Lacedemon, when King Philip threatened to punish
them with Fines, if they did not deliver up their City, answered, He can never
hinder us from dying for our Country.

13. Leonidas the Lacedemonian, when one told him that the Persians with the
multitude of their Arrrows would make a Cloud, answered, We shall then fight
the better in the shade.

14. When Caelius the City Praeaor was doing Justice in the Seat of Judicature,
a Magpy pitched upon his Head. And the Roman Southsayers told him, that if he
did let go the Bird, the Enemies would obtain the Victory over the Romans, but
if he killed the Bird, the Romans Armies would have the advantage, but Caelius
with all his Family would perish. He therefore destroyed the Bird, and it
happened accordingly, the Roman Army got the Victory, but Caelius, with
Fourteen of his Family and Name were killed in that same Fight. Some report
that it was not Caelius, but Laelius, and that the Family of the Laely, not the
Caely were destroyed.

15. P. Decius, first the Father, next the Son, being Magistrates, offered
themselves to dye for the Commonwealth: for putting spurs to their Horses, they
charged the Enemy, and obtained for their Country the Victory.

16. When P. Crussus was engaged in Asia, in the War against Aristonicus,
between Aelia and Myrina, he fell in amongst the Enemies Forces, and was taken
Prisoner, which caused him to exclaim against the Roman Consul, because of his
Captivity; but with the Rod that he had in his hand to strike his Horse, he put
out the Eye of a Thracian, who to revenge himself, run him through, and
delivered him from his Captivity, as he desired.

17. M. Cato the Censors Son, falling down in a Battle from his Horse, when he
looked about, and perceived that his Sword was fallen out of the Scabbard, he
feared the reproach of his own Men; he therefore returned to the Enemy, and
recovering his Sword after he had received some Wounds, he returned back to his
own Party.

18. When the Petilini were besieged by the Carthaginians, they cast out of
their City their Aged Parents and Children, because of the Famine. And they
endured a long Siege of eleven Months, by feeding upon the leaves of Trees,
upon wet Leather dried at the Fire, and upon all manner of Beasts.

19. The Spaniards called Arabricenses, suffered the same Misery, and would not
deliver up the Town to Herculeius.

20. When the Cassilini were besieged by Hannibal, they suffered so much want,
that a Mouse was sold for a hundred Pence, as it is left upon Record, and that
he that sold it dyed for want, but the Buyer preserved his Life. They continued
nevertheless in their Fidelity to the Romans.

21. When Mithridates besieged Cyzicum, he brought forth the Captives of that
Town, and showed them to the Besieged, imagining that out of Pity and
Compassion of their own Men, the Towns-People would yield themselves. But they
exhorting the Prisoners to suffer Death manfully, kept their Faith to the
Romans.

22. The Segobrigenses, when their Wives and Children were killed by Viriatus,
chose rather to behold the Torments of their Dear Relations than to fall away
from the Romans.

23. They of Numantia, rather than to yield, shut themselves up in their
Houses, and were famished to Death.

CHAP. VI. Of Affection and Moderation.
Example 1.
WHen Q. Fabius exhorted his Son that he should choose a convenient place with
the loss of a few Men. He answered, will thou be of the number of those few?

2. Xenophon being on Horseback, commanded a Party of Foot Soldiers to take the
Top of a Hill, but when one of them murmured, That he could easily (fitting on
his Horse) order such a difficult March. He alighted, and made the Soldier to
mount in his stead, and he running on foot, got up to the Top of the Hill. The
Soldier being ashamed of what was done, when all his Fellows laughed at him,
alighted. They all together could hardly persuade Xenophon to take his Horse
again, and to preserve himself for the Offices and Duties belonging to a
General.

3. Alexander leading his Army in the Winter, when he was sitting by a Fire to
take a view of his Forces as they marched by him, saw a certain Soldier almost
dead with Cold; he called him; and made him sit in his place, telling him, That
if he had been born among the Persians, to sit in the Kings Seat, would be a
Crime worthy of Death, but to a Macedonian born, it was allowed.

4. D. Augustus Vespasianus understanding that a certain young man, of Honest
Parentage, unable for the War, because of his great Poverty, was brought down
to the lowest ranks of Soldiers, he appointed him a Pension, and freed him from
the Militia.

CHAP. VII. Of various Counsels, Resolutions and Advises.
Example 1.
Caesar used to say that his Policy was to treat an Enemy as many Physicians do
the Distempers of Bodies, to overcome them rather by Famine than by Sword.

2. Domitius Corbulo was wont to say that an Enemy was to be overcome with a
Mattock, that is by Works and Trenches.

3. L. Paulus was of a Judgment that a General should be Old in Manners, that
is, should follow the most moderate Counsels.

4. It is reported of Scipio Africanus, that when one told him that he was no
Fighter, answered, My Mother made me a General, but no common Soldier.

5. C. Marias, when a German challenged him out to fight him; told him, That if
he were desirous of Death, he might go and hang himself. And when one showed
him a Gladiator of a low Staure, but very old, he bid him fight him, and if he
did overcome, he would encounter with him who was the Conqueror,

6. Q. Sertorius understanding by experience that he was not able to deal with
all the Roman Army together in a Body, that he might better be able to teach
his Barbarian People, who desired earnestly to fight them, he brought before
them Two Horses, the one strong and lusty, the other very weak, and commanded
two Young Men answerable to them to take them in hand; to the strong man he
appointed the weaker Horse, bidding him to pull of the whole Tail; but the
weaker Young Man, he commanded to pull off the Tail of the strong Horse one
Hair after another. The Weak Person succeeded in his Enterprise, and pulled off
all the Tail by degrees; but the strong Young Man strived in vain to pull off
the Tail of the weak Horse. By this example, said Sertorius, my Soldiers, I
have discovered to you the Nature of the Roman Army, they are not to be
overcome if you encounter them all together; but you may destroy them by
degrees, if you take them by Parties.

7. Valerius Levinus the Consul, having taken within his Camp a Spy of the
Enemy, out of a confidence he had in his Soldiers, commanded him to be led
about the Quarters; and to terrify the Enemy, he assured him, that when they
pleased, their Spies should have liberty to take a View of his Forces.

8. Caelius Principilaris, who was chose Captain in Germany over such as
remained alive, and were besieged after the Defeat of Varrus, fearing lest the
Enemy should fire the Heaps of Wood joining to the Trenches, and by that means
set their Camp in a Flame, pretended the want of Wood; he sent therefore many
to steal Wood every where; which, when the Germans saw, they carried away all
the Heaps of great Wood.

9. Cn. Scipio in the Maritime War cast Pitchers full of Tar and Grease into
the Enemies Ships, that by their weight they might do mischief, and by breaking
and shedding what was therein contained, they might afford an encouragement to
the Fire.

10. Hannibal showed to King Antiochus how he should cast Pots full of Vipers
into their Enemies Ships, which so affrighted the Soldiers, that they were
thereby hindered from resisting, and from the Government of their Ships.

11. Prusias practiced the same Policy, when his Fleet gave back.

12. When M. Parcius in a furious manner broke though the Enemies Fleet, the
Carthaginians were thereby troubled and out of order. Porcius took an advantage
of it, causing his Men to take the Carthaginian Arms, and hang out their
Colors; by that means, under the appearance of Friends, he deceived, and sunk
several of their Ships.

13. When the Athenians had been assaulted by the Lacedaemonians in their
Festival days, which were kept in Honor of Minerva, out of the City, they
continued the appearance of such as were wont to honor the Goddess, only under
their Coats they had hid their Weapons. When they had performed their
accusiomed Worship, they returned, not immediately to Athens, but from thence
in a speedy manner they hasted to Lacedemon, at that time when they were least
expected, and plundered all their Enemies Country at their pleasure: whereas a
little before they had been plundered by them.

14. Cassius took some Ships of burden, which were scarce useful, and firing
them, he sent them before the Wind amongst the Enemies Fleet, and set them all
a Fire.

15. M. Lucius having defeated Hasdrubal, some advised him to pursue the Enemy
till they had totally destroyed them; pray, said he, let some of them remain
alive, who may declare our Victory to the Enemy.

16. Scipio Africanus was wont to say, That it was good Policy, not only to
give the Enemy a way to escape and fly, but also to secure it to them.

17. Pericles the Athenian promised his Enemies that they should be safe, if
they would cast down their Weapons, which when they had done, he commanded all
that had in their Armor Iron Bucklers to be slain.

18. When Hasdrubal was entered into the Borders of Numidia to subdue them, and
that the Inhabitants prepared to resist him; he told them that he was come only
to hunt Elephants, which, were plentiful in Numidia, and if they would suffer
him, he promised to do them no harm. They believed him, and called back their
Forces, then did they assault and subdue them.

19. Alcetas the Lacedemonian, that he might more easily surprise a Convey of
Victuals sailing to Thebes unexpected, provided some Ships in a secret place,
showing but one Galley, in which by turns, he exercised his Mariners. But in a
convenient time, when the Thebans were sailing by, he sent out all his Ships
against them, and took all their Provisions.

20. Ptolomeus having but a weak Army when he marched against Perdicas, who was
the stronger in Forces, took all sorts of Beasts, and caused them to draw
behind them Carts, and to be driven forward by a few Horsemen. In the mean
while he marched before with what Troops he had with him; so that the dust
raised by the Cattle gave an appearance of a vast Army that followed behind;
which thought so terrified the Enemy, that they were put to flight.

21. Myronides the Athenian going against the Thebans, who were more numerous
in Horse, when his Foot came into the plain Fields, he told them, that if they
did keep their grouod, they would be safe, but if they yielded, they would be
destroyed, by this Speech he confirmed his Soldiers, and got the Victory.

22. L. Pinarons being Governor in Sicily of the Town Ennae, when the
Magistrates of the City desired him to deliver up the Keys of the Gates, which
he had in his Custody, to them; he had a jealousy of them, that they intended
to turn to the Carthaginians; he desired therefore one Nights space to consider
of it, informing secretly his Soldiers of the treachery of those Greeks; he
commanded them to be ready the next day, and expect the Signal. The next
morning, in the Presence of his Soldiers, he told the Magistrates that he would
deliver up the Keys, if all the Inhabitants desired it, for that purpose all
the Citizens being called into the Theater, demanded the delivery of the Keys.
By this he understood of their purpose to revolt to the Enemy, he immediately
therefore gave order to his Soldiers to fall on, and kill all the Inhabitants.

23. Iphicrates the Athenian General took the Colors, at the appearance of the
Enemies Fleet, and sailed to a Town of which he had a jealousy, and when at
his landing he was received with great Expressions of joy, he found out their
unconstancy, and plundered the Town.

24. Tiberius Gracchus declared publicly that he would give liberty to all the
Volunteers who behaved themselves manfully, but that he would crucify the
Cowards. When therefore four thousand of those who had been sloathful in the
Fight, for fear of the Threatened Punishment, were gathered together on the Top
of a Hill; he sent to tell them, that his whole Army of Volunteers, in his
judgment had got the Victory, seeing the Enemy was fled. By this saying he
delivered them from the fear of Punishment, and kept them in their Obedience.

25. Hannibal, after the Battle at the Lake of Thrasginerus, where the Romans
received so great a Loss; when he had got into his Power six thousand of his
Enemies, by an agreement he sent away all the Confederates of the Latin
Country, and spoke graciously to them, saying, that he was come into Italy to
make War, to free the Country from the Roman Slavery; and by their means some
of the People surrendered themselves to him.

26. Magro, when the Locri were besieged by Crispinus, Admiral of the Roman
Fleet, caused a Report to be spread abroad in the Roman Camp, that Hannibal had
killed Marcellus, and was coming with his Army to raise the Siege of the Town;
having therefore secretly sent out a Party of Horse, he ordered them to show
themselves on the top of the Hills which were in sight; when Crispinus saw
them, he imagined that Hannibal was really coming, he therefore hasted with his
Army on Shipboard, and fled.

27. Scipio Aemilianus at the Battle of Numantia, placed his Bow-men and
Slingers not only between his Cohortes, but also between every Century or
Company of Foot.

28. Pelopidas Thebanus being put to flight by the Thessalians, and having
sounded the depth of a River, over which he had hastily cast a Bridge; that the
Enemy might not make use of it also to pass over, he commanded the Rear of his
Army to burn the Bridge.

29. When the Roman Cavalry could by no means encounter with the Horsemen of
Campania, Q. Naevius, a Captain in the Army of Fulvius Flaccus the Proconsul,
found a way to strengthen them. He caused out of all the Army some of the
nimblest Footmen to be chosen, who were of a middle Stature. He furnished them
with round and little Bucklers, with Headpieces, Swords, and seven Spears,
every one about four Foot long, placing them amongst the Horse, commanded them
to march as far as the Walls of the City. In this order they accompanied the
Roman Horse when they encountered with the Enemy, and did a great deal of
Mischief to them, chiefly to their Horses, that were thereby soon disordered,
and obliged to leave the Victory to the Romans.

30. P. Scipio in Lydia seeing the Army of Antiochus, that had suffered much by
the Rains that fell coutinually, during a Night and a Day, and that not only
his Men fainted, but also some of their Horses became unserviceable; and their
Bow-strings being wet, were become useless: He encouraged his Brother the next
day to give them Battle, though it was a Religious day, which advice being
followed, he obtained the Victory.

31. When Cato was plundering of Spain, the Ambassadors of the Hergeti, who
were confederates with the Romans, came to him, to beseech him to send them
Help. He being loath, by denying assistance, to alienate the minds of his
Friends, or by dividing his Army, to weaken his Forces, commanded a third part
of his Army to provide themselves with Victuals, and to get a Shipboard; but
gave them privately orders to return back again, and pretend that the Wind was
contrary. The report of Succors that were a coming encouraged the Hergeti to
defend themselves, and disappointed the designs of their Enemies.

32. C. Caesar knowing that Pompey had in his Army a great number of Roman
Knights, who by their skill in Arms would overcome his Soldiers, commanded his
men to aim with their Swords at their Faces and Eyes; by this Policy he obliged
them to turn away their Eyes, and to give back.

33. When the Vaccei were fighting against Sempronius Gracchus, and sorely
handled by his Army, they enclosed themselves round with their Wagons full of
their stoutest Men in Women's Apparel, which made Sempronius more bold to
assault them, thinking them to be but Women; but they charged his men so
stoutly, that they put them to flight.

34. Eumenes Cardianus, one of the Successors of Alexander, being shut up in a
Castle so close, that he could not exercise his Horse, caused their Legs to be
tied up every day at certain Hours, that standing upon their Hinder Legs, and
their fore Feet lifted up on high; their desire and endeavor to stand on their
fore Feet made them yield a Sweat all about their joints.

35. M. Cato, when the Country People promised him Guides to lead him, and
convey him, if he would give them a considerable sum of Money; he freely offered
it to them; for he hoped when he should obtain the Victory, to pay them with
the Plunder of their Enemies: or if it happened that they were killed, he
expected then to be free from his promise.

36. Q. Maximus, when Statilius a Noble Knight of excellent Abilities was
resolved to run away to the Enemy, sent for him, and desired to be excused,
because, through the envy of his fellow Soldiers, he was not well acquainted
with his rare Virtues. He therefore gave him a Horse and Money, and sent him
away, who come to him afraid to be punished, joyful of his Rewards, and made
him doubtless for the future a Faithful, as well as a Stout Soldier.

37 When King Philip understood that a certain good Warrior, named Pythia
hated him, because having three Daughters to maintain, he was Poor, and could
not well provide for them, and the King gave him no assistance: beside, some
warned him to take heed of him, he answered, What if I should have some part of
my Body diseased, would I not rather heal it, than cut it off? He sent
therefore for this Pythia secretly, enquired of his Estate and Condition, and
furnished him with Money. By this means he obliged him to be both a better and
more Faithful Friend and Servant than before.

38. T. Runitius Crispinus, after the unhappy encounter with Hannibal, in which
he lost his Partner Marcellus, and understanding that the Conqueror had got the
Seal of the slain Consul, sent Letters all over Italy not to give credit to the
Letters that were sealed with the Signet of Marcellus. By this seasonable
advice he prevented the cunning of Hannibal, who endeavored in vain to get
into his hands the Town of Salapia, and other places of Italy.

39. After the defeat of Cannae, the Roman Courages were so abated, that some
Authentic Authors have left upon Record, that a great many that remained alive
put it in deliberation, whether they should forsake Italy. Then did P. Scipio,
a very young man offer Violence to him who proposed such a thing in an
Assembly, and publicly declared that he would kill him with his own hand,
unless he did swear that he had a resolution never to forsake the Commonwealth:
when this man had first bound himself by an Oath, he drew his Sword, and
threatened Death to a near Kinsman, unless he did also take the same Oath. He
forced him for fear, and all the rest were led by the same example to swear the
same thing.

40. When the Camp of the Volosci were near to a Wood, and a place full of
Briars and Thorns; Camillus carried all that would take fire as far as their
Works: and set them in a Flame, and drove them from their Camp.

41. P. Crassus in the War of the Confederates, in the same manner was
surprised and undone with almost all his Forces.

42. When Q. Metellus was to remove his Camp in Spain, and that the Soldiers,
who were to march, kept themselves still in their Camp, Hennocrates has
related, that they were ordered to abide till the next day; and by that short
rest, became more fit for the Fight than his People: so that by this means
Metellus made an end of the War.

43. Miltiades, when he had put to flight a vast number of Persians at the
Battle of Marathon, obliged the Athenians, who were willing to continue there
some time, to rejoice at the Victory, to depart and speedily relieve their
City, against which the Persian Fleet was sailing. He prevented them, and
filled the Walls with Armed men. When the Persians came, they imagined the
Athenians to be very numerous, and that they had yet an Army at Marathon as
well as at Athens, therefore they suddenly turned about, and sailed back into
Asia.

44. Pisistratus the Athenian, when he had taken the Fleet of Megara (brought
by Night Eleusis, to catch the Athenian Dames, who used to do Honor to the
Goddess Ceres) and made a great slaughter of the Enemy; took their Ships, and
filled them with Athenian Soldiers, placing upon the Decks some of the Women in
the Garb of Prisoners; with which appearance they of Megara being deceived, and
imagining that their Men were returned with success, came thronging out of the
City to meet and welcome them. Then did Pisistratus fall upon them unarmed, and
again made a great destruction of them.

45. Cinion the Athenian General, when he had overcome the Persian Fleet at the
Isle of Cyprus, caused his Men to take the Arms of the Persians, and in their
Ships to sail into Pamphilia toward the Enemy, into the River Eurymedon. The
Persians, who were there, knowing the Ships, and thinking the Men upon the
Decks to be their own, never suspected any thing, till they were assaulted, and
suddenly overpowred; and the same day they were overcome both by Sea and Land.

FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF THE Brave EXPLOITS AND Subtle STRATAGEMS Of several Famous
GENERALS SINCE THE Roman Empire. With a Discourse concerning Engines of WAR. By
M. D'A.

LONDON, Printed for S. Heyrick, J. Place, and R. Sare, Booksellers at
Grays-Inn-Gate, and Furnivals-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1686.

TO ALL MILITARY SOULS OF THE English NATION.
IT IS for your Perusal that this Treatise is published: To you I dedicate these
Collections, as the most suitable to your Generous and Martial Dispositions. No
Nation under the Sun have taken a greater Delight in War than ours, and none
have been more successful in former Ages, and purchased more Honor in the
Field than the English. But this is remarkable in History, that their Notable
Victories were gotten more by their plain Valor, than by their Policies. The
Strength of other Nations consists in Subtilties and Ambushes; there are are
few that dare face an assaulting Enemy in the open Field, and oppose their
naked Breasts to the Showrs of the Murdering Shot. Behend a Hedge, a Ditch, or
a Breast-work, and when they have the Advantages of Number and the Ground, they
may venture a Battle. But the English have been taken notice of for their
Undaunted Courage in the midst of the greatest Difficulties, and have often
snatched the Victory out of the Hands of their Insulting Enemy. But if the
English Courage alone, without the Assistance of Art, has been so Victorious,
what Wonders would it not be able to perform, if it were seconded by Policy and
Craft? I conceive therefore it may not be useless to you, my Brave Countrymen,
to have an Abstract, or a Collection in your own Language of the Stratagems
which have been practiced in War by the most experienced Commanders; that when
you may happen into the same Difficulties and Dangers, you may understand what
others have done to wind themselves out, and by what means they have purchased
Safety, Honor, and Victory to themselves and Followers. I doubt not but some
of you may have as sharp and subtle Wits as good Courages, and that you will
be able to use both in the business of War. But I believe none can deny, but a
Collection of such Examples as these, both Ancient and Modern, will be able to
advise, direct, and encourage your Invention to ingenious Contrivances: For
that purpose I have Translated Frontinus, who, being a Roman Warrior, and of
the Order of the Consuls, Collected the most remarkable Stratagems of the
Persisians, Greeks, Romans and Carthaginians. Their manner of Fighting and
Weapons differ much from ours I confess; nevertheless we may learn from them,
and be directed by them in many cases; for we meet with Enemies subject to the
same Passions and Infirmities as they, and we may improve the same Accidents
and Opportunities which happened to them. But for the completing of this
Treatise, I have added a Collection of the most approved Histories of diverse
brave Exploits and cunning Stratagems, successfully employed by later Generals
for the purchasing of Victory, that you might have here a Prospect of the
Warlike Policies of the first and latter Ages together, and that in the perusal
of the Noble Actions of our brave Predecessors, you may see the ready, and
pathway to Honor.

You know not how soon the Interest of the Kings Majesty, and of this Kingdom,
may call you, my Valiant Countrymen, into the Field. It is therefore your
Wisdom now amongst the Delights of Peace, not to forget the difficulties and
dangers of War, and to mind a judicious preparation for the latter as well as
the Enjoyment of the former. You especially, are in reason to be ready for the
Service of your Prince and Country, whose brave Ancestors have by their Valor
purchased for you Titles of Honor and Estates together; You, who are to be
Examples of Virtue and Courage, and who have the greatest Interest in the
Country where you live. This Preparation ought to consist not only in Warlike
Provisions, in good Arms, and in the understanding the Duties and Arts of
Officers and Soldiers; but if you be, or expect to become Leaders of Men, the
Knowledge of the Warlike Stratagems of former Captains, and how to ensnare an
Enemy without hazard, will furnish you with an excellent Skill for the Services
that may be required from you.

I shall only desire that you would employ the Arts and Policies which you may
learn from this Compendium for the Advancement of the Glory of your God, for
the Preservation of the public Peace, Quiet and Happiness of the Nation, for
the Security and Honor of our King, and for the Defense of the Interest of the
Royal Family, which God of his Mercy Bless with all increase of Temporal and
Spiritual Blessings. This shall always be the Prayer of him, who wishes that
your Religious and Loyal Undertakings may ever be Crowned with Victory and
Success.

M. D.

A Collection of the Brave Exploits and Subtle Stratagems of several famous
Generals since the Roman Empire.
CAAP. I. The Exploits of Ardaburius, General to Theodosius the II. Emperor of
Constantinople Anno Domini 400.
WHen Baratanes had succeeded his Father Isdigerdes in the Kingdom of Persia;
Socrat. Schol. lib. 7. cap. 18.
and through the persuasion of some Magicians, persecuted the Church of Christ
planted in that Country: And for their defense, the Roman Emperor Theodosius
the II. sent a famous General of those days, Ardaburius, with a sufficient Army
against the Heathen Prince, and Narsaeus his chief Captain. After the first
Battle, where the Roman Soldiers came off with Victory, Narsaeus cunningly
retreats, and invades the Province of Mesopotomia, belonging to the Roman
Empire, to make that the Seat of the War. When therefore he had gathered so
great a power that he seemed able to encounter the Romans, he sent a messenger
to Ardaburius to desire a parley, that they might appoint between them when and
where to fight a Battle. Ardaburius wisely answered the Ambassadors thus: Tell
Narsaeus from me, That the Emperors of Rome use not to wage Battle at Narsaeus
his pleasure. The Persian Prince had then all his Forces together, which
exceeding the Romans in number, caused the Citizens of Constantinople, and the
whole Empire, to doubt of the success and fortune of the War. But there
happened one thing which much encouraged them and the Soldiers to fight
valiantly. Certain Travelers going out of Bythinia toward Constantinople,
met, as they reported, with a company of Angels, who desired them to salute and
hearten the Inhabitants of Constantinople in their names, advising them to pray
to, and put their trust in God, with this assurance, that they were sent as
Celestial Recruits and Auxiliaries to the assistance of the Roman Army against
the Persians; and that they should obtain a famous Victory. Whether this report
was really so, or whether it was invented on purpose, as it has bin sometimes
practiced to encourage the Soldiers to difficult encounters, it had that good
effect, that none doubted afterward of success; and the Roman Soldiers were
more resolute and brave in all their Fights with the Enemy. Insomuch, that at
the Siege of Nisibis, a panick fear so seized the Saracens who were came to
relieve that City, and assist the Persian King, that only the Alarm and Dread
of the Romans approach, caused them in their Armor to cast themselves into the
River Euphrates, and venture over; but the swiftness of the Stream swallowed an
hundred thousand, who for fear of the Roman Sword were drowned in the Water. In
this Persian War, Ardaburius by Policy alone, overcame seven great Commanders
of the Enemies. But notwithstanding these glorious Victories, Theodosius sent
one of his Courtiers named Helion, to conclude a Peace with the Persian
Monarch; but this motion was at first rejected by the Soldiers of the Regiment
called by the Persians Immortal, consisting of 10000 variant Men, who desired
their Prince to give them leave to beat up the Roman Quarters, and try whether
they might surprise them secure and negligent: But such was the vigilance and
diligence of the Commanders, and courage of the Soldiers, that they encompassed
these stout Persians, and cut them all in pieces, though they had divided
themselves into two parties, to assault the Roman Camp with more advantage.

CHAP. II. Of Asper a Son of Ardaburius.
AFter the Persian War, and the death of Honorius the Emperor, the Uncle of
Theodosius the younger, Socrat. Schol lib. 7. cap 23.
a certain Rebel named John, attempted to invade the Imperial Crown and Dignity
with a considerable number of Soldiers, whom he had Listed for that purpose.
Ardaturius was sent against him; but it happened, that as he was Sailing from
Salonae to Aquileia, through cross winds he fell into the Enemies power. When
Aspar his Son and the Roman Army understood it, they made more speed than
ordinary to invest Ravenna, whither they had carried their General prisoner,
following the conduct and direction of an Angel of God, who being sent in the
appearance and garb of a Shepherd, as was then reported, to assist the just
cause of the Religious Emperor Theodosius, against the Rebels. Such inventions
have often bin practiced by the politic Wits of all Ages, and such reports
have been often spread and encouraged to oblige the ignorant vulgar to more
manhood and confidence. However: whether that report were real or feigned,
Aspar suddenly assaulted, and entered Ravenna through a Lake joining to the
Walls; which because never any had Forded it before, was less Guarded. Whether
then by the power of God the Waters were abated to favor the passage of the
Soldiers; or whether the boldness and resolution of the Assailants, attempting
to go through a place that was believed to be unpassable, gave an occasion to
such a report, is uncertain? Though it has bin always the wisdom and practice
of great Generals to endeavor things that seemed unfeazable; and to assault an
Enemy on that side where they were most secure, and where they most relied upon
a Natural Fortification.

CHAP. III. Of Belissarius the General of the Roman Army in the days of
Justinian the Emperor, Anno Domini 528.
SEveral Generals were in the days of Martianus Leo. 1. Zeno Anastasius, and
Justinus, the former Emperors, but none much renowned for their Policies and
Exploits. Belissarius was one of the most remarkable in all History for his
brave actions, and for the instability and unconstancy of humane Glory. His
excellent conduct, together with his wonderful success in War, raised him to
the highest Apex of Honor: but envy, malice, and ingratitude, cast him down to
the lowest step of misery, to beg his Bread at the Gates of Sancta Sophia, the
chief Church of Constantinople, with this saying, Give a half penny to
Belissarius. For the Emperor Justinianus caused his eyes to be put out, and
all his Estate to be taken from him: after that he had by his Wisdom and Valor
saved and enlarged the Roman Empire, and delivered the Emperors person from a
strong Conspiracy, headed by one Florianus a Nobleman, and assisted by
Hippatius, Pompeius, and Probus, Kinsmen of the former Emperor Anastasius.
This act of Valor restored him to the Emperors favor, for he had bin in some
disgrace through the Envy of the Courtiers. He was of no extraordinary Birth,
but raised himself through his great skill in Martial Affairs. At that time
Gilimerus Reigned over the Vandals in Africa, where that Northern People had
erected a flourishing Empire. Justinian proclaimed War against him, and sent
Belissarius as General, with a numerous Fleet; and well furnished Army. After
several Encounters he met the Vandals in a pitched Battle, overthrew and
destroyed several Thousands; pursued their King from one Kingdom to another,
till at last, he besieged him, and took him by Famine in the City of Carthage.
And with him, subdued all that part of Africa which had bin formerly under the
Roman Power: and put a period to the Arian Heresy, which had infected all that
part of the World. All this was brought to pass, not so much through the Valor
and Strength of the Army, as by the Policy and good Government of the noble
General, who was excellent in laying of Ambushes, and in besetting an Enemy in
an open Field, whereby he was reduced to the necessity either of yielding, or
of flying away. This Conquest of Africa by Belisarius happened about 95 years
after the first entrance of the Vandals into Africa, according to the
prediction of St. Cyprian, who had so long before comforted his Auditors with
the assurance of a total extirpation of the cruel Vandals, together with their
damnable Heresy. After this Victory, Belisarius leads back his Army to
Constantinople, with Gelimerus bound in Chains of Silver. Belisarius was sent
next into Sicily, to revenge the murder of Queen Amalasventa. He soon conquered
that Island, and passed over into Italy against the Goths, commanded by their
King Theodatus, who was slain at Ravenna by his own People. In his stead they
made Vitiges King. Against him Belisarius marched, took Naples and the City of
Rome, which he defended against all the Gothic Power, assisted by the Francs,
and slew in one Sally under the Walls of Rome in one day 30000 Goths. After the
siege was raised, which lasted one whole year, Belisarius relieved Ariminum,
and forced the Goths to desire the help of the Burgundians, and took their King
Vitiges in the City of Ravenna, and carried him to Constantinople. From thence
he went against Cosroes King of Persia, and drove him out of the Roman
Territories. But Totila the new King of the Goths, having made great progress
in Italy against the Emperor in the absence of Belisarius; he was recalled, and
sent thither again. He overcame the Goths again, took all that was lost From
thence he went into Persia, to give a stop to the fury of Cosroes, whom he beat
in fight, and forced to sue for Peace. After this he repressed the Huns, when
he was Old, and drove them out of Greece, having overthrown them in a Bloody
Fight.

CHAP. IV. Of Narses the Eunuch General under Justinianus.
THis Noble Eunuch was not much inferior to Belisarius in Courage and brave
Exploits. When the other was warring against the Persians, Narses was sent to
command in Italy against Totilas, the Valiant and Subtle King of the Goths. He
made use of some of the Northern People, whom he called out of Dalmatia, to
assist him against the Gothic Nation. There was a cruel Fight between him and
Totila in Tuscany, where the Goths were totally overthrown, their King killed
in the Field. After this he recovered all the parts of Italy that had bin lost
from the Roman Empire; and when the Francs and Germans invaded the Borders,
Narses set upon them unexpected, destroyed above 20000 of them, and recovered
all the booty that they had gotten before. This Narses was excellent in choosing
a fit time to assault an Enemy, and to give Battle; which made a Learned
Historian, Procopius by name, to say, that the Virgin Mary came and appeared to
him in his Prayers to God, to assure him of Success, and advise him of the time
when he should give an onset on the barbarous multitude. Certain it is, that
outward Devotion has seldom wanted Success; and it has been observed, that
Hypocrisy and feigned show of Piety have been often blessed with prosperous
Events in War; whereas Impiety, though it may Triumph for a while, continues
not long in its Flourishing Condition. So necessary it is that Men should seek
the assistance of Heaven in the critical time of War, and take the Directions
and Helps of their God, to second their natural Courage and Valor against
their Carnal Enemies, as well as Spiritual. Narses it seems is said to have
Conquered as much by his Prayers as by his Sword. After Totilas was slain, the
Goths gathered together under Teja their King; but Narses encountered him near
Cumae, overthrew, and utterly ruined their Empire in Italy, restoring it to the
Roman Dominion, from which it had been violently taken, and detained many
years. Narses after all these good Successes, was employed in several
Expeditions, wherein he failed not of the same Happiness and Prosperity. But at
last, though he had been so Victorious over all his Enemies abroad, he could
not prevent the malice and envy of his Enemies at home. Justinian, though an
excellent Lawgiver, could not give Laws to his Passions, and to his proud
Domestics and Family. The Empress Sophia caused Longinus to be sent into Italy
in his stead, with this opprobious Message, That he should come home to spin
amongst her Maids. He sent her back this Answer, That he would speedily Spin
her such a Thread, that neither she, nor her Husband would be ever able to
untwist. To make good this Threat, he sends messengers to Albanus in Pannonia,
King of the Longobards, and invites him into Italy with his People. After this
Narses leaves Rome, and departed to Naples, where he dyed in a short time after
with Grief, as is supposed.

CHAP. V. Of Cosroes King of Persia, and his Unfortunate Expedition upon the
Roman Empire, Ann. Dom. 570.
COsroes King of Persia, the Son of Cabades, was a mortal Enemy against the
Romans all his days. At his first Invasion, Belisarius and Hermogenes were
joint Generals together of the Emperors Army; and though Cosroes was both Wise
and Valiant, at Nisibis and Daras the Romans had the Victory, but because they
would not follow the good advice of Belisarins, they were overthrown by the
Persian Auxiliaries, and forced to conclude a dishonorable and shortliv'd
Peace. For Cosroes, at the request of Totilas, when he was hardly beset by
Belisarius in Italy, invaded again the Roman Empire, and would not be entreated
by the Ambassadors of Justinian to desist from his Enterprise. He took Surus,
situate upon the River Euphrates, more by Policy than by Force: He reduced
Beraea to Ashes, destroyed Antioch with Fire and Sword; took Seleucia, Daphne
and Apamia, and several other good Towns, because the Roman Army was then
employed at a distance off from thence in Italy against the Goths. So that he
met with small or no resistance in this first Invasion. Now there was a strong
report amongst the Christians of those days, that the City of Edissa, since the
time that Agbarus had been King, who lived in our Saviors time, was
impregnable, and that no Enemy could possibly take it, not so much through the
strength of the Walls, or any other natural Fortification, as through the Power
of Christ, who had procured such a privilege to that City, whereof his Friend
Agbarus had been King. Cosroes, to try the Truth of this Report, marched with a
very great Army to besiege Edissa. He sat down before it, and raised a high
Mount with Timber and Earth, which over-topped the Walls. The Citizens, sorely
gauled from this Mount with the Persian Arrows, resolved to set it on fire, by
drawing in the Night a Ditch near to the Foot of the Mount, which they filled
with combustible stuff; but when that succeeded not according to their
expectation, and the Mount could not take fire, they brought out the Picture of
Christ, which was said to be sent to King Agbarus from himself before his
Crucifixion. That which before they could not effect, was then accomplished;
for the Pile of Wood was suddenly in a Flame, which the Edisseans increased, by
casting in Tow, Brimstone, Flaggons filled with Pitch and Tar. Cosroes to
remedy this, opened the Conduits of Water to quench the Fire, but all in vain;
the flame never ceased till the Mount was levelled with the ground. This Story
is reported by Procopius and Evagrius, Lib. 4. Cap. 26. with other
circumstances. The latter Historian ascribes the Miracle and deliverance of the
City not to the Power of the Image, but to the Citizens Faith. However Cosroes
rose from his Siege, and departed with shame and dishonor. Another strange
thing, the same Evagrius in the next Chapter reports, which happened to
Cosroes at the Siege of Sergiopolis. He fancyed the Walls of the Town to be
furnished with Armed Men, shining in bright Armor, ready to defend them, when
there were scarce any Persons in the City. However, true it is that a panick
fear caused him to leave that City also; and a Miracle was reported and
believed in that credulous Age.

CHAP. VI. Of Martianus, and Justinianus Generals under Justinus and Tiberius
the Emperors, in the Persian War, An. Dom. 575.
WHen as the Persians continued in their Hostile Minds and Endeavors against
the Roman Empire. Justin the 2d. a Kinsman of Justinianus, though he were
himself but a fainthearted and letcherous Prince, appointed a brave and noble
Captain over his Eastern Army, named Martianus, whom he sent with new raised
Forces against the Persians, and to the Siege of Nisibis. Martianus was but
badly provided of necessaries, yet by his extraordinary diligence he came upon
an Army of the Persians before the rest were ready to fight, and routed them.
The Roman General laid Siege to Nisibis, but Cosroes made all have to relieve
the City, sending Adaarmanes a Captain of the wild Arabians to wast and spoil
the Roman Territories, which he performed with less opposition, because at that
time Justin the Emperor had sent Acatius, a proud ^^ector, but a cowardly and
ignorant Soldier, to be Geneneral instead of Martianus. This un-advised Act
discontented the Army, that most of them fled and forsook the Siege of Nisibis,
and suffered Adaarmanes to spoil the Country with Fire and Sword, to take and
burn Apamia, and by the help of Cosroes, to plunder Daras. Much more mischief
would have ensued, had not the Empress sent an Ambassador in season to Cosroes
to stop his Victorious Army, and revengeful Hands; for no great good can be
expected from an Army when Generals want Experience, when Officers and Soldiers
have no confidence in one another; when the chief Commander is looked upon as a
Coward, dis-esteem'd for his Folly, Pride, Cruelty, or any other Imperfections
of Body or mind. The Roman Empire was then in a sad Condition, invaded by many
Barbarous Nations on all its Borders; so that the Empress, to remedy the Evils
that threatened the State, persuaded Justin to make Tiberius, a Valiant and Wise
Man, Partner with him in the Empire. He immediately listed a Stout and Numerous
Army, and the Treasure which formerly had bin converted to Debauchery, he
employed to pay his Soldiers. Over them he appointed a discreet General, named
Justinianus, and sent him to give a Check to Cosroes, and the Persians
proceedings, who were then in Cappadocia. The two Armies met; but when Cosroes
was loath to venture the hazard of a Battle, because of the Numbers and
Stoutness of the Roman Army: Curs, a Scythian Captain of the Right Wing of the
Romans, gave such a furious Charge upon the Persians, that they were put to
flight, and he pursued them to the place where the Kings Treasure and Carriages
were kept, which he brought away with him. The King took the advantage of the
next night to fall upon one part of the Roman Army, which he did with some
success, but when both parts were united, they pursued him to the River
Euphrates, where were killed and drowned most part of his Forces. A just reward
for his Insolency and Contempt of the Roman Empire, which he had plagued with
continual Wars many years. But at last was overthrown, and his Army cut in
pieces by Justinianus, a Worthy General, and the Emperor Tiberius.

CHAP. VII. Of Mauritius, General under Tiberius the Emperor, Ann. Dom. 580.
who afterward was chosen Emperor.
THis General is represented to us a very Valiant and Politic Commander, free
from Lust and Debauchery, diligent and careful in his Business, watchful over
the Enemy, and wary in all his Undertakings, steady and courageous in all his
Resolutions. He had great Success in his Wars against the Persians, for he took
from them many Cities and Castles upon the Borders, and enriched the Roman Army
with Spoils and Plunder. Famo Cosroes, a Persian General, assisted by
Adaarmanes, met him with their Forces, but they were both overthrown by the
Wisdom and Policy of Mauritius, and by the Romans Courage and Valor, when they
were forsaken by some of their Auxiliary Troops: for such a disappointment,
when an Army depends upon the assistance of others, who either run away, or fly
to the Enemy to increase their Power, is able to give great discouragement, and
to dishearten the most Courageous Minds. Now when some Generals have had such
Jealousy of any of their Forces, they have by Policy, or some cunning
Invention, clapped a Plaster to the wound, wisely prevented before the mischiefs
which such Treachery or Cowardice would otherwise bring upon the rest of their
Army: for a wise General must be furnished against all Casualties, and be ready
to meet an Encounter with all the un-expected Accidents which in his reason may
possibly happen in a Battle. His undaunted Courage alone is able to give life
to his dying Army, and snatch from an Enemy the Honor of the Day. Mauritius
was a Politic Commander, as may appear by a Stratagem, whereof he was the
Author. When he was Emperor, Caganas King of the Avari, a Northern People,
invaded the borders of Thracia, and after many cruel Fights, besieged Priscus
the Praetor in a Castle. Mauritius not being able to raise the Siege, because
his Army was otherwise employed, sends a Letter to Priscus to will him to hold
out stoutly for some few days, for that his Fleet, which was now destroying the
Country of Caganus with Fire and Sword, by his order would speedily return and
relieve him. Caganus intercepts this Letter as it was going into the Castle; he
believes the Contents to be true, therefore the fear of his own Territories
made him in have to rise from the Siege to save his Country from the supposed
Ruin and Destruction. Caganus returned again, and in six years time took and
burnt about 40 good Towns of Dalmatia belonging to the Emperor Mauritius, whose
rare Virtues might have prevented these Mischiefs, had not his neglect of his
Army, and the base Vice of Covetousness, a Vice unbecoming a Prince, procured
him the hatred of his stoutest Soldiers.

CHAP. VIII Of Mahomet and his Successes; their first Arts and Policies,
beginning A.D. 610.
OF all the Impostors since the Creation of the World, none has been so
successful as Mahomet, and done more mischief to the Humane Race. His damnable
Superstition has bin assisted with so much Policy, Interest and Power, amongst
rude and ignorant Nations, that the wonder of its great Successes appears less
to a Judicious Eye. Mahomet's Birth was but mean, but having the advantage of
serving a Rich Merchant, after his Decease, he married his Mistress, and became
suddenly very Wealthy. His Mother was a Jew, his Father a Saracen, descended
from Ishmael, but by Religion it is reported by some, that he was an Heathen;
his Name was Abdala. This subtle Impostor perceiving how ignorant the Men of
his Country were of Religion, the general Debauchery that reigned amongst
Christians, their Feuds, Malice, and continual Quarrels, he took from thence an
occasion, and was thereby encouraged to proclaim himself a Prophet, and to set
up a Religion of his own. The Mysteries of the Christian Religion he could not
well relish, he was therefore opposed, and called in question for his dangerous
and hellish Opinions at his first appearance at Medina, and forced to fly, and
hide himself in a Cave, where Secgius a Westonian Monk assisted him to compose
the Alcoran, the rule of the Mahometans Faith and Religion, which is politickly
and subtilely made up of such Precepts and Doctrines as are most pleasing to
the Viciousness and Corruptions of Men, particularly of the Inhabitants of
those Eastern Countries. To his Followers he allows all things grateful to
their Appetites, and gives large promises of future advantages, but such as
reject his Doctrines, he threatened with Fire and Sword, and ordered his
Disciples to destroy and plunder them. The Mahometans are commonly very modest
in their behaviors, and seemingly devout, and abstain from the most scandalous
Sins which disgrace too much the Christian Profession. Mahomet had not long
proclaimed himself to be a Prophet before he was chosen General of the Saracen
Army that had assisted Heraelius the Emperor against the Persians. Upon the
denial of their just Wages, they fell upon the Roman Provinces to pay
themselves with the Spoils of the Country. Mahomet could not have a better
opportunity to settle his Religion; for by his Wit and Successes he wanted not
those of his Country that sided with him for the present Gain, and helped him
to propagate his Faith with the sharpness of their Swords. He had great
prosperity in all his Wars, and when he was dead, Abubecher his Kinsman
succeeded him, and within two Years took several Towns from the Roman Empire.
Next to him was Omer, and after him Ottoman. They all endeavored to secure
their Interest amongst the ignorant People by the same divellish Arts,
Hypoerisie, and Counterfeits. For Mahomet had a Pidgeon that would come to his
Ear, which he declared to be a Divine Message sent to direct and advise him.
When he was troubled with the Falling Sickness, he invented, that then the
Angel Gabriel did appear to him, and cast him into a Divine Rapture, whereby
his Senses were stupefied. These three formal Successors of Mahomet reformed
the Alcoron, and blotted out a great many gross Absurdities which were there
before; and left all their Conquests and Honors to Mortis Aly, who could not
be contented with the Honor of succeeding Mahomet, but resolved to set up for
himself, declaring that he was a greater Prophet than Mahomet had bin. Their
wonderful Success in War, and the great progress that they made in a few years,
caused the ignorant World to believe that these wicked Impostors were more than
ordinary Men. Homar took in Damascus, and all Phaenicia, with Egypt; Hally
conquered Persia, and spread his impious Superstition all over the Eastern
Countries. He was slain by Muavias, who enlarged his Dominions as far as the
Eastern Sea, conquered Cyprus and Rhodes, and in a notable Sea Fight beat the
Roman Emperors Navy, and killed so many Christians, that the Sea was dyed with
the Roman Blood. Such terrible executions, together with the vast numbers of
the Saracen Armies, and their subtle way of Fighting, more by surprise and
Ambush, than by plain Valor, struck such a terror to all the Provinces of the
Empire, that as soon as they appeared, the Inhabitants would compound with the
Arabian Leaders to save their Lives, and yield unto them what ever else they
would require. This wonderful success made them adventure into Italy, Greece,
Spain and France, and to run over all the Seacoast of Africa, where their
Posterity continues to this very day. These Mahometans are bound, to propagate
their Religion, and generally believe that if they kill, or are killed by
Christians in the quarrel of their false Prophet, they are undoubtedly saved,
and their Souls admitted into Paradise. This Error causes them to be so
Courageous in the greatest Dangers; and the plunder of the Countries invited a
great many Vagabonds to join themselves in hopes of Gain, to that Damnable
Superstition, and to their numerous Armies. They conquered Sicilia, Sardinia,
and almost all the most considerable Islands of the Mediteranean Sea, and
besieged the Emperor Constantine the IV. in his Imperial City. But their great
Navy was set on Fire by an Invention of Callinicus, a Learned Methematician of
those days, who with Fireballs that would burn in the Water, destroyed all
their Ships, with 30000 men in them. By this means the Roman Provinces were
quiet for a while, and delivered from the fear of their Cruel Neighbors, till
they increased again, and under the leading of Abdimelech their King. He
recovered and conquered Persia, Mesopotamia, Armenia, Hircania, and several
other large Provinces, with the Destruction of Mustar and Said, his two Potent
Enemies. Thus through the Ignorance and Cowardice of the Eastern People,
through the Divisions amongst Christians; the Cruelty, Diligence, Policy and
Power of Mahomet and his Successors, prevailed in a wonderful manner.

CHAP. IX. Of Carolus Martellus the French General, and of his Son King Pipin
of France.
THE Saracen Armies were in those days not only in Asia and Africa, but in
Europe also, they conquered all the plain Countries of Spain, and erected
several Kingdoms there. At the Invitation of Eudon Duke of Guien, jealous of
the Greatness of Charles Martel, they entered France, and passed over the
Pyrenian Mountains, under the command of Abdiran their General. Bourdeaux they
took, with several other great Towns that were forced to submit to their vast
numbers; for they were above 300000 men with all their Families. Charles
Martel, the Son of Pipin, Chief Master of the Kings Palace, taking upon him the
Name of Prince of France, encountered these Foreign Enemies with an Army of
French, Germans and Longobards, and to oblige his men to stand to the Fight
with more Courage, he placed behind them certain Troops of Horse, commanding
them to kill all such as should offer to fly away. This severe course obliged
them to be so courageous and resolved, that they cut in pieces, as is recorded
in History, near 370000 Saracens, with little loss on the Christians part. This
Famous Victory, together with the wonderful deliverance of the French Countries
from the danger of these Infidels, made Martel to be both beloved and highly
honored by all that Nation, so that he had no great difficult to set aside the
Race of the former Kings, and to make way for his Son Pipin to ascend upon the
French Throne instead of Chiperick, who was shut up in a Monastery. This has
often bin the unhappy Fate of such Princes as have minded more their Pleasures
than the Government of their Kingdoms, and have left to others that charge
which they are, by God's appointment, to take upon themselves. Martel, after
the Slaughter of the Saracen Army in the Fields of Aquitania, met with two
Generals more of the same Nation, upon the Borders of Navarre, Athimus and
Amortheus, who brought with them a great Company of the same People. He slew
Eudon, the wicked Duke of Aquitania, and drove all the Saracens out of France,
and encouraged Pelagius an Earls Son, to endeavor to free the Kingdom of
Gallicia and Leon from those troublesome Guests. With a very small Company this
Pelagius destroyed vast numbers of the Saracens, and was for his good Service
and Valor saluted the first King of Gallicia. Pipin the Son of Charles Martel
succeeds his Father in the Government of France, and in his ambitious designs;
for he confined his Lord and King to to a Covent, and took from him his
Regalia, with the Popes approbation: when Pipin sent to him to know who was
fittest to Reign, a Stupid prince, or an Active Subject; the Pope understanding
his meaning, gave orders to the Archbishop of Mentz, to set the Crown of France
on Pipins Head. Thus the Popes of Rome have secured their Interest and
Authority by obliging Persons of the greatest Valor, Activity and Authority,
that they might help to enlarge and defend their Dominions. For Pipin having
received so great a Courtesy from Pope Stephen, he could do no less than
assist him with an Army when he was overpowred by Aistulphus King of the
Longobards, from whom he took Ravenna, Bononia, Imola, Faventia, Ferrara, etc.
and bestowed them as a Gift on the Church of Rome. And when Aistulphus besieged
Rome with an Army at Pipins return into France, the Pope was forced to implore
again his Aid, which he easily granted, and forced Aistulphus to purchase his
Peace with the yielding of the third part of his Treasures, and a yearly
Tribute, which he paid to the French. Afterward Pipin at his return out of
Italy with his Army, conquered Aquitania and Goscony. Pipin was a Politic
Prince, and because the Pope and Clergy in those days were in high esteem, he
did them all the reverence, showed them all the favor that was in his Power,
and they to requite his kindness, raised him from the condition of a Subject to
that of a Monarch. When Pope Stephen came to implore his Assistance against the
Longobards, he met him with his Wife, Children and Nobles, three Miles out of
his City, and received him with a knee upon the ground, took the Reins of the
Pope's Bridle, and led him to his Palace, whilst multitudes of the People sung
Songs to the Praise, and in honor of the Pope, and the new King. For it
concerned him and his Posterity to vindicate and extol that Authority, by which
he was established in the Throne, and his lawful Prince thrust out. Therefore
both he and his Son Charles did always magnify the Popes Power, Credit and
Dominion, and would never suffer them to be questioned by any other earthly
Judges. Pipin sounded the Bishopwricks of Saltsburg, Ratisbone, Aihstrat and
Frisinge in Germany, and was very bountiful to other places. He was the first
who brought in the use of Organs into the Western Churches, having received one
as a present from the Emperor of Constantinople. And it is observed of him,
that he was sincerely Zealous, and Religious in his persuasion. He endeavored
to propagate the Christian Faith, and to employ that Power that God gave him,
to advance his Glory. He suppressed Heathenism, Judaism, and all manner of
Heresies, and established a civil Government for the execution of Justice. The
Parliament of Paris was first appointed by him, not to give a check to the
Royal Authority, but that the Kings of France might advise with the most
ingenious and excellent Men of his Kingdom, who were well acquainted with the
conditions and necessities of the People; that all Resolutions and Royal Acts
might be made for the common good, and the preservation of the Grandeur and
Authority of the Monarchy. This King highly promoted also all those who had bin
active to establish him upon the Throne, and was very careful not to suffer
Virtue in the meanest person to go unrewarded.

CHAP. X. Of Carolus Magnus the first Northern Emperor.
CHarles the Son of such a wise, successful and Religious Prince as Pipin was,
inherits his Fathers Estate, and Zeal for Religion. At his first coming to the
Crown, he was solicited by Pope Adrian to relieve the Roman Church, then likely
to be robbed of all St. Peter's Patrimony by Desiderius, King of the Lombards.
With a strong Army he marches into Italy, and in a notable Fight overcame
Desiderius, and besieges him in Ticinum, took him with the Town, and sent him
and his Wife into France. All Italy submitted to the Victorious Banners of
Charles, who enlarged the Dominions of the Romish Church. To the former gift of
King Pipin, he added several large and rich Towns. At his return into France,
he undertook an expedition against the Saxons, who were Heathens, and with them
he overcame the Westphalians, the Huns, the Angarians, the Hestians, but the
Saxons kept him in play 33 years before they could be totally subdued. The
Christians of Spain desired his Assistance against the Moors to relieve them;
he marched with his Army into Spain, where he had wonderful Success; but at his
return over the Pyrenian Mountains, the passages were so beset by the Country
People, that he lost his Army, and was forced to fly for his Life, leaving
Eginbardus, Roland, Anshelmus, and many of his best Officers, dead behind him.
Adalgisus and Thastilo, the Son and Nephew of Desiderius, raised some stirs in
Italy to recover Lombardy, but them he overcame by his Lieftenants; the first
he put to Death, and confined the second to a Monastery. After all these
Victories and Successes, Charles deserved well the name of Great; and to
requite his kindness to the Roman See, Pope Leo the 3d. put upon him the
Imperial Crown, and made him the first Emperor of the West, in St. Peter's
Church at Rome, upon Christmas day, in the year 800. From hence the Roman
Bishops claim the privilege of naming and Crowning the Western Emperors, who
have often desired to receive the Imperial Diadem from the hands of the Popes
in former ages.

This Charles was a very Wise, Learned, Courageous, and Fortunate Prince; for
he subdued the greatest part of France, Spain, Italy, Saxony, Pannonia,
Histria, Ducia, Liburnia and Dalmatia. He was very liberal to the Churches and
Clergy of his days. 23 Metropolitan Churches inherited his Treasures, besides,
he built many Religious Houses and Colleges, and appointed the 12 Peers of
France, Six of the Clergy, and Six of the Laity. And it is reported of him,
that at Supper time he would have some Godly and Religious Book to be read to
him. So careful he was for the preservation of the right Faith in his Kingdoms,
that when Nestorianism was received by the Corruption and Wickedness of two
Bishops, he called together at Franckford a Synod of 300 Bishops to judge and
determine that Controversy. Therefore for his care of Religion, and the regard
he had in all his Actions to God's Glory, he was blessed with wonderful Success
in all his wars, so that his Fame was spread all about the known World; and he
was courted by the remotest Princes, by the Greeks, Saracens, Swedes and Danes,
etc.

CHAP. XI. How Telerichus King of the Bulgarians found out those that
discovered his Secrets to Constantine Copronymus.
WHen Telerichus succeeded in the Government of the Bulgarians, to Sabinus, he
was resolved to make War against the Roman Emperor, and endeavored to assault
him suddenly, before he could be well provided to resist. An Ambush was laid to
catch some of the Emperors Forces: but several of the Bulgarian Nobility
discontented at Telerichus, reveals all the danger to the Emperor, who managed
and improved that discovery so well, that he took all that lay in Ambush for
him, without shedding a drop of his peoples Blood. Telerichus understood that
some had revealed this plot to the Emperor, but not knowing who they might be,
he found them out in this manner. He pretended that he would willingly make
peace with the Emperor, and submit to him upon certain Conditions; and to show
that he had such a real and hearty design; he desired him to name some of his
Officers and Noble Men, who were most pleasing to him, them he promised to
send, and to entrust with the management of this Agreement between them. The
Emperor not imagining the Subtilty of Telerichus, named those very Men to be
Commissioners, who had revealed all their Princes designs and plots to him.
Telerichus, as soon as he knew them, put them all to death, and punished them
for their Treason.

CHAP. XII How the Empress Irene overcame such as were of a Faction contrary to
hers.
THere was a great stir in the Eastern Empire about the Images of the Church.
They had been cast out by Leo Isaurus, and his Successors, Constantine,
Copronymus, and Leo the 4th. and those who were for Images, were banished, and
several punished. But it happened that after the death of Leo, Irene his Widow
appointed to be Governess of the Empire, during the minority of her Son,
re-establishes the Worship of Images, and calls home all that had been
banished. These and other proceedings met with great opposition, as is usual,
where two strong Factions are in a Kingdom. She being jealous of the number and
power of those that did dislike her Actions, resolves to dis-arm them; and to
color her malicious purposes against them, she pretends an expedition against
the Saracens, who were broke in upon the Roman Provinces, and that she wanted
Arms to furnish her Army, and therefore desires to borrow them from her
Citizens. The Officers who were sent, were ordered to take none, but from those
who joined not with her in the worship of Images. As soon as they had yielded
up their Arms, which they did the more willingly, because they thought that
they should be employed against the Common Enemy, she banished them out of the
City, and took away their Goods and Estates.

CHAP. XIII. How Pope Gregory the Fourth betrayed the Emperor into the Hands
of his unnatural Sons.
THe Sons of this Emperor were risen in Rebellion against him, and had raised
a considerable Army, with a design to fight with their Father near Basil. The
Pope, whose Election the Emperor had with some difficulty allowed, came to the
Armies, with a pretense to make peace between the Father and his Sons, but with
a real intent to find some opportunity to be revenged upon the Godly Emperor.
At his arrival, he found the Emperors Army the strongest, and ready to give
Battle. To prevent the mischief that was like to fall upon the Sons, whom he
secretly favored, and whom he had stirred up against their Father, he went
over to the Emperors Army, as if he had intended to reconcile the Father and
the Sons together; but as it appeard afterward, it was to get some time, that
the Emperors Army might be prevailed with by his cunning Followers to forsake
their Lord, and to join with, the Young Men. This Negotiation was carried on so
subtilely and secretly by rewards and promises, and by sowing the Seeds of
discontent in the Army, that when they were drawn out to Fight, they went over
to the Sons Army, and forsook the poor Aged Emperor, who was then forced to
cast himself in the hands of his wicked and rebellious Sons, who shut him up in
Prison. But this unnatural deed stirred up the Emperors Friends to procure him
in a short time his Liberty.

CHAP. XIV. How the Emperor Basil was deceived twice, once by a Monk, next by
a Parrot.
THis Emperor was very desirous to see again his Son Constantine, who was
lately dead. A Monk, named Theodorus, a reputed Negromancer, undertakes to show
him again alive, which he did in so lively a manner, that the Emperor admired
him. But his Son Leo, as soon as he heard of it, accused Theodorus of
Witchcraft, but could do him no prejudice, because of the Emperors
extraordinary Favor that he did bear to him. But Theodorus resolved to be
revenged on Leo; he persuades therefore the Young Man to carry secretly a
Dagger in his Boots, as a spell to preserve him from all kind of Wounds. Leo
believed Theodorus, who went to the Father, and told him that his Son Leo
intended to kill him, and for that purpose he carried secretly in his Boots a
short Dagger. Search was made, and the Dagger found, and Leo was, without
further Examination, shut up in Prison; at which the people were much
afflicted, crying up and down the Streets, Alas! Lord Leo, which words a
Parrot, belonging to the Court, heard, and learned to speak. When the Emperor
was at Dinner, the Parrot cried often, Alas! Lord Leo. These words spoke by
the Bird so prevailed upon his mind (for he fancyed the Bird to have spoken
them by some Divine Inspiration) that he released, and heard his Son's
Justification, being thereunto earnestly entreated also by the common people,
who had for him a great respect, and by that means found out the wicked knavery
of Theodorus.

CHAP. XV. How the City of Rome was taken casually by the running of a Hare.
ARnulphus, the first Emperor of the German Nation, was invited by Pope
Formosus into Italy, to assist him against his Enemies, and a contrary Faction.
He took many Towns, and besieged the City of Rome, unto which he had given
several fierce assaults; but in vain, for it was stoutly defended by the
Citizens. At last, when Arnulphus despaired to take it by force, and was going
to raise his Siege, it happened that a Hare ran before his Army toward the
breach. The Soldiers gave immediately a great shout and hollow, running after
the Hare. The Guards upon the Walls thinking they were coming to give an
assault to the City, in a panick Fear hasted away, and forsook their stations
and charge, which as the Soldiers of Arnulphus perceived, they entered the Town,
and took the City. Thus was Rome once surprised by the guidance of a Hare. Such
casual accidents have oft-times been of great moment in times of War, when men's
apprehensions are awake, and their minds ready to receive any impression, the
least surprise, or strange thing unexpected weakens their Resolutions, and
makes them less able to resist an Enemy. Therefore wise Generals have often put
in practice things of themselves, ridiculous at other times, which in War have
put the stoutest Enemy to flight, and overcame the bravest Courageous. For then
nothing is to be contemned that may either dismay or disorder an Enemy. And to
prevent such sudden casualties, which cannot be all foreseen by the most
experienced and wise Commanders; or by the most excellent Soldiers, though
never so well acquainted with the Stratagems of War; no precaution can be
prescribed, but that of a steady and well resolved mind, not to be daunted at
the fight of the greatest dangers; but in such a case, as it becomes a
Commander to animate and encourage his Men, and to have a Remedy at hand for
all misfortunes, and a plaster for every wound, so it becomes a Soldier to
stand firm, and act the part of a valorous and brave Courage, not to be
terrified with Bug-bears; and though the danger should be real and great, the
Resolutions of a good Soldier must master all such sudden and surprising
difficulties, and wade through a Sea of Blood to the Honor of the Victory,
which he ought to value at an equal rate with his own Life, when he has a good
cause.

CHAP. XVI. How a great Army of Danes were defeated by the means of one Hay a
Country Man, and his two Sons, A.D. 964.
THe Danes having invaded Scotland, overpowred a Scotch Army in a notable
Battle, so that the Scots were all put to flight. At that time one Hay a
Ploughman coming out of his Field with his two Sons, meets with the Rout. They
being all his Countrymen, he bids them stand for shame, and return to the
Fight, and so prevailed upon them by his words and example, that they turned
back, and encountered with the Danes again so fiercely, that they were all put
to flight, and utterly destroyed. For this good Service the Countryman was
rewarded with as much Land as a Falcon could fly over at one flight, which is 6
Miles in length. From this Hay is descended the Noble Family of the Hays, whose
chief is the Earl of Arroll.

CHAP. XVII How Tangrolipix the Turkish General was made Sultan of Persia.
TAngrolipix with a party of Turks, was requested by Mahomet, a Saracen Sultan
of Persia, to assist him against Pisasiris Caliphon of Babylon. He had the good
fortune to bear Caliph's Army of Arabians. After the Victory, he desired
liberty to return home, but Mahomet denied it him; which so discontented the
Turks, that they withdrew themselves into the Deserts and Forests of
Caravonitis, from whence they made Incursions upon all the Borders for their
Livelihood, and Plunder. This obliged the Sultan of Persia, Mahomet, to send
against them a powerful Army, which by the skill of Tangrolipiae was defeated.
Mahomet enraged at this loss, puts out the eyes of Ten of the chief Commanders,
and threatens to apparel all the rest of the flying Army in the Garb of Women,
and to carry them about his Kingdom as Cowards. These threatenings could not be
disgested by those Military Souls, whose mishap, not want of Courage, had lost
the day against the Turks. They therefore, either out of Fear or Revenge, went
all away to Tangrolipix, to increase the number of his Army. When Tangrolipix
was thus strengthened by this unexpected Recruit, he kept not himself any longer
in the Deserts and Mountains, but marched with a complete Army to meet with
Mahomet in the Fields of Ispahan, where after a bloody Fight, Mahomet fell from
his Horse, and broke his neck. At his death both Armies sounded a Retreat, and
their Chieftains came to a Parley, where it was agreed, that Tangrolipix should
be saluted Sultan of Persia. This was the first Kingdom of the Turks in Asia,
mentioned in History, after the leaving of their own Country. Tangrolipix
conquered Babylon, and warred against the Arabians, and the Emperor of
Constantinople, with various success: and at last he conquered many rich
Provinces of the Empire, partly through the covetousness of Constantine Ducas,
then Emperor, who taxed all the Borderers, and suffered them to withdraw their
Garrison from the strongest places of the Country, whereas before they were
free, for the services they rendered to the Roman Empire; and partly for want of
encouraging and entertaining military men. By these examples a Prince may
learn, that it is no point of policy to provoke men of courage by too great
severity; nor to suffer his Armies and Captains to want that due regard which
they expect and deserve, when his Dominions are surrounded and endangered by
powerful and watchful Enemies. By the contempt and neglect of Arms the Greeks
have lost their Honor and Empire, and are forced to submit to the Turks
Tyranny and Oppression, and are now become the basest of Men in War.

CHAP. XVIII. How the first Christians that adventured over into Asia against
the Turks were decoyed and cut off by their Ambushes.
THe zeal of our Forefathers stirred them up to the Conquest of the Holy Land.
Several great Princes had crossed themselves with a resolution to undertake
that perilous Voyage. Amongst the rest, Gualter de Saint Sanneur, a Noble Man,
and Peter the Hermit entered Asia before the rest with forty thousand Men, who
drove the Turks before them at first, but they, to deceive the Christians, made
a show as if they were wonderfully afraid, therefore they forsook the Towns. At
Exorgum the Christian Army encamped, from whence about 3000 were sent to fetch
in Provisions: some few Herds of Cattle appeared at a distance, which the
flying Turks suffered them to take quietly; but the next time that they sallyed
out to forage, they cut them all in pieces. And when ten thousand more were
sent to revenge this loss, they were almost all destroyed by the Turks
Ambuscado's; for both they and the Moors of Africa are very subtle in laying
them in convenient places; and they seldom fight, but with such advantages and
surprises. Sultan Solomon, the Son of Cutla-Moses, was the chief Commander of
the Turks in those parts; a warlike Prince, who having got together an Army of
60000 men, engaged in a sharp Fight against the Christians, after the taking of
the City of Nice, and had almost destroyed their Army by the sudden assaulting
of their Camp behind them, whilst the Christian Army was fighting in the Field.
It has always been observed, that there is nothing has been more destructive
to an Army, and given the Enemy more advantage, than when Soldiers become
insolent, proud of their Success, and begin to despise their Enemies, and their
Endeavors: for it is an easy matter to surprise such in a Snare, and make
them to repent, too late, of their folly. Hundreds of Examples might be
produced of the miserable overthrow of those who began to contemn their Enemies
too soon.

CHAP. XIX. How Othoman the first, King of the Turks cunningly slew such as
intended to have destroyed him.
O Thoman's wonderful Prosperity purchased to him the hatred and envy of many
of his Neighbors; so that several Christian Captains of small Castles living
round about him, resolved in their Assembly to murder Othoman; and the better
to effect their wicked purpose, they designed to invite him to a great
Marriage, which was to be solemnized between the Captain of Belizuga Castle,
and a fair Lady, the Daughter of the Captain of Jar-Chiser. This Captain of
Belizuga had the management of the Plot left to him. He sent therefore for one
Michael Cossi, a neighbor Captain, and an intimate Friend of Othoman, to
prevail with him at the day appointed to be present at the Marriage, for then
in the midst of their mirth and jollity, it was resolved to kill Othoman.
Cossi, when he understood it, reveals the whole design to Othoman, who desired
him on his part to conceal the Discovery from his Enemies, but to tell the
Captain of Bilezuga that he would not fail to wait on him, and that he thought
himself much obliged to him for many former Favors, for protecting his Cattle
and Subjects, desiring him to continue his good Offices, more particularly in
this time of War, which he had undertaken against one Germeanogli, of whom he
stood in some fear. Therefore he entreated him that he would receive into his
Castle certain things of greai value, which he would send thither to be secured
better than in any other parts of the Country: and to tell him also, that he
intended to bring his Mother and Wife to be acquainted with his Lady. When
Cossi had delivered this message to the Captain, he rejoiced greatly, hoping
that his Plot would take effect, willing Cossi to tell Othoman that he should
be welcome, with all such Guests as he should please to bring. When the
Marriage-day approached, Othoman, as his custom was to pack up his Goods, and
send them to Bilezuga, instead of Rich Household Stuff, he filled his Packs with
Armed Men, and cast over them some homely Coverings, and caused Young Men to
follow the Carriages in the garb of Women, as if they had been his Wife, and
Mother-in-law, with their Servants and Attendants: All this Train he caused so
to march, that they should come to the Castle at the dawning of the day. The
Captain was then in the Fields, providing for the Solemnity of his Marriage the
next day, which was to be kept at a convenient place about Three miles from the
Castle. Othoman goes to meet the Captain; after many Complements, and feigned
expressions of Love, Othoman entreats him that his Women might have liberty to
enter into his Castle, and retire themselves into some convenient place, which
was readily granted. But when these disguised Girls were entered, they played
the parts of Men; for being assisted by those who leaped out of the packs, they
slew the Guards, and took the Castle. The Captain having notice of this
surprise from some that fled out, made have after Othoman with his Followers,
but he was so briskly entertained, that he was there slain, with many of his
men. Othoman pursues his good fortune, and the same night takes the Castle of
Jar-Chisar, with the Captain and his Daughter Lulufer, with all their Company
ready for the Marriage. Thus he subtilely turned the plot that was intended for
his Destruction, to the ruin of his Enemies. After this, Othoman took Nice in
Bythinia, Neapolis, Prusia; and in the year 1300. took upon him the Title and
Honors of a Sultan, meeting with little opposition, because, Michael
Paleologus, then Emperor of the East, was busy with his own Subjects, who
would not yield to that change which he was resolved to bring into the Religion
of the Greeks, for he had promised the Pope to conform to the Church of Rome.
Both Clergy and People were averse to those Alterations; and the Emperor to
force them, employed all his Soldiers when he should have sent them against the
common Enemy; who in few years got such footing, and by the mildness and
easiness of the Turkish Government, made many Christians to prefer a living
under them, rather than under such a cruel and barbarous Emperor. So that
afterward it was never in the power of the Greeks to expel them out of their
Dominions.

CHAP. XX. How the Catalonians in Greece overcame the Prince of Athens, and
Thebes, by a Stratagem.
ANdrenicus the Son of Michael Paleologus succeeding to his Father in the
Empire, employed Foreign Forces to fight for him against the Turks. The
Mastagetes, the Turcopoli, and a party of Catalonians, brought into Greece by
Ronzerius and Tenza their Generals. When their Salary was denied them, and
Ronzerius slain by the Emperors command; these Catalonians became desperate
Enemies to the Empire. They took Galliopolis, and in pitched Battle fought with,
and overcame Michael the Emperor. After this they adventured into Beotia with
3500 Horse, and 4000 Foot. But hearing of the Duke of Athen's was coming with
his Army, they encamped upon the sides of a River, in a plain ground, and
caused all round about, the Earth to be ploughed up in Furrows, letting in the
Water of the River into each Furrow. There they lay expecting the Dukes coming,
who in great contempt of these Vagabonds, assaulted them as soon as they could
come to them. But when his Horses began to ride over the ploughed ground, which
was then overgrown with Grass, they began to stick fast in the Mire: some cast
off their Riders, others were not to be recovered, and they were most rendered
unserviceable by this means; so that the Catalonians shot them with their
Arrows at their pleasure, without any hazard of their own persons, and obtained
over the rest a notable Victory. They afterward took the Cities of Athens and
Thebes, where they seated themselves for a while.

CHAP. XXI. Of the brave Exploits of Philes Paleologus, who freed his Country
from the first Turks that came over into Europe to the assistance of the
Catalonians.
WHen these Catalonians were at open defiance with the Emperor for want of
their pay, they requested Aid of the Turks of Asia, who sent unto them Chalel a
General, with a good number of stout Soldiers. After they were grown rich with
the Plunder and Spoil of Greece, and the Catalonians resolved to stay about
Athens, and there maintain themselves: Chalel with his Turks, sent to the
Emperor to desire leave to depart, and some Ships to carry him and his Forces
over into Asia. The Emperor, to deliver his Country from such troublesome
Guests, whom he could not suppress by Arms, promised them all that they
desired. But when they came to the Seaside, in hopes to be transported over,
the treacherous Greeks resolved to cut them off, and to take away all their
rich Prey; of which design they having timely notice, they suddenly surprised a
Castle thereabouts, where they secured themselves with all their plunder,
fortifying it so well, that it was not in the power of their Enemies to do them
any mischief. The Greeks certified the Emperor of their own weakness, and the
Turks Actions and Power. But they being beset by multitudes of Enemies, and few
in number, they sent over to their Countrymen in Asia to have some Supplies,
which came to them before the Emperor besieged the Castle; for the Greeks not
proceeding with that speed as such a business required, gave a fair opportunity
to Chalel to strengthen himself against the coming of the Emperor; who having
gathered together some Country Forces, began to lay close Siege to the Castle,
but in such a negligent and careless manner, as if their Enemy had been already
overcome. This being known to Chalel and his Turks within, he sallies out with
eight hundred Horse, and directs his course to the Imperial Ensign, where,
without any resistance, he put the whole Army with the Emperor, to flight,
took all their Bag and Baggage, with the Imperial Crown full of Jewels and
Pearls, which Chalel put upon his own Head in derision of the Emperor. After
this Victory, the Turks spoiled the Country of Thracia, and so distressed the
Inhabitants, that they scarce dared to venture out of their Walled Towns to
manure their Ground. The two Emperors, the Father and the Son, having no Power
nor Courage to stop them, sent for foreign Aid out of Servia. In the mean while
Philes Faleolgus, a Kinsman of the Emperors, a Devout man, pitying the sad
condition of his miserable Country, thus spoiled by these barbarous Turks
without control, requested of the Emperors, that he might be sent to see what
he could do against them. According to his desire he was furnished with an Army
of Greeks and Servians, first he encouraged his Captains and Soldiers, giving
them many Gifts, and mon, ytook care of their safety and welfare, and promised
to them all great Rewards, according to their brave Actions. This caused Philes
to be so well beloved in his Army, that they were willing and resolved to
fight, and dye with him. When he understood that Chalel with a thousand Foot,
and two hundred Horse was plundring of the Country, he marched forward to meet
him. The Turks, at the first appearance of the Christian Army, made ready for
Battle, enclosing in their Prisoners bound, and all their booty within their
Wagons. Philes encouraged his Men, and with his Eyes and Hands lifted up to
Heaven, heartily prayed to the God of Hosts to pity the miseries of his
distressed Countrymen. After a furious Fight, and much Gaslantry on both sides,
the Turks were beaten out of the Field, and forced to fly to their Castle, as
their last Refuge; but being there besieged both by Sea and Land, they were all
slain and taken Prisoners, and the Country freed from a grievous oppression by
this devout Captain.

CHAP. XXII. The Stratagems of Orthanes the II. King of the Turks, at his first
coming to the Crown, for the Enlargement of his Dominions.
ORthanes treading the Footsteps of his deceased Father, proceeded by policy in
most of his expeditions. There was at the death of his Father a certain strong
Castle named Tzuprichiser, situate upon the passage of the River Sangarius,
which stopped all the inrodes of the Turks into part of Bythinia, and was a great
succor to the City of Nice, lately recovered from the Turks by the Christian
Captains. This Castle possessed by the Christians, Orthanes endeavored to
recover; for that purpose he disguises himself and his followers in the Habit
of Christian Merchants, with their Weapons concealed about them, and nothing
visible but Packs, and such Wares as were usually carried that way into the
Neighboring Villages. At the Gates of the Castle he desires the Guard that he,
and his might have liberty to enter in, and pass through. They without any
scruple suffered him to go in, thinking that they had bin Merchants indeed; but
as soon as they were within the Gates, they fell upon the Guards, overcame
them, and took from them this strong Castle, which gave them an inlet to all
the most pleasant Country about Nice. So that the Subjects of the Emperor were
continually vexed by their unreasonable plundring, and forced for their
security to put themselves under their protection. By this means he got daily
ground, and encroached still upon the Borders of the Empire. Andronicus the
younger, to stop the progress of the Turks, listed an Army, and met them in the
Field near Philocrene, a Town in Bythinia, where he was defeated and wounded,
and for want of good order, his whole Army forced to fly, leaving behind him
all his bag and baggage. After this good success, Orthanes commanding all the
Country round about the City of Nice without any opposition, reduced it to
great want of Provisions, so that when the Inhabitants complained to the
Emperor, he promised to send them 1000 Horse to keep Garrison there, and
defend them from the Turks power. Orthanes had intelligence of this promise,
and of the coming of this Cavalry: to prevent them, he resolves to take Nice
before their coming, which he readily performed by this Stratagem. He caused
about 800 of his stoutest men to take the Habit and Furniture which Christian
Horsemen used then to wear, commanding them to take a compass about, and ride
directly to the City, in that way that leads from Constantinople to Nice. At
the same time he sent about 300 of his own Horsemen in their Turkish Apparel
to spoil the Country round about in view of the City. At that very instant the
800 Horsemen in the Christians Garb came Traveling toward Nice, and seeing
the others plundring the Country, they fell upon them, and overcame them in a
Fight, which was all done in sight of the Citizens of Nice. After the supposed
Victory, they rid to the Gates with some part of the Spoils of their
counterfeit Enemies. The Citizens thinking that their promised Succors were
come, opened to them their Gates with Joy, and without much examination. But as
soon as they were within, the Turks made them feel the sharpness of their
Swords; and these 800. with 300 more that fled out of sight, and a strong
Ambush that lay near the City, joined all together, took and plundered it, and
left it to be possessed by the Turks to this day. After this, and the gaining
of all the Seaports about the ancient and demolished City of Troy, Accecoza, a
Captain of Orthanes, besieged Abydus, a Famous Castle upon the Hellespont,
which he took by the Treachery of the Captains Daughter in the Castle. She had
seen in a Dream a certain Officer Cavalier, of a very handsome Countenance, who
helped her out of a Miery Ditch, and performed several other pleasing Services
to her. The Image of this Gallant was so fixed in her mind, when awakened, that
she longed to see the reality of the Man that was shown to her in her sleep. It
happened that when the Castle was besieged by the Turks, an Officer did usually
ride up and down near to the Walls. She looked out at a Window and saw him, and
found that this was the Man whom she had already in her Fancy and Affection;
therefore she provided a Letter for him, which she cast over the Wall at his
next riding about, tied to a stone. Abdurachman was the name of the Cavalier.
He takes it up, and shows it to Accecoza his chief Commander, who there finds
that the Amorous Virgin promised to betray to them the Castle, if they would
raise the Siege; and if Abdurachman would return to the Castle Walls, with some
few Followers, and observe her Directions. All things being agreed upon
according to her orders, the Siege was raised: Abdurachman comes to the place
appointed with a chosen Company. The young Gentlewoman fails not to meet him at
midnight, and brings him into the Castle, shows him the Paters Lodge, where he
killed him, and let in his Followers, who immediately dispersed themselves
about, and took the Captain and all the Garrison Prisoners; for they had been
very Jovial the day before for the supposed departure of the Turks from before
their Castle, and were then most of them secure and asleep, Thus was the strong
Castle of Abidas taken by the Infidels, in whose possession it has remained to
this day. Abydus is over against Sestos in Europe, at the Mouth of the
Hellespont; and these two Castles are now called Dardanelli, and are maintained
by the Turks, as a Bar to hinder the Christian Ships from saying through into
the Pontick Sea, or from invadling suddenly their great City of Stambul or
Constantinople. For that purpose they are furnished with mighty great Guns.
After this surprizal of Abydus, Soliman the Son of Orthanes sent over two
Captains, Ezes-beg and Fazil-beg with sufficient Forces into Europe. They
landed not far from Sessos, where by the direction of a Greek Prisoner, they
took the Castles of Coiridocastron and Maditus, and next Callipolis, with many
other considerable places.

CHAP. XXIII. How Amurath the Third, King of the Turks took Didymotichum and
Adrianople by Craft.
AS soon as Amurath came to succeed in his Fathers Kingdom, he concluded a
Peace with the Christians. The Governor of Didymotichum taking advantage of
this time of Peace, resolved to fortify his City, and for the better carrying
on of his Work with speed, entertained all the Masons, Carpenters and Workmen
he could possibly get When Amurath understood his purpose, he secretly caused
two hundred lusty Workmen to come over out of Asia, and to offer their service
to the Governor. He, though he had been forewarned by some to take heed of the
Asian Workmen, hired them, but appointed to them their Lodgings out of the
Walls every night. When Amurath had intelligence of all particulars, he sent
Chasis-Ilbeg with thirty other stout Soldiers to desire work of the Governor,
and serve as Laborers, to carry Stones and Mortar. The Governor trusting too
much to the Faith of the Faithless Turks in that time of Peace, employed them
awhile. At last Chasis steals away to Amurath, gives him an account of all
passages, and tells him that if he had any more help, he would endeavor to
surprise one of the Gates of the City, to let in a greater number, if they were
at hand. Amurath ordered all things according to his desire, and sent him back
to Didymotichum to put his device in execution. Chasis at his return, watches
an opportunity. When the Christians were at dinner, then did he cause the
Turkish Workmen and Laborers to counterfeit a Brawl, and to fall from Words to
Blows; whilst they were thus quarrelling, one party of them ran suddenly to one
of the Gates of the City, where they took hold of the Weapons of the Guard, as
if it had been to defend themselves from their pursuing Companions; but they
turned them against the Soldiers keeping Guard, and being assisted by a party
of Turks, who waited near the Town for that purpose, they overpowred the
Citizens, and took Didimotichum, together with Rhodestum, by assaulting the
Walls of the latter in the night. The Turks generally have had great success by
employing such subtle Plots against the Christians, and taking them at an
advantage. The same Amurath took the City of Adrianopolis by policy. He sent
Chasir-Ilbeg, one of his great Captains, and persuaded him to run away with
some other trusty Fugitives to Adrianople, and to complain and exclaim against
the cruelty and hard usage of their Lord Amurath. This Chasis-Ilbeg with his
Turks, in several Sallies, behaved himself right valiantly against the Soldiers
of Amurath, which purchased him a great Esteem, Favor and confidence with the
Governor, who trusting too much, whilst they were at a secret appointment with
their Lord, when they should betray one of the Gates to him. For Chasis,
according to his custom, came once at break of day only with ten Followers, as
if he had bin going out to hunt; when the Gates were opened, he assaulted the
Soldiers that were upon the Guard, and having at hand all his Fugitive Turks,
they took possession of the Gates, which they kept till such as were sent from
Amurath came to their assistance; then they fiercely charged the Citizens. The
Fight continued from Morning till Night, but the Tarks at last by their
continual Recruits, got the Victory, and with it the Noble and Rich City of
Adrianople, where the Othoman Emperors have since kept a Seraglio. At this time
lived in Amuraths Court, Cara Rustemes, a Doctor of the Mohammedan Law. He
persuaded his Lord to take every fifth Captive of the Christian Youth, of about
12 or 15 years old from his Soldiers, when they returned from the plundring of
the Christian Countries. These Youths were sent over into Asia, to be bred up
in the Houses of the Country Farmers, and employed in hard Labor for two or
three years, that they might be instructed in that time in the Turkish Religion
and Language. After this, they were sent for, and trained up in the exercise of
Arms, that they might serve the great Turk in his Wars, and wait upon his
Person, as his Foot Guard, These were named Janissaries, that is, new Soldiers,
who had thence their first beginning. As the Mamalucks also in Egypt had their
original from Captivity and Bondage; for they were Slaves brought thither by
Merchants into Scitia, and other Countries, and sold to the Sultans of Egypt,
to be brought up in the Art of War. These, as the Janissaries are now to the
Turkish Emperors, were the best Soldiers of the Prince, and their Stoutest Men
in War. Amurath enlarged his Dominions both in Asia and Europe. He invaded
Servia, took Appolonia, and many great Cities, conquered Caramania, and in a
notable Battle killed Lazarus, Despot of Servia; but it happened after the
Fight, when Amurath was taking a view of the dead Bodies, one Miles Cobelitz,
sorely wounded, rose from the ground where he lay, and went staggering toward
Amurath. The Turks thought he had been come to kiss Amuraths Feet, and to do
him reverence, or to beg his Life; but Cobelitz had another purpose, for with a
short Dagger, hid under his Coat, he stabbed him in the Belly, and killed him.

CHAP. XXIV. How Tamerlan overcame Bajazets Army.
TAmerlan understanding that Bajazet was at hand, and with a resolution to
fight him, resolved to keep his Army in large Plains, not far from Sebastia,
which he had before taken and destroyed, because he had a greater number of
Horse and Foot than Bajazet. Some reckon 300000 Horse, and 400000 Foot in
Tamerlans Army; whereas in Bajazets Army were 140000 Horse, besides 30000
Mamalucks, and 30000 Janissaries, and above 100000 other Soldiers, but old and
experienced in War. Tamerlan therefore resolved to fight on Horseback, and so
to draw up his numerous Army, that they might all be serviceable in their
order, and weary the valiant Enemy with the Assaults of fresh men. This wise
and politic manner of Fight, undoubtledly obtained for him the Victory; for
having always a fresh Body of men, both of Horse and Foot, ready to fall on
instead of such as were either discouraged, or broken; he kept the Turks so
long in play, that they were tired, and sorced to yield to the greater number.

CHAP. XXV. The Stratagems of Alis Bassa, the Great Minister of State, under
Sultan Soliman, Bajazets Eldest Son, in the War against Mahomet the 5th. King
of the Turks.
AFter the departure of Tamerlan out of Natolia, the Children of Bajazet made
themselves Masters of much of his Dominions. Soliman took that part which lay
in Europe, Isa and Mahomet shared what they could keep from Tamerlans
Lievtenants in Asra. But when their common Enemy was retreated, they fell out
amongst themselves. Isa contended with his Brother Mahomet three times in
Bloody Fights, and was as often worsted, and forced to fly for safety into
Caramania, where he lived and dyed in obscurity. Soliman, the other European
Brother, made ready a strong Army, and passing over into Asia, took the Royal
City of Prusa, but the Castle was defended by Jacub-beg, a stout Captain, who
being reduced to the necessity of submitting to Soliman without speedy relief,
sent a Messenger to inform Mahomet of his distress. Mahomet dispatched back the
Messenger with a Letter to Jacub, and assured him of his Assistance. The
Messenger was taken by Solimans Soldiers, and brought to Alis-beg his Great
General. When he had read the Letter, he counterfeited others in the name of
Mahomet, wherein he commended the Faithfulness and Courage of Jacub, but
because he could not yet send him any Succors, he gave him liberty to deliver
the Castle upon Honorable Terms. This counterfeit Letter Alis-beg found means
to send secretly to Jacub-beg into the Castle; when he had read it, he hanged
out a Flag of Truce, and desired a Parley with Soliman: and according to the
direction of the Letter, he delivered up his Castle, to the great Grief of
Mahomet, who was within one days Journey of Prusa, ready with a stout Army to
fall upon the Besiegers, and force his way to the Castle. Soliman, after the
surrender of this strong place dispersed his Army. As soon as Mahomet heard of
it, he made speed to surprise his Brother, who minded more his Pleasure than
the War. But Soliman being advertized by one of his Commanders of his Brothers
coming at that time when he could not well resist him, consulted how to run
away, and sail over into Europe: but from such a disgraceful flight he was
dissuaded by Alis-Bassa, his great Councellor, because 'twas like to discourage
all his Friends in Asia, and ruin his interest there; but he advised him to
make speed, and post himself, with his small Company, about the Streights of
Neapolis, there to keep the passages of the Country; which good advice he
followed, and beat off his Brother Mahomet, whom he hindered from passing any
further. Whilst he there lay, Alis-beg doubting of his Masters strength,
resolved to try what he could do by cunning. He sent one of his Trusty Servants
to Mahomet, to inform him, that most of his Great Captains had designed and
agreed amongst themselves to deliver him up to Soliman his elder Brother, and
the undoubted Heir of his Father; and therefore willed him to stand upon his
Guard. Notwithstanding this advice, he caused several assaults to be made to
the Passages of the Mountains, but was as often repulsed. At last, when one of
his menial Servants fled to Soliman, he began to be jealous of the rest;
therefore fearing Treachery, and being otherwise incommodated by the Wet
Weather, he departed back to Amasia, and delivered his Brother from a great
fear of being taken by him. This Civil War lasted several years; first, between
Isa and Mahomet; next, between Mahomet and Soliman; then between Soliman and
Musa, who took and strangled Soliman in Europe. At last the contention was
between Musa and Mahomet, who after the Death of all his other three Brothers,
succeeded to all the Dominions of old Bajazet, deceased in Chains.

CHAP. XXVI. The Brave Exploits of Huniades the Hungarian, in defense of his
Country against the Turks.
HVniades by his Valor and Wisdom raised himself in the esteem and favor of
Vladislaus, first King of Poland, and afterward chosen King of Hungary, about
the year 1440. so that Vladislaus made him Vayvod of Transylvania. At his first
coming to the Government, he secured all the Passages and Borders with good
Garrisons, because he had an unquiet and cruel Neighbor, Isa-beg, who
commanded in Rascia, and the upper part of Servia, for Amurath. This Isa-beg.
had often, by the command of his Prince, invaded the Christians Country, and
put all to Fire, Sword, and woeful Desolation, the more to distress Belgrade,
and other Frontier Cities of Hungary. Huniades, with one Nicholas Vilach,
raised a considerable Army of Horse and Foot, and marched with them into Isa's
Government, between Belgrade and Sinderovia, to requite the Turks Cruelties.
Isa met him with such Forces as he had then, not inferior in number to the
Christians. At the first Onset Huniades's Army retreated behind the Men at
Arms, whose fierceness and undaunted Courage the Turks could not long endure,
but were forced to fly, so that Isa, to save himself, returned to Sinderovia
with more speed then he came from thence. Huniades, after a great slaughter of
the Enemies, and much Rich Spoil, and many Prisoners, returned to Belgrade,
where Amuraths Displeasure, Isa's Loss and Defeat, would not suffer him to rest
long; for this angry Turk having raised a numerous Army of Valiant Soldiers,
sent with them Mesites his General, to spoil and subdue Transylvania. Mesttes
came into the Country on a sudden, before Huniades was well able to oppose him.
He put all to the Sword at his first Entrance, and destroyed by Fire the Towns
and Villages, to make himself more dreadful to the Inhabitants. Huniades, in
this distress, was forced to fly to Alba Jula, to the Bishop of that City,
George Lepe, with an intent, by his Assistance, to raise an Army; but being
followed by the Turks speedy March, before they could be provided, they were
both besieged in the City by the Enemies, who spoiled all the Country round
about. Huniades and the Bishop sallies out upon them, but were forced by an
Ambush to retreat. The Bishop was slain, but Huniades saving himself, went all
about his Government, and gathered what Power he could make up, persuading the
People to venture themselves in the just Defense of their Country and Families.
With this Tumultuary Army he marches after the Bassa, then proud with Success,
and laden with Spoils. And for the better carrying on of his purpose, he sent
Spies to give him notice of the Turks Motions and designs. From them he
understood that Mesites had given a special command to all his Officers and
Soldiers to assault the Person of Huniades, upon whose Valor and Direction
depended the Fortune of the day. In the Army of Huniades was one Simon Kemene,
an adventurous Gentleman, who knowing of the Turks design and orders, offered
to change Horse and Armor with his General for his greater safety; which when
Huniades had granted, he pursued the Turks, and skirmished with them every day;
at last they came to a Battle, where the counterfeit Huniades, ding his
Generals Horse, was beset by the Turks, and after a stout resistance, slain.
But the true Huniades in the mean while encouraging his Men, receiving such as
were oppressed, rallying such as fled, made a great slaughter of the Infidels,
in whose Camp were many Christian Prisoners that broke their Chains, and with
such Weapons as came next to hand, charged the Turks in the Rear, whilst
Huniades kept them in play, till they were forced to fly. Mesites, with his
Son, was slain, and 20000 Turks. The Christians lost about 3000 Men, but
recovered all the Plunder, Spoils and Prisoners. After this notable Victory, he
laid the Foundation, and made a preparation far greater, first by returning
thanks to the God of Hosts, the Giver of all Success, and causing Solemn
Thanksgiving to be made in all the Churches of his Government; next, by
acknowledging the Soldiers Valor and Courage, and giving to every one, both
Officers and others, their due Praises; by enriching his Army with the Spoils
of his Enemies, which he converted not to his own private use, but made them
plentifully share in the enjoyment of that which they had got with the hazard
of their Lives; and by consecrating to Pious Uses some part of the Spoils, that
he might thereby return Thanks to God both in Word and Deed. Never any covetous
Commander was ever successful in War. As the private Soldier must do the Work,
he must not want that encouragement which Military Souls expect. The best, as
well as the meanest, are most willing to venture their Lives with those, by
whose Bounty and Liberalities they have been notably obliged. And if Soldiers
will be careful to remember their God, upon whose pleasure the Lives of Men,
and the hazards of War do immediately depend, he will undoubtedly mind them in
their greatest distress and dangers. To defy God and his Power by filthy Oaths
and Blasphemies, unknown to our Forefathers, is now the common practice of
those, who would seem to be the stoutest Men. This is a baseness and madness
which Atheism has much encouraged; and which can never draw upon their Heads
(who give themselves over to such extravagant Liberties) a Blessing, but rather
a Curse. And those Armies, where such bold Follies are either countenanced or
winked at, can never prosper long. The greatest Conquerors and most successful
Warriors, both in former and latter Ages, have bin careful to encourage
Religion, and to take with them the Blessing of Heaven in all their notable
designs; and after a prosperous proceeding, to return unto God his Praises due,
by a public acknowledgment of his Power and Bounty. Huniades is an example of
true Valor, which has always Piety joined with it.

After this Victory Valachia and Moldavia revolted from the Turks. To revenge
himself, Amurath raised a very great Army, and sent it under the command of
Schech-Aheden-Bassa, who passing through Valachia, destroyed all their Country
with Fire and Sword, and entered into Transylvania, with an intent to do the
like there. But Huniades met him with 15000 chosen Men, at a place called
Vascape, where he drew up some Battalions in form of a Wedge, which did him
great service, and could not be broken by the Turks Violent Assaults: so that
after near five hours continual fight (during which time the Fields were
covered with an incredible number of dead Bodies) the Turks fled; and the
Hungarians killed above one half of the Infidels, recovered 190 Ensigns, and
all the Bag and Baggage of the Enemy. The next Spring 'twas resolved by the
States of Hurgary, that a War against the Turks should be prosecuted with more
care and preparation. An Army was raised, where the King Vladislaus adventured
in Person to march over the River Tibiscus against a vast Army of the Turks,
and Huniades with a party of Horse was sent to beat up their Quarters in the
Night. He came so suddenly upon them, that he slew 30000 Turks, and took 4000
Prisoners, with a great Booty; after which he recovered most of Bulgaria, so
that the Turks for their safety were forced to stop up the passages of the
great Mountain Hemus, through which the Christian Army was to pass into
Thracia, and then being Winter, they powered Water in all the Roads, that
neither Man nor Beast might be able to stand or go for the Ice, into which the
Water that fell, was immediately frozen. Nevertheless the Christian Army
marched so far, till the difficulty of the way, and the want of all necessaries
enforced them to return back; at whose Heels Carambeg, the Turkish General,
followed close, to take them at some advantage. When they came to the Mountain
Cynobiza, he sent a strong party of Horse to hinder the March of the Hungarian
Army, till he could reach them with the rest of his Troops. Huniades and the
Despot of Servia encouraged their Men, and sent some loose Companies of Pikemen
to stand amongst the Bushes and Thickets, to assault the Turks Horsemen in
their passage. After a very bloody Fight, and the slaughter of many Thousand
Turks, the Victory inclined to the Hungarians. Carambeg, in his Flight, fell
into a Bog, being deceived by the deep Snow, and was taken by a common Soldier,
who sold him to Huniades for four hundred Ducats. Out of this Fight fled
George Castraot, named Scanderbeg, who was afterward one of the most valiant
Champions of the Christians against the Turks.

Amurath, troubled with so many losses, was resolved to conclude a Truce for
ten years with Vladislaus, which was granted, and solemnly confirmed by Oath;
but by the Popes persuasion, and Cardinal Julians's, this Peace was broken, the
King and his Nobles absolved from all obligations of their Oaths. An Army was
prepared to invade the Turks Territories, when Amurath was chastizing the King
of Caramania for revolting against him. Nevertheless Amurath made speed with a
brave Victorious Army to meet the Hungarian King, and at Varna encountered with
him, when he had but a small number in his Army; to prevent the Turks enclosing
in the Christians with their vast numbers, Huniades drew them up in such a
manner, that they had a deep Marsh Ground on the Right Wing, on the Left he
placed his Carriages, and on the Rear they had a steep Hill. In this
unfortunate Battle Huniades put to flight with his Transilvanian and Valachian
Horsemen both Wings of the Turks Army, and brought the main Body, where Amurath
himself was, in very great danger; so that when he saw the grievous Slaughter
and Flight of his Men, he plucked out of his Bosom a Copy of the League made by
King Vladislaus, and looking upon the Image of Christ Crucified in the Banners
of the Voluntary Christians, he cried aloud, Behold thou Crucified Christ, this
is the League thy Christians, in thy Name, have made with me, which they have,
without Cause, Violated. If thou be a God; as they say thou art, revenge the
Wrong now done unto thy Name, and show thy Power upon thy Perjurious People. He
had no sooner spoken those Words, but the Turks took Courage, made head against
the Hungarians, who nevertheless broke in upon the Janissaries, where a French
Knight of Rhodes wounded Amurath in the Thigh, and Vladislaus having lost his
Horse, was there slain, his Head struck off by Ferises Bassa, and presented to
Amurath, who commanded it to be carried upon a Lance, with Proclamation, That
there was the Head of the Christian King. His death discouraged the rest of the
Christian Army, so that Huniades, after many courageous endeavors to rally his
Men, was forced to yield to the necessity of the day. Julian the Cardinal, with
two thirds of the Army, were slain, and a greater number of the Turks, which
made Amurath ever after lament his dear bought Victory of Varna. The
Hungarians, after the loss of Vladislaus, chose Ladislaus, a young Infant, the
Son of Albert, and appointed Huniades, during his Minority, to be Governor of
the Kingdom. Huniades had another unfortunate Fight with Old Amurath at
Cossova, where for three days together the Hungarians notably maintained their
Ground against the Turks vast numbers; but at last, oppressed with continual
and fresh Supplies, they fled, leaving behind him 17000. and almost all the
Hungarian Nobility, dead under the heaps of the slain Turks, to the number of
40000. Huniades after much difficulty and danger, returned safe into Hungary,
gathered together his Forces, and made another Army, with which he marched to
the Relief of the Despot of Servia, who was assaulted by Fritze-beg, and
Jose-beg, two of Amuraths Generals. But as soon as they espied the Ensigns of
Huniades in the Field, the Turks fled for fear, and lost many, who were killed
in the Retreat, and their General Fritze-beg was taken Prisoner. This Victory
was got only by the dreadful name of Huniades. Afterward, in the Reign of
Mahomet the great, he defended Belgrade against the Turks, beat their Fleet
upon the River Danubius, and routed the Turks Emperor and Army, with a great
slaughter of 40000. and the loss of all his great Ordinance. This happened in
the year 1456. in which Huniades dyed in Peace.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Famous and never to be forgetten Scanderbeg, and his
Adventures.
NExt to Huniades, none deserves more to be mentioned than the Noble
Scanderbeg, Prince of Egyrus. In his youthful days he lived in the Turks Court
of Amurath then King, and for his dexterity in Arms, was highly favored by the
Tyrant, who had poisoned his elder Brethren, and taken away the Inheritance of
his Forefathers. At the Battle of Moravia, where Carambeg was taken, he was a
Commander amongst the Turks. In the general Rout he closely followed aster the
Generals chief Secretary, till he found him in a place fit for his purpose,
which he had imparted to some of his most trusty Friends and Countrymen,
chiefly to Amesa his Kinsman, a stout Soldier. They all together agreed to set
upon the Turks, when they found them few in number, and to kill them. The
Secretary he carried aside, and forced him for fear of present Death, to write
a Letter in his Masters Name, who (was Grand Vizir) to the Governor of Croia,
the chief City of Epirus, to command him by Amuraths order, to deliver, on
sight of the Letter, his Charge and Government to Scanderbeg the new Governor,
as appointed by Amurath to succeed him, adding several other things, on purpose
to gain more credit to the Letter and Messengers. As soon as he had thus forced
from the Secretary this Letter, he killed him, and as many of the Turks as he
could meet with, that they might not give intelligence of his Designs and
Proceedings to Old Amurath. And having with him under his Command three
thousand Epirots his Countrymen, who resolved to follow his Fortune, and fight
for the Honor and Liberty of their Native Country. He marched with all speed
toward Epirus; and to the chief City of Croia. He ordered the most part of his
Soldiers to go in the night, and by secret ways through the Woods and
Mountains, to draw as near to Croia as they could unperceived, until he had an
opportunity to bring them into the City to master the Turkish Garrison. In the
mean while he took with him a few, only to wait upon him, and went the direct
way to Croia, sending before him Amesa with two Servants, to certify the
Governor of his coming. Amesa behaved himself with that Wisdom and Discretion,
that the Governor could not perceive any deceit, much less when he saw the
great Bassa's Letter, written by his Secretary, but immediately delivered up
the command of the Town, and departed the next day for Adrianople. The same
Night Scanderbeg brought into the City his Soldiers, who were appointed to be
near at hand: with their assistance he set upon the Turks, and slew them. The
recovery of Croia caused all Epirus to yield to Scanderbeg, and the Country
People with great joy gave him their assistance, to kill all the Turks that
were left in his Dominions; the Governor also of Croia was overtaken by the
Epirots, and murdered with his Retinue. Only some strong places and Garrisons
were not so easy to be mastered; but Scanderbeg having called his Subjects to
his Assistance, he in few days gathered together 12000 Men, with whom he
besieged and took Petrelta, a strong City, by the subtle Tale of a Country
Fellow, sent thither on purpose by Scanderbeg, to tell the Garrison, that
Amurath had been lately so defeated by the Hungarians, that he could not
relieve them, and that they might have any Honorable Terms granted, if they
would submit to Scandberbeg. After this he took possession of Petra Alba,
Stellusa, and besieged Srifegrade, but could not recover that City: therefore
rising from that Siege, he wasted all the Borders of Macedonia, and spoiled the
Country round. Alis Bassa was sent with an Army of forty thousand to punish
him, and recover Epirus. Scanderbeg, to defend himself, chose 8000 Horse, and
7000 Foot, and with this small Army he waited upon the Borders near Dibra, for
the Bassa's coming; but he had placed three thousand Men with Amesa in Ambush
in a Wood, near the great Road where the Bassa was to pass with his Army,
commanding them not to stir until such time as they should see that the Fight
was begun, and that then they should fall upon the Rear of the Turks. This
order was so exactly obeyed, that the Turks having the Enemy before and behind,
were beset by a small number; yet they did fight valiantly, until a fresh
supply from the Rear came and broke in upon the Turks, forced them to fly,
killing in the pursuit and Battle two and twenty thousand, and two thousand
taken Prisoners, with all the Turks Tents and Riches. After this great
Slaughter, Scanderbeg mounted his Footmen upon the Turks Horses, and with all
his Army he plundered miserably a great part of Macedonia, and enriched his
Soldiers. This great Victory made Scanderbegs Name to be famous all over the
Courts of the Christian Princes, so that in a general Confederacy between them
for the opposing of Amurath, Scanderbeg was entreated to be one of the party;
for that purpose he raised an Army, and intended to assist Vladislaus at the
great and unhappy Battle at Varna, but his passage was stopped by the faithless
Despot of Servia. After that Overthrow, Amurath sent Ferises Bassa to spoil
Epirus with 9000 Horse: but Scanderbeg having notice of his speedy coming, he
put 1500 stout Footmen in Ambush upon the Mountains and narrow ways that led
into the Valley of Mocrea, where the Turks were to pass. These Footmen set upon
the Turkish Cavalry in such places where they could not use their Horses, that
they were all routed and slain, and pursued by two thousand Horse, which
Scanderbeg had there for the purpose. Ferises saved himself by Flight with his
broken Troops. When Amurath heard of this Overthrow, he sent one Mustapha,
another Captain, with a Recruit of 6000 Horse to succeed Ferises in his
Government, with orders to burn and spoil as much of Epirus as he could.
Mustapha, a wary Captain, came with his Troops into the Valley of Moerea, where
he lay strongly encamped in his Trenches every night, having placed Scouts and
Sentinels all round upon the Hills, to discover the Enemies coming; with 4000
Horsemen he kept his Camp, and sent out the rest in parties to spoil the
Country, with express orders, upon pain of death, to repair to him upon the
first notice of an Enemy. Scanderbeg being informed by his Spies of Mustapha's
wariness, resolves to deal with him by plain Force; therefore with 4000 Horse,
and a 1000 Foot he speedily marched through the Valley to the Turks Camp, where
he killed many that were retreating with their plunder, and then assaulted the
Trenches with that Fury and Resolution, that the Turks were beaten, 5000 were
killed, and 300 taken Prisoners, with the loss only of twenty Horsemen, and
fifty Foot. Mustapha fled with the rest of his Forces to his Government of
Macedonia, to give an account of Scanderbegs Valor, and of his own loss to Old
Amurath, who resolved to suffer awhile this dreadful Enemy to live in Peace;
therefore he commanded Mustapha not to molest the Borders of Epirus, but only
to defend his own Government. It happened at that time that there was a Quarrel
between Scanderbeg and the Venetians, and an open War proclaimed: When Mustapha
saw that Scanderbeg's Forces were employed against the Venetians, he begged
leave of Amurath to try once more his Fortune against Scanderbeg. For that
purpose with a numerous Army he entered into Epirus, when Scanderbeg was
besieging the Town of Dayna, where he left some Forces with Amesa to continue
the Siege, and with 500 Horse, and 1500 Foot he went to find out Mustapha,
encamped in the upper Country of Dibra. Out of the Garrisons he recruited and
increased his small number to 4000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, all old Soldiers. When
both Armies were drawn up in Battalia, a Turk, advantagiously mounted, came out
of the Turks Army to challenge any Christian to fight with him: his name was
Caragusa. One Paul Manessi desired Scanderbeg that he might be the Man to
encounter with this Turk, which being granted, at the first blow he wounded him
grievously in the Head, and cut it off, which when he had done, he took his
Spoils, and returned with great Acclamations of the Christian Army to
Scanderbeg, who seeing how much this had encouraged his Men, set forward
against the Turks, and with an invincible Courage beat them out of the Field,
took Mustapha Prisoner, killed 12000 Men, whereas of his own Army there was but
300 slain. The Plunder of the Enemies Camp he always bestowed upon his
Soldiers, who met there with great Riches, and according to his Custom, entered
again into the Turks Dominions to plunder and burn the Country. Amurath grieved
at so many losses, resolves, with a mighty Army, to march into Epirus himself,
and try his own Fortune against this crafty Warrior. Scanderbeg, who having
notice of his coming, made all things ready: he craved Aid of all his Christian
Neighbors; filled his Towns with Food, Provision and Arms, repaired all the
decayed Fortifications, and gathered an Army of 10000 Men to attend upon him,
leaving sufficient Garrisons in every City. Amurath had in his Army one hundred
and fifty thousand Men. He sent forty thousand before him to Stifegrade, to
make preparation for his coming. Scanderbeg marched thither with 4000 Horsemen,
a thousand Foot, and strongly encamped himself within Seven Miles of the City:
from his Camp he went up with some of his Captains to the top of a Hill as near
as he could, to see how the Turks lay before Stifegrade; at his return he drew
out his small Army, and placed them in the Woods not far from the City, unto
which he sent Moses and Musachi, with about 30 Horsemen, to drive some Horses
laden with Corn, as if they had purposed secretly to get into the City. When
the Turks Scouts perceived them, they charged them, but were beaten back, with
the loss of five men, which gave the Alarm to the Turks, who marched out to
pursue them, in number about 4000. Moses politickly drew them away from their
Camp to the place where Scanderbeg lay in Ambush. He rose with his Men, set
upon them with that Fury, that he killed 2000. and took a thousand Horse, with
the loss of two and twenty of his own Men. Amurath came before Stifegrade in
May, 1449. he battered and assaulted the Town with the slaughter of vast
numbers of his best Men; during which time Scanderbeg often brake into one part
or other of his Camp, making a terrible destruction, and then again retreated
with little or no loss. At one time, when Amurath was giving an assault to the
City; Scanderbeg was discovered drawing near to the Turks Camp, and, by
Amuraths order, was met with by Feri-Bassa, who long desiring to fight with
Scanderbeg, was by him slain, and his Army routed, with great loss: but because
all the Turks Army were at hand, he speedily retreated from thence with his
Victorious Army. Stifegrade was afterward betrayed and surrendered: but Amurath
lost before the City 30000 of his best Men. At his departure Scanderbeg
followed, and cut off many of his Army assaulting him sometimes in the Rear,
sometime, in the Van, as place and occasion would suffes him. The next Spring
Amurath returned intr Epirus with an of Army 160000 Men, seading beo fore
Sebali, as a wise Captain, with 40000 Horse to beleagure the City of Croia.
After a furious Battery, it was assaulted by the Turks; but Vranacontes the
Governor so encouraged his Soldiers and Citizens, that they stoutly defended
it: whilst they were then busy in the assault, Scanderbeg with 5000. broke
into their Camp, killed 500 Men, and was spoiling of their Tents: This gave an
Alarm to the whole Army, so that the Bassa Seremet and Prince Mahomet with his
Guard hasted to rescue their Camp, and to deliver it from such troublesome
Guests. Scanderbeg in his Retreat being enclosed in by the Turks, broke through
several Bodies of them safe, but with great danger of his Life. During this
Siege he had strongly encamped himself upon the Mountain Tumenist, not far from
the Turks, that he might be more ready to plague his Enemies, and assist his
Subjects besieged in Croia. Mahomet, to prevent Scanderbeg for the future, had
drawn all the best Soldiers of his Army on that side where he was wont to
assault them; but he having good Intelligence, caused an Alarm to be given by
Moses there, whilst he, in the mean while, with a strong party of 8000 Men at
Midnight entered their Camp at the farther end, and made a very great flaughter
of the Turks. Amurath, after many cruel Assaults given to the City, and furious
Attempts to no purpose, through the Vigilance of the Governor, and Courage of
the Defendants, dyed for Grief under the Walls of Croia. His Death caused the
Siege to be raised by his Son and Successor Mahomet, whose Army was followed,
and miserably cut off by Scanderbeg in their return homewards, at all places of
advantage. But to keep him in continual Play, Mahomet sent one Amesa a Turk,
with 12000 Horsemen to wast Epirus. Scanderbeg laid for him an Ambush upon the
Mountain Modrissa, where Scanderbeg's Infantry fell upon those Horsemen, and
killed 7000 men, with the loss of the Turks General taken Prisoner, who was
afterward ransomed at 13000 Ducats by Mahomet. The Money was distributed
amongst the Christian Soldiers. After this, one Debreas a Valiant Captain,
requested Mahomet to be sent against Scanderbeg, who hearing of his coming,
went to meet him in the Turks Dominions with 6000 choice men. Debreas had
14000. Scanderbeg thought to have come upon him unawares, but he was prevented
and discovered, therefore the two Armies drew up, and after a sharp engagement,
Scanderberbeg slew Debreas with his own Hands, as he was riding about to
encourage his Men. The whole Army, at the loss of their General, fled, and left
behind them 4120. slain by the Christians. Mahomet endeavored next to corrupt
some great Man of Scanderbegs Army; Moses Golemus of Dibra was the person
pitched upon. He fled to the Turks, and returned with an Army of 15000 men into
Epirus, where he was encountered by his late Prince, and 11000 of his Soldiers
killed, with the loss of one hundred Epirots. In this Battle Ahemaze, a Turk,
challenged Zacharias Groppa a Christian, and was by him killed, and beheaded
before the Fight. Moses, at his return to Constantinople, was so derided by the
Turks, that he preferred to cast himself upon the mercy of Scanderbeg, who
received him again, and pardoned him, restoring to him all his Goods, which had
been confiscated. Turks won next Amesa, a Nephew of Scanderbegs, promising him
the Crown of Epirus. With him Isaak the Great Bassa was sent with 50000 men, to
proclaim him King of Epirus. Scanderbeg had provided a good Army, but came in
sight of the Enemy only with 6000 Horse, with whom he took the way of Lyssa, a
Town of the Venetians, as if he had despaired of keeping of Epirus any longer,
and had fled thither for the safety of his Person. The Turks rejoiced, as if
they had no Enemy to deal with, or to fear. When Scanderbeg saw the Turks
secure, and that they had the day before ranged about the Country for Plunder
and Spoil, he divided his small Army into three Parties, and came upon them
before they expected him, for they had not time to bridle their Horses. Amesa,
making Head first, was taken Prisoner, and his Party defeated. The Bassa was
overthrown by Moses and Tanusius, two of Scanderbegs Captains, and driven out
of Epirus. He lost about 20000 men, and Scanderbeg but 60. All the Bag and
Baggage, and Tents of the Enemies were there taken, with great Riches, by the
Epirots. Three years after Sinam and Hamur, two other Captains, were ordered by
Mahomet to disturb the quiet of Scanderbegs Kingdom; but Sinam, with 20000 men,
was overthrown, and his Successor Asambeg, with 30000. was defeated next in the
Plains of Ocrida, himself wounded and taken Prisoner by Scanderbeg. One
Jussembeg, with 18000. entering into Epirus, lost part of his Army, and was glad
to save himself by flight with the rest. Their misfortune caused one
Caraza-beg, an old Companion of Scanderbegs, to request Mahomet to venture an
Army with him: He trusted him with 40000 men; but when Carazabeg had near 4000
Horse, who were cut in pieces by an Ambush at his first entrance into Epirus,
and been wearyed out with continual Alarms by Scanderbeg in the Night, the
weather proving very Tempestuous and full of Rain, he returned back to Mahomet
with less loss than any before him. A Peace afterward was concluded between
Mahomet and Scanderbeg, but it lasted not long, because of Injuries received on
both sides. Mahomet, to defend his Territories bordering upon Epirus, sent
Seremet Bassa with fourteen thousand Soldiers, but he was routed in the Plains
of Ocrida, and 10000 Turks slain. Balabanus Badera, an Epirot born, was the
next great Captain, who invaded Epirus with 15000 Horse, and 3000 Foot. He
sought to ingratiate himself with Scanderbeg by Messengers and Gifts; but
because he was born a Peasant, Scanderbeg sent him a Shovel, a Mattock, and a
Flail. This Balabanus was three times overthrown in Battle by Scanderbeg, and
his Armies routed and cut in pieces. At his return he persuaded Mahomet to send
two Generals with 40000 men against Scanderbeg; so that he, and one Jacub
Amauth entered into Epirus. Balabanus was first defeated, and forced to fly,
with great slaughter. Jacub next was killed by Scanderbeg himself, and his Army
dispersed. Mahomet went into Epirus next, and sent Balabanus with 80000 men to
besiege Croia before him, but was persuaded to return back Constantinople, and
leave the command of the Siege to Balahanus, who riding up to the Gates of
Croia, to offer them Honorable conditions, was shot in the Throat, and dyed in
his Camp. The Army fled, after the death of their General, out of Epirus,
leaving behind them their Tents and Carriages. But Mahomet the next Spring
returned with a vast Army to the Siege of Crota; but when neither by Rewards
nor Strength he could prevail upon the Governor nor Garririson, and Scanderbeg
vexing him every night with constant Alarms, by assaulting and cutting off
great numbers of his Men, he departed with his Army to Constantinople for fear
of other Mishaps. These Adventures of the Noble Scanderbeg are almost
incredible; but they are affirmed and recorded to Posterity by Marinus
Barletius, a Grave Historian. In this History you may see what Courage and
Policy may do, when they are assisting to one another.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Tomanbeius the Sultan of the Mamalukes in Egypt, had almost
entrapped Selymus 's Army.
Tomanbeius, the last Sultan of the Mamalukes, knowing the Strength and Numbers
of Selymus's Army that was marching to the Conquest of Egypt, resolved to
defend himself by Policy. He pitched his Camp not far from Caire, in plain
Fields, and drew up his Army ready to receive the Turkish Forces; but before
them he caused several deep Ditches to be drawn, hiding them over with Hurdles
and Turves, and placed his Great Guns ready charged toward the way that the
Turks were coming to him: and infallibly they had fell into the snare, if they
had not been forewarned, and led round by four Fugitive Mamalukes, who fled
from their Companions, and revealed all the danger to Selimus the Emperor of
the Turks, that conquered Egypt.

CHAP. XXIX. A just Answer of Selymus to his Bassa Pyrrhus, about Goods
unjustly taken from the Proprietors.
WHen Selymus became very sick, and saw that he must shortly dye, he lamented
and complained of his Mortal Condition to his beloved Bassa Pyrrhus, who, to
comfort him, began to discourse of diverse other things, to draw away his
thoughts from such an unpleasant Object. And amongst the rest, he asked him how
he would bestow that great Wealth that had been but a little before taken from
some Persian Merchants, and whether he would not build therewith some Famous
Hospital for the relief of the Poor. But Selymus, though a cruel Prince, yet he
returned him this just Answer, What Pyrrhus, would thou have me to bestow
other Men's Goods, wrongfully detained from them, upon Works of Charity and
Devotion, and offer to God what is none of mine own. No, I rather command thee
to see that those Goods be restored to their right Owners. This was an
excellent saying of that Mahumetan Emperor, which condemns the Unjustice and
Oppression of many Christians, who are so far from Restitution, that they
endeavor, whilst they live, to fill their Coffers with the spoil and plunder
of other men's Good, and make no conscience to increase their Childrens Estates
with the cursed Robberies of the Poor and Helpless.

CHAP. XXX. A Stratagem of Villerius, Great Master of Rhodes, to get
Intelligence of the Turks Camp and Condition.
WHen Solomon caused Rhodes (that Bulwark of Christendom) to be besieged;
certain Mariners, well skilled in the Turkish Language, in the Habit of Turks,
were sent by Villerius Great Master, in a little Boat full of Apples, Plumbs,
Mellons, and such like seasonable Fruits, to sell them to Soldiers that lay in
their Trenches; and that they might seem to come from the main land, he caused
them to sail out of the Harbor in the Night, and to land in the Island, at the
place where there is but a narrow passage from the Continent. The Turks
Soldiers thinking them to be real Turks, came over from the main Land, bought
their Fruits, and talked freely to them of their Discontents and Griefs to
continue in that dangerous Siege, where they had lost so many brave Men,
desiring them secretly to carry some of them over to the Continent. The
Mariners seemed at first very unwilling, because of the danger; at last they
yielded to take in about three of the most considerable of them, whom they
could easily master: but instead of carrying them over to the Turks Dominions,
they landed them in the Harbor of the City, and delivered them to the Great
Master, who informed himself of all things concerning the Turks Camp and
Losses, and that the Soldiers were ready to mutiny, and loath to continue the
Siege.

CHAP. XXXI. How Solomon punished the Garrison Soldiers of the Castle of Buda,
for betraying their Captain.
THomas Nadastus was lest in that Castle to defend it for Ferdinand, who had
lately been crowned King of Hungary. When Solomon with a vast Army had taken
the Town, and was besieging this Castle, the German Soldiers there in Garrison,
would not be persuaded to hold out against the Eney, but fancyed that the
Castle had Bin undermined by the Turks, and that they did smell the Gunpowder:
so strangely fear had possessed their Minds, that no persuasion of the
Governor could oblige them to a stout defense. When they saw that he by no
means would consent to a surrender, they bound him, and then capitulated with
Solomon to yield up this strong Fort, together with their Captain Prisoner. But
when this courageous Prince understood the laziness of the Garrison Soldiers,
and the Faithfulness and Valor of the Governor, he set him at liberty, but
caused his unworthy Germans to be cut in pieces by his Janissaries; a just
reward of Traitors and base Cowards, who betray their Trust by their fearful
dispositions.

CHAP. XXXII. The Valor of Nicholas Jureschitz, in defending the little Town
of Gunza in Hungary against 500000 Men in Selymus 's Army.
THis Town of Gunza was but small and weak, but stoutly defended by Nicholas
Jureschits the Governor, against Solymans vast Army. Abraham the great Bassa
had a particular kindness for this Nicholas, because he knew him to be a brave
Soldier, and had been intiamtely acquainted with him when he was Ambassador at
Constantinople. As a Token therefore of his kindness, he sent him a Messenger
at his arrival, to wish him to deliver up the Town, with large promises and
threatenings: but when he saw nothing would work upon the courageous Governor,
he caused the Town to be undermined, and the Walls to be blown up in three
places; after this he gave several furious Assaults, but was still beaten back
by the Defendants: and to trouble them the more, the Bassa had placed a Battery
on the North-side of the Town upon a high Hill, from whence he did kill the
Besieged as they were standing to desend their Breaches. But the Governor
raised speedily a Curtain behind his Soldiers to keep off the Turks Shot. After
this two great Mounts were cast up with Earth and Faggots, and the Town Ditch
levelled, to facilitate their next Assaults; but the Turks were again several
times driven back with great loss and shame. At last the Soldiers within being
for the most part either wounded or killed, the Turks had set up eight Ensigns
upon the Walls, and the besieged began to shrink away, when suddenly the Women
and Children in the Town gave a very great shout and cry, which so dismayed the
Turks, who thought that the Town had been yet full of Soldiers, that they began
to look back, and retreat apace. At this sight the Governor and Soldiers took
Courage, and charged them so furiously, that they forsook the Walls, and could
not be persuaded, nor threatened, by their Leaders to another Assault. When the
Great Turk saw the numbers of his men slain, and that his Army had given no
less than thirteen Assaults, with great loss and dishonor, in his rage he
threatened not to leave a stone standing in the Town. But Ibrahim Bassa,
desirous to save the Governor, when Solymans anger was over, persuaded him not
to dishonor himself any longer about such an inconsiderable Town, telling him,
that there was no man but would think him able to take and destroy such a small
place in time, but that it were more Wisdom to preserve his Soldiers for
greater designs, and to depart from before this mean Village: and therefore he
would call the Governor to him, to acquaint him, that out of his generosity
and love that he did bear to men of Valor, he would give him the Town, and all
that was therein. When Solomon had suffered himself to be persuaded, the
Governor was sent for, and Hostages delivered into the Town instead of him.
The Bassa discoursed with him, and asked him, why he would offer to resist his
Great Masters Power, when every one else yielded, and depend upon the relief of
King Ferdinand, not likely to come to his Assistance. The Governor answered,
that he had done nothing but what became a Man of Courage; and that for his
part, he knew King Ferdinand would assist him as soon as he could, but that his
chief dependence was upon his God, who would not be wanting to his Endeavors.
The Bassa in conclusion told him, that Solomon might easily destroy him and his
Town, but that he was so courteous, and so great a savourer of Valiant Men,
that for his sake the Town should be spared, but that he must receive into the
Town a Captain and ten Janissaries in sign of submission. Thus was the little
Town of Gunza saved from the hands of the cruel Turks by the good providence of
God, and the Valor, Policy and Faithfulness of the brave Governor.

CHAP. XXXIII. How the Island and City of Curzola was defended by the Women,
when the Men had forsaken it.
IN the Adriatic Sea there is an Island belonging to the Venetians, named
Curzola. The Turks, commanded by Perteau Bassa, Admiral to Selimns the 2d.
landed in that Island, with an intent to plunder and spoil it. Anthonius
Catarenus, the Venetian Governor, distrusting his own strength, in the dead of
the night fled up into the Mountains, and left the City to the pleasure of the
invading Enemy. The Townsmen followed their Governor, and left behind about 20
Men and 80 Women, besides Children. When this weak company saw how they were
betrayed, they took courage, and rather than they would fall into the hands of
the cruel Turks, they resosved all to dye fighting. For that purpose they armed
themselves with such Weapons as they had, and stood to defend their Walls; when
the Turks the next day drew near, they received them so briskly, animated by
despair, that they were driven back. And it happened, by the mercy of God, that
a Tempest began to rise, whilst the assault was giving; so that the Turkish
Captains discouraged thereby from any longer stay, shipped aboard their men,
and sailed away to a Haven more secure. Thus was this Town and Island saved by
the good Providence of God, and the stoutness of the Women.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Great and Famous Battle of Lepanto, between the Christian and
the Turkish Fleets, Ann. Dom. 1571.
THe Turks Fleet was commanded by Perteau and Haly two Bassa's, by Cassaues the
Son of Barbarussa Vluzales, and Chiroche Governor of Alexandria; by Carabuzes,
Governor of Cilicia, and Mahomet Governor of Eubaea, and many other
Sea-Captains of great Experience, and known Valor. The Turks Fleet consisted
of two hundred and fifty Galleys, fifty Galliots, and twenty Brigandines, with
other small Vessels; they had on board, besides Seamen and other Soldiers,
twelve thousand Janissaries and Saphies. The Christians were Venerius, the
Venetian Admiral, with 180 Galleys, 6 Galeasses, and two tall Ships. Don John
of Austria commanded 81 Galleys of Spaniards and Malteses. Columnius was
Admiral over 12 Galleys of the Pope. They had on board besides Seamen 20000
Fighting Men. These two Fleets met over against the Gulf of Lepanto the 7th of
October in the Afternoon, 1571. The Turks failed out in four Squadrons, and
came in the same order as they saw the Christians observe. Before the
Christians, lay at Anchor, six Galeasses full of Great Guns, which sunk many of
the Turks Galleys, and disordered their Fleet; they had two other disadvantages
in the Fight, the Sun and the Wind were against them, so that the smoke of the
Guns much troubled them. But notwithstanding this discouragement, they fell
into their order, and with hideous cries, came fiercely on against the
Christians. Haly grapled with the Admiral of the Christians, commanded by Don
John; but being assisted with the stoutest men of the Fleet, he boarded the
Turks, and after a great slaughter, and new supplies from both sides, was
forced to receive back his men; after three hours continual fighting, when he
saw the Turks to be wearyed out, then did he command up 400 stout men, which he
had kept as a reserve for a time of most need. As soon as these unexpected
supplies began to charge the Enemy, the Turks were discouraged. Hali being
wounded in the Head, was brought to Don John, and his Head cut off, was showed
to the Turks near by, and a Flag with the Cross hanged out upon his Gally, with
a joyful Acclamation, which ran through all the Fleet, Victoria, Victoria,
Victoria. Venerius encountered with Perteau, took his Gally after a fierce
fight, and forced him to fly away in his Long Boat. Chiroche the Turk, had some
advantage over Barbadicus the Venetian, who being mortally wounded; the Turks
being thereby encouraged, had mastered his Gally, had not two Venetian Captains
come in to their Relief, who beat off the Turks, and took their Galleys. As
soon as Chiroche was slain, with Haly, and Perteau fled, the Turks were thereby
much disheartened, and after a cruel and doubtful fight many hours, the main
Battle and the left Wing of the Turks were totally overthrown. In the right
Wing was Auria the Spanish Admiral against Vluzales, who endeavored to
encompass in the Christians small number; therefore in expectation of some
advantage, he retreated farther in the Sea, and enclosed in 12 Venetian Galleys
on a sudden, and carried them, after he had slain the Defendants, only
Benedictus Superantius, a Noble Venetian, seeing himself mortally wounded, his
men almost all slain, and his Gally taken, went speedily to the Powder, and set
fire to it, blowing himself up with the Turks. When Vluzales understood that
the Christians were victorious in the other parts of the Fleet, and were coming
to assist their Fellows, he left the Galleys that he had taken, and sailed away
for fear. Cardonius, a Spanish Captain, coming then in to the rescue of his
Fellows, pursued him, but was set upon by 15 Turks Galleys that turned back
upon him, slew him and most part of his Soldiers and Mariners, and had
undoubtedly taken his Gally, had not Don John, Columnius and Venerius been near
at hand. This Fight lasted five hours, in which about 20000 Turks were slain,
amongst which were Haly Bassa the General, Chiroche, Cassanes, Malamur, Gider,
Cassambeius, Proni, Aga, Mustapha, Zelibi, Caracoza, a Famous Pyrat, were
chief. 3500 were taken Prisoners, the chief were Achmat and Mahomet, the Sons
of Haly, and Nephews to Sultan Selimus, with others of great account. There
were 161 Galleys taken, and about 40 sunk: of other Vessels were taken about
60. The Admiral Gally of the Turks was the most beautiful. The Christians lost
7566. who were killed, and about 7000 wounded. This great Victory recovered
about 12000 Christians out of Captivity, and caused great rejoicing in Italy,
in Spain, and all over the Christian Countries. It was the greatest overthrow
that the Turks have ever had at Sea. But one of the Turkish Prisoners hearing
some compare it to the loss of Cyprus, which had been but a little before taken
from the Venetians, he affirmed, that it was not so great as the Venetians
loss: for, said he, by the taking of Cyprus from them, they have lost a Limb of
their State, which will never be recovered; but this loss at Sea is like the
shaving of the Sultans Beard, which will grow again in a little while. This
overthrow so troubled Selimus, that he commanded all the Christians of his
Dominions to be flain, but was dissuaded from this barbarous Cruelty by Mahomet
Bassa.

CHAP. XXXV. The Brave Exploits of Sigismundus Bator against the Turks in
Transylvania.
THis Prince was one of the Noblest and most Fortunate Generals of our late
years. When the Turks, his unquiet neighbors, together with the Tartars
invaded his Dominions: he set upon them, and made a great slaughter of them. He
recovered Valachia and Moldavia from the Turks, with the assistance of the two
Princes of that Country. Sinan was sent with a vast Army into Valachia, where
the Prince met him, and in a great Battle, which lasted from morning till
night, overthrew the Turks Army with a wonderful slaughter. Sinan fled, and
left all his Tents and Great Guns, with Rich Spoils, to the Christian Army. To
revenge this great Loss, Sinan Bassa the Turks chief General, raised 70000 men
to drive the Prince out of Valachia. He came to Tergovista, where he encamped
with his Army, but at the report of the Princes coming, the Turks were so
terrified, that they fled, and Sinan himself dreaded a second Encounter with so
successful and valiant a General, who pursued him from place to place as far as
Tergovista, where the Prince cut in pieces 4000 Turks, who had bin plundring
the Country, and recovered 60000 Head of Cattle, which they had taken out of
Valachia. The Castle of Tergovista, which was secured by Sinan with a Guard of
4000 Turks, commanded by Hassan Bassa, was taken, and all the Soldiers put to
the Sword. The Prince following the chase, took Bucaresta, forsaken by the
Turks, and overtook the Rear of their Army at a Bridge made over the Danubius.
Sinan, who to stop the Princes course, burnt the farther end of the Bridge, and
exposed many of his men to the fury of the Christian Army, or to the unmerciful
Waves of the River. He marched next to a Castle which defended another passage
over the same River, where 700 Turks were in Garrison. The Castle he took, and
put them all to the Sword, for refusing to yield upon Summons. This Prince
blasted the Glory of Sinan Bassa, which he had many years gotten by his skill
in War, and recovered three fruitful Provinces from the Turks, Transylvania,
Valachia, and Moldavia: a greater loss they never received at one time by Land.

CHAP. XXXVI. How Zellaly the Turkish Rebel, overcame the Bassa of Bosna by
Craft.
MAhomet the 3d. was grievously troubled by his Rebellious Subjects in Asia,
who had got together in such considerable numbers, and had such brave Generals
to command them, that all his Forces were not able to subdue them. They
overcame and cut in pieces several of his best Captains. At last he was advised
to circumvent them, and by fair means to draw them into his Service, and into
such places as he might take them off at his pleasure. Zellaly was one of the
most considerable; to him he caused the Government of Bosna, a rich Province,
to be offered, if he would come over with 12000 men, which he had under his
command, into Europe, to assist in the Wars of Hungary. Zellaly suffered
himself to be persuaded by this great Preferment, and to satisfy the
expectation of his Lord, did him wonderful service in Hungary. But when the
Great Bassa was departed toward Constantinople, Zellaly withdrew himself into
his promised Government, to take possession of it, and came to the chief Town
of that Province, named Bagualue, only with 3000 men, and encamped in a meadow
before the Town. Zeffer Bassa being then Governor, and having no orders from
Mahomet to depart from his Government, fretted to see the boldness of the
Rebel, and resolved to correct him. He called therefore together his Soldiers,
and marched out against Zellaly, in hopes to cut him in pieces with his Slender
and weak Company. When Zellaly understood his purpose, and saw how unable he
was to withstand him, he in the night caused several Fires to be made round
about his Camp, and then departed with his Forces. Zeffer hearing of his
Flight, imagined that fear had obliged him to withdraw himself, therefore he
hasted to Zellalies Camp, which he gave to be plundered by his Soldiers; whilst
they were plundring and carrying away the Spoils, Zellaly returns with his 3000
stout and valiant Horsemen, who finding them in disorder, and secure, slew 6000
of the Bassa's men, and obliged him to fly away with many of his Followers.
After this Victory, to improve it to his best advantage, he marched speedily to
all the chief places of the Province, and forced the Inhabitants to swear unto
him Allegiance: from every corner he gathered many brave Horses, Armor and
Money to serve him in time of need. All this he secured in the strong Town of
Balnaluc: and though he had been often sent for to Constantinople by the Sultan
with promises of great Honor and Advantage; he would never suffer himself to
be persuaded to go so near his offended Lord, or within his reach, but excused
himself in the best manner he could.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Battle of Crescy, between King Edward the 3d. of
England, and King Philip of France, Ann. Dom. 1343.
IN the English Army were 4000 men at Arms, 10000 Archers, with some Welsh and
Irish Auxiliaries. All commanded by the King in person, and Edward Prince of
Wales. The whole Army consisted of 30000 Men. He landed in Normandy, and
dividing his Forces into three Bodies, he marched into the Country, and took
several considerable Towns. In the French Army were 60000 men, of whom 3000
were Barons, Knights and Gentlemen. The Duke d'Alanson led the Van: The Earl of
Savoy commanded the Rear: and the King of France himself was in the main
Battle. But the English Army was brought up, the Vanguard by the Prince, the
main Body by King Edward, and the Rear by the Earls of Arundel and Northampton,
the Lords Ross, Willoughby, St. Albans and Multon. In the French Army some
remarkable passages happened in the beginning of the Fight, which gave a great
discouragement to the French Forces. They had in their Army 1500 Cross-Bows,
Genoueses, stout and valiant Men. These had beeen placed in the front of the
Duke of Alansoas Battle by a wise Commander in the Army; but the Duke envying
the Honor of that place to those Strangers, caused them to be removed to
another. This discontented these Italians, and made some disorder to be in that
Battle; which being taken notice of by King Edward, he immediately commanded
the Prince to advance, and charge, which was performed with that resolution,
that the French were routed. King Philip seeing his Brother worsted by the
English, came into his Assistance with his Body. The Fight was fierce, bloody
and doubtful a great while, till Philips Horse being killed under him, he was
conveyed out of the Battle. This disdiscouraged all the rest, and put them to a
retreat. When the Prince was engaged in the midst of his Enemies, he sent to
King Edward to come in, but the King refused, and bid him expect no help, which
made the English fight more desperately, so that 30000 French were killed, of
which about 12000 were of great quality, with the King of Bohemia and the Earl
of Flanders. After this great Victory, King Edward besieged Chalice, and took
it. In the same year the Queen obtained a great Victory over the Scots,
commanded by King David; 15000 Scots were there slain, with many Earls and
Lords of Scotland. After the winning of Chalice, the King understanding the
Governor intended to betray the Town for a great sum of Money, goes over,
receives the Money, and marched out to encounter with the French Forces in a
disguise. He was twice dismounted by one Ribomount, who being taken Prisoner,
the King, for his Valor, released him without ransom.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Famous Battle of Poictiers.
THe English Skill and Courage in War never appeared more in any Fight than in
this of Poictiers. The Prince had in his Army 2000 Horse, and 8000 Archers,
with some Auxiliaries, drawn out of the French Provinces; with these Forces he
marched out of Bourdeaux toward Poicton and Berry, to draw King John out of
Normandy: When he heard of the Princes March, he went to meet him with 30000
Horse and Foot. The English wisely entrenched themselves amongst the Vineyards,
and might have been in time starved there by the French, who with their numbers
were able to enclose and besiege them round: but the Kings Courage, and the
French fury could not suffer the sight of so small a party, without a present
Assault. 300 of the ablest men of the French Army were ordered to begin, and
draw the English to a Battle; but their defeat encouraged the English to
encounter with three Bodies of the French Army; the right Wing was commanded by
the Constable; the left, by the Dolphin; the main Battle was conducted by King
John of France. All three Battles were overthrown one after another; 5000 were
slain. The King himself and his Son Philip were taken Prisoners, honorably
entertained, and carried to Bourdeaux, and from thence into England. The Wisdom
and Courage of the Prince was here very remarkable in choosing such a ground to
fight, as rendered the French's chief strength of Horse useless; in sending
seasonable Supplies to such as were overpowred; and in the disorder of the
French Army, in falling on with his whole strength. How Glorious did the
English Valor appear to all Foreign Nations, when our Princes and our Gentry
were so nobly employed in Foreign Countries; and with such wonderful success,
that two of the greatest Monarchs of Europe, commanding over the most Warlike
People, were at one time taken Prisoners, and forced to submit to the Crown of
England!

CHAP. XL. The brave Exploits of Robert Bruce, King of Scotland.
AFter the death of Alexander King of Scotland, Baliol and Bruce were
Competitors for the Crown. To save the Christian Blood, the difference was left
to the Arbitration of King Edward of England, lately returned from the Holy
Land. Edward minding the increase of the Honor of the English Crown more than
the justness of the Cause, grants the Royal Dignity of Scotland to King Baliol,
upon condition that he would do him homage for it. When Baliol had yielded to
this, he was Crowned at Scone. But Bruce, with his Party, held out in
opposition to him, and would by no persuasion quit his claim. Baliol, after his
Coronation, being discontented with King Edward, upon an affront offered to
him, revolts from the English, and takes up Arms, but being overcome and taken
Prisoner, King Edward subdues most part of Scotland, and resolves to unite it
to the Crown of England. The Scotch were soon weary of a Foreign Government;
they join themselves therefore with Bruce, and encourage his Title, that they
might shake off the English Yoke. Bruce begins with a small Party, but finds
Victory and Success, which quickly drew to him all his discontented Countrymen.
John Cuinin, Earl of Buchan, first gathered an Army to oppose him, but durst
not venture a Battle, which made him desire a Truce: shortly after Bruce fell
sick, and Earl Cuinin taking this opportunity, resolved to recover from him
what was lost, and to fall upon his Army. Bruce, though so weak, that he could
not sit on Horseback, without being supported by two Servants, encourages his
Men by his presence and Conduct: for the sight and courage of a chief Commander
is of great moment in War. Bruce's Forces were so animated by the Kings
presence, though sick and weak, that fearing no danger, they fought
desperately, and routed their Enemies at Ennerury. After this Victory Bruce
recovered the Country of Arguile, and all Galloway, with all the Forts held by
the English in Scotland, and then invaded England, from whence he carried away
much plunder and spoil. King Edward, to be revenged, provided an Army of 100000
Men, with which he marched into Scotland, and at Bannocharn, two Miles from
Sterling, met King Bruce with 30000 Scots. The English had some discouragement
the day before the Battle; for they sent 800 Horse to Sterling, but 500 Scots,
commanded by James Dowglass, met with them, and overthrew them. The night
before the Battle the Scots dug many pits and holes in the even ground,
which was designed for the Field where they were to fight; and in the Pits
fixed sharp stakes headed with Irons, covered them over with Turves and
Hurdles. This Policy was very useful to them, for the English Horse, ignorant
of this Stratagem, sell into these Pits, where the Scots encountered them in a
great disorder. The English were forced to retreat, though the Scots pursued
the Victory furiously, the English had rallyed, and were again going to try
their fortune; but the sight of the Scotch Carriages left upon the Hills, with
their Cattle and Servants, making a great noise, and showing the appearance of
another Army coming down to the assistance of their Fellows, discouraged, and
put them to flight. 10000 were here killed, 700 Knights and Gentlemen, and many
Prisoners taken: but King Edward escaped to York. After this the Scots subdued
and plundered all the Northern Countries as far as York, and routed 10000
English in another Battle, with the loss of 3000. there slain. The King
returned toward Scotland with another Army, but King Bruce forced him to
retreat with the loss of all his Treasure. Edward Bruce, the Kings Brother, was
likewise sent over into Ireland, and subdued almost all that Kingdom to the
Crown of Scotland. This Robert Bruce enjoyed Scotland many years, and then
bequeathed it to his Son David; and if he dyed without Issue, to Robert Stuart
his Sisters Son, who was Granchild to Alexander Stuart, who about the year
1255. defeared Atho King of Norway, who had invaded the West part of Scotland
with 20000 Danes, and 120 Ships. He killed 16000 in the Field, and freed his
Country from the cruelty and oppression of these Northern People, and forced
them to sue to the Scots for peace.

CHAP. XLI. Of some of the most remarkable Persons for their Valor, of that
most Honorable, and most Noble Family of the Stuarts.
THis Family for Antiquity may contend with any in Europe, being derived from
some of the most Ancient British Kings of this Island. And I am certain that in
all Ages since, it has been taken notice of in History: none has been more
fruitful of excellent Men for their Wisdom, Valoua, and other Abilities of Body
and Mind. Besides the forenamed Alexander Stuart, who, by his wise Conduct and
Courage, delivered his Native Country from a dangerous Invasion; his Granchild
Robert Suart, who succeeded to the Crown of Scotland, after David Bruce his
Uncle, and was the first of his name King of that Warlike People; became one of
the most famous Princes of his time for his Victories over his English Enemies.
He was no sooner promoted, but a War broke out between England and Scotland for
the killing of a Friend of George Dunbar by the English at a Fair. Dunbar, to
be revenged, plundered the Fair, and burnt the Town, with the slaughter of all
Opposers. The Gentlemen Borderers on both sides invaded the Lands of one
another. At last Henry Pierce, Earl of Northumberland, gathers together 7000
Soldiers, with whom he marched into Scotland as far as Dunce. The Scots in the
night, instead of their Swords, made use of their Rattles, with which they
commonly drive away the Deer from their Corn, to encounter with their English
Enemies; and having the advantage of the Hills and Valleys to receive and
increase the sound. The noise was so great, that the Eearls Horse turned back
and fled, and the rest of the Army fearing more danger than there was, followed
after, leaving their Baggage to the Scots, who got an easy Victory without
drawing a Sword. At the same time one Gordon lay in Ambush, and defeated Thomas
Musgrave, Governor of Berwick, and his Troops, and took him Prisoner. The
English entered Scotland again under the Lord Talbot with fifteen thousand, but
in their return, only 500 Horse in the Night assaulted and overthrew them,
because they imagined them to be a greater number. King Richard of England
invaded Scotland with 60000 men, and a great Fleet; but King Robert, by entering
and spoiling England, dispersed this great Tempest without much loss to his own
Kingdom. In this Kings time the Scots took part of Ireland, and the Isle of
Man, and had many notable Victories over the English: so that after he had
governed his Kingdom, and defended it against all Invasions, he left it to his
eldest Son John, who was persuaded by his Parliament to change his name into
the fortunate name of Robert; he had two Sons, David and Robert, the first was
created Duke of Rothsay; the second, Duke of Albany. David incurred his Fathers
displeasure by his youthful pranks, and was confined to the keeping and
inspection of his younger Brother Robert, who made him a close Prisoner, and
resolved to starve him to death; but a Country Maid found means to preserve his
Life for a while with thin Oat Cakes, which she gave him through a Window; and
a certain Nurse caused him to suck her Breasts at a distance, by a long Cane.
To King Robert succeeded his youngest Son James, after a long Captivivity in
England. He delivered his Kingdom from many intestine Enemies. Alexander, Lord
of the Isles, was by him subdued; and all the little Tyrants that plundered and
robbed his People. He commissioned several Judges to make a Circuit about his
Kingdom, and to hear the Complaints of his Subjects. He was as great a Lover of
Learning as of Justice, and as careful to promote the public good, by inviting
many skilful Persons in Manufactures. His reputation was so great, that he was
earnestly courted by the Ambassadors of the Kings of England and France, to
join with them in League and Affinity: but at last he was so unhappy, that a
Conspiracy being made against him, he was basely murdered at Perth by the Earl
of Athol, and his wicked Associates, who within forty days after were
deservedly tortured to death. The Earl was Crowned with a burning Crown of
Iron, his Joints dislocated by the Strapado, the next day he was drawn through
the streets of Edinburg upon a hurdle, and executed for High Treason.

To King James the I. succeeded his Son James the II. yet a Minor, Anno 1537
The Regency of the King and Kingdom was committed to Alexander Leviston. The
Queen, a subtle Woman, seeing distempers of the Kingdom increase through the
imperiousness and ill government of the Chancellor Chrichton, resolved to get
the King out of his Custody by this Invention. She obtained leave to lodge with
her Son in Edinburg Castle: at last she found a means to convey him out of the
Castle to Leith in her Trunk, where her Linen was used to be kept. This King,
when he came to be of Age, obtained a notable Victory over the English at a
place called Sarc, and killed 3000 of his Enemies, with the loss of 600 Scots.
The Earl Douglass was then too Potent for the King and Kingdom, and too haughty
for a Subject. The King therefore weakens that powerful Family, brought them
upon their knees, after many sierce Skirmishes and Battles; and such as
continued in their Rebellion, he banished out of the Kingdom. At last he raised
an Army to assist the Duke of York against King Henry the VI. of England. After
this Kings overthrow, the Lords sent to King James to desire him to disband his
Army, and not to molest the English Borders, threarning him, that if he did
otherwise, they would meet him in the Field. He answered the Messengers, That
he was resolved to take the Town and Castle of Roxburg, which he had besieged;
and that he was not to be driven away from thence by Words. As King James was
storming the Castle of Roxburg, he gave fire to one of the great Guns himself,
and was suddenly struck dead. The Queen, then in the Army, desired the Lords
not to be dejected by the Kings death, nor to forsake the Siege; and told them,
that she would provide another King for them; her Son James, then about nine
years old, who was brought into the Camp, and saluted King by the Army, who
never left off till they had taken the Castle, and demolished it. Thus this
Courageous Queen, undaunted at the unexpected death of her Husband, continued
in the Field to hearten the Soldiers, and force the Enemy to surrender this
strong Castle to the Scots.

King James the III. succeeding to his Father, wanted not his Courage, though
he suffered himself to be too much governed by his passions, which brought him
at last to an untimely end. To him succeeded James the IV. who in the year 1500
proclaimed a War against England, in favor of the French, and sent a great
Fleet to their Assistance. He was so resolved, that when he was dissuaded from
a Battle with the English, because of his small and weak number, he declared to
the Earl of Angus, he would fight them, if they were one hundred thousand
strong. The Scots, according to the example of their King, fought stoutly, and
though there were 5000 of them killed, they slew as many of the English. But
the King lost his life in this Battle of Fluddon Field. He was so zealous for
the Christian Religion, that he obtained from the Pope, the style of Protector
of the Faith.

James the V. a Child, succeeds his Father under several Regents. At last the
distractions of the Kingdom forced the Nobility to invite over from France John
Stuart, Duke of Albany, 1514. to take upon him the Government of the King and
Kingdom. He was a wise and moderate man, but much addicted to the French
faction and interest. He was a Nephew of King James the III. by his Brother
Alexander. It was the unhappiness of this, and several of the former Kings, to
come to their Crown before they had knowledge and ability to bear them:
therefore divisions and factions in the State, between great and Ambitious Men,
did miserably tear, that poor Kingdom of Scotland, and caused many calamities
to fall upon the innocent Inhabitants. When King James the V. came to be of
Age, he visited, with a fleet, all the Islands, and punished such disorderly
Rebels as regarded not his Predecessors commands. He went over into France, and
married first Magdalen, the French Kings Daughter; but she dyed suddenly. He
married next with Mary, of the House of Guise, of whom was born that excellent
Queen Mary of Scotland, whose Rebellious Subjects, and over-jealous Kinswoman,
brought her after much affliction, and a long imprisonment, to an undeserved
Death. She was conveyed into France, and married to the Dolphin, and her mother
declared Regent in Scotland. About this time happened great troubles all over
that Kingdom, by the bringing in of the Protestant Reformation, which was
opposed by the Queen Regent and her French Faction, with the Roman Clergy; but
much encouraged by the People, the Gentry and Nobility; and especially by
James, a Bastard Son of James the V. who leaving the command of his Cloister,
was created by his Sister Queen Mary, Earl of Murrey. Queen Elizabeth of
England was not wanting to the Protestant party in Scotland; she sent them both
Men and Money, and by the assistance of the English, the French were driven out
of Scotland.

Queen Mary, after the death of her Husband, the French King, returns, by
shipping, to Scotland, where she found the Religion of the Country changed by
an Act of Parliament, and the Roman Faith abolished. Though the Queen had the
liberty of the Mass in her own Chapel, the furious Zeal of the reformed party
was scandalous and unsufferable, for they offered many affronts to the Queens
Domestics of the Roman persuasion. Therefore to strengthen her self against a
contrary faction, she calls home Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox out of England,
where he had lived in Exile. This Noble Man brought with him a Son, named
Henry, commonly called the Lord Darly, to the Court of Scotland, where as soon
as the Queen fixed her Eyes upon him, she chose him for her Husband, and
dignified him with the Dukedom of Rothesay, and Earldom of Ross, to make him a
fitter match for a Queen. He was a person of admirable and comely presence, and
a zealous Roman Catholic. After he was married, and proclaimed King, many of
the Nobility grew discontented, and fell into several parties, laboring to
breed a difference between the King and Queen, which they found means to
effect, after the King had caused David Riz, her French Secretary, to be
violently carried away from the Queens presence, and murdered, she being then
big with Child. Afterward she was brought to bed in Edinburg Castle of a Son,
named James, who, after the decease of Queen Elizabeth, united both Kingdoms,
and put an end to the quarrels of both Nations. The Queens Husband was
afterward inhumanely murdered by Earl Bothwel and other Conspirators. The
distressed Queen, after many hazards and troubles, flies for shelter into
England, where, instead of a Sanctuary, she finds a Prison and Death. King
James, though Crowned young, and governed by his Uncle Murrey, proved one of
the most excellent Princes for Wisdom, Learning, and all other Princely
Endowments that ever any Nation was blessed with. He was first governed by his
Uncle Murrey, but he being shot by one Hamilton in the Streets of Lithgo, and
killed; Matthew Lenox, the young Kings Grandfather, was made Regent of Scotland
during his Minority; but he being also killed at Sterlin, the Earls Morton and
Mar were appointed to succeed But when the King was twelve years of Age, he
took upon him the Government, and was assisted by twelve Noble Men, as
Councillors. Then his Kinsman Esmerus Stuart the Son of John, the Brother of
Matthew, late Earl of Lenox, came over from France to visit his Cousin King
James, and was by him highly advanced, made Lord Chamberlain of Scotland,
Captain of Dunbritton, and Duke of Lenox. His Father, for his extraordinary
Valor at the Battle of Baugy against the English, had the Noble seat of
Aubigny bestowed upon him by the French King Charles the VII.

King James met with many difficulties and snares, out of which Providence, and
his own discretion led him safe to the Crown of England, to the great Joy and
Happiness of both Kingdoms. He married with Anne, Daughter to the King of
Denmark; and by her had two Sons. Prince Henry, who was the great expectation
of the Enlish Nation, but suddenly snatched away by death. Prince Charles, and
the Lady Elizabeth married to the Prince Palatine of the Rhine. Prince Charles,
Successor to his Father, and Heir of three flourishing Kingdoms, after many
Battles, where he showed his undaunted Courage, as well as Piety, in his
Afflictions, was by a most unnatural, most devilish and unparalleled Rebellion
murdered by his Subjects. Never any Prince was better qualified for a Crown,
never any more patient in distress. Instead of the Imperial Crown of these
Realms, Providence bestowed upon him the Crown of Martyrdom, and his memory
will ever continue precious in the remembrance of all his Loyal Subjects. He
was too much a Christian to continue long in Peace, Governor over such a
tumultuous People. This Nation has been happy many years in excellent, wise
and valiant Princes, who have protected us and our Estates from foreign and
intestine Enemies. Our late King Charles the II. of ever blessed Memory, was
drawn into the Field betimes to contend with Cruelty, Rebellion and Tyranny:
when to the loss of his Patrimony, was added the loss of so good a Father, and
the Banishment of his Friends, his excellent Courage was not dejected, but
under so many aggravations of Sorrow, under so many pressing and grievous
Afflictions as were sent to welcome him into the World, he endeavored to
recover, by his Valor and Conduct, his Kingdoms and Crowns. In Scotland, when
he was to struggle with a seditious and troublesome Generation, and was to
encounter with a Victorious Army of Enemies; his Wisdom preserved his divided
party from that ruin, into which they were falling by their needless Factions;
and at the unhappy Battle of Worcester, King Charles showed himself to be a
wise and diligent Commander, and an undaunted Soldier, by the confession of his
greatest Enemies. But that which this brave Prince attempted to obtain by his
just Arms, Providence procured to him by a Miracle; I mean, the Restoration of
the Royal Family to their Dignities and Estates, without any effusion of Blood,
when there were so many Enemies both at home and abroad to oppose them.

In this short summary of the Heroes of the Royal Family, I cannot but mention
our present King James the II. whose great Courage, undaunted Spirit, and Noble
Mind, has been sufficiently tried both at at home and abroad, both by Sea and
Land, against Foreign Enemies in the Field, and furious and unreasonable
Combitations of sactious Spirits within the Kingdom. Victory and success has
always attended upon him; and may this most Excellent Prince long continue over
us in all prosperity and happiness, and may his Enemies lick the dust.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Conquest of France by King Henry the V. and several other
Remarkable Passages in that famous War.
KIng Henry the V. for the recovering of his Right to the Crown of France,
which was denied to him upon the pretense of the Salick Law, sent over the Duke
of Exeter, his Uncle, with several Noble Men, and 500 Horse, to Charles the VI.
of France, to demand the Crown, and with it the Princess Catherine, the French
Kings Daughter. The Dolphin, in contempt of King Henry's youthful days, sent
him, in scorn, a Tunn of Tennis Balls to play with. The King was so sensible of
this scornful present, that he swore, That he would toss so many Iron Balls in
France, that the strongest Rackets in that Kingdom should not be able to return
them back. It is no Wisdom to provoke the weakest Enemy, nor safe to contemn
the meanest Power, for that which is wanting in Ability, may be made good by
diligence and policy. King Henry, for the obtaining of his purpose, transported
over an Army into France. Harflew was besieged, and within six Weeks taken. The
Soldiers had liberty to plunder it. A sudden distemper happened in the English
Army, which destroyed many of the stoutest Soldiers, who are as much subject to
death in their Tents, as in the midst of the Enemies Swords, and the showers of
shot. The King left a Garrison in Harflew, and resolved by land to march to
Chalice with Two Thousand Horse, and Thirteen Thousand Archers. The Dolphin
with above Thirty Thousand at Rohan resolved in Council to sight the English.
At Agencourt the Constable of France came to the Dolphin with Ten Thousand
Horse, and some Foot. The French, as their manner is, boasted of the Victory
before they had got it; but they presumed so much upon their numbers, that they
thought to swallow up the English. King Henry had wisely provided all things
for a Fight. He had got a number of Stakes, strengthened with sharp Irons at
each end; with them he fences in his Foot, that they might find, in case of
necessity, some defense against the multitudes of the Enemies Horse. The French
Army was divided into three Battalions, the first consisting of 16000. was lead
by the Constable; the second, by the Dukes of Alanson and Bar; the third was
commanded by the Earls of Mark and Damp. The English Vanguard was brought up by
the Duke of York, the main Battle, in which were the strongest Bill-men, by the
King, assisted by the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Oxford and Suffolk. The
Rear was marshalled by the Duke of Exeter, the Kings Uncle. An Ambush of
English Archers was placed within a new hedge, to receive and surprise the
French at their first approach. They did such good service with their showers
of Arrows, which fell upon the Van of the French Army, consisting for the most
part of Horse, that they were overthrown, and helped to trample upon, and
disorder their Foot. In that hurly burly the English Bill-men fell upon them
with such fury, that they were forced to fly: but at the coming in of the
French main Battle, the English retreated in order within their Stakes, and
where then followed by the French Horse with more have than discretion, for
they found themselves so entangled, that many of the most furious lost their
Lives. Here the King fought hand to hand with the Duke of Alanson, and beat him
down, and would have spared his Life, had not his Guard killed him before he
was aware. When the two first Battalions were overthrown, the third had no
stomach to go on to the charge; and though they were the greater number, they
fled, and craved quarter, which was granted: but when a dreadful noise was
heard from the English Camp, occasioned by 600 Horse that fell in to plunder
the English behind their Backs; the King imagining that another Army was coming
on to assault him, and that so many thousand Prisoners might rise up, and
endanger his Army in the Rear, commanded them all to be flain, for which he
ever after was heartily sorry. In this Battle sell the Constable and Admiral of
France, the Dukes of Alanson, Brabant and Bar, many Earls, 25 Barons, 8000
Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, and many thousand common Soldiers. Though the
Enemy was fled, the King, for the public safety, commanded his Army to stand
in Array; for the Earl of Faulconbridge suddenly appeared with 600 Horse, to
take the English upon an advantage, but they were soon routed. After this,
Solemn thanks was given there to God; and the Soldiers had then liberty to take
the Plunder of the Field. From thence King Henry marched to Chalice, laden
with Riches and Honor. The next year, with a new Army, he landed in Normandy,
besieged and took Caen, and all the chief Towns, invited by the Kings promises,
yielded without resistance; only Rohan, being well manned and fortified, held
out so long, till Famine scaled the Walls, and delivered it to the English,
Bedford and the Earl of Huntington returned likewise with Victory over the
French Fleet.

In the beginning of this War, the English had no assistance, but from their
own Skill and Valor, and from the divided State of France, and the discontent
of the Grandees, who commonly find fault with one another in an unsuccessful
War. But there happened an Action which mightily increased the strength of the
English. The Duke of Burgundy, the Dolphins Enemy, sought to be reconciled to
him for the public good. The Dolphin, though he professed much kindness, took
his advantage, and murdered the Duke. The Earl of Carolois; the Dukes eldest
Son, sought to be revenged on the Murderers, and therefore from thence favored
King Henry's Claim. A peace was concluded, by which King Henry was proclaimed
Regent, and Heir apparent of France, and he married with Catherine, the French
Kings Daughter. All these sudden successes of the English were owing to the
young Duke of Burgundy's revenge, the French Kings weakness, and the Dolphins
unjust dealing; for he had purchased to himself many Enemies by the illegal
murdering of great men, chiefly the Duke of Burgundy. A Foreign Enemy has a
great advantage in a strange Country, when a Potent Person, or a considerable
Party joins with; or assists them in their Conquest. The Dolphin, though he was
discouraged by the French Kings rejection, and the defection of many Towns, he
gathered his Forces, and put a period to the English Victories and Joys, by the
gain of a Battle, wherein 2000 English were surprised and slain, with the Duke
of Clarence, the Kings Brother, the Earls of Tankerville and Kent, and the Lord
Ross, only for want of a right intelligence of the Enemies state and numbers.
The Duke being persuaded by a deceitful Scout to leave behind him the strength
of his Army, and engage the French Army only with his Horse. Too much
Confidence and Valor has been the ruin of the stoutest and best Generals of
former Ages. The Dolphin, to be revenged upon Burgundy, employs Fire and Sword
to destroy his Country; but the King of England pursued him from one City to
another, till he fell sick by the way, in marching toward Burgundy, which
caused him to be carried back to Bois d'Vnicermes, where, after he had given
order for the preservation of his Kingdom, and returned thanks to God for his
Conquests, he departed this troublesome life; leaving by his Queen a young
Henry born at Windsor, whom he committed to the Protection of his good Brother
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester; but the Regency of France was left to his Brother
John, Duke of Bedford. After the Kings Death, Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, and
the Lord Talbot, were the most noted Champions, and the most successful
Commanders for the English. Salisbury surprised the Town of Pont-Melance, and
raised the Siege of Cravant in Burgundy, with the destruction of 8000 of the
Enemy. He took several other Towns, and at the Battle of Vernoyle, between the
Regent and the Duke of Alanson, who was assisted by William Stuart, and a
strong party of Scots; this brave Commander routed the French Army, killed 7000
French, 2700 Scots, with many of the chief Nobility; so dreadful was his name
to the French Nation, that when St. James in Benyon was besieged by the
Constable of France with 40000 men, about 600 English sallying out of the Town,
and crying out, St. George, a Salisbury, put the whole French Army to flight,
and took 14 great Guns, with much of their Baggage and Ammunition. In the
prosecution of this War many Towns were lost and taken on both sides; several
sharp encounters happened between the English and the French Garrisons. The
French King was Crowned at Rheims, and young King Henry at Paris, where he
received the Homages from the Nobility and Citizens The English Affairs
prospered mighty well whilst there was a good agreement between the chief
Commanders, whilst they humoured the Duke of Burgundy, and treated the French
with Civility and kindness; but when discord happened to be between the English
Lords, and they suffered the the Soldiers to oppress the Natives of France; the
Cities fell away from them apace: Yet Lord John Clifford took Pouthois when the
English Interest began to decay. In a Snowy and Frosty Night he caused all his
party to cloth themselves in White, and in that color he scaled the Walls
undiscovered, put most part of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and plundered the
Town. Yet for all the brave Exploits, and courageous endeavors of several
English Commanders, within a few years all France was lost, with Aquitain and
Normandy, through the division of the English, the cruelty of the Soldiers, the
Falsehood and Treachery of the Natives, and the presumption and negligence of
some great Captains.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Alexander Duke of Parma, and his successful Stratagems.
WHen this excellent General came first to the Government of the Netherlands,
the King of Spain, of the Seventeen Provinces, was in possession but of three
of the least, but in a few years Parma, by his industry and skill in Arms,
recovered almost all, Holland and Zealand excepted. This Prince had given the
first Specimen of his Courage and Understanding in War in the Famous Battle of
Lepanto against the Turks, where he adventured to board a great Commanders
Vessel, named Mustapha, the Treasurer of the Turks, and after a bloody Fight,
he took that Gally, and another that came in to assist the former, with unknown
Riches in both. But when John of Austriae was sent Governor into the
netherlands, he invited Alexander, the young Duke of Parma, into the Low
Countries. At the Battle of Gemblack between John of Austria and the States,
Alexander perceiving the Enemies Horse to march in a crooked and uneven way,
gave notice of it to the General, and without expecting any return, caused some
Spanish Commanders to assault them in the Front, and upon the Flanks, which was
performed with that Gallantry, that they were put to flight, and run back upon
their Foot, which they broke and disordered, so that 10000 were there slain and
taken in half an Hours time, and but nine of the Spanish Army were found
wanting. All their Carriages and Guns were there taken, with their General, and
several Noblemen. This great Victory procured the Duke of Parma the favor and
esteem of all the Spanish Army. But as the chief skill of a General consists
not only in knowing when, and how to overcome an Enemy; but also in
understanding how to preserve his Army, and saving it from a dangerous post, or
drawing it out of the unexpected Ambushes of a powerful Enemy; this was
performed by the Duke of Parma at the Battle of Mechlin: for John of Austria,
the Spanish General, having suffered a considerable part of his Army to fall
upon the Enemies, they retreated to their great Guns, and had encompassed the
Spaniards round, so that they had been all cut in pieces, had not Parma secured
their Retreat, which he did, by placing behind the Hedges some Companies of
Musketeers to stop the pursuing Enemy, and causing some Troops of Horse
furiously to charge, whilst he gave a private sign for a Retreat, and drew away
the Body of Foot, in danger to be lost, into the narrow ways, lined with his
Musketeers. In the mean while orders were given to the rest of the Army to keep
their Ranks, and to stand ready to shelter their Fellows at their return, for
fear the Enemy, following close at the Rear, should disorder and rout the whole
Army, as it has often happened in such like cases.

When John of Austria was dead, Alexander succeeded him in the Government of
the Netherlands, and in the chief command of the Army. Maestricht was first
besieged by him, where he so cunningly enclosed in the Town with Forts and
Works by Land, and two Bridges over the River Mosa, that it was not in the
power of the Prince of Orange, and of his Army, either to relieve the Town, or
force him in his Trenches. At last, after a notable Siege, the City was taken,
and miserably plundered by the Dukes Army. By his Policy and Valor he recovered
the most part of the Netherlands, defeated the Troops of Casimirus the Saxon
Prince, who, with his German Forces, assisted the Prince of Orange and the
States. He compelled several great Towns to yield to him, Tourney, Aldenard,
Dunkirk, etc. He drove the Duke of Alanson out of the Netherlands, and often
beat the French Auxiliaries, after their unhappy endeavor to surprise Antwerp,
and the chief Towns, which they assaulted at noon day, by the orders of the
Duke of Alanson, who attempted to take and plunder Antwerp by Treachery. But
Parma's excellent skill in War never appeared more than in the famous Siege of
Antwerp: With ten or eleven thousand men he beleagur'd that great City full of
People, defeated all the Auxiliary Forces sent to relieve the Town, and at the
same time compelled Five other strong Cities to yield to him, Gant, Brussels,
Mechlin, Nimeguen, and Teneramund. In this Siege he built a Famous and most
Ingenious Bridge over the River of Scala. This Bridge was in part blown up and
broken by Ships let down the Stream from Antwerp by a notable Ingenier; but
such was the diligence and Courage of the Duke of Parma, that he caused some
Beams, Planks and Vessels to be laid in that Breach, and Drums and Trumpets
there to sound, to blind and deceive the Holland Vessels that were coming up
the River the next morning to relieve Antwerp with Provisions: so that,
notwithstanding this discouragement, and the loss of his Soldiers, killed in
the blowing up of the Bridge, he continued the Siege, until the Citizens were
forced by Famine to yield up their City. He reduced the States of Holland to
the necessity of imploring Queen Elizabeth's Aid. She sent sent the Earl of
Leicester with a brave Army; but the Duke of Parma proceeded on in the Conquest
of the Netherlands, and the taking of several Towns both from the Dutch and
English. But no Action of this Prince deserves more the admiration of Men, than
his expeditions into France. The first was for the relief of Paris, besieged by
Henry the IV. The Duke was ordered by the King of Spain to march thither with
his Army. Henry was forced to call together all his Troops, and rise from the
Siege, to meet the Duke, with an intent to fight him. But when he understood
that Paris was supplied with Provisions, he entrenched himself in such an
advantageous Post, that the King did not dare to beat him from thence. He
afterward retreated back into the Low Countries, and in view of the French
Army (far more numerous than his) stormed and took the Town of Lagny; and
though the French followed him close at the Heels, yet he ordered his Retreat
so subtilely, that they could never fight him. The next expedition was for the
Relief of Rohan, besieged by same King Henry the IV. The Duke of Parma, with an
Army of about 15000 Old Soldiers, Spaniards and Walloons, and 8000 French,
under the Duke of Mayenne, went to Rohan, and obliged King Henry to depart with
his Army. Parma, at the request of the Citizens, assaulted Caudebeck, and took
it. In the mean while King Henry had gathered together his dispersed Forces,
and finding himself as strong as his Enemies, resolved to pursue, and fight
them. They were then about Tuepot in the Chalky Country of Normandy, having the
great River of Seine between them both. The Dukes Army was much distressed for
want of Victuals, and had received some loss by the French Army in Skirmishes;
and King Henry had taken great care to cut off all provisions from them. But
the Duke of Parma, in one night, delivered his Army from the danger both of the
Enemy and of Famine. He caused great Boats, covered over with Beams and Planks,
to fall down the River from Rohan to his Camp, where he caused two Forts to be
raised, with some Redoubts, to favor and defend his passage over the River,
which in this place is half a League over. Upon these Boats he conveyed over
all his Cannon and Carriages, his Bag and Baggage, with Horse and Foot; so that
the next day, when the French Army was preparing to assault the Spaniards in
their Tents, they saw only Prince Ranuse Farnese with 1500 Men, with the rest
of their Canon, going over to the Dukes Army on the other side; and it was not
in the Kings power to follow him for want of Boats, or a Bridge. By this means
the Duke returned back with leisure into the Low Countries, relieved two great
Cities against a powerful King; and without venturing his Army, to the great
wonder of all Europe, performed what he had undertaken.

CHAP. XLIII. How the Marquis de Monte defeated five Companies of Foot, and
Seven Hundred Horse, with Seventy Lances, and Twenty Five Carabins.
THis excellent Commander, by the Duke of Parma's order, marched out of Lovain,
where he was Governor, toward Maestricht, to discover the Enemy, and by
chance met with five Companies of Foot, and Seven Hundred Horse. At the first
sight his men began to fear the in-equality of the number; but the Marquess
finding himself too far advanced, and so near that he could not well escape by
flight, resolved, to encourage his small party to stand the encounter. For that
purpose he caused his Carabines to march up to the top of the Hill in sight of
the Enemy, and there to stand ready for a charge, whilst he divided his Lances
into three parts, which he caused, at a signal given, to ride from three
several places furiously toward the Enemy. When they saw from diverse places
several Troops of Horse riding up to charge them, and hearing the sound of the
Trumpets, which the Marquess caused to be sounded in the Valleys, as if there
were a greater Body of Men coming up to charge them, they all run away, and
gave an easy Victory to the Marquess, who in half an hours time killed a great
many in the pursuit, took three Colors, two hundred Horses, and and one
hundred Prisoners. Thus, by the mistake and deceit of the eyesight, was this
party routed; and when fear causes Men to fly away, a small number is
sufficient to continue the chase, and hinder them from rallying.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Henry de Lorain, Duke of Guise, and how he defeated the great
Army of Germans in France.
THe Protestant Princes of Germany being solicited by the King of Navar, sent
abouut five and twenty thousand men, under the command of the Baron de Dona and
the Duke of Boillion to his assistance. The Duke of Guise, with a flying Army
of four or five thousand men, waited upon them from the borders of Lorain, to
cut off Provisions, and at all advantages to ruin and destroy them. In their
march toward the fruitful Country of Beauste, the Germans came near
Mountargis, and the Baron with a strong party of Horse, quartered at a small
Town called Vimory. The Duke having intelligence of the disposition of the
Enemies Army, marched out of Montargis by night with his small party through a
long Plain, and arrived at Vimory before day. The Duke of Guise having divided
his Infantry into three Battalions of about a thousand men apiece, under the
command of these Captains, St. Paul Joannes, Cheurers, and Pontsenac, and his
Cavalry into four Squadrons, led by the Dukes of Mayenne, de Elbeut, and
Aumale. The Duke of Guise led the fourth, which consisted of 300 Horse. When
they were near to Vimory, they sent four Horsemen to discover the entry in of
the Village, and found neither Scouts, nor Guards, nor Perdues, nor any
Baricado to hinder the Assault of an Enemy, so secure these Germans lay.
Therefore the Duke of Guise entering the great Street of the Town, which was
full of Carts and Wagons belonging to the German Army, soon overpowred those
that first made resistance, and then setting Fire to the Houses, burnt and
killed above a thousand Germans, and took from them a great deal of Plunder,
with 1200 Horse. But when the Baron de Dona had rallyed his Troops to make
resistance, the Duke of Guise fearing to be surrounded, retreated back to
Montagis with rich Spoils and much Honor. This Loss, though it was not great,
yet destroyed the whole German Army, by breeding a discontent between Officers
and Soldiers, and causing them to distrust the capacity of their General, who
from Vimory led them into Beauste, to the Town of Anneau, where there was a
Castle, which a certain Captain had undertaken to defend against all the German
Army. The Duke of Guise, with a very small party, pursues them, and resolves to
beat up their Quarters once more. And for that purpose having agreed with the
Captain of the Castle to receive in by Night his Infantry, he, with all his
Cavalry round about the Town, stood ready to cut in pieces those that should
offer to save themselves by Flight. The Infantry at break of day sallying out
of the Castle into the Town, surprised the Germans unprovided, killed about
3000 of them, took five hundred Priseners with their Bag and Baggage, and their
Wagons and Plate. The rest of the Army that quartered in the Neighboring
Villages were so discouraged, that they sent to agree with King Henry the 3d.
to suffer them to return home into their own Country. So that of this great
Army scarce 4000 were left alive; for in their return they were destroyed by
the Country People.

CHAP. XLV. Of Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedeland, and his brave Actions in
Germany and Poland.
THis Prince has been successful in all his Wars, first against the Muscovite
and Polander; for the King of Poland claimed the Crown of Swedes as his natural
Inheritance. The War continued very fierce many years, but the Swedes for the
most part had the Victory, and took several Towns from the Poles. Newburg and
Straisburg were taken by a new Invention of a certain Ingineer, named Elias
Tripus, who showed the King how to shoot great Shot with Leathern Guns, to
batter the Enemies Walls. During this War between the two Kinsmen, the Kings of
Sweden and Poland, the Emperor of Germany gave Assistance to the Poles, and
made War against the Swedes, from whom he took diverse Towns. Therefore as soon
as the peace was concluded with the Polander, the Swedish King proclaims a War,
by his Manifesto, against Coesar, who, in Favor of the Roman Bishops, had
abridged the Protestant Liberties all over Germany, taken from the Prince
Palatine his ancient Inheritance, plundered the Lutheran Cities, invaded the
Countries of Saxony, and other reformed Territories, and joining with the
Spaniard, resolved to promote and advance the Popish persuasion with Fire and
Sword. The King of Sweden, a rigid Lutheran, as he found himself engaged by
many Obligations in this War against Germany, he met with great Assistance and
Encouragements from diverse Princes and Cities, who had been harassed and
plundered upon the account of Religion. In the year 1630. he entered the Isle of
Rugia. Stetin, the chief City of Pomerania, yielded to the Swedes, so did the
Castles of Wolgasten and Damgart, and the Towns of Ribbenitza, Winshem,
Colberg, Griffenhage, and all Pomerania. Gustavus proceeded on in his
Conquests, and restored several exiled Princes to their Patrimonies in Saxony.
The Elector himself being grievously impoverished by the Imperial Army,
entreated Assistance from the King, who at Lipsick joins with the Duke against
Count Tilly. A furious Battle was here fought. The King had the leading of the
Right Wing, the Duke of Saxony governed the Left. At the first encounter the
Imperialists had the Advantage of the Sun and Wind, but the King of Sweden
cunningly wheeled about, and got that benefit from them, and to strengthen his
Troops of Horse, he caused some Ranks of Musketeers to be mingled amongst them,
which did notable service in that Station. The new raised Forces of Saxony gave
ground, but they were soon relieved by General Horns Foot, who were placed in
Ambush in a little Wood. The Fight was obstinate and bloody; fifteen thousand
lay dead upon the place; but the Victory inclined to the Swedes and Saxons,
who, the next day, prepared again to Fight; but when they understood that the
Imperialists were fled, and had left behind them their Ordinance, Bag and
Baggage, they took the plunder of the Field. This great Victory obtained at
Podelvitza, near Lipsick, caused many Towns of Franconia to yield to the
Conqueror. Another Battle was sought at Rottenburg, but the Imperialists were
worsted. Then did the King take all the Towns between the Baltic Sea and Mentz
in one year. The distressed Prince Palatine of the Rhine embraces this
favorable opportunity to recover his forfeited Estate, and begs the Assistance
of Gustavus, who employs all his Forces to relieve him, and by this means he
got possession again of his Countries, which could never be obtained by all the
Treaties, Leagues, and Correspondencies of his Friends in Europe. Francfort,
Ausburg, Monachium, and many of the chief Cities of Germany were surrendered to
the King, who met with no resistance, till Wallenstein Duke of Fridland, and
the Duke of Bavaria with a great Army, encamped near the Swedes about
Noremburg. The Kings Army was 50000 strong, the Imperialists more; but the
Swedes wanted Provisions, which they took by intercepting such Convoys as were
going to the Emperors Army, and by surprising Friestad, a Magazine. The King
sends Tupatelius, a Swedish Colonel, with a party of Dragoons in the Night.
They clapped a Petard to the Gates, and entered the Town, took the Corn and the
Cattle that were there; and because the Enemies Army lay not far off, the King
sent a strong party to relieve his Men, placing an Ambush for the Imperialists,
who failed not to fall into it, to their great loss. Both Armies thundered one
against another many days with frequent Skirmishes, but the want of Provisions
forced them to part after a hot Encounter. The Imperialists marched toward
Saxony, to be revenged on that Duke. With the Dread and Terror of Fire and
Sword they opened the Gates of many strong Towns, till the King, hasting to the
Assistance of that miserable Country, at the fatal Town of Lutzen, the 6th. of
November, 1632. he meets with the Imperial Army, and resolves to fight them. As
soon as the Sun was up, he implored the Assistance of the Almighty, and set his
Army in order; he himself led the Right Wing, the Duke Bernard of Saxon Weymar
had the Left. The King was desired to put on his Armor, but he refused to
incumber himself with so great a Weight. In the heat of the Battle, a certain
person, belonging to the Regiment of Piccollomini, sees him at a distance; he
rid furiously up to him, and as he was turning about his Horse, he shot him
with a Brace of Bullets in the Back, to the great grief of all his Army, but
not to their Discouragement; for when they heard of his Death, they fell so
resolutely on, that they beat off the Imperialists, and recovered the Royal
Body. In the Left Wing Duke Bernard had put the Enemy to a Retreat, but at that
Instant Papenheim, an Imperial General, came into the Field, rallyed the
disordered Troops, and with his own Forces endeavored to snatch the Victory
from the Swedes, but he sound them ready to receive him. The day was too short
for that Fight, it continued some part of the night; but Papenheim ended there
his days in the Bed of Honor, leaving the Swedes to rejoice for a dear bought
Victory, with the loss of an excellent King, who dyed in the 38th. year of his
Age. When he saw how fond and confident his People were in him, he desired them
not to trust in him, whose Breath was in his Nostrils, but in the Lord Jesus,
who had promised to be with his Church till the end of the World. Though the
Swedes here lost their King, they prosecuted the War under the command of Duke
Bernard, Kniphus and Horn, being assisted by the Dukes of Saxony, Brandenburg,
the Lantgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Lunenburg.

CHAP. XLVI. How Prince Maurice got into his Power the Town of Grolle in
Gelderland.
GRolle was a well fortified Town, possessed by the Spaniard: Prince Maurice
had laid Siege to it, but was forced to depart without his purpose. He studied
therefore how to obtain by subtilty what he could not get by force. Sometime
after he calls together his Troops, and declares, that his design was to sit
before Guelders, a Town not far distant from Grolle. As soon as the Spaniards
understood it, they furnished Guelders with all manner of provisions and
Ammunition for its defense, and took out of other Towns Soldiers and all
necessaries to supply that, but chiefly out of the Town of Grolle. The Prince
having notice how naked they had left it, suddenly surrounded it the second
time, and by reason of its want of the Ammunitions and Provisions sent to
furnish Guelders, he quickly became Master of it. Such pretenses are very
useful to deceive an Enemy, and to surprise him unawares and unfurnished for a
defense. This policy was often practiced by the Renowned Duke of Parma in the
taking of several Towns in the Netherlands. If therefore a Commander be free to
discover his design upon any place, the Enemy may understand thereby, that this
is only to deceive him, and that the real intent is kept secret: for Wise
Generals will not suffer their inferior Soldiers, and sometimes their greatest
Officers, to know their purposes.

CHAP. XLVII. How Scanderbeg with a Handful of Horse and Foot, overcame the
Turks numerous Forces of Cavalry and Infantry.
SCanderbeg, that Renowned General, and Champion of the Christian Faith, in a
certain Battle, in which he was forced to engage and fight with the Turkish
Army, which exceeded him much in number of men, made use of this policy. He
drew up his Army in such Streights and places, as that he could not easily be
surrounded. And to strengthen his Horse against the fury of the Turkish, he
lined them with some of his best Foor, commanding them at the first onset to
charge in the distances between the Horse, which was performed with that
Gallantry and Courage, that the Turkish Horse having both Foot and Horse to
encounter with at once, gave back, and were forced to retire in disorder upon
their Foot; so that without any great Loss, he routed and defeared that vast
Army with a small number of Men.

CHAP. XLVIII. How the Duke d'Alve was wont to strengthen his Army in a Camp
against the sudden Attempts of the Prince of Oranges Horse.
THe Duke d'Alve was a subtle Commander of his days, and so renowned a
General, that his Prince, Philip the 2d. pitched upon him to lead his Army to
conquer the Kingdom of Portugal, though he was then in disgrace, and bannished
the Spanish Court. When the Prince of Orange entered Brabant with a brave Army,
well provided with German Horse, this Duke d'Alve had in his Army almost all
Foot: therefore to prevent any surprise, d'Alve used to fortify himself round
with Wagons and Carts chained together, and beyond them to cast up a Trench
round his Army. He caused also his Carts to be lined with Musketeers; so that
the Prince was never able to force him to a Fight. And when all his Forage and
Provisions were spent, he was driven by that means, to the necessity of
departing out of the Country into Germany again.

CHAP. XLIX. Of certain times convenient to fight an Enemy, and other times,
wherein it is Wisdom to refuse a Battle.
IF an Armies Reputation depends wholly upon a speedy success, as in many
cases. If the Enemy be gathering together greater Forces, and expects a speedy
supply of Horse or Foot: If the Country be so at his devotion, that the longer
he delays, the stronger he grows; or if Victuals or Money begin to fail, then a
General should seek all fit opportunities for a speedy Encounter, while the
Enemy is not too strong, and his own party in a condition and resolution to
give Battle. But if a General has more Forces coming into him, or if he knows,
that by delaying he may shorten or cut off his Enemies Provisions; or if
Sickness and Diseases do daily lessen the number of his Enemies, then, by
delaying, he may do as much service, as by venturing a Battle. At the Isle of
Rhee, the Freuch Army would never offer to fight with the English, till they
perceived them in a confusion, by reason of their orders to Embark. But they
always followed them close at the Heels, till this opportunity was offered to
them, and then with all their Forces of Horse and Foot, they fell furiously
upon the English, and cut off a great many. Likewise in the War between Don
John of Austria and the Estates of the Netherlands; he endeavored to fight the
Army commanded by Count Bossute, because he understood that Duke Cassimire with
5000 Horse, and 6000 Foot, with other Forces, were coming into the Earls Camp
within a few days. But the Earl would by no means suffer his Men to venture out
of their Trenches.

CHAP. L. How Lewis King of France stopped the Assistance which the Dukes of
Burgundy and Britany, were going to send to the Duke of Normandy.
THe French King understanding that these three Dukes had made a League
Offensive and Defensive against him, their common Enemy, and having an intent
to assault and fight them single. When he led his Army into Normandy, he
feigned Letters from that Duke to the Duke of Burgundy, signifying, that he was
loath to run the hazard of a War, that he had accepted of the Kings offers, and
concluded an agreement with him for 60000 Franks, and therefore he desired him
to forbear sending of his Forces to his Assistance, as had been formerly
promised. These Letters the King caused to be sent by an Herald to the Dukes of
Burgundy and Brittany, who, though they suspected them to be false, yet because
they received a confirmation from the Contents from other hands (but by the
procurement of the King) they caused their Armies to be speedily disbanded. By
this means the King obtained by policy what otherwise he could not well get by
Force, without the hazard of his Army; for he having thus weakened his Enemies,
made with them what agreement he thought convenient, and they were forced to
yield to his Terms of peace.

CHAP. LI. A Policy used by a French General to destroy the Neapolitan Army
strongly Encamped.
WHen there was a dispute between Ferand King of Naples, and Charles, King of
France, about the Crown of that Kingdom; Ferand understanding that the French
Army was too potent for him to encounter with, only with his faint-hearted
Neapolitans, resolved to entrench himself between certain Hills. The French
General finding him in that advantageous Post, that he did not dare to meddle
with him, divided his Army secretly in the night, and sent a strong Party round
about to assault King Ferand behind, whilst he in the Interim with small
Parties skirmished and kept them in continual play. At last, when the party of
Men, which were to surround the Neapolitan Army, and to fall upon their Backs,
were come to the appointed place; the French assaulted the Enemy behind and
before, entered their Trenches, and routed them. Xerxes in the same manner
recovered the Streights of Thermopyle in Greece, defended by a handful of
Lacedaemonians, under Leonidas their Captain.

CHAP. LII. How Prince Maurice took the Town of Gertrudenberg.
WHen the Prince of Orange besieged Gertrudenberg by Sea and Land, he
understood by a Prisoner taken from the Enemy, that once every day the
Governor, with the chief Magistrates, were wont to go up privately to take a
view of the Hollanders Trenches, and of the Country round about, that they
might see for an opportunity to sally out upon them; immediately he took
advantage of this Information, and secretly ordered a Gentleman of his Army to
run away to the Town, under pretense, that he had murdered a Man, and therefore
fled to save his Life. The Gentleman, according to appointment, discovered to
the Princes Army, by playing upon a Pipe, when the Governor was in the
Steeple. The great Guns being then ready, and waiting for the purpose, were all
immediately discharged at one time, and battered down the Steeple, killed the
Governor with the Magistrates, which as soon as the Prince suspected, he
caused a sudden assault to be made, and carried the Town, for want of a
Governor and Orders to defend it. For such a Consternation that must needs
happen at the unexpected destruction of a Chieftain, either in an Army, or in a
Garrison, the Soldiers Hearts must needs be broken, and before orders can be
given to supply his place by another, the Enemy has a great advantage upon the
party that he commands.

CHAP. LIII. How the States of Holland took the Town of Breda by surprise.
THey hired a certain Master of a Boat, who was wont to carry into the City
Provisions of Bread and Beer, and other necessaries, for maintenance of the
Garrison. In this Boat they stored a Company of Stout and Valiant Gentlemen,
and covered them over with Turves and other things. The Boatsman, according to
his custom, brings strong Liquors upon the Guard, makes them all drink
plentifully, till they were drunk, whilst they were in that Condition, he
passes the Guard, and enters into the Town with his Company of Men, who
immediately gave notice to their Friends without, by casting up a Ball of
Wildfire, to fall on. A Gate was broken open for them; then did they disperse
themselves about the Town, killed all that resisted, and mastered the Guard.
Such surprises have been made with Carts full of Corn, Hay, etc. wherein have
been hid Soldiers; and sometimes a Cart has been purposely broken, and out of
order at the Gate of a Town, to hinder the shutting of it, and a party of the
Enemy has then set upon, and entered the Town.

CHAP. LIVE. How the Garrison of the Skonse at Zutphen was surprised.
THe Spaniards, to strengthen the more the City of Zutphen in Gelderland, had
built a very strong Skonse in such a place, as hindered any Enemy from making
their approaches to besiege or annoy the Town; for it was erected on the Banks
of the River Issell. When therefore Prince Maurice had a design upon that
place, he procured a dozen young Gentlemen of a Feminine Gountenance, to be
apparelled as Country Maids, and to carry thither Butter, Eggs, Poultry, and
other such Country-Commodities to be sold to the Garrison Soldiers. They coming
to the Walls to buy these Provisions, sound the Disguised Virgins very
tractable, and judging them fit for their Lust, they received them into the
Fort, and offered them drink, to make them more pliable for their purpose. As
the Soldiers were busy in their Courtship, these young and stout Soldiers drew
from under their Petticoats a long Knife, made for the purpose, and stabbed the
Soldiers who sat next to them; then rising together with such Arms us they
siezed next to thems they encountered with the rest of the Guard, and cut them
all off, delivering the strong Port to their Companions, who waited near at
hand to give them their ready Assistance. The taking of this Skonse so
discouraged the Garrison of the Town; that they yielded in few days after to
the States of Holland. Such Disguises have often proved successful, when the
business and design has been managed with care and discretion, wariness and
Courage. Another Town in the Low Countries was taken by a party of Soldiers
apparalled as Country Maids, and by them the Guard was suddenly overpowred, and
a Gate seized to let in the Enemy at hand: but the least disappointment spoils
all the Design, and destroys the bold Adventurers, who must expect no pardon or
Quarter after such a dangerous Hypocrisy.

CHAP. LV. How Spinola 's Army was like to be routed when they first sat down
before the Walls of Bergen-op-Zone.
THe Governor of the City, a politic Commander, resolved to sally out upon
the Spaniards at their first coming to besiege the Town; and to terrify them
the more, he increased the appearance of his Army with a show of Armed Troops,
besides those that he had real. His Horse and Foot were to attack the Enemy out
of one Gate, and out of Another he caused all the Weak Jades of the Town, being
mounted by Boys and useless Fellows, to march leisurely out, and show the
appearance of other Forces. These were to discover themselves at a distance,
after the first or second Charge, when the Enemy was weary. The Spaniards had
beaten back the Defendants, but the unexpected sight of these deceitful Forces
so troubled them, that they suddenly left the Chase, and retired behind their
Trenches in some disorder; and had the States Soldiers been provided with
Ammunition and Bullets, to have given at that instant another Charge, Spinola's
Army had been then totally routed, and the City freed from a troublesome Siege.

CAAP. LVI. How an Army has been discouraged in the midst of a Fight.
AT Muscleborough Field, when both Armies were fiercely engaged, there was
cunningly a rumor spread amongst the Enemies, that their General was slain in
the other Wing, and part of their Forces cut off and routed, which Report so
terrified them, that they immediately gave Ground, and began to run. This
Policy has been often used, when it was known that the General was not
present. And sometimes after the first Charge, an Army has cried out, Look how
they run in the Rear. Such Words, and false Reports have disordered and
defeated the best and most resolute Armies: for the least sear discourages
Soldiers in such a critical time, and disinables them from pursuing the
Victory. So that as it has always been the practice of well advised Generals,
by sudden Attempts, Stratagems, Rumors, and other Arts, to terrify their
Enemies, it has been the endeavor of wise Commanders to prevent fear from
discouraging their Forces, and to secure their minds against all sudden
Accidents, which they could foresee by their advice and command, and by the
steadiness of their own Resolutions and wise Orders.

CHAP. LVII. How the States of Holland got the Possession of a piece of Ground
which they knew was fit for them to build a Fort, to distress the Enemies
Towns, and stop the passage of two great Rivers.
THere is between the Wale and the Leck two great Rivers, a piece of ground
advancing into the Sea. The Hollanders perceiving that it might be beneficial
to them and their designs against the Spaniards, if they could get it, resolved
by policy to gain possession of it. Round about were the Enemies Castles and
Garrisons, which would infallibly oppose any such motion, if they came to
understand it. Therefore to conceal their intent from them, they dealt with a
Country Fellow named Skinks, to hire that piece of ground for some years to
feed his Colts, and to secure them the better, they ordered him to raise a
Wall, and dig a deep Ditch from one River to the other, which was about 400
Rod, being the only passage by Land to that place. When this was finished, the
Hollanders came by night, sailing up the River, and landed such Forces as were
able to defend the place, until they had builded a strong Fort or Skonse to
secure it from the Spaniards, who finding themselves outwitted, and perceiving
the Importance of the place, they labored to re-take it again. This was that
Fort named Skinks Skonse, so famous for a long Siege in the late Holland War.

CHAP. LVIII. How the Town of Manheim was surpised by Duke Bernard of
Saxonweymar.
THis Town is situate upon the great River of Rhine, and one of the strongest
of the Pallatinate. Duke Bernard desired earnestly to have it in his
possession, but was loath to venture his Reputation with his Army in besieging
it, knowing the Strength of the Town and the Resolution of the Garrison; he
therefore endeavored to get it by policy. He took with him five hundred men in
the night, and so ordered his march, that he came before the Gates of the Town
in the morning, an hour or two before day, and sent in word to the Governor,
that he was a Commander of a neighboring Garrison of their side, (naming his
name) and that, having adventured out with a party upon some important design,
he was overpowred, and beaten in by a stronger party of Swedes, who followed
him, and therefore forced to seek a Refuge within the Walls of Manheim, from
the Swedish Violence, desiring him earnestly to cause his Gates to be opened,
to let him and his Soldiers in with speed, because the Swedes were then at
hand, ready to fall upon, and cut off his Rear. Maravelli, the Governor,
believed all this to be true, and commanded the Gates to be opened, and a
passage to enter into the Town. As soon as the Duke was within, he cut off the
Main Guard with three hundred Soldiers, took the Governor Prisoner, and the
chief Officers, and won the Town, which could not have been otherwise taken
without a chargeable and long Siege.

CHAP. LIX. Tamerlan 's Policy to oblige the Towns to yield to him with speed.
IT was his common custom, as soon as he had pitched his Tents, to cause a
white Banner to be displayed on the top of his Pavillion, and there to remain
two or three days. If the Town or City did yield whilst that was up, the
Inhabitants were to expect good Quarter, and the preservation of their Lives
and Estates without the least Injury; but if they resisted obstinately his
offers of Grace, and would try his Strength, he did then put up a Red Banner,
which did threaten them with Death, and the loss of many Lives. After that, if
they did not open to him their Gates, he commanded his Black Banner to be hung
out; after which he would never admit of any parley, nor conditions of a
surrender, but was wont to command that Town, with all its Inhabitants, to be
destroyed with Fire and Sword. This custom of his struck such a Terror into the
minds of all his Enemies, that after one or two Towns had experienced this
Severity, none had the confidence to withstand him, but readily yielded at his
first Summons.

CHAP. LX. How the Governor of Croizon obliged his Soldiers to defend
themselves and their Fort, when they were ready to yield.
THis Fort was hardly besieged by General Norrice, and several Breaches being
made in the Walls, the Soldiers within began to talk of a surrender. The
Governor, a very stout and ingenious Man, to prevent the dishonor of a base
and cowardly yielding, caused a Post to be set in every breach made by the
Enemies Canon, and to it chained all such persons as were willing to yield, or
had behaved themselves cowardly, but with their Weapons in their hands, that
they might, if they pleased, defend themselves and their Castle. By this Policy
he forced all the rest to stand stoutly to their Arms, and saved both himself
and Fort from the Enemies Power.

CHAP. LXI. How the Lord Willoughby prevented the Siege of Bergen-op-Zone,
whereof he was Governor, when the Duke of Parma began to besiege it.
AFter the loss of the Spanish Fleet in 1588. the Duke of Parma, who was ready
with a numerous Army for the Invasion of England, but being hindered from that
design by the unexpected ruin of the Invincible Armado, he employed all his
Forces against the Towns of the Netherlands. This of Bergen was one of the
first that he endeavored to win. As he was considering of the method to be
used, because the Town was fortified both by Art and Nature, and was guarded by
a strong Castle, which was first to be mastered before the City could be taken,
secret Letters were brought to him, to give him to understand, that a certain
Spaniard, kept a Prisoner in the City, had contracted Friendship with two
English Men, a Captain and an Ensign, and persuaded them, for a Sum of Money,
to betray the Castle and City to the Spaniards. They, according to their Duty,
discovered the whole plot to the Lord Willougby, who designing to make
advantage of this business for the destruction of the Spanish Army, ordered
them to proceed on, and promise the accomplishment of the Treason, which was to
be effected in this manner; they were to persuade, for a sum of Money, some of
the chief Captains to open the Gates at night for them, and a party of Spanish
Soldiers, who should secure the strongest and most considerable part of the
Town. The Spaniards being come according to appointment, one of the Officers
went out to them, and offered himself to be bound hand and foot for their
greater assurance. At his approach before the Gates, they were instantly
opened, and when so many were entered that the Guards could easily Master, the
Lord Willougby let down the Port-Cullisses, and gave such as were hastening in,
such a Volley of small and great Shot, that several hundreds were killed of the
Spaniards. The Treacherous Officer escaped in the hurly burly, and saved
himself from such as guarded him; for they were more sollicitous how to save
their own lives, than to destroy his. At the return of the Spanish Army, which
was come to take the Town, the Sea being high, and the Air very dark, there
were a great many, that for want of knowing the right way, fell into the Water,
and were found drowned the next morning. There were so many killed of the Dukes
Army, that he was forced the next day to raise his Siege, and depart for that
time.

CHAP. LXII. How Ferand King of Naples won a Gity and Castle from the French.
FErand understanding that the King of France had fought a great Battle with
the Venetians and Millanoys near Fernon, considered with himself how he might
make an advantage of the Kings absence, and hazard for the re-taking of his
lost Kingdom. He had some Troops on foot ready at command, with them he marches
to the City of Naples, at such a time as the Issue of the Fight could not well
be known, and sent his Summons to the Governor of the Castle, to deliver it to
him, together with this false news, That there had been a Battle fought at
Fernon, wherein their King was killed, and the French utterly routed. The
credulous Governor believing the Messenger, because he knew that there had
been a Fight, but never had any certain Intelligence before, and fearing lest
he should anger the King, and make him less willing to grant Honorable
Conditions to him and his party, if he should obstinately hold out, and oblige
him by Compulsion, he yielded up his Castle and City into the Kings power,
which occasioned the loss of the whole Realm from the French.

CHAP. LXIII. How Mahomet Bassa concealed the Death of Soliman, at the Siege of
Sigeth in Hungary, from his Army near Two Months, until his Successor was come
into the Camp, and the Town taken.
WHen Soliman the Magnificent was dead before Sigeth in Hungary, the great
Bassa caused him to be put in a Horse-Litter, as if he had been only troubled
with the Gout, and obliged the Physicians to go to and fro with their Physic,
as if they had him in cure, to hide his Death from the mutenous Janissaries, who
would have taken advantage of the Interregnum to have plundered the Christians
and Jews, and perhaps have broken up the Siege. Yet he could not conceal this
death long, but they had a Jealousy that the Bassa dealt not fairly with them;
therefore to satisfy them, he promised the next day that they should see their
Emperor himself alive; for that purpose he clothed the Corpse in its Imperial
Robes, and placed it in a Chair of State at the end of a long Gallery, with a
little Boy behind him, who was to move secretly the Emperors hand, and to lift
it up to his Head, as if he had therewith stroakt his Beard, as it seems was
his usual custom. The Soldiers, seeing this at a distance off, imagined him to
be yet alive, and departed very well satisfied for that time. Thus the subtle
Bassa concealed his death from his Army and Guards about Forty days more.

CHAP. LXIV. How the Duke of Bourbon made his dismayed Troops stand another
Charge.
AT the Famous Battle of Agincourt, where our English got so much Honor of the
French Nation, Lewis of Bourbon seeing his Left Wing routed, and resolved to
try the hazard of another Charge, rallied some of his Troops that were broken,
and entreated them to follow him, for he declared, that the English were
miserably shattered, and would never abide one Charge more, and that
undoubtedly they would run away, if they would but face them once more. At that
instant he had appointed a Soldier to run to him in have before these Troops,
and to assure them; that the English were yielding apace, and crying for
Quarter; and that King Henry was ready to fly away, desiring them to give their
Assistance. This Policy obliged the French to endure another Charge; but King
Henry having then taken twice as many Prisoners as were men in his Army,
commanded them to be killed upon a rumor, that the French had rallied again,
taken the Kings Tents, and were recruited with fresh Supplies, so that being
strengthened with a new Army, they were ready to fall upon him again. This
obliged the King, for the safety of himself and Army, to command the Prisoners
to be slain, contrary to the Law of Arms, after that he had granted and
promised to them good Quarter.

CHAP. LXV. How the Scots surprised the Town of Fast Castle from the English.
IN the days of Edward the Sixth, one of his Generals took several Towns from
the King of Scots; amongst the rest, he forced Fast Castle to yield to the
English. A Governor was appointed to command there in Chief, and for the
supplying of the Town with Provisions convenient for the Garrison, he ordered
the Neighboring Villages and Country Farmers to bring in Contribution Corn:
When the Scots heard of it, they resolved to take hold on this opportunity, and
to send Soldiers in the Garb of Scotch Peasants, witth private Arms about them,
the appointed time, with Sacks of Corn upon their Horses. At the Gate they
alighted, and carried into the Town their Corn upon their backs, and fell upon
the Guard, which suspected no such attempt, and cut them off, taking possession
of the Gate, which they secured until more Forces came to their Assistance,
which took the Town, and mastered the English there in Garrison.

CHAP. LXVI. How the Island of Sarke, a strong place near Guernezey, was taken
from the French.
THis Island is situated near Guernezey, having on all sides round high and
steep Rocks to defend it, and its Inhabitants from all sudden Invasions of a
Foreign Enemy, and but one narrow passage that leads up to the Island, which
few may defend against the greatest Forces. The Island is of that Compass and
Fruitfulness, that several hundreds may subsist, and be maintained there,
without any Provision from elsewhere. The French were once possessed of this
impregnable Island, which lies very convenient for Pyracy in the Road of all
the Northern Trade. It was therefore thought convenient to take it out of their
hands. A Gentleman of the Netherlands undertook to surprise it, and performed
his Enterprise in this manner; He Anchored in the Harbor with a small Ship,
and sent a Messenger to the Islanders, to tell them, That his Merchant, a very
Wealthy Man, was lately dead a shipboard, and desired to be buried in a Coffin
in Hallowed Ground, and that he entreated them that they might have the liberty
to bring him ashore, and lay him according to his Will. The Islanders granted
the Request, upon condition they should all come without Arms. The Seamen
accordingly landed, but instead of a Dead Corpse, they filled the Coffin with
Arms, and brought it up into the Churchyard, whilst many of the Islanders went
aboard to buy some Commodities, but they were all secured. When the Coffin was
at the place appointed, they, who carried it, laid it down, opened it, and took
their Weapons, slew the Guards, and mastered the rest of the Islanders. By this
means this little, but strong Island, was taken from the Enemy.

CHAP. LXVII. How Count Peter Navaresse raised the Siege of a Town where he was
besieged.
THis subtle Warrior was besieged in a Town, where the Enemy had made a
considerable breach, and was ready to storm the Walls: to prevent the
approaching danger, he caused a countermure to be made, with other Works, and
undermined the breach, where he placed several Firkins of Gunpowder, stopping
them up with Stones and Timber. At the Time of the Assault he was ready with
all his Garrison, to receive the Enemy, but suffered a considerable number to
enter in, as many as he was well able to master, then he gave Fire to the
Train, blew up the Mine about the Ears of them that were hastening into the
Breach, and so discouraged and disordered the rest of the Army, that they gave
back, when they saw the Arms, the Legs, the Heads, and other Limbs of their
Fellows, fly, and sall round about them. In this disorder he sallied out upon
them with part of his Forces, and with another part he cut in pieces them that
were already got within the Walls. By this means the whole Army was routed, and
forced to raise the Siege with great loss. This same policy was practiced at
Montalban in France, when it was besieged by Lewis the 13th. One thing
remarkable happened there, that a Regiment of Women, led by a stout Virago,
with long Knives made for the purpose, sallied out at the time of the blowing
up the Mine, and fell so nimbly upon the dismayed Soldiers, and such as had bin
knocked down with the Stones and Timber, whilst the Men were otherwise busily
employed in fighting with the disordered Army, that the Siege was thereby
raised, and the Kings Forces routed.

CHAP. LXVIII. How the Prince of Orange relieved a Town besieged by the
Spaniards.
A Town of the Low Countries being besieged by the Spaniards, who had so well
fortified themselves, that the Prince of Orange thought it not safe to make any
attempt upon their Works, and the besieged being in great want of Provisions,
he contrives a way how to drowned all the Country round, by digging through the
Banks that kept off the Sea and the neighboring Rivers from overflowing the
Land. As soon as the Water found a Passage, it broke into the Spanish Camp,
overflowed all their Works, and forced them to retire upon the higher ground,
and give liberty to the Princes Boats to carry into the Town what Relief they
thought needful; by this means the Siege was raised, and the Spaniards forced
to depart with great Loss.

CHAP. LXIX. How a Spanish Army, consisting of almost all Foot, routed French
Forces both of Horse and Foot.
AT Lyrignola a Battle was fought between the Spaniards and the French. The
Spanish General considering his weakness in Horse, and the French numbers and
strength, resolved to fight them in such ground, that they could not well make
use of their numerous Cavalry. He drew up his Army amongst the Vines and broken
ground, where the Horse could not well ride up and down. And having a stout
Infantry, he charged the French Forces so bravely, that they retreated and
fled. In such like cases others have fixed Stakes, sharpened at both ends, in
the ground; others have dug holes, covered over with Turves; others have
encompassed in their Foot with Craw-Feet, a Swedish Invention, good to stop the
Cavalry; for there is always a sharp Iron that stands above ground about three
Inches, which way soever you fling it: Others have marched with a Wall of Pikes
round their Body, and a party of Foot in the middle, to line and secure them
against the fury of the Shot of the Cavalry. Many other Inventions there are to
be used to defend the Foot against the Horse; so that many times a small party
of Foot, by Art, have routed a considerable Body of Horse.

CHAP. LXX. How the Lord Poynings took at Samerdubois, in France, a Castle,
which was thought to be impregnable.
THe Lord Poynings, at his first coming before the Castle, summons it, but
finding it very strongly situated upon a Hill, that was encompassed round with
deep Marish Ground, and that the Governor and Garrison had such confidence in
its inaccessible Situation, that they would not hearken to a Surrender. He
caused a great Cannon to be made of Wood, and drew it over the wet ground with
many Horses, as if it had been of Metal, and of a great Weight, so near the
Castle, that it must needs do execution, if had been as they looked upon it to
be. Then again the Lord Poynings, when his Battery was made, sent another
Summons to the Governor, with this Threatening, That if he suffered the Canon
to be discharged, they should all be put to the Sword; but if he would yet
hearken to a Composition, he might have fair and Honorable Terms granted. The
Captain being deceived by this Policy, yielded up his strong hold upon
Articles, and departed out, when it was not in the Power of the Lord Poynings
to have forced him.

CHAP. LXXI. How Monsieur Lawtreck, in the Neapolitan War, forced all his
Auxiliary Troops, which were of other Nations, to fight valiantly.
IN the Neapolitan War, Lawtreck was General of the French Army, unto whose
assistance came several other People of Italy, who were in League with their
King. Lawtreck, to oblige them all to be valiant, separates them, and draws
them all up in distinct Battalions in the Fight, and when the two Armies were
engaged, he rode about to those whom he saw most backward, telling them, that
such and such Battalions, had already got the Victory; they therefore, out of
emulation, were forced to fight; by this means he put the Enemy to Flight.

CHAP. LXXII. How a Scottish King obliged his discomfited Army to fight against
the Picts.
THe Annals of Scotland make mention of a certain King of Scots, who having
been often beaten, and lost many Battles against the Picts, saw that his people
were altogether discouraged, and unwilling to try again the hazard of another
Fight; and that he could not, by any persuasion, oblige them to it, until he
had made use of this Imposture; He apparelled certain of his Men in Scales and
Seals Skins, which shine very bright in the Dark, and put into their hands
Truncheons of rotten Ash Wood, causing them in that Garb to awaken his Chief
Officers at midnight, and to tell them, That they were Messengers sent from
Heaven, to advise them to sight once more against their Enemies, assuring them
of a notable Victory. The Captains, the next Morning, came to their King, and
related to him and the whole Army what they had seen and and heard, and that
'twas their opinion to fight courageously, for that God would assist them,
seeing he had sent them such a comfortable Message. The Scotch Army upon this
considence, engaged with the Picts, and beat them out of their Country.

CHAP. LXXIII. How the Marquis of Spinola had Intelligence of all the Passages
of the Prince of Oranges Army, and of the Town of Breda, then besieged by
Spinola.
SPinola besieged the Town of Breda, but not knowing in what condition the
Garrison was, he persuaded a subtle Country-Fellow to carry Butter and Cheese,
and other necessary things into the Town. The Fellow pretended that he had
narrowly escaped the Guards and Sentinels, and was very welcome to the Soldiers,
and to the Governor, in hopes, by his means, to send a Letter to the Prince of
Orange. The Country Fellow at first showed himself unwilling, because of the
danger, but at last suffered himself to be wrought upon by rewards and promises
to carry a Letter, which he delivered to Spinola, who sealed it up, and gave it
to the same Country. Fellow to carry to the Prince. The Fellow informed him of
all passages, and told him how he had escaped through the Guard. The Prince
judged that he could not employ a fitter Man to carry back an answer to the
Town, which he undertook to perform for a Sum of Money; but when he had the
Princes Answer, he carried it to the Marquis to peruse, and received from him a
good reward. When Prince Maurice was dead, Henry his Brother succeeded him in
his Employment; and when the Marquis could not understand of the Enemies
Condition, he sent for his Country Fellow, and caused him to counterfeit a
Sickness, which he pretended he had got by traveling in Winter and Frost to
serve the Prince of Orange. The Countrymans Wife goes to Prince Henry, and
complains of her Hufbands sad condition, desiring him to pay him that stipend
which his Brother had promised for his former Services. The Prince was well
pleased to find the Man that could carry Intelligence to the besieged Town, and
willed her to fetch him, promising to pay not only that Money, but much more,
if he would serve him as he had served his Brother. After many great promises,
the Peasant was brought to the Prince, and charged with a Letter to the
Governor of Breda, but instead of carrying it to the Town, he brought it to
the Marquis; by this means he understood his Enemies purposes and conditions,
and knew how to prevent their Designs.

CHAP. LXXIV. How the Duke of Alanson was like to have surprised Mons.
THe plot was laid in this manner, That a thousand Horse, having with them a
thousand Musketeers behind them, should in the night hide themselves in the
Woods near to the City to be ready to hasten to the Gates at the first call.
About thirty young Soldiers, without Beards, were to be apparelled like Country
Girls, with their Weapons privately hid about them: to these some old Soldiers
were added, to accompany them, in the garb of Country Clowns, carrying with
them Provisions for the Market, for that day was chosen to surprise the City.
They were to have a Cart with them, laden with Country Commodities, which some
Walloons were to drive, the better to procure an entrance without suspicion.
The Cart was to be driven to the second Gate, and there to be disordered, by
letting fall the Wheel; whilst the Carter was to be busy about his Cart, the
disguised Soldiers were to take the first and second Gate, to kill the Watch,
and to give a sign to the Ambushes in the Wood to come speedily to their
Assistance, which being let into the City, would easily take and keep it for
the French. But this plot was discovered, and by that means prevented.

CHAP. LXXV. How Prince Maurice endeavored to take Antwerp Gastle by surprise.
PRince Maurice, without dispute, was one of the most successful Generals of
his time; at the Battle of Newport he obtained a great Victory over the
Spaniards, and being bread up amongst Armies and Soldiers, he proved a most
wise and subtle Commander. Antwerp Castle was attempted by him in this manner;
He being at Breda with his Army, commanded all the passages of his Camp to be
narrowly watched, and secretly drew some Companies of Foot from some
Neighboring Garrisons, putting them under the command of a discreet Colonel,
in whom he could conside. The Soldiers knew nothing of his purpose, only the
Officers; and that he might the better conceal his March from the Country, he
ordered his Men to take off their Orange Colors and change them for Red, such
as the King of Spains Soldiers used to wear, and his Wagons likewise had a
Burgundian Cross, as Spinola's. And as his Soldiers passed through the Country,
they were to say, That they belonged to the King of Spain, and were marching to
Antwerp for Provisions. By this disguise and invention a party of a 1000 Foot,
and 200 Horse went undiscovered in the dark night to the Walls of Antwerp
Castle, where they got as far as the Bridge, and were ready to blow open the
Gates, had they not bin perceived by the Vigilance of a Spanish old Soldier,
named Andreas Cea, who gave the Alarm to the Garrison, and prevented their
entrance.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of the Battle of Diep, between Henry the Fourth of France, and
the Army of the Ligne, commanded by the Duke of Mayenne.
THe King had in his Army about eight or nine thousand Men. The Duke had twenty
five thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse, the King entrenched himself about
three Miles from Diep, at a Village called Arques with his small number, but he
gave such wise Orders, that he secured both his Camp and the Suburbs of the
City from the invading Enemy, who, on the 16th. of September, 1589. gave a
furious assault to the Kings Forces, but were beaten back with great loss. The
Duke of Mayenne having continued quiet in his Camp three days, gave another
Assault, but to as little purpose, only the Regiments of Colalt and Tremblecour
called to the Kings Forces, that they would be of their side, at which offer
they were received within the Trenches, and they promised to serve the King
faithfully, if they might have any assurance of their pay, which was promised
by the King; but whilst this brave Prince was busily employed in looking to
every quarter, these Treacherous Villains turned their Weapons against them who
had taken them in, let in more of the Dukes Forces into that part of the Camp;
so that if the Duke, in that consternation that the Kings Army was then in by
the unexpected Treachery, had speedily fallen upon them, and seconded with all
his Forces these two Regiments, he had undoubtedly carried and mastered the
Trenches; but whilst the Duke delayed, the Count de Castillon, the Duke of
Montpensier and La Nove, excellent Commanders of the Kings Army, ran with their
Men to assist the Kings discouraged party, and charged the Enemy within the
Trenches so briskly, that they were forced to fly out, and leave that great
advantage they had gained by a Stratagem. After this good success, the King
with his small party gave so many Alarms to the Dukes Camp, that he found
himself with his great Army besieged by the Kings small numbers, and reduced to
many Wants, and to the necessity at last, of departing to a more secure and
commodious Neighborhood.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of the Famous Battle of Jury, between Henry the 4th. and the
Duke of Mayenne.
THe Duke designed to relieve the Town of Dreux, besieged by the Kings Army,
which as soon as the Duke began to draw near, they were ordered to retreat, as
if they had been in fear. This dissimulation so encouraged the Commanders of
the Dukes Army, that they would not be quiet, till they had forced him against
his Judgment to a Battle. Both Armies were drawn up in Battalia in an even
Plain, near the Tillage of Jury. The Kings Army had about ten thousand Foot,
and three thousand Horse, drawn up in this manner, The King appeared first at
the Head of a Squadron of six hundred Horse, most Lords and Gentlemen, which
was flanked on the right hand with a Battalion of two Regiments of Switzers,
and on the left by two other Regiments of the same Country. These Battalions
were followed by the Regiments of the Guards, and three other Regiments. The
Duke of Montpensier marched next on the Left, with a Squadron of six huudred
Horse, between two Regiments of Germany and Switzerland, seconded by two other
Bodies of Foot, chosen out of the French Infantry. The Marshal d'Aumount closed
up the Left Wing with three hundred Horse, and two Regiments of French Infantry
at his sides, and two Troops before him of Light Horsemen, commanded by the
great Prior, and by Giury Marshall de Camp. These were assisted on the Right
by the Baron of Biron, who had the charge to protect four Canons and some Field
Pieces: on the other side marched the Marshal of Biron with another Squadron of
Horse, between two Regiments of French Foot, next to the Regiments of Guards,
but a little behind, that they might be as a reserve to that Body, which was
commanded by the King in person: next to them, on the right hand, showing the
appearance of a Cressant, was a Squadron of German Horse, slanked by two small
Bodies of French Infantry, led by the Count Scomberg. This excellent order of
the Kings Army, together with the Judicious management of the Artillery by the
Master of the Ordinance, contributed much to the Victory; for the several
Bodies, into which the Kings Army was drawn up, found a means to enclose in a
body of Dutch Horse, whom they charged so furiously on the Flanks, that they
were routed, and forced to fall back upon the Infantry of the Ligne. The King
himself acted the part of an excellent Commanmander and a stout Soldier; for
when he was to encounter with eighteen hundred Lances, commanded by the Duke of
Mayenne, he, with his Pistol and Sword in his hand, was engaged in the midst of
that great Squadron, and totally defeated it with a small party that followed
him close by his sides. The King took all the Bag and Baggage, Canon and
Ammunition. By this Battle Henry the 4th. secured the Crown of France to him
and his Posterity of the House of Bourbon, for the Ligenrs were never after in
power to meet him in a Field.

A DISCOURSE OF ENGINES USED IN WAR.
THere is no art nor knowledge where the Wit of Man has been more active than
in that of War, and found out more wonderful and strange Inventions, both for
Offense and Defense, to enable him to perform things beyond his ordinary and
natural Strength. Either the greatness of the Rewards, and advantage proposed,
or the necessities unto which he has bin reduced, or the importance of War,
upon which depend ostimes the happiness or misery of whole Kingdoms and
Nations, have sharpened his contriving Faculty in this, more than in other
concerns of this humane Life. The Romans, for the increase of their Empire, and
the subduing many Warlike Nations, overcame them by the politic order of their
Militia, and took their strongest Castles by Inventions of the Wits of that
Age. At the first besieging of a Town, they were wont to fortify themselves in
their Trenches, to prevent all sudden Surprises or Sallies; then did they
encompass in the Town with Forts, Lines and Trenches to hinder all Supplies and
Provisions from going to the besieged. Afterward they made use of their
Engines to force them to yield. They raised a high Mount with Earth and
Faggots, higher than the Walls, to fight with greater advantage; this was
called Agger. They used also Towers of Wood, which they could draw so near the
Enemies Walls, that they often leaped from them into the City. Lucanus mentions
them both at the Siege of Marseilles by Coesar, Lib. 3. Stellatis Axibus Agger
erigitur, geminasqe equantes maenia Turres accipit: hae nullo fixerunt robore
terram, sed per iter longam repsere latenti.

Their Balistae were Inventions to cast great Stones of a vast bigness, or a
number of Arrows with that strength, that nothing could well stand before them;
for the weight of the stones cast violently upon the Enemy, did crush and beat
them to pieces, and the showrs of Arrows flying out of this Engine with an
incredible Violence, did great execution. The same Poet describes it,

-- Tenso Ballistae turbine rapta
Haud, unam contenta latus transire, quiescit:
Sed pandens perque arma viam, perque ossa, relicta
Morte fugit: superest telo post vulnera cursus.
At Saxum quoties ingenti ponderis ictu
Excutitur, qualis rupes quam vertice montis
Abscidit impulsu ventorum adjuta vetustas,
Frangit cuncta ruens: nec tantum corpora pressa
Examinat: totos cum sanguine dissipat artus.
Testudo was another Invention to secure their way to the Walls, or to their
Towers, from the Enemies Arrows. It was made like a Penthouse, supported with
Beams, and covered over with raw Hides; but this word is often taken for a
continued number of Bucklers, held up together by the Soldiers, when they were
marching under the Enemies Walls, by which they did protect their Heads from
great Stones, and other weighty things cast upon them. The Romans Vinea was
another Engine used by them, when they were to undermine, or work at the foot
of the Walls, to overthrow them. It was made of Hurdles and Planks, and
sometimes covered over with raw hides, to prevent burning. The Soldiers were
secured under it from the Enemies Darts and violent endeavors. But when the
Army gave a general Assault, they had another Invention, named Musculi, to
cover their Bodies in the approach. Pluteus, was another Engine, not much
unlike to a Vinea. These differing names are borrowed from the shapes and forms
which these several Contrivances had. Now for offense, besides the forenamed
Balistae, they made use of an Engine called Onager, to cast Stones with great
violence, and another Invention named Scorpio, to fling Darts against the
Enemies, and Falces Murales, to pull down the Stones of a Wall, and level the
breach for a more commodious Assault. But there was no Instrument more useful
to them than their Aries, so named, because it was headed with Iron, not much
unlike to Rams Horns; it was a great beam, weighed and lifted up, and forced
against the Walls of a Town, sometimes by the strength of the Soldiers with
Ropes and Powlies, sometimes by another Contrivance. This Aries did commonly
batter down the strongest and thickest Walls of Mortar and Stone; therefore
Coesar observes that, some of the Cities of the Gauls were builded with Beams
across, to strengthen them against the violent impulse of this great and strong
Engine, of which the Poet speaks,

-- Nunc Aries suspenso fatior ictu
Incussus densi compagem solvere muri
Tentat, and impositis unum subducere saxis.
Most of these Engines, and others, used by the ancient Greeks and Romans in
their Wars, are now out of date, because our Warfare in these days is
altogether another thing, by reason of the Invention of Gunpowder and Guns. And
the Wit of Man has proceeded further than ever they did to find out strange
Instruments of a greater strength, and more powerful operation. I shall here
give a brief account of the most modern Engines and Inventions now commonly
used in War.

Of Great Guns.
Since the Invention of Gunpowder, Guns have been found to be more serviceable,
and easy to command and procure, then other Weapons before used in their
stead. And for Great Guns, they strike a Terror into the Enemy with their
dreadful noise and thundering, and are more commodious than either the Romans
Ram, or their Balista, for to do execution upon Men or Walls; but though it is
of great use, yet there is this defect in Great Guns, that they cannot be so
easily managed, as to be brought to play so soon and so speedily as sudden
occasions may require. Their Fury is to be avoided by the nimbleness of the
Foot, or by the Galloping of the Horse. If therefore it were possible to find
out such an Invention as may add to the strength of a Great Gun the swiftness
of a Horse, I conceive there is no body of Horse or Foot could be able to
resist a small party furnished therewith. Such things may be found out as may
be of great use in time of need. But there are several sorts of great Guns:
these are the ordinary Names, with their usual proportions.

The Canon is about 11, 12, or 13 foot long, of 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 or 14 Inches
Diameter. If the Shot weighs 110 pounds, there is required of Corn Powder 76
Pounds for to charge the Gun, and so proportionable of the bigger or lesser
Cannon.

The Dragon of Double Culvering weighs 14000 pounds, and shoots 357 paces
level, 4252 paces at random

The whole Culvering weighs 8500 pounds, is about 13 Foot and a quarter long,
shoots level 415 paces, and at random about 3700 paces.

The Demi-Culvering weighs 4600 pounds, is about 9 or 10 Foot long, shoots
level 235 paces.

The Saker Ordinary is about 9 Foot and a half long, weighs 2650 pounds, shoots
level 183 paces.

The Sakeret, or Minion, is about 8 Foot long.

The Fawlcon weighs 1500 pounds, shoots level 889 paces.

The Fawlconet weighs 850 pounds, shoots level 107 paces.

The Rabinet weighs 425 pounds, shoots level 82 paces, and at random 669 paces.

The Base weighs 300 pounds, shoots level 63 paces, and at random 525 paces.

It is observable, that these several kinds of Great Ordinance are sometimes of
a less or greater weight, and according to the force of the Metal, they will
bear a greater or less charge. And that they convey their Bullets farther or
nearer, according to the charge of the Powder, and the weight of the Bullet.
Besides these former Legitimate Ordinance, there are some named Bastard Pieces;
as the Serpentine, or bastard Culverin.

Lee Aspike, or bastard Demi Culverin.

The Pelican, or bastard quarter Culverin.

The Bastard Fawlcon.

The bastard Rabinet.

The Basilisk.

The Aspike, etc.

And it is observable, that when any of these Guns grow hot, they cannot bear
so great a Charge, as when cold. They are to be cooled with Vinegar and Water
mixed, or with Wine Lees, or Urine and Water.

Of the Petard.
The Petard is an Invention to blow open Gates, Ports or Portcullisses. It is
made of Brass, of the fashion of a Leathern Bucket, and is usually hung up by a
Ring to the Gate, and skrewed to it with a Fork. It is filled with Powder, and
when it breaks, it tears all to pieces that which is near it.

Of the Granado.
This is a most dreadful Engine, commonly used to break down Walls, Houses, and
to fire Cities. It does execution where the Canon can never reach. It is
commonly made of Brass, or Pot Metal, and sometimes of Canvas, to set fire upon
Houses and Towns. They of Brass are to be filled with strong Powder, with a
snout at one end, and a hole at the other, where there must be a slow burning
powder, made of Canon Powder, beaten and moistened with the Oil of Peter,
mingled with Charcole. They are cast into the Air out of a Morter-piece into
the Enemies Cities or Castles; and they are sometimes of that Weight, that they
will brake through the Tiling and Heads of Houses, and when they break, cast
down the Walls on both sides, and set all a fire that is combustible. These me
sometimes named Bombs.

The Hand Granado is round, about the bigness of an ordinary great Bullet,
hollow and full of Powder, used to be cast among the Enemies Horse, or into
Trenches, Forts or Ships, to destroy them.

Of Fireballs.
Fireballs are very useful in the Siege, or taking of Towns. They must be shot
out of Morterpieces or Canon. They are to be made in this manner; Take
Goose-Grease or Swines Grease, one part of Tar, half a quarter as much of
pitch, two parts of strong Brandy, half a quarter of Linseed Oil, one part of
Verdigrease a quarter part of Wax, half a quarter of Groom, a quarter part of
Saltpeter, and Meal one part; all this must be stirred together over a slow
Fire till it comes to be well mixed, then cast in some Tow and Linen Rags,
which must be rolled in small beaten powder, and then round about, four, five
or six long and sharp Irons, joined together in the middle: when the Ball is as
big as you design it, you must bind it fast with Wire or Packthread, and bore
two, or four, or more holes through and through, which must be filled with good
bruised Powder that may easily take Fire. Some Fireballs are made round,
without any such sharp Irons sticking; but if planks or boards are to be fired,
those with Irons are the most proper for execution; for where they fall, they
stick so fast, that they are not easily to be removed, till the place be
consumed where they unhappily light.

Of Stinkpots.
At the boarding of Ships the Enemy throws not only Hand-Granado's and
Fireballs, but there is a new Invention, certain Pots filled with most odious
and noisome stuff, together with Wildfire and other Ingredients, which are cast
into the port-holes of Ships, or into the Steerage or Fore-Castle, which, when
they break, grievously wound the Defendants, and fill the Room with such
strange Fumes, that scarce any person can suffer them.

There are other earthen or glass Bottles filled with a Composition made of
Serpentine Powder, Hogs Grease, Brimstone, Saltpeter, Brandy, Pitch and fine
Powder; when these Bottles are cast amongst the Enemies Foot or Horse in
Streets or Lanes, they will infallibly disorder and break their Ranks.

Of a Frame of Muskets.
This Invention is very good to defend a Breach, or to flank a Body of Pikes.
The Frame is made of Planks, with three or four stories high, having so many
Tire of Muskets, and a small Spout of Brass to go from one touchhole to
another; so that as soon as the Train is fired, the whole Tire must needs go
off. When Men grow scarce in a Siege, through Sickness, or otherwise, this
Invention may be of great use, for it may be so made, that two or three Men may
manage forty or fifty Muskets at a Bridge, or a breach, and with greater safety
to their own Persons, that may be covered behind out of danger of the Invading
Enemy's small shot.

Of the Warlike Flail.
It is made as our threshing Instruments, but a little bigger, and with Iron
points at the great end, which, when an Enemy scales the Walls, or enters a
breach, must needs be of great use to defend, and beat him back.

Of several Inventions to ruin and trouble the Horse.
The Turn-pike is used in narrow passages, and is made of a round piece of
Timber about 8 or 10 foot long, sometimes more, full of sharp Irons to stop the
Horse.

The Calthrop is a round piece of Wood, full of sharp Irons, used also for the
same purpose.

The Crawfeet is a Swedish Invention, made of four Irons very sharp, joined in
the middle; so that which way soever it is cast, there is one about three
Inches long, or more, that stands upright, to run into the Feet of Horse or Man
that shall offer to pass that way.

Of an Engine named the Soulciss.
It is a Tun full of Horse-Dung and Sand, but so great, that a Horseman may
ride behind undiscovered. It is bound with Iron Hoops, and commonly used to
shelter such as are to relieve dangerous Guards, or to go within reach of the
Enemies Canon or Muskets; and therefore is rolled between them and the Enemy
with many hands.

Many other Inventions there are used by the subtle Wits of this Age in War;
in the defense of Cities, in the overthrowing of Walls, in the relieving of
Towns, in the preventing of Supplies, in marching speedily over great Rivers,
in the defending of Harbors, and other passages relating to the management of
War; but they are reserved for their knowledge, who are to be Ingeniers in an
Army, or besieged Town.

FINIS.

