THE HISTORY OF His SaCRed Majesty CHARLES the II. KING of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Begun from the Murder of his
Royal Father of Happy Memory, and continued to this present year, 1660.

By a Person of Quality.

Bona agere and mala pati Regium est.

royal coat of arms or blazon

CORK, Reprinted by William Smith, Anno Dom: 1660.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord Marquess of DORCHESTER, Earl of Kingston,
Viscount Newark, Lord Pierrepoint and Manvers, etc.
Right Honorable,
IT was not upon long Considerations, but easy resolutions, that I pitched
upon your Lordship, and determined to presume upon your patronage of this small
review of the actions of his SACRED MJESTY,) whose hard fortunes may now demand
a Subjects protection since I could no where else find a person who bears so
great a name of true Honor and Generosity, nor one whose assured loyalty will
make him less ashamed or afraid to own his Prince.

And indeed (my Lord) when I looked upon these Nations, once I may say almost
peopled with Nobles, and now in a great measure deprived both of her Nobility
and Gentry, 'twas easy for me to find out the Prime of those remaining, which
a small search told me was your Lordship; who, though you have been no whit
behind the foremost in Loyalty, yet God has been pleased to make others drink
deeper in the Cup of affliction then your self.

But all those miseries which either your Lordship or other loyal persons have
suffered, cannot come in competition with those undergon by his SACRED MAJESTY,
who has drunk up the very dregs of the Cup, and suffered more then can be well
spoken; yet all with so incomparable a patience as worthily deserves our wonder.

My Lord, you are amongst the Prime of the Nobility, which God has yet been
pleased to spare this miserable Nation; and as you are so, I could not think
any person fitter for the patronage of this small piece; since both your
loyalty may make you willing, and your power able to protect it.

If I have soared too high either in the subject or dedication, I shall humbly
crave your Lordships pardon* and answer to the first? That I was willing to
vindicate my Sovereign (as far as in me lay) from those many reproaches and
calumnies cast upon him by his backbiting enemies by giving the best account
(that either my own knowledge or the surest intelligence I could get might
enable, me to) of all his actions that he might appear the contrary of what he
is represented, and dirt be cast in the faces of his Accusers. To the second, I
wholly cast my self on your Lordship, either to pardon or condemn.

But if my Love to his Majesty may in the judgments of some have strained my
pen too much in his favor, I desire it may be imputed not to my intent, but
passion; for the unworthy sufferings of so worthy a Prince would irritate any
loyal Subject.

My Lord, whilst yotr Lordship shall be graciously pleased to patronize this
small work, that GOD would be pleased to restore his Majesty to be Patron of
his Kingdoms and people, and bless your Lordship with all imaginary blessings;
shall be the daily prayers of,

Your Lordships most humble Servant, I. D.

To the Right Honorable, Major General Richard Brown, Colonel of the Regiment
of horse of the City of- London: Alderman John Robinson, Colonel of the Green
Regiment of the Cities Trained Bands: Ald. Anthony Bateman Col. of the Red.
Ald. Will. Wale Col. of the White: William Vincent Col. of the Blew: Thomas
Bludworth Col. of the Orange, and Lawrance Bromfield Col. of the Yellow.
Right Honorable,
MAlice and error are the Epidemical diseases of our time and land: so that
whoever as a friend to his Country, shall presume to discover any thing of a
spirit of Love or truth, is likely to exasperate not a few. That, I trust, both
the Author and my self the Stationer, have endeavored to do, and therefore
must expect to meet with the hard censures and Calumnies of many, yea even of
such, of whom we have no worse thoughts, then that they suffer themselves to be
abused with popular mistakes, and unnecessary jealousies concerning that most
Christian and Illustrious, (though now clouded) Prince, the subject of the
following Book. Whose ears according to the Ephesians Hieroglyphick of
Calumny) have been opened too wide to the malevolent aspertions of ignorant and
illinterested persons, and are therefore prejudiced against every relation that
may represent him to the World as lovely and desirable. We know Themistocles
had the unhappy sat to be rendered odious to the people by Aristides, gallant
persons both, but the latter under a mistake. These we pity rather then be
angry at them, and desire to cure them of their beloved distemper by presenting
them with this succinct and faithful History. But yet that I may not be
altogether unprovided of a shelter, if the storm of their zealous frenzy
should chance to fall upon me (besides a recourse to my own integrity, which
Ianus-like will make me Tanto frontosior, quanto innocentior) I humbly crave a
room under the shadow of your wings, where I question not but to lie safe. Your
honors have taken a charge upon you, which obliges you to maintain the public
and common good interest of this Land and City, where -- Res est publica Caesar,
Et de communi pars quoque nostra bono est.


Therefore to patronize the recommendation of his virtues for imitation, and of
his sufferings for commiseration, cannot be unworthy your honors, which is the
humble desire of,

Your Humble and Obedient Servant JAMES DAVIES.

To all loyal Englishmen. Gentlemen and Fellow Subjects.
I Here present you an History which though now you may, confident I am you
very lately could not in reason expect; such was the perverseness and
crookedness of these times, that no loyal subject might without danger attempt
to write, nay hardly to speak the truth of his Sovereign: for a sort of men
there were, who having by violence usurped his Dominions, though that they had
no surer ground to maintain their unjust possession, then by scandalizing his
most SACRED MAJESTY and deceiving of his Subjects, many of whom had not but by
such deceites converted their loyalty into Treason.

Yet GOD I hope will now be pleased to return them to their Allegiance, and
give encourragement to those who have constantly continued loyal, that they may
at length once more enjoy happiness, and every man sit under his own Vine and
under his own fig tree; which, the GOD of HEAVEN be praised, we have now
greater hopes of then ever.

If I have in this History offended any loyal person, I am heartily grieved, I
have impartially endeavored the truth, and if I be found in the contrary,
reason will easily convince me; and I shall be sorry that neither my knowledge
or intelligence extended to a more narrow search.

I think I have represented his Majesty no otherwise then any loyal person (for
this age requires that distinction) that has either heard of or know him will
confess him to be; but if they will not, let them be convinced by that saying
of a worthy Gentleman long time an attendant upon his Majesty, who having given
me a large account of his virtues, at length concluded, That Tully himself (if
now alive) could not sufficiently express his praise.

Gentlemen, it is to you in General that I present this History, that you may
see, and be sensible, to whom you have been loyal, and then I believe that you
will judge that your loyalty has found it is just reward in being loyal to so
just a Prince: and if any of you have suffered for him, read but his
sufferings, and you cannot value your own. Yet I intend not this at all to his
pretended Tavern friends; which I believe (whilst they are so) are so only
there, and indeed I cannot look upon these as faithful Subjects; for how can
that man be loyal to his Prince, who has not the power to be true unto
himself. Drunken Subjects, though never so loyal, will prove the ruin both of
themselves and their Sovereign.

Gentlemen, let those that are truly loyal join their Prayers with mine for the
happiness of his most SACRED MAJESTY, since in his we must necessarily conclud
our own, and more then ours, our COUNTRIES.

To the Readers in general.
Courteous Readers
IF in this History I have displeased any person, they cannot be so much
displeased as I am sorry; I have endeavored to please all, nor have I more then
Justice enforced me to, favored any; I have labored (as J professed) to write
impartially, where J have not done so, J am confident there will not want
Carpers.

Jf in some particulers affection has swayed me, (though J confess it a
fault) yet it brings it is excuse. What loyal subject can relate his Sovereigns
sufferings without a passion? what Free born English man's heart begins not to
rise within him, when he does but think of those Tyrannies and Oppressions his
Native Country has of late groaned under? where J have been bitter, it has
been with reason; where sweet, with a great deal of Justice.

Yet one thing J shall desire the Reader to take notice of, that when J speak
of the presbyterians, J mean not those moderate people, who are as truly loyal
as they are godly; but some amongst them like wolves in sheeps clothing (such
as Straughan and Kerry in Scotland) who only pretend themselves to be
Presbyterians, but are in their proof found Sectaries, these are the
Flea-bitten Clergy, the Sowers of strife and sedition; and a scandal to those
to whom they pretend to be Brethren.

To conclude, that all the Subjects of this Land may with one heart and voice
agree together for the Restoration of our afflicted Sovereign, but of our more
afflicted selves to just Rights and Privileges, is the earnest prayer of,

A Hearty well-wisher to his Country.

THE HISTORY OF CHARLES the II. Third MONARCK of Great Britain, etc.
THe Histories of Englands late opressours have already cloyd and overladed the
exuberant Press, whole Volums daily coming forth, either of the Actions of the
late long Parliament, or the life of their aspiring General Cromwell, which
though adorned with all those flatteries, that could possibly proceed from the
most beneficed pens, yet cannot in the least justify their actions to the more
sober sort of people; for though their memories may here smell sweet to some,
who have rather tasted of their favor, then suffered under their opression,
yet do they but render them to the sufferers more infamous, and to the Neuter
ridiculous, like the extolling of Don Quixot's Chivalry.

And though there have been some who have adventured to set them out to the
life, and paint them in their own colors; yet have many of these as far
exceeded the bounds of Truth, as the others came short of it, rather
exasperated by their own, or to please their fellow sufferrers, into so great
extremes have either side been lead, out of fear or flattery, anger or passion.

Moderation and Impartiality are the chiefest virtues of an Historian, and
therefore he who writs an History, should choose such a subject to write on,
where neither fear nor gain can induce him to flatter, anger or passion, or to
too much bitterness.

Most of our modern Historians have proposed to themselves either profit,
advantage or employment by their Works, which has made them run into their so
many gross errors and flatteries; whilst had they only endeavored to
represent things, persons and actions impartially, they had gained to
themselves far greater honor of true Writing.

I have chosen a subject to write of, which I conceive may lead me to a
mediocrity, the Persons afflictions may induce me to pity him, but they will in
most men's judgments restrain me from flattery. Nor need I out of fear, I being
now (though unwillingly) out of his reach, mince the truth of his (if any) bad
actions.

I confess the Task I undertake is highly adventurous, my pen may slip, times
may change, however my heart shall guide me to an impartiality.

CHARLES the II. Heir apparent to the Crown of Great Britain and Jreland, and
crowned King of Scots, whose History I intend to treat of, was born on the 29.
of May, 1630, to the great joy of the King, Queen, and indeed the whole Nation;
for never yet had England a Prince born of so noble an extract and grand
Alliance, his father by lineal right and desent King of Great Britain and
Jreland, his mother daughter to that thrice illustrious Prince Henry the
Fourth, King of France, and worthily surnamed the Great, and Maria de Medicis.
By his Grandmothers side was he near allied to the Kings of Denmark, by the
marriage of his Aunt, the noble Princess Elizabeth, to the Elector Palatine of
Rhene, and King of Bohemia; and afterward by the marriage of his Royal Sister
the Princess Mary, to the Prince of Orange. Thus was he allied to most, of the
most potent Princes in Christendom. And happy might this Nation have been
under his Government, if we may believe the vogue of that wisest of men
Solomon, who pronounces that Kingdom blessed whose Prince is the son of Nobles.

He was some years after his birth (according to the ancient Customs of
England for the Kings Eldest Son) invested Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall,
and Earl of Chester, and was in his minority brought up under the care of the
Earl of Newcastle, till in the year 1646. the Lord Hopton's Army, in which he
was, being near enclosed by Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of all the Parliaments
Forces in the Devizes of Cornwall, and the King his Fathers affairs being in a
desperate condition all over England, he was by the serious advice of his best
friends, persuaded to take shipping, and depart for the Scillies, from whence
he was by the Parliament invited to return to London, but he thought it safer
for his Person to depart from thence to his Sister at the Hague, till the
Royal affairs in England might gain a better posture, which he did, and there
found a reception answerable to his Birth.

Not long after the King his Royal Father, being in danger to be enclosed in
Oxford by General Fairfax, who returning out of the West, had designed to block
it up, took care for his safety, and attended only by Mr. Ashburnham (or as
some say, attended on him) went privily our thence, and threw himself upon the
Scotch Army then at Newark, who shortly after notwithstanding his confidence of
them, for a sum of money delivered him up most perfidiously and traitorously to
his implacable Enemies; the English Army. These, after many pretenses of
Treaties, and seeming willingness to come to an accord with him, on that black
day the 30. of January 1648. most villaniously and traitorously, beyond the
imagination of the World, murdered him.

Thus far is a short view of those hardships and afflictions undergone by this
noble Prince, during his Fathers Life and Reign, we will now proceed to those
he has since ran through, which we may more properly and particularly call his
Own.

Among which the Chief and greatest, and from whence all his other miseries
flowed as from their spring head, was the deprivation of his Kingdom and
Royalties; For that part of the Parliament of England which had usurped the
whole power or more, were not only content to take a way his fathers life, but
by their Proclamation, deprive him of all right in the Government of those
three Kingdoms, which they take upon themselves contrary both to the Word of
God, the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, and his own undoubted right by birth,
he being lineally desended from that Family, which had successively governed
England for above three hundred years.

He was at that time of his Fathers death, at the Court of his Sister the Royal
Princess of Orange in the Hague, in expectation to hear rather of the
Conclusion of a Treaty then of his murder, to which effect he writ by the Lord
Seymour the following Letter to him some short time before his Death.

For the King.
SIR,
HAving no means to come to the knowledge of your Majesty's present condition,
but such as I receive from the Press, or (which is as uncertain) reports. I
have sent this bearer Seymour to wait upon your Majesty, and to bring me an
account of it, that I may withal assure your Majesty, I do not only pray for
your Majesty according to my duty, but shall always be ready to do all which
shall be in my power to deserve that blessing which I now humbly beg of your
Majesty upon

Sir, Your Majesty's Most humble and most obedient Son and Servant, CHARLES --
Hague Jan. 23. 1648.

And here he staid till he heard the heart breaking news of his Fathers
Murder, then shortly after he took his Journey to the Queen his mother in
France; hoping there to get aid, but found none which might render him in a
capacity to revenge his Father's Death, or demand his own right by force; and
in vain it was to think of any fair means to attain it. Yet there wanted not
some friends of his in England, who willing to demonstrate how ready they were
to adventure themselves for him and his right, (as far as their weak abilities
would strech,) caused under hand a Proclamation to be printed, proclaiming him
King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, and advising all his good
Subjects to give all due Allegiance to him; but the low condition of the
Royalists then in England, and the great strength and potency of the
Parliaments Army, made this Proclamation unvalid, and those who at a fit
opportunity would willingly have complied with it, were forced to direct their
Obedience to the contrary Goal.

But though England proved thus defective to his interest, not so much I dare
say in Allegiance as power. Yet Jreland is at his Devotion, for the Marquess of
Ormond and the Lord Inchiquin, having made a peace with the Quondam Rebels, he
is by joint consent both of Papists and Protestants proclaimed King in most
towns of that Nation, Dublin, and Londonderry only excepted, which were kept
from their Allegiance, the one by the Lieu. General Jones, the other by Sir
Charles Coote, who jointly strove to justify the Parliament of Englands late
actions.

He being thus proclaimed there, is solemnly invited to come over to them, to
which invitation, his Mother earnestly adds her desires, but the best of his
friends and Counselors, as earnestly dissuaded him, upon reasons drawn both
from prudence and Policy, since in probability the design not succeeding, it
would utterly ruin his hopes, with all the Protestant party then steadfast to
him both in Scotland and England: or that if he would needs venture himself
with this party, they desired him at least to attend, whether by any good event
of theirs, there might be any probability of success.

It Is supposed that this Council swaied with him more out of his real affection
to the Protestant Religion then any other Politic reason. Yet he immediately
after took a journey to the Isle of Iersey, which startled some as though he
had intended to have proceeded thence for Ireland, but that suspicion proved
unnecessary: he was accompanied hither by his Brother the Duke of York, (who
was lately come to him out of Holland) and many other Nobles and Gentlemen; the
Islanders immediately upon his arrival most joyfully proclaimed him King; and
the Lord Iermyn Earl of Yarmouth was made Governor of that Island, who
constituted Sir George Cartwright his deputy Governor.

The King sends from hence his Royal command to the Governor of Gernsey
Island, which was then wholly subjected ( Cornet Castle only excepted) to the
Parliaments sorces requiring him to surrender the said Island to him, and that
his good Subjects there might have liberty to return to their due obedience:
but his command proved ineffectual.

Many affirm, but how true I know not, that the reason of the Kings removal to
this Island was out of design to surprise Dartmouth and some other places in
the West, by the Levellers help, who having then made a defection from the
Parliaments Army in England were (say they) to have joined with the Royalists
for the intents and purposes a foresaid, but whether so or no I cannot affirm;
though I can certainly tell this, that were it so, it proved uneffectual, for
the Levellers were soon overpowred and quelled.

Whilst King Charles was hear expecting a Messenger from the States of
Scotland, came news of the unfortunate overthrow of the Marquess of Ormond his
Army, by Lieu. General Jones before Dublin, which caused a general sorrow
among all his followers, for there had been great hopes and expectations of
that Army, it amounting to no less then twenty two thousand men, and was
esteemed able not only to have taken Dublin, but likewise to have resisted
Cromwell's then new coming Army in the field: yet whether by the carlessness
of the Commanders, or security of the Soldiers, I am loath to judge: this
mighty Army. then beleaguring Dublin, was beat from before it by the besieged,
and utterly routed by the third part of its Number.

This overthrow, the repulse of Sir Robert Stuart and Col. Mervin from
Londonderry by Sir Charles Coot and Cromwell's sudden landing in Ireland,
whose motion now there was no field Army either to attend or oppose, made his
Majesty's affairs grow almost as desperate in Ireland, as they were before in
England.

But the Scots Kirk who had sold their King into the hands of the Independent
English Army, after they heard that they had condemned him to death, repent
them of their Wickedness, wash their hands from any guilt in his blood;
Expostulate with the English siting in Parliament, about their so severe
proceedings, and protest against having any hand in his Murder; and to make
the world believe they had yet some touch of loyalty within them, they had just
after his death proclaimed Charles Prince of Wales, eldest Son to the late
murdered King Charles the first, and his lawful and undoubted Heir, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland; and had immediately resolved in the
Committee of Estates then sitting to send some fitting persons to treat with
his Majesty about sundry Articles; before his reception to the Crown, but long
debates and demurs there were in the business before they could resolve what
and whom to send.

For some there were in this Grand Committee of Estates, who, fee'd or seduced
by the Sectaries in England, impeaded to the utmost of their power and
endeavors all proceedings in the business, so that once in stead of debating
what or whom they should send to his Majesty, it came to be a debate whether
they should send or no, but at length a Letter and Propositions was by the
prevailing part concluded on, and Mr. Windram Lord of Libberton, appointed to
be the Messenger, who on the 25. of September 1649. received his dispatches,
and some time after arrived before his Majesty at Iersey. The chief of their
desires was to this effect.

That his Majesty would graciously be pleased himself to sign the Solemn
League and Covenant, and that he would pass an Act in Parliament that every
person in that Kingdom might takeit.

That he would pass diverse Acts of the Parliament of Scotland, which was
concluded on the two last Sessions.

1. For approving of their disclaiming Duke Hamilton 's last return. 2. For
receiving several Acts made by English for the Militia. 3. That the Kings of
Scotland may have no negative voice.

3. That his Majesty would recall the late Commissions given to Montrosse.

4. That he would put away all Papists from about him.

5. That he would appoint some place about Holland to treat with their
Commissioners. An honorable Company of the most noble Lords in Scotland, being
to be appointed to attend his Majesty, to whom likewise they would send a
sufficient provision to maintain him, a train suitable to his birth and deserved
greatness.

6. That he would be graciously pleased to give a speedy answer to their
desires.

These Propositions were very stiffly debated Pro and Con, some were so firce
that they would have his Majesty utterly reject the Scots Propositions as
dishonorable and disadvantagious to his affairs. Others were of opinion, that
it would more conduce to the Kings interest to accept of such Conditions as he
could agree with the Scotch Commissioners, which would be a readier way to
attain the Crown then by Montrosse his designs (who had lately received
Commissions from the King to assault the North of Scotland with what force he
could raise, however the business was still demurred and delayed, and no answer
for a good while given to the Lord Libberton, who earnestly pressed it, till such
time as answer could come from Montross, then in Holland: and out of France,
touching their opinions concerning these Propositions, concerning which
Montross returned answer to his Majesty, desiring him to harken to the Scotch
Commissioners whilst they would propose and agree to any thing which might
stand with his Majesty's honor for the restoring him to his Rights and
Dignities. That for himself he should rather be content to endure banishment
from his highness sight and person, then in the least prejudice his affairs.
Thus this faithful and loyal servant courted banishment, (as the late famous
Earl of Strafford had done death) for his Masters good and service, but too
generous was he, and had too great a sense of goodness and gratitude to grant
his request, but returned him this answer, That he had so high a sense of his
fidelity and loyalty all along, and that he had performed so many signal
services both for his Father and himself, that he could not in honor leave
him, and therefore desired him to press him no farther.

The Queen Mother likewise earnestly presses her son to the acceptance of the
Scotch Propositions for a Treaty, as the only and readiest way for the
establishing him in his Kingdoms. These resolves of his Mother and the Marquess
of Montross, wrought strongly with his Majesty; yet notwithstanding they are as
stoutly opposed by the Lord. Cleveland, Byron, Gerard, and others; whose chief
opposition proceeded from the alleged Treachery of the Scots to his Father,
That they were Scots still, and might practice the same upon him. But the
majority of voices carrying it fora Treaty, it was resolved on, yet in regard
it would require some time to frame an answer, Sir William Fleming was sent
Agent to the Committee of Estates in Scotland, 'till such time as the Lord
Libberton could be dispatc't.

Short time after Mr. Windram returned into Scotland with a Letter and
instructions by word of mouth, whereby he gave the Committee of Estates (who
having long expected were therefore more desirous to hear what he now brought)
an account how much he found his Majesty compliant to their Propositions, viz
That as to what acted to the two last Sessions of Parliament he was content a
General Act of Oblivion should be passed, but could not approve it. That
neither those of Montrosses nor Duke Hamilton 's party in his last engagement
should bear Office in State without consent of Parliament. That he had
appointed Breda in Holland for the place of a solemn Treaty, for the making a
full accommodation and agreement between him and his loving Subjects of Scotland.

The Contents of his Letter were as follows.

For the Committee of Estates of Scotland.
CHARLES, R.

WE have received your Letters lately presented to us, by Mr. Windram of
Libberton, and we accept graciously all the expressions of affection and
fidelity therein contained toward us, with your tender resentment of our
present Condition, and the just indignation which you profess to have against
the execrable Murder of our Father: and we believe that your intentions are
full of Candor toward us, as we are, and always really have been desirous to
settle a clear and right intelligence between us and our Subjects of our
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, which may be an assured foundation of their
happiness and peace for the time to come, and an effectual means to root out
all the seeds of animosity and divisions caused by these late troubles; and
also to unite the hearts and affections of our Subjects one to another, and of
them all to us their King and lawful Sovereign; to the end that by their
Obedience to our Royal and just Authority, we may be put in a condition to
maintain them in peace and prosperity, and to protect them in their Religion
and Liberty, as it appartains to us according to our charge and office of a
King. And as we have always resolved to contribute whatever is to be done by
us to obtain these good effects, and for the just satisfaction of all our
Subjects in this Kingdom.

We have now thought fit upon the Return of Mr. Windram, to command and desire
you to send unto us Commissioners, sufficiently authorized to treat and agree
with us, both in relation to the Interest and just satisfaction of our Subjects
there, as also concerning the aid and assistance, which in all reason we may
expect from them to bring and reduce the murderers of our late most dear
Father of happy memory to condign punishment, and to recover our just rights in
all our Kingdoms. And we will that they attend us on the fifteenth of March at
the Town of Breda, where we intend to be in Order thereunto. And in confidence
of a Treaty, as also to make known to you and all the World, that we sincerely
desire to be agreed, We have resolved to Address these unto you under the Name
and Title of a Committee of Estates of our Kingdom of Scotland, and will and
expect that you use this grace no otherwise for any advantage to the prejudice
of us, or our Affairs, beyond what we have given this Qualification and Title
for, namely, for the Treaty and in order to it. Although we have considerations
sufficient, and very important to dissuade and oblige us to do nothing in this
kind antecedently at this time. Also we hope the confidence which we declare to
have in your clear and candid intentions toward us, will furnish you with
strong Arguments to form in your selves a mutual confidence in us, which by the
blessing of God Almighty by your just and prudent moderation, and by that great
desire we have to oblige all our Subjects of that Kingdom, and by the means of
the Treaty which we attend and hope for may be a good foundation of a full and
happy peace, and an assured security to this Nation for the time to come, which
we assure you is wished of us with passion, and which we shall endeavor by all
means in our power to effect.


This is the full of his Majesty's Letter to the Co^mittee of Estates in
Scotland, and much to this effect was there another writ by him to the
Committee of the Kirk. But this I the rather fully insert in regard of the many
Calumnies cast upon it, and by it upon his Majesty: His enemies here by taking
occasion to carp at him, by pretending his inveterate desire of revenge, which
was so contrary to the last precepts given him by his dying father. I think, I
need not answer his enemies objection, they by those carps, only condemning
themselves of a self-guiltinesse, but to the more sober sort of people I shall
refer it, and let them seriously consider whether the beginning, progress and
end of the Latter, demonstrate him not a man more addicted to peace and
quietness, then to revenge and destruction.

The principal Objection which his enemies have against him, is, that he
desires the aid of his Scotch Subjects, to bring the Murderers of his Father to
condign punishment; does this show him a lover of Revenge or of Justice? I
would fain know which of his enemies or of his Fathers Murderers, would not,
should I have done the same to any of their so near Relations, have endeavored
to have brought me under the utmost censure of the Law.

But to proceed, these Letters are seriously debated both in the Committee of
Estates and Kirk the first order its consideration to a select sub Committee of
their own, consisting of nine Lords and others, who present their opinions upon
it to the grand Committee, and these provide ready a state of the Case to be
presented to the Parliament of Scotland which was shortly after to assemble.
But mean while a select number of the Kirk and State made up a Committee, who
by common consent were to consider what was to be done about sending
Commissioners and Propositions to his Majesty; these had strong and serious
debates; for the arrogant Kirkmen would not have his Majesty admitted into
Scotland, but upon Conditions which should make him wholly subservient to their
commands: but the State would have such tart Conditions wholly waved; and
(though their own were rough enough, yet) at length a mediation is concluded on
between theirs and the Kirk. And the Earl of Castles, the Lord Louthian,
Burley, and Libberton, Sir John Smith and Mr. Jeoffreys for the Estates. Mr.
Broady, Lawson and Wood are appointed Commissioners for the Kirk.

These having received their Commissions and Instructions, took their journey
for Holland and arrived at Breda, some few days before his Majesty got
thither. On the 16. March 1649. he also arrived there, and on the 19. the Lord
Wentworth Master of the Ceremonies conducted them to Audience, being come
before his Majesty, who in a large Chamber purposely provided, expected them,
The Lord Castles in behalf of the Estates, and Mr. Lawson in behalf of the
Kirk, having made their Speeches, declared the occasion of their coming, and
showing their Commissions, they delivered the ensuing Propositions in the
behalf both of the Kirk and State of Scotland.

1. That all those who had been excommunicated by the Church, and still
continued so, should be forbid access to the Court.

2. That all Acts of the Parliament of Scotland should be by him ratified and
approved of. That the solemn League and Covenant, the Presbyterian
Church Government, The Directory, Confession and Catechism should be enjoined
in Scotland; and the same used and practiced in his family, and an Oath to be
taken by him, that he would never oppose it, or endeavor to alter it.

3. That he would by solemn Oath, and under his hand and seal declare and
acknowledge his allowance of the solemn League and Covenant, and the National
Covenant of Scotland.

4. That he would consent and agree that all civil matters might be determined
by subsequent Parliaments in Scotland, and all Ecclesiastical matters by the
General Kirk assembly, as was formerly granted by his Royal father.

To these Propositions his Majesty demanded,

Whether this were fully and wholly all that the Committee of Estates and Kirk
in Scotland had to desire or propound? and whether these Commissioners had
power to remit or recede from any of these particulars; and further, what they
had to propound concerning his affairs in Scotland.

To whch the Commissioners replied,

That they had acquainted him with their full power, according to the
instructions they had received from the Committees of Estates and Kirk in
Scotland

Upon which his Majesty made answer; that he would consider of their
Propositions, and doubted not but to return them such an Answer as might give
his Kingdom of Scotland satisfaction:

and so dismissed them for the present.

But let us thus leave his Majesty and Council debating about the Scotch
Commissioners propositions, and discourse a little about his affairs under the
conduct of the thrice noble and Illustrious Marquess of Montrosse, who having
(notwithstanding the opposition which Hamilton gave to the design) obtained
Commissioners from his Majesty to leavy what force he could on that side the
sea, endeavored to the utmost of his power to effect it, but chiefly among the
Princes of the German Empire, where he found large and fair promises, but very
little real assistance, only the Duke of Holstein supplied him with four ships
well armed and manned, though these were likewise by some strange neglect
delayed a long time at Amsterdam, which much retarded the service. Colonel
Cochram likewise who had been sent agent into Poland to the Scottish Merchants
there for assistance of men and money, having received a considerable quantity
of money, and good supply of corn, disposed of the first to his own use, sold
the other, and himself revolted from the service. General King, who was
expected out of Sweden with a party of Horse, came not at all; so many crosses
there were in the beginning of the business as had Omens to it is future ill
success. But at length the Marquess fearing least if the King should conclude
with the Scots before he had attempted any thing, his Co^missions would be
recalled, fatally resolved to depart Scotland as he was. So with four ships
indifferently well armed, (but with not above six or seven hundred men, and
those most stangers) besides a small Frigate of sixteen Guns, and one thousand
five hundred good Arms given him by the Queen of Sweden; he set sail, and this
was all the strength he carried with him from Hamburgh to assault that potent
Kingdom. Two of these ships, and those the biggest; were sent before, and
directed to steer their course for the Orcades, but these unfortunately met
with a storm; and where amongst those rocky Islands, their men, arms and
ammunition was cast away, so that a third part of the Forces raised for this
expedition was lost.

But notwithstanding these fatal disasters, the sad presages of his ruin, the
noble Marquess proceeds, and with the small number that was left him, lands
amongst the Islands where he gets together a pretty considerable number which
had almost the face of an Army, but was for the most part composed of raw and
unskilful fellows, a party of these he sends out, who without resistance
enters the Isle of Orkney, there being no Garrison there; from thence he
dispatches Commissioners to Scotland, and the Island adjacent, for the levying
of Horse and Foot, which because the inhabitants of those places to which they
were sent could not resist, obeyed; and not long after the sending of those
Commissions, Montrosse himself; with those forces he had, and those Gentlemen,
resolved to engage in partaking of his fortune, landed in Scotland. at the
point of Cathanes, the very farthest land to the Northwest of that Kingdom.

The people here whom he expected to have joined with him (were so sensible of
the miseries of the former war, and now more terrified with the name of
Forraigners,) deserted their dwellings, and fled away, some never stopping till
they came to Edenbrough.

The Parliament of Scotland who were now assembled, though they had former
advice of the Marquess's designs, yet could not tell the place of his landing,
but now alarmed by the flying Country: David Lesley is commanded with the body
of the Army to march directly toward them for fear Montross should grow too
numerous: and Colonel Straughan, whose valor the States highly approved, is
ordered with a party of select Horse to advance before, to hinder the
Marquess's levyes, and if he saw opportunity to fight him.

Montrosse in the mean time to satisfy the World, and because the people
should not be startled at his Invasion, whilst the King was upon Treaty,
publishes a very patheticall Declaration, declaring the justness of his cause,
and to clear himself from the aspertion of sinister ends, and that his
intention was only against some particular persons, who had against the Laws of
the Kingdom, raised and maintained a war against his Majesty's father. and did
now by their wiles and subtle practices endeavor to destroy the Son also; and
therefore exhorting all Subjects of that Nation to endeavor to free themselves
from the Tyranny of those who then by an usurped power ruled over them. But
notwithstanding this Declaration, the Country came very slowly in.

Straughan in the mean time advances with all possible speed toward the Royal
party, whilst Montross had not (for indeed he could not effect) any thing
Material besides the fortifying of Dunbath Castle: but the Marquess hearing of
the enemies approach, made his whole Forces march at a great rate to recover a
pass; yet nevertheless before they could come at it, the front of the Army
discovered Straughan's forlorn hope, who marching with have upon the Marquesses
Army, found them both almost tired, and out of breath and Order; howevera
forlorn hope of a 100. foot are drawn out to meet them, who giving them a
resolute Charge forced them to an Orderly Retreat, but being seconded by
Straughan's whole body of Horse they again maintained their ground resolutely
Charging upon the Marquesses main body: the Islanders immediately threw down
their Arms and cried for quarter, but the Holsteiners and Hamburgers made an
Orderly retreat for the present into some bushes, which having a short time
defended, they were at last enforced to yield.

This was a sad blow to his Majesty's affairs in Scotland, there being great
hopes, that had Montross succeeded and kept them in play, both Kirk and State
would have come to milder Conditions with him: Yet the Marquess himself
escaped for the present out of this Battle, Though there were hear two hundred
slain, and twelve hundred taken in the field (for the Country coming in upon
them, few escaped, (Amongst the Prisoners of note, there were taken Col. Hurry,
the Lord Frenderick, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgettey, Col. Hay of Noughton, Col.
Gray and several other Officers; together with the Kings Standard, which
contained this Emphaticall Motto, JUDGE AND REVENG MY CAUSE O LORD; and whereon
was pourtrayed to the life the Effigies of his Majesty's Father beheaded.

But long it was not ere this thrice Heroic Marquess fell into the hands of
these cruel, Obdurate and inveterate enemies; for though when he saw the
Battle at a loss, he had saved himself by escaping out of the field, and had
afterward to disguise himself changed his habit with an Highlander, yet all
could not prevail to his Escape, for the whole Country was raised up in arms
in search after him, and a price set upon his head by the States, but
espetially the Presbyterian Ministers exhorted the people to endeavor his
atachment, as a thing necessary to their Salvation.

At length the whole Country being up in arms about him, and no way left for
this distressed Marquess to escape, he thought it better to throw himself upon
the Lord Aston, formerly a friend of his, and now out in the search with some
of his Tennants, then fall into the hands of his more inveterate and implacable
enemies. But this Lord, notwithstanding he had formerly been Montross's
follower, either out of fear or covetousness durst not conceal him; but sent
him with a strong guard to David Lesly; by whom he was directly sent to
Edenbrough, and shortly after brought to his Trial before the Parliamant of
Scotland: where all the while notwithstanding those many ignominious affronts
and disgraces thrown upon him (as his being intriumphant manner brought through
Edenbrough bound in a Cart) yet he carried himself with so much Magnanimity and
Courrage, That those of his Enemies, who did not pity him, yet were almost
ashamed of their vilainies toward him.

The Parliament of Scotland upon the first news of this Noble Marquess being
made a Prisoner, met, and resolved to pass a sentence upon him before either he
was come up, or had at all answered for himself, and though, when they allowed
him to speak somewhat for himself, (which he pronounced with gravity void of
passion,) yet he had as good have held his peace; for the sentence being agreed
upon, it was past to this effect.

That he should be carried to the place from whence he came, and from thence
(to morrow being the 21. day of May 1650.) be carried to the high Cross in
Edinbruogh and be hanged upon a Gibbe thirty foot high, and there hang for the
space of three hours in the sight and view of all people, with his History and
Declaration hanging about his Neck; after which he should be taken down,
beheaded and quartered; his head to be placed upon, he Talbooth or prison house
in Edenbrough, and his legs and arms over the gates of the Cities of Sterling,
Glascow, S. John's town and Aberdeen. And in case he repented (by which means
his sentence of Excomunication might be taken off by the Kirk) the bulk of his
body might be buried in Grayfriers, if not, to be buried in the Common burying
place for thieves and robbers. Thus far did their unparalled hatred and
malice extend even to his dead Corpse.

This Sentence being aggravated by the Chancellor in the utmost terms of
horror that his spleen could invent, was yet mildly and unpassionately
received by this Illustrious Marquess, who answered nothing to it. But, That he
took it for a greater honor to have his head stand on the prison gate for this
quarrel, then to have his picture in the Kings Bed-chambers; and least his
loyalty should be forgotten, they had highly honored him, in designing lasting
Monuments to four of the chiefest Cities to bear up his memorial to all
posterity; wishing he had flesh enough to have sent a piece to every City in
Christendom, to witness his loyalty to his King and Country.

The next day being the day appointed for his execution, richly habited, in a
scarlet Cloak laced with gold, but his soul adorned with constant Loyalty the
far richer Ornament of the two, he marched along the street with so composed a
Courrage and Gravity, that most of his Enemies either pityed or admired him:
being come to the place of execution, he was some time detained with many
frivolous questions of the flea-bitten Clergy, being ready to mount up the
lader, he said it was Jacob 's Lader by which he should mount to Heaven.

His Speech to the people was short and much to this effect. That he was sorry
if his end should be scandalous to any good Christian: but that it often
happened to the Righteous according to the ways of the wicked, that they who
knew him should not disesteem him for his ignominious death. That he confessed
it was the judgment of God upon him for his private sins; but as for his
condemners, they were but instruments. That they had perverted judgment and
justice and oppressed the poor: yet he desired God to forgive them, for he
heartily forgave them. That what he did in that Kingdom, he did it in
obedience to the just commands of his Sovereign, to assist him against those
which rose up against him. That it was not his fault that he lay under the
sensure of the Church, since 'twas only for doing his duty. That for what was
said of him that he should blame the King, he said, 'twas most false, for
(says he) the late King lived a Saint, and died a Martyr. That if ever he
should wish his soul in any man's place, it should be in his. That for the King
now living, he was a Prince under whom any people might live most happily, his
commands were righteous, his promises saithfull, and his dealings just.
Finally, that he commended his soul to God, his service to his Prince, his good
will to his friends, and his name and charity to all good people.

This was the sum of his speech on the ladder, which, and some private prayers
being finished: he mounted up the top of that prodigious Gibbet, where his
History and Declaration being tied about his neck, and his hands bound by the
Executioner, he turned about and gave him some gold, asking; If they had any
more dishonor, as they conceived it, to put upon him, he was ready to accept
it, and then with a great deal of magnanimity, biding the Executioner turn him
off when he should hold up his hands, it was accordingly performed.

Thus nobly lived, and thus ignominiously and yet nobly died: the truest of
friends, the loyallest of Subjects, the faithfullest of Servants, the best of
Masters, and the valiantest of Captains. James Graham, Marquess of Montross
Earl of Rindardin, Lord of Groaem and Baron of Montdieu, whose death was not
only lamented as a private but rather as public loss: most of the Princes in
Europe deploring the unfortunate fall of so Noble and Heroic a person; for he
was endowed with such winning graces, that wherever he came he was both
honored and esteemed, and wherever he Commanded, both feared and loved.

His enemies Mallicce, though he was dead, kept still alive; for after they had
beheaded him and cut off his quarters, they would not permit that bulk of his
body which remained to be buried in any other place then the Borough Moor.

But this Noble Marquess suffered not alone, for soon after Col. Hurrie
(notwithstanding he pleaded the benefit of Quarter, young Spotswood of Daersie,
A most complete Gentleman) Sir Francis Hay, and Col. Sibbalds, two most
accomplished persons, though they had all the favor to be beheaded.

There was likewise one Captain Charters, who being put in hopes of life by the
perfidious Kirk, upon his recantation, made a long speech upon the Scaffold,
acknowledging his Apostasy from the Covenant, and desiring to be reconciled to
the Kirk but had notwithstanding his head struck off,

This was the fatal and Tragical Event of his Majesty's affairs in Scotland
under Montrosse's Conduct: let us now turn to see how the treaty at Breda went
on in the mean time.

But before I proceed any further, give me leave to speak a word or two,
concerning the Magnanimous Col. Will. Sibbalds, who (say some) confessed
himself guilty of the Murder of D. Dorislaus the English Agent at the Hague,
which I must ingeniously confess I believe upon good ground to be only a
Calumny and scandal raised from the so far extended Marice of his enemies; for
I can find nothing either in his speech at Death, or in any Records of credit
tending to such a confession, though much against any likelihood of it: nor can
I imagine that any man could with so much resolution as he dyed with, part from
this world, and have so great a load and blot upon Conscience. But to proceed,
Great debates there were in the mean time between his Majesty and the Scotch
Commissioners concerning the Treaty, and great demurs there were upon it; for
besides the striving of some Lords who had a kind of a serious Antipathy to the
Scots perfidiousness, and endeavored to persuade his Majesty not to trust them
who had betrayed his Father. The King himself stuck highly as he had reason,
about the business of of taking the Covenant; For, 1. There was no reason why
he should be enforced to relinquish the Religion of his Fathers, and whilst he
permitted to his Subjects Liberty of Conscience, it would be very inconsistent
with their so earnestly pretended desires of a peace and agreement, to deny him
the same privilege which he gave them. 2. That Covenant tendered, and so
earnestly pressed upon him by them, was an Obligatory Covenant to bind the
Subjects to him, and not for him to swear to; and therefore he judged it
sufficiently satisfactory to pass an act for the peoples taking it.

Whilst these demurs and delays were in the Treaty, the Scotch Commissioners
give a visit to the Illustrious Prince of Orange, whom they entreat to be a
Mediator between them and their King. His Majesty likewise withdrawes himself
for some time from Breda to the Hague, there to advise with his Aunt the Queen
of Bohemia, the Prince of Orange and other friends, about what he were best to
resolve on, or determine.

But the Estates of Scotland though their proposed Conditions were already
unreasonable, yet resolve to add more weight to the scale: the Earl of
Carnworth and Mr. Murrey are sent over to the Commissioners at Breda with new
instructions and propositions; As, 1. That his Majesty should confirm all Acts
done in some late Sessions of Parliament, without any exception. 2. That
neither Montross nor any of his adherents be admitted to come into the Kingdom
of Scotland.

But notwithstanding the harshness of the Conditions, the King is earnestly
pressed to come to a full conclusion with the Scots, Though many Lords of the
contrary faction pleaded for an utter rejection of their propositions,
alleging to his Majesty, That the Covenanters horid perfidousness to his
Father might be a sufficient motive and inducement for him not to trust them;
That the more willing he was to condescend to their Propositio^s, the more
impudent they were still in proposing things most unreasonable; That should he
accept of their Conditions, they would so tie up his hands that he would be
then but a King only in Title, which he was without them. On the other side,
the Earl of Lauderdale, the Lord Wilmot, Piercy, and others of his Majesty's
Council who stood for an accommodation with the Scots, urged, That his Majesty's
affairs both in Ireland, under the Marquess of Montross, and in the Navy under
Prince Pupert, were in so weak and tottering a Condition, that no help could
be expected from them; That all the Princes in Europe were so imbroyled in Wars
of their own, that it was in vain to crave any Foreign aid; and that therefore
there was no way left for his Majesty to regain his lost Rights and Kingdoms
but by complying with his Subjects of Scotland, and though it were upon such
Conditions as would at first seem harsh, those Curbs might in time (possession
got) be thrown off by degrees; these reasons swayed with his Majesty, and the
Treay went on with a clearer face then formerly.

But now there happens a strong demur, or as most supposed, a business that
would wholly break off the Treaty, for the news of Montrosse's ignominious
death being come to Breda, extremely incensed the whole Court, and those who
were against the Treaty, bestirred themselves strongly, still endeavoring to
avert the King wholly from it, by telling him, That they had by thus murdering
his Leiutennant, Demonstrated to the World what they would do to him if they
had him in their power; That it was an act of rashness and desperation to
trust them, or to have any more to do with such a perfidious generation; That
they only cunningly and subtly endeavored to entrap him that they might
destroy him. But notwithstanding their heat, his Majesty conceals his anger,
(which doubtless could not but be great, for the death and the so Ignominious
death of so good and loyal a subject and Servant; and that too in his quarrel,
and for obeying his just commands (only he expresses his resentment of their so
strange proceedings to the Committee of Estates by a Message sent by Mr. Murrey
to this effect.

That it could not but grieve and perplex him to hear, that whilst they
pretended to conclude a peace, they proceeded in the way of War; and that
whilst they treated of an accord with him, they shed the blood of his best
Subjects, and that in such a manner, that if true as reported, they could not
imagine but it must extremely incense him, he therefore desired them to give
him an account of their business.

To this they return Answer.

That their affections were still real to him, and that it rejoiced their very
souls, to hear that he would be willing to concur with them in a peace and
agreement, That as for the Death of Montross, they desired it might be no
obstacle in the way, for that they did nothing in it but with a real intention
to promote his interest.

Thus they endeavored to excuse them selves, but it was not their excuse, nor
their so many reiterated Protestations of fidelity, but the necessity of the
Kings affairs, which drew him not long after to conclude the Treaty at Breda
(notwithstanding the violent opposers of it) by condescending to most of their
desires

The conclusion of the Treaty was soon carried to Edenbrough, where the
Parliament being met, it was yet by some of those who favored the Secterian
party in England made a debate, whether they should make any more addresses to
the King. So impudent were they even after the treaty was concluded with him,
but there were found but thirty of these malevolent persons; so the major part
of the Votes carrying it in the affirmative, it was resolved that another
message should be sent unto him, to invite him to make all possible speed to
his Kingdom of Scotland, protesting that they would venture Lives and Fortunes
in assisting him to regain his Rights and Kingdoms; but they not only debar him
from having those whom he chiefly favored to wait upon him, but likewise
prohibit the Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Lauderdale and Seaforth, and many
other persons of qualities return to Scotland, and they nominate such persons
as they thought fit out of their own Gang to be officers of his household there.

The Juncto then siting and Governing in England, had certain intelligence all
along of the proceeds of the Treaty between his Majesty and the Scots, together
with their Propositions to assist him in the recovery of his Rights in England
by some who sat in the Parliament of Scotland, betrayed their counsels, and
earnestly solicited the English to assault Scotland, before they were
themselves assaulted and invaded, to which effect they prepare an Army without
any just pretense, which they give to Oliver Cromwell to command, making him
Generalissimo of all the Forces of that Commonwealth in the room of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, whose Commission was between taken away and laid down.

Some time before his Majesty's departure from Holland into Scotland, news
was brought of the unfortunate loss of all Prince Rupert's Fleet, most of his
ships being either taken, sunk or burnt by General Blake, Admiral to the
English Navy; so though the Treaty was concluded with Scotland, his Majesty's
affairs went every where else to wrack.

At length all things being in a readiness, his Majesty about the beginning of
June 1650. took shipping at Sheveling in Holland, and after a tedious storm,
and narrow escape of some English Vessels which lay in wait for him, arrived at
Spey in the North of Scotland. Some Lords are sent down to receive him, and to
accompany him to Edenbrough, where two stately houses are richly provided and
furnished to entertain him.

He was all along the Country entertained with the General joy of all the
people, several presents being given him by the Towns as he came along.
Aberdeen presented him with 1500. l but the Committee of Estates and Kirk
fearing that such diet would prove too unwieldy to their pleasures, sent an
injunction to several places, requiring them that what ever moneys they had to
bestow, they should bring it to such treasuries as should be appointed by them.
Thus they permit not the Subjects to show their good will to their Sovereign,
nor him to receive it.

Nor were the States and Kirk as yet content with those hard conditions: but
they send him new propositions to Dundee to sign, which after some reluctance
he performed; for indeed he could do no otherwise, being now in their clutches.

The Parliament and Committee of Estates in Scotland had while they expected
his Majesty's arrival been consulting about the framing of an Army, every
fourth man in the Kingdom is ordered to be trained; and sixteen thousand foot,
and six thousand horse to be raised for his Majesty's present service. Of this
Army the Earl of Leven is made General of the Foot, and Holborn Major General,
David Lesley Lieutenant General of the Horse, and Montgomery Major General: the
place of Generalissimo was reserved for the King, though he never went into the
field with the Army.

His Majesty being come to Edenbrough, is received by the Parliament and
Committee of Estates and Kirk, with infinite complements and expressions of
fidelity and affection, and with great acclamations of joy from the people, and
on the 15. of July is again solemnly proclaimed King at Edenbrough Cross, but
his coronation yet deferred by reason of the then troubles.

For the English Army, notwithstanding the Scots had expostulated them the
unjustness of invading their Country, was advanced upon the borders, and at
Muscleborough the Scots under Montgomery with a small party, set upon the
English Army, but were worsted, and so the two Armies moved at a distance one
from the other, till they came as far as Dunbar, where the Scots had got a
considerable advantage, by reason of a pass, and bragged they had got the
English in a pound: but whether by their own carelessness and over security; or
the overreaching, courage and valor of the English, I cannot tell, a total
loss they had there, the pass gained from them, and themselves wholly routed
and dispersed.

I am the shorter in relating the passages between these two Armies, in regard
that though the King was made Generalissimo; yet he had no influence upon the
Army, which might rather be called the States or Kirks then the Kings; for
though he was there present; and bore the title of King, yet they had the whole
power, and made and revoked Laws and Orders.

The King was then with the States at Saint Iohnstons, when the news of this
loss, and that of the Death of his Sister the Princess Elizabeth arrived much
about the same time, and some have been bold to affirm that the latter grieved
him more then the former, in regard of the imperiousness which 'twas probable
the States of Scotland would have usurped, had the success answered their
minds.

And sufficiently imperious were both they and the Kirk already,
notwithstanding the ill fortune of their affairs; for, so great was their
insolency toward his Majesty, in their earnestness to purge his house, in
extorting Declarations from him against his own party and proceedings, and in
usurping the whole government of affairs to themselves, in placing guards of
their own creatures upon his Person, etc. That his sacred Majesty no longer
able to suffer such intolerable affronts and abuses, went secretly away,
accompanied only with four horse toward the North of Scotland, where the
Marquess of Hunt ley, the Earls of Seaforth and Atholl, the Lords Ogilby and
Newburgh, with the Gourdons were ready to appear for him with a considerable
party.

Scotland was at this time not only perplexed with a foreign enemy in her
bowels, but with civil distempers and divisions; for in the West there was a
party under the command of Straughan and Kerr; who declared against the actions
of the Committee of Estates, for their too much have and precipitation in the
Treaty with the King for their receiving him before he had given any evidence
of a real change. That they believed his profession of the cause and covenant
was counterfeit, and therefore refused to submit to his power; These men were
purely for the Kirk against the King's Authority.

Another party there was in the North under the Command of Huntley, Atholl,
Seaforth, etc. who declared purely for the Kingly Authority disclaiming and
disowning all power or order of the Kirk, Parliament or Committee of Estates.
These having gotten together a considerable party, it was supposed by the
Committee of Estates that his Majesty was gone to them, whereupon to quiet and
alay them if possible, an Act of Indemnity was passed by Parliament for what
they had done; but they slighted it, fell upon Sir John Brown's Regiment, and
slew and took prisoners many of his men; Whereupon Lieut. General David Lasley
was sent against; him; but the whole business after the Kings return to St.
Iohnston's ended in a Treaty.

The third and greatest party were the Parliament and Committee of Estates and
Kirk, who were equally for King and Kirk; these were highly perplexed and
discontented at the King's going away from S. Iohnston's and the more because
they feared he was gone to the Athol men, many controversies and consultations
were had about it; some were so ridged as to propose, that since he had
deserted them, they should look no more after him, but let him take his own
ways: Others were more mild, and would yet have him understand their
resentment for his leaving them; nor wanted there some sticklers for his
Majesty; at length it was concluded that Major General Montgomery should
speedily march after him, and earnestly entreat him to return to S. Iohnstons.

Montgomery according to his order went, and having had secret information that
his Majesty was at the Lord Dedup's house in the North confines of Fife, he
first surrounds the house, and then sends in a Messenger to acquaint the King
with the earnest desires of the Committee of Estates; that he would graciously
be pleased to return with him to St. Johnston's; but his Majesty at first
absolutely refused, as scorning to endure that slavery which they had subjected
him to, he was in the mean time earnestly solicited by Huntley, and the Gordons
to adhere solely to them, which he so much seemed to incline to, that he had
almost made the breach implacable between that party and the Kirk; but at
length upon several propositions granted him, he returned with Montgomery to
St. Johnston's.

The King being thus returned, and Huntley's party come in by admitting those
with him to bear public Offices, a general Meeting was resolved on to be held
at St. Johnstons, which should consist of King, Lords, Barons, Burgesses and
the assembly of Ministers; whereupon the Committee of the Kirk are summoned to
meet, but stand off, alleging that Sterling was the more convenient place to
meet in; To which the States answered, that they esteemed S. Johnstons the
fitter, that if they would not meet, they should consult for their own
securities, but at length they consent; The grand Assembly meets, and all
parties seem now agreed. Several Lords formerly in disfavour with the Kirk,
are received into Command in the Army, or have liberty to sit in Parliament,
such as Hamilton, Lauderdale, Lies, Bucheim, Dedup, and Crawford, Major
General Massey of the English was admitted to a command in the Army. Thus did
their divisions begin to be cemented, which else must necessarily have hastened
their Ruin.

About this time the King received the sad news of the death of the thrice
illustrious Prince of Orange, Brother-in-law to his Majesty, and who had
demonstrated himself a true and faithful friend to him in his necessities;
his Lady the Royal Princess Mary was by him left great with Child, and soon
after his death was delivered of a Posthume son.

And now on the first of January the day appointed by the Grand Convention at
S. Johnstan's the solemnity having been removed to Scone the usual place for
the Coronation of the Kings of Scotland; First his Majesty in a Princes Robe,
was conducted from his Bedchamber by the Constable and Marshal to the Chamber
of presence, where he was by the Lord Angus Chamberlin placed in a Chair under
a cloth of Estate; Then the Nobles and Commissioners of Baronyes and Buroughs
entered the Room, and having shown themselves to his Majesty, the Chancellor
spoke to this effect. Sir, your good Subjects desire you may be crowned, as
righteous and lawful Heir of the Crown of this Kingdom, that you would
maintain the present professed Religion the National Covenant and Solemn
League and Covenant. That you would graciously be pleased to receive them under
your protection, to govern them according to law, to defend them in their
rights and privileges by your Royal power, they offering themselves in humble
manner to your Majesty with their vows to bestow Land, Life and what else is
in their power for the maintenance of Religion, for the safety of your
Majesty's sacred person, and maintenance of your Crown, which they entreat your
Majesty to accept, and pray Almighty God that for many years you may enjoy the
same.

The King to this made Answer.

I do esteem the affections of my good people more then the Crowns of many
Kingdoms, and shall be ready by Gods assistance to bestow my life in their
Defense; wishing to live no longer then I may see Religion and the Kingdom
flourish in all happiness.

This ceremony performed, the Nobles and Commissioners of Baroneys and
Buroughs accompanied his Majesty to the Church of Scone; the Spurs being
carried before him by the Earl of Eglinton, the sword by the Earl Rothes, the
scepter by the Earls of Craford and Lindsey; the Crown by the Marquess of
Argyle; immediately before the Kings Majesty; who followed supported by the
Constable and Marshall; his train born up by the Lords Montgomery, Ereskin,
Newbottle, and Machelene; under a Canopy of crimson Velvet, supported by the
Lords Drummond, Carnegie, Ramsey, Johnson, Brechin, and Yster; which six were
supported by six Noble men's sons.

Thus they went to the Church, which being fitted for the purpose, the Honors
were laid upon a table provided for them, and his Majesty ascended on a stage
24. foot square, and seated himself in a Chair to hear the sermon; upon this
stage there was another smaller stage erected whereon the Throne stood. His
Majesty being seated on the Chair, a Sermon was preached by Robert Douglas
moderater of the Commission of the General assembly: Sermon being ended, the
National Covenant of Scotland, and the solemn League and Covenant were
distinctly read, which done, the Oath was ministered in these Words.

I CHARLES King of Britain, Frence and Ireland, do assure and declare by my
Solemn Oath, in the presence of Amighty God the Searcher of all hearts, my
allowance and approbation of the National Covenant, and of the solemn League
and Covenant; and faithfully Oblige my self to prosecute the ends thereof in
my station and calling; and that I for my self and successurs shall consent
and agree to all acts of Parliaments enjoining the National Covenant, and the
solemn League and Covenant: and fully establish Presbyterian Government, the
Directory of Worship, Confession of Faith, and Catechismes in the Kingdom of
Scotland, as they are approved by the General assemblies of this Kirk, and
Parliament of this Kingdom, and that I shall give my Royal assent to acts and
Ordinances of this Parliament passed, or to be passed, enjoining the same in my
other Dominions. And that I shall observe these in mine own practice and
Family, and shall never make opposition to any of those, or endeavor any
change thereof.

The King having thus solemnly sworn, the National covenant, the solemn League
and Covenant, with the oath subjoined, was by him under written in the presence
of them all; which done, the King ascended the other Stage, and sat down in the
Throne. Then the Lords great Constable and Marshall went to the four corners of
the Stage, Lion king at Arms going before them, who spoke these words to the
people, Sirs, I do present unto you the King, CHARLES, the Rightful and
undoubted Heir of the Crown and Dignity of this Realm; this day is by the
Parliament of this Kingdom appointed for his Coronation. And are you not
willing to have him for your King, and become subject to his commandments? At
this Action the King stood up, and showed himself to the people round about,
who expressed their consent by their joyful acclamations, crying, God save
King CHARLES the Second.

Then his Majesty descended from his Throne into the Chair, where he sat to
hear the Sermon, of whom the Minister accompanied with some others of his
tribe, demand if he were willing to take the Coronation Oath, according as it
was contained in the eight Act of the first Parliament of King James the VI.
his Royal Grandfather. The King answered he was most willing. Then was the
oath read aloud by Lion king at Arms, in these words.

Because that the increase of Virtue, and suppressing Idolatry craveth that the
Prince and people be of one perfect Religion, which of GOD'S mercy is now
presently professed within this Realm: Therefore it is statuted and ordained by
our Sovereign Lord, the Lord Regent, and three Estates of this present
Parliament, that all Kings, Princes, and Magistrates whatsoever, holding their
place, which hereafter at any time shall happen to reign and bear rule over
this Realm, at the time of their Coronation, and receipt of their Princely
Authority make their faithful promise in the presence of the eternal God.
That enduring the whole course of their lives, they shall serve the same
Eternal God, to the utmost of their power, according as he has required in
his most holy Word, revealed and contained in the new and old Testaments, and
according to the same words shall maintain the true Religion of Christ Jesus,
the preaching of his holy Word, and the due and right ministration of the
Sacraments, now received and preached within this Realm, and shall abolish and
gainstand all false Religions contrary to the same, and shall rule the people
committed to their charge according to the will and command of God revealed in
his foresaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions
received in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal GOD,
and shall procure to the utmost of their power, to the Kirk of GOD, and whole
Christian people, true and perfect peace in time coming: The rights and rents,
with all just Privileges of the Crown of Scotland, to preserve and keep
inviolated, neither shall they transfer or alienate the the same. They shall
forbid and repress all in all estates and Degrees, Leases, Oppression, and all
kind of Wrong in all Judgment. They shall command and procure that Justice and
Equity be kept to all Creatures without exception, as the Lord and Father of
mercies be merciful unto them. And out of their Lands and Empire they shall be
careful to root out all Heretics and enemies to the true worship of God, that
shall be convict by the true Kirk of GOD of the aforesaid Crimes; and that he
shall faithfully affirm the things above written by the solemn Oath.

The Oath thus read, the Minister tendered it to the King, who kneeling and
holding up his right hand, swear thus: By the Eternal and Almighty GOD who
lives and reigns for ever, I shall observe and keep all that is contained in
this Oath.

Then was the King disrobed by the Lo. Chamberlain berlain of the Princely
Robe, with which he entered the Church, and vested with his Royal Robes; and so
supported as before, he removed to the Chair placed on the North side of the
Kirk, whither the sword was first brought from the table by Sir William
Cockburn of Langtown Gentlemanusher, who delivers it to the great Chamberlain,
and he making a short speech, delivers it to his Majesty, by whom it was given
into the great Constable's hands and by him girt to the King's side.

Then his Majesty sitting down in the Chair, the spurs are put on him by the
Earl Marshall. After which Archibald Marquess of Argyle takes the Crown into
his hands, and after a short prayer made by the Minister, put it upon his
Majesty's head,

which done, Lion King at Arms, the great Constable standing by him, called the
Nobility one by one, who came all, and kneeling, and touching the Crown upon
the Kings head with their right hand, Swore thus: By the Eternal and Almighty
God, who lives and reigns for ever, I shall support thee to the uttermost.
The obligatory Oath was likewise read to the people, they holding up their
hands.

Lastly, after the Earls of Craford and Lindsey had delivered his Majesty the
Scepter, he returned again to the Stage, where he was installed in the Throne
by the Marquess of Argyle; and after a short exhortation of Master Robert
Douglass, returned to the Pallas with the Crown upon his head in the same
manner as he came.

This is a full relation of the ceremonies performed at his Majesty's
Coronation at Scone, on the first of January 1650, which I the rather fully
insert, because the World may take notice of those hard Covenant Pills which
the Kirk-men made him swallow.

Presently after the coronation, the King and Nobles returned in a most solemn
manner to S. John's town; the Kings Majesty having a guard to attend him,
confisting of most Lords and Gentlemen's sons, and the Lord Lorne son to the
Marquess of Argyle was made Captain of it.

And now his Majesty intends with all possible speed the raising of an Army
(for the Scots having had all this while no Army on the other side the Fife to
oppose the English proceedings, they had reduced all places there under their
force, even Edenbrough Castle it self) to which effect he orders his Standard
to be set up at Aberdeen, himself nobly resolving to be Generalissimo of this
army; the other general commands were now given as well to the Royallists as
Presbyterians; For Duke Hamilton was made Lieut. General of the Army, and
Middleton Lieut. General of the Horse.

The Levies came in a pace to the general Randezvouze, which was appointed on
the East part of Fife, whither his Majesty in person went to encourage his
Soldiers, whom he found both increasing in their numbers, and much rejoiced at
his presence.

The Parliament of Scotland, which had adjourned to give time for his Majesty's
nation; being met again, there were strong endeavors of the King, that several
Lords of the Royal party should be admitted to their seats in Parliament; but,
the assemblies of the Kirk at Sterling and Aberdeen as strongly oppose it, and
show themselves discontented both at this proposal, and likewise at the new
levies, in regard they were there admitted to commands in the Army: as they now
desired to have place in Parliament; yet notwithstanding these murmurings, they
were upon their reconciliation to the Church; and passing the stool of
Repentance, readmitted to their places in Parliament; such were Duke Hamilton,
the Marquess of Huntley, the Earls of Calendare, Crawford, and others.

But still not only many of the Ministers (notwithstanding there was a select
Committee appointed to examine and punnish such persons who any way confronted
and murmured against any designs or acts of State) rail against these
proceedings; but some of the Nobles too are discontented, insomuch that the
Earl of Sutherland utterly refused to concur with them, and if he could
possibly, would have opposed them by force.

And indeed very many or most of the Presbyterians were discontented; For the
Royal party by the Admission of those Lords and others, was grown stronger then
the Kirk's, and now bore all the sway; which made the proud Marquess Argyle
and other Covenantier Lords, murmur at: being afraid least in time they should
wholly be laid aside, they having already seen one of their party begun with;
for the Earl of Louden who customarily had the Lord Chancellorship of the
Kingdom, was removed from his place, and the Lord Burleigh constituted
Chancellor in his stead.

Yet on the Covenanters side there wanted not some Ministers, such were Mr.
RoBert Douglass, and Mr. David Dicks, who endeavored to beget a right
understanding in both parties, that these sparks of discontent might not at
last burst out into a flame, as 'twas very much feared they would; but rather
that in this time of danger they might lay a side all animosities, and unite
together against the Common Enemy, who else would be the Ruin of them both.

And now his Majesty to keep a corespondency abroad, sends the Earl of
Dumferlin Ambassador to the States of Holland, he had likewise at the same time
several other Ambassadors oragents abroad in the courts of several Princes, to
require aid; but never found more, then what fair and sugared promises produced

And about this time, Sir Henry Hide, being sent over to England from
Constantinople (whither he had been sent as Ambassador from his Majesty to the
Grand Seignior) by Sir Thomas Bendysh his means, who was then Ambassador for
the republic in England (but yet deemed a person of more loyalty to his
Prince, then to have sent his Ambassador to be murdered, if he could have
avoided it) after somewhat a formal trial, he suffered death on a Scaffold
before the Royal Exchange in London, for having taken Commissions from his
Sovereign.

And not long after him Captain Brown-Bushell, who though he had formerly been
an enemy to his Majesty's father, yet now suffered death upon the Tower Hill
London, for having done some signal services by sea for his present Majesty.

But to return to the Kings affairs in Scotland, where the special businesses
in hand were, the completing the Levies to 15000 foot, and 6000 horse, which
went on a pace; and the fortifying the town of Sterling, which his Majesty
intended for the place of his chief residence; to the hastening of the which
his Majesty went often in Progress to view the Works, and encourage the
Pioneers.

And time it was to hasten those Works, for the English drew every day nigher
and nigher toward them having already taken the Fort of Blackness, which lay
btween Sterling and Edenbrough; which was never theless not accounted so great
a loss, as the surprizsal of the Earl of Eglinton and one of his Sons by a
party of English horse at Dumbarton; for this Earl was a person of a great deal
of power in that Nation, and his taking very much obstructed the going forward
of the Levies.

But Sterling being almost fortified sufficiently, his Majesty removed his
Court hither; where whilst he was, his birth day being the 29 of May, was kept
through Scotland, with such tokens of joy as are usual upon such occasions;
but the town of Dundee exceeded all the rest, for besides their equal
expressions of joy, they presented his Majesty with a rich Tent, six pieces of
Field Ordinance, and set out a Regiment of horse toward his assistance at
their own charge.

At Sterling likewise were the head Quarters kept; most of the Scotch Army
Quartering about it, whither Middleton's levies from the North being come, and
amounting to about 8000 men, it came to be a dispute whether these should be a
distinct Army by themselves, or be joined with Lesley's Southern levies; but at
length it was thought most convenie^t to join them: and his Majesty to prevent
those animosities which might arise between Middleton and Lesley for the
General-ship, took upon himself the Command of the whole.

From hence his Majesty sent a messenger to the Parliamet still sitting at S.
Johnston's with these demands.

1. That the Act about the Classis of malignants should be revoked and
disannulled, and that an Act pass for its repeal.

2. That there may be no more any mention of the name of malignants among them.

3. That Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Seaforth, and Callendare, etc. might have
as full command in the Army as any others.

The demands were strongly debated pro and con in the Parliament; the Marquess
of Argyle and others of the Covenanted strain, endeavoring by all means
possible to oppose them; yet at length, though with much difficulty, they were
carried in the affirmative, it being urged by the more moderate sort too, that
the granting of these would be the only way to take away all animosities,
between those parties which they intended to unite.

The Parliament having granted these things to his Majesty, and given large
commissions and instructions for the completing of the Levies, about the
beginning of June dissolved, leaving all things (in relation to civil and
intestine distempers in a calm and quiet) all parties seeming to be pleased,
and their actions united toward the opposing of their common Enemy Cromwell.

Whilst these things were thus transacted in Scotland, a great and terrible
plot was discovered against the Juncto then ruling in England, and their
government in assistance of his Majesty to his just Rights. This design was
chiefly laid by those Presbyterians who had been such dire Opponents of his
Majesty's blessed father of happy (yet unhappy) memory, viz the greatest part
Presbyterian Ministers, who had most of them formerly belcht out such
firebrarnds from their Pulpits as had set both Church and State in a
combustion; but now whether out of a real sense of their Error (which I have
the charity to believe it was) they had a desire to return to their Allegiance
to his Son their lawful and native Sovereign; or out of an ambition, by
joining with their Scottish Brethren (which I am loath to judge) to get the
Power again into their hands, which was snatched from them by the Independent
English Army, and the Juncto of Sectaries in England, they had laid a design
to raise both a contribution of money; and levy men for his Majesty's
assistance here; but their Plot was betrayed by the intercepting of Letters in
a ship forced by foul weather into Air in Scotland; but bound with provisions
for the Isle of Man, whereupon the chief undertakers in London were
apprehended, viz. Mr. Cook, Mr. Gibbons, Mr. Christopher Love, Mr. Jenkins, D.
Drake and others, of which two. viz. Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Love was condemned by
a high Court of Justice; and suffered death on the Tower hill, for that cause
against which they had once so strongly declared.

But to return again to the chief Scene in Scotland. The English Army had long
had a desire to bring the Scots to a field battle, which his Majesty upon
sundry good reasons and serious advice declined; so Cromwell endeavored to the
utmost of his power to force them to it, and therefore several times faced his
Majesty's Army which lay encamped at Torwood, within three miles of Sterling,
but could not yet draw them out of their trenches, the chief reason being
imagined to proceed from their stay for Argyle, Huntley, and Seaforth, who were
gone into their several Territories to complete the King's Levies.

Cromwell perceiving that he could not draw the Scots to a field-battel, upon a
sudden draws off his Army, and transports fixteen hundred Foot; and four
Troops of Horse over unto Fife on such a sudden, that it startled his
Majesty's whole Army; And Cromwell with an unparalled expedition, faces again
the Royal Army with a resolution to fall upon their rear if they should attempt
a motion thetherwards; but they offered not to stir, for already order had been
given to Sir John Brown Governor of Sterling to march with four thousand Horse
and Foot to drive out that party of Cromwell's which were already landed in
Fife; of which, intelligence being brought Lambart and Okye with two Regiments
of Horse and two of Foot, are with all possible haste wafted over to reinforce
the party already there; with which additionall supply of men they routed Sir
John Brown, who expected none but the first landed party, taking himself and
several other officers of quality prisoners, and killing two thousand upon the
place, and taking near 1200. prisoners: and shortly after Cromwell transports
most of his Army over the Fife, and resolving to stop the passage which the
Scots had over by Sterling, marches to S. Iohnstons and takes it almost upon
summons.

Hs Majesty seeing the English Army was advanced so far Northward, thought it
in vain to attempt the forcing them back; and knowing that the Scots naturally
fights better in another then in their own Conntry, resolves toadvanc with all
possible speed into England, where he yet hoped, not withstanding the discovery
of the design, to find some Loyal souls to join with him for the Recovery of
his right and Kingdoms.

Many were there who opposed this intention of his Majesty, and among those
Duke Hamilton was one of the chiefest; whose dislike may sufficiently appear by
his Letter to Mr. Crofts after their Advance to this effect;

We are now laughing, (says he) at the rediculousness of our present State; We
have quit Scotland being scarce able to maintain it: and yet we grasp at all,
and nothing but all will satisfy us, or to lose all. I confess I cannot tell
whether our hopes or fears are greatest? but we have one stout argument
Despair: for we must now either stoutely fight or dye: all the Rogues have left
us, I shall not say whether out of fear or disloyalty; but all now with his
Majesty are such as will not dispute his Commands.

But notwithstanding his dislike: and his and other oppositio^s, yet the Kings
resove takes place, and on July the 31. 1651. his Majesty's Army began to
advance from Terwood near Sterling steering their course dirirectly for
England, which they entered six days after by way of Carlisle; This march of
the Royal Army made Cromwell with the greatest part of his forces immediately
recrosse the Frith, and forth with send Major General Lambert with a select
party of Horse and Dragoons to fall upon the Rear of his Majesty's Army, whilst
they hoped that Major General Harrison, then lying near the borders with about
three thousand Horse and Dragoons, would attach them in the Front; shortly
after himself followed with the rest of the Army which could be spared,
amounting to about eight complete Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse.

But then this greater preparation is made against him in England, for the
Juncto then fitting at Westminster, not only interdicted all aid or assistance
either of men or moneys, to be given to his Majesty under the penalty of High
Treason; but also in all or most of the Countries had caused a numerous force to
be raised, the Church-Militia of the City of London being likewise sent out
against him; and for the present impeading of his march, two thousand of the
Country- Militia of Staffordshire, and four thousand out of Lancashire and
Cheshire, under the command of Col. Birch, had joined with Harrison.

But be sides all this, many of the Royal Army had in their march deserted
their colors, and near a fourth part of the army was wanting; but these were
most of them such, as were not very well affected to the business, nor cause
they went about; and therefore there was but little miss of them, for the rest
of the Army marched on cheerfully, and continued to the utmost push steadfast
and loyal; and were so contentedly obedient to all Military Discipline, that
it is believed that in all their march through all that part of England they
hardly took the value of six pence forcibly.

But notwithstanding this unwonted evility of the Scottsh Army, and his
Majesty's earnest invitations, the Country came very slowly in, whether
besotted, dulled and contented with that slavery they then lay under, or
over-awed by an armed power, I cannot tell, but such was their backwardness,
that few or none besides the Lord Howard of Estriche's son with a Troop of
Horse came to him, during his long tedious march through England.

Nor did his Majesty with his Army take that course which was expected by most
he should; for the great fear of his Enemies, and greatest hopes of his Friends
were, that he would march directly for London, but he contrary to their
expectations, being come into Lancashire, struck off at Warrington, either
doubting the enterprise for London too hazardous, or out of the hopes had of
the Forces, it was expected Major General Massey might raise in Glostershire
which was the then generally voagu'd reason.

But before his Majesty could pass over Warrington Bridge, he had occasion to
try the stoutness of his Soldiers; for there Harrison was resolved if possible
to stop him, and was endeavoring to that purpose to have broken down the
Bridge; but his Majesty's forces by a swift march from Charley, prevented his
design, and forced him to an engagement, The dispute was somewhat hot and long,
but at length his Majesty got the better; for he gained a free passage over the
Bridge, though with the loss of some men.

This Bridge gained, his Majesty marched on toward the West, without any
opposition: and indeed with as little assistance or increase of numbers: yet
being all along as he came proclaimed King of Great Britain France and Ireland,
by an Englishman whom he had created King at Arms.

Being come to Tong-Norton, his Majesty sent a Trumpet with his Royal summons
to Colonel Mackworth Governor of Shrewsbury, which ran thus.

C. R. Col. MACKWORTH,
BEing Desirous to attempt all fair ways for the recovery of our own, before
we proceed to force and extremity, and (where the controversy is with
Subjects) accounting that a double victory which is obtained without effusion
of blood, and where the hearts that of right belong to us are gained as well as
their strengths. We do hereby summon you to surrender unto us our Town, with
the Castle of Shrewsbury as in duty and Allegiance by the Laws of God and the
Land you are bound to do, thereby not only preventing the mischief which you
may otherwise draw upon your self and that place, but also opening the
foredoore to peace and quietness, and the enjoyment of every one both King and
people, that which pertains to them under certain and known Laws, the end for
which we are come. Given at our

Camp of Tong-Norton this 20. August 1651.

This summons was accompanied with a Letter from his Majesty exhorting him as
he was a Gentleman to return to his duty and Alleigance, upon promises of
pardon and reward.

To both which Col. Mackworth returned answer thus;

For the Commander in Chief of the Scottish Army.
SIR,
BY your Trumpeter I received two Papers, the one containing a proposition, and
the other a direct Summons for the Rendition of the Town and Castle of
Shrewsbury, the Custody whereof I have recieved by Authority of Parliament; and
if you believe me a Gentleman (as you say you do) you may believe I will be
faithful to my trust, to the violation whereof neither Allurements can
persuade me, nor threatenings offorce; espetially when but paper ones compel
me? what principles I am judged to be of, I know not; but I hope they are such
as shall ever declare me honest, and no way differing herein (as I know) from
those engaged in the same employment with me; who should they desert that cause
they are embarked in, I resolve to be found as I am, unmovable,

The faithful Servant of the Commonwealth of England. H. Mackworth.


Thus flat a denial did his Majesty's Royal summons receive here; nor did his
Commands to Sir Thomas Middleton Governor of Chirk Castle in Flintshire, for
the levying of men for his service, find better success.

But from hence his Majesty directs his course for Worcester, where he arrives
on the twenty second of August, and notwithstanding some resistance made by the
Parliaments soldiers, quickly enters by the help of the towns men, who
joyfully returned to their Aleigance and Duty; here 'twas again solemnly
debated whether they should remain here or march for London, and was at length
concluded that in regard of the long and tedious marches that the Soldiery had
had, it would be much better to tarry hear: that after some refreshment they
might be able with more vigor and courage to endure the brunt.

The Earl of Derby who had some few days before his Majesty's Arrival at
Worcester, brought him a supply of two hundred and fifty foot and sixty Horse,
which he had brought with him out of the Isle of Man, and was returned back
into Lancashire, out of hopes that by his influence upon that County he might
get a more numerous Force there, having got together a considerable party, was
routed by Col. Lilburn, who was there with a party to watch his motions; and
was first engaged by the Earl, out of a design he had to hinder Lilburn's
joining with a Regiment of Cromwells; which was sent for the same purpose
toward Manchester, but the engagers themselves were defeated; and most of the
Earls chief Commanders and Gentlemen of note with him taken prisoners, such
were the Lord Witherington, Sir Thomas Tilsly, Sir William Throgmorton, Col.
Boynton, and sundry others.

His Majesty being now at Worcester and solving there to stay and endure the
utmost brunt, all preparations possible are made, for the fortifying the place
and gaining all advantages possible; to which purpose a Line and several Mounts
were quickly raised by the Pioneers, and all passes about the Town and toward
it secured.

But Major General Lambert on the Rebulick's side, sending suddenly a party of
Horse to discover the difficulty of the pass at Upton, (where Major General
Massey (for his Majesty) lay with a party about 300. Horse and Dragoons) those
desperate fellows being not above fifty in number, adventured over upon one
piece of Timber, which had been carelessly left, from arch to arch.

And though Massey's men took the allarm, yet was Lambert so quick in sending
over relief to his Soldiers (whom the Royal party had beleagured in a Church)
that the pass was clearly gained, and Major General Massey forced to retreat
(though as honorably as ever man did) for him self still brought up the, Rear
in which service (though his Horse was slain under him, and himself shot in
the arm) yet he got off with a very inconsiderable loss.

And now Cromwells Army began to join with all those parties, which had
conspired there to ruin his Majesty, whom they accounted already like a bird
in a Cage; for this Royal Army consisting (at the most) of not above 10000
fighting men, whereas the Army that then beleagur'd and encompassed them, was
one of the greatest that had (during the whole time of the late War) been
raised in England, amounting (according to common computation (to some 50. or
60. thousand Horse and Foot, so that (as I have been well informed) this Army,
though in a more sanctified strain bragged and insulted more over his Majesty,
then the French Army at Agincourt did over the thrice Illustrious King Henry 5.
Yet notwithstanding their assurance of making him their prize: it pleased God
(though not to give him the success that Henry the 5. had) yet to deliver him
out of their blood thirsty hands.

When I speak of the Armies insulting over his Majesty's misery; I hope the
Reader will understand me in the generality; for though many and perhaps the
major part were glad of these his straits; yet many noble and candid loyal
souls there were, whom nothing but a tyrannical impulsion could have forced to
have born Arms against their lawful Sovereign. It being well known that
thousands were forced out of several Countries to serve against their wills,
and them too put into the brunt of the battle, as though destined for the
slaughter.

But for all these numerous forces which encompassed the Royal Army, they were
cheerful and resolved to sell their lives at a noble rate, his Majesty by the
Example of his undaunted courage, principally encourageing them: so that many
vigorous sallies were made upon their Enemies, and though their supernumeraries
forced them to a retreat, yet was it very seldom and never ignobly.

But now the fatal day draws nigh, a day before so eminently auspitious to
Cromwell, and as unfortunate to the Scots, viz. the third day of September. The
fight was occasioned thus, Cromwell, Fleetwood, and others of the Republic
party, had, after the gaining the pass at Upton, endeavored to make themselves
a clear passage to the City, that their Army might join in the Leagure, to
which end and purpose they ordered the making of two Bridges, the one over the
Severn, the other over Them, over the last of which passes Lievt. General
Fleetwood went to attach the West side of the Town, which so alarmed the
Royal Army (who then lay within their Leagure at St. Jones) that to prevent
their drawing nigher, they salyed out with the greatest part of their Horse and
Foot and a stiff encounter there was, till over powered by numbers more then by
valor, which they demonstrated to the utmost of men's strength, they were forced
to retire again into the Leagure, leaving more of their Enemies dead bodies in
the field then of their own.

But whilst the encounter was on the West side of the Town. Cromwell having
passed his Army over Severn, he marched directly to the Town on that side,
whereupon his Majesty in person, and in the head of the Horse, sallied out upon
him, and that with so much valor and courage, that Cromwell's own lifeguard,
and the best of his old Soldiers, who were thought almost invincible) were
forced to retire, 'till seconded by those numerous supplies of fresh Soldiers,
who served only like the Turkish Asapi, to blunt the Royal swords, so that
their wearied arms no longer able to hold out, were forced to retreat, and at
Length (notwithstanding the generous example of his Majesty who performed
things worth wonder) to a disorderly flight, and notwithstanding his Majesty's
earnest endeavors (in which he had his horse twice shot under him) to bring
them again to a rally, yet it proved fruitless, for the Cromwellian Army
pouring forth their numbers upon them, permitted them not so much time, but
following them close at the heels to the Town, toward which they fled, entered
pelmel with them.

And now notwithstanding their flight, and the danger of their own lives; yet
had they so much care of their sovereign, that the whole cry throughout both
Town and Army was nothing else but Save the King, Save the King; for him they
knew it was that the Junctoes army chiefly looked after, and indeed in great
danger he was; for notwithstanding the earnest desires of many of his friends,
and particularly Duke Hamilton, who pressed him to have a care of his safety,
and reserve his person to a more fortunate day; yet his Majesty was hardly
induced to quit the field, nor would he till he saw all absolutely lost; for
Cromwell's Army having as I said followed the Royalists into the Town, and got
possession of one side of it, and after by two or three strong assaults upon
the fort Royal where the Cheshire men (never before found so disloyal to their
Prince; and therefore found now their due,) who out of three thousand men
sacrificed the lives of 1600 to the Ghosts of those new Royallists which were
all put to the sword in it, it was taken by storm; and now when it was almost
too late, his Sacred Majesty thought it high time to provide for his safety;
and so with some Nobles and Servants not without a great deal of difficulty,
(for how could it be otherwise where there was such hard search made for him,)
he quit the field, and by the most unfrequented roades that they could possibly
find out, rode to the Farmehouse of a noble Gentleman on the borders of
Staffordshire, where they no sooner arrived but his Majesty disroabed himself
of his Princely Ornament and accoutrements; and particularly of a Chain of Gold
or spannar-string worth three hundred pounds sterling; the Present of a
Scottish Lord, which he bestowed upon a Servant of his there present: which
done for his farther disguise, he proceeded to the cutting of his hair, and the
Cote affording neither shears nor scissars to perform it, it was by the Lord
Wilmot cut off with a Knife.

And now every one is commanded to shift for himself, and this poor Prince
left alone to the sole protection of the Almighty, he choosing none but one
friend to accompany him, with whom he wandered into a Wood, within four miles
(say some) of Wolverhampton, where finding a hollow Oak, he was now content to
make it his Pallas; for here he for some days concealed himself, his Friend
still toward night going out to provide him some refreshme^t dureing this his
solitary confinement.

In the mean time the Lord Wilmot who was commanded with the rest to seek his
fortune, was by chance pursued by some Soldiers, but meeting with a Country
fellow for merly a Soldier in the old King's Army, he was by him secured
though somewhat strangly, for he carries him into a Malt-house belonging to Mrs
Jane Lane, and having no other convenient place to hide him in, clapped him under
the Kilne, though there were then some fire in it, and the Malt smoking on the
top. In the mean time the Soldiers then in pursuit of him, entered the house,
and having made about three quarters of an hours search every where else, but
not at all suspecting the Kilne, where they saw the fire they departed, and the
Lord Wilmot was taken out of the Kilne almost ready to faint with the
extremity of the heat.

The country fellow having thus secured this Lord, acquaints Mrs. Lane with
what he had done, and she extremely glad of it, gets him to her house, where in
conference she enquires of the Kings safety. The Lord Wilmot gives her the
former relation of his miseries and distress, which forces tears from the
tender hearted Gentlewoman, she earnestly entreats him to take some course for
the finding out of his Majesty, and conducting him to her house, she being
resolved to venture her life, had she ten thousand, for the saveing of his
Royal Majesty's.

The Lord Wilmot glad of so happy an opportunity to serve his Majesty, and so
great a ptobability of secureing him, the next night finds him out, and
conducts him from the Royal Oak to the House of Mrs. Jane Lane, where after a
large condoling of his hard fortune, consultation was had for a convenience for
his Escape beyond sea, at length it was concluded, that Bristoll would be the
most convenient place to take shipping, That his Majesty should ride before
Mrs. Lane by the name of William, servant to Mr. Lastel her father in Law, who
was likewise to go with them; and thus it was immediately given out, that Mr.
Lastel and Mrs. Lane were to take a journey into the West, to visit some
friends, and shortly after they set forward.

In this journey there happned many accidents worthy commemoration, and first
the Kings Majesty riding now as a servant to one of the faithfullest of his
subjects, in a Livery cloak, though not without that respect that durst be
given to him; complains to Mrs. Lane that the Cloak wearied him, whereupon she
desires Mr. Lastel to carry it, and long they had not rid so, but they met upon
the road her Brother in law, who amongst other questions demanded of her, if
her Father must carry her man's Cloak, to which she readily answered, that it
was so big that it often endangered the throwing her off the Horse, and that
she had therefore desired him to carry it.

The next and most important accident of all was, that coming into a Town which
they were to pass through, there was a Troop of horse there to be quartered,
drawn up, which at a distance caused some fear, but at length with a resolution
they passed on, and the Captain taking them for honest Travelers, made his
Troop open to the right and left, and so permitted them to pass.

Another accident there happened, which one may say was almost comical in this
Tragedy; Mrs. Lane coming into the Inn, leaves his Majesty under the name of
William her servant, in the Kitchen, with whom the Maid enters into discourse,
she asks him where he was born, and what trade he was; he answered at
Brummingham, and a Naylor's Son; and after a great deal of other discourse, the
Jack being down, the Maid desires him to wind it up; which he willingly
undertakes, but goes the wrong way about it, and somewhat prejudices it; at
which the Maid grew angry, asking him where he was bred, and telling him he was
the veryest clownish booby that ever she saw in all her life; which railing of
hers made his Majesty notwithstanding his present misery, go out of the room
smiling.

Mrs. Lane notwithstanding his Majesty went as her Servant, yet had a greater
respect for him before others, pretending him her Tennant's son; but on the
Road she would always ask what he would have to dinner or supper; and what
piece of that he liked, which she would always be sure to get made ready, and
give him, he still sitting at the lower end of the Table.

But to come to the end of their journey; being arrived at Bristol, they lodged
at the house of a noble Gentleman there, and Kinsman to Mr. Lastles: the King
finding it to be a house of great resort, feigns him self sick of an Ague, and
so keeps his Chamber all the day, coming down only at nights; but one night
coming down, and being somewhat cold, he craves a glass of wine of the Butler,
This Butler having before served his Majesty's Father in the Wars, looking
earnestly upon him, suspected him to be the King; so easily will Majesty
appear, though veiled in the utmost disguises; and thereupon pulling off his
Hat, told him very ceremoniously, That he might command what wine he pleased;
of which the King took no notice, but drinking of his wine went out: Yet the
Butler could not satisfy his suspicion, but went up to Mr. Lastell's, and
demanded of him how long he had had that servant? Whereupon Mr. Lastell's was
very angry at his boldness in dareing to ask him such a Question, But the
Butler still persisted, and whispering told him, that he believed it was the
King: Whereupon Mr. Lastell's seeing he was discovered, sends immediately up for
his Majesty, whom he acquaints with the Butler's discovery of him, with whom
the King was somewhat angry, in regard he did not first acquaint himself with
his suspicion, it not being impossible, but Mr. Lastles might not have known
him to be the King: but upon pardon asked by the Butler, it was granted him by
the King, and he afterward proved very instrumental in his Majesty's
conveyance through the Country.

But here at Bristol; the chief design they had in hand failed them; for though
there were a little Bark lay there, judged most convenient for the business;
yet the Master would for no reward transport a single person, though he was so
honest as only to deny it, and made no farther search or inquiry concerning the
Person, which might perhaps have tended to a discovery.

This design here failing, his Majesty desired to be brought some miles
westward, to the house of a worthy Gentleman, whom he knew to be a trusty
friend; where coming, he finds the Gentleman in the Field with his Servants:
having discovered himself to him, he was by him conveyed to a convenient stand
'till night, (having first taken leave of his true friends, who had thus far
conducted him with the danger of their Lives and Estates) from whence he was in
the dusk conveyed into the house, and there carefully concealed for a week,
till such time as preparation could be made in some Western Port of a passage
for him; but coming afterward there where it was provided, chancing to dine
with a Parliament Colonel then there, he thought it the safer to lose the
benefit of that passage, then adventure to imbarque himself singly, which might
breed suspicion, and perhaps have been the means after so many deliverances, to
have betrayed him into the hands of his Enemies.

This passage then likewise failing him, he returned back to the place from
whence he came, and there concealed himself three weeks longer, till in the end
it being resolved on, he by the assistance of Mr. Ph. was conveyed through the
most by ways they could imagine, to a Gentlewomans house in Sussex, where he
lay some few days, til a person of true worth and honor made provision of a
faithful master, who with a small vessel wafted him to a small Creek in
Normandy, to the great content of the Kings sacred Majesty, and all his loyal
Subjects, and to the honor of the master with due reward, as in time may
appear.

Perhaps the reader may think it tedious that I have given so large a relation
of his Majesty's escape from the fight at Wercester; but it was a work so full
of wonder and providence, and so many false relations there are abroad, that I
could do no less then recount all those miseries and hardships which this poor
Prince endured for the sakes of us his Subjects, and more would he willingly
have endured, even death it self, to the redeeming of us from the tyranny and
oppression which we then groaned under.

But let him that shall look upon the several passages of his, read them over
and over, consider the several difficulties he passed, the many dangers he was
in to be betrayed, the country being up round about, the sum of money set
upon his head, for which many hundreds out of covetousnes made it their
business to search for him; and they will confess ingeniously, that God was
never so merciful to any people, as to us, in delivering his sacred Majesty so
wonderfully out of the hands of his Enemies, who breathed out nothing but his
death and destruction, that we may yet have hopes to be a happy Nation.

But let us now return to give a full account of this dismal loss at
Worcester, in which most of his Majesty's foot were either made a prize, or a
sacrifice to their enemies swords; of the horse there escaped 300. out of the
field, but were most afterward either taken or killed by the country people in
their flight; three thousand were judged slain in the Field, and about seven
thousand taken prisoners; whereof the chief were, the Earls Derby, Lauderdale,
Cleveland, Shrewsburge, and the Lord Wentworth, and many other noble persons
taken in the pursuit. And the chief of those taken in the battle were, the
Earls of Carnworth and Kelly, the Lord Synclare, Sir John Packington; the
Major Generals, montgomery and Piscotty; and the Virgil of this Age, that
thrice worthy Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Translator of the renowned Paster Fido, and
Secretary to his Majesty. As for the thrice noble Duke Hamilton, he was taken,
but not overcome; overpowred, but not vanquished. For after having made a most
Heroic resistance, he was reduced under his enemies power, more for want of
strength then valor: but death entering in at those wounds which he so
gallantly received in defense of his Sovereign, soon after released him. Major
General Massey, though he escaped the field; yet his wounds being desperate, he
was forced to surrender himself to the Countess of Stamford, and was by her
Son, the Lord Gray of Grooby, after the recovery of his wounds, sent up
prisoner to the Parliament, and by them committed to the Tower, from whence he
not long after escaped, and went to his Majesty beyond sea.

This strange and wonderful Victory (as the Juncto at Westminster gave it out
to be, though they had six to one in the field) made that Sectarian party
cock-a-hoop; and to make it the greater, public days of Thanksgiving are
appointed to make God the patronizer of their villainies, murders, tyrannyes and
treasons; and now they boast in all their discourses how clearly it might
appear that God owned their cause, and disowned their adversaries.

I think a modern writer has sufficiently confuted that commonly received
tenent of Politicians, See Modern Policy.
That success denotes actions to be either just or unjust. I shall therefore
leave the sober Reader here to satisfy himself, and refer it to him, whether
such do not justly deserve Ovid's wish: -- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
Let him for ever in success be poor;
That thinks it justifies his cause the more.


But this Nation is so highly sensible of the injustice put upon them by those
who pretend so much right in their Cause, that there is no loyal Subject but
will think according to reason, that it was not the justice of their cause,
but our own and the Nations sins which caused God to raise up these men as
scourges both to Prince and People; and to the prince only for the peoples sake.

Some I have heard, which out of a spirit which I cannot well define, have
endeavored to brand his Royal Majesty with Cowardice in this battle; which
from whence it could proceed, unless from their own coward nature, which would
insimulate another in that of which themselves are guilty, I cannot imagine;
since Cromwell the greatest of his Enemies (because the most desirous of his
Kingdoms) yet had so much of truth in him, as to give a high and noble
Character of his valor.

But to proceed, we have now said enough of this fatal battle, the seeming
ruin of the Royal Interest in England, unless God of his mercy be pleased to
restore it for the good, peace and quiet of these Nations, since without it we
cannot hope to enjoy any.

His sacred Majesty being landed in France near Havre de Grace; from thence
with a Noble Lord in his Company, posted directly for Roan, where they stayed
to alter their disguises, and furnish them with habits answerable to their
qualities; his Majesty from thence having dispach't Letters to the French Court
to acquaint his friends there of his safe Arrival, which doubtless caused no
little joy in those who were real to him, and almost despaired ever again to
have seen him. The Duke of Orleans sends his own Coach to fetch him, and
several persons of quality go to meet him; by whom he was attended to Paris,
and there received with all possible expressions of joy, lodgings and
attendants being forthwith provided for him in the Louure; where, at his first
arrival he was visited by the Queen his Mother, and the Duke of Orleans, who of
all persons in the Kingdom expressed himself the most ready to do him service;
and the next day visits him again, accompanied with his Daughter Mademoiselle.
he is likewise courted by the Dukes of Beaufort, Langueville. Guize, the
Marshall Thurine, and many other Peers and Nobles of France, who all
congratulate his safe deliverance.

And now his Majesty having lost all hopes of any furthermeans of attaining his
Dominions by force, leads here a retired life; yet living in regard of his high
alliance and extraction, in great esteem with all the French Nobility: Insomuch
that notwithstanding his present low condition, there was very great talk of a
match to be made up between him and the Mademoiselle de Orlians, the richest
princess in Christendom; yet by some means or other it came to no effect,
though the Queen of England his Mother, was an earnest promoter of it, and also
the Duke of York to Longuevelle's Daughter.

Whilst these things were transacting, happened that lately reconciled Fracture
between the Prince of Conde and Cardinal Mazarine, most of the Prince of the
Blood siding with the first; and the King of France (who was newly declared of
age to sway the Scpter himself) with the last. The cause of the quarrel was
that extravagant power which Mazarine a stranger had usurped in the government
of the Kingdom, both depriving the Princes of the blood of their Right, and
oppressing the people; whose daily murmurings more encouraged the Princes
against him: this power he had got into his hands in the Regency of the Queen
Mother, whose grand Favorite he only was.

The Princes therefore, though they could not dureing her Regency who so much
loved him, yet hoped they might effect something now the King himself is come
to govern; to which intent they charge him with several miscarriages of State,
which the Cardinal defends, and the King also enclines to his side by the
instigation of the Queen his Mother; yet nothing but the Cardinals banishment
will satisfy the Princes, who join the Duke of Lorain to them, then in the
service of the Spaniard, with an Army of ten thousand men; so that they intend
with his assistance (if they could not obtain their desires by fair means) to
have forced it.

Thus these differences were arrived to such a height, that nothing but a Civil
war was like to ensue; which made his Sacred Majesty of England use his utmost
endeavors to compose and stay this breach before it came to an utter overflow;
to which effect he daily went to and fro be twixt the King and the Princes;
endeavoring to bring them to a reconciliatio^, urging by his own example the
miseries and calamities that must necessarily fall upon every man's head by a
Civil War, telling the King that the late example of his Royal Father of happy
memory, might be an inducement to him to be at peace with his Subjects, rather
then embroil his Kingdoms in a bloudywar, by which though he might for the
present gain the better; yet in the end he would still be sure to have the
worse.

Yet these Arguments, and his Majesty's earnest endeavors for peace and
reconciliatio^, produced nothing, but only contracted an unjust odium upon him
from both parties for his good will; the Princes believing that he counseled
the King against them, and the Cardinal against him: So that he lost the love
of both by endeavoring to make them love one another; yet notwithstanding the
ill success he had, this Noble Prince still pursues his pacifick intentions,
til such time as he gains a conference between the King Cardinal and Princes;
but this proves ineffectuall; For the Princes heightened with the aid they
expected from the Duke of Lorain, instead of coming to an accord, only
exasperate differences.

Yet his Sacred Majesty ceases not, but endeavors to bring them yet to a
peaceable compliance; and in order threunto procures another Conference, where
he himself would be Moderatour; but this proves as ineffectuall as the former;
For the Prince of Conde was above all others outrageous, and would come to no
agreement, except Mazarine were first banished France, and the French King as
violently persisted in his resolution against it, alleging, That he had
approved himself both a faithful servant, and an able Minister of State. So in
stead of agreement, both sides prepare for War, yet are both sides equally
angry, and exasperated against his sacred Majesty for his good will toward them
and the Nation, the one and other party imagining that both he and his Mother
had given counsels opposite to their designs.

But that which above all exasperated the Princes against his Majesty of
England, was the sudden luke-warmness of the Duke of Lorain in the business.
For though he had drawn off his Army, as though he had complied with their
resolutions to come to a battle; yet being sent for by the Princes to advance
toward Paris, he refused to come; which made the Princes believe there had
been some underhand dealing with him; and that which most of all increased
their jealousies that King Charles had a hand in it, was this; The Duke of
Beaufort coming to the Camp of Lorain to desire him in the name of the Princes
to come up and fight, found there his Majesty and his brother the Duke of York
in private conference with Lorain, who withdrawing when Beaufort appeared; and
Beaufort finding the Duke's aversness to the enterprise confirmed him, and he
confirmed the Princes of the King of England's endeavors, whereby he had
withdrawn Lorain from their party: This coming to the peoples ears who were
absolute favorers of the Princes, and inveterate enemies to Mazarine, so
extremely incensed them against the English Princes, that they threaten
violence and indignities to their persons, and are not afraid to affront the
Queen their Mother in her Coach; which made his Majesty to avoid the popular
fury, retire himself from the Lovure to St. Germane.

Nor is the Cardinal less incensed, though under a more politic vail; For
though both Princes and People might imagine and believe that his Majesty had
counseled things opposite to their intentions, yet the Cardinal very well knew
that he had advised the King as the best course, to consent to his departure
out of the Kingdom; and that if he had endeavored to draw Lorain from their
party, 'twas only out of a desire he had to expedite their agreement; he
therefore resolves to thwart him in all his designs.

And so he did to the utmost of his endeavors: For his Majesty though
suspected by the Prince, in his several conferences with Lorain to have
endeavored to divert him from them, was only transacting with him for the
recovery of his Kingdom of Ireland out of the hands of the English Republic;
to which effect several Articles were drawn up between the Duke of Lorain, and
the Lord Taaff; two of which were: 1. That the Duke of Lorain should transport
an Army of 10000. men at his own charge into Ireland, there to join with such
as should be found Loyal, for the Recovery of his Majesty's Rights in that
Kingdom.

2. That the Duke of Lorain should by his Majesty be invested with the power
and Title of Protector Royal of Ireland.

These Articles though drawn up, never came to be signed; the cause of which
some have imagined to be the disability of the Duke to perform the Enterprise
without the Aid of some other Prince; but we may in more reason guess, it
proceeded from the strenuous endeavors of Mazarine (his Majesty's so lately
made-enemy) to divert the Duke's Army, then from any other cause.

Many in England upon hearing of these Propositions made to the Duke of Lorain,
(which I must confess some believe to have never proceeded any farther then
discourse of the Duks) feared his Majesty's too great inclination to the Romish
Religion, which fear his after retirement at St. Germain's, convinced there was
no need of: For here he spent his time wholly in Piety and Devotions, according
to the best worship of the Church of England, never forgeting to pray for those
his Enemies who were not only content to have deprived him of his Kingdoms, but
continually belched forth both slanders and maledictions against him.

His Majesty having staid at S. Germains till such time as the heat of the
popular fury was over, which decreased still toward them as they found
Mazarine more averse to him, returned again to the Lovure; where during his
abode, his brother the Duke of Gloucester (who had a long time been detained by
the Juncto of England in the Isle of Wight, and was lately permitted by them to
go to his Sister the Princess Royal in Holland, came to him accompanied from
the Hague by Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Richard Greenvile; he was at his
arrival at Paris honorably received by the King of France, and Queen Mother;
and courted according to his birth by the rest of the Grandees and Peers of the
Kingdom.

Likewise during his Majesty's abode here, arrived his Quondam Preserver Mrs.
Jane Lane, who after she had taken leave of his Majesty at Bristol, returned
home; and lived for some space in a great deal of security, not doubting she
could be betrayed: Yet at length by what means I know not, (though indeed I
have heard of many relations that I dare not relate any) it came to light; yet
she had some timely notice of it, whereupon she who had formerly disguised his
Majesty in a Servingmans habit, now disguises her self in that of a Country
Wench; and trots on foot (to save her life which she was like to lose for
having formerly saved his sacred Majesty's,) quite cross the Country to
Yarmouth, where she found shipping which conveyed her safe into France; great
search after her departure there was made for her but in vain; which so
incensed the Soldiers that they burnt down to the ground that poor Cottage
where his Majesty first took shelter after his escape from Worcester.

She being arrived in France, sends a Letter to the Court, whereupon his
Majesty almost overjoyed at her Escape who had been the cause of his,
immediately sends some persons of quality in Coaches to conduct her to Paris,
whither he being near come himself with the Queen his Mother, the Duke of York,
Gloucester, went out to meet this Preserver of the life of their Son, Sovereign
and Brother; the Coaches meeting, and she being descended from her Coach, his
Majesty likewise descends, and taking her by the hand, salutes her with this
grateful expression, Welcome my life, and so putting her into his own Coach,
conducts her to Paris, where she was entertained with the applause and wonder
of the whole Court: and she could indeed deserve no less; for I believe neither
past or future Ages can or will ever parallel so great a pattern of female
Loyalty and Generosity.

Whilst his Majesty was thus passing away his time in France, more in
contemtemplation then action, Oliver Cromwell made General of all the Juncto's
Forces in England, Scotland, and Jreland, finding now a fit opportunity to put
his long-laid ambitious designs in execution, had dissolved that Juncto which
had usurped the Kingly power or more, over England, and taken upon himself
(though not the title) yet the Royal power and authority over these Nations,
which the people, though unwilling, yet were forced to submit to; and though he
had not at first any basis whereon to ground his new usurped Regality; yet in
stead of one Juncto he plucked down, he easily sets up another, which I may the
more justly call so, in regard there was not one of them chosen by the free
Votes of the People, but by his own arbitrary Election, and those such persons
who knew well enough what they had to do before they met: these after a short
time sitting (without doing any thing besides the making of some impertinent
laws which were forceably imposed on the people) surrender their power (as
dying men do their souls to God) into his hands that gave it, who by the help
of the Officers of the Army, and Lamberts instrument, makes himself immediately
king of England, Scotland and Ireland (which government he had often sworn
against) though under the title of Protector.

This (I must needs say) Noble Tyrant, having got the Dominion of three such
Kingdoms into his possession, made it now as much his study to preserve himself
safe in his Estate and Grandeur, as he did before to acquire it; to which
purpose he thought it most suitable to that design, to make some remarkable
disturbance amongst the neighboring Princes; then to continue that War (begun
by the Juncto of Parliament) with the Dutch, to which purpose several motions
of a Treaty passed.

His sacred Majesty, though he had sundry times before solicited the assistance
of those United Provinces for the regaining of his Right in his Kingdoms, now
more earnestly upon secret intelligence of the first motions of this Treaty,
sends the Lord Gerard his Ambassador to the United States more earnestly
entreating them to own his Interest then before, proffering, that if they would
set out a good squadron of ships under his Flag, he would command them himself
in person.

His Sister, the princess of Orange and other of his friends in the Low
Countries, addicted to his Interest, earnestly prosecutes his desires, and use
their utmost influence on the States of the United provinces for the
performance of his propositions. Nor are there five of these Provinces, nor Van
Trump himself their Admiral unwilling to comply with him. Only the Province of
Holland, the most potent at sea, stands out, chiefly out of the disgust they
had lately taken to the family of Orange, whose interest and command they were
fearful might be restored, should his Majesty, who was Uncle to the young
Prince, be invested in his Territories.

His Majesty likewise to advance his hopes of their assistance, when Monsieur
Bortell came from those United States to negotiate a League with the King of
France, used his utmost Interest to promote the Treaty, and in fine, brought it
to a desired period: notwithstanding the United States sent no other answer to
his Embassey then a cold Letter of Complements.

His designs thus failing him here, he directed himself to a more hopeful
course, by interposing himself a Mediator with the Pope and other Catholic
Princes for an accord and peace between the two mighty Crowns of France and
Spain. And indeed two such potent Monarchs had been in better capacity with
their joint forces to have assisted him (had the peace gone forward, as there
was great hopes) then the United States of the Netherlands; but Cardinal
Mazarine by a piece of secret state policy, endeavored to obstruct all
proceedings which might tend to a Treaty or accord.

Nor was this Cardinal's spleen to his Royal Majesty yet allayed; for his
supposed Council against him in the forementioned difference between the King
and Princes; but farther to prejudice him and his affairs, he endeavors the
promotion of a peace between the Protector of England and the French King his
Master, which, though opposed by all the force and Interest that either
himself or the Queen his Mother had in the French Court; yet was by the
Cardinal (whose will was a law, all other Government in that Kingdom being
but a mere shadow) vigorously carried on, and an Ambassador sent over to treat
of an accord: where having been sometime in England, his Majesty was by secret
intelligence informed that the chief Article insisted upon in the Treaty (by
the Protector of England) was the excluding himself, relations and followers
out of the Kingdom of France and it is Territories; wherefore least the treaty
should be suddenly concluded upon those terms, and he ceremoniously excluded,
he thought it more honorable himself to leave that Kingdom of his own accord;
and having taken his leave of the King of France, and the rest of the Nobility
accompanied with his Coufin Prince Rupert, he departed for Germany, where the
Lord Wilmot had long been Ambassador for him to solicit aid and assistance.

Yet notwithstanding his Brothers, the Duke of York and Gloucester, staid still
in France. The first having under the Command of the Marshall of Turine against
the Spaniards performed such eminent services as had made him deservedly
esteemed a most valerous and prudent Prince; in so much that notwithstanding
his Youth he was made Lieu. General of the French Army, and thought so well
worthy that Command, that when Turine (the most esteemed General the French
have for a long time had) lay desperately sick, and it was expected that he
should breath his last; he was by the King of France sent to, to desire him,
that seeing there were so little hopes of his life he would nominate such a
General of his Army as he might judge fit to succeed him. To which Turine
answered; that if his Majesty would have his affairs prosper, he should make
choice of a Noble, Valorous, and fortunate General; which if he did, he could
make choice of no fitter person then the thrice Heroic Duke of York.

As for his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, he remained at the Palace Royal in
Paris with the Queen his Mother; who shortly after the departure of his Royal
Majesty, endeavored by all the bonds of filial obedience and the most
prevailing Arguments could be used, to persuade him to become Roman Catholic:
(nor did she alone) but the Queen Mother of France, and the prime Nobility of
that Kingdom, attempt the same: when the Retorique of the Court could not
prevail, the most eminent for learning set upon him with that depth of reason,
as long acquired study and their own interest, could oblige them to use, or
furnish them withal: nor were Arguments and Reasons only used, but the highest
temptations this world could present, to a Prince in adversity; such were a
Cardinals Hatt, and a Revenue suitable to his Dignity: when these could not
prevail, the indignation of a Royal Mother was poured forth upon him, which
wrought him the deprivation of his Tutor, his Servants, and all Comforters in
these temptations: But that Noble Prince was so far endowed (dureing this
affliction) with the Principles of the Religion of the Church of England,
besides that natural piety and constancy, flowing from his most religious
Father of blessed Memory, that by the depth of truth and Reason, he defended
himself against these attempts. After this he is committed to the care of one
Mr Walter Montague Abbot of Nantueil living at Pontoise, who keeps him in very
closely, and works, and persists still in endeavoring to pervert him, using
the Argument of Duty and Obedience to his Mothers Commands, which she did
enjoin him to do or never more to see her face, (which from that day to this
he has not seen.) This noble soul replied with a sorrowful heart, That as the
Queens Majesty was his Mother, he ought her duty; but as his Brother was his
King and Sovereign, he ought him duty and Allegiance, which he could not
dispute. Whilst he is at Pontoise the most noble and religious Lord Hatton,
takes occasion to go wait upon the Duke, according to private iustructions
received from his Majesty (who to his great sorrow had advise of these
particulers) he is admitted with much trouble to the presence of the Duke, who
embraces him as his Deliverer, and with some difficulty, urging the Commands of
his Majesty, and his own arguments; he is delivered to his care, who conducts
him with a spetiall respect and diligence to his house in Paris, where he is
entertained diverse days with all honor, and confirmed wih all diligence, by
that Learned Lord, in his so well imbued Principles, until the arrival of the
Marquess of Ormond, who by the Kings Command, receivs, and conducts him to his
Majesty's Court.

His Majesty in his journey toward Germany came first to Catillon a Castle
belonging to the Prince of Conde, whither he was accompanied by his Brother the
Duke of York, and his Cousins prince Rupert and Edward, Palatines; here Prince
Edward and the Duke of York left them; the one going to Bourbon, the other
returning to the Army: (where he continued a good while after) his Majesty and
Prince Rupert continued for some few days their journey together, 'till the
Prince parted from him to go visit his Brother Frederick at Hidelberg; his
Majesty passing through Cambray and Liege to the Spaw; where he took up the
first place of his Residence in Germany, whither his Sister the Royal Princess
of Orange came to visit him; and they no doubt during the time of their being
there, were as merry as two such afflicted Princes could.

But let us a little leave his Majesty at the Spaw, and look into his
Kingdoms, where Cromwell that he might secure himself, in his ill-gotten
Estate, endeavors by all means possible either to take away the lives or
wholly impoverish and disable his Majesty's loyal Subjects; who are
continually charged with something, which he by his usurped power takes hold of
to destroy them: several persons are apprehended and charged with a design to
have seized on the Tower, and Proclaimed his Majesty King of those Kingdoms
which by right were his: for trial of which persons, a High Court of Justice,
(a thing we now in England know very well) was erected for the trial of those
persons, Col. John Gerard, Mr. Peter Vowell, and Sommerset Fox were condemned
to be hanged, drawn, and quartered: (for no less then high Treason for-sooth,
though there were then no Act in being making it Treason to conspire against
the power then in being in England) but somewhat of the sentence was remitted,
Col. Gerard was beheaded, Mr Vowell only Hanged, and Mr. Fox reprived.

I have always observed that in all the trials made by those high Courts of
Justice for plots (as they call them) there has still been some one person,
who though brought to trial, have either not been condemned though looked upon
by the people as eminent in the business as any) and though condemned, yet have
been reprived; what others guess of it, I will not determine, I know what I do.

The truth is, that his Majesty had always the ill fortune to have such false
servants about him as have for the Lucre of money either betrayed any
enterprise of his for the gaining of his right, (the Protector especially being
very prodigal in such expenses: his intelligence as most affirm, standing him
in no less then two hun dred thousand pound per annum) or else those persons
engaged for him, being many of them deboist fellows, (and who often ran upon
designs uncommissioned) have in a Tavern both laid and betrayed their own
undertakings; or else some here in England, who have undertaken in such
businesses, have either for fear or gain betrayed both their Prince friends and
Country.

Thus much for England; let us now take a viwe of his Majesty's affairs in
Scotland; which Kingdom was not yet wholly conquered, for the Lords Seaforth,
Atholl, Glencarne, Kenmore, and Glengary, and several others who had some of
them been formerly followers of the noble Marquess of Montrosse, by Commissions
to the Earl of Glencarne had levied sundry small parties in their several
Territories; which all joined, would have made up a considerable Army, besides
the help which they expected Middleton should bring them out of the
Low Countries they therefore made all possible speed to join; but in their
march the Earl of Glencarne is set upon by Col. Morgan, his party routed,
himself hardly escaping.

This defeat of Glancarn's who was the chief, though it discouraged the rest,
yet made them not wholly desist; for they had yet hopes of those supplies which
they expected Middleton to bring out of the Low Countries, who at length
arrives and brings with him Monroe to be his Lieu. General, he being
Commissionated General, which highly displeased Glancarne, who had been the
greatest instrument of his Armies raising (which was now joined and made up a
considerable body) who protested that he would not raise an Army for others to
Command, so high a dispute there was between Glancarne and Monroe; in so much
that many affirm, though some say the contrary, that it came to a Duel, in
which Monroe was worsted and disarmed by Glancarne; however the dissension
still continues, for Middleton pretended that he had not power to tak away
Monro's Commission which was given him by his Majesty, and Glancarne scorning
to be under him, being of Noble blood, and accounting himself as good a
Soldier, deserts the Army with five hundred Horse in his company, and goes in
to General Monck with whom he makes his Composition.

Yet notwithstanding his desertion (caused by those differences amongst them
selves for Superiority, the only way to ruin any design) Middleton pursues
his business and Commission; and had made up a pretty Considerable Number,
when General Monck engaging him at Laugherry after a not dispute totally routed
him, scattered his party and had almost taken himself Prisoner, but he escaping
returned again into Holland.

Thus his Majesty's ill fortune still attends his affairs, God still permiting
his Enemies to taper up in the World and advance themselves, not that he in the
want of us, but that we in the want of so Noble a Prince might be yet farther
Miserable.

But let us return again to his Majesty at the Spaw where he having staid a
while, courted by all the adjacent Grandees, at length takes his journey in
company of the Princess Royal his Sister toward Colen, where being arrived,
they were recieved with all possible honor and demonstrations of joy and
affection, the great Guns difcharging at their entrance, and the Deputies of
the City coming out to meet them in solemn manner, and conducting them in great
pomp to the pallas provided for them by the chief Magistrate of the City.

Shortly after their Arrival, the Grandees of the Place entertained his
Majesty and his Royal Sister at a sumptuous Banquet or Collation, where they
express in many ceremonious complements, the high resentment they had of his
Majesty's condition, and the great honor which he did them, in being pleased
to come and visit their City.

After a short time of abode here, his Majesty was invited by the Duke of
Newburgh to his palace at Donzell-dorf, where he and his Sister were most
sumptuously and Royally entertained for some days; and here the Royal Princes
took her leave of her Brother his sacred Majesty, and returned for Holland, the
King accompanying her on her way as far as Redinguen, and from thence returned
back again to Colen, where he was joyfully received.

And now more of his Majesty's loyal Subjects are put to wrack in England by
tyrannizing Cromwell; a general design must needs be laid over all England,
and perhaps might be so, though Cromwell Knew it well enough before it was like
to take any effect, which apeared by his settling the London Militia in the
hands of his own Criado's, his apprehending of Sir Henry Littleton, Sir John
Packington, and many other of the Royal party; yet he lets it still go on,
that he might have the better color for keeping his Scaffold in use; whilst he
having certain Intelligence of all proceedings from his hired Agents, had care
to prevent them when they just came to the height, that he might then lay the
surer hold on the undertakers: so now, though he was sure to prevent all
risings which might be near London, yet he lets others in the Countries more
remote to go on so far, as they might only raise to a head, but not have any
secure place of strength to retreat to, in case of a defeat, where they might
again have made a head. The surprizal of Shrewsberry and Chirk Castles are to
that effect now prevented. But a party in Dorset and Wiltshier made a body,
consisting most of Gentlemen who surprised Salizbury, took away all the Horses,
and Marched toward Cornwall, where they expected a greater force to rise with
them; but being eagerly pursued by Captain Crook with a party of Horse, were
overtaken at Southmolton in Devon shire, and after a hot dispute, most of them
either slain or taken; but Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, the chief Commander of this
small loyal party escaped. The Captains, Penruddock, Grove and Jones were
taken, and afterward being tried by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, were
condemned to death: Captain Jones was reprived, but Grove and Penruddock were
beheaded at Exeter, The last of which parted nobly with his life, and died with
a resolution, worthy of the cause for which he suffered. Many others likewise
were hanged for his enterprise.

Yet these and their fellows might have come off better, had the Countries as
they promised, risen to their assistance; for all the Countries in England had
designed (as they say) to rise; but whether besotted, dulled and fearful, or
else prevented by a force upon them, I cannot tell; but sure I am they failed.
Yet in Yorkshire there were two parties up in several places, but dissipated
by their own fears; at Hexam Moor the Gentry in that shire had a Rendezvous,
of whom Sir Henry Slingsby was taken, and remained prisoner in Hull, till such
time as he was brought up to London, where he suffered death under pretense of
another design; as shall in due time be declared.

But now the Protector finds another course to rid himself of all such
English men as were loyal to their King and Country. Several of those who
were active in the late design and had been taken, are out of the Prisons
hurried aboard ships; and though they were freeborn English men, and many of
them Gentlemen, sent to be Slaves in the Foreign Plantations; nor were they
alone served so, but many who though they had not actually stirred, yet being by
the Protector known as persons not very well affected to his Tyrannical
Government, were privately taken out of their houses and shipped away in like
manner; it not being enough for him when he had impoverished them by taking
away their Estates to look upon, and insult on their misery at home, but to
make them as much as in him lay the scorn and derision of the world, by
selling them to those Plantations (a punishment inflicted usually on none but
thieves and vagabonds.) Yet I hope those Noble souls who were thus dealt
withal, account those miseries and hardships they have endured but little in
respect of the cause for which they suffered them.

But to return to our Princes abroad. The Duke of Gloucester in his journey from
Paris with the Marquess of Ormond touched at the Hague, where he found his
Sister newly returned from her journey with his Majesty; and having staid with
her some time there, she accompanied him to visit their Brother the King, again
at Colen, with whom she staid till after the fair at Frankford, whither his
Majesty accompanied with his Royal Sister, the Duke of Gloucester, the Marquess
of Ormond, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Newburg, and several Ladies and
persons of Quality went in progress; part of the way they went by Land, and the
other part by water; being complemented in all Princes countries through which
they passed, by their chief Ministers of State, and saluted with the great Guns
from their Towns and Castles, but particularly being come into the Territories
of the Elector of Mentz they were saluted by his grand Marshall, who in the
name of his Master the Elector, invited his Majesty the Princess Royal and the
Duke of Gloucester to his Court; but in regard that the intent of their progress
was to see that renowned Fair at Franckford which now drew nigh, his Majesty
sent the Lord Newburgh back with the grand Marshal, returning thanks to the
Elector for his civilities; but desiring to be excused till their return, when
his Majesty with his Royal Sister and Brother would not Fail to come, and give
him thanks in person, and so his Majesty with his Noble company continued their
journey.

Being arrived at Frankford, advice was brought to his Majesty that the Queen
of Swethland (who had some time before Voluntarily surrendered her Kingdom into
the hands of Carolus Gustavus her Kinsman) was passing that way in her intended
Journey for Italy, whereupon his Majesty sent a Noble Lord to acquaint her
Royal Highness the Queen Christina, that he was ready to wait upon her at what
place soever she should be pleased to appoint for an interview; her Majesty
received the message with a great deal of affection, telling the Messenger That
she was highly obliged to his Majesty of England for so great an honor, and
that if he pleased, she would not fail to meet him at Conningstein a village
not far from Frankford where his Majesty for the time resided.

And accordingly there these two Potentates, (both equally deprived of their
Kingdoms, only with this distinction, the one Voluntary, the other by force
and Tyranny) met; the Queen of Sweden being there, first attended his Majesty:
and he being come, was immediately admitted in a room there purposely provided;
and having had near half an hours private discourse with her, the Duke of
Gloucester was admitted, and presently after the Lords that attended his
Majesty; there passing between their two Majesty's many ceremonious
complements; and so after a little longer discourse they took their leaves. The
Princess Royal being a little indisposed went not to this interview.

His Majesty having tarried at Franckford as long as seemed convenient to that
Royal Company, in his departure thence according to the promise he had before
made by the Lord Newburgh; passed through the Elector of Mentz his Country,
resolving to give him a visit, but that Noble Prince had so much of honor in
him that he met his Majesty a great part of the way, and conducted him with his
Royal Company to a Palace of his, where he sumptuously entertained them for
three or four days; and then himself in person accompanied them a good part of
their way to Colen, from whence shortly after his Majesty's arrival there, the
Princess Royal departed for Holland.

In the mean time the Protector of England, having made a peace with the
Hollander, fearing that the Nation should grow rebellious to him, if they lay
free from wars, which would fill their purses; resolves to keep them low, at a
diet; to which effect he begins a war with Spain, at first in his Western
Territories, but soon after (that business not succeeding) in his Europaean
Quarters, which made Mazarine with all have possible endeavor the concluding
the Leageu Offensive and Defensive with the Protector, which being by him
considered to be as beneficial for his own interest as for the French, was
easily and willingly assented to; but the chief Articles of this Peace was that
his Majesty, the Duke of York and Gloucester with all their relations and
friends should be expelled out of, and no more admitted into the Kingdom of
France.

Certainly had the French King had but the least touch or sense of honor, he
would have counted this the hardest condition in the world, or indeed he would
never at all have treated with the protector, but that he should yield to such
a condition, as to banish out of his Kingdom those who came to him for succor
and relief in the utmost extremity that ever Princes were put too, and these
too his nearest relations, being Brothers and Sisters children: And this to
make a league offensive with him who had murdered, their Father, and expelled
them out of their Dominions. What was this? but the owning of that murder, and
aggravating their oppressions instead of relieving them. But neither honor nor
relation can stand in competition with self-Interest.

His Majesty had before foresaw what the event of this treaty would be, and
had therefore wisely wihdrawn himself from France to prevent a complemental
expulsion. But the Duke of York, who in regard of the great command which he
had in the Army, had staid there til the conclusion of the League, was now
warned to depart with all his retinnue (consisting of a gallant number of young
English gentlemen bred up under his valor and conduct) notwithstanding those
many great services which he had performed for that Kingdom, in requital of
which he had only a complemental Apology made him for the necessity of his
departure, and a small time respited for his stay, during which he was visited
by the Duke of Modena, then in France, and other French Grandees; but more
espetially by the Marshal of Turine, who extremely loved him and above all
others expressed a sorrow for his dismisment; but at length the day perfixed
being come, his grace having solemnly taken his leave of the King of France,
the Queen his Mother, and the rest of his Friends at the French Court, he takes
his journey toward Flanders, accompanied by the Earl of Yarmouth, and several
other English Lords.

For upon the rupture of the Peace between Oliver Cromwell and the King of
Spain, Don John de Austria, Governor Royal of the Low Countries, for his
Catholic Majesty (commiserating our Kings unfortunate Condition, now that his
Interest might stand them in some stead) had sent the Count D' Fuensaldaigne,
his Ambassador to his Majesty of Great Britain, then resident (as I said
before) at Colen, inviting him into the Low Countries, and assuring him in the
name of his Catholic Majesty all possible service and assistance: which
invitation his Majesty graciously accepted, and soon after took his journey
from Colen toward Flanders, and being come to Bruges, the place appointed for
his reception, he was received with all honors imaginable, and conducted to a
Palace purposely provided for him, where he has for the most part ever since
remained.

Hither the Duke of York came, accompanied as aforesaid, having first in his
way touched at Brussels, where he was magnificently entertained, and
complemented by Don John, to whom he freely proferd his service in the Wars,
which was accepted with a great deal of thanks; and though he had not at first
a command given him corespondent to that which he left in the French Army, yet
was his prudence, courage, valor, and conduct in no less respect, as
afterward by the Spaniards esteem of him appeared. From thence he went to wait
on his Majesty at Bruges, where he was received with an affection correspondent
to the near Alliance with his sacred Majesty.

Before his Majesty's departure from Colen, there happened a discovery of one of
those persons, who under pretense of waiting upon him. (Captain Manning by
name) discovered unto the Protector all his Designs and Counsels, who being
found out was by his Majesty's Command sent to a strong Castle adjacent to
Colen, there to be kept close prisoner: But all the Court being highly incensed
against him for his perfidiousness, one of his Majesty's Servants (though
contrary to order) pistol'd him as he was lighting out of the Coach at the
Castle gate, giving him less then the due reward of his so abominable treachery.

The Duke of York being arrived (as I said) at Bruges, was highly carressed by
all the persons of quality there resident; and his Majesty, who notwithstanding
Cromwells earnest endeavors, either to dispatch, disable, or make slaves of
his loyal Subjects, had nevertheless some true friends in England, who were
still ready to venture lives and estates for his so just cause) had got
together a considerable number of such English and Scotch, whose Loyalty had
banished them from their habitations, and who were ready at all occasions to
assist both his Majesty and themselves for the recovery of his and their just
rights and estates; but the continual advice which Cromwell always had from
those treacherous persons which he maintained about his Majesty, made all
enterprises tending to the regaining of his Kingdoms, and redeeming of his
subjects liberty ineffectuall.

This Army which his Majesty had quartered near the sea side to be ready on all
occasions for transport, was afterward (since there was no apparent hopes that
his Majesty might make any successful use of them) employed in the service of
the King of Spain.

For his Majesty of Spain had then great need of men in Flanders, the English
Protector having according to Articles agreed upon between him and the French
King, sent over sixthousand foot for his assistance in his wars against
Flanders, in consideration of which help the English were to have Dunkirk,
which was agreed on to be beleaguered by the joynt-forces of France and England.

Whilst in the mean time the Protector Cromwell is by a parcel of a
Parliament, of which Sir Thomas Withrington was Speaker, invested with his
power, and installed in Westminster Hall, and now he conferrs those dignities
which were formerly the Kingly rewards of loyalty, upon his copartners and
followers, and whether in mockery of that Government which he had so violently
endeavored to abollish, or out of perjured intention to setle it in himself,
which he swore not to endure in another, he established a Pageant House of
Lords; who though then made to rule and domineer over the Nation, yet were
formerly most of them persons not fit to be Servants to some mean Mechanics.
This was that Government which he had so Solemnly sworn against; but when men
have once forgot their Loyalty to their Sovereign, what vices will they not run
into.

But to return again to Flanders, The English and French Armies had according
to the articles concluded on betwixt them beleagure'd Dunkirk which Don John
knowing to be a place of great importance, and an inlet into Flanders by sea
for English Forces, used his utmost endeavors to raise the sieges; to which
effect he levied what Forces he could, either by his own or his Majesty's
influence, and having made up a considerable Army himself in person,
accompanied by the English Dukes of York and Gloucester, together with those
Forces formerly addicted to his Majesty's Service, advanced toward the
joynt-force of the French and English then beleaguring the Town, who
understanding by their scouts of his approach, left such Forces in the leagure
as might secure them within from a sally, and drew up toward Don John, who had
encamped near Evernes: the French and English were (notwithstanding those
forces they had left in the trenches) much more numerous then the Spaniards
both in horse and foot, which made them the more resolved in the Encounter; for
though the others came to raise the siege, yet the besiegers were the first
Assaulters.

The first brush began with a Forlorn hope of English Infantry, consisting of
above three hundred, who desperately charged upon a party of the Spanish Foot
(which had advantagiously drawn themselves upon a rising ground, and seconded
by Lockart's Regiment, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Fenwick, and some other
additional supplies of English Infantry,) routed not only them, but the other
bodies of Spanish Foot drawn up on the same manner. In this charge Lieutenant
Colonel Fenwick received his mortal wound, and some other English Commanders
were slain outright.

The Spanish Cavalry seeing their foot so easily put to a rout, began likewise
to fly, nor could by any endeavors be persuaded to stand; whereupon the
French Horse who had all that while stood still, and seen the English do
execution on the Enemies foot, with a full career pursue their flying Enemies,
of whom they found little opposition, but only what was made by the thrice
valiant Duke of York's Regiment, who for a time made the whole French Army to
stand, and saved the lives of many of their flying Friends, which else had been
sacrificed to the Enemies fury, whilst in the mean time they dedicated their
own lives or persons to their safeties.

For after they had made a very noble and gallant resistance, over powered by
numbers, and having no supplies to refresh their wearied bodies, they were
forced to yield to their Enemies numbers, or trust to the swiftness of their
horses heels; but very few of them escaped, among which were the Dukes of York
and Gloucester, though the first was not heard of till three days after, which
made some suspect that he was taken by the French Forces but by Turine after at
a fit opportunity nobly releast.

I may particularly take occasion here to commend the valor of the Duke of
Yorks own Troop, who indeed bore the brunt of the whole Battle though I cannot
deny but they were seconded by some very noble Spirits of the Spaniards; but
the personal Valor of Mr. Henry Bendish son to Sir Thomas Bendish Ambassador
for the English Nation in Turkey (who had the ill fortune to be taken prisoner)
must not be forgotten.

Let us now change the Scence a little to England, where the Protector begins
to die the Scaffold in as deep a purple as the Vest given him at his late
installment bore; and that not only with the Blood of those seculars that were
loyal to their sovereign, but having as he thought now secured to himself the
Government, his hand reaches to the sacred Clergy, nor will he strike at a reed
or a shrub amongst them, but imitating the Ancient fable of the Jubitrian
Thunder, strikes at the Olympus the Atlas, the mainest pillar and support of
the Protestant Religion; for no less then the Reverend Doctor Hewet's Blood
will now satisfy his insatiate Cruelty; a man whose virtues and piety as they
were beyond expression, so I think was the manner of his death beyond example.

This Doctor and Sir Henry Slingsby (who had ever since the forementioned
rising in Yorkshire lain prisoners in Hull Castle) with many others are accused
of a design to have seized on the Tower of London, and the Magazine at Hull
both in one day, the one by a Divine, the other by a Prisoner; but these
persons must have several others to be their assistants, and that espetially
in London, who while the Doctor was securing the Tower, must fire the City of
London in several places.

Those that make plots may as easily discover them, and with as much ease
prevent them; the Protector could do both: but to make some show of a great
deal of fear in the business; Worthy Alderman Tichburn then Lord Mayor of
London is immediately commanded to settle the Militia, the Protector telling
him (as he easily might) that there was a grand design in hand (probably of his
own contriving) against his Government, that the Marquess of Ormond had lately
been in England transacting about it; that the Common Enemy (for so was his
Sacred Majesty then styled) lay ready with a potent Army, and ships hired to
transport them on the Sea coasts of England, and that therefore the Militia
should be settled in confiding hands, meaning such either whose interest or fear
must render them faithful to the Protector; shortly after, according to the
common course, the persons to be accused are apprehended, the chief of which
were Dr. Hewet, Mr. John Mordant, brother to the Earl of Peterborough, Col.
Ashton, Capt. Henry Mallory, Mr. Woodcock, John Betteley, Edmund Stacy, Henry
Friar, John Sumner, and Olliver Allen; who were all accused to be accomplices of
this grand design.

And because no English Law could take away these men's Lives, the ordinary
Tyrannical way of a high Court of Justice must do it; Sir Henry Slingsby (who
was brought prisoner from Hull Castle) was the first who came before them, and
is accused for having endeavored to draw the Governor of that Cast from his
Alleigiance (excellently good!) to the Protector, and pleading not guilty, yet
was, by two Witnesses found ready, convicted, and condemned.

Dr. Hewet being come before them (according to the Example of his Royal
Master King Charles the first) refused to plead or to own the jurisdiction of
the Court, for which contempt (as they were pleased to interpret it) he had the
same sentence pronounced against him, and was afterward together with Sir
Henry Slingsby executed on Tower hill.

Mr. Mordant brother to the Earl of Peterborough disavowed likewise the
Authority of the Court; but at last being induced to plead, was acquitted, so
was Mr. Woodcock, Mallory, Friar, Sumner, and Allen were sentenced but
reprived; Ashton, Stacy, and Bettely were hanged, drawn, and quartered, in
several places of London.

And here we must not forget the magnanimous death of John Betteley, who having
made a Speech, clearing his Innocence and the justness of his Cause,
undauntedly leapt off the Ladder, and died a worthy Sufferer for the Royal
Interest.

His sacred Majesty (during these strange Murders and Oppressions of his
Subjects in England, by a power which had usurpt the Regality) is forced to sit
still; his urgent necessities not giving him leave either to revenge their
deaths or redeem the surviving, who heavily groaned under the yoke, his only
remedy now was his prayers to God (which he pursues with an earnest devotion)
that he would be pleased in his good time to deliver his faithful Subjects from
those miseries and burdens they then strugl'd under, and without doubt God has
heard, and will perform his pious defires.

As an introduction to which, it pleased the DIVINE MAJESTY to take out of the
world the grandest opposer of his Majesty's Right: OLIVER CROMWELL, who from a
mean beginning had raised himself by force to be the arbitrary Governor of
these Nations, who is by the Almighty called to give an account of his actions
before the High Tribunal of Heaven, where are neither false witnesses nor
interesed Judges, and that on the same day on which he had gained two such
signal victories over his Majesty's forces at Dunbar and Worcester, viz. on
the third day of September.

Yet he thought he had certainly secured the Government of these three Nations
for himself, and nominates his son Richard for his Successor, a person, to
speak the truth, as not at all endowed with his fathers courage, so not at all
inclined to his ambition: one, whom if fame lies not of him, could have
willingly been content to have surrendered his Protectorship to the King the
lawful heir, and (by law) undoubted Successor of his royal Father. But those
Officers of the Army, whose ambition, (though not in so high a degree,) had so
engaged them as Accomplices to Oliver Cromwell in his high late designs against
his King and Country, had so great a load of guilt upon their consciences,
that they could not hear of, much less agree to the admission of his Sacred
Majesty.

Nor was it indeed only thus, but some ambitious spirits there were, and
particularly Maj. General Lambert, whose highflown thoughts made him fancy
Idea's in his brain, and forced him to attempt the enterprising to make himself
Commander of these three Nations, as Oliver (by his means) had done before,
which designs of his in the sequel, ruined him, and discovered those grand
cheats and abuses which that par^^ had put upon the Nation, endeavoring to
enslave them to their own arbitrary power, whilst they pretended those
strangely mistaken names of Religion and Liberty as hereafter will appear.

And these passages I shall the more fully insert, as tending so much to his
Majesty's interest here, and to the undeceiving of his good Subjects, who are
not blinded with Interest, which the Usurpers had endeavored to make the most
potent men in the Nation, i. e. such as had the greatest sums of money, by
selling such cheap penniworths of the Kings, Queens, Bishops, Deans and
Chapters lands, which together with the purchases of the estates of such loyal
subjects to his Majesty, as those in power were pleased to style Delinquents
had near infatuated a good part of the Nation.

But to proceed, let us now begin with these distinctions. It Is an old Proverb
in English, When theives fall out, then honest men come by their Goods; may it
now prove as true as old, (which God be praisd) we have some reason to hope.

Oliver Cromwell, the greate^^, though most heroic enemy of his King and
Country being dead, his son Richard is proclaimed Protector, and for some
times seemingly complied with; but Lambert's ambition which had long lain hid,
begins now to appear, and something he whispers into the ears of the Army,
which mixed with the great love they had formerly for him, easily creates a
dislike of Richards Government, which afterward wrought to such a height, that
by a joynt-Conspiracy the Protectorship is disjoynted, and Richard deprived of
his Government, the taking away of which he as willingly consents to, as they
are ready to deprive him of it.

This was the first jarring which this Generation had amongst themselves, which
withstanding was composed by the Protector's easy consent, without the
shedding of one drop of blood. But there yet remained to his deposers the
greatest task, since they were sufficiently sensible that though they had
pulled down one civil Government, (they must be enforced though never so
unwillingly) to set up another.

For they very well knew, that they had already so much gul'd the Nation, that
they could not but now be sensible of their many abuses; yet they fly to their
old pretenses of Religion and Liberty, and under that pretense (since they must
at least establish the face of civil government, they call a Parliament again
(Resolving to have one like themselves) that Juncto which was formerly desolved
by Oliver, was those that murdered their King, and had for some years enslaved
their Native Country,

Yet I cannot tell whether it were their inclinations to the General, or
Lambert's particular persuasions; which called these men even out of the grave
of infamy to sit again in the House, and rule as Lords Paramount over these
Nations, though I have a great deal of reason to believe it was the latter,
since Lambert's ambition might rather prompt him to begin with those men, and
con over an old lesson, exeperimentally taught him by his old Master Oliver,
then hazard the venture of a new one.

But this Juncto being thus recalled to their seats in the House, and the
exercise of their former Arbitrary power and authority by their Quondam
servants of the Army, accept of the invitation; and accordingly met in the
Parliament House, whether likewise there assemble several of those Members
which had formerly been secluded and debarred sitting in 1648. These demand now
an equal right with the others, either to Consult or Vote; but as they had
been formerly violently thrust out: so they are now forcibly kept out by the
Officers of the Army.

This causes another as great distraction of their affairs. For these secluded
Members, do not only dispute their right by Law and Reason (which could
nothing prevail with swordmen) but Sir George Booth and some others levy Arms
now more truly in defense of Parliamentary privileges then those raised in
1642.

This small Army raised in Cheshire, gave Lambert as fair an opertunity to put
in execution his ambitious designs, as possibly could be; for he being sent
with the greatest force of the Army against Sir George, easily overcomes him,
takes him prisoner, and retakes those Holds which he had possessed himself of,
and so returns victorous.

This fortunate success revived his ancient credit with the Army, and now he
begins to practice the ruin of those which he had so lately set up, that be
might give full scope to his own Ambition. They found out his designs, but yet
not being able to hinder them, are forced shortly after to submit to a
dissolution.

Thus was this Nation hurried into changes of Government, and Anarchicall
confusions, by persons who endeavored only to promote their own ends and self
interest; yet by these strange endeavors of their own, they only lost
themselves, for the people, now beginning to discover their juggles, do as much
detest them; and though they might for the present force the people to a
submission by sword-law; yet could no Government whatsoever, by them
established, be firm or dureable, since it must be settled contrary to the
Genius of the people.

For even those who were formerly such strong enemies and opposers of Monarchy
and Kingly Government, undeceived by those many delusions which they see put
upon the Nation (by those who pretended so much to Religion and Liberty, and
the settling of a Free State or Commonwealth, whilst they intended only their
own ends) are now as much affected as they were formerly disaffected with
Monarchical Government, finding that those who adventure to change a settled
Government before they have determined of another in its stead, run into
fancies and Chymera's, and vainly endeavor to build castles in the air; But to
proceed.

This party being thus divided among themselves, there were great hopes, and
certainly, greater wishes that that power wherewith they had for some years
past, arbitrarily governed the Nation by turns, might at length come to a
period, which by the eye of reason was now in greater probability then ever,
they by their intestine devisions running headlong to their own ruin.

Fleetwood, Lambert, and the rest of the Officers of the Army, have now the
sole Authority, and having the longest sword, make their wills a law; yet
somewhat to satisfy the people, and to make at least the face of a civil
government, they set up a new kind of a thing which they composed of
themselves, and some other choice persons, which they call a Committee of
Safety, and to these they give full Authority over these Nations, without ever
asking the peoples consent

This Government is far more the scorn and derision of the people, then the the
other, yet notwithstandinding their spirits are by constant use so subjected to
slavery, that their Asinine backs are forced to endure this as well as other
more intolerable burdens, they not daring all this while to adventure the
regaining of their Liberties, nor indeed do other then by their tongues express
their hate and anger.

But all this while those divisions of theirs, and the peoples being weary of
them, and extremely for his Majesty's interest, it being a rule in Politics,
that the peoples hatred to an usurper, does always produce their love to a
lawful Prince, nor had they before, 'till deluded by those Tyrannizers any
time to consider the Miseries of their lawful Sovereign, which now they begin
to compassionate, and seeing him the only person whom these men endeavor by
all means possible to keep down, hatred to their Tyrannies, makes the people
naturally desire his restoration, and him whom before they thought justly
expulsed, they think it both Justice and Charity to reinstate, as much
considering it to be their own as his interest, experience having taught them
the difference between the Government by one gentle Prince, and many Rusticks.

Thus far did these men's devisions invest his sacred Majesty with the love of
his people, who in the mean time lives retiredly at Bruges, expecting either
what the good will of his subjects might do for the restoring him to his right,
or what the success might be of that Treaty which was then (the grand action of
Europe) in agitation between those two potent Monarchs France and Spain, from
whose joynt-forces he might expect so great a supply as might have reinstated
him in his Dominions by force, a course most of all opposite to his Majesty's
nature, who even in private things never attempts any thing by violence which
he can obtain by entreaty.

Yet great hopes had the Royalists both in England and aboade, that this Treaty
would produce some good effects; yet it went on very slowly, and after a great
deal of tediousness, came to a cessation, and from that to an interview between
the two grand Officers of State, Don Lew is de Hare Count de Olivares, chief
favorite to his Catholic Majesty, and Cardinal Mazarine, chief Minister of
State to the most Christian King; these being met upon the Frontier, his sacred
Majesty of great Britain, was invited thither by Don Lew is de Haro.

His Majesty received this invitation at Diepe in Normandy, whither he had
privately withdrawn himself (as likewise had his Brother the Duke of York to
Calice) that they might be in a readiness to have come over into England, upon
any fit opportunity, they having received many invitations from their friends
here, about that time when Sir George Booth was up in Cheshire, and all England
in a manner gaping for him. But Sir George being (as I said before) overcome,
his Majesty's and the whole Nations hopes failed, and the Phanatick power still
continued Paramount.

His Majesty therefore from Diepe begins his journey toward the frontiers of
Spain, which journey he intended to make privately, and being first come to
Roan, he was there nobly entertained and feasted by Mr. Scot, an English
Merchant, who accompanied his Majesty to the Protestant Church, about three
miles from the City, where with a great deal of Devotion and Attention he heard
a Sermon.

From Roan, his Majesty accompanied with the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord
Digby, Mr. Oneen took Post, steering their course directly for Bayonne (near
which the two great officers of state were to meet) not staying in any place,
but endeavoring by all means possible to travel undiscovered as was before
resolved.

Being come near to the end of his Journey, advice was sent to Don Lewis de
Haro of his Majesty's approach, who immediately (accompanied with a gallant
Train) came forth to meet him, and being come near unto him, Don Lewis alighted
from his horse, and notwithstanding the place where they met was very durty,
kneeling down he clapped his hands about his Majesty's Knees, and with a great
deal of humility kissed them.

His Majesty was from hence conducted with becoming Ceremonies, to the place
appointed for his accommodation ( Don Lewis riding all the way bareheaded by
him) where he was entertained with all possible splendour and gallantry.

Many overtures and propositions there passed, between his Majesty and Don
Lewis de Haro touching what aid and assistance might be granted him by his
Catholic Majesty, for the regaining of his rights and Kingdoms; his Majesty
endeavoring by all means possible, to promote and further the present Treaty
between France and Spain, and to bring it to a happy conclusion, by the
Marriage of the King of France to the Spanish Infanta, it tending so much to
his interest, that 'till the conclusion of it, nothing could be effected by
those Princes which might any way promote his right or possession.

To all his desires or propositions, the noble Count de Olivares returned
pleasing answers, and carried himself with so much respect toward him, that he
could not have been more submissive to the Catholic Majesty of Spain his
Master.

His Majesty having some time been treated here, returned back again through
France, being accompanied some part of his way by Don Lewis, and repassing the
rest privately by Post as he had formerly passed it, till he came to Charinton
and Paris, where his Mother was, with whom he staid some few days (though he
was not now Courted and carressed by the French Nobility as formerly) and then
returned to his residence at Brussels.

His Majesty's private departure from Brussels, and his privacy during his
whole journey, made it certainly believed, that both he and his Brother the Duke
of York, who lay at Callis, were come over into England, and that they lay hear
concealed, expecting according to the event of things, either to discover or
secure themselves: nay so certain was the belief even those in power had of it,
(who had not so good intelligence as Oliver Cromwell) that many persons were
aprehended for them, and particularly one Mr. Colt was taken for the Duke of
York, and kept in prison for him, till such time as certain news arrived in
England of the Dukes return to Brussels. Several other persons likewise
suffered imprisonment forbeing supposed tobe like either his Majesty or his
Brother.

His Majesty living retired at Brussels, the continuances of the differences in
England among those who had usurped his power, does still highly promote his
interest. For though Lambert had routed Sir George Booth, and by it declared
absolutely against a Free Parliament (for which, as the undoubted right of the
Nation, Sir George Booth and his party took up Arms) yet the people could not
be content, but now once put in the way, they began violently to hanker after
their long lost Liberty.

Nor could the turning out of the Rump (for so had the people out of disgrace
termed the Juncto which then sat) whom they inveterately hated, any whit now
sweeten them in their slavery, but they continually murmured out and agravated
their oppressions one to another, and though they came to no violence, yet it is
suspected it was more out of the hope they had that General George Monck, (who
was then marching with his Army out of Scotland) should assert their Liberties,
(which somewhat allayed the popular fury) then out of any fear or Cowardice.

But in the mean time their expectations seemed utterly to fail them, for the
Rump had by their industry so inveigled most of the Army from Lambert, that by
their help they return and take their seats in the House and dissolve his
Committee of Safety, commanded the Soldiers of his Army to repair to their
appointed Quarters, and Order General Monck to bring up his Army to London, in
all which they are punctually obeyed; Lambert's Soulders deserting him, and
General Monck according to their orders, marching up his Army quite through
England.

Yet the Nation had so great hopes of the Noble General, that in all his
passage through England, he is courted with Addresses from the Gentry of every
County, remonstrating the distractions they long had, and were still like to
lie under, and entreating that he would be (as they hoped he would prove) the
Deliverer and saver of his Country; that to settle them in some way of
Government, a Parliament might be called by the Free Votes of the people, that
they might no longer be Governed by such Wolves, as only made a Prey of them,
nor their Governors be subjected to the awe and force of an Exorbitant Army.
To all these desires he returned answers, promising such things as might be for
the good of the Nation.

But being come to London (where he was received with a great deal of joy) he
put the people almost quite out of hopes of him, nay rather into a fear, that
in stead of proving their deliverer, he would be the means to enslave them; for
by the commandment of the Rump, he enters the City with his whole Army,
imprisons many of their Common Council, digs up their Posts, and breaks down
their Gates, whilst the stupifi'd Citizens, having now fear added to their
slavery, durst hardly murmur at it, but with sighs and nods bid adieu to their
Liberty.

Yet notwithstanding this violence, the Noble General revives their hopes, and
retiring himself into the City, refusing to be subject to the Juncto's command,
shortly after he admitts those Members of the House of Commons which were in
1648. forceably excluded by the Army, (for having given their Votes that the
Kings Concessions at the Isle of Wight Treaty, were sufficient grounds for a
Peace and settlement:) who having taken their places in the House, we had now
got a step toward our ancient happiness, one of the three Estates of the
Kingdom viz. the House of Commons, being permitted to sit freely, a thing not
known to us in twelve precedent years. God of heaven of his mercy to these
Nations, grant, that the other two may, in his due time, be admitted to the
discharge of their power and trust, that these Nations once so famous under
that Government, may no longer continue to be the scorn and derision of
foraign Countries.

And great hopes there is now that these Kingdoms may again return to be
happy, since disloyalty (the first cause of their miseries and distractions)
begins, blessed be God, every day to be depressed, and loyalty to flourish,
many of those who formerly with a zealous fury broak their oath of Allegiance
to their King, wishing now that they had a King to show allegiance to; and
perceiving that al innovations of Government are not what some would have them
seem to be, viz. ways to liberty and freedom, but mere baits of ambitious
selfminded men, to hook in the people to slavery.

But to return to his Majesty in Flanders; of whose jtenary life we have
already given you a particular account: it will not be impertinent to say
somewhat of his sedentary and retired Living, that by his Aeconomy we may judge
of his Monarchy, and of the Government of those few subjects in his Family, of
that of his three Kingdoms.

His Majesty has spent most of his time, wherein he has been out of his
Dominions in Flanders under the protection of the Catholic King of Spain; nor
had he ever any where else so settled a Court and Habitation, as here, where
his chief Attendants are the Lord Chancellor Hide, the Marquess of Ormond, the
Earl of Norwich, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Digby, and many other Nobles and
Gentlemen, whose loyalty to his sacred Majesty and his Royal Father has made
exiles to their Country; a particular number of which he makes use of for his
Council, doing nothing without serious and mature advice; and yet being of so
sagatious a judgment, that whatever he says is seldom contradicted by the
most Judicious of his Councillors, not out of fear or flattery, but out of a
real assent to, and concurrence with his judgment.

And indeed those great opportunities which he has had, by his so long being
abroad, of diving into the great Councels of Foreign Princes and States, must
necessarily make him a person of a very perspicuous understanding, endow him
with all those qualities which may deservedly attain the name of Great, and
render him as well an able Statist, as a King; he having during his expulsion
traveled through and lived in the Countries of three the most potent Princes
in Christendom, viz. the Emperor's of Germany, and the Kings of Spain and
France; and so to the Germain resolution added the Spaniards prudence, and the
Frenchmans expedition.

To these extraordinary helps which never a Prince in Christendom can boast
of, we may yet add, those more then ordinary gifts, wherewith nature has been
pleased to endow him, which being so extremely improved, we can hardly now
discern; but that it may be known what they were, take the character of an
Honorable Lord upon his death Bed, who speaking of him when about fiteen or
sixteen Years of Age, has these words: Truly I never saw greater hopes of
virtue in any young Person then in him: Great Judgment, great understanding,
strong apprehension, much of honor in his nature, and a very perfect
Englishman in his inclinations. So that both nature and industry have seemed to
use their utmost endeavors to make him a perfect Prince, his very affliction
turning in this to his benefit, and making him in knowledge and sufferings (the
Refiner of knowledge) unparalleld. Some foreign Princes as well envying, as
pitying his expulsion.

This perfect knowledge of his he has indeed had but small occasion to
practice, except a little in Scotland: where, I think, he demonstrated himself
a person so prudent and careful in his affairs, that is beyond my Pen's
expression.

His Subjects good was his only care; nor did he ever act any thing but what
might tend more to theirs then his own interest; still consulting whether it
might benefit them, not himself.

His Letter to Col. Mackworth Governor of Shrewsbury sufficiently demonstrates
his affection to his very Enemies; he would win, not Conquer the Hearts of
those who though they have broke their Allegiance to him, yet he would esteem
still his subjects.

He would not conquer with blood, lest he should be thought a Tyrant. He
endeavors by fair means to attain the love of his Subjects, that (what ever
his very enemies think of him) he may approve himself to be a just Prince.

And did Fortune give him power, yet would he rather attempt Courtesy then
Force. He knows that whilst he kills a Subject he weakens his Kingdom. Rebels
themselves may be found useful; and though justice cannot, yet his Majesty's
Clemency will admit their pardon; but if they resist to the utmost, their blood
is on their own heads, what man is not willing to destroy him, who he knows
would be his murderer.

This is his justice and his Clemency mixed together; he would not Kill, where
he might with safety save. Nor does his unspotted innocence raise fancies or
fears in him. As he is guilty of nothing, so there is nothing he fears. Whilst he
endeavors to be true to his subjects, those endeavors force a belief in him,
that his subjects will be true to him.

His very nature enclins him to a compassion. He pitties those that will not
pity themselves; and whilst they are conspiring his destruction, his prayers
procure their safety. Nor can the utmost of their injuries provoke him to a
retaliation. He has learned not only of God, but of the King his father, to
forgive his Enemies.

Nor is it his desire to obtain his Kingdoms that makes him willing to forgive
his Enemies, but his desire to forgive his Enemies that makes him willing to
obtain his Kingdoms: he counts the possession of his Royalties but as a
transitory dignity, the pardon of his Enemies a Divine and lasting one.

Neither is his piety less then his Justice, they are both in the Superlative
degree, he hates wickedness, not because the world should see him glory (that
would make him an Hipocrite) but because God abhors it; it is Love not Fear
makes him Religious, he Fears God, only because he Loves him.

He hates not the Vicious, but abominates their Vices, his hatred extends not
to persons, but to things; He dislikes not the Swearer, it is the Oaths he
abhors, he hates not the Drunkard but his Drunkenness.

Yet does his mercy extend beyond their sins, as he is a King so he is a God,
he is gracious to pardon, as well as just to punnish; nor can a remission or
reformation but over take his remission.

His constant service of God excites others to live by his example, he sleeps
not without invoking the blessing of the Almighty, nor does his Eyes open
without a returned thanks, he knows it is God alone which can restore and
protect him: nor can the wickedness of Man preval against him.

Nor does his public devotion show him less Zealous then his private, the one
demonstrates him full of Zeal, the other void of Hypocrisy; he would have
others holy as well as himself; he knows that saying concerns him, being a
King, above all private Men, Non nobis solis nati sumus.

Private persons are not alone born for themselves, much less Kings, the
public concern is their duty: it is not enough for the Master of the house that
he be Godly whilst his family is wicked. There must be Precept as well as
Example: and if need be, correction as well as instruction.

This makes his Majesty deservedly famous; he counts it as great a fault to
suffer a sin in another whilst he has power to correct it, as to commit it
himself, he knows that what crime soever a Magistrate suffers willingly to be
committed, he brings upon his own head.

He is therefore above all things careful not to father vice, least he should
be accounted vicious: he detests that in another which did he commit, he knows
he might justly detest himself for; and endeavors by Example to reform that
in others which he knows were it in him, would seem odious to him.

He abhors vice, as well because it is so, as because God abhors it: His nature
inclines him to virtue, and as he cannot admit its contrary in himself, so he
cannot endure it in another.

His constancy in Religon is no less conspicuous then his piety. His
discerning judgment knows what is truth, and that truth is followed by his
settled will; Yet he hates not the Popish Religion, but their Idolatry; he
abhors not them, but their false worship: He loves all that knows Christ at
all, but wishes that they all might know him more.

His steadfastnesse in Religion proceeds not from self-interest; he sticks not
so much to be true to Protestants, because he knows the English to be addicted
to that Religion; nor because he thinks it for his benefit; and because he
imagines that it would prove very difficill to obtain his Crown and leave it.
But because he knows it to be true.

He knows the Prince is born for the people, as well as the people for the
Prince. He knows their interests to be interwoven. He knows that without them
he cannot stand; yet will he sooner loose them then relinquish verity.

He is the perfect pattern of Piety, but more of Patience, his Afflictions have
not made him repine, he knows God to be just: he believes that as God restored
Job twofold, so will he likewise restore him his Kingdoms.

Yet he thinks it just in God to suffer them to be detained from him.

He Laments more his Subjects slavery then his own Exile, he grievs that they
have been so long blind, yet rejoyses for their sakes that they have now a
Glimmering; he constantly prays for the restoring of their sight, not so much
because they should restore his, as their own Rights and Privileges.

He is inwardly troubled and perplexed at the many Schisms, Sects, and Heresies
that are raised in the Church of England, he is sorry that their rise is from
some men's envy toward him; he pitties, and his pity produces his prayers for
them. He is willing that though they will not obey him, yet that they may serve
God.

He was never heard to curse his Enemies, many times to pray for them, and
desire God to forgive even his Fathers Murderers; his good will surpasses
their cruelty: And whilst they are conspiring his Destruction, he is praying
for their Salvation.

He is a perfect Enemy to all Debauchednesse, he is sorry those who pretend
themselves his friends in England are so great a scandal to him: He wishes that
they would so carry themselves, that he might adventure to own them as Friends;
for he understands not the good will of those who drink his Health for the
liquors sake, nor wishes for their help who over their Sack only swear they
will fight for him. He is noe greater a hater of vice then a cherisher of
virtuous Actions, he loves them in his very Enemies, and often grieves when he
finds occasion to think that many of them will rise up in judgment against
his most pretended Friends,

He is most exactly just in all his Commands and faithful in performance of
all his promises Take the Character given him by the dying Marquess of
Montrose. For his Majesty now living (says he) Never people I believe may be
more happy in a King, his Commands to me were most just, in nothing that he
promises will he fail: He deals justly with all men etc. So punctual is he,
that when a word is once gone out of his Mouth he will rather suffer by it then
break it.

To conclude, he is the pattern of Patience and Piety, the most Righteous and
Justest of Kings. The most knowing and experienced of Princes. The Holiest and
the best of Men. The severest punisher of Vice. The strictest rewarder of
Virtue. The constantest preserver of Religion. And the truest lover of his
Subjects.

This is a short Character of his illustrious Majesty, which I fear those that
know him will rather think to come short of then reach his due praise, so
sweetly virtuous is he in all his Carriages, so affable in his discourse, so
void of passion and anger, that he was never yet heard or seen in Choler, the
utmost extent of any passion that ever was discerned in him, being toward one
of his Meniall Servants, who justifying himself in what he had done amiss,
his Majesty with some motion told him that he was an insolent fellow.

Yet this is that Prince whose virtues we have given leave to Foreign Nations
to admire, whilst we our selves have rested as well ignorant of his deserts, as
destitute of our own Liberty, whilst either infatuated or blinded by those who
have Tyrannically usurped Governments over us, we have been contented to sit
still and see him Expulsed and exiled from his due Rights and Royalties, and
our selves from our Freedom and Privileges.

Nor has God alone been merciful to us in endowing his sacred Majesty with
such Heroic Virtues, but he has given us a stock of Noble Princes, who seem
to Emulate Virtues in one another, and grow up like Royal Oaks to maintain the
Honor and Glory of this Nation, but are yet and have a long time been the
disgrace of it, all the Nations in Europe laughing at the English folly, who
slight that happiness which they might enjoy.

As for the illustrious Duke of York his Fame is spread so far over the World,
that my self have heard the very Turks commend and applaud his Valor which
was so esteemed among the French, that before he arrived at twenty one years of
Age, he was by that King thought worthy the Command of Liu. General of his
Armies, which he managed with such care and prudence, that seldom any affairs
he took in hand, produced not its desired success; and since, his being in
requital of his services, complemented out of that Kingdom of France, though
he has not had such eminent commands conferred on him by the Spaniard, yet have
they always thought him worthy the highest employment and respect.

As for the Duke of Gloucester, he is esteemed by most to be fitter for a
Counselor then a Soldier: His Carriage is grave, and somewhat severe; of a
Sagace Genious and understanding, and very much prying into State Affairs,
which have made most judge him the fitter for a Council board.

These three Princes, are like three Diamonds or Pearls which we have
ignorantly cast away, and not come to know the worth of them till we come to
want them, Their virtues having made them resplendent throughout all the World,
and rendered them, if we justly consider it, the only means whereby we can
attain to happiness; for what Nation can be more blessed then that which has
for her Prince a just King to Govern, a Valiant Duke to Defend, and a Wise
Counselor to Advise.

May the God of Heaven then open our Eyes and let us at length see our Error,
and heartily repent of it, by calling our Native Sovereign to the possession of
his due Rights, which the Divine Majesty (I hope) will be Graciously pleased to
Grant.

Thus far the History.

March 1660.
POSTSCRIPT
WHen this admirable miraculous foregoing History came first out, (which
contayns so great wonders, that noe former age can parralel, or future
believe,) it may well without derogation from the author, be owned by a person
of Quality: for so questionless he was, and a person of Honor, and loyal
confidence; that at that time, before the dawning of our day of Liberty, or the
arising of our long set Sun, which by its appearing inlightens, comforts, and
refreshes these our Kingdoms, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, CHARLES the
second defender of the faith etc. I say, much may well be attributed to his
confident bouldnes, at that time to publish it, when to speak truth, reason, or
loyalty, was accounted, Error, Treason, and dangerous.

And although it be not so full as it might be, either for manner or Matter, in
setting forth the worthy and deserved Praise of our most gracious Sovereign,
(whose perfections whosoever shall undertake to describe, must needs fall
short) and of his Miraculous escape; but that it may well be said of it, as the
Queen of Sheba said of the Wisdom of Solomon etc. behold the half was not
told of what she found, (though reported by fame, which seldom looses in the
Progress) nor of the wonderful signal mercy to his Kingdoms and Subjects
thereby, as is well expressed in the 107. psalm and the 43. Who so is wise may
may understand these things, and such shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord.

And truly I think never people had more cause, cheerfully and thankfully to
acknowledge the goodness of God herein: and express it by their duty and
obedience. The wisemans advice its wisdom to take. Pro. 24. and 21.22. My
Sonfear God and the King, and meddle not with them that be seditious, and
desirous of change etc.

Have we not been (ever since the sad Sacrifice of his sacred Majesty (who God
has made a Saint, and they a Martyr) of most precious and blessed memory, who
was Murdered by the pretended sword of Justce: and to say noe more of it, was
as horrid a crime as ever the Sun beheld) oppresed by high Courts of Injustice,
and other arbitrary impositions, more then ever was done by coular of
authority, in the raigns of all the KINGS since the CONQVEST.

Did not the want of our King bring on us? Usurpation, Tirrany, Enmity,
Animositie, Poverty, and all Misery? All which will be removed, and to our
comfort (if our sins and disobedience hinders not) we shall assuredly enjoy a
Settlement of Religion, Law, Liberty, Property, Peace, Penty, Honor and Safety.

Has not his singular wisdom discovered and directed a way, not only for
discharging those large arrears (which before daily increased on us) to the
Army and otherwise, which is in a short time done, but also for their
disbanding in England; to free us thereby for the future, from those
insupportable burdens.

Read but his gracious General pardon, (before which who could justly say he
was free) and see his unparaleld clemency: who to us Arises like the Sun of
Righteousness with healing under his wings Mal. 4.2. And if ingratitude be the
worst of crimes (as I think was never yet questioned) how inexcusable then in
the Eyes of all the world shall such be, that after so great favor, shall
either in thought, word, or deed, think, speak, or act any thing against him.

Read but his Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs; with what
Religious care and caution has he framed it: to the Satisfaction of all
interests that pretend to Religion, Reason or Civility, Provided they quietly
conform to the Established Laws, and make not Religion (as some formerly did) a
Match to give fire to Rebellion.

Who knows not that in our unfortunate jnterregnum, the design of our
hardharted taskmasters was to blind (if not put out) the Eyes of the three
Kingdoms, by endeavoring to pilladge those formerly famous Seminaries of
Learning, and discourage it for the future, as if they had been of that
judgment, that ignorance was the Mother of devotion.

All which and much more that might justly be urged on this subject, must needs
make us acknowledge, as it is in the forementioned psalm and that often as it
is there, to Praise the Lord for his goodness in restoring him, and declare the
wonders that he has done for him, and the people of these Kingdones.

I am sure we may justly say If God had not been on our side, we had been
destroyed, but to him for ever be the praise; The snare is broken and we are
delivered.

Yet there are a sort of people in the world, and too many in this kingdom
(the more is the pity) God grant there be none in England; the Epistle of
Saint Jude, espetially the 10. and 16. describs them: that through ignorance,
misinformation, prejudice, or advantage, are ready to slander the footsteps of
the LORDS anointed: who live in this dark corner of Ireland, and are ignorant
of the worth of that happiness that is in the King, and to themselves thereby. I
thought it therefore a necessary duty, having this History by me, to get it
reprinted here for information: being as far from endeavoring to gain applause
thereby, as I am incapable of attaining it by any thing from my self: only
that I may manifest the goodness of God, which is the duty of every Christian:
and my loyalty, which is the duty of every Subject and good Christian, (though
for these twelve years I have been a sufferer for it.) and inform those that
yet know not so much as this manifests.

To the Lord the only ruler of Princes, whose right hand and mighty arm has
done it, for ever be the praise: Yea let all the People praise thee O Lord for
thy goodness to us, in restoring the light of our Eyes, the breath of our
Nostrills, the Kings most excellent Majesty! the restoring of whom unto his
Throne, must needs be acknowledged the hand of God, and if enough to convince
an Athist: and may evince to the World the validity of united and devout
prayers, such as are enjoined with good authority by the Church of England, and
are the very Marrow of the Scriptures: and where are not Scripture, are
vncontroulably agreeing: composed by those that laid down their lives to
maintain; and bequeathed as the best Legacy to their Wives and Children. And
in a word, are those prayers for which our blessed Savior will not refuse to
be an intercessour: and which have so miraculously restored the defendor of our
Faith to his Throne: which noe rational man alive but may well conclude, being
(as I am confident they were) put up to the Throne of Grace, with pure and
upright hearts, by the dutiful and obedient Sons of the Church.

And therefore let all (but espetially such,) never forget to return due praise
for his mercyes to us and to our King, and as it is there directed, yield
praise and thanksgiving for our deliverance from those great and apparent
dangers, where with we were encompassed: and to acknowledge it his goodness that
we were not delivered over as a prey unto them: beseeching still his goodness
and mercy to us, that all the World may know, that he is our Savior and mighty
Redeemer. And that all those that do confess his holy Name, may agree in the
truth of his holy word, and live in unity and Godly love, and that under our
Lawful King and governor we may be Godly and quietly governed.

And for our most gracious Sovereign also let us pray, That he knowing whose
Minister he is, may above all things seek his honor and glory: that so we his
Subjects duly considering whose authority he has, may honor and humbly obey
him according to Gods blessed word and Ordinance.

And as it is directed by that Divine, Orthodox, ancient and best lyturgie, of
the Church of England, To keep and strengthen in the true worship of thee, in
righteousness and holiness of life, thy Servant CHARLES. our most gracious KING
and Governor.

That it may please thee O Lord to rule his heart in thy faith fear and love,
that he may ever more have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

That he may always incline to thy will and walk in thy way, Endue him
plentyously with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long to live:
strengthen him that he may Vanquish and over come all his Enemies; and finally
after this life: he may attain everlasting Joy and felicity, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

As for those who so barbarously acted in that horrid crime the Murder of his
Sacred Majesty of blessed memory: they have had (at least some of them) the
reward of Regicides. So let his Enemies perish O Lord, and all that rise up
against him: But on his own head let his Crown flourish: Let his days be many
and prosperous, and let all, (but espetially those that are truly loyal,) find
the Comfort of it.

The unexpressable joy of all his Subjects, felt and declared at his return
requires a Volume, and at this place cannot be informed: it being indeed beyond
expression, God inclining the hearts of all his people, as some times all the
Subjects of King David, the people of Juda, to bring home their King: 2. Sam.
19.14. Take one for all, a Copy of Verses presented with his own hand at his
return to his Government: By that most Honorable and Heroic person, and
renowned Champion of the English interest in Jreland (which Maugre all
opposition, will eternize his fame to all posterity) The Lord President of
Munster, all that know him, know his excellency that way: its enough to say
they are his; and they follow as well worthy to conclude the History of his
most excellent Majesty, whom God preserve.

H: F:
Cork 22. No: 1660.
TO THE KING UPON HIS MAJESTY'S Happy Return.
AS the Great World at first in Cbaos lay;
Then darkness yielded to triumpha^t day;
And all that wild and undigested Mass
Did into Form, and to perfection pass:
So, in our lesser World, Confusions were
Many, and vast, as now our Blessings are.
Our past, and present State fully express
All we could bear, and all we would possess.
Wonder not that your forces could not bring
You to Your Crowns, nor us unto our King:
Fate made therein this high design appear,
Your Sword shall rule abroad, Your Virtues here.
The lesser Conquest was to you denied
That by the greater it might be suppy'd.
Nor think it strange that some so long have strove
With that which they did most admire and love;
Since all against their dissolution pray,
Although to Heaven there is no other way.
Like to Bethesdas Pool, our Commonwealth
Till it was troubled, could not give us health:
You as the Angel, did our Waters stir,
And from that motion we derive our Cure.
The highest Blessing God to You does yield,
He, His Anointed, as His Church does build:
Nothing of noise did to perfection bring
The greatest Temple, and the greatest King.
Alike he builded both, that all mght see,
Your Kingdom, like his Church, shall endless be.
As when Great Nature's Fabric was begun,
Expanded Light made day, and not the Sun;
But Light diffused was to perfection grown,
When from one Planet, it contracted shone:
So when our Government was formed to last
But till the race of a few days was past,
With Ruling Gifts GOD many did endue,
But, now it is fixed, all those are placed in you.
Your Banishment, which your Foes did design
To cloud your virtues, made them brighter shine.
Thus Persecution did but more dispense
Throughout the World the Gospells influence.
Princes, who saw Your Sufferings, did esteem
'Twas greater to subdue those griefs then them.
And in that conquest found how they should fare,
If they provoked your Justice to a War.
By Your Return, and by Your Foes pursuit,
Europe Your Blossoms had, but we your Fruit.
Our Senate does not for Conditions sue;
We know we have our All, in having You:
Your Mercy with our Crimes does nobly strive;
And, e're we ask forgiveness you forgive.
Your Subjects thus doubly you now subdue,
Both in the Manner, and the Action too.
Your great Reception in our neighboring State,
Proves that on you depends their Countries fate:
Your dreadful Fleet does on their Coast appear,
Yet to their Joy, they yield up all their Fear;
For knowing you, they know Heaven has resigned
A Power unbounded to a bounded Mind.
Triumphant Navy! Formerly your Freight
Consisting but of Laurel, or of Plate;
But to your happy Country now you bring
More then both Indies in our Matchless KING.
Twice has the World been trusted in a Barque;
The New, the Charles contained, the Old, the Ark,
This bore but those who did the World re-build,
But that bore you, to whom that world must yield.
The spacious sea, which does the Earth embrace,
Never held so many Princes in one place;
Princes whose Father still the Trident bore,
As shall their Sons, till time shall be no more.
Now whilst the Sea, your greatest subject, moves
Slowly, as loath to part with what he loves;
And whilst your Sails the calmed Air subdue;
(For which he chides the winds, and thanks them too)
I might present you with a Prospect here,
Of that vast Empire to which now you Steer.
But on that Theme my Numbers cannot stay;
Copies to their Originals give way,
For now your Fleet sees land, which many a peal
Of thundering Cannon to the Shore does tell:
And now your ravished Subjects see your Fleet,
Which they with shouts, louder then Cannon greet;
Two Suns at once our sights now etertain;
One shines from Heaven the other from the Main.
All Loyal Eyes are fixed on the East,
For you more welcome then that daily Guest;
While on the shore your longing Subjects stand,
Subjects, as numberless as is the Sand;
Subjects sufficient, if but led by You,
All Countries you have lived in, to subdue.
In Raptures now we our great General see,
Move faster to meet you then Victory:
He at your Feet himself does prostrate now,
To whom vast Fleets and Armies used to bow;
And greater Satisfaction does express
In This Submission, then in That Success.
Your Royal Arms inwreath him, which he more
Does prize, then al those laurel wreaths he wore.
Now all for his Victorious Troops make room,
Which never but by Joy. were overcome:
Loud shouts to heaven for your Return they send,
Whilst low as earth their dreaded Ensigns bend;
He leads them still to what exalts their Name;
Now to their Duty, as before to Fame.
Their Misled Courage, in a fatal Time,
Had been too long their Glory and their Crime.
Now they are truly Great, now truly live,
Since this you Praise, and that you do forgive.
Those, who so long could keep you from your due
What can resist, now they are led by you?
Your Great Example will their Model prove;
Persuading soon, and willingly, as love.
Such Fleets, and Armies, and our Charles their head,
Are things which all the Universe may dread.
And now you move, and now in all the Ways,
Thick clouds of Subjects, clouds of dust do raise;
Through which the worlds chief city now you see,
Great in Extent, greater in Loyalty;
Their Cannon speak, their Streets the Soldiers line,
And brightest beauties from their windows shine:
Your Subjects Earthly Jove you now are grown;
Thunder and lightning guard you to your Throne.
Thus you triumph, whilst at your Palace Gates
The highest earthly Senate for you waits:
One Roof contains those which our laws do make,
And him from who^ the world their laws must take:
Their knees do homage, whilst their Tongues confess,
They in their duty find their happness,
And Fame aloud, through every Region, sings,
They are the best of Subjects you of Kings.
The Royal throne so fully you Adorn,
That now all praise what some before did scorn:
A throne, which now the envious do confess,
Our Safety urged your Merit to Possess.
Where Caesar could no further Glory win,
There is the Scene, where yours does but begin;
By which indulgent Fate would have it known,
Though his Success had end, Yours should have none?
Or else that nothing worthy was of you,
But what Great Julius wanted Power to do.
Our fierce divisions made our Courage known,
But more your wisdom shins, that makes us one;
Which has so framed your Empire to endure,
We need but prudent Foes to be secure.
You might possess by Armies, and by Fleets,
All where the Sun does rise, or where he sets;
But you a nobler Conquest have designed,
The placing Limits to your Greater Mind:
And may those highest titles never cease,
A King of Greatest Power, and Greatest Peace.
Of sufferings past let us no more Complain,
Since you by them with greater Glory Reign;
Till that we saw; your Subjects could not guess,
Heaven had for them a Blessing above Peace.
Nor can we tell which most in you to own,
Either your Virtues or Extraction;
Though never any was so Great and Good;
It springs from Martyrs, as from Royal Blood:
But your own Glories do so brightly shine,
You need not borrow Luster from your Line.
Yet we must say, since justly but your due,
Though you our glories raise, they raisenot you:
Like to the Royal Bird that climbs the Skies,
You lesser seem still as you higher rise.
Your self you limit to a triple Throne,
And all men's Wonder are, except your own.
Now Sacred Peace and Justice cease to mourn,
And both in you again to us return.
Religion now shall flourish with your Crown,
And the fierce sword yield to the peaceful gown.
The Muses too so highly You esteem,
That you are both their Influence and their Theme
FINIS.

