A REJOINDER to Mr. WILLS his Vindiciae: Wherein The Antiquity for Believers,
and Novelty of Infant Baptism is further confirmed.

As also, His groundless Appeal distinctly answered, and the Forgeries and
Mistakes boasted of, still found to be his own.

With an Appeal to his Conscience about the same.

That the words of Tertulian and Nazianzen show it was long before all were
agreed of the time or Necessity of Baptizing Infants before the use of Reason,
in case they were like to live to Maturity.

-- It was thought less needful to give it [viz. Infants Baptism,] a particular
express mention in the Records and History of the Church [viz. In those times]
Mr. Baxter in his More Proofs, p. 279.

By H. Danvers.

Matthew. 5.11. And shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my names
sake. Job 16.10. They have gaped upon me with their mouths, and have smote me
upon the cheek reproachfully. Psalm. 119.42. I shall have wherewithal to answer
him that reproacheth me, for I trust in thy word. Printed for Francis Smith, at
the Elephant and Castle, near the Royal Exchange, 1675.

The PREFACE.
BEfore I had finished with Mr. Baxter, I was first assaulted by a new
adversary, one Mr. Whitston, and again by my old Antagonist Mr. Wills, not
suffering me scarce to take breath, and three to one you know is odds. But
hearing, that Mr. H. a mere stranger to me, had undertaken Mr. Whitston, I have
obtained so much leisure, to consider what our 3d. Triumvir has further to say
to me. And whom I find upon a serious perusal instead of giving that due
satisfaction, my sober Reply, (and all good men) might expect from him, for his
manifold detected errors in Antiquity, abuse of Authors, scurrility and
indignity to my person (a mere stranger to him) injurious reproaches to the
whole party of Baptists, (as well in this as other Nations; not only loading
the professors thereof with his slanders, but the profession it self, as
leading to Blasphemy and Immorality) is pleased notwithstanding to come forth
in this wrathful, self-justifying, and revengeful Spirit, abounding still in
his repeated and renewed errors and reproaches; as though an impenitent
standing by error was the best way to defend truth, and to recriminate others,
the fairest way to clear himself, justifying that Malefactor, who fell foul
upon his Prosecutor, Judge, Jury, and Witnesses, as the best way to save
himself: And with the Chaced Fox, raises a Dust to make his escape. Dealing
just with me; as the Heathens did with the Christians of old, putting them into
Bears Skins, and then set the Dogs upon them; or as the Papists have done with
worthy Mr. Fox, for detecting their errors and cruelties, have decry'd him as
such a Forger, that none ought to converse with him. But Mr. Wills will find
himself under a disappointment, truth is not so to be baffled, nor innocence
foiled, he will yet meet with a Vindication of both, in his farther just
detection and reproof.

These few Pages therefore do first truly discover to you, notwithstanding the
great noise and clamor of mistakes, that the question discoursed betwixt us is
certainly lost, and given up by him, and that the Antiquity so much boasted of
is wholly for Believers, not Infants Baptism. With a serious and particular
Answer to his groundless frivolous Appeal; discovering withal, that he is
truly guilty of those crimes, and many more, that he would so injuriously
father upon me, though what he discovers to have been my errors, I fully own,
which are few, and very inconsiderable, mistaking 2 or 3 names one for another,
viz. Aquinas for Albertus, Sericius for Hincmarus, not hitting a Popes Name,
and not taking Walden to so good advantage as I ought for myself; that of
Lanfrank mentioned before, and which are all, of any weight, that I know of,
none. of them hurting us in the least, and and are so frivolous, that an
ingenious man would scorn to have mentioned, much less to have made such a dust
about.

But in the mean time I must acknowledge, it is very sad the World should be
troubled with such stuff, as though such accusations, recriminations, and
discovery of nakedness, was for their edification, which I can truly say is
very grieving to me, and were not the truth of God likely to suffer by my
silence, I should rather have born his reproaches and slanders, than have made
any return to him. And therefore what I have done on my part to prevent such
mischiefs and inconveniences, I think will be necessary to give you some
particular account of, having before only given you a hint thereof, viz. how
much I have endeavored with Mr. Wills to rectify mistakes, and
mis-understandings in a more Private, Friendly, Christian way, that we might
save the world this unnecessary trouble.

Know therefore, that my first Treatise of Baptism, having slept about 12
Months without any public notice, and being ready to come forth with a 2d.
Edition, I improved my utmost interest with all sorts, to procure what
Objections did rationally lie against it, that if I had committed any mistakes,
I might rectify them, having been constrained to take several things upon
Trust, for want of opportunity to examine them by their Originals: And
therefore did Apologize in my Preface for Candor, that if by the multitude of
Quotations through so ancient a Track, they might find any particular mistake,
mis-quotation, or mis-applicatoon, they would not so dwell or insist upon it,
as to reject the truth of all the rest, that are full, and clear, and without
exception, the way that Carpers and Sophisters take, and the Method that
Papists have all along taken in Reply to our Protestant Writers, though did
assure, (and so I can say with a good Conscience) that I have not willingly
given any such occasion, and truly at last, after all the malicious scrutiny,
clamor and noise that has been made, it is matter of Admiration, that no more
has been brought forth: Mr. Wills having discovered but those few before
mentioned: Mr. Baxter but one that had any significancy: And Mr. Whitston not
one.

Therefore hearing, That Mr. B. had something to say against it, I ventured, as
I have told you, to send to him; and understanding, that Mr. Wills had spent
some time in the Oxford Library, to trace my Authorities, and found me tardy in
many, I sent Two or Three Messages to him, to admit of some Converse about it,
but in vain; then upon the coming forth of the 2d. Impression, I sent Mr. Wills
one of them, with this following Letter.

SIR,
I Understand you have some Exceptions against my Treatise of Baptism,
especially the Historical Part, and particularly about the Waldenses, and that
you intend speedily to print the same. I having, Sir, printed a 2d. Impression,
and therein made some alterations, and very considerable additions, especially
as to the Waldenses, have taken upon me the confidence to send you one; and
which if it may tend to your satisfaction, may save the world, your self, and
me, the further trouble of Answers and Rejoynders, if not, if you will please
to Communicate where your principal Objection lies, either to that, or any
thing else, and admit of the Exchange of a Letter or Two about it; it may not
be unserviceable to the Truth, with this assurance, that if it may appear, that
I have done any manifest injury to truth, I shall be ready to give the most
public satisfaction it may call for; it having been my earnest and importunate
desire, ever since the Exposure of the first, to procure any rational Objection
against any thing I had said, and which should have been as welcome to me as
an Approbation, (because it is only truth in sincerity I design to propagate)
but do assure you, have not as yet met with the least Objection from any one
that I had not before obviated. And indeed as to the Historical Part, though it
is not offered for proof, but illustration only, would be too great folly to
render any willful mistake, which every Scholar in his Library confutes; Which
with the render of Christian Respects, is recommended to your Consideration, by

Your unknown Friend and Servant, H. D.
March 22. 1673.

To which Letter upon the 10th of May 1674. Mr. Wills returns me answer, that
had not my Letter come too late, it would have been incivility not to have
complied with me; but that part of his Book was in the Press before mine came
to his hand, and therefore desired my excuse, and not to reckon him a willing
disturber of the world, having never before invaded the Press.

As though my Messages sent to him (by a neighbor of the Devizes, and an
acquaintance of his after, that came by him to Bristoll Fair, and several
speakings to his Bookseller to write to him to that end, who still told me he
staid the Press for my second Impression, having been ready for it some months)
had no signification, if my Letter had not in time reached him, to prevent that
disturbance, or at least to have obtained some Civil return from him.

Well, the Book comes forth, and how stufft with prejudice, personal
Reflections, egregious Mistakes, bitter Invectives not only against my self,
and whole Party, but the Principle it self, you are best able to judge; which I
endeavored some time after, notwithstanding all those high provocations given,
modestly to detect in a sober Reply.

Though by the way this piece of Civility and Ingenuity must not be forgotten,
that the week before my Reply was published, they thought meet to put Mr. Wills
Title into the Gazette, to proclaim me a Forger all the Nation over, knowing
that though I might follow him in the Press, yet there I was not capable to
attend him for my Vindication.

Some months after mine came forth, I heard Mr. Wills was come to Town with a
Rejoinder: whereupon I sent some Friends to him to prevail for a Conference
with him, which could not be obtained. Then I wrote to some of his Friends to
acquaint him, that if he would meet with two or three Christian Friends of a
side, and communicate to me his Exceptions, I should assure him, that if I had
done him or the Truth any injury, I would make the most public satisfaction
that they should judge requisite; which could not prevail with him. Afterward
I hearing that he had been with my Bookseller, to read some writing of mine
respecting the Controversy, which was showed him, and supposing that might be
some obligation to him to be reciprocal, did send my Bookseller to his to
obtain the like freedom, to peruse his Papers in his Booksellers hand, but
could obtain no permission thereto.

And yet after the rejection of all these modest endeavors of my part, which
bespoke me far from being obstinate or tenacious in any thing that I had writ,
he has the Confidence with this clap of Thunder he has come forth with, to tell
the world in his Ep. to his Vindiciae, That he must acquaint me that I having
treated him with so much rudeness in what is past, that he had little heart to
have any more to do with me, unless he see better cause, and gives me security
of his Silence for the future, to any of my Contradictions, there being no
gaping against an oven, and silence is accounted the best answer to such as
super-add contumacy to their mistakes.

But where has that Contumacy appeared in me? It is true he deals with me in
his appeal as a contumacious person, but how such proceedings are to be
reconciled to Reason, Rule, or Religion, I must confess my self at a great loss.

Had he dealt with me herein as the Quakers dealt with Mr. Hicks, which he
makes his pattern, he had been much more excusable, who (I presume he will find)
admitted of private conference, and had Letters exchanged betwixt them; and
till they supposed Mr. Hicks was contumacious, and tenacious, did not proceed
in that their Appeal.

I do not know that it is the practice in Westminster Hall, for a Plaintiff to
procure publication for Trial before he gives his Declaration, has his Answer,
Reply, Rejoinder, etc. and surely Mr. Wills should have had so much patience to
have attended what I had said to his Vindiciae, before he had thundered out his
Appeal: It may be my Answer to the former, might have prevented the latter.
Will nothing satisfy him but my utmost shame and reproach? Yet would he
persuade the world, That he loves me as a Brother though erring, and had much
rather convince then shame me, advising me to leave tossing the Ball of
contention, etc.

But is this dealing with me like a Brother he designs to convince and reduce
from error? Is this to instruct with meekness? to use any Gospel-way to reform
and inform, he knows the Sovereign Rule Mat. 18. is not publicly to tell the
Church, till all other private ways are ineffectual.

I must confess these are ways and strains that I have not been acquainted
withal, either amongst men or Christians, which only serve as to my own
particular to lead me to Christ's rule, which I desire more to attend in the
case, To pray for him that thus despitefully uses and persecutes me, and to
rejoice that I am counted worthy to suffer shame, and to have all manner of
evil spoken against me falsely for his Names sake.

Withal satisfying my self that Mr. Wills takes the ready way by these methods
to promote the cause he opposes, for few that ever I heard of, that manage a
good cause, are left to such foul miscarriages.

H. D.

The Antiquity of Believers, and Novelty of Infants Baptism.
GHAP. I. Wherein the Antiquity of Believers, and Novelty of Infants Baptism is
further confirmed; and that the Baptism after Faith was the only Baptism that
was owned in the first Centuries, to be Christ's Ordinance and the Churches
Practice, in full Answer to Mr. Wills his Vindiciae.
THE main question discussed between Mr. Wills and me, has been, whether the
Anabaptists (so called) or the Paedobaptists have most to plead from Antiquity
for their Way; viz. Those that only Baptize Men and Women after Profession of
Faith and Repentance, or those that Baptize Infants that are capable of neither.

The former of which I first asserted in my Treatise, and since defended, in my
Reply to Mr. Wills, Mr. Baxter, and others, viz. That the Anabaptists,
notwithstanding the great Cry to the contrary, have the Antiquity of their side
for the first Centuries.

And which notwithstanding all the noise and clamor after the full discussion
of that point on both hands, is now clearly manifested (if not by their own
grants confirmed) to us. The which you may receive in the following brief
Account.

CENT. I.
1. Cent. gives Examples only for Ad^lt Baptism.
FIrst it is most manifest as is confessed on all hands, that the Scripture Story
for the first Century gives us an account of no other Baptism, but that after
Faith and Repentance, viz. Produces Instances, or gives us Examples only for
adult Believers, and not Infants Baptism; As we have observed the Magdeburgs
themselves those Paedobaptists have so fully owned acknowledging, That they
find Examples in the 2, 8, 10, 16, 19. of the Acts for the Baptizing of adult
Believers, hut of Bap^izing of Infants they read of no Example De Infantibus
Baptizatis Exempla quidem non leguntur: To which Mr. Wills subscribes,
acknowledging, That there are no particular Examples for Infants Baptism upon
Record, p. 3. 53. vind. Mr. Whitston confessing the same as generally owned by
them.

As for the Allegation, That the Apostles Writings do not expressly exclude
In^ants, as Mr. Wills and Mr. Whitston from the Magd. affirm is so weak and
frivolous, that needs no Reply, which would establish Baptizing of Bells,
Chrysm, and what not of the Popish Inventions.

And that if not asserted in Scripture, is yet found in the Writings of Origin
and Cyprian to have been the Apostles practice, is as utterly insignificant;
for as it has, and will further appear to you they have writ no such thing; nor
secondly if they had, would what they writ in the third Age, upon their single
Testimonies, prove such a matter of fact in the first Age, when as it is confessed
the Scripture is wholly silent therein.

Therefore I hope it cannot be denied, that for what appears in Scripture
Story* our Enemies themselves being Judges, that Antiquity for the first
Century is wholly on our side; so that no mention need be made of the Epistles
of Clement and Ignatius in Confirmation thereof.

CENT. II.
SEcondly, as to the Second Century 2. Cent. gives Examples only for Adult
Baptism.
we find upon the fullest discussion, it produces as few Examples for Infants
Baptism, as the first, and that only those are mentioned to have been Baptized
in this Age, that first made a profession of Faith, and Repentance, as appears
by that most remarkable account given us out of Justin Martyrs Apology, the
most Authentic piece of Antiquity of this Age (not to mention what is said
from Dionysius, and Clem^nt. Alexandrinus Treat. p. 49, 50. which is not
gainsaid by our Antagonist, only Mr. Wills would insinuate, that the Magd. did
suppose, That the Order Justin Martyr lays down, respected the reception of
Aliens to Baptism, which would not hurt us, because all are Aliens till
Converted, no mention being made of any that were otherwise received. But
Justins own words are full for satisfaction in the point, as Treat p. 49. viz.
I will declare unto you how we offer up our selves to God after we are renewed
through Christ, etc. Which respected the Order and Method observed by the
Saints and Believers in the Church at that day, and how all of them had their
admission therein.

So that for the first 200 Years we carry it, having Examples as is confessed for
the one, but none to be produced for the other: Whereby I should be
sufficiently justified, (should we proceed no farther) in that assertion Mr.
Wills so complains of, p. 2. vind. By affirming, That Antiquity it self is
altogether for Believers, and not for Infants Baptism. For if it be manifest,
that there be 200 Years for the one before the other, well may I say, That
there is Antiqity for the one, and not for the other; for if Antiquity be writ
upon Believers Baptism, Novelty then must needs be writ upon Infants Baptism.
Nor but that I grant some that were called the Ancient Fathers of the 5th. Age,
as Austin, Chrysostom, and others affirmed it; from whence Mr. Wills again and
again upbraids me, and Mr. Whitston also, That I do contradict my self, in
saying Antiquity was altogether for the one, and not for the other, they not
considering, or willingly omit that I mean Primitive Antiquity; the Elder
Brother was to carry away, as the dignity and preheminency, so the Inheritance
from the Younger, much more the true born, from the base born Child.

CENT. III.
IN the 3d. Century we have as few Examples to be produced for Infants Baptism,
No Example for any but Adult Baptism in the 3. Cen.
as in the two former; but that they Baptized in this Age after the Profession
of Faith, we have an ample account from Tertullian, Origin and Cyprian, and
several others, as Treat. p. 51, etc. And which our Antagonists are so far from
opposing, that they abundantly confirm, viz. Mr. Baxter, in his Saints Rest, p.
1. cap. 8. sect. 5. telling us, That Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, who lived
(says he) in the 2d. and 3d. Centuries, do all of them affirm, That in the
Primitive times none were Baptized without an express Covenanting, wherein they
renounced the World; Flesh, and Devil, and engaged themselves to Christ, and
promised to obey him. And Mr. Wills also, 2. part. p. 6. of Infants Baptism,
acknowledges, That the Magdeburgs do tell us, Thaet Tertullian in this age
opposed himself to some that asserted Infants Baptism, affirming, That the
Adult were only proper Subjects.

So that it is manifest by what appears upon Record from any Authentic Story,
that Believers Baptism carries the Antiquity of the Third Century also; there
being not as yet one Infant upon Record that was actually Baptized, as any
Ordinance of Christ, nor any thing appearing from good Authority by any
Scripture Argument, that they ought so to be: What is pretended from Origin and
Cyprian you have fully replied to afterward, and the utter insignificancy of
any thing that is urged from them to this end, whilst you have full mouthed
Evidence, and undeniable Authority for the other.

CENT. IV.
AS to the 4th. Century it does not yet appear when and where any Infant was
Baptized, as an Ordinance of Christ; Adult Baptism the general practice of the
4th. Age.
it is said indeed that some Sick Children were Baptized for their Health in
this Age, and that some Dying Children might be Baptized to save them, as some
other Dying Persons were; and that some Doctors in this Age inclined from
Circumcision to bring it into the Church; but as yet none did pretend it to be
necessary, none to have been a Precept of the Gospel, as Dr. Tailor Treat. p.
105. Whereas the Baptizing of Believers after the Profession of Faith, was the
general practice of the Age, and which appears from the Three Substantial
Instances given by me in my Treatise, especially in the Reply, viz. From 1. the
Sayings of Fathers. 1st. From the Sayings of the Fathers.
2. Decrees of Councils. 3. Children of Believers unbaptized till aged, p. 4,
etc. 1. From the Sayings of the Fathers, and greatest Men of this Century, both
in Athanasius and Arnobius.
Africa, Basil, Nazianzen, Ephesians. Syrus, Epiphanius.
Asiae, and Hillarii, Ambrose, Jerome, Marius Victorinus.
Europe, asserting the necessity of Confession of Faith before Baptism, both
from Christ's Commission, Apostles Practice, and ends of the Ordinance.

Which Mr. Wills little opposes, only says, That some of these Doctors were
corrupt in other things, and so they were all, That some of them 3 or 4
asserted Infants Baptism; which I deny not, to save Dying Children; says one
of them, viz. Arnobius was spurious from Perkins; what then? the rest are
genuine; and that Arnobius on the Psalms was ever Doubted is more than I heard
before; but if he was, it signifies nothing; he also Doubts Basils Proof, urged
by me contra Eunomium, which he calls for, and which he will find l. 2. p, 24.
viz. Baptism is the Seal of Faith, but Faith is the confession of the Diety;
for First he ought to believe, and after to be Sealed with Baptism. Doubts
whether Athanasius is rightly rendered, for which I give you my Authority* That
what is urged for the necessity of Faith to precede Baptism, respected the
Adult, very true: And that some were for the Baptism of Infants, who were not
capable to make Confession; very true also; Si aliquid periculi immineat, If
any danger happned otherwise, the necessity thereof from any precept of Christ
was not yet enjoyed.

2. As to the 3 Councils, 2. Decrees of Council.
( viz. the Carthaginian, Laodicean, and Neocesarian) so positively decreeing,
That Teaching, Confession of Faith, and free choice, ought to precede Baptism.
He says, That these Decrees respected the Adult; very true; therefore not
Infants. That the Council of Carthage and Laodicea Decreed also for Exorcism,
and giving the Eucharist to dying Persons, and Penance etc. What then, if they
were corrupt in other things, were they not right here? Most of the Fathers
were for these Corruptions also. And that as to the Neocesarean Council he
says, He had as much cause to question, whether there was any such Council, as
I had to question Cyprians Council. But herein he will find himself much
mistaken, whilst the Magdeburghs, Cent. 4 c. 9. p, 615. give the Bishops Names
who sat in this Council, the time when it sat, viz. Immediately after that of
Anoyranus, which Helvicus makes to be about the 10 or 12 of Constantine.
Together with the 14 Canons of which this is one expressed at large, and which
Dr. Tailor gives us in the Original Greek, Determining as he says, that none
ought to be Baptized without giving an account of their Faith, and desiring the
same, Whilst Mr. Wills can neither produce from any Ancient and Authentic
Authority, when, or where Cyprians Council sat, or what they decreed or
determined in that Council, but what is pretended from that Epistle, which for
its corruption is so much questioned, whereof more hereafter.

The 3d. Instance, viz. from 10 of the most eminent Men of the Age, who were
not Baptized till aged, 3. From 10 of the most eminent men, not Baptized till
aged.
though the Children of Christian Parents, viz. Bazel, Gregory, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, Austin, Nectarius, Constantine, Valentinian, and
Theodosius. Concerning whom, excepting: Two of them, viz. Constantine and
Austin. he tells me he will not contend with me, but for them he doubts whether
their Parents were Christian, yet denies not but that Dr. Tailor and Mr. Baxter
may have been of my mind, whilst some others wirh himself have denied it, which
will be of great force with any considering persons; for if they had judged it
an Ordinance of Christ, so many of the Chief of the Age would not so have
neglected it.

In the next place Mr. Wills quarrels with some of my modern Authors, who
speak the same thing, viz. That in these first times none were Baptized without
prefession of Faith, viz. Strabo Rhevanus Rupertus Boemus Dr. Hammond, Mr.
Baxter, especially questions Rhenanus and Rupertus for Forgery; the first I
grant you is not proper to prove only such were Baptized, that term only being
not in it as in all the rest, but is no Forgery. As for Rupertus, it is no
Forgery; the Treat. says, They administered Baptism only to the Children of the
Church at Easter; the Reply says only the Cathechumens, which as I take it is
one and the same, as it respects the Children of the Church, who it seems were
not Baptized till aged.

But concerning Mr. B. and my abusing him, respecting his witness, that Adult
Baptism was the only necessary Baptism in these times, take his own words so
lately given us in his More Proofs, p. 279. viz. Yet again I will confess, That
the words of Tertullian and Nazianzen show, Mr. B's full grant against the
Antiquity of Infants Baptism.
that it was long before all were agreed of the very time, or of the necessity
of Baptizing Infants before any use of reason, in case they were like to live
to Maturity, for I am persuaded, that the Apostles and first Ministers were so
taken up with the Converting of Infidels, Jews and Gentiles, that the case of
Infant Baptism was so post-poned, and taken up as an Appendix to the Baptism of
the Adult, as that it was thought less needful to give it a particular express
mention in the Records and History of the Church.

Thus Mr. Baxters own Pen has given himself the lie, and just rebuke for all
his vain jangle about the point of Antiquity for Infants Baptism, which now he
is thus forced to confess the^e is no express mention in the Records and
History of the Church for, and so also at once spoiled all Mr. Wills daubery,
and silly Wranglings about this Point.

Therefore I hope it will not now be denied us that the Anabaptists have the
Antiquity on their side, not only for the first 200, but for the first 400
years, there being nothing in the Records of Church History, as is manifest,
and confessed to us also, to prove any Infant was Baptized, as a Church
Ordinance, or that they ought in point of necessity so to be; and therefore
there is no cause to question the truth of Dr. Tailors, and Dr. Barlows
positive assertions in concurrence herewith, and in confirmation hereof
remarked to us: And it is worthy of consideration, that Dr. Barlow, in his
Apologetical Lr. printed by Mr. Wills, does not gainsay the Reason and Truth of
what he formerly affirmed, but the indiscretion of writing, and unfaithfulness
of printing the same.

CENT. V.
THe Fifth Century, as we have at large proved Treat. p. 105, etc. brings in
the necessity of Infants Baptism 5. Cent. Brings in and imposes the necessity
of Infants Baptism.
to regenerate, take away sin, and to save the Soul of the Infant, and that
without which there was no Salvation to be had for them, grounded upon John
3.5. as determined in the Milevitan, and afterward in the Carthaginian
Councils, by Pope Innocentius, afterward confirmed by Pope Zozimus, and
afterward by Pope Boniface, etc. Never determined says Dr. Tailor, till the
Canon made in the Milevitan Council, so says Strabo, Luther, Grotius, Treat.
p. 107. which afterward by degrees came generally to be received both East and
West. Yet withal this is most remarkable in the enjoining thereof, that the
appointing of Gossips to confess Faith, and profess repentance in the name and
stead of the Child before Baptism, Gossips confirm the necessity of profession
before Baptism.
and the practice thereof ever since to this our day, was a great Confirmation
that the truth of the principle was owned, that Christ enjoined in the
Commission, requiring Faith should precede, and a Witness of the ancient
practice of personal profession in the former Centuries. This Invention being
found out purposely to answer the Commission: And therefore says Lud. Vives l.
1. c. 27. That none were Baptized of old but those of age, who did not only
understand what the Water meant, but desired the same; the perfect Image
whereof (says he) we have yet in our Infants Baptism; for it is asked of the
Infant, will thou be Baptized? for whom the Sureties answer, I will. And so
says Strabo Treat. p. 63. and Boemus p. 73. And upon this account both Austin,
Chrysostom, and the Doctors and Learned Men produced by me downwards through
the Papacy to our day, spoke so much (from Christ's Commission, and primitive
Saints practice) for the necessity of Faith and Repentance before Baptism, only
by their Sureties. And therefore did I so loudly call upon Mr. Wills to prove
Gossips to be an appointment of Christ, or else to allow me all those
Paedobaptists for proper Witnesses for Believers, and against Infant Baptism,
and to free me from the many Forgeries he loaded me with for the same. But
instead of doing himself and me right therein, he only returns thus to me, p.
45. vind. Mr. Danvers brings Testimony for Adult Baptism foom Paedobaptists,
and It seems astrange design to all that I have spoken with about the same,
that he should offer to bring, Chrysostom, Austin, etc. against Infant Baptism,
so making the Fathers to contradict themselves, and for which I rebuke him.

Mr. Wills declines answering the material point about Gossips.
But he takes much pains to vindicate himself, in which undertaking I find him
so full of Meanders, and tedious Circumlocutions, that I judge it not worth the
while to follow him.

By which his declining to answer so material a thing, we must take it for
granted he cannot, and therefore must still apply all those Authorities from
Paedobaptists, even from Austin to Mr. Baxter, in full Confirmation of the
practice of the Anabaptists, in their Baptizing only after profession, and in
point blank contradiction to their own practice of Baptizing Infants, who are
so incapable either to answer the Commission, primitive Saints practice, or the
Spiritual ends of that great Ordinance, and so our whole Witness stands good,
as not answered or owned by themselves. As to what he says respecting those
several falsehoods returned upon him; and the absurdities made out against him
about Tradition, from p. 51. to 83. I only desire the Reader to examine the
shortness and insufficiency of his Answers by the Reply, from p. 29 to 79. it
being not worth while to trouble them with his silly wranglings animated by
partiality, as Mr. B. phrases it. And it must be remembered to him that as to
those Stories about John a Leyden, for which he reflected so much obliquy upon
the way of Anabaptistry; which was returned upon him, and his great error and
ignorance in Story evinced with his malicious slanders and false reports he
therein published, not only against the Holland, but English Anabaptists
discovered to him: Concerning all which he makes no return, and whose silence
therein must be taken for his guilt, and bound upon him at least till he
vindicate himself, or own his folly and injustice. As also in his saying
nothing to the Arguments for dipping, against sprinkling or pouring, (about
which he has made such a flourish heretofore) is because if he be not wholly
convinced, yet that he is substantially silenced, and can say nothing thereto.

And lastly, as to what he has said against our Positive Witnesses against
Infants Baptism, we must refer him to what is said to Mr. Baxter, after whose
Copy he writes, and he having so fully granted us Tertullian, and Mr. Baxter
having granted as before, that the Beringarians, Wickliffians, and Waldenses
were against Baptizing Infants for Salvation, Manichees were expressly against
it, who were no other than Waldenses. The whole of the Book stands yet firm and
untouched, and most of it confirmed and established by their own Pens.

CHAP. II. Some Objections about Origin and Cyprian, and others, answered.
Wills tells me, p. 4. That I silently pass by what the Magdeburgs do expressly
say was in use in the 3d. age. viz. That adult Persons of both Sexes, and also
Infants were Baptized, Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 124.

Cent. 3. p. 124. viz. Origens Hom. on Leviticus, and Cyprians Epist. to Fidus,
neither of which proving, as I suppose, sufficient Authority upon the trial to
make good the same. The Words of the Magdeburgs are these, Baptizabantur autem
in utroque sexu adulti simul and infantes, That adult Persons of both Sexes and
Infants were Baptized. Nam de Infantibus Baptizandis Origines Homil 8. in
leviticum, Ecclesiam ait traditionem accepisse ab Apostolis: Et Cyprianus l. 3.
Ep. 8. For concerning the Baptizing of Children, Origens 8 Homily on Leviticus
says, That the Church received it as a Tradition from the Apopostles, and
Cyprians 8 Epistle in his 3d. Book to Fidus. Contra quod tamen etiam Tertullian
censuit in lib. de Bapt. Notwithstanding Tertullian thought otherwise in his
Book of Baptism, (mind that.)

The Arguments brought from Origin and Cyprian have been examined at large in
my Treat. p. 124. to 151. and further in the Reply p. 84. to 97. where I prove
that of Origens to be Spurious, 1. Origens Testimony examined.
and not only that upon Levit. and Romans which Mr. Wills cannot now deny,
[whereby the Magdeburgs proof is out of doors] but what he says also upon
Luke, with my grounds urged for the same from Vossius, Scultetus, Erasmus, Dr.
Owen. (1) Because the Original is not extant. (2) Because what is therein
pretended from Origin, viz. That Children must be Baptized to take away Orignal
sin, (so contrary to his own judgment) he being the head of the Arrians.
Therefore how fair this is for Mr. Wills to boast of this Antiquity, and yet
decline Answering to their Arguments, I leave all Men to judge. Who is pleased
without any one word of Answer to that which is so positively said to enervate
what is pretended for Luke, yet in a scurilous and pedantick way to say p. 93
Vind. We see by what is said, That we have Infants Baptism owned, as from the
Apostles, by Origin on Luke, what ev^r becomes on the Romans, and translated by
(...), etc. So that the Fabreck stands yet uprig^^, never like to be demolished
by Mr. Danvers, that ever great Exploits he has done heretofore in the days of
his Collonelship.

Concerning which proof from Origin, you have Dr. Tailor in his liberty of
Prophecy, p. 237. Thus, D. Tailors full witness against Origens Testimony.
viz. None of the reformed Churches can pretend this Argument for this opinion:
Because they who reject Tradition, when it is against them, must not pretend it
in the least for them; but if the Topic be allowed to be good, yet how will it
be verified? For so far as can yet appear, it relies wholly upon the Testimony
of Origin, for from him Austin had it, a Person whom all other Ages have
condemned of Errors, and whose works have been judged so spurious. etc.

And that it was the opinion of the Primitive Church, That Infants ought not to
be Baptized, is clear, faith he, in the Canon of the Council of Neocesaria,
determining, that none ought to be Baptized without giving an account of their
Faith, and desiring the same. And agreeable hereto witnessing the the Doctor,
spoke fully his own sense herein, take that parallel passage writ in one of his
last pieces, in his Disswasive against Popery, writ 1667. viz. That there is a
Tradition to Baptize Ynfants relies but upon Two Witnesses, Origin and Austin,
and the latter having received it from the former, it relies wholly upon a
single Testimony, which is but a pitiful Argument to prove a Tradition
Apostolical, he is the first that spoke it, but Tertullian that was before him
seems speak against, which he would not have done, if it bad been a Tradition
Apostolical, and that it was not so, it is but too certain, if there be any
Truth in the woriss of Lud. Vives, saying, that anciently none were Baptized
but Persons of riper Ages.

2. Cyprians Testimony furtheo examined.
Then as to Cyprians Ep. to Fidus, (which is so much leaned upon, the other
proving but a broken Reed) supposing there was such a Council; (which yet no
Author can tell us when, and where held, and what therein determined) and that
this Epistle was genuine, (against which I have much to say, Stephens, Daylle,
Erasmus, and others proving how much his Works as well as Origens have been
abused, and things fathered upon him that were never his) yet the erroneous
grounds upon which Infants Bahtism is asserted therein, takes away the Credit
and Authority of the said Council, determining as one well says Childrens
Baptism, by such Childish Reasons.

But the matter of Fact say they is clear, which witnessed, that the Church had
then such a practice, and which all our three Adversaries much insist upon,

As to matter of Fact in Antiquity, (if this should be granted, of which I see
not much cause, for at best it was but advice, and that upon erroneous grounds
too, no President as yet apparing in the Case) it would signify little to
create a practice from it. For that Children were Baptized for health, and
Church Walls were also solemnly Baptized for dedication, and after that Bells
etc. cannot be denied, shall we therefore be warranted to do the like from
those Presidents? But in as much as here was no Example, or matter of Fact, nor
any advice but upon corrupt and erroneous grounds, this can signify nothing;
the grounds of the advice being rejected by the Paedobaptists, therefore the
advice it self as to matter of Fact is rejected be them also; all that can be
gathered from it, if true, is only that such a Custom was creeping in. We know
giving the Sacrament to Infants is supposed to be very ancient, and continued
very long in use 600 years, says Maldonat on Jo. 6. and that amongst the
Greeks as well as Latins, assisted by Austin, Innocent, and others, (if not by
Cyprian also) and that it was Apostolical, or founded upon the Scriptures, but
is not that rejected?

But holy Cyprian, says Mr. Baxter, tells us, as p. 276. More Proofs, was an
eminent worthy, a great Father and Pillar of the Church, and ought not to be
slighted. Yet by his leave Father Cyprian was not Father Paul, nor any Apostle
to us, nor does he give us any warranty from the Word of God, and Chrlsts
Precept to ground such a practice upon, but the contrary, and that which
Paedobaptists now a days reject, as very erroneous. And if he tells us, we
should do any thing as Apostolical without a word, we must give as little
credit to him, as when he tells us, Chrysm is so, (which the Magd. tell us he
does, Cent. 3. p. 82. out of Cyprian, l. 1. Ep. 12. though Mr. Wills denies the
same) or as when he tells us of the necessity of Exorcisms, the Authority of
Peter's Chair, Alms to take away sin, that the Administrator gives the Spirit in
the act of Baptism, of Rebaptization, by undoubted Councils confirmed,
Perfusion of the Clinici, Diluting of Wine, or mingling Water with it in the
Sacrament etc.

I have been the larger upon these Two, Origin and Cyprian, because my Three
Antagonists, and others, do lay so much stress upon them, to prove their
Antiquity from, but how little they signify you now see.

Thus we have ended the point of Antiquity; and which we shall conclude with an
Appeal to the Learned An Appeal to the Learned.
of all persuasions, Whether there is not good cause to write Antiquity upon
Believers, and Novelty upon Infants Baptism; Nothing more appearing for it for
the Four first Centuries, than has yet been brought forth by our opposites, And
so much for the Antiquity of Believers Baptism.

CHAP. III. Gives answer to Mr. Wills his Appeal in all the parts of it.
THe better to help the Appellants (viz. the Baptists) to give a righteous
judgment in the matters brought to their Bar, by Mr. Wills in his Appeal: And
for the satisfaction of all men, I do hereby ^oyn issue with him in the candid
examination thereof.

Mr. Wills his Appeal to the Baptists, as you find, consists of 8 Complaints,
the which I distinctly answer as follows.
1. His first Complaint against me is, 1. Prevarication.
For leaving out part of what my Authors say, to make the Sentence more for my
purpose; and for which he gives six Instances.

In Reply whereto, I first say in general, Answered. 1. Generally.
That in the quoting of Authors we are obliged to give only what they speak to
the thing in hand, without unnecessary repetitions. And therefore Mr. Wills in
his own case, when I blamed him p. 48. Reply, for leaving out part of that
remarkable Sentence out of Nazianzen, viz. where he brings him to affirm, That
a Child may be Baptized, leaving out the next words, si aliquid periculi
imminoat, if any thing of danger happened. And in Excuse thereof is pleased to
make the following return Vind. p. 7. viz. That I do exclaim against him for
Curtailing that Father. but (says he) the Judicious Reader may understand,
that he quarrels at me without cause; for my business was to prove, That Infant
Baptism was owned in that Century as to matter of Fact, and not to discover the
ground of it, or to enquire in what Cases it was done; and therefore he might
have spared his frivolous Charge about that matter.

Which Rule of his own, however it may serve to relieve him for leaving out
that passage, (which I doubt, and is not now my b^siness to dispute) to be sure
it will justine me in all the 6 Particulars charged upon me under this head.
Yet this by the way, as to the reason of his omitting that passage; because,
says he, in the former words the matter of fact is to be made good, (viz. That
Infant Baptism was owned in this Century) is manifest. But he knows the
Question is not, Whether an Infant might be Baptized; for at another time he
can tell us, That every Baptism is not the Baptism intended, but only that
which is done in Christ's way in obedience to his Rule. So that if a Child was
Dipped, which it might be accidentally by chance, or occasionally upon some
emergency, or Medicinally to cure Diseases, (as some were in this Age) or
superstitiously to save its dying Soul, which was only the fancy intended in
this place, (and therefore should not have been omitted, for spoiling the
scope) it would signify nothing, being no Baptism of Christ's appointment, the
matter of fact being only to be made out, when the necessity of such a practice
in obedience to Christ's Command in performing a Gospel Ordinance is proved. And
which Mr. Baxter grants us, was not as yet to be proved by any Church Record;
and never till the Milevitan Council, says Dr. Tailor.

In the next place, for your better satisfaction, 2ly Particularly.
I shall speak to each Particular: And,

First, as to the quotation out of Daille 1. About Dailles.
l. 2. p 149. mentioned Treat. p. 62. My business was therein to discover, That
the Ancients deferred Infants Baptism, therefore I gave the several Instances
from him of those who had their Baptism de^erred till aged, viz. Ambrose,
Nazianzen, Bazil, etc. who appear undeniably to have been the Children of
Christian Parents, and that it was, as he says, the opinion of some of the
Fathers, That it is fit Infants Baptism should be deferred: And how comes it to
pass, that there is not the least tracing or footing of this Custom in the
Church of Rome. Nay, whence is it besides, that they will not so much as endure
the very mention of it, and would abhor the Man that should go about to
practice it, (the Truth whereof we find also, and feel) etc.

But says Mr. Wills, Daille mentions the deferring the Baptism of other people
also, and why did I leave that out? For the Reason Mr. Wills gives, because it
was not so much ad rem. Though if I had, it would have done him no service, it
Daille understood himself, who refers us to what he had before spoken about it,
which we find in p. 72. where he tells us, That some were of opinion, That
elder People should be deferred Baptism, as well as Infants, agreeing therein,
says he, with the Anabaptists, (which indeed is our Custom, waiting for fruits
meet for Repentance in the first place, so deferring elder as well as younger.

2. The Canon of the Council of Constant.
And as to the Second, about the Canon of the Council of Constant. I find upon
search, that though the 2d Chapter, referred to by the Magd. and Mr. Wills
mentions no more then what follows, viz. Si parvulus aegrotans ad quemlibet
Presbyterum Baptismi gratia de cujuslibet parochia allatus fuerit, ei Baptismi
Sacramentum nullo modo denegetur; siquis hoc munus petenti concedere
detrectaverit, and ille parvulus absque Baptismi gratia mortuus fuerit noverit
ille qui eum non Baptizavit pro ejus anima rationem redditurum. Yet the 7th.
Chapter which neither point to, expresses what Mr. Wills repeats from the Magd.
about it; and withal, it does now appear also, that that 7th. Chapter is one
of the 9 Binius reckons to be spurious, in these words, Hi novem sequentes
Canones falso adscribuntur sextae Synedo; sed quia pij cum primis esse videntur
noluimus curiosum Lectorem eorum cognitione fraudare. Bin. Tom. 5. p. 361. And
therefore upon the whole, though i^ be sufficient to clear me, that the
omitting the exception in that place was not with an intention to deceive,
having in my Book twice mentioned it; yet I acknowledge, it should have been
expressed, or rather the whole quotation omitted, and do now disown it.

3. That out of Calvin's Institutes.
Thirdly, As to that passage out of Calvin's Institutes, wherein I bring him p.
91. Treat. to confess, That it is no where expressly mentioned by the
Evangelists, that any one Child was by the Apostles hands Baptized; which he
in^imates, was not Calvin's sense, but expressed by him to have been the objection
of Fools, the which Mr. Wills might blush to mention, when he knows Calvin
himself to own it as the next words express, viz. Et si enim id nominatim ab
Evangelistis non narratur, i. e. For although it is not by the Evangelists
expressly mentioned: And is not that the making it his own? Concluding that
their solly only lay in not receiving it, equivalent with Scripture, in as much
as Infants were not excluded by Scripture, Guilty of what he accuses.
and that whole Families are mentioned to be baptized: And therefore whether
Mr. Wills did fairly in stopping his Translation where he did (that it might
appear to those that understood not Latin to be so gross as he would make it,
and thereby render himself to be guilty of the very thing be falsely accuses me
of, viz. To leave out part of the Author, that discovers he speaks quite
otherwise than he is made to speak, Romans 2.1.) is submitted to his Conscience,
and the considerate Reader.

Fourthly, As to what he complains to have been left out in Bellarmin, 4ly.
Bellarmine, and 6. Dr. Field.
viz. That Infants Baptism was to be deduced out of Scripture, p. 95. And that
out of Dr. Field, That the grounds of it were taken out of Scripture, p. 155,
1. Ed. were also omitted from his own grounds aforesaid: Because I there quoted
both of them under the Head of Tradition, (they both with so much positiveness
asserting Infants Baptism so to be) yet you will find, that when I speak to that
Head of Consequences from Scripture, I quote them both, as Reply, p. 74.
Lastly, Dr. Owens.


And lastly, As to that of Dr. Owen, p. 175. which with Estius, Ainsworth and
Ames, I brought to prove the Seed of Abraham, Genesis 17.7. respected the
Spiritual Seed only, viz. the Elect, who were to partake of the Spiritual
Promises, (and not the Carnal Seed, as Paedo-baptists generally take it,) which
the D^. does so fully and at large evince: And therefore that Clause he excepts
against, was by his own Rule well enough left out, that speaks to another
thing. Though I confess, had I supposed that the omitting it, would have been
any injury to the Dr. or just offense to any man, or any wrong to truth I
should have mentioned it, and which I may well do without any prejudice to the
cause I maintain. For if I had been to prove that Circumcision, tha^ External
Administration of the Covenant which the Jews had, belonged to their Carnal
Seed, I should have mentioned that; but in as much as the other was the matter
in hand, I know not that it was so heinous to omit it, Mr. Wills in his own
Case being Judge. It is our belief that (as the Dr. says) the external
Administration of the Covenant, viz. Ci^cumcision did belong to Abraham, and
his Carnal Seed (the Jews) under the legal Administration; yet it follows not
therefore, that Baptism belongs to his Carnal Seed under the Gospel
Dispensation. And therefore the omitting that Phrase, which is not at all
disputed betwixt us, could not be from any injurious design. And therefore I
conceive I deserve not the severe rebuke, he is pleased to give me for the
same, viz. That I am therein guilty of much dishonesty,
and that it is such an unworthy carriage, that be never observed the like in
any man. Though truly if I should have put it in, I know not what advantage Mr.
Wills could make of it at another time, except he concludes, that the same
^ederal right to the Carnal Seed, is continued under the Gospel, as it was
under the Law, and gives the same right to claim the same privileges now, as
that did to the Jews before: If so, surely John Baptist did greatly mistake
himself, when he forbad them Baptism upon that consideration, and bids them not
to say within themselves, that they were the Children of Abraham, for that must
not now serve their turns, it being only Fruits meet for Repentance, that that
must qualify them for the Baptism of Repentance, (and Gospel Ordinances and
Privile^ges) and not their old Carnal Privilege to be Abraham's flesh^y Seed,
in which they mainly boasted, and whereon ^hey bolste^ed themselves. And
suitable he^eto does Dr. Owen himself very excellently tell us in his 6.
Exercit, on the Heb. p. 56 Tom. 1. viz.

That the misapprehension hereof was the main thing that confirmed the Jews in
their obstinacy and unbelief, that being only a peculiar Privilege to that
fleshly Seed, for the bringing forth of the Messiah into the World, and that
when he was come, that Privilege fell, and all Ordinances suited thereto,
expired, and new Ordinances of Worship more suitable to the Gospel were
appointed, etc. That whole Exercitation being written with so much Judgment
and Spirituality, I would earnestly recommend it to Mr. Wills, and Mr. Whistons
Considerations, and all other of their minds, who would, upon like
misapprehesions, have Gospel Ordinances and Privileges still entailed upon the
fleshly Seed, upon that old federal right which was only Typical, as well
observed to us, and done away, (having done its business) when Christ came into
the world, that greater Privileges, and better Ordinances suited to the Gospel
dispensation might take place. Jesus Christ as the Dr. so well tells us in his
Cat. p. 106. Requiring Regeneration as an indispensible condition in a Member
of his Church, a Subject of his Kingdom: For his Temple is now to be built of
Living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. viz. Men spiritually, and savingly quickened, from
their Death in sin by the Holy Ghost, (whereof they are partakers) made a meet
Habitation for God, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. and page 103. God
has appointed Saints to be the seat and subject of all his Ordinances, having
granted the right of them to them alone, 1 Timothy 3.15. But this by the By, which
may not be unseasonable upon this occasion. Thus I have dispatched the first
Head, not doubting but I have given ample satisfaction therein.

II. His Second Complaint against me is, for adding to Authors Adding to
Authors.
without the Distinction of a different Character, whereof he gives seven
Instances.
Answered. 1. Generally.
This is a Charge that I think may concern most Writers, and it is confessed,
that many times it falls out, that through the inadvertency of Writers, or
carelessness of Printers, that Quotations out of Authors are not always
written in a different Character, whereby the Reader is at a loss many times,
whether he reads his Author, or another Man that he refers to: And which is the
fault, as Mr. Wills knows, of the Magdeburgs, of the Bazil Impression, and the
fault of Mr. Wills his present Book, which I could abundantly evi^ence, if I
would be Critical, and troub^e the Reader with such Impertinencies. And wherein
any such omission has been in any of my Writings, I can truly say they have not
been wilful, but my trouble to find, and of which I shall be more careful for
the future, and so will I hope my Corrector. But to be more particular to your
7 Instances, viz.

Those Two added to the Magdeburgs are truly their own, 2. Particularly.
though not so immediately following in that Page. That other of Chrysostom was
purely my own and should have been distinguished. That which he calls my adding
to Jerome, positively saying they are none of his words, though I tell you, that
he says it is, is Mr. Wills his grofs mistake; for he will find they are his
own words in his Annot. upon Mat. 28. Tom. 9. Edit. Paris, Anno 1546. viz. Non
enim potest fieri ut corpus Baptismi recipiat Sacramentum, nisi ante anima
fidei susceperit veritatem, i. e. For it cannot be, that the Body should
receive that Sacrament of Baptism, till the Soul has before received the
verity of Faith. That to Lydia is not an adding to the Scripture, but my own
sense of the words, concluding, that only Believers in her Household were
Baptized, of which I speak at large in my Reply, p. 184. That to Beza's is
easily understood not to be his, by any ordinary Reader. And that to Ames very
plainly. But what Injury done herein, and what the obstinacy calling for an
Appeal, is left to all to judge.

Forgery.
III. The Third Complaint is, For making Authors affirm one thing, when they
affirm the directly contrary, yea, contradicting my self.
Answered. 1. About Estius.
1. The first he mentions, is that of Estius for Calvin, heretofore owned by me,
which savours nothing of Ingenuity, though in looking into my Book, I find I am
not altogether so tardy as I took my self to be; for whoever pleases to look p.
176. in the end of that Quotation, will find, that I put Estius Ann. Genesis 17.7.
and by what mistake Calvin came to be mentioned in the beginning of it, I know
not, therefore how fair Mr. Wills was in that Cavil, and since, by his
unmerciful inculcating the same, is left to the Reader.

2. Dr. Hamond on Joh. 13.10.
2. The second is, for mistaking, (as he says) a Quotation out of Dr. Hamond,
quite contrary to what he affirms, with his remark upon it, viz. No wonder Mr.
D mistakes Latin Authors so often, when he cannot rightly understand those that
are in English. But what cause there is for the same, and that it ought rather
to be turned upon himself, will appear by the following Parallel.

Dan. Treat. p. 194. Dr. Hamonds An. on Joh. 13.10. printed for R. Royston,
1653 Mr. Wills says, that Dr. Hamond says, Dr. Hamond upon Joh. 13.10 tells
us, that (...) signifies an Immersion, or washing the whole body, and which
answers to the Hebrew word (...) used for dipping in the Old Testament. The
Heb. had their (...) or (...), and their (...) the former, ( viz. (...))
washing of the whole body, which they call (...), the other of the hands or
feet, which they call (...), sanctifying. The Heb. had their (...), and their
(...), or (...), the former (that is (...)) the washing of the whole body,
which they call (...), the other two (that is (...) and (...)) of the hands or
feet.

And then has the confidence to say, Mr. D. tells us, the Dr. says Baptismos
signifies an Immersion, or washing of the whole Body, and answers to the Hebrew
word (...), whereas indeed he tells us, That (...) signifies the washing of the
whole Body, and answers to (...).

Now that this was exactly agreeable to the Drs. Writings elsewhere in the said
Book, as well as the truth, the Reader is desired to peruse him upon Mark 7.4.
p. 172. where he says, That the word (...) (as it differs from (...) v. 3.
which belongs to the hands or feet) signifies the washing of the whole body.
Thus it is said of Eupolis (which wrote the Tragedy called Baptae against
Alcibiades) that being taken and thrown into the Sea (...), and so the Baptisms
of Cups, etc. in the end of this Verse is putting into water all over, rincing
them: Two words there are used by the Hebrews for washing. 1. (...), the word
used for washing hands and feet only, the (...) here; And 2. (...) immersion
of the whole body, to which (...) answers. And upon Mat. 3.1. p. 14. As the
Jews call those Lakes wherein they wash themselves (...), so in the Christian
Church the (...), or Vessel which contained the Baptismal Water is often called
(...), a swimming or diving place. -- And further, John in token of the
resolved change of the Jews, put them into the Water, and dipped them all over,
and so took them out again; And upon the sincerity of their change, promised
them remission of sins. And now whether it be Mr. Wills or I that have abused
Mr. Hamond, is submitted to the unprejudiced Reader.

3. About the Popes Name Deus dedit.
As to the Third I grant, Deus dedit appearing to me two words, and not the Name
of a Man; I rendered it Deo dans, or Gods gift, not considering, as Mr. Wills
observes, that there had been a Pope of that Name, which since I find in the
Catalogue of Popes, and therefore acknowledge it to be my error.

4. Quotation out of Walden.
Fourthly, as to the Quotation out of Walden, I acknowledge Mr. Wills has truly
rectified to our advantage, which confirms more fully, that Wickliffe, and his
followers, were against Infants Baptism, in agreement with the Albegois, and
Sylvester in Scotland, though different from Pelagius and Vicentius Victor,
which was my mistake, who (as it is said) held Infants Baptism, and thereby
reproved himself for asserting the quite contrary, viz. That Walden affirms,
That Wickliffe held Infants Baptism, p. 45. of his Vind.

The words of Walden relating to Wickliffe are, Nostri Wiclivistae Baptismum
Ecclesiasticum inutile judicant parvulis, which [parvulis] Mr. Wills very
unworthily leaves out, to insinuate to his Reader, that they rejected all
Baptism, whereas that term expressly limits it to little ones; nor can I
seriously conjecture, but its rather a lapsus mentis then error Calami or
Typographi: Nor does he take notice of the reason assigned there for their
denying Infants Baptism, which is the very same Mr. Wills, and those of his
mind, produce for its practice, viz. sufficienter eos aiunt esse mundatos and
sanctos, quia de sanctis parentibus and Christianis nascuntur, i. e. They deem
them sufficiently cleans'd and holy, because they are born of Holy and
Christian Parents. And now whether Mr. Wills his Curtailing this Quotation, or
my harmless and unndesigned mistake of asserting Wickliffe to agree with
Pelagius be the more blameable, I humbly submit to consideration.

The Fifth is no contradiction, 5. That of 1. Cor. 7.14
which is only an Allusion to those in Ezra's time that put away their strange
Wives, Similies not running of all four, as Mr. Wills would stretch it.

The Sixth is no Contradiction, 6. Quotation out of Frank.
for Infants Baptism might be universally received, and yet in many places
little esteemed, has it not been so heretofore here in England, as to that as
well as other things I could mention? 1. Because persons may little esteem
things they receive. 2. By universal, I explain my self to mean the Greek and
Latin Churches, (which admitted of exception) viz. Those that submitted to the
Pope, and those that were under the Patriarchs.

7. An Assertion of my own.
The Seventh is no Contradiction, which in the former Chapter I have so fully
cleared; there being Antiquity for Believers Baptism in the first Centuries,
but no Record for Infant Baptism, as Mr. Baxter grants, in the Church
Histories. So that no primitive Antiquity for the same, though the Ancients in
after Ages did assert it.

So that what ezceptions he has made hitherto, are but slender, and not of that
Moment, nor so persisted in, as to deserve an Appeal.

False Translation.
IV. He charge me with perverting the sense of Authors by the falseness of
Translations, whereof he gives Nine Instances.
Answered.

1. Generally.


As to Translations, I conceive there is a great liberty allowed, provided the
scope and intention of the Author be well heeded; and therefore says Mr.
Marshal in his Defense, p. 16. Translations are various, some affect in their
Translations to follow their Author Kata poda, to have the very footsteps of
the words they translate; other Translations are Metaphrastical, or by way of
Paraphrase they expound as they translate; thus several men have their several
fancies though they adhere to to the Author which they translate, even when
they keep not in all things to his words; Jerome gives Instances in the
Septuagint translations, whose Testimony I need not name to you. But to the
particulars.

As to the first of Bullingers, 2. Particularly.

1. Bullingers.


I did not translate it, but transcribed it word for word out of that Author,
called, A very plain and well grounded Treatise concerning Baptism. p. 14.
mentioned by me p. 9. It is true, I confess, I should have expressed it, or
rather have searched the original my self, and so should Mr. Wills, when he so
mistakenly quoted one from Dr. Holmes, and did neither, and another from the
Magdeburgs about Erasmus.

As to the Second, about Nazianzen, 2. Nazianzen.
Baptizandos peccatae sua confiteri solitos, I own it should be rendered, The
Baptized were wont to confess their sins. Nor did I give it as a translation,
verbatim; but what I apprehended to be the consequential sense, which I deduce
thus: [the Baptized] being an indefinite term, and equipolent with an
universal, is as much, as if all the Baptized did so; and if all did confess
their sins, then none but such we^e Baptized in the first times, which is
concurrent with the sense of so many Authors, so positively affirming the same
thing; and if that be not the meaning, I humbly conceive the expression
(otherwise understood) may be somewhat impertinent, it being owned of all
hands, that the Adult in all Ages so to do.

The Third is of Olympiodorus, 3. Olympiodorus.
a mere quibble, and catching at words; the word [Born] by the words going
before, viz. Spiritual Li^e, being easily understood to be [born again] however
the word [again] came to be omitted.

The Fourth of Albertus, is of like Import; 4. Albertus
for if Baptism cannot through the incapacity of the subject operate upon them,
it may be truly said in a Paraphrastical Translation, That it is not proper to
admit Infants thereto: For if it cannot operate in any other but the Adult, who
are illuminated and called, who can draw Virtue from Christ's Death and
Resurrection, then Baptism not proper for other.

5. Albinus.
Neither is the Fifth from Albinus ill rendered or perverting the sense if you
take the scope, and former words, which speak the thing he excepts against; and
which Mr. Wills leaves out, a liberty being granted to paraphrase, keeping to
the sense, though contracting the words.

The Sixth is no perverting or mis-representing the Magdeb. in saying, They
tell us, That in the latter end of the Fourth Cent. they Baptize Children,
giving it from the testimony of Athanasius, who writ in the latter part of the
4th. Cent. That Contra Arianos being writ, as says Helvicus, Anno 360 But I
have since made appear, that the Magdeb. tell us therein an untruth; for that
pretended account was from Athanasius's supposed Questions, which they
themselves afterward confess to be spurious, as I have told Mr. Wills, and he
confesses to be true, and therefore wonder, that he should have the Confidence
to put this under the notion of mis-representation, or mis-translation, it
being neither. Had I given a translation of the former part of the sentence,
respecting Origin and Cyprian (before refuted by me, and which I cencern'd not
with my self, then) and not rende^'d [in Ecclesiijs Affricaenis] in the
Affrican Churches, there might be some ground of Cavil; but whereas I did not,
I hope I may be excused. The words are, Hoc vero seculo eundem [viz. Baptismum]
durasse ex Athanasio constat, quaest. 124. i. e. It appears from Athanasius
124. question, that it (viz. Infant Baptism) was in this Age. So that what I
say respects the time, and not whether all or part of the Affrican Churches.
But if to say in the Affrican Churches they Baptized Children, pleases Mr.
Wills, I am contented it should be so; and let him make the most of it.

The 7th. concerning the Milevitan Decree, 7. About the Milevitan Canon.
viz. That first part of the Canon, That all that affirm, that young Children
receive Everlasting life, albeit they be not by the Sacrament of Grace or
Baptism renewed. I made it not, nor abused that Council, nor mis-translated
their words, for in the Verse before going, as the Magdeburgs express it, p.
835. they represent the crime of those they censure in these words, Non
opitulari parvulis ad consequendam vitam Aeternam Christianae gratiae
Sacramentum, viz. That the Sacrament of Cristian Grace (or Baptism) profits not
little Children to Everlasting Life. The same also is expressed by the whole
Council to Innocentius, in their Synodical Epistle, p. 842. in these words,
pueros qu^que parvulos si nullis innoventur, and gratiae Sacramentis, habituros
vitam Aeternam. The same is also in Innocents Decretal Letter, p. 845. which he
reiurned to the Council in these words, Illud vero quod eos vestra fraternitas
asserit praedicare, parvulos Aeternae Vitae praemijs, etiam sine Baptismatis
gratia, posse donari perfatuum est; And to meet with those Heretics, (as they
counted them) was the decree I mentioned, made, and which is to be found in
Regia Collect. Tom. 4. p. 559. immediately after the words recited by Mr. Wills
ex Pervetusto codices, out of a very ancient Copy, thus. Item placuit, ut
siquis dicit ideo dixisse Dominum, in domo patris mei mansiones multae sunt, ut
intelligatur, quia in regno Caelorum erit aliquis medius, aut ullus alicubi
locus, ubi beat vivant parvuli, qui sine Baptismo ex hac vita migrarunt, sine
quo in regno Caelorum quod est vita aeterna intrare non possunt Anathema sit;
and which is the very thing I affirmed: and therefore I hope will justify me
from this Charge, giving only an Epitome, and not the whole of the Decree, out
of the Decretals themselves, not the Magdeburgs. It Is true, the Canon has not
this Appendix to it, where recited by the Magdeburgs, nor in Reg. Collect. p.
362. though properly belonging to it; but where the Affrican Canons are
collected, repeated, and confirmed under Caelestinus Pope, and Theodosius
Emperor, Anno 424. it is annexed. And then this 2d. Canon of the Milevitan
Council, with this annexed, is made the 77th Affrican Canon. And I must further
inform the Reader, that the Mag'd. confounded these two Milevitan Councils
together, putting the latter, which was in the year 416, under the year 402.
which was the first Milevitan Council in Numidia in Africa; and both held
under Innocent Pope, and Theodosius Emperor; which mistake is taken notice of
in Regia Collectione, with the grounds thereof. And in p. 541. you will find these
words beginning the Collection, Sequuntur Concilia Affricana sub Innocentio
habita: which includes the Canon I cite in p. 559. aforesaid.

1. About P. Innocents Blasphemy.
That the 8th. is no mis-representation, in saying, That P. Innocentius
attributed divine Honor to the Popedom, will be easily conceived, inasmuch, as
he singled out Peter, and attributed Divine Honor to him, put confidence in
him, and desired help from him in conjunction with God himself; and whether he
did it as to Pope Peter, or St. Peter, is not much material, the former is
probable. And therefore does Fox 2 Vol. p. 1020. etc. tell us in how many
things the Popes blasphemously match themselves with God himself.

The 9th. out of Vossius, 9. Quotation out of Vossius.
giving the Reasons from the Ancients, why they Baptized Men and Women naked,
is a full and clear Translation, as fully made good from those particular
instances given out of Vossius from Cyril, Chrysostom, Cretensis, Anselm,
Ambrose, etc. his being a miserable trifle in his Appeal to the Reader, whether
the Reasons given, were not because their naked Bodies were to be Baptized, and
not the Clothes, as I ignorantly (as he says) affirm, whereas I give those
Reasons, why they Baptized their naked Bodies, and not the Clothes, viz. That
they might be, as in the state of Innocence; and as in their first Birth, and
as they expect to be in Heaven, or as Christ was was nailed to the Cross. From
the Ancients, which they expressly make out in p. 32.

Therefore it is left to the Reader to judge, where there is the least
mis-representation, or false Translation in all these Particulars, and what
cause to make an Appeal for the same.

V. Forgery.
The Fifth thing he complains against me for is, For fathering upon Authors
that which they indeed say not, at least in the places, by me quoted; whereof
he gives 8 Instances.
Answered. 1: Quotation out of Luther.
The first as to a Quotation out of Luther de Sacrament. Tom. 3. fol. 168. I
transcribed it out of the same Author before mentioned, the plain and well
grounded Treatise, p. 25. I have since examined that Tome, but cannot there
find it; supposing, they either misquoted the Tome, or else quoted it out of
another Edition, concluding, so large a Quotation was not fathered upon him, he
speaking much that Language in other places.

2. Out of Bazil.
To the Second, as to the Quotation of Bazil, contra Eunom. who only say, That
he says, lib. 3. That Baptism is the Seal of Faith. But he will find the rest
of the Sentence in that Book of Bazil they refer to, viz. lib. 3. p 84. Baptism
is the Seal of Faith; but Faith, the Confession of the Deity: for first he
ought to believe, and after to be sealed with Baptism. Nam credere prius
oportet ac postea Baptismate designari.


3. Magdeb.
To the Third, where he says, That the Magdeburgs do not say, it was the
universal practice to Baptize the Adult under the 4th. Cent. as I affirm they
do. I say, That I have made it appear, they do by those Instances mentioned by
them, from the sayings of the Doctors, and the Decrees of Councils, that
Decreed only for Adult Baptism; and for which, I refer you to the former
Chapter for further proof, that I did not mis-represent them therein. If I
speak their sense, though vary in words, and contract what they say at large, I
do them no injury. But so they do express it.

4. Arnobius.
To the 4th, That I quote Arnobius, a spurious Author, whilst I blame him for
such, and which I say, I take out of the Magd. whereas the Magdeburgs have it
not.

To which I say first, I do not know, that Arnobius upon the Psalms, is a
spurious Author, should I have quoted him out of Perkins, who (Mr. Wills says)
tells us, it is spurious, as he did Athanasius's questions out of the Magdeb.
which they said was so, I had been liable to like Reproof. Neither 2dly. did I
say, I took Arnobius out of the Magdeburgs; I said the Magd. did give some of
those that followed, not all, he being mentioned upon the 146. Psalm, and not
from any Book or Page in the Magdeburgs.

The Fifth, 5. Out of Aquinus.
it is true, is a mistake as placed by the Printer, but not intended, as easily
discerned by the Reader, being put down as an additional Proof out of Albertus,
having Inserted 3 before, the Printer putting Aquinus before the last of them,
and so made that which I had put, viz. [And again] to belong to Aquinus, and
not to Albertus. Which Venial mistake he makes equivolent with that grand one
of Bazil for Nazianzen, which he so egregiously abused me for, and boasted what
great acquaintance he had with Father Bazil, putting it down as a great remark
3 several times: This of mine being a proof for him, viz. to prove Infants
Baptism; therefore it matters not much, whether from one or the other, they
both speaking the same thing, that of his, wholly against me.

As to the 6th. the Magd. tell us, 6. Out of the Magd.
That Infants as well as the Adult, were Baptized; and instance only in a
Queen then Baptized, whom Zonaras calls Rossorum Reginam. And that is all (I
confess) that Zonaras is concerned in it.

The 7th. is such another trifle. I say, 7. Out of Vossius.
Vossius says, (for he was a Collector from Authors; and those he quotes, we
may in propriety of speech attribute to him) That Nectarius was made Bishop of
Constantinople before he was Baptized, he says, he was but appointed so, the
stress of the proof lying, That he was a Believer at age before he was
Baptized, there being no such great difference, betwixt being made and
appointed Bishop in the Case. And Beza there gives instances, not of obscure
persons, but of persons, as he says, that had the eyes of all upon them
Baptized at Age, viz. Constantine, Nectarius, and Nazianzen.

8. One of Mr. B.
The 8th. is much like his fellows, in a Quotation from Mr. Baxter, proving
against the Popish Doctrine, ex opere operato, to work Grace by the deed done,
I brought him to say, That Baptism of it self cannot give Grace or
Regeneration, nor can work any such cause; for Water, he says, is not a
subject either capable of receiving or conveying Grace to the Soul. But he
says, I abuse Mr. Baxters words, who says, That Baptism can be no such cause,
whereby I do, as he says, attribute Nonsense and Absurdity to him; and that
there is neither Innocence nor Truth in so affixing it. If to work no such
cause, be such an error, it is a venial one, and I can say, not wilful; but
certainly this Man would make notable work with me, if he had matter to work
upon. But what just cause of Complaint or Appeal in all this, I profess
seriously, I see not.

Misplacing Quotations
VI. The 6th is, for picking out of Authors here and there, and joining them
together, as if they were one entire Sentence, whereof he gives four Instances.
To the 3 first, viz. Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, Answered.
and Dr. Tailor, I say, I have put down nothing but their own, and what is
congruous, one thing answering properly and naturally with another, which if it
did not, we should, I presume, have heard of.

And for what relates to himself, which is the 4th. I have done him no wrong,
the Pages mentioned by me, viz. p. 36, 38, 101, 131, 132. I have particularly
examined, and desire the Reader so to do; and let him judge betwixt us, whether
he does not in those Pages compared again and again say, That as there is no
Scripture expressly commanding, so neither is there any Scripture excluding
Infants from Baptism, nor any Scripture that says, there was no Infant
Baptized, each Page I would have put down, but that I would not burden the
Reader; which you find expressed by me in my Reply, p. 63. and the several Pages
particularly expressed, I refer to. And what good cause is given to complain of
me in this, I see as little as the former.

VII. The 7th. is, for asserting notorious untruths, Notorious untruths.
giving Instances of Eight.
The first for affirming, 1. Answered.
That Antiquity it self, so much boasted of, is altogether for Believers, and
not for Infants Baptism, 1. About Antiquity for Infant Baptism.
an Assertion, as he says, so notoriously false, that I have confuted my self
in owning the ancients asserted it.

This is already answered again and again, I hope to satisfaction, viz. That
primitive Antiquity is only for Believers, and not for Infants Baptism; and the
Ancients in latter, not former Centuries, only for Infants Baptism.

2. About Christning a Dead Child.
The Second for saying, That a Child that dyed unbaptized, was taken up and
Christened, putting in the Margent a dead Child Christened; the Boy was not taken
up and Baptized Dead; but after he came to life again, he was Baptized.

In the first place, I conceive there is no untruth in my rendering the words,
Is puerum sine Baptismo mortuum resuscitarit ex mortuis, and tandem Baptizarit,
That a Child that dyed unbaptized, was taken up and Christened; being not
exclusive of the sense Mr. Wills would have it bear. But it is the Margent that
says [a dead Child Christned] he mainly quarrels at, which indeed is wholly
mine, and therefore my sense or explanation of my own words, is to be received,
which admits of a Two fold, or double Interpretation, viz. either that Child
that was Dead, now Christened, and so not to be blamed in Mr. Wills own sense:
Or if I should intend the Child then dead when Christened, I know no reason, but
I may have my liberty of Conjecture, as well as Mr. Wills: And the rather,
because, though resuscitare be generally understood, to raise to life, yet the
phrase here, may, without any such palpable absurdity, be understood, a taking
up from among the Dead, or out of the Grave; especially, because such an
Interpretation so exactly agrees with their (then usual) practice to Baptize
the Dead that dyed unbaptized; which certainly is more likely, and far more
agreeable to truth, then that such a Miracle was wrought of raising to life.
Besides, why may not the Dead be sometimes used for the Grave, as the Grave is
often (Metonymically) used for the Dead, and Death? as I could instance with
great variety, had it been necessary. So that this latter (should I persist in
it) is so far from being blameable, that it is indeed very probable; and
therefore Reader, take it which way you will, no such notorious untruth as he
talks of can hence be justly chargeable upon me.

The third noto^ious untruth he says I assert, is from the Magdeburgs, Cent:
13. p: 419. viz. That the Magd: do say, 3 About Gulielmus blasphemy.
that as to the form of Baptism, Gulielmus added to the Father. Son, and Holy
Spirit, the Virgin Mary, viz. I baptize thee in the Name of the Omnipotent
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and the Blessed Virgin Mary; which says he, is
another notorious untruth; for the Magdeburgs say nothing of the Virgin Mary;
but which of us speak truth, let the Reader judge: The words of the Magdeburgs
are these in the Cent: and p: abovesaid, viz: Male Gulielmus ad Formam
Baptismi addidit Mariam, (...)
Baptizo te in Nomine Patris Omnipotentis, and Filii and Spiritus Sancti, and
Beatae Mariae Virginis. De Bapt: and ejus part. c. 2. Magd. Cent: 13. c: 419.
i: e. Gulielmus wickedly added Mary to the form of Baptism: I Baptize thee in
the Name of the Omnipotent Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and the Blessed Virgin
Mary in his 2. ch: of Bapt. and its parts. Therefore if this be not daring
temerity, I know not what is.

To the 4th. that the Donatists were against Infant Baptism, 4 About the
Donatists.
which, he says, is as true, as that a Dead Child was Baptized, and that Pope
Innocent was the first Inventor of Baptism, and Antiquity altogether for
Believers, and not for Infants Baptism.

What ground I had to affirm the Donatists were against Infants Baptism, I have
given at large enough at least, if not to make it good, yet to free me from a
Forger. Whether the Child taken up was living or dead, when Baptized (what I
writ being capable of being i^terpreted either way) is left to better judgment;
that I any where have said that Pope Innocent was the first Invetor of Infants
Baptism, is I presume Mr. Wills his Invention not to be ma^e good from my
writings. I do indeed say, p. 111. And this was that Innocent who was the first
great Patron and Imposer of this Inven^ion viz. In his Canon in the Milevitan
Council; and so says Dr. Tailor Grotius, Strabo, p. 107. as well as my self,
that Infants Baptism was never determined, nor en^oyned nor imposed till th^n.
And whether Antiqui^y, viz. of the first Centuries was not for Be ievers, and
not for Infants Baptism; Let Mr. Baxter himself, wi h what has been said,
de^ermine.

5 About Lanfrank.
The 5th about Lanfranks Testimony, one of my witnesses to prove Berengarius
denied Infants Baptism, is, I fully acknowledge my mistake, which (a Person of
quality) a worthy Friend of mine several months since helped me to discover,
in examining that Story of Berengarius with me out of the Magdeburgs, and who
is my witness of my in^ended resolution to rectify the same, and which I
concluded to have done, though not discovered by them. And the ground of that
my mistake was truly this* I finding that in the Hypothesis of the erroneous
Dogm's charged upon Berengarius; they gather up 5 or 6 Particulars, the first 4
respecting Transubstantiation, the 5th. and 6th. Infants Baptism, and Marriage,
then superficially casting my Eye to the end of the Story, I found it said, ad
quintum and sextum opponit Doctrinam perpetuam and consensientem Ecclesiae Dei,
To the 5^h. and 6th. he therein opposes the perpetual and agreeing Doctrine of
the Church of God; Quoting Lanfrank of the Sacraments, and his Book de
Scintill: concluding it did respect those 5 or 6 Particulars before mentioned,
but afterward examining it with the aforesaid Friend, I found that those 5 or
6 Particulars did not include those first mentioned, but were 6 other
Particulars discoursed about Transubstantiation, betwixt Lanfrank and him Yet
this I must remark by the way, that though I mistook my self in this, yet the
rest of my Testimonies to prove Berengarius did deny Infants Baptism hold good,
as you will find before in p. 92. 2d. Rep. Guitmond being one of them, who asserts
that he did affirm Baptism did not profit little ones.

7. As to the Canon of Illerdon in Spain, 7 Illerdon Canon.
I quote it out of the Dutch Book of Martyrs, for which they Cite their
Authorities at large, page 189. 1 Book. And if they have mistaken it, let them
be accountable for it, and me, no more than Mr. Wills desires to be, for
quoting the Magdeburgs in their mistake about Erasmus.

6. Amongst my notorious untruths he puts my calling Circumcision a legal
Ordinance, 6 About Circumcisin.
when as he says, it was instituted 400 Years before the Law. What then? so
were Sacrifices 2000 Years before it; were they not therefore legal also, being
enjoined by God as well as the other under the Law? and therefore it is said of
Circumcision, though of the Fathers, yet it was given by Moses, John 7.22. and
which was so legal, that it bound to the keeping of the whole Law, Gal: 2.3.
and so typical and shadowy, that it was to be done away when Christ came, Gal:
2.2. and of such great stress that there was no entering into the Jewish Church
without it, and whoever eat the Passover uncircumcised must be cut off: And
that the Paedo-Baptists Arguments from Circumcision are begged, not proved: See
my Reasons p: And how all my Arguments are begged or stolen, is begging still
till proved, which will be best understood by his Answers, to which these are
referred.

Sericius, for Hincmarus.
8: The mistake of the name Sericius for Hincmarus I own; but what Decrees were
made by P: Sericius so immediately proceeding Innocentius for Infants Baptism as
Mr: Wills supposes, I find not, when he produces them I Will blot out Innocent,
and put Sericius the first Imposer of it.

Strange Doctrines.
VIII. The last he charges is strange Doctrines.
The first for calling the National Church of the Jews, Answered.

1 About the Jewish Church.


made up of the Carnal Seed, a Carnal Church, who had Carnal Ordinances, which
he says is Blasphemy to affirm. But that Balsphemy the Holy Spirit will acquit
me of whilst he calls their Ordinances of their Church by that Name, and what
Salvo Mr: Wills gives for their Ordinances, will serve for the Church also,
which is to be understood (says he) Comparatively; and so say I to the more
Spiritua Church and Ordinances in the New Testament.

But that Baptism does as much Initiate the carnal seed in the Gospel Church,
as circumcision under the Law, is I presume Mr. Wills strange Doctrine, God
enjoining the Infant-male or Carnal Seed to be circumcised; but so has he not
that under the Gospel they should be baptized: and touching which I refer you
to Dr: Owen for better Information, as before.

2. False Doctrine, That I do with Dr. Tailor say, Infants have neither
Habitual nor actual Faith, nor are Disciples of Christ, and incapable of
Regeneration, 2 About Infants Faith and Regeneration.
so consequently of Salvation.

That they are incapable of that Faith and Regeneration spoken by James 1.18. 1
Pet: 1.2, 3. John 1.12, 13. And as Dr: Owen has defined Regeneration is all I
say, viz. begotten by the Preaching, Hearing, and Receiving of the Word,
renewed in knowledge, changed and Converted thereby, is all that I affirm, page
213. That they are capable of Salvation by Christ's purchase and the Application
of his Blood and Spi it to them, who doubts it? I am sure I never affirmed the
cont^ary.

3. The next false Doctrine is for affirming nothing to be a Seal of the New
Covenant, 3 Baptism no seal.
but the Holy Spirit, a strange Paradox! But when Mr. Wills, or any body else
proves the contrary, I shall be content to alter my judgment.

4. That Infants are neither capable to perform Duties, 4 Infants capacity.
nor enjoy Privileges, viz. Church Priviledges, as I have sufficiently
explained my self page viz. Baptism, Lords Supper Hearing the Word,
Church-watch, etc.

5 About Baptism.
5. For owning Baptism to be the gate of Sacraments, viz. ini sensu sano viz.
The first entrance into the Church, where the Holy things in Christ's order and
way are duly administered, not in the Popish sense of Sacramen^s.

6 New Test. Church.
6. That the New Testament Church is by Christ's appointment to be a separated
people, consisting only of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; but he says,
Hypocrites and wicked persons are in it. But whether will he call that Christ's,
or the Devil^ appointment, who sows the Tares? of which Point Dr. Owen has well
spoke, to whom I refer him as before.

7 About the Order of Baptism.
7. That the Mystery should go before tht Symbol. Had Mr: Ws. represented the
quotation truly, the very perusing it would clear me from this charge; but he
(very unworthily) leaves out the Parenthesis which explicates the expression,
and without which the words seem to import, a harsh Doctrine. The words a^e, If
the Mystery goes not before the Symbol, (which it does when the Symbols are
consignations of Grace, as the Sacraments are) [this Parenthesis he lea^es out]
yet it always accompanies it, but never follows in order of time I do not deny
but a man may be Baptized if he proof es Faith and repentance though not in
truth, and in him the Mystery goes not before the Symbol; but coming afterward
really to believe and repent, it may follow in order of time, but then the
Symbol to him when Baptized was no consignation of Grace. And now let the world
judge whether Mr: Ws. dealt honestly in skiping over those words which were
laid in on purpose to obviate such a Cavil as he makes; it may be truly sai^ o^
him, that if he cannot find a hole, he will make one.

8. No visible Churchmember before Conversion: 8. About Church Membership
I say none ought to be so, and so says Dr: Owen.

9. That I make a Believer and Dipping to be the right matter and form of
Baptism, 9. About the matter and form of Faptism.
which I have proved against Mr: Blinman, and neither by Mr: Wills nor him yet
answered.

10 That nothing now but Fruits meet for Repentance, 10. About receiving to
Baptism.
can give right to the baptism of Repentance, and nothing short of the Spirits
birth can orderly admit to Water Baptism, and Spiritual Ordinances, a Doct ine
apparently false, instancing in John, baptizing the Jews upon confession of sin
and repentance, which was not Fruits, and the 3000 Baptized. Acts 2. And were
they not pricked at heart, and received the word gladly, and confessed Christ to
be the Messiah, whom they and were not those Fruits meet for Repentance and
amen meant of life? etc.

THE CONCLUSION
THus I have given a Candid return to each Particular charged in this Appeal,
publicly acknowledging what of Error or Mistake I am convinced of, and
justifying my Innocence and Integrity in the rest; for as yet I see cause to
own no more (not accounting a few immaterial over sights which Ingenious men
would scorn to dwell upon) than the mis-naming two or three, viz. Aquinas for
Albertus, Sericius for Hincmarus, not hitting the Pope Deus dedit's name, and
not taking a Quotation out of Walden to so good advantage as I ought, that of
Austin 3 and 4 Book being left out, Lanfrank being before owned to Mr. Baxter.

Concluding that as none of which can be supposed to be wilful, so neither can
there be any obstinacy in the Case, having never heard of them before.

Therefore upon the whole, I join issue with Mr. Wills, freely submitting it to
the Bar he has brought it; not doubting upon the due examination of his
Complaint, and my defense, that if they find me guilty of the Crimes he lays to
my Charge; but they will, as he desires, discharge duty to me as becomes them,
to bring me to the acknowledgment of my evil, or to disown me if obstinate, as
a person unworthy to be countenanced amongst them.

But if on the contrary Mr: Wills his Appeal appears to be faulty, and the
Particulars thereof not true, then that his said Appeal shall, as he desires,
as unjust, reflect the blame of the charge upon himself, according to the
righteous Law of the Lord.

Deuteronomy: 19.16, 17, 18, 19. If a false Witness rise up against any man, and
testify against him that which is wrong, then both the men before whom the
Controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, and the Judges which shall be in
those days. And the Judges shall make diligent inquisition; and behold if the
witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely against his Brother,
then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his Brother: So
shall thou put the evil away from amongst you: And those that remain shall
hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

CHAP. IV. An Appeal to Mr Will's Conscience.
Sir,
I Having at your Groundless and injurious summons, given this full Account of
my self, in my just vindication: And so far as I am convinced made (as you
charitably suggest I would, Pref. App.) a Candid and public acknowledgment of
what of error or mistake is made out against me by your self or others, may
therefore with more freedom apply to your Conscience herein, especially since I
offer you nothing, but what I conceive carries demonstration with it, and
backed with Scripture evidence, for your better consideration and conviction.

Therefore in the first place, I desire you to consider, whether you are not
notoriously guilty of Backbiting, 1. Reproachful Backbiting.
by taking up reproaches from others, and Talebearer like, spreading and
publishing the same to the defaming your Neighbor, without enquiring into the
Truth thereof from himself; nay, refusing all due information and satisfaction,
when friendly tendered to you.

For, have you not taken up these following things upon report and Hearsay
from others, against one that is a mere stranger to you, and published the same
to my disgrace, to promote thereby your Cause, viz.

First, That, as you have heard, I own not so much Scholarship to compose such
a Book, though my solitary life has given me opportunity enough to study, Pref.
Inf. Bapt.

Secondly, That I have only fixed my Name to the Book, that another chiefly has
most Reason to own himlself to be the Author of, Pref. Ibid.

Thirdly, That, as you have heard, I have Ixion like, fallen in love with my own
shadow, puffed up with the Excellency of my own performance, Ibid.

Fourthly, That I am a very tenacious Person, as you have heard, Vind. P.

Fifthly, That I am fain to call in the Wits of our Party, to help me to deal
with you, Pref. Vind.

Sixthly, That I am of a Self-conceited scornful Genius, unbecoming a Christian,
Infants Bapt. a g. 86.

Seventhly, Insinuating that I am of such a (pugnatious or) fighting temper,
that though my hands are tied behind me, yet will do it with Tongue and Pen,
Pref. Inf. Bapt.

But, how agreeable such actings are with the following Scriptures, I leave you
to judge.

Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not receive a false Report: Put not thy hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous Witness.

Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy people.

Psalm. 15.3. He that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his
Neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his Neighbor.

Prove. 18.8. The words of a Talebearer are as wounds, etc. 20.10. Where no
Talebearer is, the strife cease.

Jer. 20.10. I have heard the defamation of many Report, say they, and we will
report, etc.

And to these add the Golden Rule, so highly infringed thereby, Math. 7.12.
Therefore all things whatsoever you would that Men should do unto you, do even
so unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. And would you be so dealt
with by me and others, ask your own heart? Pray, read Mr. B. Rules to this
Point, in his Christian Directory; some of which are given you in p. 158. 2.
Reply. And amongst the rest, this is one:

If you know it not to be true, or there be no sufficient evidence to prove it,
you are guilty of lying and slaundering interpretatively, though it should
prove true, because it might have been a lie for ought you know.

Secondly, are you not evidently guilty of Bitter Scoffing and Reviling both
Person and Book, and notoriously guilty of Railing.

1. As to Scoffing and jeering at my Person, 2. Scoffing and Railing.
Have you not deridingly called me the Antisignanus, the Goliath, one that is
Philantia nimis inflatus; viz. a proud conceited fellow, one guilty of
notorious Plagiarism or Thievery, and shameful Oscitancy or heedlesness, all in
the Preface of Inf. Bapt. And scoffingly to tell me, Bernardus non vidit omnia;
That I am not such a seer as taken to be, Inf. Bapt. p. 89. A Hagio-Mastix, a
sever Lasher, Ibid. That I am a Zantippe, and a Momus, a mere Carper, Vind.
Scoffingly reflecting upon the Exploits or Feats done in the days of my
Colonelship, Ibid. p. 93. That you have discovered my Mummery, and plucked off
the mask of my Vizard, Pref. Vind. and much more of this kind.

2. As to my Book, That it is a pompous Piece, very fallacious and
contradictious, heapt up with forgeries and prevarications, swelled with
Sesquipedalia verba; viz. Words of a foot and half long or ridiculous stuff, p.
35. Inf. Bapt. The non-such, the Arguments therein consisting only of Trite
out-worn things that have been trampled upon, and confuted again and again,
Pref. Inf. Bapt.

And thirdly, Whether in a Railing reviling manner you have not called me, One
possessed with a maleveleant Spirit, and filled with envy, p. 11. Inf. Bapt. An
unworthy Caviler, p. 13. Ibid. Of so much disingenuity as to traduce the
sayings of worthy Men, p. Ibid. Impudent, silly, ridiculous, p. 16. 2. part.
Ibid. One that will not refuse the most sordid and shameful ways to promote my
opinion, p. 57. Ibid. A daring Champion; and again, A daring Person indeed, p.
72. Ibid. That I discover the ebulition of a malicious Spirit, p. 106. Ibid.
Reflect the Munster Venarian Spirit upon me as one that is under Satanical
delusion, p. 99. Ibid. One that prevaricates to free my self from
prevarication, p. 2. Vind. That I have added contumacy to my mistakes, Pref.
Vind. And that never Writer did more prevaricate and showed more falsehood then
I have done, p. 34. Inf. Bapt.

But, how such language can stand before the following Scriptures? is submitted
to your Conscience; viz.

Ephesians. 4.31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger and clamor, and evil
speaking be put away from you with all malice, and be kind one to another,
tender hearted.

Prove. 15.1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grevious words stir up anger.

Tit. 3.2. Speak evil of no Man; Tim. 33. not a brawler; 1. Cor. 5 10. If any
that is called a Brother be a railer, with such a one do not eat.

Matthew. 3.22. Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in
danger of the Judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his brother Racha, shall
be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of Hell fire.

Thirdly, I desire you to consider whether you are not evidently guilty of
False accusation, and notorious false speaking. 3. False accusation, and
speaking.


First, in that general charge, That never Writer did more prevaricate, or was
guilty of more falsehood then my self (what! none of the Popish Legendaries?)
whereas in both your Books you have not been able to make out any one that is
significant; for after you have done your utmost to make good such a thing,
what does it amount more then to discover the mistaking of 2 or 3 Names, and
not rendering that passage in Walden, so much to my advantage as it was, none of
which can possibly be judged willful mistakes, nor be truly charged with
forgery or prevarication, which must needs therefore return upon you, according
to the Rule Deuteronomy. 19.16, etc.

Secondly, in those many particular falsehoods you have so positively charged
upon me; viz. 1. That I misrepresented Dr. Tailor, and dealt deceitfully in
those Quotations out of his liberty of Prophecy, as p. 35. Inf. Bapt. whereas
the quite contrary is manifest, as p. 51, etc. of my Reply.

Secondly, That I produced Durandus, a persecutor of Anabaptists, as a Witness
for them, p. 143. Inf. Bapt. when it is most manifest I do the quite contrary,
p. 242, Treaty.

Thirdly, that I do bring Jerome, to say such words upon the 28. Matthew.; whereas
you say, they are words of my own adding, and none of Jeroms; and yet I tell
you he says it, p. 166. Vind. whereas I have made good to you they are
verbatim Jeroms own words upon that place.

Fourthly, That I produce Gulielmus from the Magdeburgs, for saying the Virgin
Mary should be added to the words of Baptism; which you say is a notorious
untruth, and that the Magdeburgs say nothing of the Virgin Mary, p. 185 Vind.
And which I have expressly proved, and made good to a tittle as before.

Fifthly, you accuse me for abusing Dr. Hamond in that Quotation, on the 13. of
John 10, making him speak quite otherwise then he does; Satyricaliy deriding me
for the same, p. 171. of your Vind. whereas I have made good to you that I did
the Doctor no injury, but quoted his words truly and faithfully.

Sixthly, You accuse me, for saying, that the Magdeburgs say, that the Apostles
only Baptized the adult or aged, Chapter 7. p. 2. Inf. Bapt. which you say is
false; whereas I said no such thing, as p. 31. of Reply is demonstrated: and
though I called for satisfaction again and again, yet you in your Preface to
your Appeal justified, your self and severly reprove me for a tenacious and
unreasonable Person, for not falling under your charge, what an evidence it is
of my obstinacy; whereas my words were only these, That the Magdeburgs tell us,
that they find the adult or aged were only Baptized; viz. in the Scripture
Instances and Examples that they produce: And yet there you have the confidence
to tell me it is alone, nay makes more against me; To which I say let it make
for or against me, that is nothing to the falsehood you fathred upon me, I say,
none of these words, neither does it make at all against me; for they may find
Scripture Instances only for the adult, and yet believe, as you grant, they did
Baptize others then the adult, being two different things; but you tell me the
word [they find only such] employed their certainty of the assertion, which they
were so far from believing that they tell us, it appeared from the Apostles
Writings, that they did not exclude Infants from Baptism; and at another time,
p. 53. Vind. you tell me they say that Origin and Cyprian tell us, that Infants
were Baptized in the Apostles days; but what then do either of those Instances
produce any Scripture Example for the Baptizing of an Infant or any other, but
the adult; which serves only to evince that had I said, what you would have me
say I had not so fairly represented them; viz. that they did only Baptize the
adult, they believing with you, though upon as little ground, that Baptized the
Infants also. But in as much as I said they said they found ( viz. in those
Scripture Instances) Examples only for the one, and not for the other; I
faithfully and truly represented them, and you did injuriously and untruly
represent me, and for which instead of giving me satisfaction, you still
justify your self; and for your better conviction read what I have further said
hereof before.

Seventhly, For your false and injurious charging me for producing Munz'r and
John of Leyden fro my Witnesses, to prove against Infants Baptism, scoffingly
telling me, that you will quietly permit me to enjoy the comfort and honor of
such Witnesses, p. 154. Vind. whereas I produce them not as any of my
Witnesses, but reflect upon their story, as I tell you p. 145. Reply: First, to
show the unreasonableness of charging the Innocent with the crimes of such as
are guilty. And secondly, to Examine that matter of fact, and how proved, upon
which so much obliquity has been cast upon the Anabaptists, and there way ever
since; and both of which I conceive was fairly and modestly done by me in that
4. Chapter.

Eighthly, You scoffingly tell me, that my invention will not serve me, to say
any thing against one of the Waldenses Confessions for Infants Baptism, viz.
that of Angrogue An. 1535. viz. As we promised when we were Baptized, being
little ones, p. 121. which is a notorious falsehood, for I expressly speak to it,
Treaty p. 310.: And which afterward he is fain to confess, p. 122. Vind.
saying, that Mr. D. tells us p. 313, that these words being Baptized when
little ones were foysted into the Article, which I also there make good.

4. Slandering Foreign Anabaptists.
Secondly, You so falsely and slanderously accusing the Anabaptists, both
foreign and domestic, that you might the better bring contempt upon them, and
their cause, viz.

First, as to the Foreign Anabaptists, you charge those first Commotions, in
Swevia, and Munster, to be Anabaptistical, p. 102, etc of you Inf. Bapt. the
quite contrary upon due Examination is manifested, p. 146 of my Reply, and now
unanswered by you.

Secondly, That the Anabaptists., who were burnt, drowned and starved in
Switzerland, was for perjury, disobedience, and sedition; and not for
Anabaptistry, p. 79. Inf. Bapt. the contrary whereto is fully manifested from
the Decrees themselves, which are word for word given you, and by what Gastius
and Hornberk say in confirmation thereof; viz. for their judgment of
Rebaptization, as appears p. 152 of Rep. and Treat. p. 260. where the Edicts
themselves are expressed.

Thirdly, For charging those in Germany to be so universally wicked and
immoral, p. 200. whereas the contrary was made good to you from Bezas words,
viz. That many of the Anabaptists are good Men, Servants of God, Martyrs of
Christ; and our most dear Bn. in his Ep. to the Gallo-Belgick Churches at
Embden, as Repl. p. 151. Besides the account of many 1000 of them that as
Faithful Martyrs sealed the truth with their Blood, as Treat. 256, etc. appears
to you.

Fourthly, That their principles were heretical and blasphemous, p. 94. etc.
whereas from their confessions of Faith themselves, it is manifest they held
the same with the Waldenses, as appears p. 154. Rep.

Fifthly, That the Minists, those Holland Anabaptists were for resistance of in
affinity with the Munster satanical delusion, which put them upon such
exorbitances, p. 99. whereas the quite contrary is said of them, and known to
be their constant practice, refusing to bear Arms, or to carry so much as a
Gun in their Ships, as p. 147, etc.

Secondly, as to our English Anabaptists, have you not in like manner powered
reproach upon them, by your notorious false accusations, viz.

First, You stick not to say, 2. Slandring English Anabaptists.
that those who are inclinable to their way, are now grown so politic as not
to profess their Faith till warm weather; scoffingly telling us, that many last
Summer were dipped in our parts, and in all likelihood we may hear of many more
this Summer, Preface to Infants Bapt.

The falsehood and slander whereof is refuted by known experience.

Secondly, neither are you ashamed to lay blasphemy and immorality to the
charge of diverse Anabaptists in our own Nation, p. 95. implying, as I told you
in my Reply p. 151. that the rest ^ore with them, otherwise, why is it
mentioned, as I told you, challinging you to produce one Man of those diverse
Persons that is truly to be charged with your due proofs for the same; or else
to be esteemed as truly you ought to be a false accuser of the Brethren, which
notwithstanding you have neither done in your last Book, nor taken shame for
your sin and folly therein.

Thirdly, and that above all you have not been affrayed to charge the Principle
of Anabaptistry it self, viz. To be of a dangerous nature: Your words are
these, That you may safely affirm that is a Doctrine to be s^sp^cted false,
which is usually attended with gross miscarriages in the Professors of it; for
that bespeaks it ominous and like a spiritual Judgment of God upon it: And, I
heartily wish, say you, there were no ground to say that of such a nature is
the Doctrine of Baptizing grown Persons, in opposition to that of the Inft.
Seed of Believers, for not to insist upon. The horrid errors and wicked lives
of those in Germany, and blasphemies and immoralities of diverse in our own
Nation. [that being taken for granted, it seems to be undoubted proof in
confirmation hereof] And that as some Men hold it (viz. that Baptism is a
boundary of Communion) is of such a disquieting tendancy, that it is not fit
for any age or state of the Church. And as soon as Men become Baptists (as they
call themselves, affecting as you say that name) they fall off from Godly
Ministers, etc as an effect (as you reflect) of ignorance and pride, and to the
scandal and shame of Christian Religion, p. 94, 95. And in your Preface you
tell us with Mr. Sydnham, that the opinion of Antipaedobaptism has been
always ominous, and of a wonderful strange influence, to distroy Unity and
Peace amongst Christians, accompanied also with the most retinue of errors,
since the first Embrio of it was brought forth, whether by a secret judgment
of God, or from the natural and secret connection with other Principles of
darkness, will not with Mr. Sydnnham determine (oh wonderful Charity!) only God
has showed same black Characters of it in exery Nation, where it has
prevailed.

And, Men of this opinion so inflexible, that never any of them was heard to
change his opinion, unless to some worse error, (and how can that well be, if
this be true that you have affirmed?) But, what can be spoken more venanous,
more false, and repugnant to truth and common honesty, and more savouring of a
malicious mind, is left to your Conscience to determine; Entreating you
seriously to consider how such dealing can stand before these following
Scriptures.

Exodus 20 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

23 1. Thou shall not receive a false report, put not thy hand with the wicked
to be an unrighteous witness.

It being one of the things the Lord hates and abominates, as viz. Prove. 6.19.
A false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord amongst
Brethren.

Prove. 15.18. He that bears false witness against his Neighbor is a maul,
and a sword, and and a sharp Arrow.

Prove. 19.9. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall not escape.

Deuteronomy. 19, 16, 18. If a false witness rise up against any man to testify
against him that which is wrong -- the Judges shall make diligent search; and
behold, if the witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely against
his Brother, then shall you do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his
Brother: so shall thou put the evil away from among you: Which I shall conclude
with that serious word, Dr. Stubs speaks to Mr. B. upon like occasion, and
which I desire you to lay to heart: If he be a slanderer, who wrongs his
Neighbors credit, either by unjust raising, or upholding an evil report
against him, surely you have cause to lay your hand upon your heart, and to
took shame to you self. And if this be the mark of those that shall dwell in
the Lords Tabernacle, that they are such that neither raise nor take up a
reproach against their Neighbor, Psalm. 15, 3. What will become of You [Mr.
Wills] and where, and with whom must you dwell to Eternity, if God do not
humble you, for your slanderous and lying Tongue and Pen?

^. Prevarication.
Fourthly, are you not truly found guilty of Prevarication, in many particulars,
the thing you so notoriously and falsely charge upon me, which is according to
your own definition, p. 7. Vind. To coneeal what ought to have been declared on
purpose to deceive: And of which I shall give you a few of many Instances that
might be produced, viz.

First, Is it not manifest, as I have undenyably proved (and in your own word
by Mathematical Demonstration) that you left out so many of the most
considerable passages of the Waldensian Confessions, as p. 45. 2 part Inf.
Bapt. and for which you have given no satisfaction, though you was so earnestly
called upon by my self, as well as Mr. Tombs for the same.

Secondly, by leaving out part of that Confession you took out of Bishop Usher,
p. 119. Vind. which Hoveden calls the Waldenses, I the Popish Inquisitors, you
only taking part of it, which declares for Infant Baptism to save them; and yet
you can tell us at another time, that the Waldenses affirmed that it profited
them not for salvation. That the better to hide the cheat can now tell us in
their excuse, that this was a dark time 500 years since; but in the mean time
conceal that other part, which bespeaks it wholly Popish; viz. for the Mass,
Popish-Priesthood, Real presence, Penance, etc. which Usher is so faithful to
give, and which I have at large discovered to Mr. B. your Partner, in that
evil; p. 84. 2 Reply.

Thirdly, by repeating every syllable of that Qu^tati^n p. 169. Vind. called
Calvin's; yet leaving out the last Clause Estius Annot. on Genesis 17.7. which you
know is there, as Treaty p. 176. Vind. And yet so often upraid me for not
calling it Estius's; not only in your first Book, but 3 times, and very
unmercifully too in your last.

Fourthly, by Concealing so much of the Translation of that out of Calvin's
Institu^es, that you might the better deceive your English Reader, and make him
believe it was the Objection of Fools, and not owned by Calvin himself, which
his next words, as I have demonstrated and you very well knew, does.

Fifthly, by that injurious dealing with me in that Quotation of mine from
Spanhaemius, and Osiander p. 326. of my Treat you only take notice of what
Spanhaemius speaks to part leave out what I say Osrander says to the rest, and
reprove me for my mistake, p. 104. Iuf. Bapt. and though I called upon you in
my Reply^, for satisfaction, Pref. and p. 148. yet you return ne not one
syllable in your last.

Sixthly, by that injurious leaving out what you in your first p. quot from my
20. p. of Reply, which speaks it to be quite an other thing then you make it to
be, and thereupon charge me with prevarication, if not madness and
contradiction, which was an ill beginning that you should so stumble at the
threfhold; as though I quoted Austin, and those Ancients downwards to prove
that the practice of Inf. Bapt. was not in those Centuries, when I say the
quite contrary, and tell you expressly that I quote them only for their sayings,
which speak so fully for Adult Baptism only, contrary to their express
practice. And then by affirming again and again that I contradict my self in
owning the Ancients were for Infants Baptism, and denying there was Antiquity
for it: whereas the foregoing words in my 19. p. enumerates them from Austin,
and not the Ancients of the former Centuries, whom I claim for Beleivers Bapt.
only.

Seventhly, by the like injurious dealing with me, p. 57. Vind. taking part of
a saying of mine in Treat. p. 101. and leaving out the next following words in
p. 102. rendering me thereby ridiculous, and then call me at your pleasure, when
I am so wholly innocent in the matter; viz. I justify my self in my Reply p.
36. from that falsehood you charge upon me, supposing me to say, that dipping
was changed into Sprinkling the 3. Centurie, when I only say that the Magdeb.
do tell us, that many corruptions about Bapt. was creeping in amongst the rest
I mentioned (as I saw cause) that of Cyprians Letter to Magnus about
Sprinkling, for dipping. But withal do say, they tell us they do not find any
one person was then Baptized with any of their corrupt Ceremonies, having
indeed, as they soy, no authentik proof of the Baptizing of any one person;
whereby I say it may be conjectured their corruptions were then more in the
notion then practice, which afterward came all of them to be in use.

You are pleased to repeat my former words about their beginning to alter the
form from dippin to spinkling, and leave out all my latter words both what I
so fully speak in the Treat. and my Rep. also. And then as p. 51. I suppose,
Reader, thou have seldom met with the like ridiculous contradiction in any
Author -- So that he is the Man that has cause to be ashamed, and is found
very unfaithful in speaking forwards and backwards at his pleasure; yea, that
which is manifestly false, and then denying in the same breath, so adding one
salsehood to another.

And therefore whilst you judge me so worthy of reproof for prevarication
(though not at all proved by you) and you your self so guilty thereof, as so
fully evidenced, does not this following Scripture concern you?

Romans 2.1.23. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge thou condemnest thy self, for thou that
judge does the same thing.

But, we are sure the judgment of God is according to truth against them,
which commit such things. And think thou this, O Man, that judges them,
which do such things and does the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of
God,

Verse 21. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self,
thou that preachest, a Man should not steal, do thou steal. So thou that
teach a Man should not prevaricate, why art thou guilty of so much
prevarication, and so self judged and condemned therein?

And fifthly, is it not evident that you are hanously guilty of Forgery; 5.
Forgery.
viz. pretending Authors say so and so, when they say no such thing, or the
quite contrary.

Of which I shall give you few Instances.

First, do not you affirm p. 45. Vind. that Walden shows from Wickliffs works
that he was for Infants Baptism; whereas he abundantly says the quite
contrary, and your own Pen is constrained at another time to acknowledge, as p.
125, 172. Vind.

Secondly, do not you positively affirm, tha^ Austin says in bis third Book
De Anima, c. 13. that Vincentius Victor his opinion was that Infants that dyed
Baptized went immediately to Heaven; whereas there is no such thing said,
either in that or any other Chapter that I can find.

Thirdly, do not you say that Rainerius in the Catalogue of the Waldensian
errors brings not one word of their denying Inf. Bapt. as p. 67. Inf. Bapt.
whereas he expressly says in that Catalogue, that they affirmed Inf. Bapt. was
nothing worth, and that Gossips that undertook for them knew not what they did;
for which see Rep. p. 125.131.

Fourthly, do now affirm that Dr. Tailor in his Book called Consideration of
the Practice of the Church, and Dr. Hamond in his Letter of Resolutions, had
given answer to those Arguments produced by me, out of his Liberty of Prophecy
against Infants Baptism, as p. 36, 37, 98 of your Infants Baptism; whereas in
p. 53, etc. of my Reply, it is fully made out from both their words, that they
do confirm those Arguments to be good that are therein brought against the
principle Arguments, the Paedobaptists bring for that their pract^se.

Fifthly, do not you prodvce Basil, to be an Eminent wotness for Infants
Baptism in the fourth Century, as p. 136. Whereas there is never such a word to
be found in any of Basils writings that does yet appear.

Sixthly, you do positively affirm from the acquaintance you had with Father
Basil that he in his third Book Contr. Vnomiam in the very next lines after
those words I had repeated of that quotation, declared himself to be for
Infants Baptism. And for my omitting the same, call upon the Reader to have a
ca^e henceforwards how they true t my quotations f^r the palpable abuse done to
that Father, and for a fallacy and falsehood upon the Reader, p. 13. Inf. Bapt.
And again in his Preface, charging me for curtailing and leaving out part of
that Sentence of Basils. About which I got a Friend first to write to you, to
know where to find it: to which you replied, that You charged me not for
misquoting, but for partially quoting and misapply- it, but could not direct to
the page.
for which manifest injury done to Basil and me, also in that your severe
Reflection, I called for satisfaction, as p. 48. Reply. But all that I can get
yet from you is this, that you misto^k only a name Basil for Naziazen, p. 61.
Vind. Equilizing my mistake of Albertus for Aquinus with it, p. 183.

Which I cannot take for due pay: First, because it was not a bare slip in
haste, but a thing justified by you in coold blood when I gave you time to
deliberate upon it, by sending so civily to you that you might have an
opportunity to rectify it, or clear your self.

Secondly, by your extenuating it, as though it was just like my mistaking,
Albertus for Aquiquinas, which I can by no means admit for that was a quotation
for you to prove for Infant Bapt. which cannot demonstrate any wilfulness in
me; nor that I could have any end in the mistake, nor was it improved to your
prejudice; whereas that of yours was a great proof against me, highly boasted
of by you to discover your reading and acquaintance with that Father, and
improved much to my disgrace, and often and very severly inculcated upon me.
Therefore I do expect from you more fuller satisfaction therein, and your due
humiliation for such a notorious miscarriage.

As well for your vainglorious boast as your trampling so upon me.

Seventhly, in like manner was your dealing about what you own to be your
mistake, only of a Century respectiong Peter Bruis p. 53. Inf. Bapt. out of
Osiander, which was not only so, but the sever lashes you gave me about it;
viz. That you see by this that when Men are engaged in a Cause, and wedded ^o
an opinion, they will not refuse the most sordid and shameful ways to promote
it fall in with slanderous Papists, and take up what they say to defend their
opinions, witness my Antagonist. And at this rate you go on chastising of me,
and all upon your own gross forgery and mistake: For which Sir, I expect your
repentance, you did not mistake a Century only, but Christianity, Civility, and
Common Honesty also; and you did not only abuse me, but Osiander Cluniacensis,
Peter Bruis, and yet have you the confidence to tell me p. 131. that you could
retort upon me, that I belyed Calvin, I belyed the Truth, and by that forgery,
I would cover, and hide, and abuse the World with a cheat, and much more, my
own Conscience, by that piece of folly and falsehood.

Whereas is now manifestly appears that I did put Estius his name to the
Quotation; and therefore there could be neither cheat, abusing of the World,
forgery, nor falsehood in the matter; which does but heighten your crime, and
makes more work for Repentance, which I also duly call far from you.

And therefore to further, the same desire you to read and consider the
following Scriptures.

Lev. 19.11. Ye shall not lie one to another.

Prove. 14.5. A faithful witness will not lie, but a false witness utters lies.

Ephesians. 4.25. Wherefore putting away lying speak every Man truth with his
Neighbor.

Col. 39. Lie not one to another.

Psalm. 119.69. The proud has forged lies.

Jer. 9, 3. They bend their tongues like bows for lies, but are not valiant for
the truth.

With the Scriptures before mentioned, Romans 2.1, 2, 3, 21. Because you have
proclaimed me such a forger, and judged me for the same, but has yet made no
proof thereof.

And sixthly, are not you guilty of Mistranslation, 6. Mistranslation.
and Misrendring Authors. For Instance;

First, That notorious passage about the Minists, which you translate quite
contrary to Truth; viz. that they were for Resistance in the Munster way, and
for distroying the wicked by force of Arms, in order to the setting up the
Kingdom of Christ, p. 99. of Inf. Bapt. when the quite contrary is there said
and the constant knowledge of their principles and practice evinceth.

Secondly, for Misrendring that passage out of Calvin's Institutes, before
accounted for in the appeal to be the objection of fools, when Calvin owns the
same to be his Judgment.

Thirdly, for Misrendring a passage out of Austins 3. B. de Anima, fathring
that upon Vincentius Victor, that is not there said of him.

^ourthly, for translating (...), to signify only an Infant without
understanding, p. 11. Inf. Bapt. when the contrary is true, as appears 2 Timothy
3, 4. Thou have known the holy Scriptures a Child, there is the same word.

Lastly, whether your solemn Appeal to the Searcher of hearts, 7. Hypocrisy.
that you have no malignity to my Person, having ground to hope I am a Godly
Man; and in your Preface to Vind. that you love me as a Brother though erring,
and had much rather convince then shame me, can be well reconciled to
sincerity, and not rather speaking lies in hypocrisy: when it is considered,
First, how you have declined all fair Brotherly ways of receiving
satisfaction, choosing rather in this public manner to reproach and slander me
upon hearsay: 2. Jeer and Scoff at me: 3. to Rail upon and Revile me in that
unchristian manner you have done, speaking so much evil of me falsely: 4.
proclaiming me with your Associates in the Gazette and in the Catalogues (where
you know I cannot follow you for my vindication) 5. And at last so groundlesly,
disorderly, not to say maliciously, to Appeal to the Baptist^ against me, as a
person that has added contumacy to my mistakes and evils.

All which is recommended to your Conscience in the sight of God, (and all that
are conscienciously concerned with you) leaving it to your choice, which of
your promises you will keep, whether that in the conclusion of your first Pref.
Vind. To answer me by silence, because you will not gape against an Oven: Or
that in the end of your last Preface, viz. That if I can make it appear that
you have wronged me herein, as you can truly say you did it not willingly: So
you faithfully promise to make me public satisfaction, by acknowledging your
mistakes.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. l. ult. r. enjoined, p. 10. l. 28. r. Rhenanus, p. 14. l. 32. r.
obloquy, p. 18. l. 13. dele the, and the Comma at Doctor, l. 23. r. to speak,
l. 26. r. words, p. 19. l. 28. r. by them, p, 21, l, 15, dele that, p. 35. l.
27 r. ought so to do, p. 38 l. 1. r. codice, p. 41. l. 16 and 19. r. Aquinas,
p, 51, l, 19, r, philautia, p. 52. l. 8, r, malevolent, l, 17, r. Munster and,
p, 55, l, 21, r, that they, l, 32, r, for, p. 65. l. 23. dele of, p, 67, l, 19,
r, every, l, 25, r, venomous, p, 70, l, 12, r, Osiander, p. 73. l. 8. for do
now r. do not you, l. 27. r. Eunomium. p, 74, l, 8, r, Nazianzen, equalizing,
l, 9, and 18, r, Aquinas.

I desire the Reader, where I mention to Mr. Will's (in p, 2, Pref. and p. 51,
and 53,) the mistakes I own, not to understand it exclusive of those few slight
and immaterial ones not mentioned there, as that of the Canon of Constant,
which I my self found to be spurious, that of Chrysostom's not being in a
different Character, my translating the passage of Nazianzen, metaphrastically,
putting Zonaras for the Magdeburgs; that of Mr. Baxters, work, for be no such
cause.

A POSTSCRIPT by H. D.
FOR the Readers better and more full satisfaction (after the great cry against
me for Forgery and prevarication by my Antagonists) I have here given you
together, this brief account of all the mistakes of moment that I have met with
from any hand. And which the Reader is desired to correct in the Treatise as he
meets with them; which are as follows, viz.

1. Of my own or Friends discovery, p. 55, 56. for Eastern r. Western, p. 139.
for Erasmus r. Beza, p. 124. dele what is produced from Lanafrank about
Beringarius, and p. 68. and 115. and Index, dele the Canon of the Council of
Constant. as spurious. 2. Of Mr. Baxters finding out, p. 223. for 3 and 4 book
against the Donatists r. 4 book, p. 286. 294. for Cochleus r. Walden. 3. Of Mr.
Wills's, p. 75. for Aquinas r. Albertus, p. 116. dele Deodans, and for
Hincmarus r. Sericius, p. 117. r. Magdeburgs for Zonaras, p. 155. for work no
such cause r. be no such cause, p. 287. dele Pelagius and Vincentius Victor.
These being all the errors of any weight I have yet met with from any: The
judicious Reader will be more able to discern;

1. Whether here be any Forgery or Prevarication, or any wilful abuse, or
misleading the Reader, (as with so much virulence suggested) or any other
oversight or mistakes, then such as usually attend other writings; and
therefore whether all the clamor and outcry of my Antagonists, discovers not
more of malice then matter, and is the result rather of prejudice and passion,
then a zeal for the candid investigation of truth. To lead from the main
question to things not to the purpose, and make a heavy stir about them, is the
right Method of Cavillers; and which my Opposites take with me in this
controversy.


2. Whether since the Exceptions appear to be so insignificant and immaterial
to the great point contended about, and no weightyer objections made good after
so severe a scrutiny, and troubling the World with the dust and pudder made
about them, the Question in debate be not fully given up, viz. That it is now
clearly manifest, that there is no Primitive Antiquity for Infants Baptism, nor
no Record to make it appear that it was practiced as Christ's Ordinance for the
first 300 years; The truth whereof having not only been evinced by unanswered
Arguments and Demonstration; but from their own Pens, being constrained at last
to acknowledge, That except in case of danger of Death, there is no Record in
the History of the Church for the necessity thereof in those first times.

Therefore the Reader is desired to take notice what ground we get herein, and
how far this consideration tends to justify our practice, viz.

1. That the Baptizing of Believers, after profession of Faith, is not only
evidenced by express precept and example from the Scripture; (the true and only
way whereby Christ's Ordinances are established to Protestants) but by the
universal consent of all Ages; our very Enemies being Judges.

2. That the Baptizing of Infants is neither to be made good by any express
precept or practice from Scripture; nor as an Apostolical Tradition for these
first and purest times; as our Adversaries also acknowledge; though they would
insinuate as if they could consequentially deduce it; whereas no natural nor
un-forc'd consequence can be inferred in its favor from Scripture or primitive
Antiquity, but absurd and illogical non-sequiturs, proving nothing so much as
the weakness of the cause they endeavor to support.

So that it necessarily and undeniably follows, That though Papists and some
Protestants may plead Antiquity since the 5th. Century, and no higher (the
Milevitan Synod that first imposed it, being in the year 416.) for the
necessity of Baptizing of Children to take away Original sin, regenerate and
save their Souls, with the Concomitants of Chrysm, Exorcism, Gossips, etc. Yet
the Protestants with whom we have to do (owning this to be a poisonous
Antichristian Doctrine) cannot pretend higher for their Christning Children
upon the account of foederal Which novel Argument of foederal right is
excellently refuted by Mr. Ed. Hutchinson.
right then the 15th. or 16th. Century. And that therefore (they rejecting the
grounds of the Ancients) their Infants Baptism upon this new Medium is a very
novelty. So that I hope we shall hear no more of Antiquity for Infants Baptism
of any sort.

And 3ly, that it yet undeniably appears, that a famous Witness has been born
for Believers and against Infants Baptism in the successive Ages since Christ.

And as a further ratification of the truth of these things pleaded for betwixt
us in this contest, it may not be unnecessary to mind the Reader the sense that
some standers by have given by their suffrages, both as to the manner and
matter pleaded for, which you have exemplified in the learned and jud^^^^us
disquisitions of Mr. Hutchinson in his late Reflections and Animadversions upon
Mr. Baxter, Mr. Wills, and Whiston's Writings. The Letter of Mr. T. B. to Mr.
Wills, the Epistle of Mr. Tho. DeLaune before Mr. Hutchinson's; all of them so
great strangers to me, that I neither ever saw any of their Faces, or so much
as heard of their names that I know of, before their said works.

And to which I may presume to add a Let^er sent to me upon this occasion, by a
person of Quality, a searcher into this Controversy, and one of known worth,
ability, and moderation; which you may take as follows.

SIR,
As to Mr. Baxters Piece (which so soon as I heard of, I forthwith sent for) I
have cursorily run over, especially that part thereof, which more immediately
concerns your self, and am sorry to see so much Rancor and Malice in the
writings of one who has had so great a Name for Religion and Piety: But
whither will not Pride, Passion, and an Overweening Opinion of a man's self
carry those who are over come by them?

When I first read your Treatise of Baptism, I hoped it would have occasioned a
serious and full Disquisition of that point; but whether through the unhappy
temper of your Opponents, or what else I know not, I have been hitherto
disappointed in my expectation, meeting in their writings with more of heat,
passion, and personal reflections, then of Reason or a sober Inquisition after
Truth.

I am not so well versed in Antiquity, as to say when Infant Baptism first came
in use amongst Christians; but admire a matter of fact only, as that is, should
be so difficult to be determined: But if it were not in all, or at least the
first and purest Ages of Christianity, (as some learned Paedobaptists seem to
grant it was not) it cannot be said to be of Apostolical Tradition; the best
plea, if true, I have yet heard for it; and therefore I could wish that Point
had been soberly and calmly debated. I must confess, I know not of any
difference amongst Professors of more unhappy and pernicious Consequence than
this of Baptism, in regard of that separation and Division it causes amongst
Learned, sincere, and truly Pious Christians; for such I no ways doubt but
there are of both persuasions. But it is matter of greatest trouble and sorrow
to me, to see with what uncharitable and unchristian Spirits some men manage
this Controversy, even to the reproach and scandal of Religion, and this too
in a day, when our common sufferings ought in prudence, if not for Piety-sake
to unite us; at least in Brotherly love, and a Christian Walking together so
far as we have attained, and in other things to a Patient waiting for the
Revelation of the mind of God, to them that differ; who in his good timewill, I
doubt not, Unite our Affections, Heal our Breaches, and make us all but one
Sheepfold, under the great Shepherd of the Sheep Christ Jesus, to whose
guidance and protection I most heartily recommend you, and for the present
remain, etc.

And lastly, I hope the Baptists answer to Mr. Wills his Appeal against me,
will have no small tendency to issue this Controversy, whose diligent search
(by those learned Men they appointed thereto) into the Authors quoted by me,
and excepted against by him, will be a sufficient vindication (I doubt not) of
my integrity in my Quotations, as well as the truth asserted thereby; and a due
Reproof to Mr. Wills for his great Temerity, being himself so eminently found
guilty by them in so many things he so injuriously charges upon me, insomuch
that they (as he desires, in case my innocence appears to them) as you see,
have thought just to acquit me, and reflect the blame of the Charge upon
himself: All which is again submitted to his Conscience, the Impartial Readers,
and the blessing of the Almighty. By

H. D.



