THE DECLARATION OF Thomas Lord FAIRFAX, AND The Chief of the Gentlemen and
Freeholders in the County of YORK. With their LETTER to the Lord General MONCK.
We being deeply sensible of the Grevious pressures, under which We by the
extreme danger whereunto We are exposed at this time, through the violent
alteration of Government, and mutation and interruption of Parliaments, having
no Representative to express or remedy our Grievances, have thought it meet
according to the example of other Countries, to Declare and Desire, That the
Parliament begun November 3, 1640. be yet continued, the Members that were
secluded in 48, be forthwith Restored to the Exercise of their Trust, that
right may be done to their Persons, the Parliament and People that have chosen
them. If otherwise, That a Parliament may be presently called, without the
imposing Oaths or Engagements, the greatest prejudice to Civil or Christian
Liberty: or requiring any Qualifications saving what by Law are already
established. And until this, or the one of these be done, We cannot hold Our
selves obliged to pay the Taxes that are, or shall be imposed, We not enjoying
the Fundamental Rights of the Nation, to consent to our own Laws by equal
Representatives.

To the LORD General MONCK,
My Lord.
We find Our selves constrained by writing to supply the omission of
acquainting your Lordship with Our thoughts and desire, when you passed through
Our County, which we had then done, if upon so short notice, we could have met
for a mutual understanding. Your Lordship will find in the enclosed Declaration
the sum of Our apprehensions; We thought it not necessary to multiply
perticulars, but leave all other things to a duly Constituted Parliament:
neither have we been Solicitors to multiply Subscripsions, trusting more to the
weight of Our Proposals then the number of Subscribers; Yet We may safely
affirm this to be the sense of the generality of the County, as your Lordship
sees it is of others. We have only to add, Our earnest desires to your
Lordship, that you will be pleased to further the accomplishment of what we
have presented with such seasonable speed, as that the fear of Friends and the
hopes of Enemies may be prevented.

Thomas Fairfax. Barrington Bourcher, H. Sheriff. Charles Wigfield. Thomas
Wharton. Francis Boynton. William Cholmly. Thomas Harrison. John Dawn. John
Hotham. Roger Langley. Thomas Slingsby. Thomas Rumington. Henry Cholmly. M.
Robinson. John Gibson. William Fairfax. James Noyser. Thomas Hublethwait.
Thomas Hutton. Gustavus Boynton. Thomas Yerburie. William Adams. William
Dawson. William Dalton. Bryan Laton. Richard Chinly. Thomas Lovel. Walter
Bethel. Robert Winfield. John Pearson. William Rooksby. John Dawson. Robert
Bell. Henry Bethel. John Richards. John Mucklewhaite. Robert VVithy. Fran.
Diffield. Nicholas Bethel. Richard Levet. Walter Lacock. Thomas Crookland.
William VVoodyeare. John Legate. John Watson. Henry Fairfax. George Harwood.
Richard Redman.
Many other Noble Persons Subscribed, but could not be presently read, their
Names being their own Hands.

LONDON, Printed for John Johnson, 1659.


