THE ADVANTAGES OF THE PRESENT SETTLEMENT, AND THE GREAT DANGER OF A RELAPSE.

LICENSED, July 4. 1689.

J. Fraser.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

THE ADVANTAGES OF THE Present SETTLEMENT, etc.
THE wonderful Revolution that has fallen out in the Island of Great Britain
since September last, 1688. is justly at present the discourse and amazement of
all Europe; but chiefly in the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England and Ireland,
whose Inhabitants are the Parties most concerned in it; and no wonder, since a
greater Deliverance, more unexpected, and that has plainer Characters of a
Divine Contrivance and Conduct, has neither been heard of, nor seen, in any
place of the World, in any of the former Ages of it. But there is a greater
Wonder now to be observed amongst us than the Deliverance we have received (if
any thing can be greater) viz. That there are many of us who seem to be much
discontented with it, and express themselves in such a manner, as if they were
offended with Heaven it self, for being so propitious to us; and seem
ungratefully to envy his Honor, whom God made the great Instrument of our
Deliverance. Strange! that another Change should come under the desires of
reasonable men, which must of absolute necessity occasion a fatal Relapse into
the same Miseries we were so deeply plunged, and likewise occasion the
inevitable and lasting ruin, not only of our potent Deliverer, but also of all
those Royal Branches of the Royal Family, in whose prosperity all the hopes of
England's Happiness are certainly reposed.

While I frequently hear such Murmurings and Whisperings as tend to such a
fatal End, I cannot but be surprised, both with astonishment and grief:
astonishment, it being wonderful men should be displeased with their own Safety
and Happiness: and grief, it being easy to apprehend those ill Consequences to
the Public, that usually attend such Discontents and undutiful Murmurings, so
maliciously and industriously promoted.

And though I am very sensible of my own utter unfitness for so great an
undertaking, as the allaying of those Heats and Animosities that so much
disturb the quietness and peace we have in our hands, if we would but embrace
it, and be contented to enjoy it: yet I hope I shall be forgiven of all, even
of those who perhaps may have an aversion to this Discourse, for the very
sincerity of my Intention; for the Author assures his Reader, that his
Condition is so obscure, his Acquaintance in the World so narrow, and (as you
will easily perceive by this Pamphlet, both as to the matter and style of it,
which falls so much below the dignity of the Subject, and is so rude and
unpolisht) his Habitation is somewhat solitary, and in a manner rural; and
thereforefore it cannot be imagined that Self-interest should share in his
Design: no, suffer him only quietly to put in his poor mite into the Treasury,
and if he in any measure contribute to the Public Peace and Happiness of that
Church of which he glories to be a Member, even that of England, as it is now
by Law established; and of that Kingdom, which he accounts it the greatest part
of his civil happiness to be a Subject in, he is sufficiently satisfied; which
design he is sure no man can possibly blame.

I would therefore, as an Introduction to what follows, ask but this question
of those Persons that seem so discontented with our present Tranquillity.
Gentlemen, what is it you would be at? what do you desire? If they speak
plainly, and give a round answer to this question, it must be this; We would
have King WILLIAM and Queen MARY dethroned again, and have them either
voluntarily to return back from whence they came, or else to be sent back again
by force; we would have King JAMES the Second restored to his Crown and
Dignity, and reinstated in his Throne and Government. This must be the Answer,
or else I cannot imagine what some men keep such a noise for. Fair and soft,
Sirs! This is a demand of the greatest consequence and importance that ever
England heard; I assure you it is not likely to be yielded to without very
mature and serious deliberation; and I am very confident, would men suffer
their Reason to act freely, without the strong Biass of Interest or Passion,
they would see it as unfit to be asked, as they certainly must despair of
having it granted. For, upon the whole, the yielding to the Proposal, would be
a fatal Relapse into all those Miseries, under which we so lately groaned; and
as it is in the case of a Relapse into the same Distempers from which Patients
seemed almost to be freed, their last condition is much more dangerous than
their first; so undoubtedly it would be with us. And this will the more clearly
appear, upon a serious consideration of these three things. 1. What condition
we were in before the happy arrival of their present Majesty's. 2. What
condition we are now in by this happy Revolution. 3. What a miserable condition
we must of necessity fall into upon such a second Revolution as would satisfy
some men's desires.


As to the first of these, it is to be hoped that you will not take it ill, if
upon your proposal, we make a review of that state you would reduce us to. I
assure you, we are as sorry, even for King JAMES's sake, that the reflection is
so unpleasant, as possibly you can be; yet if we find it to be a miserable
Condition, you will, I hope, excuse us, if we be not willing desperately to
rush our selves into it again.

Now I know not what in all the World is dear to a reasonable Creature, that
was not (as our Circumstances were) in the greatest hazard of being utterly
lost. For what is it that is most dear to us as Christians? Religion. What is
most dear to us as English men? The enjoyment of our Liberties and Properties,
secured to us by the Laws of the Land. What is most dear to us as individual
single persons? The safety and protection of our Lives, Persons and Families.
Now I dare appeal to all unprejudiced men, whether in any Nation under Heaven,
that was so firmly in the possession of all these as we were a few years ago,
they were ever in greater danger of being utterly lost, than they were here in
England; so that the preservation of them is next to a Miracle.

That there was a Design to subvert the established Religion of this Church and
Kingdom, I hope no man will so much as question. King JAMES did quickly let us
see what was so much feared by many before he came to the Crown, That it was
great folly to imagine that a Prince so great a Zealot for his own Persuasion,
would not think it his Duty to use that Power God had given him, to the
promoting of that Religion he was so Zealous for; which could never be without
the Extirpation of the Established Religion, accounted by him a Pestilent
Heresy. To this end tended the Erecting of Chapels for Popish Devotion, and
Public Schools for Popish Education. Was it for nothing, that an Ambassador
was resident at Rome? And a Nuncio publicly entertained here, for a constant
Correspondence between England and Rome? Why were all the Protestant Nobility
and Gentry turned out of all places either of Honor, Profit, or Trust; and
Papists put in their Rooms? What could be the design of that ducoy of Liberty
of Conscience, at a time, when since the first beginnings of those unhappy
divisions of Protestants here at home, there was never less need of it? When
not any Protestant Party amongst us, did so much as Petition for it; when the
Generality of Dissenters were so well satisfied with the Church of England,
that there were never fairer hopes of perfect Unity amongst us. But this was
the matter; the division of Protestants amongst themselves would weaken the
whole Body of them, and render them the more capable of an easy overthrow; a
design, which the wiser sort of Dissenters quickly saw, and even the generality
of them in a short time were satisfied in. For since it is as easy for the
Arctick and Antarctick Poles to meet together; or for the East and West to be
in Conjunction, as to reconcile Infallibility of one Religion, with a
Toleration of all; the necessity of Extirpating all Heretics, with a
Connivance at all Heresies; all were easily convinced what such a Toleration
tended to, and none were entrapped in the Snare, or trepanned with the Cheat,
but a few hotheaded Zealots, ready to Sacrifice all to Ambition and Revenge.
What could be the design of putting Papists in for Heads of Houses, Masters and
Fellows of Colleges, in our famous Universities? What could be the design of
Erecting a High Commission Court for Ecclefiastical Causes, for the suspending
and depriving of Bishops and Clergy; which was justly termed the New
Inquisition of England? Why was that ensnaring Declaration so violently, and
yet so unnecessarily pressed upon the Clergy, to be read in Churches; and Seven
Bishops imprisoned, and the whole Clergy of the Kingdom threatened with
Deprivation for Noncompliance? If these things, and a great many more, will
not satisfy men, That there was a real Design of subverting our Religion, I
know not what will.

Yet to demonstrate this matter to the full, consider only the mighty
endeavors that were used to abrogate the Penal Laws and Test; in which the
King used so much industry, that he truly took methods too much below Royal
Dignity to effect it. What a mean office for a King to become an earnest
Solicitor of his Subjects, to that which they could not in Conscience nor
Honor yield to; and then a disobliger of all his Kingdom, for removing them
from all places, upon so necessary a refusal! The design must be mighty great,
when Arts both so mean and so harsh, were used to accomplish it. But this was
it; The Papists had then stood upon even ground with all other Subjects; and
the great advantage of Authority on their side, would quickly have raised their
Ground above us; the doors of both Houses of Parliament had been set wide open
to them, whence the House of Peers might quickly have been filled with new
Creations, and the House of Commons as quickly made Popish by Force or Fraud in
Elections, Corporations being framed and regulated agreeable to the design; and
what could be then expected, but a sudden Establishment of Popery? The whole
Nation did see this Project so clearly, that the greatest part of the
Dissenters were so sensible of the mischief, that though they had smarted
somewhat hardly under the Lash of the Penal Laws but a little while before, yet
they would rather venture the Continuance of them, than run the hazard of
ruining the substance and being of the Protestant Religion amongst us; nor
could all the virulent Pamphlets thrown about to exasperate them, by a Tragical
Commemoration of their former Suffering by the Penal Laws, ever persuade them
so far out of their Senses, as not to be fully assured, that the Little Finger
of the Popish Inquisition would be heavier upon them, than the Loins of all the
Penal Laws made since the Reformation against them. And indeed to the Fidelity
of that Party at that Critical time, are we to ascribe a great share of the
disappointment the Popish Party met with, being much chafed, that the Grand
Cheat of the Toleration had no better success.

And as all these plain matters of fact, are more than sufficient to convince
us of the Mischievous Design of subverting the Established Religion in these
Kingdoms; so are they a plain and evident proof, that there was certainly a
Private League between the Late King James and the French King for bringing
this to pass, tho there were nothing else to evince is. For it could never be
hoped that the Popish Party here in England could do it, their Strength and
Interest were not sufficient to accomplish such a Design. There was a fine Army
indeed, but most of them Protestants, who would hardly be commanded by Popish
Officers, to ruin their Religion; for men must certainly fight very faintly,
when the edge of their Swords is turned against themselves, and their success
is certain desolation to their Country. From whence one of these two things
must follow; either that King James had no Resolution to change the Religion of
this Nation, the contrary of which appears by what has been said; and besides,
to say so, is to put the greatest affront and dishonor upon the Late King that
can be, and calls his Wisdom and Discretion highly in question, in the conduct
of his Affairs; that he should do all these mean, harsh, and suspicious things
before alleged, for no other end, but to bring an obloquy upon himself, to
render his Government uneasy, fearful, and suspected, and to disoblige all the
three Kingdoms. But if it cannot be admitted, that a person of any common seuse
or reason, should be guilty of so much Indiscretion, that might in the end
prove so fatal to himself, then we must acknowledge that some Foreign Power was
certainly to be made use of; since no reasonable man proposes to himself any
end, but withal he proposes means proportionate to that end, in order to the
acquiring of it: and now we would fain learn, what other Force can so much as
come under the Probability of being made use of, but the French?

And now that which makes this Design abundantly the more inexcusable in it
self, and the more insupportable to us, is this; That this Church, and the
Religion professed in it, run such a great hazard from a Prince, from whom the
Members of that Church, and Professors of that Religion, had all the reason in
the world to expect much kinder usage. For I am sure never any Prince could be
more highly obliged by Subjects, than King James was by the Members of the
Church of England, both before, and after he was King. Not to run so far back
as the unhappy Wars in his Father's time of ever Blessed and Glorious Memory,
when the Church of England was ruined, and a great many of the Members of it,
of all degrees and conditions, exposed to the greatest miseries, for their firm
adherence to the Interest of the Crown. Nor yet to speak of his Late Majesty
King Charles the Second's happy Restoration; it is enough only to reflect upon
our dutiful behavior to King James himself, both when Duke, and King. Who were
the great opposers of the Bill of Exclusion, in Parliament, both in the House
of Lords and Commons, and out of Parliament all the Kingdom over; and preferred
their standing fast to the Duke's Interest at that time, to all their own
Interest in the World: What Reproaches, Disgraces, Insolences, nay Threats
were cast upon, and used toward us, we very well remember. Was there ever any
King received by his People, or proclaimed in all Places, with greater
Satisfaction, Joy and Acclamations, than he was? For who then doubted of the
Sincerity of King James the Just? Who were they that so readily settled the
Revenue of the Crown, and gave larger supplies than the necessity of Affairs
required? Who were they that stood the Shock, and ventured their Lives in
suppressing of that dangerous Rebellion of Monmouth? Were they not all Members
of the Church of England, who preserved the Crown for King James before he came
to the possession of it, by opposing the Bill of Exclusion; and kept it upon
his Head when he was possessed of it, by suppressing Monmouth's Rebellion? And
this brings to my mind an Expression, in the Oxford Reasons, against signing
the Address of their Bishop Dr. Parker; for being told that their refusal of
the Address would exasperate the King, and move him to take rougher Methods
against the Church; their Answer was, That if the remembrance of the Services
of the Church to the Crown in those two Affairs, of the Bill of Exclusion, and
Monmouth's Rebellion, were not sufficient to secure the King's kindness to, and
protection of the Church of England and its Members, the signing of such
insignificant Addresses would never do it; and truly I cannot tell what else
could do it.

But the truth of it is, the Papists have all along, upon all occasions so ill
requited the Fidelity of the Protestants to their Popish Princes, as if they
had a mind never more to be obliged in that nature. I need not speak of the
obligations put upon Queen Mary, the Daughter of Henry the Eighth, and the
barbarous usage showed them in a very little while after; nor of former
dealings of that kind in France: the present King of France has demonstrated
this to the full; he ows his possession of the Crown of France, and
consequently all his Glory he so proudly boasts of, to the firm adherence of
his Protestant Subjects to his Interest. He has several times publicly owned
this, and yet his Cruelty to them has far surpassed all Heathen Barbarity. And
now I am very sorry that such a hearty Endeavor to subvert the Religion
established in this Church, which could not be, without the ruin of those, to
whom the late King JAMES was so highly obliged, has given such another fresh
Instance, that Popery will not suffer Kings so much as to be grateful to their
Subjects; for by this means they have more than satisfied the World, that it is
utterly unsafe for a Protestant Kingdom to be under the Government of a Popish
Prince.

But since all men have neither that knowledge of, nor that zeal for their
Religion, that it were heartily to be wished they had, yet every man is very
sensible, when their Liberties and Properties, and the Laws by which they are
secured, are invaded: and lest the Endeavors to subvert Religion, should not
have been sufficient to have provoked the Nation, there was added to this a
plain Invasion of the Rights of the Subject, and of the Laws upon which they
are grounded; to let the World know, that there was no mistake in those men,
who affirmed, that Popery could never be introduced into this Kingdom, unless
Slavery ushered it in. It were endless to make instances of this; the Master
and Fellows of Magdalen College are a sufficient proof of this, who were
deprived of their Freeholds, by a most arbitrary Sentence of a Court, that in
the whole constitution of it, was utterly illegal; and in an Affair of this
nature, a Judge altogether incompetent; where the Persons concerned were
admitted to no legal Trial, before the competent Judges, by a Jury of the
Vicinage, as in those Cases is the Law of the Nation; but were removed by
Persons, who had no more right to disposess them of their Freeholds, than the
Persons, receiving such an injurious Sentence, had to dispossess their very
Judges of theirs. And it was no wonder that the general Cry of the Nation,
following that unjust and Arbitrary Sentence, was, All our Freeholds and
Estates shake by this Sentence.

Another proof of this Invasion of our Rights and Estates was, the most
exorbitant and extravagant Fines, put upon persons by the plain Arbitrary Will
of the Judges, as if they would declare to the World, their design was rather
to ruin the Delinquent, than punish the Delinquency. This was so frequent,
that every Term showed how easily, for very small faults, men might be ruined
in their Fortunes in a trice.

The invading the Rights of Corporations, was more than sufficient proof, that
our Liberties, Estates and Laws were in the greatest hazard. The despoiling
them of all their Ancient Privileges, struck at the very Foundation of the
Government it self; the altering all the Ancient Prescriptions in choosing of
persons for Representatives in Parliament, struck at the very Fountain of our
Laws, both in being, and to be made.

But above all things tending to the ruin of all our Security in our Laws,
Liberties and Properties, none is more worthy of our serious consideration,
than that Hellow of Dispensing Power, that would have devoured all at a morsel,
and swallowed all at one draught, if need had been; there was no Law, no
Privilege able to stand in the way of this Leviathan. This was such a Power,
that once being yielded to, in the full latitude it was claimed, would have
rendered all Laws in England not only uncertain and insecure, but utterly
needless; nay, altogether ridiculous. For to what purpose should the Nation be
put to so much trouble and charge, to elect Representatives for the House of
Commons; or why should Persons, who have either a natural Right, as Noblemen,
or a deputed Right, as Commoners, go from all parts of the Kingdom, to enact
Laws for the good and profit of the Realm, if the Sovereign Power can dispense
with them, whenever their backs are turned? To what purpose is all this wast?
Or why should the Nation be fooled with Laws, which when made, promise us the
greatest security, in all things that are most valuable; when in the mean time,
at the mere will of the Prince in dispensing with these, all our Security is
turned into Despair; and all our Expectations, grounded on those Laws, wholly
frustrate, and quite blown up?

The Imprisonment of the Seven Bishops, who all deserve to have Statues erected
to their Memories, for so courageously stemming that Tide of Oppression, that
was like to have sunk us into the deepest miseries both in our Religious and
Civil Rights: This Imprisonment, I say, tho it was dismal and gloomy, yet
blessed be God, their Trial that followed upon it, occasioned the absolute
baffling of that Dispensing Power, by those learned and stout Gentlemen, their
Council, who dared at such a time, to vindicate our Laws from so much Violence,
and our Liberties from such Oppression.

But then if we add to all this, That we were not so much as safe in our
Persons and Families, our Condition will appear the more deplorable. How many
were there, who abandoned their Native Country, upon the apprehension of those
Dangers that Innocence it self was not able to secure them from? Was not the
Lord De La Mere exposed to the greatest danger by a false Accusation, and
pressed earnestly to acknowledge a Capital Crime, of which in the end he was
found innocent? Was not the now Reverend Bishop of Salisbury forced to fly for
his Life, and could hardly obtain the liberty of breathing in a Foreign Air, or
the benefit of the Protection of Foreign States and Princes; excepted in all
Acts of Grace as the greatest Criminal? And yet upon the strictest enquiry into
the reason, why Royal Power was so armed against this Person, it will be hard
to find any other, than this, that he was the Author of the History of the
Reformation; which will be a sufficient Monument for that Great Man when he is
dead, and for his undaunted Courage and Zeal for, and great Abilities and
Industry in defending a Religion his then Majesty had so great an aversion to.
Add to this, the cruel Corporal Punishments, inflicted upon several Persons
both in City and Country. In fine, The unspeakable Oppression of the Soldiery,
by virtue of whose quartering at pleasure, neither men's Families or Persons
were secure from the greatest violence; most of the Corporations of the Kingdom
are too too able to give a sad and deplorable account of this, who felt the
Insolences of Mercenary men, permitted in all their Extravagant Mischiefs, to
inure the Nation by degrees to Slavery and Oppression.

I know that many will not be pleased with such a representation of our late
Miseries; But they must pardon us, if we judge it fit to reflect upon them,
since they seem so extremely desirous to involve us in them again. For upon a
review of these Particulars, which are undeniable matters of Fact, we cannot
possibly think that a continuance in such a miserable Condition, was, or is, or
can be a desirable State, tho it never advanced further; much less can we think
it tolerable, when the whole Nation were more than satisfied, that these were
but the beginning of those Sorrows we had such a dismal Prospect and
Apprehension of, had the designs afoot made a further Progress; And we would
pray them to pardon us, that we are not willing to be so treacherous to our
selves, and our Posterity, as to throw our selves into that Misery, from whence
we have been so miraculously delivered.

Now, tho I do not find any Man that will take upon him the impossible Task of
justifying these Proceedings; but rather all of force must acknowledge there
were very many Male-administrations in the Government, yet they strive to
excuse them, as much as may be. I must tell them, would the matter bear it, we
would be as willing to do it as they. And we must let them know, that our case
is the more to be pitied, because we were so like to be ruined and undone by a
Prince, whom no honest Man in the Nation, did ever so much as desire, should
sall into those misfortunes that have overtaken him; but upon the contrary,
were extremely afflicted, to see a ^atal necessity of the ruin of either King
or Kingdom in a very short time, and would most willingly have contributed our
utmost to the preventing of it, had it lain in our Power. But this is the
misery, the more pains men take to palliate these things, the more still it
appears, there was a wilful, fixed and unmovable Resolution of driving these
things to the height.

For while it is said, That the Late King, being very zealous for his Religion,
and giving the Conduct of his Conscience to the guidance of men sworn to that
interest; we cannot wonder if their perpetual solicitations, and unwearied
importunities, highly prevailed upon him to gratify their desires, in which he
was withal satisfied that he was doing God singular good service; this very
excuse is our greatest Complaint. For was it not easy to divine what a
Protestant Nation had reason to expect from a Prince altogether guided by those
who have sworn their destruction? And the very taking of these men into his
secretest Councils, was an open declaration to the Three Kingdoms, that their
destruction was at no great distance; for we know, and all the World knows,
that such men as swarmed about Whitehall, were employed in nothing more, than
in contriving and projecting the utter destruction of Heresy and Heretics, as
they account us all to be: And therefore had the late King James consulted
either his own or his Peoples safety, he would never have been so influenced by
such men, nor given the least suspicion that he was so. But his making a Jesuit
openly a great Minister of State, whose very being in the Kingdom was Treason;
his entertaining openly a Nuntio from Rome, the swarming of Priests both
Regular and Secular, of several Orders about him, cannot but show that their
Assumption into such Privacy, so destructive to his People, was really a matter
of his own mere choice.

And here let me add, That the Priests and Jesuits in their management of
Affairs in the late King's time, were both the falsest and the foolishest men
in the world, tho they had the fairest game to play, that ever men in their
Circumstances could wish for before, and fairer than I trust they will ever
obtain again. They were very false and treacherous to their great Patron and
Benefactor; for they consulted their own interest so much, that they minded
neither the Honor nor Safety of their King. For while he was driving so Jehu
like, it was their duty faithfully to have represented to him, what was like to
be the issue of such proceedings, what dishonor the so frequent breach of his
Word must be, and how fatally dangerous the exasperating of three Kingdoms must
be; and therefore seriously to have advised him to slower and milder methods;
and to have declared their satisfaction, that they had rather commit the great
design its self to the Divine Providence, in methods more agreeable to the
Genius of the Nation, than hazard his Majesty's Honor and Safety in such
violent and harsh measures. But the truth of it is, they saw they had nothing
to rely upon, but the King's Life; and that was as uncertain as any other man's;
and therefore they were willing to drive at all furiously: For (say they) if we
succeed, we have our aim, the day is our own; if not, we know the worst of it,
we are but where we were; we can as easily retire to the Cells we crept from,
as we left them; but whether the King sink or swim, is the least of our
concerns. And ah! that these Wretches had fallen alone, without drawing such a
Prince into such misfortunes with them, by their precipitate Counsels! Let this
therefore be for ever another instance of Popish Treachery and Falsehood to
their Princes; for these men always act as if they gloried in being the
Instruments of the Destruction of Kings, or Kingdoms, or Both.

And as they were the falsest Men to their Prince, so they were the foolishest;
for never Men took so improper means to attain their Ends, as they did. In
truth they left nothing undone, which any man could wish them to do, who never
so earnestly wished a disappointment of all their Designs; as a Reverend Divine
and great Man of our Church said, in his Sermon on the Thanksgiving-day, they
were Politicians by Book, and never consulted the Genius and Humor of that
People they had to do with. It may be they are thought very wise Men and great
Politicians in other Countries, but they can never in England expect any thing
but the reputation of the most imprudent and unpolitick of Men; and I hope this
great Instance will be sufficient to convince all Princes, how unsafe it is for
them to trust Men of little Honesty, and less Discretion.

If it be again said, That the late King, in all these things so deservedly
decried, was informed of the Legality of them by his Judges, whose Advice in
the like Cases all our Kings have relied upon; so if he erred, it was their
fault; and besides, such as do unlawful things by the King's Command, are
liable to answer for it notwithstanding, but not the King Himself. To this the
Answer is very easy: The whole Nation knows very well, that when the Judges
at any time gave just and good Advice, according to the Law, and the best of
their knowledge, if it thwarted the Design intended, there was a Quietus ready
at hand for their descent from the Bench; and thus, the whole Reign of King
James, there was a perpetual Change of the Judges, till they were so modelled,
as to secure the Interest driven at; nay in the very last famous Trial of the
Seven Bishops, all know, that two of the Judges were immediately removed, for
giving their Opinion contrary to that Interest. So that it is extremely plain,
the King was not advised by his Judges, but the Judges by him, how they should
act at their Perils, and he would have no other than such as would serve his
design; as for such as acted by his Authority, either in Civil or Military
Affairs, it is plain few or none were allowed of, but such as would serve the
Popish Interest; what meant else the Change of Charters; the Regulating of
Corporations; the so frequent alterations of the Governors of them; the
removing of all Officers that would not comply; the previous Questions put so
diligently all over the Kingdom, to Deputy Lieutenants, Officers of the
Militia, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Cities and Boroughs, concerning
Elections of future Members of Parliament? The King then was so far from
suffering Persons to be brought to Trial for their unjust and illegal Actions,
that as he would have no other Persons in his Service, so he avowed their
Protection. In vain it was to expect a redress of these things, since even in
the beginning of that Reign, when that King was so much obliged to the Fidelity
of the Nation, for opposing the Duke of Monmouth so vigorously, yet that very
House of Commons, who but a little while before, was so highly cajolled and
caressed by the King, went away with a Repulse to their honest Address, against
Papists bearing Offices without legal Qualifications, and in a sew days after,
he prorogued them, and never met them more. Since then, the late King would
have no other Persons to serve him, nor any in places of Trust, but such as
highly disserved the Nation; since he protected such Persons in all their
illegal Proceedings; certainly all they did, is clearly imputable to himself,
for so he would have it, and no otherwise.

In fine, while it is said, King James was lawful King of England, accountable
to none for his Actions, but God only; that all we had to do, was to submit
either Actively or Passively; that our Oaths had obliged us against all
Resistance of his Majesty, or those commissioned by him; and therefore let the
worst be supposed that can be, we cannot justify our reliction of him, or
transferring our Allegiance from him.

Now in the first place, this is a plain acknowledgment, That we had very great
cause of complaining; and only helps us with this Accumulation of our Misery,
we have no possibility of Redress. Now it is a desperate Condition a Prince is
brought to, that the only Justification of his Proceedings, consists in
asserting an unlimited and uncontrollable Power; and indeed, it is much the
worse, when this is done to a Nation that never have, nor never will acknowledge
themselves to be Slaves to be ruled by the Arbitrary and Despotick Power of
their King; but are Subjects governed by their King in the Execution of the
Laws of the Land.

Again, There is nothing more certain than this, That there is so great
reference to be had to Governors and Government, that every small irregularity
in Government ought not to lessen the Affection or Fidelity of Subjects, such
as Injuries accruing only to some private Persons; or if they be of a public
and general Nature, yea, even against Laws in force; yet, if it be in matters
of small concern and importance, it is rather to be born with, than the Peace
of the Government to be disturbed; it is in such Cases duly to be considered,
that nothing perfect is to be found under the Sun; that Changes and Alterations
upon such small accounts, would render Government very unsteady and uneasy, to
the main end of it, which is the peace of Mankind. But, what if the Case be
such, that there is no less attempted than the ruin of Souls and Bodies, and
Fortunes, of far the greatest part of the Subjects? What if those Laws are laid
aside, and rendered useless, which were enacted of set purpose, to secure the
Religion and Property of all the Subjects, without ever consulting the
Legislative Power; nay, after a great part of that Power has remonstrated
against it? What if such Courses be taken, as perfectly destroys the very being
of Parliaments, and makes a summoning of them utterly impracticable, according
to the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom? Does not these, and such like
Proceedings, perfectly dissolve the Government to our hands, and deprive the
King of the best Security he has for his Crown, to wit, the Security of the
Laws so dissolved? And that this was our Case, is apparent by what is before
written: And this brings to my mind, a saying of the late King James, at his
first Accession to the Crown, That he desired to be no greater King, than the
Laws of England made him; and upon my Conscience had he continued always in
that mind, and acted accordingly, he might, nay, he would have Reigned a
Glorious King, to the great Joy and Satisfaction of all his Subjects.

I suppose it will be granted, That the end of all Government is the Protection
and Peace, and Security of the People, by governing of them agreeably to the
Laws enacted for that end; now, if this end cease, and all things be acted
contrary, is there not an end of that Government, with relation to the Peoples
concerns in it? And in such case, what can reasonably be expected from them by
the Laws of God, of Nature, and Self-preservation, the first and great
Principle of Nature, but that they should look for better terms where they may
have them?

All this whole matter is grounded upon a false Opinion of Government being
Jure Divino, even with relation to the species or kind of Government; nay, to
the very Person or Family regnant; than which there cannot well be a greater
Paradox; for tho it be most true, that Government in general, is of Divine and
Natural Right; yet all the World will never be able to make either of these two
things appear, viz. either that this or that Species of Government, is of such
a right; for example, Monarchy in contradistinction to all other; or much less,
that this or that family or person has such a Divine or natural right to such
or such a Kingdom or Dominion: for upon this Principle we condemn all other
kinds of Government as sinful; we oblige our selves to perpetuate the
Succession of the same Family, in a direct Line, in the same Dominion; a thing
by the experience of all Ages known to be impossible, and of which this
Kingdom, on several occasions, has taken very little notice. For he is a
mighty stranger to the English Histories, who knows not that some Persons have
been removed from the Administration of the Regal Power, by the Authority of
Parliament; and others Crowned in their stead, while the former were in being:
and likewise in the Succession of the Crown, little regard has been had to the
next in Proximity of Blood, whatever outcry we make now; and certainly when it
was Enacted in Queen Elizabeth's time, That it should be a Praemunire for any
person to affirm, That it was not in the power of the Parliament to settle the
Succession of the Crown, they were far from dreaming of this Chimaera of Divine
Right. And certainly when a Parliament in Henry the 8th's time gave that King
Power to settle the manner of the Succession, and nominate the Successors as he
thought fit, they were far from this Divine Right too. Nay, this Opinion that
men would so fain impose upon us, is destructive of all Right of Conquest or
Prescription; for against Divine and Natural Right, none of these are
prevalent; for still the former Obligation remains to the kind of Government
and Family pleading such a Divine Right; which would be so far from conducing
to the Peace of Mankind, the great End of all Government, that it would
certainly perpetuate Blood, War, and lasting Confusions.

In a word, I am sure our Government is such, as will acknowledge, That the
Kings of England are bound to govern their People, not as they please, but
according to the Laws of the Land: Now I would fain ask these few Questions
upon this Concession, Whether it be just, that the King should be absolutely
secured by the peoples Oath of Fidelity to him; and if they break it, Gibbets,
Axes, Whipping-Posts, Pillories, Exile, Confiscations of Goods, are their just
and deserved Punishments; and yet the People should have no Security in the
Earth, by any Oaths the King makes to them, but he is still at his liberty to
break them, and the People without all possibility of redress, if he do so? And
consequently, Whether the Coronation Oath be a mere matter of form, and
administered only to mock God and the Nation; since after all, the King may at
pleasure break it, and the whole Kingdom has no remedy but God help? Whether
when Christ and his Apostles prescribed to us general Rules of Subjection and
Obedience to Government; they did not leave the several Nations in the
possession of those Civil Rights they enjoyed notwithstanding, but engaged
Mankind to be all Slaves to the Lust and Will of their Governors, without
possibility of control? Whether any acting in this Kingdom by an illegal
Commission, can possibly be esteemed to act by the King's Commission, which we
are sworn not to resist; since it is certain that all Illegal Commissions are
null and void in themselves, and that Men are bound to resist such in their own
defense; since the Subject is never to suppose any private Will of the King in
the governing of his People, contrary to the public Will of his Laws; and is
always to be supposed, that he who takes upon him the just defense of the Laws,
is so far from resisting the King, that he is really defending of him? If the
Case be not thus, then we certainly are commanded to swear, and actually do
swear, to expose our Persons, Families, Fortunes, Laws, Liberties, nay Religion
it self, to as many Men's Wills as may have the Conscience to act against us, or
ruin us in any or all these particulars by Illegal Commissions. In fine,
Whether the King's being generally said to do no wrong, be not to be
interpreted, either because he most commonly employs other persons in the
execution of his Commands, either Legal or Illegal; or else in respect that the
King being sworn to govern by Law, he is not to be supposed to act against it?
If the First, then they that execute illegal Commands, are liable to be called
in question and punished for so doing; but if the King protecting them with all
his Power, prevent this Justice, does he not then make these Illegal Executions
his own, whether we will or no? If the Second, then we are to conlude, That no
Illegal Act is a Regal Act; and consequently, if a King either by Himself, or
by Others commissionated by him, oppress and ruin his People in all
particulars that are of greatest concern to Mankind, he so far Unkings himself,
and puts his People upon an absolute necessity of Self-defence.

As for the lawfulness of transferring our Allegiance to Their present
Majesty's, the Reverend Bishop of Salisbury, in his excellent Letter to his
Clergy, has so fully cleared that Point, that it were presumption in me
further to undertake the Defense of it.

Let me only add, That the late King showed the most fixed Resolution in the
World, by his going to France; for what was this, but rather than suffer any
Redress of the insupportable Grievances of his People, he would rather forsake
and abandon them, and apply himself to the sworn Enemy of his Kingdoms, both in
their Religion and Civil Rights? King James sent to the Prince of Orange some
Noblemen to treat with him, but had not the patience to stay long after the
Answer; but rather than listen to the calling of a Free Parliament, withdrew
himself voluntarily, when no Enemy was near him. His coming back again to
Whitehall was a mere force put upon him; for at Feversham, when Persons of
Quality in those parts tendered him their best Service, his constant Answer was,
The most acceptable service you can do me, is to facilitate my departure, and
procure means for my going beyond Sea: And whatever noise is made about his
leaving Whitehall the second time, yet it is plain his resolution was still to
depart, as a thing he was before most solemnly engaged to do; and so to leave
his People, rather than enter upon fair and legal ways of giving them
satisfaction: and this the Lords and Commons in Convention, as freely chosen as
ever Representatives were to any Parliament in England, have avowed to be an
Abdication of his Government, and Vacating of his Throne. And I would know but
these two things in this particular, Whether, in the condition we were left by
the King's departure, any better, juster, or speedier course could be taken, to
save the Nation from those Miseries and Confusions it must necessarily have
fallen into, in that state of Anarchy the King left us, than that of calling
such a Convention? And then, Whether such a Convention, so freely called and
chosen, when met, does not conclude the Nation by their Resolutions, since all
knew their Election was for this very purpose, to restore us the Happiness of a
settled State, and by electing of them, included Themselves and their Consents
to their Resolves, as much as ever they did in other Elections to Parliament.
As for those Redresses that were made just upon the News of the Prince's
Intention for England, they were done at such a time as too plainly showed it
to be the product of Fear and Necessity, not of Choice; and it is well known,
that what Kings in straits are forced to do; when free, they voluntarily and
readily undo; and the worst wish I wish King James is, That what he did then,
he had done a twelvemonth before; tho even then the greatest matters continued
as they were, viz. Persons in all Offices of Trust without legal
qualifications, by virtue of the Dispensing Power, then not in the least
disowned.

By what I have said, it plainly appears, that our Condition, when their
Majesty's arrived here, was most deplorable, without any hope of a redress, our
Miseries daily growing upon us; and it is not uneasy for any man to divine,
what our Case must certainly have been, had not God raised up this mighty
Deliverer, our present King, to put a stop to those unhappy Proceedings; and if
we be so insensible of this great Deliverance* and so soon have forgot our
former Thraldom, and our just fears of worse; I can say no more, but that we
are as bad as the Israeliets, desiring Egypt again, when their faces were
toward Canaan; and lusting for the Fleshpots there, when they were feeding on
Angels Food. And so I come to show the danger of our Relapse, by considering
the happy Estate and Condition we are in by this blessed Revolution.

We may take up in these Nations that Song of David, When the Lord turned again
the Captivity of Sion, then were we like unto them that dream. The Deliverance
was so strange and wonderful, that it appeared plainly the Lord's doing, and
therefore marvelous in our eyes. We may look upon the Providence that gave the
Prince of Orange, our now most Gracious King, so just a right to succor us, as
wonderful, even that happy day, wherein the Auspicious Marriage of that Royal
Pair was consummated, to the great joy and lasting security of the Peace and
Happiness of these Nations. This was, I am sure, a great earnest of the Divine
Goodness, and a happy Omen of this blessed Fruit of it.

I know not what to admire most at in this prodigious Deliverance; That a
matter of so great importance, that must of necessity be communicated to
several persons both at home and abroad, should take no air all the while, till
just it was ready to be executed; so that the Deliverance was sudden and
unexpected, no-ways looked for at that time, or in that manner, is scarce to be
exemplified: the means used to effect this Design, being so unproportionate to
this great end designed, makes the success a Prodigy. The extent of this
Blessing is not the least thing considerable in it; it is general to the whole
Nation, every one shares in the Deliverance; those only excepted, that would
fain have made us miserable. For as the Religion and Civil Interests of all
were equally in danger, so the Security of both is extensive to all: Nay, this
Revolution secures Truth, and the Profession of it, to other Nations; for it is
well known what hazard the Protestant Religion everywhere had been in, had it
been subverted in this famous Island. And therefore, however ungrateful we may
be, who yet have the more immediate advantage of it; yet I am sure all
Protestant Europe are li^ting up their Hearts, Hands and Tongues in the Praises
of the God of Truth, who has so signally appeared for our Deliverance; and in
that, for their security.

Let us look upon our present Condition; Would we be content to be happy, and
compare it to what we were a Twelvemonth ago? then we were almost in Despair,
sadly thinking with our selves, to what strange Countries we should repair to
avoid the impending Storm; our Bishops were thrown into Prisons, our Clergy
threatened with Deprivations and Suspensions, our Universities pursued with Quo
Warranto's, our Colleges invaded by the Locusts of Egypt; the Abomination of
the Mass, and Idolatry and Superstition of Popery set up in all the Corners of
City and Country; our Judges carrying about Shavelings, to preach before them
in their Circuits; and they themselves in their Charges, at Assizes, preaching
Sermons of Transubstantiation, and Submission to the Sea of Rome: Protestants
discountenanced, discarded, disgraced; Papists every where, in City, in
Country, in Court, in Armies, in Forts, in Navies, in Corporations, in
Counties, lording it over us. Parliaments intended us worse than none, the
Complement of our Miseries being expected from them, as Elections were then
ordered; which made all good Men wish from their Souls, That whatever our
Condition was, or might be, yet we might never see a Parliament sit in England,
during King James the Second's Reign; since they would never be suffered to do
us good, and in all probability could not fail in doing us much harm.

The Case is quite altered now, as is obvious at first sight; our Religion has
the greatest Security, our Bishops and Clergy the greatest Protection, our
Vacant Bishoprics are filled with the most wise and learned of the Clergy,
Colleges are restored to their proper Owners; the Idolatry of Popery dare not
show it self any where; the Wind has blown these Locusts of Priests, Jesuits,
etc. beyond the Seas, to their former Lurking-Places; every one sits safe under
his own Vine, enjoying securely the Liberty of an Englishman, the Property he
is possessed of; our Councils, Navies, Armies, Magistrates, are Protestants; and
a Security to our Religion, dearer to us than our Lives: our Judges are as at
the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning.

Pray Gentlemen recount with your Selves, What was our greatest Hope, our only
Comfort on Earth, in those Days of our Dustress? What was it that sustained our
Spirits and delivered us from utter Despair? What did we discourse of
everywhere to one another, as the sole Foundation of our Hopes of Freedom and
Relief? Was it not that the King was a Mortal Man, and after him we had a
Reserve of the Prince and Princess of Orange for our Security? How often then
did we cast our Eyes and Hearts upon the Belgic Shore, trusting that at last
the Providence of God would whaft over that blessed Pair to the lasting Joy of
this British Island? The Papists knew this very well, and could never think
themselves safe, till these Princes Interests were defeated, and thereby, as
they thought, all our Hopes frustrate. But God that brings Good out of the
greatest Evil, by his infinite Wisdom and Power, converted that Project by
which they intended to perpetuate the Slavery of these Nations, to an
accelerating or hastening our Deliverance, sooner than ever we hoped for it;
for never was there a juster Cause given any Prince, to quarrel with a
Possessor, than was given the Prince of Orange, when he saw not only all our
Laws violated, and the People of England enslaved, but likewise his just
Interest in the Crown, in Right of his Princess the immediate Heir, so
violently invaded, without any Satisfaction given, usual in such Cases, of the
Sincerity of that Affair of the pretended Prince of Wales; in which not only
this whole Nation was violently suspicious, upon very great Grounds, but
likewise the intended Fraud was the Discourse of Europe. This Matter has been
sufficiently written of, and for my part, if there were no more to create a
Diffidence in me not possible of receiving any Satisfaction, this would be more
than sufficient, that I never heard of any Satisfaction given, to the Great and
Virtuous Lady the Princess Ann of Denmark in this whole Affair; and yet it was
highly just she should have received it, in respect of her Proximity to the
Crown; and likewise in regard of that Fruitful Womb, God has been pleased to
bless her Highness with, whose Children have a very fair Prospect to the Royal
Inheritance: it had been likewise very easy to have done it, because her
Highness was perpetually upon the very place where the Scene was acting, just
till the time of its finishing, and then it was most necessary she should have
been there; and it is impossible to imagine, had it been a real Thing, care
would have been taken that she should have been present; but on the other Hand,
if it was not real, then it was altogether necessary, that of all Persons she
should be out of the way, and such care was accordingly taken: And as her
Satisfaction was both just and easy, so it would have been of mighty advantage
to the convincing of the Nation of the Truth of it, her Highnesse's Evidence
would have been of more weight, than all those at Council Board, in respect
none will bear witness against their own Interest, especially in a matter of so
great Moment, unless it be very true. All the answer ever I could hear to this
most material ground of Suspicion, is, either that there was no Obligation to
give any such Satisfaction, or that the Princess did not desire it, and was not
curious of being satisfied. To which this is only fit to be said by way of
Reply, that the first is a desperate, and the second a senseless Answer. Is it
not then a great Favor of God to us, that the Deliverance we so earnestly
wished, and the Persons on whom our Eyes were fixed, are thus come to our
Deliverance? our very Enemies hastening it sooner than ever we looked for it.

Is it not the Joy of all good Men, who love the Prosperity of our Sion, and
pray for her Peace, to see a Protestant King and Queen in England, a Happiness
Britain has not been favored with, since the Death of Queen Ann the Wife of
King James the First? We have no Dalilah in the Bosom of our Sampson, to allure
him to betray his own and the Nations Strength, that we may be the easier Prey
to the Philistines: The Marriage of our Kings, to Ladies of the Popish
Persuasion, has been so plain a Cause of the Nations Misery, that we have
great cause to rejoice in so happy a sight, as both King and Queen to be of the
same Religion, and that which is the professed and established Religion of
their Kingdoms: and its greatly to be hoped, the Wisdom of our Parliament will
make it no small part of their Care, to prevent the Mischiefs that have so
constantly attended our Kings being so unequally yoked. Our King and Queen draw
not now several Ways, their Principles are the same; as they are in Bed and at
Board one, so it is our great Comfort to see them repair to the same Churches,
exercised in the same Devotions, addressing to the same Altar; in a word, of
the same Faith and Religion, to the great encouragement of their Subjects, to
follow so pious, so great an Example: So that there are no hopes now of the
Philistines plowing with Sampson's Heifer. The Royal Interest is now absolutely
the same with that of the People; for their Majesty's and their People, are
more surely tied together by the Bonds of that Religion, for which both have an
equal Zeal, than by any Political Obligations whatsoever; so that now both
rejoice in the mutual Prosperity of each other, their Majesty's rejoicing in
their Peoples Security, and they again in the Royal Protection, as in all
Things, so chiefly in that which is the best of all Things, Religion.

Neither are we to neglect the Consideration of that, which deservedly makes
his present Majesty the Darling of these three Kingdoms, nay, like another
Titus, the Delight of Mankind, viz. that the King, the Prince of Orange, had no
such great matters to look for as to his own Interest, to move him to encounter
so great Dangers, to undergo so much Trouble. He was considerably great in the
Low Countries; he has no Children to enjoy the Crown after his own Death: so
that it plainly appears his Zeal for Religion, his great concern for the
bleeding state of these Nations, his love to Justice, did much more prevail
with him to this Heroic and Glorious Undertaking, than any concern of his own
in the Case.

Now upon the whole, if we despise so wonderful a Mercy, and become so bereft
of Reason as to be weary of Happiness, and court perpetual Slavery, and abandon
our present Security and Tranquillity, for those Miseries we have reason to
look for upon such an unwise change; What can we then expect but to be treated
by God as the despisers of his greatest Goodness, and to perish without so much
as the pity of Men, since we knew not how to prize a lasting Security, when we
had it in our Hands, and consequently that our Relapse must be very miserable
to us?

But if at last we propose to our Selves the Miseries that must unavoidably
fall upon us; if the Sins of this Nation so provoke God, as to bereave us of
that Happiness we now enjoy, and if we be wise may entail it upon our
Posterity, by another Revolution some Men so eagerly desire, we cannot but be
convinced that a Relapse is highly dangerous; I do profess, that the Calamities
that fatally attend such a Revolution, are so tremendous and horrible, that the
very apprehension of them cannot but strike considerate Men into the greatest
Confusion and Amazement: we can expect nothing else, but that our Miseries
should occasion our being a Proverb and a Byword, a hissing and reproach of
Popish Nations, who gape for our Ruin, and greedily thirst after our
Destruction; and on the other Hand, that we should be followed with Execrations
and Curses, from the Protestant World, for so treacherously betraying that
Truth we had so great a Zeal for; that a Nation that glorified so justly in
being accounted the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, should so fatally
occasion the total overthrow of it.

I will but briefly recount some of those Mischiefs, that any reasonable Man
cannot but apprehend must overtake us upon such a Relapse; if we consider with
what Rage and Fury, with what thirst of Revenge, not only the late King, (whose
natural Temper does not much dispose him to a forgetting of Injuries) but all
of the Popish Party must return amongst us, what are we to expect? Is the late
King ever the less a Papist than before? Has he abated any thing of his Zeal
for that Superstition? Have the Jesuits, etc. any other Sentiments of us and
our Religion than they had? ask the Protestants of Ireland, and they will
inform you, who fly as fast out of that Kingdom, as ever the French Refuges
forsook France. If we were so unjustly used when we had given no Offense, what
are we to look for when the worst of Crimes shall be laid to our Charge? If our
Religion (...) ^ear lost, our Laws and Liberties invaded, when all the
Obligations of the Earth were upon the Prince to protect them, how utterly must
all be lost, when the Resentments of so late Affronts, shall expose us to all
the direful Effects of an ungoverned Zeal, and enraged Revenge?

But besides, How are we to expect that such a Revolution should be brought
about? I am very confident England and Scotland, will never be willing to
afford so great a Strength as is sufficient for such an Enterprise; some
hotheaded Men may assist a stronger Party from Abroad, but they will never
undertake to do it alone: No, no, we plainly see it is an Irish and French Power
must do this; thence Men, Money, and Arms must come: this is so certain, that I
do not believe any Man in the Nation so bereft of Sense, as to expect it any
other way. And now what a Train of Miseries this Dragons-Tail draws after it,
is not easy either to be thought or expressed: if ever such a dismal Calamity
should befall us, we shall want another Jeremiah to write the Lamentations of
our Judah and Jerusalem. I do not think that ever any Nation under Heaven was
exposed to a more barbarous Desolation, than this poor Nation must be upon such
an unhappy Change. How has the French King used his own Subjects, to whom by
the Oaths of God, upon his Soul, he owed all Protection? and if so cruel at
Home, what are we Strangers to expect from his Armies, but all the Outrages
that attend an insulting Conquest, of an Enemy, who has resolved our Ruin,
and sworn the Extirpation of our Religion? If the cutting us off from being a
People should be the price of it; what are we to expect, whose unhappy
Connivance has occasioned all his Greatness, and whose Strength and Riches,
are the Shears that now clips his Wings, from soaring to that height of
Universal Empire, he so vainly and proudly grasps at? And the Truth is, this is
a great Misery, that upon such a Change the Crown of England is most likely to
devolve, not from King William to King James, but from King William to King
Lewis of France; which the great God of Heaven avert. We have heard of Princes
sposled of their Dominions by that King, but never could hear yet of any Prince
restored by him. Can it possibly enter into the Thoughts of any reasonable Man,
that the King of France will employ his Forces by Sea and Land, and spend his
Treasures, in conquering of these Kingdoms, and then quietly deliver them up to
another to possess? who himself labors so deeply of the Dropsy of enlarging
his Dominions, that neither Faith of Treaties, Laws of Nations, Oath of God,
nor the sense of common Equity and Justice, could ever yet bind him, from
making the most unjust Encroachments upon his Neighbors wherever he could. And
this is the more to be considered, because it is very easy to believe that the
Popish Clergy of England would be willing enough it should be so, King Lewis
being more able to maintain his Conquest, than King James can ever be supposed
to be to maintain his Possession, and their Security; and if the Popish Clergy
may justly be supposed to become so indifferent in this case, it is easy to
foresee, how the Laity of that Persuasion might be induced to a Satisfaction,
since these so slavishly, and indeed so brutishly, hang their Consciences at
those Men's Girdles; so that upon the whole, King Lewis is like to be the only
Gainer, although I am far from thinking that they who make this noise amongst us,
aim at any such thing, yet it is worth their while seriously to consider,
whether it will lie in their Power to prevent or help it.

As for the Irish, their Carriage to Protestants in King Charles the First's
Time, and now to the Protestants at this very instant, is more than sufficient
to satisfy us what Measures we are to expect from them; their natural
Barbarity, their constant Aversion to the English Nation, their thirst after a
Reprisal upon Protestants Estates, to make up the pretended Damages they have
sustained, their ignorant and blind Zeal for a rooted Superstition, are too
much to convince us, with what Intentions they must invade us; and what are
like to be the Effects of their barbarous Cruelty? In a word, it is Papists are
certainly to be employed to do this grand Feat, who will be sure to give the
Protestants, that shall be so unwise as to assist them, the same Thanks that
Queen Mary gave those of Suffolk; that the King of France has given his
Protestants; and that the late King James did so lately give the Church of
England; they will find, at last, to their Cost, the Effects of that
unalterable Maxim amongst them, That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics.

But then how is it possible for us, without the highest concern in the World,
to represent to our selves the Consequences of such a Change, with relation to
their present Majesty's, and the Princess Ann of Denmark? I am very loath to
insist too long upon this, its so extremely Tragical; Is this the Gratitude we
owe to the most magnanimous, courageous, and charitable Undertaking, that ever
was, to rescue three Nations out of the Jaws of Popery and Slavery? Can we find
in our Heart to expose our great Deliverer to so much Danger in his Person, and
Ruin in his Fortune, who so readily ventured Life and Fortune for our Good?
Can we so willingly deprive our selves of all our Hopes reposed in these
Protestant Branches of the Royal Family, as for ever to render them incapable
of doing us any further Kindness, or affording us any further Protection? Have
we so little sense of the most steadfast Constancy, and the unmovable Fidelity
of these great Persons, to the Religion and Interest of these Nations, which
could never be byaffed by the Authority of a King and Father, nor shaken by the
violent Temptations, and Assaults upon their Constancy? Who by their fixed
Resolutions to adhere to our Interests, had the worst of Arts used to deseat
them of their just Rights; for would they have but complied with the Designs
projected against us, I dare say neither they nor we had ever been troubled
with a Prince of Wales. Can we expect in another Deluge of Misery, to have
another Prince of Orange, so successfully and miraculously to draw us out of
it: No, no, it is to be hoped the Nation will never be prevailed upon to incur
the Guilt of such Ingratitude to Persons we owe our Religion, Laws and
Liberties to: We will never do that which will so justly expose us to the
Censures of the World, and render us unworthy, in any Circumstances, of any
Foreign Assistance, so utterly inconsistent with the Safety of those who afford
it. In a Word, we will be so just to our Selves, as not to entail Popery and
Bondage to our Posterity; for if we lose these great Persons, where can we fix
our hopes of any Relief?

Can we likewise, without Astonishment, think upon the Condition of Lords and
Commons, in this present Parliament, in case of any such Change of Affairs,
without Horror? Have we chosen so many worthy Patriots, to represent us there,
only to expose them to the greatest Mischiefs? Have they been so faithful to
re-settle us into a most happy Condition, by securing our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, to be left at last to the Fury and Malice of Popish Vengeance? Did
the Famous Nobility and Generous Gentry of this Kingdom, venture all for the
Security of the Nation, to no other purpose, than to lose Honor, Estate, Life,
and all, for their Zeal to their Religion, and Love to their Country? Surely as
we cannot but believe, that this must be the Consequence of such an unhappy
Change, with relation to the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom; so it is not
to be doubted but that all England will conceive a just Indignation, against
such Ingratitude, and will apprehend themselves obliged to espouse their
Interest cordially and unanimously, who have so wisely, and with so much
Courage, secured to us all Things capable of our utmost Esteem.

In a word, when we seriously consider the great Danger the Protestant Interest
is exposed to all over Europe, that nothing less is intended, than the rooting
out of that vile pestilent Northern Heresy, as the Enemies of our Holy Religion
are pleased to call it; I hope we will think more than once upon it, before we
contribute so highly, to the utter Subversion of the Protestant Religion in
general every where, as the cutting off of these three Kingdoms from it must
necessarily occasion. It Is well known that these Churches of Great Britain and
Ireland, and more particularly that of England, have been justly looked upon,
as the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion in general; and therefore the Papists
have used their utmost Fraud in undermining of her, and their utmost Violence
in raising up their Batteries against her, assuring themselves, if they could
but once gain this Bulwark, they would quickly, and with Ease make themselves
Masters of the whole Fort; it is well known, that the French King durst never
have used his Protestant Subjects, as he both perfidiously and barbarously did,
if England had had the liberty to have espoused their Interest, and it was
justly looked upon as a wonderful Thing, that the King of England, should be
declaring himself so much for Liberty of Conscience here, and yet on the other
side of the Water, the French King should be using all sorts of Cruelties upon
those of our Religion wholly to extirpate it, and yet King James should never
become their Intercessor, nor declare to that King his just Resentments of his
Acting so contrary to his constant Principles, especially when his using his
Subjects so could not but strike all his own English Subjects into an Alarm,
and put them upon sadly divining what in all probability was like to be their
own Fate in time. Why have the Protestant Princes and States entered into so
strong a Confederacy, looking upon their present Majesty's as the Chief support
of it, but upon the certain knowledge they had, of a Design on Foot to ruin
them? and thus it may be easily conjectured, what must be the Danger of the
Protestant Religion abroad, if England be rendered incapable of giving
Assistance to its Professors; nay more, if the strength of England be made use
of to promote their Destruction. But its obvious this must be the result of the
return of Popery and Slavery amongst us; so that upon the whole Matter, if ever
such a Judgment from Heaven, should overtake us, as the return of this unclean
Spirit of Popery, and its Usher Slavery, among us, we cannot but expect that
not only Seven, but a Legion of Miseries worse then we have felt, must return
with it, sufficient to make our last Case worse then our first.

The Case being so plainly thus, is it possible that Men can ever be in love
with such Miseries as these, not only upon themselves, but upon their Innocent
Posterity. For the Word is Now or Never, and Now and Ever. And that we may
never feel the Mischiefs of the last part of this Sentence, I hope we will take
Care to Secure the first, that because not now therefore they never shall
prevail upon us. I beseech you, Gentlemen, who seem to be so willing to bereave
us of our present Tranquillity, and to contribute what in you lies to bring a
Deluge of Miseries upon us, in which you your selves must certainly be
overwhelmed, if ever you be truly Zealous for, and faithful to the Truth of God
professed in this Nation; I pray you to consider with your Selves, that if your
Desires should succeed, and you should be aiding and assisting to it, what late
Repentance and Horror must seize upon you, while you shall sadly then, when it
is to late, reflect upon that Destruction you have brought upon your Country
and Fellow-Country-Men, and it is not to be doubted, but at last upon your
Selves too!

But if Men will continue obstinate in Mischief, and are resolved to use their
utmost Endeavors to rush us again into Confusions, and to set all in a Flame,
it is to be hoped his Majesty will have such a special regard to the Welfare of
these Nations, in which that of his own, and all the Protestant Branches of the
Royal Family, is so closely wrapped up, that he will most diligently inspect into
the wicked Practices, and most villainous Designs of such ill-minded-Men; and
indeed they ought betimes to bethink themselves, what the whole Kingdom must
think those Men worthy of, who are Haters of their Peace, and Contrivers of
their Destruction: for what ever Eyes they look with, and whatsoever
Prospective-Glass they make use of, they must pardon us, who can see nothing
but lasting Misery, attending their Projects and Designs: and therefore however
they may hope his Majestys Clemency (which by their undutiful Language, bold
and ungrateful Speeches, and insolent Attempts, in the Face of a Nation,
resolved to continue their Happiness, by most constantly adhering to his
Majesty's Interests) they have already too much tried; yet they are Fools to
imagine his Majesty will suffer his innate Lenity and Gentleness, to be the
greatest Cruelty to his faithful Subjects, by extending it to Persons
obstinately bent upon his and their Ruin; nor can they dream, that a whole
Nation, now secured of all that is dear to them, will much longer bear the
bantering Affronts, and not only undutiful, but even Treasonable Practices of
such Men who so carry themselves, as if they longed for nothing more than our
Destruction.

And just as I was writing this, came to my Hands that Paper, pretended to be a
Declaration from King James the Second to all his Loving Subjects in the
Kingdom of England. Perhaps there was never a greater piece of Insolence acted
in any Nation, than dispersing of these in a Kingdom, where there is a King de
facto upon the Throne; and the Resentment the House of Commons has showed, is a
sufficient proof of what I have just now said; but for the Paper it self, it
carries all the Marks of Forgery that possibly can be: for would ever the late
King tell his Subjects of England, of his kind usage to his Protestant Subjects
in Ireland, who are so infallibly convinced of the contrary? For why should so
many of the Bishops and Clergy, so many People of all Conditions fly out of
that Kingdom, even since his arrival there, and leave their Estates and
Habitations, and cast themselves upon the Charity of England for a present
Subsistence, if this Libel were true? Why, even at this very Time, do they
embrace all opportunities of Transporting themselves, into this Island, with
great Joy and Thankfulness? If Protestant Persons, Fortunes, Religion, were in
so much Safety, what makes the Protestants of Londonderry, etc. rather venture
their Lives in their own Defense, and endure the Perils and hardship of a
dangerous Siege, if the Protestants there were in so great Security? Surely the
Forgers of this Libel imagine it possible to put out our very Eyes, and to
hood-wink us to Destruction. Can we ever think that Protestants will ever be
safe, or apprehend themselves so, where the French domineer, at the rate they
must certainly be presumed to do in Ireland? For it is very reasonable to
conclude that seeing Men, Ammunition, Money, and whatsoever is necessary for
War, comes from the French, that King will, nay, must rule the Roast. We will
therefore believe our own Intelligence much better then this piece of Forgery,
viz. that the very Papists of Ireland, are so apprehensive of the French
Tyranny, that they begin to wish for the mild Government of Protestant England,
rather than ly under the insupportable Tyranny of Popish France. As for the
large Promises made to England upon a surrender these Forgerers invite us to, I
have said enough already, that Popish Faith can never be more truned by
Protestants, and we are very well assured, that if it were possible for the
Host of Heaven to come down upon Earth, to be Guarantee for the Fidelity of
Papists to Protestants in any Treaties made with them relating to Religion;
they would notwithstanding, upon the first safe Opportunity, violate them; and
if these blessed Spirits should take upon them the Desence of the Guarantee and
the Honor of it, they would presently disown their Patronage, and deprive them
of the Honor of their being their Intercessors, and charge them with being
Favorers of the vilest Heretics; for we would desire but one Instance wherein
ever Protestants were used kindly by Papists where ever it was in their Power
to use them otherwise.

Go on then, Great Sir, in the perfecting of that, which your Majesty has so
gloriously begun, and so magnanimously undertaken, and have had the assistance
of the God of Truth, to the Joy of these Nations, to the Despair and Confusion
of your Enemies, to the Security of the Protestant World; your Majesty has
the Hearts, the Hands, the Purses of your People at your Devotion; you have a
Parliament, who having engaged whatsoever is worthy of Men of Honor, of
Fortune, of Religion for your Assistance, will never be wanting to enable you
to complete Yours, Theirs, Ours, nay Europe's Happiness; You have the greatest
Security of the Protection of that God, who is the Disposer of Kingdoms, by
whom Kings reign, who has hitherto blessed you with Success to a Miracle, You
have, in fine, the best and most Glorious Cause, even the preserving of these
Nations (to which God, and Nature, and a General consent of your People, have
given you such a close Interest and near Relation) from all the Calamities that
could befall either the Souls, Bodies, or Fortunes of Us and our Posterity.
This I am sure is the hearty Prayer of all that are lovers either of our Civil
or Religious Rights, and our secure, peaceable, and lasting enjoyment of them,
that your Enemies may be clothed with shame, but upon your Head the Crown may
long Flourish.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswel.
THE Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City to a Minister in the Country. A Sermon preached at
Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace, upon Easter Day 1689, at the Consecration
of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony
Horneck, D. D. The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its
first rigid Laws for universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a
prospect of these near approaching Revolutions, viz. The Revival of the
Protestant Profession in an eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed.
The last End of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification of the Power
of the Roman Church in all parts of its Dominions. In Explication of the
Trumpets and Vials of the Apocalypse, upon Principles generally acknowledged by
Protestant Interpreters. By Drue Cressener, D. D. A Breviate of the State of
Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts, Officers of State, Inferior
Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts, Jurisdictions, Buroughs
Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol. Some Considerations touching Succession and
Allegiance. 4 to. A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before
the University of Oxford. By George Tully, Sub-Dean of York, for which he was
suspended. Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in
the Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors. The History of the
Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in England, from the
beginning of September, 1688. to the Twelfth of February following. With an
Answer to a Piece called the Dissertion discussed, in a Letter to a
Country-Gentleman. By a Person of Quality. K. William and K. Lewis, wherein is
set forth the inevitable necessity these Nations lie under of submitting wholly
to one or other of these Kings; And that the matter in Controversy is not now
between K. William and K. James, but between K. William and K. Lewis of France,
for the Government of these Nations. An Examination of the Scruples of those
who refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance, by a Divine of the Church of
England. A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite;
occasioned by the late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance. Two
Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring: By Simon Patrick,
D. D. An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles the Second, King of
England, to declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in
1672. And of the Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the
French King to carry it on, and to establish Popery in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, as they are set down in the History of the Duten War, printed in
French at Paris, with the Privilege of the French King, 1682. Which Book he
caused to be immediately suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador.
Fol. An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second
and the French King. Fol. The Case of Oaths Stated. 4 to. The Answer of a
Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Popish Letter of N. N. upon a
Discourse between them, concerning the present Posture of that Country, and
the Part fit for those concerned there to act in it. 4 to. An Apology for the
Protestants of Ireland, in a brief Narrative of the late Revolutions in that
Kingdom; and an Account of the present State thereof: By a Gentleman of
Quality. 4 to. A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the
Present Revolution. 4 to. Mr. Wake's Sermon before the King and Queen at
Hampton Court. -- His Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, June 5. 1689.
Dr. Tennison's Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons, June 5.
1689. Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689. A
Letter written by the Emperor to the late King James, setting forth the true
Occasion of his Fall, and the Treachery and Cruelty of the French. The
Resolution of the Electors, and the Princes of the Empire, February 11. 1689.
Containing the Reasons of their Declaring War against France: Together with the
Emperor's Concurrence with them in it, and approving the same. An Account of
the late Revolution in New England. Together with the Declaration of the
Gentlemen, Merchants, and Inhabitants of Boston, and the Country adjacent,
April 18. 1689. Written by Mr. Nathanael Byfield, a Merchant of Bristol in
New England, to his Friends in London. A Declaration of his Electoral Highness
the Duke of Brandenburgh, concerning the present War with France: Directing his
Subjects and Vassals, and all other His Dependants, how they are to demean
themselves in their Trading, Negotiation, and all incident Occasions during the
present War. As also a Letter sent from the Imperial Diet at Ratisbon, to the
Thirteen Cantons In Switzerland, March 7. 1689. Exhorting hem to adhere to his
Imperial Majesty, and the Princes of the Empire, in the present War against
France.

