THE JESUITS POLICY TO Suppress Monarchy, Proving out of their own WRITINGS
THAT THE Protestant Religion IS A SURE FOUNDATION AND PRINCIPLE OF A True
Christian.

Written by a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walls of
the New-Exchange, 1678.

To all Supreme Powers, by what Titles soever Dignified, or Distinguished, i.
e. To Emperors, Kings, Sovereign Princes, Re-publicks, etc.
TO You (Gods Vicegerents on Earth, over all Persons, whether Ecclesiastical
or Temporal, next under god within Your own respective Dominions Supreme
Governors,) I conceive fittest to Dedicate, and Direct the ensuing Papers; to
You (Most Illustrious,) they address themselves, as to persons most concerned
in the Subject they treat about; whereby is endeavored the Vindication of Gods
Honor, wherein as his Vicegerents You are highly concerned; also Your own
Supreme Powers and Authorities, which in former Ages, (and yet still in the
Doctrinal part,) have been often Invaded by the Bishop of Rome, and their
Abettors; amongst whom the Jesuits have been still in the Front, as the
principal Champions against You; and for those Bishops from whom all
Anti-Monarchical Principles have proceeded under the veil and cover of other
Religions, -- as Quakers, Anabaptists, Independents, etc. which several Sects
have been Abetted by several of the Roman Clergy, (thereunto Authorized and
commanded by the Bishops of Rome,) to prevent a Reformation amongst themselves
(always a terror to them,) and the better to d^vide the Reformed Churches over
the World, according to that Maxim, Divide and Impera, -- whereby they have not
a little impeded the Christian Profession, in the Enlargement of the Kingdom of
Christ, and thereby given occasion to the Enemies of God (the Turks, etc.) to
Blaspheme, and enlarge their Dominions and Territories; hereby the Isle of
Rhodes and Candie has been lost, to the Eternal reproach of the Christian
Profession; for while Christians are disjoined, the common Enemy takes the
advantage, which by a happy Union, ho would lose.

I shall here add a few particulars out of the History of France, in the Life
of Lewis the Thirteenth; Fol. 1295. Upon occasion of the Murder of Henry the
Fourth of France by Ravilliac; the words be these. -- This wicked Murderer
confessed no other motive of his crime, but the Book of Mariana, a Spanish
Jesuit; which Book by a decree made by the College of Sorbonne, and confirmed
by a Sentence from the Courts of Parliament, was for that cause condemned to be
publicly burnt before our Lady Church in Paris: the tenor of the Sentence was;

[The Court, the great Chamber the Turnelle, and the Chamber of the Edict being
Assembled, having seen the decree of the faculty of Divinity assembled the
Fourth of this Month of June, according to a Sentence given in May last, upon
the renewing of the censure in matter of Doctrine made by the said faculty in
the Year 1413. Confirmed by the Holy Council of Constance; that it is an
Heresy full of Impiety to maintain that it is lawful for Subjects or
Strangers, upon any pretense or cause whatsoever, to attempt against the Sacred
Person of Kings and Sovereign Princes, the Book of John Mariana Entitled, De
Rege, and Regis Institutione, Printed as well at Mentz as in other places,
containing many execrable Blasphemies against the Deceased King Henry the Third
of most happy Memory, the persons and Estates of Kings and Sovereign Princes,
and other propositions contrary to the said decree: upon the conclusion of the
Kings Attorney General, the matter being propounded; the said Court has and
does ordain, that the said decree of the Fourth of this present month of June
shall be entered into the Registers thereof, and heard at the instance of the
Kings Atturny General, and read every year on the like day, on Sunday, in the
Parishes of this City, and Suburbs of Paris; it does also ordain that the Book
of Mariana shall be burnt by the Executioner of Justice, before our Lady Church
in Paris; forbidding all men, of what Estates, Quality and Condition soever
they be, upon pain of High Treason, to write or cause any Books to be Printed
against the said Decree and Sentence; it does also enjoin, that Copies taken
out of the Originals of the said Decree, and this present Sentence, shall be
sent unto the Bailewicks and Seneshaushes of this Jurisdiction, there to be
read and published after the accustomed manner and form. And moreover, at
Evensong in Parishes, in Towns, Suburbs, and other Buroughs, the first Sunday
of June; enjoining all Bailiffs and Seneshalls to proceed to the said
publication, and the substitutes of the Kings Atturny General to have a care of
the Execution, and to certify the Court of their Diligence.]

Upon A Declaration, or Letter from one Cotton the Jesuit to the Queen Regent,
to wipe off that Aspersion from their Society, An Answr is framed unto it, by
the name of Anti-Cotton, which you will find in Fol. 1298. The words be as
follow.

Anti-Cotton, the Doctrine of Jesuits for Murdering Kings.
[Francis Ribadinera writing of the parricide of James Clement, he says,
forasmuch as the resolution Henry the Third took upon him, was the advice of a
Politician, and a Machiavilist, not conformable to the rules of our Savior,
behold the reason, that by the judgment of God, the said Henry was killed by a
young Monk, and dyed by the stroke of a Knife.

Carolus Scribanius, a Flemish Jesuit, who calls himself Clarus Bonarscius, in
his Book Entitled Amphitheatrum honoris, says, that if it so fall out, that a
Denis, a Machonidas, or an Aristotimus, Monsters of their Age, oppress France,
shall not the Pope have absolute power to animate against them some Dion,
Timoleon, or Phil^poemen, that is to say, tamers and suppressers of Monsters?
And afterward speaking of a Tyrant wasting France, will no man (says he) take
Arms against that Tyrant wasting France? Will no Pope set free that Noble
Kingdom from the stroke of the Axe?

He cites Bellarmine, who although he condemns Treason against Princes, yet
in ambiguous terms he seems to approve it, by commending Garnet the Jesuit, in
these words. Wherefore was Henry Garnet, a man unmatchable in all kinds of
Learning and Holiness of Life, so punished in the highest Degree, but only for
that he would not detect that, which with a safe conscience he could not? And
the same Author, in his Book De Pontifice Romano, says, the Pope may dispose
of Kingdoms, taking from one, and giving to another, as being the Superior
Prince Ecclesiastical; and the Jesuit Gretzer says, we are not such Dastards,
as that we fear to affirm openly, that the Pope of Rome may (if necessity so
require) free his Catholic Subjects from their Oath of Obedience, if their
Sovereign entreat them Tyrannically; yea he adds, in the same place; that if
the Pope do it discreetly and warily, it is a meritorious work; after all this,
he quotes the Doctrine of Tolet, Mariana, and John Guignard, a Jesuit Priest
residing in Paris, who had written a Treatise in praise of James Clement, with
diverse motives to make away the King which last dyed; for the which he was
Executed. But Francis Verona Constant, exceeds them all; he affirms, that
notwithstanding the Council of Constance, it is lawful for any private man to
Murder Kings condemned of Heresy and Tyranny: And Emanuel Sa writes, that
that the Rebellion of a Clerk against the King is no Treason, insomuch that he
is not Subject to him; the which Bellarmine in a manner confirms; saying, the
Pope of Rome has Exempted Clerks from their subjection to Princes: Kings are
now no more Superiors of Clerks. And to prove their Doctrine of killing Kings
more plainly, he produces the equivocations and evasions of Garnet, being
apprehended for the Powder Treason; the which is justified by many of that
Society: John Henreux writing thus: When any man is drawn into question under
an unjust trial, no man standing bound to inform against himself (as the law of
nature teaches us plainly) he may peremptorily, and freely deny that for which
he is called into question, without any tergiversation, because he always
understands this Clause, [Ut tenear dicere] which Doctrine is confirmed by
diverse other Jesuits; One of them affirming, that the Doctrine of Equivocation
is grounded upon the memorable Example of St. Francis: in the end he shows
their opinion touching concealing of Confession, which they hold ought not to
be revealed. John Henreux, writing of that Subject, says: That a thing Sealed
up with the most holy Signet of Confession, cannot be broken without detestable
Sacrilege: and that there cannot fall so great a mischief, for the avoiding of
which it can be lawful to bewray a Confession. And Suarez adds; yea though the
safety of the whole Commonweal should stand upon it; by all which proof^ he
shows, that it was not Mariana's Doctrine alone to Murder Kings, but that all
the Jesuits have erred with him in this; whom Father Cotton connot justify,
in general. Anti-Cotton having set down the Jesuits Doctrine, he proves it by
their Actions, and first, by the Fact of John Chastel, Clerk, Confirmed by the
Actions.
brought up in the Jesuits College; who having Stabbed the King in the Mouth,
the 27. of December, 1604. being examined upon sundry Questions, and among
others, wh there he had studied Divinity in the Jesuits College; he answered,
that he had been th^re under Father Gueet, with whom he had continued two years
and a half: And being ask^d if he had ever been in the Chamber of Meditation,
(whither the Jesuits use to bring the greatest Sinners, there to behold the
Representation of many Devils, set forth (under color to reduce them to a
better Life) thereby to cause a perturbation in their minds, and consequently,
upon such resolutions, to thrust them forward to the undertaking of some great
Action) His answer was, that he had often been in the Chamber of Meditations:
And being questioned, whether the killing of the King were not an ordinary disc
urse amongst the Jesuits, answered, that he had heard them say, it was lawful
to kill the King, and that he was no member of the Church, and that we ought
not to obey him, nor hold him for our King, until he had received approbation
from the Pope.

Peter Barriere being apprehended at Melun, in April, 1593. being d scovered by
an honest Friar, Confessed, that he came purposely to Court, to kill the King;
and that he had been p^rswaded thereunto by one Varade, a Jesuit, whose daily
practice was to d^fame the King with v^le Speeches, by wh se persuasion he had
provided a Knife to do the Fact: he first of all discovered his intent to
Aubrey, Curate of St. Andrew des Acts, who directed him to Varade, Rector of
the Jesuits Coll^dge, who confirmed him in his Resolution to kill the King;
assuring h m that in case he were put to death, he should obtain in Heaven a
Crown of Martyrdom; and adjuring him unto this Action, upon the Sacrament of
Confession, and to Holy Communion. And (omitting many Actions of Jesuits, both
at home, and abroad, to prove their damnable Doctrine) he concludes with
Garnet, Hall, and others of the Sect, who were Accomplices in that Powd^r-Treason
which was practiced to ruin the King, and the whole Estates of England.

In the end, he seeks to prove by many pregnant presumptions, that the Jesuits
are guilty of the Murder. First, by an Advertisement sent from M. de la force,
the Kings Lieutenant in Bearn, that a Spaniard, described by him was come into
France with an intent to kill the King; which Spaniard was brought unto the
King by Cotton; but the King having received these Letters, showed them to
Cotton, and commanded him to bring the Spaniard again, but he could not be
found.

2. Secondly, the seditious Preaching of Gontier, and Hardy, both Jesuits, the
Lent before the Fact was committed; insomuch that the Marshal D'Ornano told the
King, that if Gontier had Preached so at Bourdeaux, he would have caused him to
be cast into the River; and yet he was as very Zealous Catholic.

3. Thirdly, the Confession of Ravilliac, who justified unto Father Aubigny,
that he had told him in Confession, that he had been sent to give a great blow,
and that he had showed him the Knife, having a heart graven upon it; But the
Jesuit protested, That God had given him the grace to forget that presently
which was revealed to him in Confession; whereby he saved his Life.

And last of all, the Predictions before the Kings death as at Bruxelles, it
was spoken of twelve, or fifteen days before it happened. At Prague, it had
been given out, that the King was dead, before it fell out so; and moreover, it
was told them, that after his death the Daulphin should not be King, but the
King of Spain; and that for some reasons, which Gontier gave in his Sermons in
Lent last; and then the Prediction of the Provost of Pluviers, that the King
was either slain or hurt that day. He was a Jesuit in Faction, and had a Son a
Jesuit.

To conclude, I think it not amiss to say something concerning the first
General Council that ever was in the Church of Christ; you have the whole Story
of it in the 15 Chap. of the Acts of the Holy Apostles; I shall take notice,
that it was not called by the particular direction of any of the Apostles, but
that all of them did concur th^r^unto; and this was, doubtless, the Method of
the Christian Church, during it is greatest Purity and Integrity; and the truth
is, no other way could be used, while the Church of Christ was under
Persecution: but in process of time, when supreme powers did receive, and
protect the Christian Faith; and that (as the Scripture says,) Kings and
Queens were Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers, of the Spouse of Christ; then
were General Councils summoned by them, and by them were these Councils left to
their free Debates and determinations; whose Decrees were afterward confirmed
by the Supreme Authorities, whereby those Decrees, which before such a
Confirmation did only oblige the Conscience, had then the Coercive Power of the
State to compel their Observation; and this Method did continue, till the
Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome upon all Powers, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; for he now takes upon him to assume unto himself the power of
calling Councils, of presiding in them, and Confirming their Decrees; saying,
that without His Confirmation, they are invalid. Thus does he make his own Will
to be of more Authority than a General Council; and this same Will of his to be
Superior to all Supreme Powers and Authorities whatsoever: But I shall add no
more upon this Subject, but proceed to what I at first proposed in the
beginning hereof; where I shall take notice of some things in the 15th Chap. of
the Acts of the Holy Apostles, where we read of the first General Council that
ever was in the Church of Christ; (and therefore most likely to be a direction
for all others.) It was occasioned by an Appeal made by some Converted
Gentiles, to this General Council; for some Pharisaical Christians would impose
upon these Converted Gentiles the whole Law of Moses; therefore to this General
Council they do appeal; the words of the Council are these. -- The Apostles,
and Elders, and Brethren send Greeting unto the Brethren which are of the
Gentiles in Antioch, Ver. 23. of this 15. Chap.
and Syria, and Cilicia.

24. Forasmuch as We have heard, that certain which went out from us, have
troubled You with Words subverting Your Souls; saying, Ye must be Circumcised,
and keep the Law, to whom We gave no such Commandment:

25. It seemed good unto Us, being Assembled with one accord, to send chosen
Men unto You, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul.

26. Men that have hazarded their Lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

27. We have sent therefore Judas, and Silas, who shall also tell you the same
things by word of mouth.

28. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon You no
greater Burden, than these necessary things.

29. That Ye abstain from Meets offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from
things Strangled, and from Fornication; from which if ye keep your selves, ye
shall do well; fare ye well.

These be the words together; We shall now take them into parts. -- The
Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, [There is no Primacy in St. Peter, or in
any body else; either first, as to calling this Council; or Secondly, In degree
it self; or Thirdly, by way of Confirming this Decree of the Council; Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren, are all alike concerned;] Send Greeting, unto the
Brethren, which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia. [Now here I
cannot but take notice, that the Church of Jerusalem treats the Churches of
Antioch, etc. not with a Maternal, but a Fraternal App^llation; not like the
Church of Rome, (certainly if ever any had been the Mother Church, it must have
been that of Jerusalem, St. Peter, and all the rest of the Apostles; yea, even
a General Council there residing,) which makes her self the Mother Church, and
all others she will have to be esteemed but Her Children; and yet in this
General Council St. Peter was present, as appears by the 7. Verse of this 15.
Chap. and yet St. Peter does not pronounce any Judgment; contenting himself
rather with relating matter of Fact; and Paul and Barnabas do the same, as it
is Ver. 11. But the Apostle St. James proceeds further in Ver.
13.14.15.16.17.18. and in the 19. Ver. is very bold, saying: -- Wherefore my
sentence is, that we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned
to God; -- and Ver. 20. He proceeds. -- But that we [here St. James is equal
with St. Peter, or any of the rest] write unto them, that they abstain from
pollutions of Idols, and from Fornication, and from things strangled, and from
Blood; -- And to this Sentence of St. James the whole Council acquiesces, not
any one speaking after St. James; [ -- Forasmuch as certain which went out from
us, have troubled you with words subverting your Souls, saying, Ye must be
Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom We, not St. Peter alone] gave no such
Commandment, it seemed good unto Us, being assembled with one accord; [This
Council you see was not called by St. Peter alone,] to send chosen men unto
You, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, Men that have hazarded their Lives for
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; We have sent therefore Judas, and Silas, who
shall also tell you the same things by word of Mouth; for it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and to Us; [you see the Holy Ghost is not tied to St. Peter's, or
the Pope's Chair, nor the College of Cardinals, but remaining with the General
Council;] To lay upon you no heavier burden than these necessary things, that
ye abstain from Meats offered to Idols, from Blood, and from things strangled,
and from Fornication; [all this, the Sentence of, and Opinion of St. James
delievered to the Council, and thus approved of by the Council,] from which if
ye keep your selves, ye shall do well; fare ye well.

A DIALOGUE: BETWEEN ORTHODOX a ROYALIST, AND CACODAEMON; one Popishly affected!
Orthodox, WELL met, Sir; a Saying of yours I have very often thought of.


Cacodaemon, What is that (Sir) I beseech you.


Ortho. That the Papists are, and always were the Kings best Subjects.


Caco. I am still of that opinion.


Ortho. If you be so, I am desirous (if your leisure will permit) that Systeme
of yours may be the Subject of our present Discourse. For the truth is, I am of
a quite contrary Opinion; this is an assured truth, one of us two is out of the
way; and good Manners, as well as Charity and good Conscience, commands us to
bring the Knight Errant into the right way; I am ready to hear your Argument,
and I do hope the like patience for mine.


Caco. Content, for I am very confident I am in the right; and do hope with
little trouble to bring you over to be of my Opinion.


Ortho. Pray, be pleased to begin.


Caco. I am ready; and thus I begin. Who, I pray, were firmest for the late
King during his Wars with the long Parliament, were not the Papists? This is
certain, none of them were of the Parliaments Party; but many thousand of
Protestants fought against, and at the last brought His Sacred Head to the
Block; and so that Holy Martyr was put to Death by His Protestant Subjects.
Besides that, Who were they that Preserved Our present Sovereign in His
greatest Hardships, in His greatest Extremities, were they not the Papists? And
none of any Belief whatsoever, I am sure, are so ready as they to serve Him
now, and to Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes for Him.


Ortho. I perceive by your silence now, that you expect my Answer.


Caco. I do, but not a Confutation; for what I have said is an Invincible and
Infallible Truth.


Ortho. I hope to make you shortly of another Opinion; In the first place, I
will lay down for an infallible Truth, That never any Protestant [ i. e. a Son
of the Church of England] did ever draw his Sword against the King, or any
other their Sovereign Prince, since the Reformation, begun by King Henry the
Eighth.


Caco. "Oh Monstrum horrendum! Sure you do not believe what you say.


Ortho. Yes, and I Will prove what I say, thus; That the late Rebels, Cromwell
(your Friend President Bradshaw) and the rest of those that were of their
Party, were not Protestants, (that is, they were not Sons of the Church of
England;) you may as well call those People Royalists, as Protestants, or Sons
of the Church of England; Did they not overthrow the Hierarchy of the Church,
as well as Monarchy? How then can you call them Protestants? When indeed they
do not deserve (without a great deal of Charity) the name of Men, so Monstrous
were their Actions? Thus much to vindicate Protestants, whose Tenet is this,
that if their Sovereign were a Tyrant, and a Turk, (which our Sovereign is far
from, I thank God) yet in such a case we allow of no other Arms, than what the
Primitive Christians did use against their Persecutors, that is, Prayers and
Tears.


Caco. Thus far, I confess, you have well proved, that Protestants in a strict
sense so called ( i. e. true Sons of the Church of England) may be very good
Subjects; and that if they deviate from their Lovalty to their Sovereign, it is
not from any ill Principle in their Religion, which they suck in with their
Milk; and that such deviations do rather proceed from the ill Principles of
Sin, and frailties of humane Nature; All this I acknowledge for a great truth;
but what have you to say against Papists, that they should not be as good
Subjects, as any the best Protestants in the World?
Ortho. In a word, the Rebellion of Ireland, accompanied with an universal
Massacre, without all distinction of Ages and Sexes; which as it preceeded the
Rebellion of England, so did it also exceed it in Inhumanity and Bloodshed;
and, for ought I know, might occasion the English Rebellion.


Caco. I did expect no less from you, who are so great an assertor of the
Protestants, so much an adversary to the Papists, and so Loyal to the Prince;
but all this while I hear nothing of any Principle in the Popish Religion, that
should lead them into such horrid actions, which I do by no means justify.
Ortho. Have patience, and I shall give enough of that; you know what our
Savior said, No man can serve two Masters, which possibly might be a Prophecy
of the Popes Sovereignty over the Kings and Protentates of the World; How can
the Papists serve God, Honor the King, (which two are but one in reality) and
Serve, Worship, and Obey the Pope? for he is (as our Savior says) the other
Master.


Caco. "Well enough; for the Pope (as the Papists tell me) pretends to no other
Soverelgnty, but in Spiritualibus.


Ortho. In Temporalibus also, I assure you; and yet it is a wonder, how an
Opinion so Diametrically opposite to the truth of God, delivered in the
Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the Ancients, both Councils and Fathers, should
ever get up among such as profess Christianity; And surely, were not the
Interests of the Court of Rome in greater esteem, than the truths of the
Gospel, and the Peace of the Catholic Church, it were not possible that your
Popes should be so presumptuous as to assume this Power; or the Doctors of Rome
so impudent, as to assert it. For, to enlarge a little on this particular, of
such concernment to the peace of the Church, and all Christendom; Is it not St.
Peter's Exhortation, 1. Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
Man, for the Lords sake; to the King, as Supreme? and St. Paul is of the same
mind, Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; and v. 5.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience
sake; and St. Chrysostom's gloss upon the Text answers all your pretenses
against this truth. Etiamsi Apostolus sis, etc. Although you be an Apostle, or
an Evangelist, or a Prophet, yet you must be subject; And such was St. Paul's
own practice; He submits himself to the judgment of Felix, Acts 24; and to
Festus; and from him ( Acts 25.) makes his appeal to Caesar; Appellatio autem
non nisi ad legitimum sit judicem. And this incontroulable Power did the
Primitive Christians acknowledge in their Emperors, and submit to it; though
Heathens, Heretics, and Persecutors. Athanasius being unjustly banished from
Alexandria where he was Bishop, by Constantius, and afterward falsely accused
of Disobedience to his Decree, makes this mild defense to him though an Arian
and a Persecutor [ Epist. ad Constantium] Nequaquam restiti mandatis tuae
Pietatis, etc. I no way resisted the Commands of your Piety; neither shall I
ever endeavor to enter into Alexandria, till your Piety give me leave. And thus
St. Augustine. in Psalm. 128. Apostata erat Julianus, iniquus, Idololatra;
milites tamen Christiani servierunt Imperatori, etc. Julian was an Apostate, a
wicked Man, an Idolater; yet the Christians obeyed him: When it concerned the
cause of Christ, then indeed they acknowledged him only, that was in Heaven;
but when the Emperor commanded other things, they obeyed him. I may also ask
by what Law the Pope can challenge this Power to himself, to dispose of the
Temporal Affairs or Estates of Princes; Not by any human Law: for the Prince is
above the coactive or coercive Power of humane Laws, solo Deo minor: If by
Divine Law, let him show any Text of Scripture, or Tradition of the Apostle;
surely they are both against it: The weapons of our Warfare, says the Apostle
[2 Cor. 10.] are not carnal, but Spiritual; and our Savior determines against
it, Mat. 20.25.26. The Princes of the Gentiles exerise Dominion and Authority
over them; but it shall not be so among you; Hence St. Hicrom [Epist. 3. ad
Heliodor.] speaking of the King and the Bishop, says* Ille nolentibus praeest,
hic volentibus. The King has Power over the refractory and disobedient; the
Bishop over such as are willing to obey him; His Power compulsory, the Bishops
but precarious. And thus the second General Nicene Council, Act 3. discoursing
of the Regal and Sacerdotal Power, speaks to the same purpose, Sacordos
Coelesti^ curat; Rex autem legibus aequis and justis, omma quae in terris
siunt, procurat; The Priest takes care for what may bring us to Heaven; The
King by just and equitable Laws orders all Affairs on Earth. And this is
answerable to the terms and boundaries of both powers which we see appointed by
Jehosaphat [2 Chronicles. 19.11.] Ananias the chief Friest is over you in all
matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah the Ruler [or Prince] for all the Kings
matters: If therefore the King be over all, and orders all Temporal Affairs by
a supereminent and incoercible Authority, none may depose him from, or deprive
him of his Temporals, either directly or indirectly; much less the Church or
Pope, whose Power is merely Spiritual; and therefore the behaviors of your
Popes have been. Rebellious and Scandalous against Reason and Religion, against
the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and the Practice of the Ancient Christians,
especially since Gregory the 7th. who seems to have been the first assertor and
practicant in this intolerable presumption, not only excommunicating (though
that be more than St. Augustine will allow him,) when he tells us, nec Rex, nec
Multitudo Excommunicandi sunt [ ut-refert Glass. in Mat. 23.] but also
dethroning and deposing the Emperor Henry the 4th. whereof he thus complains;
Ignominiam sustinco ante inauditam; I suffer a disgrace never before heard of:
Vide Albertum Stadiensem, ad Annum 1106.

Innocent the Third makes Otho (although a Rebel to his Prince) Emperor, and
afterward deposes him, not because a Rebel, but because unprofitable to
himself. Honorius the Third Excommunicates Frederick the Second, and deposes
him; which Sentence Gregory the Ninth confirms, Innocent the 4th also. Of the
Pride and cruelty of the Popes against this Emperor Frederick; the King of
France thus complained (as Mat. Paris tells the story, in Hen. 3.) Quo Spiritu,
vel ausu temerario Papa. With what spirit, with what daring rashness did the
Pope disinherit, and depose from his Imperial dignity, this worthy Prince, than
whom a greater is not found among Christians, nor yet his equal, etc. De
transgressionibus ejus, etc. Concerning his Faults objected, no credit is to be
given to his Enemies, among whom the Pope is known to be principal: To himself
he was always an harmless and good neighbor; neither have we ever found him
faulty in his fidelity concerning Secular Affairs, or the Catholic Faith: We
know he was a gallant Soldier in the Holy War, and boldly exposed himself to
all dangers both by Sea and Land; I find not so much Religion in the Pope, who
when he ought to have promoted his Interests, and have defended him when he was
abroad Fighting Gods Battles, did yet, in his absence, wickedly endeavor to
supplant and destroy him.

Boniface the Eighth threatens to depose Philip King of France, absolving his
Subjects from their Allegiance, and afterward subjects him and his Kingdom to
Albert the Emperor.

John 23d excommunicates Ludovicus Bavarus; Benedict the 12th confirms it; and
then Clement the 6th deposes him.

I shall not trouble you with any more particulars, although I might further
tell you of the Kingdom of Navar given from the French to the King of Spain by
the Pope; of Our own Kingdoms of England and Ireland made feodatary to the
Popes; sometimes transferred to the Spaniard, other while to the French; of
several of our Kings inthralled, our Nation involved in bloody Wars by these
Papal Usurpations: But I shall conclude, with a Copy of the Grant made by Pope
Alexander the 6th (Father to Caesar Borgia) of the Indies to Ferdinando King of
Spain, and his Heirs for ever; wherein you may read, at large, the pride of the
Popes in the Power they pretend to.


Caco. I protest you astonish me; I pray be pleased to read it over.


Orthod. I am ready so to do; Now I begin.


Alexander, Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God; To Our most Dear beloved
Son in Christ, King Ferdinando, and to Our Dear beloved Daughter in Christ,
Isabella, Queen of Castile, Legion, Aragon, Sicily, and Granata, Most Noble
Princes, Greeting, and Apostolical Benediction.
AMong other things acceptable to the Divine Majesty, and according to our
hearty desire, this certainly is the chief, That the Catholic Faith, and
Christian Religion, especially in this our time, may in all places be exalted,
amplified, and enlarged, whereby the health of Souls may be procured, and the
Barbarous Nations subdued and brought to the Faith. And therefore whereas by
the favor of Gods Clemency (although not with equal deserts,) We are called to
this holy Seat of Peter, and understanding you to be true Catholic Princes, as
we have ever known you, and as your Noble and Worthy Facts have declared, (in a
manner to the whole World,) in that with all your study, diligence, and
industry, you have spared no Travails, Charges, or Perils, adventuring even the
shedding of your own Blood, with applying your whole Minds and Endeavors
hereunto, as your Noble Expeditions achieved in recovering the Kingdom of
Granata from the Tyranny of the Saracens in these our days, do plainly declare
your Facts with so great Glory of the Divine Name; for the whch, as we think
you worthy, so ought we of our own free will favorably to grant you all things,
whereby you may daily with more fervent Minds, to the Honor of God, and the
enlarging the Christian Empire, prosecute your devout and laudable purposes,
most acceptable to the Immortal God. We are credibly informed, that whereas of
late you were determined to seek, and find certain Islands and firm Lands, far
remote and unknown, (and not heretofore found by any other,) to the intent to
bring the Inhabitants of the same to Honor our Redeemer, and to profess the
Catholic Faith; You have hitherto been much occupied in the Expugnation, and
Recovery of the Kingdom of Granata; by reason whereof you could not bring your
said Laudable purpose to the end desired. Nevertheless, as it has pleased the
Almighty God, the foresaid Kingdom being recovered, willing to accomplish your
said desire, you have not without great Labor, Perils and Charges, appointed
our well beloved Son, Christopher Columbus (a Man certes well commended, as
most worthy and apt for such a matter) well furnished with Men, and Ships, and
other necessaries, to seek by the Sea (where hitherto no Man has sailed) such
firm Lands and Islands far remote, and hitherto unknown, who (by Gods help)
making diligent search, in the Ocean Seas, have found certain remote Islands,
and firm Land, which were not heretofore found by any other; in the which (as
is said) many Nations inhabit, living peaceably, and going naked, not
accustomed to eat Flesh; and, as far as your Messengers can conjecture, the
Nations Inhabiting the foresaid Lands and Islands, believe that there is one
God, Creator in Heaven, and seem apt to be brought to the embracing of the
Catholic Faith, and to be endued with good manners; by reason whereof we may
hope, that if they be well instructed, they may easily be induced to receive
the Name of our Savior Jesus Christ; We are further advertised, that the
forenamed Christopher has now builded and erected a Fortress, with good
Munition in one of the foresaid principal Islands, in the which he has placed
a Garrison of certain of the Christian Men that went thither with him; as well
to the intent to defend the same, as also to search out other Islands, and firm
Lands remote, yet unknown; We also understand, that in these Lands and Islands,
is great plenty of Gold and Spices; with diverse, and many other precious
things, of sundry kinds and qualities. Therefore all things diligently
considered, (especially the amplifying and enlarging the Catholic Faith, as it
behooves Catholic Princes, following the Example of your Noble Progenitors of
Famous Memory) you have determined by the favor of Almighty God, to subject
unto you the firm Lands and Islands aforesaid, and the Dwellers and Inhabitants
thereof; and to bring them to the Catholic Faith.

We greatly commending this your Godly and laudable purpose in our Lord, and
desirous to have the same brought to a due end, and the Name of our Savior to
be known in those parts; do exhort you in our Lord, and by the receiving of
your Holy Baptism, whereby you are bound to Apostolical Obedience, and
earnestly require you by the bowels of Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
when you intend, for the Zeal of the Catholic Faith, to prosecute the said
Expedition, to reduce the People of the foresaid Lands and Islands to the
Christian Religion, you shall spare no Labors at any time, or be deterred with
any perils, conceiving firm Hope and Confidence, that the Omnipotent God will
give good success to your Godly Attempts; and that being Authorized by the
Privilege of the Apostolical Grace, you may the more freely and boldly take
upon you the Enterprise of so great a matter; We of our own motion, and not
either at your request, or at the instant Petition of any other person, but of
out own mere Liberality, and certain Science, and by the fullness of Apostolical
Power, do Give, Grant, and Assign to you, your Heirs and Successors, all the
firm Lands, and Islands, found, or to be found; discoverd, or to be discovered;
toward the West and South, drawing a Line from the Pole-Arctick, to the Pole
Antarctick, (that is,) from the North, to the South; containing in this
Donation whatever firm Lands, or Islands are sound, or to be found, toward
India, or toward any other part, whatsoever it be, being distant from, or
without the foresaid Line, drawn a Hundred Leagues toward the West and South
from any of the Islands which are commonly called De Loz Azores, and Capo Verd;
All the Islands therefore and firm Lands found, and to be found; discovered,
and to be discovered; from the said Line toward the West and South, such as
have not actually been heretofore possessed by any other Christian King, or
Prince until the day of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, last past, from
the which begins this present Year, being the Year of our Lord, 1493.
Whenever any such shall be found by your Messengers and Captains; We, by the
Authority of Almighty God, granted unto us in St. Peter, and by the Vicarship
of Jesus Christ, Whoth we bear on the Earth, do for ever, by the tenor of these
presents, Give, Grant, Assign unto you, and your Heirs and successors (the
Kings of Castile and Legion) all those Lands and Islands, with their Dominions,
Territories, and Cities; Castles, Towers, Places, and villages, with all the
Rights and Jurisdictions thereunto pertaining; Constituting, Assigning, and
Deputing, you, and your Heirs and Successors, the Lords thereof, with full, and
free Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction; Decreeing nevertheless, by this our
Donation, Grant, and Assignation, that from no Christian Prince, which actually
has possessed the foresaid Islands, and firm Lands, unto the day of the
Nativity of our Lord aforesaid, their Right obtained to be understood hereby to
be taken away, or that it ought to be taken away. Furthermore, we Command you,
in the virtue of Holy Obedience, (as You have promised, and as, we doubt not,
you will do, upon mere Devotion, and Princely Magnanimity) to send to the said
firm Lands and Islands, Honest, Virtuous, and Learned Men, such as fear God,
and are able to instruct the Inhabitants in the Catholic Faith, and good
Manners, applying all their possible diligence in the Premises; We furthermore
straightly Inhibit all manner of persons, of what State, Decree, Orders, or
Condition soever they be, although of Imperial Dignity, under the pain of the
Sentence of Excommunication, which they shall m^ur, if they do the coutrary;
that they in no case presume, without special License of you, your Heirs, and
Successors, to Travel for Merchandises, or for any other cause, to the said
Lands, or Islands; found, or to be found; discoversd, or to be discovered,
toward the West and South; drawing a Line from the Pole-Arctick, to the
Pole-Antarctick; whether the firm Lands, or Islands, found, or to be found, be
situate toward India, or toward any other part, being distant from the Line
drawn a Hundred Leagues toward the West, from any of the Islands commonly
called De Loz Azores, and Capo Verd; Notwithstanding Constitutions, Decrees,
and Apostolical Ordinances, whatsoever they are, to the Contrary, in Him, from
whom Empires, Dominions, and all good things do proceed; trusting that Almighty
God directing your Enterprises, If you follow your Godly and Laudable Attempts,
your Labor and Travels herein shall in short time obtain a happy end, with
Felicity and Glory of all Christian People. But forasmuch as it should be a
thing of great difficulty, these Letters to be carried to all such places as
should be expedient; We will, and of like Motion and Knowledge do Decree, that
whithersoever the same shall be sent, or wheresoever they shall be received,
with the Subscription of a common Notary thereunto required, with the Seal of
any person Constitute in Ecclesiastical Dignity, or such as are Authorized by
the Ecclesiastical Court, the same Faith and Credit to be given thereunto, in
Judgment, or elsewhere, as should be exhibited to these presents.

Let no Man therefore, whatsoever, Infringe, or dare rashly to contrary this
Letter of our Commendation, Exhortation, Request, Donation, Grant, Assignation,
Constitution, Deputation, Decree, Commandment, Inhibition and Determination;
and if any shall presume to attempt the same, let him know, that he shall
thereby incur the Indignation of Almighty God, and his Holy Apostles, Peter,
and Paul.

Given at Rome at St. Peter's, in the Year of the Incarnation of our Lord, 1493.
The Fourth Day of the Nones of May, the first Year of our Popedom.

Caco. This Archbishop of Spalato did leave the Church of Rome, and came over
to us; but (upon great promises of Worldly preferments) returned back to his
former errors, like a Dog to his vomit, or like a* Sow that is washed, to her
wallowing in the mire; yet notwithstanding all this, and fair promise of fair
usage, he was burnt by them for an Heretic.
You have made me more than half a Christian; for now I perceive that they (I
mean the Papists) yield in some things to us, till they get us in their
clutches, and then with them not to believe at all, (even all their Fopperies)
is to believe nothing at all; so that in such a case (with the Archbishop of
Spalato) they will persecute one with Fire and Sword, if in the least they seem
to retract; if therefore you have any thing to say to confirm me in my
new-taken resolutions, pray proceed; for I am ready to hear you.


Ortho. In obedience, Sir, to your lawful desires, I am ready to give you the
satisfaction you now require; to add therefore to what I have already urged, I
shall a little insist upon one particular, in the beginning of our Discourse;
and that is, where you plead so much, that no Papist ever was against the Late,
or Our present King; You are (Sir) now convinced, as you have already declared:
what therefore I now say, is rather to Confirm, than Confute you, because you
are now one of us. And thus I begin.

The Rebellion of the Irish is already mentioned, therefore no more of that;
But I shall give you this further instance: upon His Majesties-Restauration, it
was observed, that when the Army (formerly Rebellious) were enjoined to take
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, that in every Troop of Horse, and
Foot-Company, one Man, or more did refuse to take those Oaths; at first, that
refusal was attributed to the Republicarian or Anti-Monarchical humor, and
disposition; but upon further inquiry and disquisition, it was found out, that
those persons so refusing to Swear, were Papists; and more than that, Roman
Priests. And this leads me to another Story, I conceive proper to relate unto
you; and that is concerning a supposed Quaker, under the habit of a Cobbler,
that was a Tub-Preacher; famous he was a long time during the Rebellion, but by
some that had been Travelers in Popish Countries, was detected to be a Romish
Priest, and thereupon was forced to fly.


Caco. Sir, I thank you for this addition; this puts me in mind of something of
this nature, which (I have heard) was discovered by Famous Dr. Hammond, which
(as I take it) was thus: This worthy Divine was reading a piece of Chrysostom
in a Booksellers Shop, two Men, in the habit of Soldiers, (being in the Shop,)
one of them looks over the Doctors shoulder into that Book, and turns the Greek
into English, with as much ease as if he had read English; the Doctor being a
little surprised, turns about to the Translator, saying, I did not expect to
see such a Scholar in that habit; Sir, (says the seeming Soldier or Fanatic)
you are mistaken, for I am no Scholar; it is true, I understand all Languages,
but that is by the gift of the Spirit, not attained unto by Industry, or Humane
Learning. Hereupon the Doctor tries him in all Learned Languages, and finds his
Soldier exact in all of them; at last he tries him in Welsh, and there the
Spirit of Darkness forsakes his Disciple, and leaves him in the dark it seems;
for at that time (at least) the Church of Rome ( for this Militant Gentleman
was a Roman Priest) wanted a Miracle to understand Welsh, for the support of
his Doctrine: so Truth overcame a Lie.


Ortho. I have heard that Story you now relate; I am glad to see things of this
nature so well imprinted in your memory: I shall ever account our present
meeting happy, since it has wrought so good an effect upon you; What our
Savior enjoined St. Peter upon his Conversion, every person so Converted is to
imitate; When thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren, is Our Saviors
Precept; and to our Powers we are obliged to observe it. And therefore now
being disabused your self, I make no doubt but you will disabuse others; and so
(Noble Convert) fare you well for this time.


Caco. Pray (Sir) let us not part yet, but give me leave to ask you some
Questions, as concerning the Sacrament, and some other things, whereby we may
confirm one another in the right Orthodox way.


Ortho. I am willing to wait your own leisure, and give you what satisfaction I
can; and being you are pleased to mention the Sacrament, I will relate to you a
Story I met withal lately in a Book of Travails, writ by one who had been a
Romish Priest; In Short, his words are these. -- One day as I was saying Mass,
after the Consecration of the Bread, being with my Eyes shut at the Mental
Prayer, (which the Church of Rome calls her Memento for the Dead) there came
from behind the Altar a Mouse, which coming about, came to the very Bread or
Wafer-God of the Papists, and taking it in his Mouth, ran away with it, not
being perceived by any of the People who were at Mass; for that the Altar was
high, and the People below it; but as soon as I opened my Eyes to go on with my
Mass, and perceived my God stolen away, I looked about the Altar, and saw the
Mouse running away with it; which on a sudden did so stupifie me, that I knew
not well what to do or say; I thought if I should take no notice of the
mischance, and any body else should I might be questioned by the Inquisition;
but if I should call to the People to look for the Sacrament, I might be but
chidden and rebuked for my carelessness, which I thought might be more easily
born, than the rigor of the Inquisition; whereupon I turned my self to the
People, and called them to the Altar, and told them plainly, that whilst I was
in my Memento Prayers and Meditations, a Mouse had carried away the Sacrament,
and that I knew not what to do, unless they would help me to find it out again:
the People called the Priest that was at hand, who presently brought in more of
his Coat; and as if their God by this time had been eaten up, they presently
prepare to find out the Thief, as if they would eat up the Mouse, that had so
assaulted and abused their God: They lighted Candles and Torches to find out
the Malefactor, in his secret and hidden places of the Wall; and after much
searching and inquiry for the Sacrilegious Beast, they found at last, in a hole
of the Wall, the Sacrament half eaten up, which with great joy they took out;
and as if the Ark had been brought again from the Philistines to the
Israelites, so they rejoiced for their newfound God, whom with many Lights of
Candles and Torches, with joyful and solemn Music, they carried about the
Church in Procession; my self upon my Knees shaked and quivered, for what might
befall me expecting my Doom and Judgment; and as the Sacrament passed by me, I
observed the marks and signs of the Teeth of the Mouse, as they are to be seen
in a piece of Cheese gnawn and eaten by it. This struck me into such a terror,
that I called to my best Memory all Philosophy concerning Substance and
Accident; and resolved within my self, that what I saw gnawn, was not an
Accident, but some Real Substance, eaten and devoured by that Vermin, which
certainly was fed and nourished by what it had eaten. Philosophy well teaches,
Substantia cibi (non accidentis) convertitur in substantiam aliti; The
Substance, (not the Accident of the Food or Meat) is converted and turned into
the Substance of the thing fed by it and alimented; Now here I know that this
Mouse had fed upon some Substance, or else how could the marks of the Teeth so
plainly appear? But no Papist will be willing to answer, that it fed upon the
Substance of Christ's Body; ergo, by good consequence it follows, that it fed
upon the Substance of Bread; [and so Transubstantiation here in my judgment was
confuted by a Mouse,] which mean and base Creature God chose to convince me of
my former error, and made me now resolve upon what many years before I had
doubted, that certainly the Point of Transubstantiation, taught by the Church
of Rome, is most Damnable and Erroneous; For besides what before I have
observed, it contradicts that Philosophical Axiom, teaching that duo
contradictoria non possunt simul, and semel, de eodem verificari, two
contradictories cannot at once and at the self-same time time, be said and
verified of the same thing; but here it was so; for here (in Romes Judgment
and Opinion) Christ's body was gnawn and eaten; and at the same time the same
Body in another place, and upon another Altar, in the hands of another Priest,
was not eaten and gnawn; therefore here are two contradictories verified of the
same Body of Christ, viz. it was eaten and gnawn, and it was not eaten and
gnawn: These Impressions at that time were so great in me, that I resolved
within my self, that Bread really and truly was eaten upon the Altar, and by no
means Christ's Glorious Body which is in Heaven [the Heavens must contain him
(as it is in the New Testament) till his last coming,] and cannot be on Earth,
subject to the hunger and violence of a Creature.

The same Author, upon the finding in a Cave a Heathen Image, worshipped by the
Idolatrous Indians for a God, relates this Story.

In Mexico were many of the chief of that place outwardly very fair-tongued,
liberal, and very free-handed to the Church, much devoted to the Saints, great
Feasters on their days. and yet in secret great Idolaters; but it pleased God
to make me his Instrument to discover and bring to light the secrecy of their
hidden works of Darkness; which it seems the privacy of a thick Wood, and
Mountain, had for many years hid from the Eyes of the World; some of these
being in the company of better Christians, drinking hard of their Drink called
[ Chica] boasting of their God, saying, that he had Preached unto them better
than I could Preach; Nay, that he had plainly told them, that they should not
believe any thing that I Preached of Christ, but follow the old way of their
Forefathers, who Worshipped their God aright; but now by the Example of the
Spaniards they were deluded, and brought to Worship a false God: The other
Christians hearing this, began to wonder, and inquire of them where that God
was, and with much ado, promising to follow their ways, and their Gods, got
out them the Place, and Mountain, where they might find him; though this in
their Cups were agreed upon, yet in soberness thinking better upon what they
had promised, they slighted what before in drinking they heard; But this was
not kept so close, but that it came to the Ears of a Spaniard in the Valley,
who finding himself touched in Conscience, came to Mexico to me, and told me
what he heard, that some Indians of that Town followed an Idol, and boasted
that he had Preached unto them against my Doctrine, and for the ways of the
former Heathens. I thanked God that he was pleased to undermine the secret
works of Satan, and desired the Spaniard to tell me by whom he came to know of
this; He told me the Indians Name from whom he had it, and that the said Indian
was afraid to discover the Indians, and to tell me of it: I sent for the
Indian, who confessed unto me before the Spaniard, that he had heard such a
thing, but knew that if he did discover the Indians, they, with the power of
the Devil, would do him much harm; I told him, if he were a true Christian, he
ought to fight against the Devil, and not to fear him that could do him no
harm, if God were with him, and he closed by Faith with Christ; and that the
Discovery of that Idol might be a means for the converting of the Idolaters,
when they shall see the small power of their god against the true God of the
Christians; I told him plainly, that if he did not tell me who the Indians
were, and where the Idol was, that I would have him to Guatalema, and there
make him discover what he knew: Here the Indian began to tremble, and told me
the Fuentes had boasted of such an Idol, whom they called their God, and gave
some signs of a Fountain, and a Pine Tree at the mouth of a Cave in such a
Mountain; I asked him if he knew the place, or what kind of Idol it was; he
told me that he often had been in that Mountain, where he had seen two or three
Springs of Water, but never was in any Cave. I asked him if he would go with
me, and help me to find it out; He refused still, fearing the Idolaters, and
wished me not to go, for fear if they should be there, they might kill me,
rather than be discovered: I answered him, that I would carry with me such a
Guard, as should be able to defend against them; and my Faith in the true
living God would secure me from the false god; I am resolved therefore, with
the Spaniard, to go to search out the Cave the next day, and to carry with me
three or four Spaniards, and my Blackmore Miguel Dalva; and that Indian, I told
him I could not suffer him to go home to his House that day, for fear he should
discover in the Town my design and purpose, and so we might be prevented by the
Idolaters, who certainly that night would take away their Idol. The Indian
still refused, till I threatened to send for the Officers of Justice, and to
secure his person; with this he yielded; and that he might have no discourse
with any body in the Town, nor with the Servants of my House, I desired the
Spaniard to take him home to his House, and to keep him there close that day
and night, promising to be with him next morning; that day I rid to Pinola for
the Blackmore, Miguel Dalva, and brought him to Mexico with me, not telling him
what my intent was; I went also to four neighboring Spaniards, desiring them to
be in readiness the next morning, to go a little way with me for the Service of
God, and to meet me at such a Neighbors House; and that if they would bring
their Fowling-Pieces, we might chance to find some sport where we went; and as
for provision of Wine and Meat, I would provide sufficiently: They promised to
go with me, thinking that although I told them it was for the Service of God,
my purpose only was to hunt after some wild Deer in the Mountains; I was glad
they construed my Action that way, and so went home, and provided that Night a
good Gammon of Bacon, some Fowls roasted, cold, and others boiled, well Peppered
and Salted, for the next days work; Where I had appointed my Indian to be kept,
I met with the rest of my Company, and from thence we went together to the
place of the Idolaters Worshipping, which was some six Miles from Mexico,
toward the Town of St. John Sacate Sacatepeques; when we came into the Wood, we
presently met with a deep Barranca, or Bottom, where was a Running stream,
which encouraged us to make a diligent Search, but nothing could be found; from
thence we ascended up out of the Barranca, and found (after much time spent) a
Spring of Water, and looked carefully about it, but could find no Cave: Thus in
vain we searched till the Evening; and fearing lest we might lose our way, and
our selves, if the Night overtook us, my Friends began to speak of returning
homewards; but I considering that as yet we had not gone over one half part of
the Wood; and to go home, and come again, might make us to be noted, and spoken
of; We thought it our best course to take up our lodging that Night in the
Wood, and in that Bottom which we first searched, where was good Water for to
drink, Chocalatte, and warm lying under the Trees, and so in the Morning to
make our second search. The company was very willing to yield unto it, and the
calm Night favored our good Intentions. We made a Fire for our Chocalatte, and
supped exceeding well of our cold Meat, and spent most part of the Night in
merry discourse, having a watchful Eye over our Indian, lest he should give us
the slip, and committing him to the charge of Miguel Dalva; in the Morning we
Prayed unto God, beseeching him to guide us that day in the work we went about,
and to discover unto us the Cave of Darkness and Iniquity, where lay hid the
Instrument of Satan, that so by this discovery glory might be given unto our
true God, and shame and punishment brought upon his Enemies. We entered again
into the thick Wood up a steepy Hill, and having searched all the South side of
it, we went on to the North side, where we found another deep descent, which we
began to walk down, looking on every side, and not in vain; for almost half a
Mile from the top, we found some marks of a Way that had been used and trodden,
which we followed till we came to another Spring of Water; we searched narrowly
about it, and found some pieces of Earthen Dishes and Pots, and one piece of a
Chaffing-dish, such as the Indians use to burn Frankincense in, in the Church
before their Saints; we verily imagined that these were pieces of some
Instruments wherewith the Idolaters performed their duty unto their Idol, and
we were the more comforted, for that we new the Earthen Ware had been made in
Mexico; the Pine Tree, which immediately we discovered, confirmed our hopes;
when we came unto it, we made very little more search, for near at hand was the
Cave, which was dark within, but light at the Mouth; where we found more
Earthen Ware with Ashes in them, which assured us of some Frankincess that had
been burnt; We knew not how far the Cave might reach within, nor what might be
in it; and therefore with a Flint we struck Fire, and lighted a couple of
Candles, and went in; at the entering it was broad, and went a little forward;
but when we were in, we found it turn on the left hand toward the Mountain,
and not far; for within two Rods we found the Idol standing upon a low Stool,
covered with a Linen Cloth; the Substance of it was Wood, black, shining like
Jet, as if it had been parched or smoaked; the Form was of a Man's Head unto the
shoulders, without either Beard or Mustachio's; his look was grim, with a
wrinkled Forehead, and broad startling Eyes; We feared not his frowning look,
but presently seized upon him; and as we lifted him up, we found under him some
single Rials, which his Favorites had offered unto him, which made us search
the Cave more diligently; and it was not amiss, for upon the ground we found
more single Rials, some Plantanes, and other Fruits, Wax Candles half burned,
Pots of Maize, one little one of Honey, little Dishes wherein Frankincense had
been burned; whereby I perceived the Idolaters and Christians both agree in
their Offerings; and had I not been informed that they called this their
Idol-god, I could have blamed them no more than the rest of the Towns, who
Worship, kneel before, and offer such Offerings to their Saints made of Wood,
and some no handsomer than was this Idol, which I expected might have been some
Beasts shape; but being the shape and form of a Man, they might have named him
by the name of some Saint, and so some way might have excused themselves, which
they could not do, nor would they do it; in that they persisted in this Error,
that he was their god, and had spoken, and Preached unto them; and being
afterward asked by me, whether it were the Picture of any Saint, such as were
in Mexico, and other Churches? they answered, no; but that he was above all the
Saints in the Country. We were very joyful to see that we had not spent our
time in vain; we cut down boughs of Trees, and filled the Cave with them, and
stopped the Mouth of it up, and came away, making the Indian that went with us
carry the Idol on his back, wrapped up in Clothes that it might not be seen or
perceived as he went; I thought it fit to delay the time till Night, and then
to enter into Mexico, that the Indians might see nothing; so I staid at one of
the Spaniards Houses till it were late, and desired him to warn, from me all
the Spaniards thereabouts to be at Mexico Church the next Sabbath (fearing lest
the Idolaters might be many, and rise up against me) that I had somewhat to say
to them and their Blackmores, concerning their Sodalities; for I would not have
them know of the Idol, till they heard of it, and saw it in the Church, lest it
should come to the Indians hearing, and so the Idolaters might absent
themselves: At night I took my Indian, and Miguel Dalva with me, and went home;
and shutting up the Idol in a Chest till the next Sabbath, I dismissed the
Indian, charging him to say nothing, for he knew if he did, what harm might
come to him from the Idolaters; and I knew few words would now suffice, for
that he feared himself, if it should be known that he had been with me; I kept
Miguel Dalva with me, who was desirous to see the end of the business, and
prepared my self against the next Sabbath, to Preach upon v. 3 of the 20. Chap.
of Exodus, Thou shall have none other Gods before Me; though it were a Text
nothing belonging to the Gospel of the day, from whence commonly, in the Church
of Rome, the Texts, and Subjects, and Sermons and deducted; but I judged that
Text most seasonable for the present occasion. On the Sabbath Day in the
Morning, when the Pulpit was made ready, by him that had care of the Church and
Altars, I caused Miguel Dalva to carry under his Cloak the Idol, and to leave
it in the Pulpit, on the ground, that it might not be seen, till such time as I
should think fit in my Sermon to produce it; and to watch about the Church till
the Congregation came in, that none might see it, or take it away. Never was
there a greater resort from abroad to that Church, than that day, of Spaniards
and Black-Moors, who, by the warning I sent unto them, expected some great
matter from me; and of the Town very few were absent: The Fuentes, and all the
rest that were suspected to be that Idols Favorites (little thinking that their
God was brought from his Cave, and now lay hid in the Pulpit to shame them)
came also to the Church. I commanded Miguel Dalva to be himself near the
Pulpit, and to warn those Spaniards that knew the business, and some more
Black-Moors his friends, to be also near the Pulpit-stairs.

Thus, Mass being ended, I went up to Preach; when I rehearsed the words of my
Text, I perceived both Spaniards and Indians began to look one upon another, as
not being used to Sermons out of the Old Testament: I went on, laying open this
Command of God, for having no other gods before him, so that the Doctrine might
seem to convince all that were there present, as well Saint-Worshippers, as
indeed that Idols Worshippers, if the cause of my Preaching upon that Subject
had not diverted their eyes from themselves, to behold their own guiltiness of
Idolatry, and to look only upon those who Worshipped a piece of Wood for a god,
and not as they did for a Saint (which yet in my judgment are much alike.)
After I had spoken what I thought fit, concerning that horrible Sin, and showed
that no creature could have the power of God (who was the Creator of all
things) neither could do good or harm without the true living Gods Commission,
especially inanimate Creatures, as Stocks and Stones, who by the hand and
Workmanship of man, might have eyes, and yet were dead Idols, and not see;
might have ears, and not hear; might have mouths, and not speak; might have
hands, and not work, nor help and defend with them such as Worshipped them, and
bowed down unto them. Thus having half finished my Sermon, I bowed my self down
in the Pulpit, and lifted up the black, grim, and staring Devil, and placed
that Dagon on one side of the Pulpit, with my eyes fixed upon some of the
Fuentes, and others, who I perceived changed their colors, blushed, and were
sore troubled, looking one upon another: I desired the Congregation to behold
what a god was Worshipped by some of them, and all to take notice of him, if
any knew what part of the Earth was the Dominion of this god, or from whence he
came, I told them that some had boasted that this piece of Wood had spoken, and
Preached against what I had taught of Christ, and that therefore he was
Worshipped by them for a god; and they had offered Money, Honey, and of the
Fruits of the Earth unto him, and burnt Frankincense before him, in a secret
and hidden Cave under the Earth, showing thereby that they were ashamed to own
him publicly; and that he lurking in the darkness of the Earth, showed
certainly that he belonged to the Prince of Darkness: I challenged him there in
public to speak for himself, or else by his silence to shame and confound all
his Worshippers; I showed them how being but Wood he had been made and
fashioned by the hands of Man, and therefore was but a dead Idol. I spent a
great deal of time arguing with him, and defying Satan, who had used him as
his Instrument, daring the Devil himself to take him from that place which I
had confined him to, if he could; to show what little power he or Satan had
against my Faith in Christ; after much arguing and reasoning, according to the
shallow Capacity of the Indians there present, I told them that if their god
had power to deliver him from that Execution which I had intended against him
(which was, there publicly to have him cut in pieces and Burnt) they should
not believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ; but if they saw no power in him against
me, the weakest Instrument of the true living God, then I beseeched them to be
converted unto that true God, who Created all things, and to embrace Salvation
by his Son, the only Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ, and to renounce and
abjure from that time all Heathenish Idolatry of their Forefathers, assuring
them for what was past I would intercede for them, and secure them from what
punishment might be inflicted upon them by the President and Bishop; and if
they would come to me I would spend my best endeavors, for the helping and
furthering of them in the way of Christianity.

And thus concluding, without naming any person, I went down out of the Pulpit,
and caused the Idol to be brought after me, and sending for an Axe, and for two
or three great Pans of Coals, I commanded him to be hewn in very small pieces,
and to be cast into the Fire, and Burnt before all the People in the midst of
the Church: The Spaniards cried out joyfully, Victor, Victor; and others
repeated, Gloria a Nostro Dios, Glory to our God: The Idolaters held their
peace, and spoke not then a word, but afterward they acted most spitefully
against me, and conspired day and night to get me at some advantage and to kill
me; I writ to the President of Guatalema, informing of what I had done, and to
the Bishop (as an Inquisitor, to whom such cases belong) to be informed from
him what course I should take with the Indians, who were but in part yet
discovered unto me, and those only by the relation of one Indian; from both I
received great thanks, for my pains in searching the Mountain, and finding out
the Idol, and for my zeal in burning of it. And as touching the Indian
Idolaters, their Counsel to me was, that I should further inquire after the
rest, and discover as many as I could, and endeavor to convert them to the
knowledge of the true God, by fair and sweet means, showing pity unto them for
their great blindness, and promising them upon their repentance pardon from the
Inquisition, which, considering them to be but new Plants, uses not such rigor
with them as it uses with the Spaniards, if they shall fall into such horrible
Sins: This Advice I followed, and sent privately for the Fuentes to my Chamber,
and told them how merciful the Inquisition was unto them, expecting their
conversion and amendment; they seemed somewhat stubborn and angry for that I
had burned that god, whom not only they, but many others in the Town, and also
in the Town of St. John Sacatepeques, did Worship; I used reasons to persuade
them, no honor was due to it, as unto a God. But one of them boldly replied,
That they knew it was a piece of Wood, and of it self could not speak; but
seeing it had spoken (as they were all witnesses) this was a Miracle whereby
they ought to be guided, and they did verily believe that God was in that piece
of Wood; which since the Speech made by it was more than ordinary Wood, having
God himself in it, and therefore deserved more Offerings and Adoration than
those Saints in the Church, who did never speak unto the People. I told them,
that the Devil rather had formed that speech (if any they had heard) for to
deceive their Souls, and lead them to Hell; which they might easily perceive,
from the Doctrine which I was informed he had Preached against Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, whom the Father loves, and in whom he is well pleased,
and against whom he certainly would not speak in that Idol. Another answered
boldly, Our Forefathers never knew what Christ was, until the Spaniard came
into the Country; but they knew there were gods, and did Worship them, and did
Sacrifice unto them; and, for ought they knew, this god of theirs belonged in
old times to their Forefathers, and theirs was the Old Religion, and
Christians were Heretics and Innovators.

And thus (Sir) you see those same Arguments made use of by these Heathens,
which the Champions of the Church of Rome take up against the Protestant
Religion: For do they not call it an Innovation? Do they not, with these
Heathens, plead Antiquity? Do they not call us Innovators, as these Heathens do
the Spaniards; and with them again plead the Religion of their Forefathers;
and the Papists bestow the same Epithetes upon King Henry the Eighth, King
Edward the Sixth, Luther, Calvin, and other Reformers from the errors of the
Church of Rome? You see, Sir, again, how these Idolaters in pleading for their
Idol, plead just as Papists do, for Worshipping of Saints, which makes it
impossible for a Papist to confute an Idolater: As Popery does also by this
means prevent the Conversion of the Jews, who, however in former Ages much
given to Idolatry, are now the greatest Sticklers against it of any People
under Heaven.


Caco. Sir, I give you many thanks for these two Stories; I find my self much
edified by them: the truth is, when you and I first met, I did not expect what
I now find, and must confess to you two great Truths; the first, that I was
inclining you kn^w where, i. e. to Popery; the second, that your Discourses
have made me as firm a Protestant as your self.


Ortho. I give God thanks, with all my heart, for this good progress; it shall
be my Prayer that you may be happy both here and hereafter. Shall we now part?


Caco. With your good leave (Sir) let us continue a while together, for if I
may not be too troublesome to you, I would let you know, what I heard urged by
a Learned Papist, out of the Psalms, to maintain the Doctrine of Merit, and
Intercession by Saints to God. Will you givt leave, Sir? For else I should not
dare to proceed.


Ortho. With all my heart (Sir,) I pray you go on.


Caco. The 1 verse of the 132 Psalm was quoted, the words are these, (Lord,
remember David, and all his troubles.) as also the 10 verse of the same Psalm
(For thy Servant David's sake turn not away the presence of thine Anointed.)
He said this Psalm was composed after the Death of King David, and therefore
concludes, that here the Prophet is made an Intercessor to God: I beg therefore
your thoughts, as to this particular.

Ortho, You shall be obeyed; and I do conceive it no difficult matter to answer
it; and thus I begin: In the first place, I know nothing to the contrary, but
that this Psalm was composed by King David himself; and though this might serve
for an answer, yet, for the present, we will suppose some body else was the
Author of it, after the Death of King David.

All along in the Old Testament, we meet with many promises for future Times
and Ages; the first promise was to Adam, immediately after his fatal Lapse,
where the Messiah was first of all promised; and so from time to time, as the
Church of God was in any affliction, it was supported by promises. It would be
too long to insert all those promises here; whoever has an inclination to be
well acquainted with those promises of God to his Church, let him be pleased to
read the Old Testament, for the promise of the Messiah, and other benefits of
inferior consequence; and the New Testament, for what concerns Christianity.
King David (whom, in this Psalm, Romes Stickler would make an Intercessor
between God and Man) had many promises (as Adam, and others) made unto him,
beneficial to the Church of God; therefore when the Church (or Servants of God)
was in any streights, God was thereupon minded of his promises; not that God
stood in need of these Memorandums; but hereby the Church, i. e. the Faithful
Servants of God, did support themselves and their Holy Faith, with the
remembrances of these promises of God to King David and others; and so we
Christians are supported, in our greatest exigencies, with this promise of
Christ to his Church, that the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail
against it; and therefore whoever thinks these two Verses (the first, and the
tenth) of this Psalm, to confirm the Romish Doctrine of praying to Saints, and
making them Intercessors, is very much mistaken; for (says our Savior) Come
unto Me [this Me has an Emphasis in this place] all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will refresh you; in another place, says our Savior, -- I will
pray unto the Father for you; what need we then to desire the intercession and
mediation of any other than Jesus Christ, the Savior, Mediator and
Intercessor, of and for the whole World? And, as it is in the 130. Psalm, the
last Verse, And He shall redeem Israel from all his Sins. -- He it is only can
do it, and not Saints or Angels, who are but our fellow Creatures, and did
evermore refuse Worship and Adoration, wherever it was offered unto them; many
instances of this we have both in the Old and New Testaments.


Caco. I do confess I have very much trespassed upon your patience; one word
more, Sir, and I have done; there is one thing urged by the Papists, which does
a little weigh, and that is this; -- the Papist urges thus against the
Protestants, You (say they to the Protestants) do acknowledge that Papists may
be Saved, i. e. that there is Salvation in our Church; we hold (says the
Papists) that there is no Salvation out of the Pale of the Roman Church;
therefore to be a Roman Catholic, as it is the best, so it is the safest
Religion that is. -- I beseech you, Sir, do not mistake me, I do not (I assure
you) speak this as being of their persuasion, but to be better enabled by you
to oppose our Adversaries, when they shall object to us this fallacious
argument.


Ortho. Sir, you shall not want what I can contribute to your satisfaction; and
truly I think this may be easily answered; and I shall begin with a reply. I
have heard of a very learned man upon this Subject, in a Disputation between
him and a Papist; who being at his last shift, and forced to make use of your
abovesaid Argument, answered thus, -- Sir, says he, do not condemn us for an
excess of Charity toward you, and consider how want of Charity in you toward
us may be laid to your charge another day. And withal, take notice of this,
that in the same manner those infamous Schismatics, the Donatists, argued
against St. Austin and the Catholic Church, taking hold of their Confession,
that Salvation might be had in their Churches, which was not (said these
Schismatics) to be had in a Catholic Church; thus did these wicked
Schismatics conclude (with the Papists) their Religion to be the surest and
safest; and so consequently, the best also: Does not the King of Assyria, by
his Servants, rant, and argue against good King Hezekiah, much at this rate, in
the 2 of the Kings, and the 18 Chap. Have any of the gods of the Nations at all
delivered his Land out of the Hand of the King of Assyria? Where are the gods
of Hamath, and of Arphad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Henah, and Ivah?
Have they delivered Samaria out of my Hand? Who are they Amongst all the gods
of the Countries, that have delivered their Country out of my Hand, that the
Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my Hand?


Caco. One word more (Sir) and I promise you I have done: Does not the Author
of whom you quote the Story of the Speaking Idol, etc. express an aversion
against, and relate some things to the prejudice of Archbishop Laud, toward
the Conclusion of his Book.


Ortho. I confess he does, and he is blameworthy for it; but withal to be
pityed, if you consider his case aright; and thus it is; in his Infancy, with
his Milk, he sucks in the Roman Religion, has his Education in Popish
Countries, becomes a Priest, goes over an Emissary into the Indies, for the
advancing and propagating the Romish Religion: However, being a Man of Parts,
and Learning, through all the Mists and Clouds of Error, he discerns the
unreasonableness first, and then the dangerous Tenets of the Church of Rome;
but all this while, it is scarce much more than Break of day with him; he is
but a Negative Christian, but a Neophyte; the Roman Religion he perceives is
bad, but as yet knows little of the Protestant Religion: Thus endowed, he comes
over into England, very little before our Civil Wars began; still troubled in
mind, he goes over into Italy to Rome, where he thought, if any place could
afford him satisfaction in the Romish Persuasion, there it must be; in that
place he converses with Eminent Divines, who tell him strange Stories of the
Archbishop of Canterbury his great inclination to return to the Roman Church;
This Neophyte, this doubting, wavering Christian, is told these falsehoods by
these Roman Divines, to encourage him to go over an Emissary into England, and
there labor vigorously in the Roman Vineyard; the poor Man believes that which
these men knew to be false; but this must be rumor'd, to gain English
Proselytes, (you know, how much the Church of Rome allows of officious and
beneficial Lies) confirm those they have, and add Reputation to their Cause
amongst the English Papists, [and observe (Sir) do not the Papists the same
thing now? Do they not observe the same Method still, to the great
dis-heartening His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, so that the King and
Parliament have been forced to take notice of their Insolences?] Well, Sir,
with this prejudice to the Protestant Church of England, and the Archbishop,
This Neophyte, this doubting Christian, comes over into England, where every
innocent Ceremony, and the Liturgy of the Church of England, confirm in him the
Belief of the Italian Falsehoods concerning the Archbishop, etc. and by reason
of that his persuasion, he proves as great an Enemy to the Church of England,
as of Rome; and thus out of the Frying Pan, or out of one Fire, he leaps into
another; and so turns a new kind of Fanatic; and it often falls out, that out
of one extreme, Men are apt to run into another; and therefore it often falls
out, that when a Protestant turns Papist, he, for the most part, does throw
himself into the Arms and Bosom of a Jesuit, and then sucks in all their
wicked and abominable practices; as principles against the Sovereignty of
Kings, Humane Society, and Moral Virtues, and the Dictates of Nature; a stout
Champion of the Pope, and Court of Rome, (rather than the Church of Rome)
against all Temporal and Civil Interests whatsoever, you may be sure such a
Convert he proves; and truly, this is so natural to Man, in avoiding one Rock
of danger and offense, to fall foul upon another; that if Men be not very wary
and discreet, they can hardly avoid it: (thus when a Papist turns Protestant,
he is apt to turn from being that, to throw himself headlong into all sorts of
Enthusiastic phrensies, in opposition to Popery:) this was the case of this
Author; for he was so fearful of the Rock of Popery, that he fell foul upon the
Rock of Enthusiasm, and there made Shipwreck of his Faith; and therefore
waving that passage concerning the Archbishop, and Monarchy, let us believe
the rest concerning the Idol, etc. for he delivers them upon his own knowledge,
being an Eyewitness, and not reports from others; and now, thus I have, Sir, I
hope, answered your Scruple concerning this Author.


Caco. I do confess, you have very fully; and now I will give you no further
trouble at this time; yet, if it be not too troublesome to you, be pleased to
let a small piece, of some two sheets of Paper, conclude our Discourse.


Ortho. Name it. Sir, and you shall be obeyed.


Caco. It is that which you showed me lately; the Title of it is this: [An
Answer to a Pamphlet, Entitled (The humble Apology of the English Catholics)
written by a Royalist, before Christmas.]


Ortho. I Am ready to obey you, and thus I begin; and first with the Title,
though I but repeat your foregoing words.


An Answer to a Pamphlet, Entitled [ The humble Apology of the English
Catholics,] Written by a Royalist, before Christmas, 1666.
Thuanus. Miseros Principes quibus de conjuratione non creditur, nisi occisis.
IF the Author of the Apology could make good the beginning of his Discourse, I
could very heartily turn Apologist for him and his Friends. He says aright (and
the Devil spoke true, when he cried aloud, that Jesus was the Son of God) that
the Arms which Christians may use against Lawful powers, in their Severities,
are only Prayers and Tears: Thus far he speaks like a Protestant, that is to
say, a Primitive Christian; and it might have stood as a fair Character of his
pretended Innocence, had he not foully bespattered it in the Sequel, with the
Dirt he casts upon the face of Authority. But first, It would be considered
what it is the Apologist would be at, upon his frequent Compellation of his
Lords and Gentlemen; is it to draw them to a firm Combination with those of his
Roman party, against all such as should question the innocence of his Carriage
and Intentions? Nothing less, it seems, can satisfy or secure him, unless my
Lords and Gentlemen, that is, the old constant Royalists, stand up for his
Advocate, he must fall under the heavy censure of his greatest Adversaries, who
(to complete the mischief and misery of it) are not only become his Accusers,
but his Insulting Judges, as he complains.

And now it is high time for my Lords and Gentlemen to remember their often
Vows to that party, and Renounce all further Conjunction with them that have
been the cause of so great Calamity to the Nation, as he there tells them.

But is not this -- Davide and Impera? and though they did not nip the Plant in
the Bud, yet now being grown up, and not likely to answer them in the expected
Fruits, they will endeavor so to dismember the parts, as may manifestly
endanger the whole.

For what else mean those words, Let it never be Recorded in Story, that you
forgot your often Vows to us, injoyning to them (those insulting Judges, as he
terms them before) that have been the cause of so great Calamity to this Nation.

Is not a Disunion here manifestly endeavored? and that in direct
contradiction to what was before protested, [far be it from Catholics to
perplex Parliaments.] To reconcile this difference in the expressions, will
well become the Apologist, before he answer the following Objections, which he
makes his next task.

And here first he presents his Catholic Party, astonished even to admiration,
at that Calumny above the rest, that their Principles are said to be
inconsistent with Government, and they themselves thought ever prone to
Rebellion; as if, because they account themselves the only Orthodox Christians,
they must necessarily be very loyal Subjects at the least.

Indeed, If they could make good the former, we had reason to expect some
compliance, as to the latter; Religio a religando.
seeing Religion has its name from the Connection and strick conjunction it
works in its Professors, as with each other, so in all with that government,
and Governors under which they have their common protection.. But how Orthodox
and united Roman Catholics are in the grounds of their Belief (the main
Ingredient in the Essence of Religion) has sufficiently appeared in the
Writings of many, who have unanswerably evinced the nullity of the Romanists
Faith; whether ultimately resolved into their virtual Church, the Pope with his
Conclave, as the Jesuits will have it; or into the representative Church, a
General Council, as others will have it; or into both the former conjoined, as
others contend; or (erranti nullus terminus) into the new mode of Oval
Tradition, as it is lately, and clamorously, urged by others, who abominate the
former.

Yet though our Catholics do thus stagger in the Grounds of their Faith, are
they not more firm in their Fealties and Loyalties? Surely their Principles are
every way consisting with the Government under which they live.

Nothing less; and it will plainly appear, if we consider the Doctrine of their
Church, and their frequent practice; to the former, much need not be said; that
the Pope, the acknowledged Head of their Church, has a plenary power to
Excommunicate all Christian Kings that will not close with Papal Persuasion;
and when they are Excommunicated, that they cease to be Kings; that their
Subjects are absolved from all Fealty and Allegiance to them; yea, may take up
Arms against them, and so murder them: All this is so notoriously known, that
as no real Roman Catholic will deny, so it were needless to urge further proof
of it; He that has leisure may find enough of this, Becanus, Bellarmine,
Rossius, Molina, Campion, Stapleton, etc.
in Alvarez, Mariana, and others, that speak expressly enough at this rate; and
has it not been sufficiently verified in the Roman Catholics practice? it is
well known, who encouraged one Parry to Murder Queen Elizabeth; what Pope it
was that issued out his dreadful Excommunication, animating the Subjects of
England against her; and, if you will allow of Cardinal Perron's positive
Sentence, he will tell you, that that Doctrine which renders Kings indeposable,
opens a gap to no less than Schism, and Heresy; and hereby, as if it were not
only Lawful, but necessary, to suppress whatever they be, that will not Conform
to the Popish Hierarchy.

He that should see a Sovereign Prince holding the Basin, whilst the Pope
washes his Hands; and another, no less Sovereign, holding his Stirrup (though
unfortunately mistaken in the side,) whilst he mounts up on Horseback; yea, he
that should see that Bishop of Rome treading on a great Princes neck, and
abusing that of the Psalmist, for justification of his usurped power; Super
Leonem and aspidem, etc. cannot but conclude, that, Dominus Deus noster Papa
(as the Canonists style him) will be Supreme Prince of the Christian World; and
that all other Potentates must limit their Authority, and Jurisdiction,
according to the measure of his Placet.

And now, the Premises considered, that upon the Popes excommunication, Kings
cease to be such, and stand lawfully exposed to all insolences of their
Subjects, (as has already appeared,) I cannot but very much wonder, that the
Romanists should be so angry with Cromwell, Bradshaw, and the rest of that
hellish Crew, for Murdering our late Sovereign of Blessed Memory; were they
not taught by those Romish Fathers, above cited, to Murder Charles Stuart, and
yet not kill the King? I dare boldly say, that our late Republicarians have not
one Tenet that is destructive to Civil Government, and the Sovereignty of
Kings, that was not first broached by the Romanists, to whom we owe our late
Confusions, which has answered the Predictions of Gondamore, the Spanish
Ambassador, who, when he returned to Spain, gave out, that he had kindled a
Fire in England, which would burst out Forty Years afterward.

Not to insist upon those several disguises presented by the Romanists, in the
late Troubles, under the habit of all sorts of Mechanic Artists, Soldiers and
others; so to Preach up and foment the Rebellion, with our homebred
Sectarians; this may suffice to demonstrate how ill-consistent their Principles
are with our English Government; and consequently how weakly they acquit
themselves of that Calumny they complain of, even to Admiration; but the
Apologist has his other pretenses, and will clear all Objections that may
encounter him in his way; it will be necessary to take a brief view of them.
And here, first, our Author accuses us with a pretended Submission to Lawful
Powers; begins then to boast how patiently their party did bear with the
proceedings of the present Parliament; how they used no tricks and subterfuges
to nip their proceedings in the bud; (this is his expression,) and I would be
glad to know what they could have done more than they did? what means he by
this nipping in the bud? would he have another Gunpowder Treason? to what
purpose is all this enumeration of our several Kings, Richard the First, Edward
Longshanks, Edward the Third, and Henry the Fifth, their Opinions of their
Popish Subjects; in the first place, it may be said, that were not so
clear-sighted, as Princes are in these days; that the Roman Writers were not
altogether so insolent, plain, and positive against the Sovereignty of Kings,
as now.

As for the French Kings, they did very roundly maintain their Rights and
Sovereignties, having been sufficiently tormented by their Popish Subjects in
the time of the League; that what the Jesuits were inventing to the prejudice
of Kings, was by cunning and insinuation; Writing one thing, and making the
French Kings believe another, as is usual with that kind of people.

As for the House of Austria, they have the greatest dependences upon the Pope
imaginable, and the Pope has a very great tie upon that House; for by their
Incestuous Marriages, authorized by the Popes, they make it impossible for them
to throw off the Authority of the Pope; for should they do so, all of the
Household would prove Bastards; and now even in these our days, the present King
of Poland, (in the lifetime of his Brother, known by the name of Cardinal
Casimir,) did Marry his said own Brothers Wife; and this was the Policy of the
Pope with our Henry the Eighth, in dispensing with his Marrying his own
Brothers Wife, that he might have as great Dominion over the Kings of England,
as of Spain.

As for the Authors branding this last Century, that what was perpetrated now,
was never done before (as to Mary Queen of Scots, and Our late Sovereign,) I
very much wonder at the Impudence of the Man, to mix these two actions; the
first was done by Lawful Authority; for her being Queen of Scotland, did not
bereave Queen Elizabeth of her Sovereignty; and I have heard it averred by
Learned and knowing Men, that the King of Scotland has sat in an English
Parliament in former ages, as a Peer of England; and then no wonder, nor
Injustice neither, that the Queen of Scotland suffered Death for her Treasons
against the Queen. As for the latter, (the Murder of our late Sovereign of
Blessed and Glorious Memory,) the action is without Example, such and so
heinous a thing was never acted upon the Theater of the World: And as I said
before, so I will again, that the Murder of that good King may properly enough
be said to be the abominable product of that accursed Doctrine of the Popes
Infallibility, and his Sovereignty over Kings; for those accursed Regicides,
and Murderers of that Glorious King, did but a little alter the Argument; for
that Power which the Romanists lodged in the Pope, these wicked Miscreants
placed in the People; They had heard there was a Power above Kings, and instead
of giving it to the Pope, they gave it to the Peoples Representative, and so
fell that Great King, to the Consternation of the whole World, and for a
Memento to all Kings, to awake them out of their Lethargy, and be an
Exhortation to them to Vindicate their Supreme Authority: We do all of us much
commend the Fidelity of Carlos Whitegrave, and the Penderels, and Huddlestone;
and this Author is much mistaken, if he think we wish any of them ill: We have
said enough already to evidence, that they effected that glorious and happy
action, (happy, I say, to these Nations,) through some other instigations, than
the Principles of the Romish Religion; they were led thereto certainly by a
hand Divine, as well as assigned by it; they carried English hearts about them
at that time; but if they will Apostatize, it is none of my fault, for my part,
I am well content they be dispensed with, as a Mark put upon them for their
miraculous preserving our Good King.

As for the stigmatized person, I must needs say for him, that he labored in
the Vineyard before the last hour of the day, and was very ready, both with
Hand and Pen, to promote the Interests of the King for his Restoration; and
therefore that word of reproach might well have been left out.

That we differ in Religion, is but too true; and we dare as boldly as your
selves appeal to the day of Judgment; something, you say, we differ; I say,
very much; else why does Your Church Damn ours? But this is not a place, either
to Dispute about Religion, or express wherein we vary; We are assured our
Religion is the best, free from Superstition, free from too much homeliness,
God and the King are best served in our way; Our Church is Monarchical as well
as yours, but still with a Subordination to Our Sovereign, Temporal Prince;
what our great Ancestors were, we shall not be ashamed to remember, nor the
Conversion of England from Paganism, which possibly (as all the World besides
Converted from the like Errors,) did retain some few Pagan Ceremonies, from
which the Church of England was purified in the Reformation of Edward the
Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth: He does well to put us in mind of Romish
Persecutions; Are not we justified thereby, if we do the same to you? France,
forsooth, is instanced, where the Reformed Religion is permitted; which I shall
leave indifferent whether to attribute that toleration to their vast numbers,
or to the innocence of their Tenets, not at all prejudicial to Kings: This I am
sure, they own no Sovereign above their natural King; they have no Foreign
Jurisdictions in their Spirituals, and as little in their Temporals; Let this
be remembered, they assisted their King Henry the Third against his Popish
Rebels, even after the Massacre at Paris; and Henry the Fourth, in his Siege of
Paris, when the Duke of Parma relieved it. But as for the French King, he is no
competent instance in this case; (had you singled out some Trent-Catholick,
such our English Catholics would be acknowledged,) there had been a fairer
color for your Argument. When you have found some Roman Catholic of the
Trent-Perswasion, allowing the same favors to known Protestants, you may more
plausibly plead for the like allowance; till when, by their Inquisitions, and
such like entertainments of Protestants, they have prescribed the Law for other
Princes toward those, that no less differ from them in matters of Religion. We
will wave the Massacre at Paris, to come nearer home; What think you of the
Massacre in Ireland? As a forerunner of the Enlish Troubles; Was not the
Massacre and Rebellion in Ireland countenanced and owned by a Popes Nuncio? Let
us draw nearer to these times, and speak of what passed within this Twelve
Months: Was not the Popes Bull an occasion of Cornet Nangle's Rebellion, which
had been as universal as the first, but that the Romish Party there wanted
strength; the Author by mentioning the French King's kindness to the French
Protestants, puts me in mind to affirm, he is much mistaken; for that King has
of late begun very much to Persecute them; he has taken from them most of their
Churches, will not suffer them to Educate their own Children, and many other
grievous punishments he does now inflict upon them; and it may well be
suspected, he intends yet more against them, having already purged his Guards
of all of their Belief.

The Author grows yet more Impudent, and Extravagant; for first, he goes about
to Illegitimate Queen Elizabeth, and then bespatters the Fame of Our King Henry
the Eighth; and by that, one may see where he has his Breeding, and where he
learned to speak contumeliously of Kings.

You urge the Allegiance sworn to Queen Mary; and it is no such wonder,
considering the Artisices and Power of the Roman Catholics at that time: But
all Roman Catholics will grant, that Queen Mary's Mother was King Henry's
Brothers Wife; yes, and it will be replied, that the Pope dispensed with the
Marriage. He did so, but St. John the Baptist (whom Our Blessed Savior Honors
with so high a Testimony in the Gospel) would not have done it; He condemned
the like Marriage in King Herod; and had he lived in those times, would have
done no less in King Henry, though perhaps the Pope, like another Herod, would
have cut off his Head for that bold affront; yet the Popes Power, though never
so much severe in those times, could not then silence the suffrages of our
Universities here, nor those in foreign parts, who jointly affirmed and
confirmed both the lawfulness, and necessity of King Henry's Divorce from his
Brothers Wife; which does sufficiently wipe off that filth the Author from his
Impure mouth breaths out against that Queen of Glorious Memory: But King Henry
the Eighth, it seems, is a great Eyesore to you, and you will leave no place
unsearch'd for some Stones of Reproach to throw at him; yet if you would be
pleased to cast a serious Eye upon diverse of your Popes, the chief Heads of
your Church, (you may find a full choice, in the Ninth and Tenth Centuries,
besides several others;) and when you have thoroughly perused the exact Symetry
of their carriage and practices, (as described in some of your own Authors,)
then turn your Eye upon King Henry the Eighth, and you will readily, I doubt
not, conclude the Saint to be on his side; and making so bold with Princes, it
would be a wonder, if Ministers of State did escape his Pen; and it may well be
affirmed, that King James is wounded through Cecyl's side, or rather that wise
King himself is deeply pierced; for may not one thus understand the Apologist?
Cecyl is compared to Ulysses, and King James to Cromwell, the whole Parliament
is likewise aspersed by him; and according to the opinion of the Apologist, God
is mocked every Fifth of November; so that God himself cannot escape him
neither.

He insists upon the merit of those of his Religion that ventured their Lives
in the Quarrel of the late King of Glorious Memory; where this great merit
lies, I cannot well understand: for these reasons; first, they were his
subjects, and so they were in duty bound to fight for him; secondly, they were
Persecuted by the Long Parliament, and that good King (upon pretense that he so
much countenanced them) was Persecuted likewise for their sakes, and so they
were constrained to stand by him, and for him, for their own preservation; and
there is one of His Subjects of that Religion that stipulated, and they drive a
bargain with the late King, before he would engage him. The Author would have
us belive, that Dinner-Bells were mistaken for Mass-Bells: Do the Papists Dine
at Six, Seven, or Eight of the Clock in the Morning? All their Insolences, the
Author would persuade us to attribute to the height of their zeal against
Constables, or other Persons in Authority, formed against the King; when it is
very well known, that during the Rebellion, when the late Rebels, Cromwell,
Bradshaw, and the rest, were in humane appearance, confirmed in their Throne,
none were better used, that went under the name of Cavaliers, than Papists; and
now, since the happy Restoration of our Gracious Sovereign, many of these
endeavor to strike in with the Phanaticks; desiring them to join with them, and
they will take an order with the Episcopal Party: these are the men that so
much boast themselves of their Loyalty.

As to the Burning of London, God reward them according to their demerit, that
were the Authors of that Dismal and Execrable Fire; this is most certain, that
the Papists rejoice much in those sad Flames; and it is a common saying amongst
them, That the burning of that City is a happiness to the Kingdom, and has
cured it of the Rickets.

It is now time to draw to a conclusion, though perhaps some things in the
Pamphlet (being stuffed with many ridiculous passages) and little pertinent to
the purpose, I have, for brevities sake, omitted to speak to.

For a Farewell, I will only add this to the Author; that if the Protestant
assertors of his Majesty's Right, had been as few as those he has set down in
red Letters of his Party, he should have been imitated by me; but our Numbers
are so vast, that many large Folio's would not contain them.

But instead of the Apologists Bloody List, take here an extract of some things
out of the History of Henry the Fourth of France, written by Hardovin de
Perefix, Bishop of Rodez, formerly Tutor to this French King Lewis; concerning
the League in France, called by its Abettors, The Sacred Union; supported by
Popes, and more especially by Sextus Quintus, and Gregory the Fourteenth, and
entered into (by persuasion of the Roman Divines) by the Rebellious Roman
Catholic Subjects of the two Henry's, the third and the fourth; to oppose
which, they were most chiefly assisted by their Protestant Subjects, who were
always most ready to help them in time of extremity, and still proved their
best and most Loyal Subjects.

On all hands little notice is taken of Henry the Fourth his Right to the Crown
of France, Fol. 61. The Author writes thus concerning the succession of H^n. 4.
to the Crown of France. 1584. year of our Lord.
because he was removed above the seventh degree of Blood from Henry the Third
of France, beyond which there is no kindred as to private Succession; besides
he was not of that Religion which was ever professed by the French Kings, ever
since King Clovis, and consequently was incapable of wearing the Crown, and
bearing the Title of Most Christian, etc.

Some French Divines, for the promotion of the League, Fol 66. a Popish
Principle, concerning Kings, A. Dom. 15^4.
and since approved by Pope Sextus Quintus, did maintain, That the Prince ought
to be deposed, that did not to his duty; that power is only of God which is
well regulated; otherwise, when it is ill ordered, it is not Authority, but
Thievery; the words in the Original are thus, -- Qui'il ny a que la puissance
bien ordonne qui Soit de Dieu, autrement quand elle est dereglee te n'est pas
autorite, mais Brigandage, and qu'il est aussi absurd de dire que celuy la
Soit Roy, qui ne Soait pas gouverner, and qui est despouruen d'entendement,
comme de croire qu'un avengle puisse servir de guide, on qu'une Statue imobile
puisse fair mounoir des hommes vivans. --

Then came News from Rome, that the Pope Sextus Quintus, who succeeded Gregory
the Thirteenth, had approved the League, and, Fol 68. Auno Dom. 1585.
over and above, had thundered out his Bulls of Excommunication against the
King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde, declaring them Heretics, Relaps,
Cheiss, Fautors, and Protectors of Heresy, and as such fallen into the
C^nsures, and Penalties imported by the Laws and Canons; deprived them, and
their Heirs, of all Lands and Dignities; and incapable to succeed to any
principality whatsoever; and more especially to the Kingdom of France;
absolving their Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, with a command not to
obey them.

When Henry the Fourth (then King of Navar) heard what the Pope had done
against him, Fol. 71. Anno Dom. 1585.
he sent presently to King Henry the Third, to complain thereof, and let him
know that it concerned him, more than himself; That he might well think, if the
Pope took upon him thus, to determine of the Succession to his Kingdom, and
declare a Prince of the Blood incapable of the Crown, he might afterward
proceed farther, and unthrone him, as here-tofore Pope Zachary had degraded
Childerick the 3d.

The Pope gives to the Duke of Joyense all the King of Navarr's Territories.
Fol. 82. Anno Dom. 1687.


Henry the Third is Excommunicated by Pope Sextus Quintus. Fol. 100. Anno Dom.
1589.


The Leaguers would have the Duke of Mayenne to take upon him the Title of King
of France, Fol: 101. Anno Dom. 1589.
which he refuses, but accepts another Title which they give him, to be
Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France, as if the Throne were
empty. The Leaguers break the Kings great Seal, and make a new one; on the one
side thereof, were the Arms of Escutchion of France; and on the other, and
empty Throne, with this Inscription about the new Seal [Charles Duke of
Mayenne, Lieutenant of the State and Crown of France.]

Henry the Third being killed by a Roman Priest, called Jaques Clement, Fol.
112. Anno Dom. 1589.
a Jacobin, those that did not oppose him, because he was a Roman Catholic,
did believe themselves obliged to join with the Leaguers against the King of
Navar, now King of France, by the Death of the foresaid King Henry the Third,
because he was an Hugonot; for the Papists of that Kingdom do hold, that none
can be King of France that is not a Roman Catholic.

The reproaches of the Parisians, Fol. 139. Anno Dom. 1591.
the instant desire of the Legate (whom the Pope had sent to countenance and
uphold the concerns of the League) and the Spanish Cabal, obliged the Duke of
Mayenne to give Battle to King Henry 4th. of France.

Paris being besieged by the French King, the Popes Legate forgot, and omitted
nothing, Fol. 152. Anno Dom. 1590.
that might encourage the Parisians to hold out; he consulted the Faculty of
Divinity, and obtained from that Society, such Resolves against the Bearnois
(for so was called by the Leaguers Henry the Fourth) as he thought good; the
Legate caused several Processions, and all Officers took an Oath of Fidelity to
the Holy Union; for so was the League called by its Abetttors.

In the mean time Sextus the Fifth dies, leaving in the Treasury of the Church;
five Millions of Gold; Fol. 182. Anno Dom. 1591.
to him succeeded Urban the Seventh, who dyed within 13 days; and to Urban
succeeded Gregory the Fourteenth, who with very much zeal supported the League.

The King of Spain was seconded by Pope Gregory the Fourteenth in his
Assistances to the Leaguers, Fol. 185. Anno Dom. 1591.
who was much more eager and earnest, than the said King, for them; for
notwithstanding all the Letters and entreaties from the Lord of Luxemburg
(afterward Duke of Piney) and other Princes and Lords, who continued with
Henry the Fourth; and being deaf likewise to the Submissions and Remostrances
made to him by the Marquess of Pisani (deputed by the Pope) he very hotly
embraced the Interests of the League; These Sixteen, were the chief Abettors of
the League in Paris
he kept correspondence with the Sixteen, receiving Letters from them, and
writing to them again: Moreover, the Pope did prodigally lavish the Treasure
left him by Sextus Quintus, to raise an Army of 12000 men, which he sent to
succor and assist the League; the Command whereof he gave to Count Hercules
Sfondrati his Nephew, (whom he made Duke of Montmortion at that instant, for
the greater luster;) and this Army was seconded by a Minatory, or Bull of
Excommunication, against all Prelates that should assist King Henry, and sent
this Bull by Marcellin Londriane his Nuntio, with a great quantity of Money to
be distributed amongst the Sixteen, and other Chiefs of the Faction, in the
Principle Cities of France.

The Parliament at Tours caused the Bull to be torn by the hands of the
Common-hangman, and ordined Seizure of the Popes Nuntio: On the other side, the
Parliament at Paris repealed this Decree, Ordaining that the Pope and his
Nuntio must be obeyed.

King Henry receives Succors out of England, Fol. 191. Anno Dom. 1592.
and from the Protestants of Germany, and then Besieges the City of Roan.

King Henry turns Papist, Fol. 211.212.213. An. Dom. 1593.
and is absolved by the Archbishop of Bourges, in the Abbey-Church of St.
Denis: Against the said Bishop the Pope is very angry, for absolving the King;
and till he obtain it of the Pope, his Rebellious Roman Catholic Subjects
refuse to obey him; neither would the Pope be persuaded to grant the King his
Absolution, till his Majesty had, upon the matter, totally suppressed the
League.

Jean Castle, a young Student educated by the Jesuits, Fol. 223.224. A. Dom.
1599.
attempts to kill the King, but by good fortune, only wounded him in the Face;
whereby the Society of Jesuits are banished out of France; and their Scholar
is executed, for this wicked and lewd Attempt.

King Henry the Fourth, is killed by Ravilliac, who never expressed any kind of
sorrow or Repentance for so wicked a Fact; being persuaded he had done the
Pope, and the Church of Rome a very acceptable Service; because he thought that
King was Marching into Germany, to overthrow the Roman Catholic Faith there.

FINIS.

