A SERMON Against False Weights and Balances; Preached at SHEFFIELD, JANVARY
the 10th, 1696/7. BY NATH. DRAKE, M. A. and VICAR there.

-- Suum regit Omnia pondus. LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for A. Bosvile, at
the Dial, against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street; and N. Simmons,
Bookseller, in Sheffield, Yorkshire, 1697.

TO THE Gentlemen, and Others, Inhabitants, within the Town and Parish of
Sheffield, my Beloved Parishioners.
SIRS,
SEeing at last you have taken such an effectual Course to oblige me to comply
with your Requests, in making this Sermon public; (which was the farthest thing
from my Thoughts, when I penned and preached it,) I am sorry that I resisted
your Importunities so long, because, That which at first chiefly commended this
Discourse, I mean the Seasonableness of it, is much worn off since it was
delivered.

Not but that the Subject of it, Commutative Justice, will ever be Seasonable,
and the just Balance always in Fashion, but the ill Occasion which has of late
so busily employed it, and so foully corrupted it, is now declining and far
spent.

It is well for us that it is so; for we have labored too long under the
mortifying Effects of Corrupt Practices, those especially relating to the Coin,
and the Balance.

To prevent, and put a stop to the growing Corruptions of this latter, was the
Design of this Composure; and, I thank God, I had my End in Preaching it,
beyond what I could hope for: I wish you may have yours in Publishing it, viz.
that it may be an acceptable Monitor to all Tradesmen, that it may excite them
effectually to Resist the Impulse of Covetous Affections, That the treacherous
Dealer may deal no more Treacherously, nor the Land tremble and mourn for Fraud
and Oppression.

What Occasion there is, and of late has been for Discourses of this Nature, I
need not say; nor would I seem to lay this as a particular Indictment against
this Parish. The kind Entertainment that this plain Sermon has generally found
among you, purely for the sake of Justice, is an evident Proof of your Love of
that Virtue.

I am bound to thank you for the exceeding Good Will with which you received
it, and for your Respect and Kindness, which I know you intended me, in your
repeated Wishes that it might be made Public: But indeed you have no reason to
thank me for my forced Obedience.

I shall ever readily obey you in any Instance relating to my Calling, and
limited within my Compass, but when you would oblige me to launch out beyond my
Bounds, and incur the Hazard of public Censure, you must give me leave to
dispute your Commands. I am not so well assured of the Charitable Construction
of Others, as I am of Yours.

However, You stand hereby engaged to be accountable for this Adventure: And,
for my part, I shall concern myself no further then to accompany it with my
Prayers, that it may have the same good Effect upon others that it had upon
you, and in all Temptations be a Remembrancer to you of the Sacred Rules and
Measures of Justice.

And now, my Brethren, may the Blessing of God upon your just Dealing, make, or
rather continue, you a prosperous People; and may all your Kindness to me find
its Reward in the happy Success of the Ministry of,

GENTLEMEN, Your Obliged, and Faithful Serv^^^, N. D.

PROVE. XVI. xi. A Just Weight and Balance are the Lord's; all the Weights of
the Bag are his Work.


I Dare so far pretend, my Brethren, to be a Judge of your Thoughts, as to
assure my self, that upon the very naming of this Text, you all look upon it as
a Word in Season, suited as well to the Place as Time wherein we live.

Indeed Commutative Justice, or Honest Dealing 'twixt Man and Man, is a Subject
always seasonable, because the thing is always necessary; but it is much more
so in such a critical Juncture as this, when by the many Difficulties under
which the present Government labors, such Advantages are given to Designing
Persons, and such Temptations are laid before all Men, of more Dexterity than
Honesty, to deceive and defraud under the Color of Justice.

The Tempting Advantages, I mean, are chiefly such as relate to that noted
Instrument of Justice, the Balance; the use of which has been corrupted by ill
Practisers in all times.

But sure Opportunities for such Corruptions were never more than at this time,
when, besides common Wares and Merchandise, That which answers them all is
brought to the Standard, I mean Money itself, comes to be bought and sold by
Weight, and that at different Rates.

Upon this Account it is as much in every trading Man's power, if he be
charitably inclined, to favor the poor Man, without any damage to himself, as
it is to cozen and overreach him, if he be a deceitful Dealer. I do not mean,
that any Man is bound to take the poor Man's Money to his own loss; but surely
both Justice and Charity oblige us to make allowance to the utmost Farthing
that we can with safety, lest by taking advantage of his Necessity, we cause
Complaining in our Streets.

Let it not be therefore thought an improper Undertaking, if from the Pulpit I
a little inspect your Weights and Balance, and interpose some pious Caution and
impartial Advice in a Point wherein both Charity and Justice are concerned.

I look upon it as the Duty of every Faithful Minister to be particularly
watchful against Public Temptations, and preserve as many as he can from Sin
and Danger; as also to plead for the Poor and Needy in the Day of Evil.

Now when we hear the Poor complain that they scarce receive Justice, where
they expect Charity; and on the other hand consider, that Temptations to this
sort of Fraud infect most in such populous trading Towns as this; I cannot
think a Discourse of this Nature (though unusual) to be either improper or
unseasonable; and therefore shall make no further Apology, save that to prevent
Censure, I desire to enter this serious Protestation, that I undertake this
Argument upon a truly honest, religious, and charitable Design, without any
reflection upon particular persons.

And as Solomon was a Faithful Monitor to his People in this matter, (as we
find by many repeated Cautions in this Book,) so I shall only represent to you
the Reasons that we have to attend to those wise and just Observations, and
particularly improve these remarkable Words, A just Weight and Balance are the
Lord's, all the Weights of the Bag are his Work.

Justice is a Natural principle, and the measure of it is, to do to others, as
we would have done to our selves.

This Justice is either Commutative, or Distributive.

Distributive Justice consists in rendering to all such Dues, as without any
express compact or agreement, may be challenged by right of a Divine Command,
by the Laws of Nature or Religion, or the civil Constitution; such are,
Tribute, Honor, Impositions, Tyths, Customs, etc.

Commutative Justice supposes a mutual Contract and Exchange of things
profitable, and requires simplicity in Bargaining, and faithfulness in
performing Covenants. The former respects chiefly the Dignity of Persons, this
latter the Equality of Things.

The common Instruments of this sort of Justice, are Weights and Measures, the
use of which was introduced by natural Reason and Necessity.

Commerce and Traffic became necessary, as soon as Mankind became multiplied
and divided into Colonies. For God in his wise and good Providence has so
ordered, that there is no condition of Life, wherein one does not stand in need
of another, whether we respect private Families, Communities, or Kingdoms: And
this for the preservation of Society, and to promote and spread abroad Love and
Friendship over the Face of the Earth.

Now it is not easy to imagine how this necessary Commerce could be effected,
without these Instruments of Justice, Weights and Measures.

Neither is it material to enquire when and by whom they were invented, seeing
we are sure they are as old as Traffic in the World.

And indeed Authors disagree much in this point; as Polydore Virgil has
observed, from whose account we can only gather thus much, that some Nations
invented them before others.

Diogenes Laortius affirms, Lib. 9. Antiq.
That Pythagoras first invented them, for the Grecians; and Josephus tells us,
that it is credible, That Cain, the Son of Adam first established the use of
them; but there are no Footsteps of this in Scripture.

There seems to me to be more ground for a Conjecture, That Tubal Cain, the Son
of Lamech, contrived these and the like Instruments, seeing he is recorded for
an Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron, Genesis 4.22. Him Vossius
takes to be the same with Vulcan.

But as to that particular Instrument, The Balance, The first Invention of it
is by the Heathens, attributed to Astrea, who is therefore deified for the
Goddess of Justice, and her Balance is advanced among the Celestial Signs, to
denote the extreme Value of this Invention, and the sacred Regard they had to
the use of it.

But now, if the Balance and Weights be of humane Invention, how will this
Proverb of Solomon's be accounted for, which plainly ascribes 'em to Divine
Institution, A just Weight and Balance are the Lord's?

By which we are not only to understand that the Lord approves of 'em, and
requires 'em in all our Dealings of Traffic with one another. But that he
claims this Ordinance of Justice as his own Institution, intimating, that his
overruling Hand was employed in the Workmanship of all and every of these
Instruments. All the Weights of the Bag are his Work.

This seeming difference is easily made up, For (as Dr. Tailor observes) Though
this part of Justice depends upon the Laws of Man directly, and takes its
Estimate and Measures from civil Sanctions, and private Agreements; yet it is
built upon the Laws of God by plain Consequence, and undeniable Inference, as I
shall undertake to prove from three Topics:

First, From the Law of Nature.

Secondly, From the Revealed Laws of God.

Thirdly, From the Established Laws of his Vicegerent, established in this
Kingdom.

First, If we examine the Law of Nature, we shall soon find that all the
Instruments of just Dealing are ultimately resolved into God's Workmanship:
For, who taught the first Inventers of them, this useful Art? Who imparted to
them this Skill in Geometry? Who guided the Workman's Hammer? Who gave Men that
Natural Sagacity to find out the critical Rules of Proportion? Who but the God
of Nature? Who but that Omniscient Workman, who writ his first Law, the Law of
Nature, in the Hearts and Minds of all his Servants?

This Natural Principle furnished Men with common Rules of Justice, as is
evident from the Moral Precepts and Practice of the Heathens.

Commerce, says Tully in his excellent Book of Offices, consists in buying and
selling, hiring and letting, and exchanging Commodities; but there can be none
of this Dealing, says he, without Justice. Offic. Lib. 2.


And therefore in another place he condemns it as a pernicious Error, That they
had a cunning artificial sort of People, in great admiration, misstaking Craft
for Wisdom.

And that the like fraudulent Abuses of this Divine Institution were practiced
in former Ages, we learn from the Testimony, which Aristotle gives of the
Merchants in his time. -- For the remedying of which Abuses, the Ancients did
appoint diverse Officers, called (...), Wilkins.
who were to overlook the common Measures of Justice.

So sacred a Regard had those Moralists for this piece of Natural Religion,
that they worshipped Justice for a Goddess, complaining that she had left the
Earth, and was retired in Heaven, from whence she came, leaving only her
Scales, as I hinted before, within our sight in the Zodiac, as a sign that our
Dealings with Men should be equally divided as the Globe is with the
Equinoctial Line, Lucan.
adjustae pondera Librae.

Thus Nature it self directs us to Heaven for the Author of the Balance, as
Virgil sings:

Jupiter ipse duas aequato examine Lances
Sustinet. --
Intimating that the Righteous God weighs all the Actions of Mortals, as in the
Scales of Justice, whence the Poets style him (...), the High and Heavenly
Holder of the Balance.

Such Honor and Reverence do the Disciples of Nature pay to the Balance, as
the noblest of all Mechanical Instruments, and worthy of a Divine Author. But,

Secondly, A just Weight and Balance are the Lord's, by the Laws of Revealed,
as well as Natural Religion. -- The Divine Institution of this Ordinance of
Justice, is frequently repeated in the Old Testament, and confirmed by general
Rules of Righteousness, laid down in the New.

First, Hear the Voice of the Lord, in the Law given by Moses, Ye shall do no
Unrighteousness, in Judgment, Lev. 19.35.
in Meteyard, in Weight, or in Measure. Just Balances, just Weights, a just
Ephah, and a just Hin shall ye have; I am the Lord your God. Observe that
solemn Confirmation, IAM THE LORD. He stamps the Mark of his Royal Authority
upon them.

Again, This Law is enforced by a promised Blessing, and the contrary Practice
prohibited under pain of an heavy Curse, Deuteronomy. 25.13.
Thou shall not have in thy Bag diverse Weights, or (as it is in the Original) a
Stone and a Stone, a great and a small, i.e. the greater to Buy with, and the
lesser for Selling, or the one for public Show, and the other for private Use.
Likewise, Thou shall not have in thy House diverse Measures, a great and a
small; but thou shall have a perfect and a just Weight; a perfect and a just
Measure shall thou have, that thy Days may be lengthened in the Land, which the
Lord thy God gives thee; For all that do such things, that is, do falsify
Weights and Measures, are an abomination unto the Lord thy God, i. e. highly
abominable, as the Abstract signifies.

Accordingly we find God expressing a more than ordinary Displeasure, against
his own People, for this fradulent Dealing; Amos 8.4. Hear this, O ye that
swallow up the Needy, even to make the Poor of the Land to fail, Saying, When
will the new. Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn; and the Sabbath, that we may
set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying
the Balances by Deceit? The Lord has sworn by the Excellency of Jacob, surely
I will not forget any of these Works.

Upon so much Reason and Divine Authority does this Observation stand, Ezekiel.
45.9, 10. Prove. 11.1^ 20.10.
A just Weight and Balance are the Lord's. God seems to have consecrated them,
by these and several other Divine Sentences that we meet with in the Old
Testament, thereby to raise in us a Reverence in the Use of them.

And in the New, the Law of the Lord of Righteousness is as full, though not so
particular in this Point. -- There the Golden Rule is established, To do to all
Men, as we would have done to us; i. e. So to deal with every Man, as if we had
exchanged Persons with him, and he were in our place, and we in his.

Again, Our Lord, in reckoning up the Duties of Justice, besides the
Commandment, Do not Steal, he adds, Defraud not; thereby expressly forbidding
this secret Theft of abusing our Brother in buying, selling, etc.

And the like Instructions we have from his Apostles, to converse in the World
with Simplicity, and godly Sincerity, 1 These. 4.6.
not to lie one to another, not to go beyond or defraud our Brother in any
matter; because the Lord is the Avenger of all such: An Argument charged with
Thunder, and Almighty Indignation. And so I proceed to the

Third Topic, From which we prove God's Title to these Instruments of Justice:
And that is from the Laws of his Vicegerent, The Statutes of this Realm.

We have many excellent Statutes and Ordinances about the Weights and Measures
used in this Realm, which show what abundance of Care our Ancestors have taken
to prevent all Cheating and Deceit herein.

And for greater security in this matter, it has been judged absolutely
necessary to entrust our Kings with the care and charge of them, and
accordingly the Royal Standards which must regulate all others, are kept in the
Exchequer, (as the Roman Standards were in the Capitol) by a special Officer of
his Majesty's Household.

Now though these be Human Laws and Provisions, yet they are made for the better
Execution of Divine Laws, and consequently do confirm God's Title, and
aggravate every Transgression.

It must be an high Aggravation to dissemble both with God and Man, and that
perhaps in a matter of very small moment; so that a Peniworth of unjust Gain
shall often cast the Scale against the weighty Considerations of Duty both to
God and the King.

We should reverently consider the double Mark and Impression, viz. of Divinity
and Majesty, that is stamped upon these Instruments of Justice, and that awful
Consideration would make us render to Caesar the thing that are Caesar 's, and
to God the things that are God's, and raise a just Hatred in our Minds against
all unclean Hands.

But the highest Aggravation is to cheat a poor credulous Neighbor under this
show of Justice: To deceive with the Balances of Equity, is like Lying and
Swearing falsely upon the Gospels of Truth. -- Weights, Balances and Measures,
whether of Application or Reception, being authorized by the Royal Signature,
become the Peoples Security for Honesty of Commerce, they are appointed, as it
were, Judges to give every Man his Due.

He therefore that imposes upon his Neighbor by Slight of Hand, false Weights,
or the like, does, in this sense, corrupt the King's Judges, and makes Justice
itself a Cloak for his Knavery: He holds a Lie in his Right Hand; nay, he lies
not to Man, but to God.

He violates that just Ordinance which God has consecrated; he secretly wounds
his Prince's Authority, and undermines his Government, by dissolving those
secret Ties of Justice, which like Nerves, and other sinewy Ligaments, bind the
Members of the Body Politic together.

This Observation agrees with the Context and with the Royal Concern, which
Solomon here expresses for Just Dealing among his People. He often repeats his
Charge against False Weights, to show his Detestation of such Practices; and in
the Verse following my Text, declares, That the committing this Wickedness is
an Abomination to Kings, because their Throne is established in Righteousness.

Thus we have the Royal Honor, and Interest, and the Public Faith, (beside
Divine Commands) all engaged for the Security of Trade, and to keep Men from
doing and receiving Injuries.

And if this be not sufficient, we may further consider, the Sacred Regard that
the Jews had for the Preservation of Commutative Justice from all Abuse and
Falsification in this kind; insomuch that the Public Standards and Originals,
by which all other Measures were to be tried and allowed, were with much
Religion preserved in the Sanctuary, the care of them being committed to the
Priests and Levites, whose Office it was, among other things, to inspect all
manner of Measures and Size.

Hence that frequent Expression, According to the Shekel of the Sanctuary;
which (as the learned Bishop Wilkins observes) does not refer to any Weight
distinct from, and more than the Vulgar, (as some fondly conceive) but only
obliges Men in their Dealing and Traffic to make use of such Measures as were
agreeable to the Public Standards that were kept in the Sanctuary.

The Sum of all is, -- As God has declared himself the Author of Weights and
Measures, That he is pleased in the due Use of them, and that the contrary
Practice is an Abomination to him: So in all our Dealings with Men, we are to
set him before us as the Rewarder or Avenger of our Deeds; and accordingly all
good Kings and States have enacted or executed Laws for this equal
Administration of Private as well as Public Justice; knowing that those corrupt
Practices which are abominable to God, will soon, if not remedied, be
destructive to Government.

Lastly, There is an Emphasis in the last words of the Text, which affords
another worthy Consideration, All the Weights, (or Stones,) in the Bag are his
Work. ALL the Weights, except there be False Ones, which are the Workmanship
and Invention of the Devil and accursed of God: But all the Just Weights, the
least as well as the greatest, are here noted to be the Lord's, and that, to
signify to us, that we must be scrupulously Just, and do no Unrighteousness,
no, not even the smallest Matters.

Every little Fraud is a Sin, and every Sin must be hated, and universal
Righteousness prove our Sincerity.

The Tempter often gets Advantage by whispering to Men, that the Sin is small,
and such as God's Servants themselves frequently commit. This is one of the
subtillest Insinuations of the Devil, a Net in which he catches innumerable
Souls; for the Sin is not small, in respect to the Guilt, which is great enough
to ruin the Soul, (every Act of Fraud being really a Wilful Sin,) but so called
with respect to the smallness, or inconsiderableness of the matter wherein such
Sins are committed.

It is to be feared (says a pious Author) that more Souls perish by these
supposed small Sins, than by the grossest Acts of Wickedness. We naturally fly
with greater Fear from great Dangers than from less. And the true Reason why
idle Words and sinful Thoughts are oft'ner committed than more hanious Sins,
is, because the Soul is not so much awakened by Fear and Care to make
Resistance, and Love needs the Help of Fear in this our weak Condition.

We easily yield to what we think little Sins, and those lead us on and betray
us into greater: He that has brought himself to take an unjust Penny without
regret, may in time be prevailed with to take a Purse, when Want and
Opportunity join together to make the Temptation strong.

Covetousness has no Bounds; if a Man be in for Grains and feels no Remorse, he
will quickly bribe the Balance to lie, and cheat by Ounces.

When a Man is successful in the little ways of Sinful Gain, he naturally
desires to become a Proficient, and to try his skill in greater matters.

He that can dexterously counterfeit a Halfpenny, will hardly stop his eager
Fancy till he come to the Half-crown, nor there till he come to the Halter.

Thus Little Sins bring Great Punishments; and Injustice in the smallest
Weights will sink the Soul down to Hell.

Beware therefore, O young Man! of making little Transgressions, in any kind,
habitual. And let every Transgressor break off his ill Custom before it be too
strongly rooted in him.

It is easier to check covetous Appetites at the first, than to stop them in
their Course; for if Reason and Religion do not resist them in the beginning,
they will go on in spite of us: -- Nothing, but the Powerful Spirit of God,
(which in that wicked course we have no reason to hope for,) can reclaim us.

Let the young Man therefore, I say again, be cautious and jealous of every
little Encroachment of Sin, and stand upon his Guard against the first Onsets
of Temptation to Injustice: And if he resolutely bears the first Shock, he
will, by God's Grace, carry the Day, and attain at last a Crown of
Righteousness, infinitely more worth than all the unjust Lucre of the World.

Now to Counter-balance the many Temptations that entice Men to commit these
Frauds, I shall endeavor, by way of Application, to lay the forementioned
Obligations to the strict Observance of Commutative Justice more home to Men's
Consciences, and set before them the Rewards and Terrors of the Lord of
Righteousness.

You have heard by how many Titles these Instruments of Justice belong to God,
and now by way of plain Consequence, or Inference, you shall hear more
particularly what Obligations the Laws of Nature, Religion, and our Civil
Constitution lay upon Us to maintain these Ordinances of Commutative Justice.

And that these Arguments may have their due Force and Effect upon Men, I will
set forth how every Dealer in the World ought often to lay these Considerations
to Heart, and Examine his Soul by these Rules and Measures, as,

First, Whether he has regarded the Natural Obligations and Eternal Reasons of
this Moral Duty, such as these:

That the Nature of Man in Society claims just Dealing from every Man he deals
with? That the God of Nature, who made Man a sociable Creature, gave him that
Right? -- And moreover, That the Eternal Justice and Righteousness of that God
should be a Standard of our upright Dealing with Men, i. e. as our Lord is
Righteous in all his Works, so should we be in all Ours, by virtue of the
Natural Relation that Servants have to their Lords. -- No thinking Man can be
ignorant of these everlasting Reasons of Righteousness, we are directed by a
Law within us to help and assist one another in matters of Commerce, and that
Law tells us, that as there is a Benefit accrews by the exchange of Things, so
each Party has a right to a Share of it; that the Buyer may have the worth of
his Price, and be thereby furnished with such Conveniences of Life as he
wants, and the Seller may have the full worth of his Commodity; otherwise,
instead of answering the great Design of Society, which was, to be mutually
helpful one to another, we become cruel Oppressors of our Brethren.

Thus we are to consider that the Great Balance of Nature gives every Man his
due, and equally divides the Profits and Advantages of our Traffic: And that
Man who is not contented with his Share, but ingrosses all the Profits of
Exchange to himself, is rather a Wen of the Body Politic, (as Dr. Scot well
expresses it,) that draws all the Nourishment to himself, and starveth the
neighboring Parts, than a Regular Member that contenteth itself with a
proportionate Share, and gladly permits his Fellow Members to live and
thrive as well as he.

The Heathens, who attended to these Moral Obligations, needed no other Laws of
Justice; they praised it in their Sayings, practiced it in their Dealings, and
punished the Transgressors of it.

And what a Reproach is this to some Christian Professors, who seem to have put
off the Nature of Men, while they make profession of Faith as Christians, and
have as little Regard to Moral Equity, as if it was no part of our Religion.

In truth, such Men are so far from Religion, that they are not honest Heathens
yet; the Gentiles, which knew not God, shall rise up in Judgment against them,
and condemn them: It was pardonable Superstition for Heathenish Ignorance to
pay Divine Honor to the Goddess of Justice; but for Christian Knowledge to have
Hand and Heart offered up, as it were, in Sacrifice to the unrighteous Mammon,
is abominable Idolatry; Their Worship terminated in Heaven, but We fall down
and worship the Earth.

Again, Let every Dealer further consider in the second Place, that as
Injustice is repugnant to the Principles of the Light of Nature, so likewise
(as has been proved) to the Positive Laws of God revealed to us from Heaven.

That Divine Word which declares, that the Weights and Balance belong to God,
does plainly declare, that just Dealing belongs to Us, for whose sake these
Instruments were ordained.

All the Laws of Heaven are Just as well as Holy: As Christ came not to destroy
the Moral Laws delivered by Moses; so Moses made no Alteration as to the Laws
of Nature; Moses confirmed 'em all, and Christ improved 'em all, and both set a
particular Estimate upon Justice.

And how can it be otherwise, since Justice is a Ray, nay, a mighty Beam of
Divinity, as Eternal as the Godhead, as Immutable and Indelible as the Image of
God in the Rational World, which though much defaced in some Individuals, yet
preserves its Luster over the Universe, and will for ever determine those Men to
deal justly with one another, who attend to the Dictates of Nature, or the Laws
of Religion; and therein to those Eternal Reasons which have determined God to
deal justly with us. So that to take away Justice, (as one observes) is to take
the Sun out of the World, and reduce all things to a blind Confusion.

All which considered, is it not a Wonder that there should be Men, zealously
professing Christianity, who look upon Honesty and Justice as the Beggarly
Elements of Religion? A sort of Heathen Virtue belonging to Carnal and mere
Moral Men, that are utterly unacquainted with the Spirit and Power of
Godliness: Yet such there are, as a late Great Divine excellently describes
'em, Who in the room of Justice, and the like Moral Virtues, have foisted in a
sort of Spiritual Religion, as they call it, which consists in a certain
Model of Conversion and Regeneration, Dr. Scot Vol. 4.
that is made up of nothing but a mere fanciful Train of Dejections and
Triumphs; after which supposed Regeneration, all their After-religion is
nothing but an idle Leaning on Jesus Christ; and whilst they should be
governing their Wills, their Words, and Actions, by the Eternal Rules of
Justice and Goodness, they are employed, as they think, in an higher
Dispensation, in forming odd Schemes of Spiritual Experiences, and attending to
the Inward Whispers, and Incomes, and Withdrawings of the Spirit of God. -- But
how dangerous a Mistake is it, for Men to take up with any Religion which does
not principally insist upon the Eternal Laws of Morality? For though Justice in
our Dealings with Men, will never singly recommend us to God, unless it be
joined with Mercy, Sobriety, and Godliness: yea, though all these together will
never recommend us to God, unless their Imperfections be purged and expiated by
the All-sufficient Merit of our Blessed Savior; yet without Justice and
Honesty all our Religion is a Damnable Cheat, a Piece of Pious Fraud, and All
the Merit of our Savior will be as insignificant to us, as it is to the
Devils, or damned Ghosts. For his Merit is no Refuge for Religious Knaves, his
Wounds no Sanctuary for Spiritual Cheats or Liars and Oppressors: For such
Persons as these to shelter themselves in our Savior's Propitiation, is to
Profane and Desacrate it, and make those Vocal Wounds to accuse them which
were made to plead for them.

In vain, my Brethren, are all Pretenses to Religious Purity, while your Hands
are defiled with unjust Practices: Shall I count them pure, Mic. 6.11.
says the Prophet, with wicked Balances, and with the Bag of deceitful Weights?

Nay, in vain is Christ dead for us, if we are not redeemed from unrighteous
Conversation: It is St. Paul's Doctrine, Tit. 2.14.
For this end Christ gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works.

Thus that sacred Book of Religion, which declares, That the Instruments of
Justice belong to God, declares, that the Exercise of it belongs to Us; without
which we neither answer the Ends of our Creation nor Redemption. And so I go
on, in the

Third Place, To urge our Obligations to the mutual Offices of Justice, from
our being subject to Government, and bound by the Laws of the Land of our
Nativity.

Those Laws which entrust the King, as the Minister of God, with the Standards
of Justice, do require that Subjects do Justice both to the King and to one
another: Those Laws which empower every Subject to demand Justice, do surely
exact Reciprocal Justice from every Subject again; this is Civil Righteousness
without which it is impossible any Society should be happy or subsist long.

Nay, so great is the force of it, 'That, as Tully well observes, common
Highway-men, and those that support themselves only upon Rapin and Violence,
cannot yet subsist without it, insomuch that if one Thief does but defraud
another of the same Troop, he is expelled the Society, as a Man of no Faith; and
if the Captain of the Band shows but any Partiality in the Distribution of the
Booty, he is at least Deserted by his Party, if it do not also cost him his
Life; for there is a Discipline even among Pirates themselves, and their Laws of
private Justice are duly executed and obeyed.

Now since this kind of Justice is so sacred, even among Thieves and Robbers,
with how much greater Reverence ought it to be observed in a Regular and
well-ordered Government, seeing that, of itself alone, it is able to advance
and establish a Piratic Power without any other Support.

The Pythian Oracle delivered, concerning Sparta, this remarkable Sentence,
That it was not in the Power of anything in the World, but Avarice and
Injustice to destroy that Commonwealth.

Now though other Sins may (and do threaten to) bring heavy Judgments upon this
Land, yet this alone will effectually overthrow the Best of Governments, and
like that Accursed Thing, trouble our Israel, so that we shall not be able to
stand before our Enemies.

While we therefore pray that our Parliament may establish Peace and Happiness,
let us maintain Truth and Justice, as the best and surest Foundations upon
which the Peace and Tranquillity both of Church and State must be settled. -- It
is a Mockery to pray to Heaven for a National Establishment, while there are so
many Personal Corruptions of Private as well as Public Justice, which two parts
of Justice carry the same Correspondence to one another as Cement to the
Foundation. Every good Government is founded upon Public Justice, but Private
Equity is the Cement that fastens the several Parts together, and consolidates
the whole Fabric.

Thus Natural Reason, Religion, and Civil Policy, all with one Voice declare
the Necessity of just Dealing among Men, as well as God's Propriety in those
Instruments of Justice, which his Name has hallowed for our Use.

A just Weight and Balance are the Lord's. -- And that we may use and manage
them with scrupulous Integrity, in the smallest as well as the greatest
Matters, the Royal Wiseman further adds, ALL the Weights of the Bag are his
Work.

And how great Reason there is for this Caution, we may gather from that
notable Observation, in the whole Duty of Man: -- In this whole Business of
Traffic, says that justly admired Author, there are so many Oppertunities of
Deceit, that a Man had need fence himself with a very firm Resolution, nay,
Love of Justice, or he will be in danger to fall under Temptation. -- For, as
the Wiseman speaks, Ecclus. 27.2. As a Nail sticks fast betwixt the Joynings
of the Stones; so does Sin stick close between Buying and Selling. It is so
interwoven with all Trades, so mixed with the very first Principles and Grounds
of them, that it is taught together with them, and so becomes part of the Art;
so that he is now adays scarce thought fit to manage a Trade that wants it,
while he that has most of this Black Art of Defrauding, applauds and hugs
himself, nay, perhaps boasts to others, how he has over-reacht his Neighbor;
but there is neither Christianity, nor Humanity in all this.

Therefore let me seriously Exhort all that hear me this day, (and I wish that
my Exhortation might reach not only the Ears, but the Hearts of all the People
of this Land,) That they would make it, as it really is, Matter of Conscience,
to be exact, strict, and scrupulous in all Points of Justice, and that

To all Persons, In all Things, and At all Times.
First, To all Persons: To the Simple as well as the Skilful, to the Poor as to
the Rich, without any Partiality or Respect to Persons; only respect the
Weakness and Necessities of your poor Brethren, and make some Charitable
Allowances accordingly. Justice is required in all Cases, but a kind Partiality
may be indulged in this. -- However, beware of being Unjust, where you should
be Charitable; impose not on the Weak Man's Ignorance, nor take Advantage of
the Poor Man's Necessity; make not the One Buy his Folly, nor the Other Pay
dear for his Poverty and Want. This adds Inhumanity to Injustice, Oppression to
Misery. -- If God has given you more Skill and Understanding than your
Neighbor, Justice requires that you help him with it, and use him not only
Justly, but Ingeniously, as one that reposeth a Trust in you, and casts
himself upon your Honesty.

Again, If a poor Man be driven by Necessity to Sell his Wares, Justice
requires that you give him the same Price that you would do, supposing that he
stood in no more need of your Money than you do of his Commodity.

Beware of the heinous Crime conmdemned by the Prophet, of Buying the Poor for
Silver, Amos. 8.6.
and the Needy for a pair of Shoes.

And, on the other hand, let not the Poor think themselves privileged, by
their Necessities, to Overreach and Defraud their Rich Neighbors, but rather,
by their Diligence and Patience, by their Modesty and Integrity, recommend
their Condition to the Mercy of God, and the Charity of all good Men.

The Richest Man has a Right to conscionable Dealing as well as the Poorest
Beggar, only with this Difference, That to the Poor, extremity of Justice is
unmerciful, which to the the Rich Person may perhaps be innocent, because it is
within the Latitude of Justice, and he stands not in need of Mercy.

In a word, In the compass of Lawful Gain, which is allowed to Tradesmen; use
Favor toward the Necessitous, Ingenuity toward the Ignorant, and Moderation,
at least just Dealing, toward all Men.

Secondly, Be strictly Just as becomes honest Men, and conscientious Christians
in all Things, as well as to all Persons; substract not the least from just
Measure; detain not the least Grain of Weight, for the least as well as the
greatest are the Lord's. For this Reason Weights are made of Stones, and other
hard Metals, that by Use they may not easily be diminished.

Many have sinned for a small matter, says the Son of Sirach; For a piece of
Bread, (A poor Reward!) some Men will Transgress. -- It Is a lamentable thing to
observe, how some Persons will dissemble, conceal, equivocate, deny, nay, lie
and swear too, and all to skrew a little unjust Gain from their Neighbor, and
that sometimes so very little, 'That (as the Excellent Author of the Whole Duty
of Man observes) it is a Miracle that any Man who thinks he has a Soul, can set
it at so miserable and contemptible a Price.

But I have observed to you before, both what Temptation and Danger there is in
these Little Sins, and shall now only add, this short Advice, as a Preservative
from Danger: In all Intercourse with others, do not do all which you may
lawfully do; reserve some little in your own Power; keep not only within the
Limits of lawful Gain, but at some Distance from Temptation: If you go to the
utmost Verge of what is Lawful, you will be in danger to tread upon the Skirts
of Injustice: Consider not therefore how far the Laws of Equity allow you to
go, but how far you may go with safety: Consider that there is no Medium
betwixt the utmost Extent of Justice, and the Confines of Sin, and that there
is a dangerous Precipice joins upon the Borders of Christian Liberty. Watch
therefore, and Pray likewise, that ye enter not into Temptation: Abhor that
which is evil, cleave to that which is good.

Thirdly, and Lastly, Maintain your Integrity and just Dealing in all Times, in
a difficult and unsettled, as well as a steady course of all Things: -- Do not
make your Fortune in Calamitous Times, nor Delight to fish in troubled Waters.
When the Nation labors under any unhappy Grievance, and the Body Politic,
through Wars, or other evil Accidents, is sick and sore wounded; be not like
Ill Humors in Natural Bodies, which run all to the part affected, and cause
greater Inflammations; do not make private Advantage of public Miseries, but
let every Man, in his Station, apply his healing Hand, by mixing Mercy with
Justice in all his Dealings.

That I may the better be understood in this point, Let it be considered, that
as the Iniquities of Clippers has brought this Kingdom into a difficult and
confused State, as to the Coin; so I need not tell you those Difficulties lie
heaviest upon poor Tradesmen and Laborers, and I scruple not to say, That they
who allow the Poor less than their Coin is worth, which is brought to the
Balance, are themselves guilty of Clipping, in foro Conscientiae, In the Court
of Equity, and of Conscience, and before the Righteous God, because, in Effect,
they diminish the just Value of it; only here is the Difference, That Clipping
is properly a Robbery of the Public, This of private People; That is done
without any design of Injury to any private Person, and so pretended (though
without Reason) to be no Sin, but the Sin of false Weights and unjust Balances
was never disputed.

How can we dispute the Sinfulness of That, of which God has expressly declared
his Detestation again and again? It is often condemned in this Book, by a
terrible Word, and called an ABOMINATION, i. e. such an Evil as God Detests
with a singular Indignation, for Idols are called by the same cursed Name,
(...) Abominable Things.

On the contrary, a just Weight is said to be his delight, and he has promised
an acceptable Blessing, even, Length of days, to the observers of it, Deuteronomy.
25.15. A perfect and just Weight shall thou have, that thy Days may be
lengthned, in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

I will conclude with a few Scriptures, which show how this Duty is hedged
about with Rewards and Punishments.

And First, Hear this, O ye that Swallow up the Needy, falsifying the Balances
by Deceit! Amos 8.4.
Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every One mourn that dwells
therein? And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, observe this
Terrible Threatening, That I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will
darken the Earth in the clear Day: I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and
your Songs into Lamentation: I will bring up Sackcloth upon your Loins, and
Baldness upon every Head, and I will make it as the Mourning of an Only Son,
and the End thereof as a bitter Day. And (which is most Dismal of all) I will
send, says the Lord, a Famine into that Land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a
Thirst for Water, but of Hearing the Word of the Lord.

And to show that an Estate got by these Injurious Means shall not last long,
nor afford much Enjoyment; hear again what the Prophet Micah declares, Meca. 6.
Chap. 6. Are there yet Treasures of Wickedness in the House of the Wicked, and
the scant Measure that is abominable? Shall I count them pure with the wicked
Balances? etc. -- Thy Rich Men are full of Violence. -- Therefore will I make
thee sick in smiting thee. -- Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied: Thou shall
sow but not reap, etc. -- But on the contrary, The wealth of the Sinner is laid
up for the just, says Solomon, and he that has clean hands, Prove. 13.22.
etc. shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, where the Righteous live for
evermore: Their Reward also is with the Lord, Psalm. 24.
and the care of them with the Most High. -- To which Divine Care and
Protection, I commend your Souls and Bodies, that they may be preserved
blameless, till the coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

And now, Lord, we beseech thee to grant thy People Grace to withstand the
Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and with pure Hearts,
Hands, and Minds to follow thee, the only GOD, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

FINIS.

