THE VINDICATION: OR THE PARALLEL OF THE FRENCH HOLY-LEAGUE, AND THE. English
League and Covenant, Turned into a Seditious Libell against the KING and his
ROYAL HIGHNESS, BY Thomas Hunt and the Authors of the Reflections upon the
Pretended Parallel in the Play called The DUKE of GVISE.

Written by Mr. DRYDEN.

Turno tempus erit magno cum optaverit emptum
Intactum Pallanta: and cum spolia ista, diemque
Oderit. --
LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleetstreet, MDCLXXXIII.

THE VINDICATION OF THE Duke of Guise.
IN the Year of His Majesty's Happy Restoration, the First Play I undertook
was the Duke of Guise, as the Fairest way, which the Act of Indemnity had then
left us, of setting forth the Rise of the Late Rebellion; and by Exploding the
Villainies of it upon the Stage, to Precaution Posterity against the Like Errors.

As This was my First Essay; so it met with the Fortune of an Vnfinisht Piece;
that is to say, It was Damned in Private, by the Advice of some Friends to whom
I showed it; who freely told me, that it was an Excellent Subject; but not so
Artificially wrought, as they could have wished: And now let my Enemies make
their Best of This Confession.

The Scene of the Duke of Guise's Return to Paris, AGAINST the King's Positive
Command, was then written; I have the Copy of it still by me, almost the same
which it now remains, being taken Verbatim out of Davila: For where the Action
is Remarkable, and the very words Related, the Poet is not at liberty to change
them much; and if he will be adding any thing for Ornament, it ought to be
wholly of a piece. This do I take for a sufficient Justification of that Scene,
unless they will make the pretended Parallel to be a Prophecy, as well as a
Parallel of Accidents, that were twenty years after to come. Neither do I find
that they can suggest the least color for it in any other part of the Tragedy.

But now comes the main Objection, Why was it stopped then? To which I shall
render this just Account, with all due Respects to those who were the Occasion
of it.

Upon a wandering Rumor (which I will divide betwixt Malice and Mistake) that
some Great Persons were represented or personated in it, the Matter was
complained of to my Lord Chamberlain; who, thereupon, appointed the Play to be
brought to him, and prohibited the Acting of it till further Order; commanding
me, after this, to wait upon his Lordship; which I did, and humbly desired him
to compare the Play with the History, from whence the Subject was taken,
referring to the First Scene of the Fourth Act, whereupon the Exception was
grounded, and leaving Davila (the Original) with his Lordship. This was before
Midsummer; and about two Months after, I received the Play back again from his
Lordship, but without any positive Order whether it should be Acted or not;
neither was Mr. Lee or my self any way solicitous about it: But this indeed I
ever said, That it was intended for the King's Service; and his Majesty was the
best Judge, whether it answered that End or no; and that I reckoned it my duty
to submit, if his Majesty, for any Reason whatsoever, should deem it unfit for
the Stage. In the interim, a strict Scrutiny was made, and no Parallel of the
Great Person designed, could be made out. But this Push failing, there were
immediately started some terrible Insinuations, that the Person of his Majesty
was represented under that of Henry the Third; which if they could have found
out, would have concluded, perchance, not only in the stopping of the Play, but
in the hanging up of the Poets. But so it was, that his Majesty's Wisdom and
Justice, acquitted both the One, and the Other; and when the Play it self was
almost forgotten, there were Orders given for the Acting of it.

This is Matter of Fact; and I have the Honor of so Great Witnesses to the
truth of what I have delivered, that it will need no other Appeal. As to the
Exposing of any Person living, our innocence is so clear, that it is almost
unnecessary to say, It was not in my Thought; and as far as any one Man can
vouch for another, I do believe it was as little in Mr. Lee's. And now since
some People have been so busy as to cast out false and scandalous Surmises,
how far we two agreed upon the Writing of it, I must do a common Right both to
Mr. Lee and my self, to declare publicly that it was at his earnest Desire,
without any Solicitation of mine, that this Play was produced betwixt us. After
the writing of Oedipus, I passed a Promise to join with him in another; and he
happened to claim the performance of that Promise, just upon the finishing of a
Poem, when I would have been glad of a little respite before the undertaking of
a second Task. The Person that passed betwixt us, knows this to be true; and
Mr. Lee himself, I am sure, will not disown it: So that I did not [seduce him
to join with me] as the malicious Authors of the Reflections are pleased to
call it; but Mr. Lee's Loyalty is above so ridiculous a Slander. I know very
well, that the Town did ignorantly call and take this to be my Play; but I
shall not arrogate to my self the Merits of my Friend. Two thirds of it
belonged to him; and then to me only the First Scene of the Play; the whole
Fourth Act, and the first half, or somewhat more of the Fifth.

The Pamphleteers, I know, do very boldly insinuate, that before the Acting of
it, I took the whole Play to my self, but finding afterward how ill success it
had upon the Stage, I threw as much of it as possibly I could upon my Fellow.
Now here are three damned Lies crowded together into a very little room: First,
That I assumed any part of it to my self, which I had not written; wherein I
appeal, not only to my particular Acquaintance, but to the whole Company of
Actors, who will witness for me, that in all the Rehearsals, I never pretended
to any one Scene of Mr. Lee's, but did him all imaginable Right, in his title
to the greater part of it. I hope, I may, without Vanity, affirm to the World,
that I never stood in need of borrowing another man's Reputation; and I have
been as little guilty of the Injustice, of laying claim to any thing which was
not my own. Nay, I durst almost refer my self to some of the angry Poets on the
other side, whether I have not rather countenanced and assisted their
Beginnings, than hindered them from Rising. The two other Falsities are, the
ill success of the Play, and my disowning it. The former is manifestly without
Foundation; for it succeeded beyond my very hopes, having been frequently
Acted, and never without a considerable Audience: And then it is a thousand to
one, that having no ground, to disown it, I did not disown it; but the Universe
to a Nut-shell that I did not disown it for want of success, when it succeeded
so much beyond my Expectation. But my malignant Adversaries are the more
excusable, for this course method of breaking in upon Truth and good Manners,
because it is the only way they have to gratify the Genius and the Interest of
the Faction together; and never so much pains taken neither, to so very, very
little purpose. They decry the Play, but in such a manner, that it has the
Effect of a Recommendation. They call it a dull Entertainment; and that is a
dangerous word, I must confess, from one of the greatest Masters in humane
Nature, of that Faculty. Now I can forgive them this Reproach too, after all
the rest: For this Play does openly discover the Original and Root of the
Practices and Principles, both of their Party and Cause; and they are so well
acquainted with all the Trains and Mazes of Rebellion, that there is nothing new
to them in the whole History. Or what if it were a little insipid, there was no
Conjuring that I remember in Pope Joan: And the Lancashire Witches were without
doubt, the most insipid Jades that ever flew upon a Stage; and yet even These
by the favor of a Party made a shift to hold up their heads. Now if we have
outdone these Plays in their own dull way, their Authors have some sort of
privilege to throw the first stone: But we shall rather choose to yield the
Point of Dullness, than contend for it, against so indisputable a Claim.

But Matters of State (it seems) are canvassed on the Stage, and things of the
Gravest Concernment there managed: And who were the Aggressors, I beseech you
but a few factious, popular Hirelings, that by tampering the Theaters, and by
poisoning the People, made a Playhouse more Seditious than a Conventicle: So
that the Loyal Party crave only the same freedom of defending the Government,
which the other took beforehand of exposing and defaming it. There was no
complaint of any Disorders of the Stage in the Bussle, that was made (even to
the forming of a Party) to uphold a Farce of Theirs. Upon the First day, the
whole Faction (in a manner) appeared; but after One sight of it, they sent
their Proxies of Serving-men and Porters to Clap in the Right of their Patrons:
And it was impossible ever to have gotten off the Nonsense of three hours for
Half a Crown, but for the Providence of so Congruous an Audience. Thus far, I
presume, the Reckoning is even, for Bad Plays, on Both Sides; and for Plays
written for a Party. I shall say nothing of their Poets Affection to the
Government, unless upon an absolute and an odious necessity. But to return to
the Pretended Parallel.

I have said enough already to convince any man of common sense, That there
neither was, nor could be any Parallel intended: And it will farther appear,
from the nature of the Subject; there being no Relation betwixt Henry the Third
and the Duke of Guise, except that of the Kings marrying into the Family of
Lorrain. If a Comparison had been designed, how easy had it been either to
have found a Story, or to have invented one, where the ties of nature had been
nearer? If we consider their Actions or their Persons, a much less proportion
will be yet found betwixt them: and if we bate the Popularity, perhaps none at
all. If we consider them in reference to their Parties; the One was manifestly
the Leader, the Other, at the worst, is but misled. The Designs of the One
tended openly to Usurpation: those of the Other may yet be interpreted more
fairly; and I hope from the natural candor and probity of his temper, that it
will come to a perfect submission and reconcilement at last. But that which
perfectly destroys this pretended Parallel, is that our Picture of the Duke of
Guise is exactly according to the Original in the History; his Actions, his
Manners; nay, sometimes his very Words, are so justly copied, that whoever has
read him in Davila, sees him the same here. There is no going out of the way,
no dash of a Pen to make any By-feature resemble him to any other Man: and
indeed, excepting his Ambition, there was not in France, or perhaps in any
other Country, any man of his Age vain enough to hope he could be mistaken for
him. So that if we Would have made a Parallel, we Could not. And yet I fancy,
that where I make it my business to draw Likeness, It will be no hard matter to
judge who sat for the Picture. For the Duke of Guises return to Paris contrary
to the Kings Order, enough already has been said; 'Twas too considerable in the
Story to be omitted, because it occasioned the mischiefs that ensued: But in
this likeness which was only Casual, no danger followed. I am confident there
was none intended; and am satisfied that none was feared. But the Argument
drawn from our evident design is yet, if possible, more convincing. The first
words of the Prologue spoke the Play to be a Parallel, and then you are
immediately informed how far that Parallel extended, and of what it is so. The
Holy League begot the Covenant, Guisards got the Whig, etc. So then it is not,
(as the sharling Authors of the Reflections tell you) a Parallel of the Men,
but of the Times. A Parallel of the Factions, and of the Leaguers. And every
one knows that this Prologue was written before the stopping of the Play.
Neither was the name altered on any such account as they insinuate, but laid
aside long before, because a Book called the Parallel had been printed,
resembling the French League, to the English Covenant; and therefore we thought
it not convenient to make use of another man's Title. The chief person in the
Tragedy, or He whose disasters are the Subject of it, may in reason give the
Name; and so it was called the Duke of Guise. Our intention therefore was to
make the Play a Parallel, betwixt the Holy League plotted by the House of Guise
and its Adhaerents, with the Covenant plotted by the Rebels in the time of King
Charles the First, and those of the new Association, which was the Spawn of the
old Covenant.

But This Parallel is plain, that the Exclusion of the Lawful Heir was the main
design of Both Parties: and that the endeavors to get the Lieutenancy of
France established on the Head of the League, is in effect the same with
offering to get the Militia out of the Kings hands (as declared by Parliament)
and consequently that the power of Peace and War should be wholly in the
People. It Is also true that the Tumults in the City, in the choice of their
Officers have had no small resemblance with a Parisian Rabble. And I am afraid
that both Their Faction and Ours had the same Good Lord. I believe also that if
Julian had been written and calculated for the Parisians, as it was for our
Sectaries, one of their Sheriffs might have mistaken too, and called him Julian
the Apostle. I suppose I need not push this Point any further, where the
Parallel was intended, I am certain it will reach: But a larger account of the
Proceedings in the City may be expected from a better hand, and I have no
reason to forestall it. In the mean time, because there has been no Actual
Rebellion, the Faction triumph in their Loyalty; which if it were out of
Principle, all our divisions would soon be ended, and we the happy People,
which God and the Constitution of our Government have put us in condition to
be: but so long as they take it for a Maxim, that the King is but an Officer in
Trust, that the People, or their Representatives are superior to him, Judges
of Miscarriages, and have power of Revocation, it is a plain case, that when
ever they please they may take up arms; and, according to Their Doctrine,
lawfully too. Let them jointly renounce this one opinion, as in Conscience and
Law they are bound to do, because both Scripture and Acts of Parliament oblige
them to it, and we will then thank their Obedience for our quiet, whereas now
we are only beholding to them for their Fear. The miseries of the last War are
yet too fresh in all men's memory: and they are not Rebels only because they
have been so too lately. An Author of theirs has told us roundly the
West-Country Proverb; Chad eat more Cheese and chad it: Their Stomach is as
good as ever it was; but the mischief on it is, they are either Muzled or want
their Teeth. If there were as many Fanatiques now in England, as there were
Christians in the Empire, when Julian reigned, I doubt we should not find them
much inclined to passive obedience; and Curse ye Meroz would be oftener preached
upon, than Give to Caesar, except in the sense Mr. Hunt means it.

Having clearly shown wherein the Parallel consisted, which no man can mistake,
who does not wilfully; I need not justify my self, in what concerns the sacred
Person of his Majesty. Neither the French History, nor our own could have
supplied me, nor Plutarch himself, were he now alive, could have found a Greek
or Roman to have compared to him, in that eminent virtue of his Clemency; even
his enemies must acknowledge it to be Superlative, because they live by it. Far
be it from flattery, if I say, that there is nothing under Heaven, which can
furnish me with a Parallel; and that in his Mercy, he is of all men the Truest
Image of his Maker.

Henry the Third was a Prince of a mixed Character; he had, as an old Historian
says of another, Magnas virtutes, nec minora vitia: but amongst those virtues,
I do not find his forgiving qualities to be much celebrated. That he was deeply
engaged in the bloody Massacre of St. Bartholomew, is notoriously known: and if
the relation printed in the Memoires of Villeroy be true, he confesses there
that the Admiral having brought him and the Queen Mother into suspicion with
his Brother then reigning, for endeavoring to lessen his Authority, and draw
it to themselves, he first designed his Accusers death by Maurevel, who shot
him with a Carabine, but failed to kill him; after which, he pushed on the King
to that dreadful Revenge, which immediately succeeded. It Is true, the
Provocations were high, there had been reiterated Rebellions, but a Peace was
now concluded; it was solemnly Sworn to by both Parties, and as great an
assurance of Safety, given to the Protestants, as the Word of a King and
Public Instruments could make it. Therefore the Punishment was execrable, and
it pleased God, (if we may dare to judge of his secret Providence) to cut off
that King in the very flower of his Youth, to blast his Successor in his
Undertakings, to raise against him the Duke of Guise, the Complotter and
Executioner of that inhumane Action (who by the Divine Justice, fell afterward
into the same snare which he had laid for others) and finally, to dye a violent
Death himself; murdered by a Priest, an Enthusiast of his own Religion. From
these Premises, let it be concluded. if reasonably it can, that we could draw
a Parallel, where the lines were so diametrically opposite. We were indeed
obliged by the Laws of Poetry, to cast into Shadows the vices of this Prince;
for an Excellent Critique has lately told us, that when a KING is named, a
HERO is supposed: It Is a reverence due to Majesty, to make the Virtues as
conspicuous, and the Vices as obscure as we can possibly. And this we own, we
have either performed, or at least endeavored. But if we were more favorable
to that Character than the exactness of History would allow, we have been far
from diminishing a Greater, by drawing it into comparison. You may see through
the whole conduct of the Play, a King naturally severe, and a resolution
carried on to revenge himself to the uttermost on the Rebellious Conspirators.
That this was sometimes shaken by reasons of policy and pity, is confessed; but
it always returned with greater force, and ended at last in the ruin of his
Enemies. In the mean time, we cannot but observe the wonderful Loyalty on the
other Side; that the Play was to be stopped, because the King was represented.
May we have many such proofs of their Duty and respect: but there was no
occasion for them here. It Is to be supposed, that his Majesty himself was made
acquainted with this objection; if he were so, he was the supreme and only Judge
of it; and then the Event justifies us: If it were inspected only by those whom
he commanded, it is hard if his own Officers and Servants should not see as much
ill in it as other men, and be as willing to prevent it; especially when there
was no solicitation used to have it acted. It Is known that noble person to
whom it was referred, is a severe Critique on good Sense, Decency, and
Morality; and I can assure the World, that the Rules of Horace are more
familiar to him, than they are to me. He remembers too well that the vetus
Comaedia was banished from the Athenian Theater for its too much license in
representing persons, and would never have pardoned it in this or any Play.

What opinion Henry the Third had of his Successor, is evident from the words
he spoke upon his Deathbed: He exhorted the Nobility (says Davila) to
acknowledge the King of Navarre, to whom the Kingdom of right belonged; and
that they should not stick at the difference of Religion: for both the King of
Navarre, a man of a sincere noble nature, would in the end return into the
bosom of the Church, and the Pope being better informed, would receive him into
his favor to prevent the ruin of the whole Kingdom. I hope I shall not need
in this Quotation to defend my self. as if it were my opinion, that the Pope
has any right to dispose of Kingdoms: my meaning is evident, that the Kings
judgment of his Brother-in-law, was the same which I have copied: and I must
farther add from Davila, that the Arguments I have used in defense of that
Succession, were chiefly drawn from the King's answer to the Deputies, as they
may be seen more at large in page 730. and 731. of the first Edition of that
History in English: There the three Estates, to the wonder of all men jointly
concurred in cutting off the Succession; the Clergy, who were managed by the
Archbishop of Lions, and Cardinal of Guise, were the first who promoted it;
and the Commons and Nobility afterward consented, as referring themselves
(says our Author) to the Clergy; so that there was only the King to stand in
the Gap; and he by artifice diverted that Storm which was breaking upon
Posterity.

The Crown was then reduced to the lowest Ebb of its Authority; and the King,
in a manner, stood single, and yet preserved his Negative entire: but if the
Clergy and Nobility had been on his part of the Balance, it might reasonably
be supposed, that the meeting of those Estates at Blois, had healed the
breaches of the Nation; and not forced him to the ratio ultima Regum, which is
never to be praised, nor is it here, but only excused as the last result of his
necessity. As for the Parallel betwixt the King of Navarre, and any other
Prince now living, what likeness the God of Nature, and the descent of Virtues
in the same channel have produced, is evident; I have only to say that the
Nation certainly is happy where the Royal Virtues of the Progenitors are
derived on their Descendants.

In that Scene, it is true, there is but one of the Three Estates mentioned; but
the Other two are virtually included; for the Archbishop and Cardinal are at
the head of the Deputies: and that the rest are mute persons, every Critique
understands the reason, ne quarta loqui persona laboboret; I am never willing
to cumber the Stage with many Speakers, when I can reasonably avoid it; as here
I might. And what if I had a mind to pass over the Clergy and Nobility of
France in silence, and to excuse them from joining in so illegal and so ungodly
a Decree? Am I tied in Poetry, to the strict rules of History? I have followed
it in this Play more closely, than suited with the Laws of the Drama, and a
great Victory they will have, who shall discover to the World this wonderful
Secret, that I have not observed the Unities of place and time; but are they
better kept in the Farce of the Libertine destroyed? 'Twas our common business
here to draw the Parallel of the Times, and not to make an Exact Tragedy: For
this once we were resolved to err with honest Shakespeare: neither can Catiline
or Sejanus, (written by the great Master of our Art) stand excused any more
than we, from this exception: but if we must be criticis'd, some Plays of our
Adversaries may be exposed, and let them reckon their gains when the dispute
is ended. I am accused of ignorance, for speaking of the Third Estate, as not
sitting in the same House with the other two: Let not those Gentlemen mistake
themselves, there are many things in Plays to be accommodated to the Country in
which we live; I spoke to the understanding of an English Audience; Our three
Estates now sit, and have long done so in Two Houses; but our Records bear
witness, that they, according to the French Custom, have sat in one; that is
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal within the Bar, and the Commons without it.
If that Custom had been still continued here, it should have been so
represented; but being otherwise, I was forced to write so as to be understood
by our own Countrymen. If these be Errors, a Bigger Poet than either of us
two has fallen into greater, and the Proofs are ready, whenever the Suit shall
be recommenc'd.

Mr. Hunt, the Jehu of the Party, begins very furiously with me, and says I
have already condemned the Charter and City, and have executed the Magistrates
in Effigy upon the Stage, in a Play called the Duke of Guise, frequently
acted, and applauded, etc.

Compare the latter end of this Sentence with what the Two Authors of the
Reflections, or perhaps the Associating Clubb of the Devil-Tavern write in the
beginning of their Libel. Never was Mountain delivered of such a Mouse; the
fiercest Tories have been ashamed to defend this Piece: they who have any
sparks of wit among them are so true to their pleasure, that they will not
suffer dullness to pass upon them for wit, nor tediousness for diversion: which
is the reason that this Piece has not met with the expected applause: I never
saw a Play more deficient in Wit, good Characters or Entertainment, than this
is.

For shame, Gentlemen, pack your Evidence a little better against another time:
You see, My Lord Chief Baron, has delivered his Opinion, that the Play was
frequently acted and applauded; but you of the Jury, have found Ignoramus, on
the Wit and the Success of it. Oats, Dugdale and Turbervile, never disagreed
more than you do; let us know at last, which of the Witnesses are true
Protestants, and which are Irish. But it seems your Authors had contrary
Designs: Mr. Hunt thought fit to say, it was frequently acted and applauded,
because, says he, it was intended to provoke the Rabble into Tumults and
Disorder. Now if it were not seen frequently, this Argument would lose somewhat
of its force; the Reflectors business went another way, it was to be allowed no
Reputation, no Success, but to be damned Root and Branch, to prevent the
Prejudice it might do their Party; accordingly, as much as in them lay, they
have drawn a Bill of Exclusion for it on the Stage; But what Rabble was it to
provoke? Are the Audience of a Playhouse (which are generally Persons of
Honor, Noblemen and Ladies, or at worst, as one of your Authors calls his
Gallants, Men of Wit and Pleasure about the Town) are these the Rabble of Mr.
Hunt? I have seen a Rabble at Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Night, and have heard of
such a name, at true Protestant Meeting Houses; but a Rabble is not to be
provoked, where it never comes. Indeed, we had one in this Tragedy, but it was
upon the Stage; and that is the Reason, why your Reflectors would break the
Glass, which has showed them their own Faces. The business of the Theater, is
to expose Vice and Folly; to dissuade men by Examples from one, and to shame
them out of the other. And however you may pervert our good intentions, it was
here particularly to reduce men to Loyalty, by showing the pernicious
consequences of Rebellion, and Popular Insurrections. I believe no man, who
loves the Government, would be glad, to see the Rabble in such a posture, as
they were represented in our Play: But if the Tragedy had ended, on your side,
the Play had been a Loyal Witty Poem, the Success of it, should have been
recorded by immortal Og or Doeg, and the Rabble Scene, should have been true
Protestant, though a Whig Devil were at the Head of it.

In the mean time, pray, where lies the Relation, betwixt the Tragedy of the
Duke of Guise, and the Charter of London? Mr. Hunt has found a rare connection,
for he tacks them together, by the kicking of the Sheriffs: That Chain of
thought was a little ominous, for something like a kicking, has succeeded the
Printing of his Book; and the Charter of London was the Quarrel. For my part, I
have not Law enough to state that question, much less decide it; let the
Charter shift for it self in Westminster Hall, the Government is somewhat
wiser, than to employ my ignorance on such a Subject; my promise to honest Not.
Lee, was the only Bribe I had, to engage me in this trouble; for which, he has
the good fortune to escape Scot-free, and I am left in pawn for the Reckoning,
who had the least share in the Entertainment. But the Rising, it seems, should
have been on the true Protestants side, for he has tried, says ingenious Mr.
Hunt, what he could do, toward making the Charter forfeitable, by some
Extravagancy and Disorder of the People. A wise man I had been doubtless for my
pains, to raise the Rabble to a Tumult, where I had been certainly, one of the
first men, whom they had limn'd or dragged to the next convenient Sign-Post.

But on second thought, he says, this ought not to move the Citizens: he is
much in the right; for the Rabble Scene was written on purpose, to keep his
Party of them in the bounds of Duty. It Is the business of factious men to stir
up the Populace: Sir Edmond on Horseback, attended by a Swindging Pope in
Effigy, and forty thousand true Protestants for his Guard to Execution, are a
Show more proper for that design, than a thou sand Stage Plays.

Well, he has fortified his Opinion with a Reason, however, why the People
should not be moved; because I have so maliciously and mischievously
represented the King, and the Kings Son; nay, and his Favorite (says he) the
Duke too; to whom I give the worst strokes of my unlucky Fancy.

This need not be answered, for it is already manifest, that neither the King,
nor the Kings Son are represented, neither that Son, he means, nor any of the
rest, God bless them all. What strokes of my unlucky Fancy, I have given to his
Royal Highness, will be seen, and it will be seen also, who strikes him worst
and most unluckily.

The Duke of Guise, he tells us, ought to have represented a great Prince, that
had inserv'd to some most detestable Villainy, to please the Rage or Lust of a
Tyrant; such great Courtiers have been often sacrificed, to appease the Furies
of the Tyrants guilty Conscience; to expiate for his Sin, and to atone the
People. For a Tyrant naturally stands in fear of such wicked Ministers, is
obnoxious to them, awed by them, and they drag him to greater evils, for their
own impunity, than they perpetrated for his Pleasure, and their own Ambition.

Sure, he said not all this for nothing, I would know of him, on what persons
he would fix the Sting of this sharp Satyr? What two they are, whom, to use his
own Words, he so maliciously and mischievously would represent? For my part, I
dare not understand the villainy of his meaning; but some body was to have been
shown a Tyrant, and some other a great Prince, inserving to some detestable
Villainy, and to that Tyrants Rage and Lust; this great Prince or Courtier ought
to be sacrificed, to atone the People, and the Tyrant is persuaded, for his
own interest, to give him up to public Justice. I say no more, but that he has
studied the Law to good purpose. He is dancing on the Rope without a Metaphor,
his knowledge of the Law is the Staff that poizes him, and saves his Neck. The
Party indeed speaks out sometimes, for wickedness is not always so wise, as to
be secret, especially when it is driven to despair. By some of their
Discourses, we may guess at whom he points; but he has fenced himself in with
so many Evasions, that he is safe in his Sacrilege; and he who dares to answer
him, may become obnoxious. It Is true, he breaks a little out of the Clouds,
within two Paragraphs; for there he tells you, that Caius Caesar (to give unto
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's) was in the Catiline Conspiracy; a fine
insinuation this, to be sneer'd at by his Party, and yet not to be taken hold
of by public Justice: They would be glad now, that I or any man, should bolt
out their Covert Treason for them: for their loop hole is ready, that the
Caesar here spoken of, was a private man. But the application of the Text,
declares the Authors to be another Caesar, which is so black and so infamous an
aspersion, that nothing less than the highest clemency can leave it unpunished.
I could reflect on his ignorance in this place, for attributing these words to
Caesar, he that is not with us, is against us: He seems to have mistaken them,
out of the New Testament, and that is the best defense I can make for him; for
if he did it knowingly, 'twas impiously done, to put our Saviors words into
Caesar's mouth. But His Law and Our Gospel, are two things; this Gentleman's
Knowledge is not of the Bible, any more than his Practice is according to it.
He tells you, he will give the world a taste of my Atheism and Impiety; for
which he quotes these following Verses, in the second or third Act of the Duke
of Guise.

For Conscience or Heavens fear, religious Rules
Are all State-bells to toll in pious Fools.
In the first place, he is mistaken in his Man, for the Verses are not mine,
but Mr. Lees: I asked him concerning them, and have this account, that they
were spoken by the Devil; now, what can either Whig or Devil say, more proper
to their Character, than that Religion is only a Name, a Stalking horse, as
errant a Property as Godliness, and Property themselves are amongst their
Party? yet for these two lines, which in the mouth that speaks them, are of no
offense, he hallooes on the whole pack, against me: Judge, Justice, Surrogate,
and Official are to be employed, at his Suit, to direct Process, and boring
through the Tongue for Blasphemy, is the least Punishment his Charity will
allow me.

I find it is happy for me, that he was not made a Judge, and yet I had as lieve
have him my Judge as my Council, if my Life were at stake. My poor Lord
Stafford was well helped up with this Gentleman for his Solicitor; no doubt, he
gave that unfortunate Nobleman, most admirable advice toward the Saving of his
life; and would have rejoiced exceedingly, to have seen him cleared. I think, I
have disproved his instance of my Atheism, it remains for him, to justify his
Religion, in putting the words of Christ into a Heathens mouth: and much more
in his profane allusion to the Scripture, in the other Text; Give unto Caesar,
the things that are Caesar's; which, if it be not a profanation of the Bible,
for the sake of a silly Witticism, let all men, but his own Party judge. I am
not malicious enough to return him the names which he has called me; but of all
sins, I thank God, I have always abhorred Atheism: and I had need be a better
Christian than Mr. Hunt has shown himself, if I forgive him so infamous a
Slander.

But as he has mistaken our Savior for Julius Caesar, so he would Pompey too,
if he were let alone: to him, and to his Cause, or to the like Cause it
belonged, he says, to use these words, he that is not with us is against us. I
find he cares not whose the Expression is, so it be not Christ's. But how comes
Pompey the Great to be a Whig? He was indeed, a Defender of the ancient
established Roman Government; but Caesar was the Whig, who took up Arms
unlawfully to subvert it. Our Liberties and our Religion both are safe, they
are secured to us by the Laws, and those Laws are executed under an established
Government, by a Lawful King. The Defender of our Faith, is the Defender of our
Common Freedom; to Cabal, to Write, to Rail against this Administration, are
all Endeavors to destroy the Government, and to oppose the Succession in any
private man, is a Treasonable Pactice against the Foundation of it. Pompey very
honorably maintained the Liberty of his Country, which was governed by a
Commonwealth: So that there lies no Parallel betwixt his Cause and Mr. Hunts,
except in the bare notion of a Commonwealth, as it is opposed to Monarchy: and
that is the thing he would obliquely slur upon us. Yet on these Premises, he is
for ordering my Lord Chief Justice, to grant out Warrants against all those who
have applauded the Duke of Guise; as if they committed a Riot when they
Clapped: I suppose they paid for their Places, as well as he and his Party did,
who Hissed. If he were not half Distracted, for not being Lord Chief Baron,
methinks he should be Lawyer enough, to advise my Lord Chief Justice better. To
Clap and Hiss are the Privileges of a Freeborn Subject in a Playhouse: they
buy them with their Money, and their Hands and Mouths are their own Property:
It belongs to the Master of the Revels, to see that no Treason or Immorality be
in the Play; but when it is acted, let every man like or dislike freely: not but
that respect should be used too, in the presence of the King, for by his
Permission the Actors are allowed: It Is due to his Person, as he is Sacred, and
to the Successors, as being next related to him: there are opportunities enough
for men to hiss, who are so disposed, in their absence: for when the King is in
sight, though but by accident, a Malefactor is reprieved from death: Yet such
is the Duty, and good manners of these good Subjects, that they forbore not
some rudeness in his Majesty's presence; but when his Royal Highness and his
Court were only there, they pushed it as far as their malice had power; and if
their Party had been more numerous, the Affront had been greater.

The next Paragraph of our Authors, is a Panegyrique on the Duke of Monmouth,
which concerns not me, who am very far from detracting from him: the
Obligations I have had to him, were those, of his Countenance, his Favor, his
good Word, and his Esteem; all which I have likewise had in a greater measure
from his excellent Duchess, the Patroness of my poor unworthy Poetry. If I had
not greater, the fault was never in their want of goodness to me, but in my own
backwardness to ask, which has allways, and I believe will ever keep me from
rising in the World. Let this be enough, with reasonable men, to clear me from
the imputation of an ungrateful man, with which my enemies have most unjustly
taxed me. If I am a mercenary Scribler, the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury
best know: I am sure, they have found me no importunate Solicitor: for I know
my self, I deserved little, and therefore have never desired much. I return
that slander with just disdain on my accusers; it is for men who have ill
Consciences to suspect others: I am resolved to stand or fall with the Cause of
God, my King and Country; never to trouble my self for any railing aspersions
which I have not deserved, and to leave it as a Portion to my Children, that
they had a Father, who durst do his duty, and was neither Covetous nor
Mercenary.

As little am I concerned at that imputation of my back friends, that I have
confessed my self to be put on to write as I do: If they mean this Play in
particular, that is notoriously proved against them to be false: For the rest
of my Writings, my hatred of their Practices and Principles, was cause enough
to expose them, as I have done, and will do more. I do not think as they do;
for if I did, I must think Treason: But I must in conscence write as I do,
because I know, which is more than thinking, that I write for a lawful
established Government against Anarchy, Innovation, and Sedition: But these
Lies (as Prince Harry said to Falstaff) are as gross as he that made them.
More I need not say, for I am accused without witness. I fear not any of their
Evidences; not even him of Salamanca; who though he has disowned his Doctorship
in Spain, yet there are some allow him to have taken a certain degree in Italy;
a Climate they say more proper for his Masculine Constitution. To conclude this
ridiculous Accusation against me, I know but four men in their whole Party to
whom I have spoken for above this year last past; and with them neither but
casually and cursorily. We have been acquaintance of a long standing, many
years before this accursed Plot divided men into several Parties: I dare call
them to witness, whether the most I have at any time said, will amount to more
than this, that I hoped the time would come when these names of Whig and Tory
would cease among us; and that we might live together, as we had done formerly.
I have since this Pamphet met accidentally with two of them; and I am sure they
are so far from being my Accusers, that they have severally owned to me, that
all men who espouse a Party, must expect to blackened by the contrary Side:
that themselves knew nothing of it, nor of the Authors of the Reflections. It
remains therefore to be considered, whether, if I were as much a Knave as they
would make me, I am Fool enough to be guilty of this Charge: and whether they
who raised it, would have made it public, if they had thought I was theirs
inwardly. For it is plain they are glad of worse Scriblers than I am, and
maintain them too, as I could prove, if I envied them their miserable
subsistence. I say no more, but let my Actions speak for me: spectemur agendo,
that is the trial.

Much less am I concerned at the noble name of Bays; that is a Brat so like his
own Father, that he cannot be mistaken for any other body: they might as
reasonably have called Tom Sternhold, Virgil, and the resemblance would have
held as well.

As for Knave and Sycophant, and Rascal, and Impudent, and Devil, and old
Serpent, and a thousand such Goodmorrows, I take them to be only names of
Parties: And could return Murderer and Cheat, and Whig-napper, and Sodomite;
and in short the goodly number of the seven deadly Sins, with all their
Kindred and Relations, which are Names of Parties too; but Saints will be
Saints in spite of Villainy. I believe they would pass themselves upon us for
such a Compound as Mithridate, or Venice-Treacle; as if Whiggism were an
admirable Cordial in the Mass, though the several Ingredients are rank Poisons.

But if I think either Mr. Hunt a Villain, or know any of my Reflectors to be
ungrateful Rogues, I do not owe them so much kindness as to call them so; for I
am satisfied that to prove them either, would but recommend them to their own
Party. Yet if some will needs make a merit of their infamy, and provoke a
Legend of their sordid lives, I think they must be gratified at last; and
though I will not take the Scavengers employment from him, yet I may be
persuaded to point at some men's doors, who have heaps of filth before them. But
this must be when they have a little angered me; for hitherto I am provoked no
further than to smile at them. And indeed, to look upon the whole Faction in a
lump, never was a more pleasant sight than to behold these builders of a new
Babel, how ridiculously they are mixed, and what a rare confusion there is
amongst them. One part of them is carrying Stone and Mortar for the building of
a Meeting House, another sort understand not that Language; they are for
snatching away their Work-fellows materials to set up a Bawdy House: some of
them blaspheme, and others pray; and both I believe with equal godliness at
bottom: some of them are Atheists, some Sectaries, yet ALL True Protestants.
Most of them love all Whores, but her of Babylon. In few words, any man may be
what he will, so he be one of Them. It Is enough to despise the King, to hate
the Duke, and rail at the Succession: after this it is no matter how a man
lives; he is a Saint by infection; he goes along with the Party, has their mark
upon him; his wickedness is no more than frailty; their righteousness is
imputed to him: So that as ignorant rogues go out Doctors when a Prince comes
to an University, they hope at the last day, to take their Degree in a Crowd of
True Protestants, and thrust unheeded into Heaven.

It Is a credit to be rayl'd at by such men as these. The Charter-man in the
very Title Page, where he hangs out the Cloth of the City before his Book,
gives it for his Motto, Si populus vult deeipi; decipiatur; as if he should
have said, you have a mind to be cozened, and the Devil give you good on it: If
I cry a Sirreverence, and you take it for Honey, make the best of your bargain.
For shame, good Christians, can you suffer such a man to sterve, when you see
his design is upon your Purses? He is contented to expose the Ears
representative of your Party on a Pillory, and is in a way of doing you more
service than a worn out Witness, who can hang no body hereafter but himself. He
tells you the Papists clap their hands in the hopes they conceive of the ruin
of your Government: does not this single syllable YOUR deserve a Pention, if he
can prove the Government to be Yours, and that the King has nothing to do in
your Republic? he continues, as if that were as sure and certain to Them, as
it is to Us, without doubt, that they (the Papists) once fired the City, just
as certain in your own Consciences. I wish the Papists had no more to answer
for, than that accusation: pray let it be put to the Vote, and resolved upon
the question, by your whole Party, that the North-east Wind, is not only
ill-affected to Man and Beast, but is also a Tory or Tantivy Papist in
Masquerade. I am satisfied, not to have so much art left me as to frame any
thing agreeable, or verisimilar, but it is plain that he has, and therefore, as
I ought in justice, I resign my Laurel, and my Bays too, to Mr. Hunt; it is he
sets up for the Poet now; and has the only art to amuse and to deceive the
people. You may see how profound his knowledge is in Poetry; for he tells you
just before, that my Heroes are commonly such Monsters as Theseus and Hercules;
renowned throughout all Ages for destroying. Now Theseus and Hercules you know
have been the Heroes of all Poets, and have been renowned through all Ages, for
destroying Monsters, for succouring the Distressed, and for putting to death
inhumane arbitrary Tyrants. Is this your Oracle? If he were to write the Acts
and Monuments of Whig Heroes, I find they should be quite contrary to mine:
destroyers indeed, but of a Lawful Government; Murderers, but of their fellow
Subjects; Lovers as Hercules was of Hylas; with a journey at last to Hell, like
that of Theseus.

But mark the wise Consequences of our Author. I have not, he says, so much art
left me to make any thing agreeable, or verisimilar, wherewith to amuse or
deceive the people: and yet in the very next Paragraph, my Province is to
corrupt the Manners of the Nation, and lay waste their Morals, and my
endeavors are more happily applied, to extinguish the little remainders of the
Virtue of the Age. Now I am to perform all this, it seems, without making any
thing verisimilar or agreeable: Why, Pharaoh never set the Israelites such a
Task, to build Piramids without Brick or Straw. If the Fool knows it not,
verisimilitude and agreeableness, are the very Tools to do it; but I am willing
to disclaim them both, rather than to use them to so ill purpose as he has done.

Yet even this their celebrated Writer, knows no more of Style and English,
than the Northern Dedicator. As if Dullness and Clumsiness were fatal to the
Name of TOM. It Is true, he is a Fool in three Languages more than the Poet, for
they say, he understands Latin, Greek and Hebrew, from all which, to my
certain knowledge, I acquit the other. Og may write against the King if he
pleases, so long as he Drinks for him; and his Writings will never do the
Government so much harm, as his Drinking does it good: for true Subjects, will
not be much perverted by his Libels; but the Wine Duties rise considerably by
his Claret. He has often called me an Atheist in Print, I would believe more
charitably of him; and that he only goes the broad way, because the other is
too narrow for him. He may see by this, I do not delight to meddle with his
course of Life, and his Immoralities, though I have a long Bead-roll of them. I
have hitherto contented my self with the Ridiculous part of him, which is
enough in all conscience to employ one man: even without the story of his late
fall at the Old Devil, where he broke no Ribbs, because the hardness of the
Stairs could reach no Bones; and for my part, I do not wonder how he came to
fall, for I have always known him heavy; the Miracle is, how he got up again. I
have heard of a Sea-Captain as fat as he, who to escape Arrests, would lay
himself flat upon the ground, and let the Bailiffs carry him to Prison, if they
could. If a Messenger or two, nay, we may put in three or four, should come, he
has friendly Advertisement how to escape them. But to leave him, who is not
worth any further consideration, now I have done laughing at him, Would every
man knew his own Tallent, and that they who are only born for drinking, would
let both Poetry and Prose alone.

I am weary with traceing the Absurdities and Mistakes of our great Lawyer,
some of which indeed are wilful; as where he calls the Trimmers, the more
moderate sort of Tories. It seems those Polliticians are odious to both sides;
for neither own them to be theirs. We know them, and so does he too in his
Conscience, to be secret Whigs, if they are any thing. But now the designs of
Whiggism are openly discovered, they tack about to save a Stake, that is, they
will not be villains to their own ruin. While the Government was to be
destroyed, and there was probability of compassing it, no men were so violent
as they; but since their Fortunes are in hazard by the Law, and their Places at
Court by the Kings displeasure, they pull in their horns, and talk more
peaceably; in order, I suppose, to their vehemence on the right side, if they
were to be believed. For in laying of Colors, they observe a Medium; Black and
white are too far distant, to be placed directly by one another, without some
shadowings to soften their contrarieties. It Is Mariana I think (but am not
certain) that makes the following relation; and let the noble Family of
Trimmers, read their own Fortune in it. Don Pedro, King of Castile, Sirnam'd
the Cruel, who had been restored by the Valor of our Edward the Black Prince,
was finally dispossessed by Don Henry the Bastard, and he enjoyed the Kingdom
quietly, till his Death; which, when he felt approaching, he called his Son to
him, and gave him this his last Counsel. I have, said he, gained this Kingdon,
which I leave you, by the Sword; for the Right of Inheritance was in Don Pedro;
but the favor of the People, who hated my Brother for his Tyranny, was to me
instead of Title. You are now to be the Peaceable Possessor of of what I have
unjustly gotten: and your Subjects are composed of these three sorts of men.
One Party espoused my Brothers Quarrel, which was the undoubted Lawful Cause;
those, though they were my Enemies, were men of Principle and Honor: cherish
them, and exalt them into Places of trust about you, for in them you may
confide safely, who prized their Fidelity above their Fortune. Another sort,
are they who fought my Cause against Don Pedro, to those you are indeed
obliged, because of the accidental good they did me, for they intended only
their private Benefit, and helped to raise me, that I might afterward promote
them: You may continue them in their Offices, if you please; but trust them no
farther than you are forced, for what they did, was against their Conscience.
But there is a third sort, which during the whole Wars, were Neuters; let them
be crushed on all occasions, for their business was only their own Security.
They had neither Courage enough to engage on my Side, nor Conscience enough to
help their Lawful Sovereign: therefore let them be made Examples, as the worst
sort of interessed men, which certainly are Enemies to both, and would be
profitable to neither.

I have only a dark remembrance of this Story, and have not the Spanish Author
by me, but I think, I am not much mistaken in the main of it: and whether true
or false, the Counsel given, I am sure, is such, as ought in common prudence,
to be practiced against Trimmers, whether the Lawful or Unlawful Cause prevail.
Loyal men may justly be displeased with this Party, not for their Moderation,
as Mr. Hunt insinuates; but because, under that Masque of seeming mildness,
there lies hidden either a deep treachery, or at best, an interressed
lukewarmness. But he runs riot into almost treasonable Expressions, as if
Trimmers were hated because they are not perfectly wicked, or perfectly
deceived, of the Catiline make, bold, and without understanding, that can
adhaere to men that publicly profess Murders, and applaud the design: By all
which villainous names, he opprobriously calls His Majesty's most loyal
Subjects; as if Men must be perfectly wicked who endeavor to support a lawful
Government; or perfectly deceived, who on no occasion dare take up arms against
their Sovereign: as if acknowledging the right of Succession, and resolving to
maintain it in the Line, were to be in a Catiline Conspiracy; and at last,
(which is ridiculous enough, after so much serious Treason) as if to clap the
Duke of Guise, were to adhaere to men that publicly profess Murders, and
applaud the design of the Assassinating Poets.

But together with his Villainies, pray let his incohaerences be observed. He
commends the Trimmers (at least tacitly excuses them) for men of some
moderation; and this in opposition to the instruments of wickedness of the
Catiline-make, that are resolute and forward, and without consideration. But he
forgets all this in the next twenty lines; for there he gives them their own,
and tells them roundly, in internecino bello medii pro hostibus habentur.
Neutral men are Traitors, and assist by their indifferency to the destruction
of the Government. The plain English of his meaning, is this; while matters are
only in dispute, and in machination, he is contented they should be moderate;
but when once the Faction can bring about a Civil War, then they are Traitors,
if they declare not openly for them.

But it is not, he says, the Duke of Guise, who is to be assassinated, a
turbulent wicked and haughty Courtier, but an innocent and gentle Prince: By
his favor, our Duke of Guise, was neither Innocent nor Gentle, nor a Prince of
the Blood Royal, though he pretended to descend from Charlemaign, and a
Genealogy was printed to that purpose, for which the Author was punished, as he
deserved; witness Davila, and the Journals of Henry the Third, where the Story
is at large related. Well, who is it then? why, it is a Prince who has no fault,
but that he is the Kings Son: Then he has no fault by consequence; for I am
certain, that is no fault of his. The rest of the Complement, is so silly, and
so fulsome, as if he meant it all in ridicule. And to conclude the Jest, he
says, that the best People of England, have no other way left, to show their
Loyalty to the King, their Religion and Government, in long intervals of
Parliament, than by prosecuting his Son, for the sake of the King, and his own
merit, with all the Demonstrations of the highest esteem. Yes, I can tell them
one other way to express their Loyalty, which is, to obey the King, and to
respect his Brother, as the next Lawful Successor; their Religion commands them
both, and the Government is secured in so doing. But why in Intervals of
Parliament? How are the more obliged to honor the Kings Son out of Parliament,
than in it? And why this prosecution of Love for the Kings Sake? Has he ordered
more Love to be shown to one Son, than to another? Indeed, his own quality, is
cause sufficient for all men to respect him, and I am of their number, who
truly honor him, and who wish him better than this miserable Sycophant; for I
wish him, from his Fathers Royal Kindness what Justice can make him, which is a
greater Honor, than the Rabble can confer upon him.

But our Author finds, that Commendation is no more his Talent, than Flattery
was that of Esop's Ass; and therefore falls immediately, from pawing with his
fore-feet, and grinning upon one Prince, to downright braying against another.

He says I have not used my Patron Duke much better: for I have put him under a
most dismal and unfortunate Character, of a Successor, excluded from the Crown
by Act of State, for his Religion; who fought his way to the Crown, changed his
Religion, and died by the hand of a Roman Assassinate.

If it please his Royal Highness to be my Patron, I have reason to be proud of
it; because he never yet forsook any man, whom he has had the goodness to own
for his. But how have I put him under an unfortunate Character? the Authors of
the Reflections, and our John a Nokes, have not laid their noddles together
about this Accusation. For it is their business to prove the King of Navarre to
have been a most successful, magnanimous, gentle, and grateful Prince: in which
Character they have followed the stream of all Historians. How then happens
this jarring amongst friends, that the same man is put under such dismal
circumstances on one side, and so fortunate on the other, by the Writers of the
same Party? The answer is very plain, that they take the cause by several
handles. They who will not have the Duke resemble the King of Navarre, have
magnified the Character of that Prince, to debase his Royal Highness; and
therein done what they can to show the disparity. Mr. Hunt, who will have it to
be the Dukes Character, has blackened that King as much as he is able, to show
the likeness. Now this would be ridiculous pleading at a Bar, by Lawyers
retained for the same Cause; and both sides would call each other fools,
because the Jury betwixt them would be confounded, and perhaps the Judges too.

But this it is to have a bad Cause, which puts men of necessity upon knavery;
and that knavery is commonly found out. Well Mr. Hunt has in another place
confessed himself to be in passion, and that is the reason he is so grossly
mistaken in opening of the Cause. For first the King of Navarre was neither
under dismal, nor unfortunate circumstances. Before the end of that very
Sentence, our Lawyer has confessed that he fought his way to the Crown; that
is, he gloriously vanquished all his Rebels, and happily possessed his
Inheritance many years after he had regained it. In the next place, he was
never excluded from the Crown by Act of State. He changed his Religion indeed,
but not till he had almost weathered the Storm, recovered the best part of his
Estate, and gained some glorious Victories in pitched Battles; so that his
changing cannot without injustice be attributed to his fear. Monsieur Chiverny,
in his Memoirs of those times plainly tells us, that he solemnly promised to
his Predecessor Henry the Third, then dying, that he would become a Romanist;
and Davila, though he says not this directly, yet denies it not. By whose hands
Henry the fourth died, is notoriously known; but it is indiviously urged, both
by Mr. Hunt and the Reflectors: for we may, to our shame, remember, that a King
of our own Country was barbarously murdered by his Subjects, who professed the
same Religion; though I believe that neither Jaques Clement, nor Ravillac, were
better Papists, than the Independents and Presbyterians were Protestants: So
that their Argument only proves that there are Rogues of all Religions: Iliacos
intra muros peccatur and extra. But Mr. Hunt follows his blow again, that I
have offered a Justification of an Act of Exclusion against a Popish Successor
in a Protestant Kingdom, by remembering what was done against the King of
Navarre, who was de facto excluded by an Act of State. My Gentleman, I
perceive, is very willing to call that an Act of Exclusion, and an Act of
State, which is only in our Language, called a Bill: for Henry the third could
never be gained to pass it, though it was proposed by the three Estates at
Blois. The Reflectors are more modest; for they profess, (though I am afraid it
is somewhat against the grain) that a Vote of the House of Commons is not an
Act: But the times are turned upon them, and they dare speak no other Language.
Mr. Hunt indeed is a bold Republican, and tells you the bottom of their
meaning. Yet why should it make the courage of his Royal Highness quail, to
find himself under this representation? which by our Authors favor, is neither
dismal, nor disastrous. Henry the Fourth escaped this dreadful Machine of the
League: I say dreadful; for the three Estates were at that time composed
generally of Guisards, factious, hot headed rebellious interressed men: The
King in possession, was but his Brother-in-Law; and at that time publicly his
Enemy; for the King of Navarre was then in arms against him: and yet the sense
of Common Justice, and the good of his People so prevailed, that he withstood
the Project of the States, which he also knew was levelled at himself; for had
the Exclusion proceeded, he had been immediately laid by, and the Lieutenancy
of France conferred on Guise: after which the Rebel would certainly have put up
his Title for the Crown. In the Case of his Royal Highness, only one of the
three Estates have offered at the Exclusion; and have been constantly opposed
by the other two, and by his Majesty: Neither is it any way probable, that the
like will ever be again attempted: For the fatal Consequences, as well as the
Illegality of that Design, are seen through already by the People. So that
instead of offering a justification of an Act of Exclusion, I have exposed a
rebellious, impious, and fruitless contrivance tending to it. If we look on the
Parliament of Paris, when they were in their right wits, before they were
intoxicated by the League, (at least wholly) we shall find them addressing to
King Henry the third in another Key, concerning the King of Navarr's
Succession, though he was at that time (as they called it) a relapsed
Heretic. And to this purpose I will quote a passage out of the Journals of
Henry the Third, so much magnified by my Adversaries.

Toward the end of September, 1585. there was published at Paris, a Bull of
Excommunication, against the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde: The
Parliament of Paris, made their Remonstrance to the King upon it, which was
both grave, and worthy of the Place they held, and of the Authority they have
in this Kingdom. Saying, for conclusion, that their Court had found the Style
of this Bull, so full of Innovation, and so distant from the Modesty of ancient
Popes, that they could not understand in it, the voice of an Apostles
Successor; forasmuch, as they found not in their Records, nor in the search of
all Antiquity, that the Princes of France, had ever been subject to the Justice
or Jurisdiction of the Pope, and they could not take it into consideration,
till first he made appear the Right which he pretended in the Translation of
Kingdoms, established and ordained by Almighty God, before the Name of Pope was
heard of in the World. It Is plain by this, that the Parliament of Paris,
acknowledged an inherent Right of Succession in the King of Navarre, though of
a contrary Religion to their own: And though after the Duke of Guises Murder
at Blois, the City of Paris revolted from their Obedience to their King,
pretending that he was fallen from the Crown, by reason of that and other
Actions, with which they charged him; yet the sum of all their Power to
renounce him, and create the Duke of Mayenne Lieutenant General, depended
ultimately on the Popes authority; which as you see, but three years before,
they had peremptorily denied.

The College of Sorbonne began the Dance, by their Determination, that the
Kingly Right was forfeited; and stripping him of all his Dignities, they called
him plain Henry de Valois: after this, says my Author, sixteen Rascals (by
which he means the Council, of that Number) having administered the Oath of
Government to the Duke of Mayenne, to take in quality of Lieutenant General of
the Estate and Crown of France; the same ridiculous Dignity, was confirmed to
him, by an imaginary Parliament, the true Parliament being detained Prisoners,
in diverse of the City-Gaols, and two new Seals were ordered to be immediately
made, with this Inscription: The Seal of the Kingdom of France. I need not
enlarge on this Relation, it is evident from hence, that the Sorbonists were the
Original, and our Schismatiques in England, were the Copiers of Rebellion; that
Paris began, and London followed.

The next Lines of my Author are, that a Gentleman of Paris, made the Duke of
Mayenne 's Picture to be drawn, with a Crown Imperial on his Head, and I have
heard of an English Nobleman, who has at this day, the Picture of Old Oliver,
with this Motto underneath it, Vtinam vixeris. All this while, this cannot be
reckoned an Act of State, for the Deposing King Henry the Third; because it was
an Act of Ouvert Rebellion in the Parisians: neither could the holding of the
three Estates at Paris, afterward, by the same Duke of Mayenne, devolve any
Right on him, in prejudice of King Henry the Fourth; though those pretended
States, declared his Title void, on the account of his Religion: because those
Estates could neither be called nor holden, but by and under the Authority of
the Lawful King. It would take more time than I have allowed, for this
Vindication, or I could easily trace from the French History, what Misfortunes
attended France, and how near it was to Ruin, by the Endeavors to alter the
Succession. For first, it was actually Dismembered, the Duke of Merceur setting
up a Principality in the Duchy of Bretagne, Independent of the Crown: the Duke
of Mayenne had an evident design to be elected King, by the favor of the
People and the Pope: the young Dukes of Guise and of Nemours, aspired with the
interest of the Spaniards, to be chosen, by their Marriage with the Infanta
Izabella. The Duke of Lorrain, was for cantling out some part of France, which
lay next his Territories; and the Duke of Savoy, had before the Death of Henry
the Third, actually possessed himself of the Marquisate of Saluces. But above
all, the Spaniards fomented these Civil Wars, in hopes to reduce that
flourishing Kingdom, under their own Monarchy. To as many, and as great
Mischiefs, should we be evidently subject; if we should madly engage our
selves, in the like Practices of altering the Succession, which our Gracious
King, in his Royal Wisdom well forsaw; and has cut up that accursed Project by
the Roots; which will render the memory of his Justice and Prudence, Immortal
and Sacred to future Ages, for having not only preserved our present quiet, but
secured the Peace of our Posterity.

It Is clearly manifest, that no Act of State passed, to the Exclusion of
either, the King of Navarre, or of Henry the Fourth; consider him, in either of
the two circumstances: but Oracle Hunt, taking this for granted, would prove a
fortiori, that if a Protestant Prince, were actually excluded from a Popish
Kingdom, then a Popish Successor is more reasonably to be excluded from a
Protestant Kingdom; because, says he, a Protestant Prince, is under no
Obligation to destroy his Popish Subjects, but a Popish Prince, is to destroy
his Protestant Subjects: upon which bare supposition, without farther Proof, he
calls him insufferable Tyrant, and the worst of Monsters.

Now I take the matter quite otherwise, and bind my self to maintain, that
there is not, nor can be any Obligation, for a King to destroy his Subjects of
a contrary Persuasion, to the established Religion of his Country: for quatenus
Subjects, of what Religion soever, he is infallibly bound to preserve and
cherish, and not to destroy them: and this is the first duty of a Lawful
Sovereign, as such, antecedent to any tie or consideration of his Religion.
Indeed, in those Countries where the Inquisition is introduced, it goes harder
with Protestants, and the reason is manifest, because the Protestant Religion
has not gotten footing there, and severity is the means to keep it out: But to
make this instance, reach England, our Religion must not only be changed (which
in it self, is almost impossible to imagine) but the Council of Trent received
and the Inquisition admitted, which many Popish Countries have rejected. I
forget not the Cruelties, which were exercised in Queen Mary's time, against
the Protestants; neither do I any way excuse them: But it follows not, that
every Popish Successor should take example by them, for every ones Conscience
of the same Religion, is not guided by the same Dictates in his Government:
Neither does it follow, that if one be cruel, another must; especially, when
there is a stronger Obligation, and greater Interest to the contrary: For if a
Popish King in England should be bound to destroy his Protestant People, I
would ask the Question, over whom he meant to Reign afterward? and how many
Subjects would be left?

In Queen Mary's time, the Protestant Religion had scarcely taken root: And it
is reasonable to be supposed, that she found the number of Papists, equalling
that of the Protestants, at her entrance to the Kingdom; especially if we
reckon into the account those who were the Trimmers of the times; I mean such,
who privately were Papists, though under her Protestant Predecessor they
appeared otherwise. Therefore her difficulties in persecuting her reformed
Subjects, were far from being so insuperable, as ours now are, when the
strength and number of the Papists is so very inconsiderable. They who cast in
the Church of England as ready to embrace Popery, are either Knaves enough to
know they lie, or Fools enough not to have considered the Tenants of that
Church, which are diametrically opposite to Popery; and more so than any of the
Sects.

Not to insist on the quiet and security, which Protestant Subjects at this day
enjoy in some parts of Germany, under Popish Princes; where I have been
assured, that Mass is said, and a Lutheran Sermon preached in different parts
of the fame Church, on the same day, without disturbance on either side; nor on
the Privileges granted by Henry the Fourth of France to his Party, after he
had forsaken their Opinions, which they quietly possessed for a long time after
his death:

The French Histories are full of Examples, manifestly proving, that the
fiercest of their Popish Princes have not thought themselves bound to destroy
their Protestant Subjects: and the several Edicts granted under them, in favor
of the Reformed Religion, are pregnant instances of this truth. I am not much
given to Quotations, but Davila lies open for every man to read. Tolerations,
and free exercise of Religion, granted more amply in some, more restraindly in
others, are no sign that those Princes held themselves obliged in Conscience to
destroy men of a different Persuasion. It will be said those Tolerations were
gained by force of Arms: In the first place it is no great credit to the
Protestant Religion, that the Protestants in France were actually Rebels. But
the truth is, they were only Geneva Protestants, and their opinions were far
distant from those of the Church of England, which teaches passive obedience to
all her Sons, and not to propagate Religion by Rebellion. But it is further to
be considered, that those French Kings, though Papists, thought the
preservation of their Subjects, and the public Peace, were to be considered,
before the gratification of the Court of Rome; and though the number of the
Papists, exceeded that of the Protestants, in the proportion of three to one;
though the Protestants were always beaten when they fought, and though the
Popes pressed continually with Exhortations and Threatenings to extirpate
Calvinism, yet Kings thought it enough to continue in their own Religion
themselves, without forcing it upon their Subjects, much less destroying them
who professed another. But it will be objected those Edicts of Toleration were
not kept on the Papists side: They would answer, because the Protestants
stretched their Privileges further than was granted: and that they often
relapsed into Rebellion: But whether or no the Protestants were in fault, I
leave History to determine: it is matter of fact, that they were barbarously
massacred, under the protection of the Public Faith: Therefore to argue
fairly, either an Oath from Protestants is not to be taken by a Popish Prince;
or if taken, ought inviolably to be preserved. For when we oblige our selves to
any one, it is not his person we so much consider, as that of the most high God,
who is called to witness this our action: and it is to him we are to discharge
our Conscience. Neither is there, or can be any tie on humane Society, when
that of an Oath is no more regarded: which being an appeal to God, he is
immediate Judge of it; and Chronicles are not silent how often he has punished
perjured Kings. The instance of Vladislaus King of Hungary, breaking his faith
with Amurath the Turk, at the instigation of Julian the Popes Legate, and his
miserable death ensuing it, shows that even to Infidels, much more to
Christians, that obligation ought to be accounted sacred. And I the rather urge
this, because it is an Argument taken almost verbatim from a Papist, who
accuses Catharine de Medicis for violating her word given to the Protestants
during her Regency of France. What securities in particular we have, that our
own Religion and Liberties would be preserved, though under a Popish
Successor, any one may inform himself at large in a Book lately written by the
Reverend and learned Doctor Hicks, called Jovian, in answer to Julian the
Apostate: in which, that truly Christian Author has satisfied all scruples
which reasonable men can make, and proved that we are in no danger of losing
either; and wherein also, if those assurances should all fail (which is almost
morally impossible) the Doctrine of Passive Obedience is unanswerably
demonstrated: a Doctrine delivered with so much sincerity, and resignation of
spirit, that it seems evident the Assertor of it is ready, if there were
occasion, to seal it with his blood.

I have done with mannerly Mr. Hunt, who is only magni nominis umbra; the most
malicious, and withal, the most incohaerent ignorant Scribler of the whole
Party. I insult not over his misfortunes, though he has himself occasioned
them: and though I will not take his own excuse, that he is in passion, I will
make a better for him; for I conclude him cracked: and if he should return to
England, am charitable enough to wish his only Prison might be Bedlam. This
Apology is truer than that he makes for me: for writing a Play, as I conceive,
is not entering into the Observators Province; neither is it the Observators
manner to confound truth with falsehood, to put out the eyes of People, and
leave them without understanding. The quarrel of the Party to him, is that he
has undeceived the ignorant, and laid open the shameful contrivances of the new
vampt Association: that though he is on the wrong side of life, as he calls it,
yet he pleads not his Age to be Emeritus: that in short, he has left the
Faction as bare of Arguments, as Esops Bird of feathers; and plumed them of all
those fallacies and evasions which they borrowed from Jesuits and Presbyterians.

Now for my Templar and Poet in association for a Libel, like the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter in a fiery Sign: what the one wants in Wit, the other
must supply in Law. As for Malice, their quota's are indifferently well
adjusted: the rough Draught I take for granted, is the Poets, the finishings
the Lawyers. They begin, that in order to one Mr. Friend's commands, one of
them went to see the Play. This was not the Poet, I am certain, for no body saw
him there, and he is not of a Size to be concealed. But the Mountain, they say,
was delivered of a Mouse: I have been Gossip to many such Labors of a dull fat
Scribler, where the Mountain has been bigger, and the Mouse less. The next
Sally, is on the City Elections, and a Charge is brought against my Lord Mayor,
and the two Sheriffs, for excluding true Electors. I have heard, that a Whig
Gentleman of the Temple, hired a Livery-Gown, to give his Voice among the
Companies at Guild Hall: let the question be put, whether or no, he were a true
Elector? Then their own Juries are commended from several Topiques; they are
the Wisest, Richest, and most Conscientious: to which is answered Ignoramus.
But our Juries give most prodigious and unheard of Damages. Hithero there is
nothing but Boys-play in our Authors: My Mill grinds Pepper and Spice, your
Mill grinds Rats and Mice. They go on, if I may be allowed to judge (as men
that do not Poetize, may be Judges of Wit, Humane nature and Common Decencies:)
So then the Sentence is begun with I: there is but one of them puts in for a
Judges Place: that is he in the Gray: but presently it is men; two more in
Buckram, would be Judges too. Neither of them it seems, Poetize; that is true,
but both of them are in at Rhyme Doggrel; witness the Song against the Bishops,
and the Tunbridge-Ballad. By the way, I find all my Scribbling Enemies have a
mind to be Judges, and Chief Barons: proceed Gentlemen. This Play (as I am
informed by some, who have a nearer Communication with the Poets and the
Players, than I have.) Which of the two Sosia's is it that now speaks? If the
Lawyer, it is true, he has but little Communication with the Players: if the
Poet, the Players have but little Communication with him. For it is not long
ago, he said to some body, By G -- my Lord, those Tory-rogues will act. none of
my Plays. Well, but the Accusation, that this Play was once written by another,
and then 'twas called the Parisian Massacre: Such a Play, I have heard indeed
was written; but I never saw it. Whether this be any of it or no, I can say no
more, than for my own part of it. But pray, who denies the unparalleld villainy
of the Papists, in that bloody Massacre? I have enquired, why it was not Acted,
and heard it was stopped, by the interposition of an Ambassador, who was willing
to save the Credit of his Country, and not to have the Memory of an Action so
barbarous, revived. But that I tempted my Friend to alter it, is a notorious
Whiggism to save the broader Word. The Sicilian Vespers I have had Plotted by
me above these seven years: The Story of it, I found under borow'd Names in
Giraldo Cinthio; but the Rape in my Tragedy of Amboyna, was so like it, that I
forbore the Writing. But what had this to do with Protestants? for the
Massacres and the Massacred were all Papists.

But it is observable, they say, that though the Massacre could not be acted, as
it was first written against Papists, yet when it was turned upon Protestants,
it found reception.

Now all is come out, the Scandal of the Story, turns at last upon the
Government: that Patronises Popish Plays, and forbids Protestant. Ours is to be
a Popish Play, why? because it exposes the Villainy of Sectaries and Rebels?
Prove them first to be Protestants, and see what you will get by it when you
have done? your Party are certainly the men whom the Play attaques; and so far
I will help you: the Designs and Actions represented in the Play, are such as
you have Copyed from the League; for though you have wickedness enough, yet you
wanted the Wit to make a new Contrivance. But for shame, while you are carrying
on such palpable villainy, do not assume the name of Protestants. You will tell
us, you are friends to the Government, and the Kings best Subjects; but all the
while, you are aspersing both it and him. Who shall be Judges, whether you are
Friends or not? the Government or you? Have not all Rebels always sung the same
Song? Was ever Thief or Murderer Fool enough to plead Guilty? For your Love
and Loyalty to the King, they who mean him best amongst you, are no better
Subjects than Duke Trinculo: They would be content he should be Viceroy, so
they may be Viceroys over him.

The next Accusation is particular to me, that I the said Bays, would falsely
and felloniously, have robbed Not. Lee, of his share in the Reputation of
Oedipus: Now I am Culprit; I writ the first and third Acts of Oedipus, and drew
the Scenary of the whole Play: when ever I have owned a farther Proportion, let
my Accusers speak: this was meant mischievously, to set us two at variance: Who
is the old Serpent and Satan now? When my Friends help my barren Fancy, I am
thankful for it: I do not use to receive assistance, and afterward
ungratefully disown it.

Not long after, Exemplary Punishment is due to me, for this most devilish
Parallel. It Is a devilish one indeed; but who can help it, if I draw Devils
like one another, the fault is in themselves for being so: I neither made their
Horns nor Claws, nor cloven Feet: I know not what I should have done, unless I
had drawn the Devil a handsome proper Gentleman, like the Painter in the Fable,
to have made a Friend of him; but I ought to be exemplarily punished for it;
when the Devil gets uppermost, I shall expect it. In the mean time, let
Magistrates (that respect their Oaths and Office) which words you see, are put
into a Parenthesis, as (if God help us) we had none such now; let them put the
Law in execution, against lewd Scriblers, the Mark will be too fair upon a
Pillory, for a Turnip or a rotten Egg to miss it. But for my part, I have not
Malice enough, to wish him so much harm; not so much as to have a Hair of his
head perish, much less, that one whole side of it should be dismantled: I am no
Informer who writ such a Song, or such a Libel, if the Dullness betrays him not,
he is safe for me. And may the same dullness preserve him ever from public
Justice: it is a sufficient thick Mad-wall, betwixt him and Law: it is his
Guardian Angel, that protects him from Punishment, because in spite of him, he
cannot deserve it. It Is that which preserves him innocent, when he means most
mischief; and makes him a Saint, when he intends to be a Devil. He can never
offend enough, to need the Mercy of the Government; for it is beholding to him,
that he writes against it: and he never offers at a Satyr, but he converts his
Readers to the contrary pinion.

Some of the succeeding Pargraphs, are intended for very Ciceronian: There the
Lawyer flourishes in the Pulpit, and the Poet stands in Socks amongst the Crowd
to hear him. Now for Narration, Refutation, Calumniation, Aggravation, and the
whole Artillery of Tropes and Figures, to defend the Proceedings at Guild Hall:
the most minute circumstances of the Elections, are described so lively, that a
man, who had not heard he was there in a Livery-Gown, might suspect, there was
a quorum pars magna fui in the Case: and multitudes of Electors, just as well
qualified as himself, might give their Party the greater Number: but throw back
their guilt Shillings, which were told for Guinnies, and their true Sum was
considerably less. Well, there was no Rebellion at this time, therefore says my
Adversary, there was no Parallel. It Is true, there was no Rebellion; but
whoever told him, that I intended this Parallel so far? if the likeness had
been throughout, I may guess by their good will to me, that I had never lived
to write it. But to show his mistake, which I believe wilful, the Play was
wholly written a month or two before the last Election of the Sheriffs. Yet, it
seems there was some kind of Prophecy in the Case: and till the Faction gets
clear of a Riot, a part of the Comparison will hold even there; yet, if he
pleases to remember, there has been a King of England forced by the Inhabitants
from his Imperial Town. It Is true, the Son has had better fortune than the
Father; but the reason is, that he has now a stronger Party in the City, than
his Enemies: the Government of it is secured in Loyal and Prudent Hands, and
the Party is to weak to push their designs farther. They rescued not their
beloved Sheriffs, at a time (he tells you) when they had most important use of
them. What the importancy of the occasion was, I will not search; it is well if
their own Consciences will acquit them. But let them be never so much beloved,
their Adherents knew it was a Lawful Authority that sent them to the Tower; and
an Authority, which to their sorrow, they were not able to resist: so that if
four men guarded them without disturbance, and to the contempt of their
strength, at broad noon day, and at full Exchange time, it was no more their
honesty, to stand looking on with their hands in their Pockets, than it is of a
small Band of Robbers, to let a Caravan go by, which is too strong for them to
assault.

After this, I am called after the old rate, loose and infamous Scribler, and
it is well I escape so cheap: bear your good fortune moderately, Mr. Poet: for as
loose and as infamous as I am, if I had written for your Party, your Pention
would have been cut off, as useless. But they must take up with Settle, and
such as they can get: Bartholomew-Fair Writers, and Bartholomew-Close Printers;
there is a famine of Wit amongst them, they are forced to give unconscionable
rates, and after all to have only Carrion for their money.

Then I am an ignorant fellow for not knowing there were no Juries in Paris: I
do not remember I have written any such thing: but whoever did, I am confident
it was not his ignorance. Perhaps he had a mind to bring the case a little
nearer home: if they had not Juries in Paris, we had them from the Normans, who
were Frenchmen: and as you managed them, we had as good have had none in
London: Let it satisfy you we have them now; and some of your loose and
infamous Scriblers may come to understand it a little better.

The next is the Justification of a Noble Peer deceased: the Case is known, and
I have no quarrel to his memory: let it sleep; he is now before another Judge.
Immediately after I am said to have intended an abuse to the House of Commons;
which is called by our Authors, the most August Assembly of Europe. They are to
prove I have abused that House; but it is manifest They have lessened the House
of Lords, by owning the Commons to be the more August Assembly. It Is an House
chosen (they say) by every Protestant who has a considerable Inheritance in
England; which word considerable signifies forty shillings per annum of free
Land. For the interest of the loyal Party, so much undervalued by our Authors,
they have long ago confessed in print, that the Nobility and Gentry have
disowned them: and the Yeomanry have at last considered, queis haec consevimus
arva? they have had enough of unlawful and arbitrary power; and know to their
cost, what an August Assembly they had once without a King and House of Peers.

But now they have me in a burning scent, and run after me full cry: Was ever
such license connived at yet, in an impious Libeller and Scribler, that the
Succession, so solemn a matter, that is not fit to be debated of but in
Parliament, should be profaned so far as to be played with on the Stage?

Hold a little, Gentlemen, hold a little (as one of your fellow Citizens says
in the Duke of Guise:) Is it so unlawful for me to argue for the Succession in
the right Line upon the Stage; and is it so very lawful for Mr. Hunt, and the
Scriblers of your Party, to oppose it in their Libels off the Stage? Is it so
sacred, that a Parliament only is suffered to debate it, and dare you run it
down both in your Discourses and Pamphlets out of Parliament? In conscience
what can you urge against me, which I cannot return an hundred times heavier on
you? And by the way you tell me, that to affirm the contrary to this, is a
Praemunire against the Statute of the 13. of Eliz. If such a Praemunire be,
pray answer me who has most incurred it? In the mean time do me the favor to
look into the Statute-Book, and see if you can find the Statute: you know your
selves, or you have been told it, that this Statute is virtually repealed, by
that of the first of King James, acknowledging his immediate lawful and
undoubted right to this Imperial Crown, as the next lineal Heir: those last
words are an implicit anti-declaration to the Statute in Queen Elizabeth, which
for that reason is now omitted in our Books. The lawful Authority of an House
of Commons I acknowledge; but without fear and trembling, as my Reflectors
would have it: For why should I fear my Representatives? they are summoned to
consult about the public good, and not to frighten those who chose them. It Is
for you to tremble who libel the supreme Authority of the Nation. But we
knavish Coxcombs and Villains are to know, say my Authors, that a Vote is the
opinion of that House. Lord help our understandings that know not this without
their telling! What Englishman do you think does not honor his
Representatives, and wish a Parliament void of heats and animosities, to secure
the quiet of the Nation? You cite his Majesty's last Declaration against those
who dare trifle with Parliaments: (a Declaration by the way, which you
endeavored not to have read publicly in Churches, with a threatening to those
that did it.) But we still declare (says his Maje^^^) that no irregularities of
Parliament shall make us out of love with them: Are not you unfortunate Quoters
why now, should you rub up the remembrance of those irregularities mentioned in
that Declaration, which caused, as the King informs us, its dissolution?

The next Paragraph is already answered; it is only a clumsey Commendation of
the D. of M. copied after Mr. Hunt, and a proof that he is unlike the Duke of
Guise.

After having done my drudgery for me, and having most officiously proved that
the English Duke, is no Parallel for the French; which I am sure he is not,
they are next to do their own business, which is, that I meant a Parallel
betwixt Henry the Third, and our most gracious Sovereign. But, as fallacies are
always couched in general Propositions, they plead the whole course of the
Drama, which, they say, seems to insinuate my intentions. One may see to what a
miserable shift they are driven: when, for want of any one instance, to which I
challenge them, they have only to allege, that the Play SEEMS to insinuate it.
I answer, it does not seem, which is a bare Negative to a bare Affirmative; and
then we are just where we were before. Fat Falstaff was never set harder by
the Prince for a Reason, when he answered, that that if Reasons grew as thick
as Black-berries, he would not give one. Well, after long pumping, lest the lie
should appear quite barefaced, they have found, I said, that at Kiug Henry's
Birth, there shone a Regal Star: so there did at King Charles the seconds:
therefore I have made a Parallel betwixt Henry the third, and Charles the
second. A very concluding Sillogism, if I should answer it no farther.

Now let us look upon the Play, the words are in the fo^^th Act. The Conjurer
there is asking his Devil, what Fortune attended his Master, the Guise, and
what the King? The familiar answers concerning the King. He cannot be Deposed,
he may be killed; a violent Fate attends him: but at his Birth, there shone a
Regal Star, (Conj.) My Master had a stronger, (Devil) no not a stronger, but
more Popular. Let the whole Scene (which is one of the best in the Tragedy,
though murdered in the Acting) he read together; and it will be as clear as
daylight, that the Devil gave an Astrological account of the French Kings
Horoscope: that the Regal Star, then culminating, was the Sun in the tenth
House or Mid-heaven; which Caeteris paribus is a Regal Nativity in that Art.
The rest of the Scene confirms what I have said: for the Devil has taken the
Position of the Heaven's, or Scheam of the World, at the point of the Suns
entrance into Aries: I dispute not here the Truth or Lawfulness of that Art;
but it is usual with Poets, especially with the Italians, to mix Astrology in
their Poems: Chawcer, amongst us, is frequent in it; but this Revolution
particularly I have taken out of Luigi Pulci, and there is one almost the same
in Boiardo's Orlando Inamorato. Now if these Poets knew, that a Star were to
appear at our Kings Birth, they were better Prophets than Nostradamus, who has
told us nothing of it. Yet this they say is Treason with a Witness, and one of
the Crimes for which they condemned me to be hanged drawn and quartered: I find
they do not believe me to be one of their Party at the bottom, by their
charitable wishes to me; and am proud enough, to think I have done them some
little mischief, because they are so desirous to be rid of me. But if Jack
Ketch must needs have the handling of us Poets, let him begin first where he
may take the deepest Say: let me be hanged, but in my turn; for I am sure I am
neither the fattest Scribler nor the worst; I Will be judged by their own Party.
But for all our Comforts, the days of hanging are a little out of date: and I
hope there will be no more Treason with a Witness, or Witnesses; for now there
is no more to be got by Swearing, and the Market is over-stock'd besides.

But are you in earnest, when you say I have made Henry the Third fearful,
weak, bloody, perfidious, hypocritical and fawning in the Play? I am sure an
unbiased Reader will find a more favorable image of him in the Tragedy; what
ever he was out of it. You would not have told a lie so shameless, but that you
were resolved to second it with a worse; that I made a Parallel of that Prince.
And now it comes to my turn, pray let me ask you, why you spend three Pages and
a half, in heaping up all the villainies true or false, which you can rake
together, to blast his memory? Why is all this pains taken, to expose the
Person of King Henry the Third? are you Leaguers, or Covenanters, or
Associators? What has the poor dead man done to nettle you? Were his Rebels
your Friends, or your Relations? Were your Norman Ancestors of any of those
Families, which were Conspirators in the Play? I smell a Rat in this business:
Henry the Third is not taken thus to task for nothing. Let me tell you, this is
little better than an implicit confession of the Parallel which I intended.
This Gentleman of Valois sticks in your stomachs: and though I do not defend
his Proceedings in the States, any otherwise, than by the inevitable necessity
which caused them, yet acknowledging his Crime, does not extenuate their Guilt,
that forced him to it. 'Twas bad on both sides, but the Revenge was not so
wicked as the Treason: for 'twas a voluntary act of theirs, and a compelled one
of his. The short on it is, he took a violent course to cut up the Covenant by
the Roots; and there is your quarrel to him.

Now for a long winded Panegyrique of the King of Navarre: and here I am sure
they are in earnest, when they take such over pains, to prove there is no
likeness, where they say I intended it. The Hero at whom their malice is
levelled, does but laugh at it I believe: And amongst the other virtues of that
Predecessor, wants neither his Justice nor his Clemency, to forgive all the
Heads of the League, as fast as they submit: As for obliging them, (which our
Authors would fain hook in for an Ingredient) let them be satisfied, that no
more Enemies are to be bought off with Places and Preferments: the Trial which
has been made in two Kings Reigns, will warn the Family from so fruitless and
dangerous an Expedient. The rest is already answered, in what I have said to
Mr. Hunt; but I thank them by the way, for their instance of the fellow, whom
the King of Navarre had pardoned, and done good to, yet he would not love him:
for that Story reaches home somewhere.

I must make haste, to get out of hearing from this Billingsgate Oratory; and
indeed, to make an end with these Authors, except I could call Rogue and Rascal
as fast as they. Let us examine the little reason they produce, concerning the
Exclusion.

Did the Pope, the Clergy, the Nobility and Commonalty of France think it
reasonable to exclude a Prince for professing a different Religion, and will
the Papists be angry if the Protestants be of the same Opinion? No sure, they
cannot have the impudence.

First, here is the different Religion taken for granted, which was never proved
on one side: though in the King of Navarre, it was openly professed. Then the
Pope, and the three Estates of France had no power to alter the Succession,
neither did the King in being, consent to it: or afterward, did the greater
part of the Nobility, Clergy and Gentry adhere to the Exclusion, but maintained
the lawful King succesfully against it; as we are bound to do in England, by
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; made for the benefit of our Kings, and
their Successors: The Objections concerning which Oath, are fully answered by
Doctor Hicks, in his Preface to Jovian, and thither I refer the Reader.

They tell us, that what it concerns Protestants to do in that case, enough has
been heard by us in Parliament Debates.

I answer, that Debates coming not by an Act to any Issue, conclude that there
is nothing to be done against a Law established, and fundamental of the
Monarchy. They dare not infer a Right of taking up Arms, by virtue of a Debate
or Vote, and yet they tacitly insinuate this: I ask them, what it does concern
Protestants to do in this case, and whether they mean any thing by that
expression? They have hampered themselves before they were aware; for they
proceed in the very next lines to tell us, they believe the Crown of England
being Hereditary, the next in Blood, have an undoubted right to succeed, unless
God make them, or they make themselves incapable of Reigning: So that according
to them, if either of those two Impediments shall happen, then it concerns the
Protestants of England to do that something, which if they had spoken out, had
been direct Treason. Here Is fine Legerdemain amongst them; they have
acknowledged a Vote to be no more than the Opinion of an House, and yet from a
Debate, which was abortive before it quickened into a Vote, they argue after
the old Song, that there is something more to be done, which you cannot choose
but guess. In the next place, there is no such thing as Incapacity to be
supposed, in the immediate Successor of the Crown; That is, the rightful Heir
cannot be made incapable on any account whatsoever to succeed. It may please
God, that he may be inhabilis, or inidoneus ad gerendam Rempublicam, unfit or
unable to govern the Kingdom; but this is no impediment to his right of
reigning; he cannot either be excluded or deposed for such imperfection: For
the Laws which have provided for private men in this case, have also made
provision for the Sovereign and for the Public: and the Council of State or
the next of Blood, is to administer the Kingdom for him. Charles the sixth of
France (for I think we have no English Examples which will reach it) forfeited
not his Kingdom by his Lunacy, though a victorious King of England was then
knocking at his Gates; but all things under his Name, and by his Authority,
were managed. The case is the same, betwixt a King non compos mentis, and one
who is nondum compos mentis, a distracted or an Infant King. Then the People
cannot incapacitate the King, because he derives not his Right from them, but
from God only: neither can any Action, much less Opinion of a Sovereign, render
him incapable for the same reason; excepting only a voluntary Resignation to
his immediate Heir, as in the case of Charles the fifth: for that of our
Richard the second was invalid, because forced; and not made to the next
Successor.

Neither does it follow, as our Authors urge, that an unalterable Succession
supposes England to be the Kings Estate, and the People his Goods and Chattels
on it: For the preserv^tion of his Right, destroys not our Propriety, but
maintains us in it. He has tied himself by Law, not to invade our Possessions,
and we have obliged our selves as Subjects to him and all his lawful
Successors: By which irrevocable Act of ours, both for our selves and our
Posterity, we can no more exclude the Successor, than we can depose the present
King. The Estate of England is indeed the Kings, and I may safely grant their
supposition, as to the Government of England: but it follows not, that the
People are his Goods and Chattels on it; for then he might sell, alienate, or
destroy them as he pleased, from all which he has tied himself by the Liberties
and Privileges which he has granted us by Laws.

There Is little else material in this Pamphlet: for to say, I would insinuate
into the King, a hatred to his capital City, is to say, he should hate his best
friends, the last and the present Lord Mayor, our two Honorable Sheriffs, the
Court of Aldermen, the worthy and Loyal Mr. Common Sergeant, with the rest of
the Officers, who are generally well affected, and who have kept out their
factious Memfrom its Government. To say I would insinuate a scorn of Authority
in the City, is in effect, to grant the Parallel in the Play: For the authority
of Tumults and Seditions is only scorned in it: an Authority which they derived
not from the Crown, but exercised against it. And for them to confess I exposed
this, is to confess that London was like Paris.

They conclude with a Prayer to Almighty God: (in which I therefore believe the
Poet did not club:) to libel the King through all the Pamphlet, and to pray for
him in the conclusion, is an action of more prudence in them than of piety:
perhaps they might hope to be forgiven, as one of their Predecessors was by
King James; who after he had railed at him abundantly, ended his Lampoon with
these two Verses.

Now God preserve our King, Queen, Prince and Peers,
And grant the Author long may wear his Ears.
To take a short review of the whole; It Is manifest, that there is no such
Parallel in the Play, as the Faction have pretended: that the Story would not
bear one where they have placed it; and that I could not reasonably intend one,
so contrary to the nature of the Play, and so repugnant to the Principles of
the Loyal Party. On the other side, it is clear, that the Principles and
Practices of the Public Enemies, have both formerly resembled those of the
League, and continue to hold the same Resemblance. It appears by the outcry of
the Party before the Play was acted, that they dreaded and foresaw the bringing
of the Faction upon the Stage: and by the hasty printing of Mr. Hunts Libel,
and the Reflections, before the Tragedy was published, that they were
infinitely concerned to prevent any farther operation of it. It appears from
the general consent of the Audiences, that Their Party were known to be
represented; and Themselves owned openly by their hissing, that they were
incensed at it, as an Object which they could not bear. It Is evident by their
endeavors to shift off this Parallel from Their Side, that their Principles
are too shameful to be maintained: It Is notorious, that They, and They only
have made the Parallel betwixt the Duke of Guise and the Duke of M. And that in
Revenge for the manifest likeness they sind in the Parties themselves, they
have carried up the Parallel to the Heads of the Parties, where there is no
Resemblance at all. Under which color, while they pretend to advert upon One
Libell, they set up Another: For what resemblance could they suggest betwixt
two persons so unlike in their descent, the qualities of their minds, and the
disparity of their warlike Actions, if they grant not, that there is a Faction
here, which is like that other that was in France? so that if they do not first
acknowledge one Common Cause, there is no foundation for a Parallel. The
Dilemma therefore lies strong upon them; and let them avoid it, if they can:
that either they must avow the wickedness of their designs, or disown the
likeness of those two persons. I do furcher charge those audacious Authors,
that they themselves have made the Parallel which they call Mine, and that
under the covert of this Parallel they have odiously compared our present King
with King Henry the Third. And farther, that they have forced this Parallel
expressly to wound his Majesty in the Comparison. For since there is a Parallel
(as they would have it) it must be either Theirs or Mine. I have proved that it
cannot possibly be Mine; and in so doing, that it must be Theirs by
consequence. Under this shadow all the Vices of the French King are charged by
those Libellers (by a side-wind) upon Ours: And it is indeed the bottom of their
design to make the King, cheap; his Royal Brother, odious; and to alter the
course of the Succession.

Now after the Malice of this sputtering Triumvirate (Mr. Hunt, and the Two
Reflectors) against the Person and Dignity of the King, and against all that
endeavor to serve him (which makes their hatred to his Cause apparent,) the
very charging of our Play to be a Libel, and such a Parallel as these
Ignoramus's would render it, is almost as great an affront to his Majesty, as
the Libellous Picture it self, by which they have exposed him to his Subjects:
for it is no longer our Parallel, but the Kings, by whose Order it was Acted,
without any shuffling or importunity from the Poets; The Tragedy (cried the
Faction) is a Libel against such and such Illustrious Persons. Upon this the
Play was stopped, examined, acquitted, and ordered to be brought upon the Stage:
Not one stroke in it, of a Resemblance to answer the Scope and intent of the
Complaint. There were some Features indeed, that the Illustrious Mr. Hunt, and
his brace of Beagles (the Reflectors) might see resembling theirs. And no other
Parallel either found or meant, but betwixt the French Leaguers and Ours: and
so far the Agreement held from Point to Point, as true as a couple of Tallies.
But when neither the King, nor my Lord Chamberlain, with other honorable
Persons of eminent Faith, Integrity and Understanding, upon a strict perusal of
the Papers, could find one syllable to countenance the Calumny; up starts the
Defender of the Charter, etc. opens his Mouth, and says; What do you talk of the
King? he is abused, he is imposed upon. Is my Lord Chamberlain and the
Scrutineers that succeed him, to tell US, when the King and the Duke of York
are abused? What says my Lord Chief Baron of Ireland to the business? What says
the Livery-man Templer? What says Og the King of Basan to it? We are men that
stand up for the Kings Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, next and immediately under God and the PEOPLE. We are
for easing his Royal Highness of his Title to the Crown, and the Cares that
attend any such Prospect; and shall we see the King and the Royal Family
paralleled at this rate, and not reflect upon it?

But to draw to an End. Upon the laying of matters fairly together, what a King
have these Balderdash Scriblers given us, under the Resemblance of Henry the
Third? How scandalous a Character again, of his Majesty, in telling the World
that he is Libelled, and Affronted to his face, told on it, pointed to it, and
yet neither He, nor Those about him can be brought to see or understand it.
There needs no more to expound the meaning of these People, than to compare
them with Themselves: when it will evidently appear, that their Lives and
Conversations, their Writings and their Practices do all take the same Biass:
and when they dare not any longer revile his Majesty or his Government point
blank, they have an intention to play the Libellers in Masquerade, and do the
same thing in a way of Mystery and Parable. This is truly the Case of the
Pretended Parallel. They lay their Heads together, and compose the Lewdest
Character of a Prince that can be imagined, and then exhibit that Monster to
the People as the Picture of the King in the Duke of Guise: So that the Libel
passes for current with the Multitude, whoever was the Author of it: And it
will be but Common Justice to give the Devil his due. But, the truth is, their
contrivances are now so manifest, that their Party moulders both in Town and
Country: (for I will not suspect that there are any of them left in Court.)
Deluded well-meaners come over out of honesty, and small offenders out of
common discretion, or fear. None will shortly remain with them, but men of
desperate fortunes or Enthusiasts: those who dare not ask pardon, because they
have transgressed beyond it, and those who gain by Confusion, as Thieves do by
Fires: to whom forgiveness were as vain, as a Reprieve to condemned Beggars;
who must hang without it, or sterve with it.

FINIS.

