London's Choice OF CITIZENS TO Represent them in the Ensuing Parliament; Viz.
Sir Robert Clayton Lord Mayor Elect. Sir Thomas Player Knight. William Love,
and Thomas Pilkington Esquires.
WITH An Account of some Passages previous thereto, and Remarques upon the
Whole, October 7th. 1679.
In a Private Letter from E. E. to J. W. at Newcastle upon Tine.
SIR,
HAving those Obligations upon me, which will not permit me to neglect what
(within my power I judge) may be acceptable to you, I could not forbear to give
you some Account of this days Work, in the Choice of Citizens to serve in
Parliament for this City of London.

You know Sir, it was about the beginning of September, that I left your very
agreeable Comny, and came to London, where I read every day new Pamphlets, and
heard Discourses, some commending the Choice of such men for the Ensuing
Parliament as had showed themselves Zealous for the Defense of the King's
Person, the Protestant Religion, and Government of England, and were upon those
Grounds, Voters for the Bills against Popery, and the D. for Justice upon
Danby, and the Popish Plotting Lords, etc. whilst other Pamphlets and
Discourses did bitterly inveigh against the late Commons in Parliament, as
Factious and Ill-minded men, fomented with the Leven of 41, Fanatically
inclined, dangerous to the Church and Monarchy, worse than Papists; and
therefore the greater care should be to keep them, and such as they were out of
the Parliament House. The Graver sort of these men, would charge those late
Members with great Imprudence, Want of Moderation, and rashness in their
Resolves, especially in the Bill against the D. which they would persuade was
inconsistent with Allegiance and Religion too. And all this Outcry was made in
the behalf of the Church of England, and under pertrxt of her true Sons. The
Act of Oblivion made by this King seemed now to be forgot, and whilst some
charged others with the Designs of 41, they themselves did with all their Might
endeavor to revive the same Spirit and Rancour, which raised the Storms of
those days. The Papists and Presbyterians were brought upon the Stage and
paralleled, but so, that the latter ware still more dangerous than the former.
In some of these Pamphlets, Published under the Vizar of the Church of England
men one might easily discover the Lineaments of a Jesuit: for even the Murder
of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey by the Papists was made doubtful; and they could not
forbear to cite the Texts of Scripture in Latin, though that Custom is
obsolete among us Protestants. The Duke of Y's Presence at Court added Vigor
and Spirit to these agents, which being perccived by many considering Citizens,
gave occasion to the Address made by Sir Tho. Player in their Names, that the
City-Guards might be increased; for the Argument was very plain, If there was
need of any Guards when the Duke was Absent, then there was need of more in his
Presence, when the Popish Party did manifestly take Courage and Activity from
that Cause.

This also they did endeavor to improve to the Advantage of their Cause, by
interpreting these Addresses to be Factious, and the Forerunners of most
mischievous Actions. And now the Kingly Government was underminded, because the
Popish Successor was feared; and the Church of England was like to be
Subverted, because some Citizens had the Courage to open their Mouths, in
humbly Representing their Dangers from the Papists. And yet in the mean time
Sir T. P. is a Devout Son of the Church of England, and inferior to no man in
the City, in Abilities for Public Employments; and such he did appear in the
last Parliament, where they would hear him with as much Readiness, and employ
him in their greatest Trusts as soon as any; he was one of their Secret
Committee; he was one of their Commissioners for Disbanding the Army, etc. But
all must now turn to his Prejudice; he was a Popular Man, and therefore to be
feared and hated. Would you not wonder, that the Experience of a man's Ability
and Integrity in Trusts, and the Love and Esteem he reaps thence should be an
Argument against his being employed. But this was the Handle our Yorkists took
this man's Actions by, and now they labor to improve this against his being
chosen by the City into the Ensuing Parliament, and for his sake all the rest
of their late Citizens in Parliament must be rejected, and men more firm to the
Church (that is in truth more for the Dukes Interest) chosen; for all these
Four (it seems) had Voted for the Bill of Exclusion.

Another Occasion of Clamouring in the Anti-Popish Citizens was, that some of
them, having long observed the Great and Unnecessary Expense their Sheriffs are
at in their Shrievalties; insomuch that no man can be capable of Holding that
Office, except he have an overgrown Estate, and consequently the Magistrates
must be chosen out of those few that are so rich, however unqualified with
Abilities befitting their Places, and others, better qualified, must be
rejected, because they are not so rich; considering also, that this year (in
the Condition we stand with our Popish Enemies) is like to require men of best
Parts and Knowledge in the Government of the City; and finding one Mr. Jenkins
to be well qualified with Understanding, Courage and Integrity (though not with
a great Estate) they resolved to choose him as a man fit for these difficult
Times, and that would reduce the Charge to such a moderation as might make it
supportable by one of an indifferent Estate, and to keep out a Man strongly
addicted to the D. of Y's Party, whom they understand some aimed at; and
therefore so many of the Common Hall held up their Hands for Mr. Jenks, that it
could not well be decided on whom the Choice fell without a Poll, but Mr. Lewis
carried it. This was made such a Crime, as if all that Voted for Mr. Jenks, had
presently a Design under his Conduct to raise a Rebellion, and turn the
Government of the City and Nation upside down; and this is reflected on Sir T.
P. because one of the Addresses to the Lord Mayor, was made the same Morning,
and by many of the same Persons that were at Guild Hall, to choose a Sheriff: as
if indeed so many Citizens, many of them of good Estates, understanding Men,
Lovers of Peace, should all of a sudden run mad, and in that Fit go to choose
one, that should infallibly lead them and their Families into Ruin; but this
and nothing else could be the Design of this Choice, if you will believe our
City- Yorkeists, and some others that they could impose upon. This I am told,
is the first time in the Memory of Man, and perhaps ever since there were
Sherriffs of London, that any man was endeavored to be chosen into that Office
for Love, and not for Envy and Ill Will.

In the Management of a Second Address, another Circumstance arose, which the
Adversaries made Sport with. The Lord Mayor had answered the Citizens, that he
would call a Lieutanancy on Thursday; and then if half a Dozen of them would
come with Sir T. P. and offer their Reasons for their Proposal, they should be
heard. This was interpreted a Promise in, Sir T. P. and his Not appearing when
the Lieutenancy met, a breach of Promise; and a Declaration was made by the
Lieutenancy, entered in their Books, and put into the Gazette accordingly, with
diverse other Reflections upon the Citizens that had appeared in that aforesaid
Address.

Thus the poor Protestants that are afraid of Popery, and Arbitrary Power with
it, were banded against; and now that the Lieutenancy was on the other side
with them that usurped the Title of Churchmen and Anti-Fanaticks, these men
must be quite run down, nothing shall serve those men's Turns, but the Excluding
them not only from Parliamentary Seats, but throwing them out of their other
Offices, when tme should come for repeating Elections. And that they had found
their Strength in the Election of Mr. Lewis Sheriff, they doubted not to carry
every thing as they pleased. This ground gained, they press on by many Clubs
and Meetings, where they make their Party as industriously as a newly
Commissioned Captain labors to complete such a number of Soldiers, as may
enable them to pass Muster, and have right to Pay. Here they drink and talk
themselves into a great Confidence of their Numbers: For the Designing Men,
think that is the way to increase them: for there are not a few, that love to be
on the prevailing side, right or wrong. They fill the City with Boastings and
Threats, their Party is so numerous now, they shall fulfill all their Pleasure;
they triumph already, as having got a Victory; they brag, that all the
Churchmen are on their side, that the Day of Election shall discriminate
between the Loyal Sons of the Church, and the Fanatics; to that end they would
have a Poll, so should see what Churchmen durst be against them.

Then they offer Wagers upon the Choice, from one Guinny to an hundred against
one or two or all the former Representers in Parliament. Here the Popish Party,
the Plotters, the Jesuits are quite laid aside. It Is no longer Papists and
Protestants, but Fanatics and Church-of- England-Men. The Popish plot of
Seventy eight is asleep, or questioned. Ask one of these Sticklers, whether
there was a Popish Plot against the Life of the King, the Protestant Religion
and Government, he would answer minceingly, I do not make it an Article of my
Creed. The King's Witnesses were exposed to all the Obloquy and Reproach
imaginable.

By these Arts and Tricks, the moderate and hearty Churchmen, as well as the
Dissenters, were put upon Defense and Apology. They are charged as Revolters,
Degenerate Sons of the Church, and of suspected Loyalty, so that these were
amazed, they wondered at and bemoaned the Change that appeared in the Actings
of some Citizens, Zealots indeed for our Church, but blown up by Popish Breath
into a too vehement Flame, tending manifestly to the Destruction of themselves
and others. Some of the more Judicious and Eminent Ministers of the Church of
England, began to express their sad Resentments of these Transactions; and did
what became them to stop the Popish Torrent. In the end, the Day of Election
came, October the 7th. when there was a numerous and thronged H^ll; some
without Doors, that durst not venture themselves in so great a Crowd, for all
expected a Poll, and prepared themselves accordingly. But all this great Noise
and Roaring by these Boasters, proved the Groanings of the Mountains, which
brought forth a Mouse.

It Is generally reckoned, there were in that Assembly of Livery-men, between
Five and Six Thousand Men, and they were so unanimous in their Choice, that
it is Judged by impartial and judicious Men, that he that had most Voices among
these Yorkists (in opposition to the City's former Choice) had not above five
hundred at most, and some say three hundred Voices; upon which I crave your
patience till I make some Remarques.

1. It Is manifest that it was the Popish Interest and Agents, that made all
this Bustle^ and Clamor in the name of the Church of England: for really and
in truth, the Church of England appeared against them, if ten to one in the
whole can comprehend the Church of England: for the most favorable Account
makes them but Hundreds for Thousands, or one for ten; and if you rekon half of
these to have been Dissenters, there will still remain five to one of the true
Churchmen; if you reckon the Dissenters more than that number, you will make
them too considerable; if less, then will the sober Churchmen be so much the
more considerable, and better bear the Denomination of the Church of England.
And it cannot be imagined, that these few Churchmen (whereof some are well
minded) could make so hideous a Noise, and be so unmeasurably concerned in
opposition to their Brethren, if they had not been agitated by Jesuitical
Emissaries.

2. These Well-minded Men that were thus drawn in by these Plotters, should see
how their unwary Zeal exposes them to be made a Property and Instrument for the
worst of Purposes. They design only to divide us, to beget Hatred and
Animosities between us, that in pursuit of one another, they may escape, till
they can get an opportunity to destroy us all; which they will easily do, if
they can keep Parliaments from making Fresh and necessary Provisions against
them. If you were Papists, and in their Case, would you tread any other steps
than those that these men walk in. You know they can take any Shapes, make any
Pretense, use any Argument that will work. You know they have no other Argument
to use at this time, but to pretend high for the Church of England, and against
Forty one. So did these Members in the Pensionary Parliament, that were cast
out thence for being Papists. Surely, Gentlemen, you have a high Opinion of
your selves, to think that You are the only men concerned for the Church of
England; but your Neighbors ten for one, know you are but abused Machins.

3. It appears how weak the Duke of Y's Interest is in this City; Ten to one is
odds enough in a good Cause, and who will deny that to be a Good Cause, which
is Defense of our Lives and Properties, the Concerns of us and our Posterities
both for this World and the World to come, against most Superstitious Enemies,
which of all Enemies are the most Cruel and Savage? But if the whole City could
have met, and given their Voices in this Election* it may well be presumed
there would have been forty for one for their old Patriots.

4. We may perceive that the Lieutenancy of the City was chosen, when the D. of
Y. influenced the Court: for the most part of them appeared openly in his
Cause; they made their Declaration in the Gazette on his behalf, and on purpose
to slur the Old and New Elected Parliament Men; they used their Interest
against them; but their Interest and the Dukes being one, could not make in
reality a tenth part of the City, though in Noise and Outcries they made more
than half. Oh unhappy City! whose Governors of the Militia are for the most
part Servants to those that you most dreadfully fear.

5. We may hence take this Political Remarque, that we must not judge of the
Temper of the People from loud Clamor. I conceive our Statesman on both sides
were mistaken, and thought the number of the Yorkists had been vastly greater,
than upon Trial it appeared. It was a great happiness to true Protestants, that
there was the occasion of such a Decision; for otherwise the Mistake might have
done the Papists as much Service, as if it had been really so.

Lastly, we find our Enemies Zeal and Diligence in their worst of Causes to be
great, and it may provoke Protestants to Fervor and Activity in the best;
otherwise we are like to be destroyed. I mean not that we should travel
forbidden Paths, or go over Hedge and Ditch to come at our Journeys end; but in
such Cases as this, the Choice of Citizens to serve in Parliament, and all
other cases wherein we are justified by Law, neither Danger, nor Ease, nor Loss
should prevail upon us to be lukewarm or negligent. The Plotters have for
these thirteen or fourteen years, kept back the Dissenters from giving due
Assistance and Encouragement to the true and seeing Country Royallists, by
crying out Forty one against them. Now they practice to divide those Royal
Lovers of their Country and Religion among themselves, by pretending Zeal for
the Church of England, and Caution against Forty one. But if, when His Majesty
and the Parliament have made long ago, an Act of Oblivion, and time and our
enemies Plots and Practices have made the Royallists and Parliamenteers of one
mind and Concern for Preservation of our King, our Religion, our Selves and
Posterities; if we will not all join Hands in this work, as far as the Laws of
God and our Country allow us, we shall deserve to perish, and be no more
pitied, than dastardly Fools, that are afraid to defend our Religion and
Lives, lest we be ill spoken of; a greater Folly than to die for fear of dying.
Thus, Sir, having given you such an Account of this Notable Affair, as my
Abilities and Haste would permit, I take Leave,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. E. E.

FINIS.

