TWO SERMONS Preached before the Queen-Dowager IN HER MAJESTY's CHAPEL AT
Somerset House.

By the Reverend Father Dom. PHIL. ELLIS, Monk of the Holy Order of St.
Benedict, and of the English Congr. Preacher and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

A SERMON Preached before Her Majesty THE QUEEN-DOWAGER, On Easter Day, 1686.
Si consurrexistis cum Christo, quae sursum sunt quaerite. If you have risen
again with Christ, seek those things which are above.
INto this pathetick Exhortation the Apostle falls in his Epistle to the
Colossians, chapter 3. v. 1. (Sacred Majesty): Into this seasonable Exhortation the
Church breaks forth at the Entry of this Solemnity, in the first Mass, which we
on the Vigil, the Primitive Christians celebrated at the first Point of the
Natural Day. In these Words she communicates to her mourning Children the
joyful News, that her Beloved was dead and is alive: Words which express not
only the Reality, but also the Efficacy and Extent of our Lord's Resurrection;
that the yearly Revolution of this Festival implies something more than our
Blessed Master's glorious Rising from the Dead, that it carries us farther than
a bare Memory of his Triumph, that it comprehends the Glory of the Members as
well as of the Head, and celebrates our own Victory over Death, if indeed we
are risen again with Christ.

My Text therefore is an Argumentation founded upon two Suppositions; the one,
of Faith; the other, touching Matter of Fact: Of Faith, That Christ is risen;
the Fact, That we are actually risen with him; Si consurrexistis cum Christo.
The one he supposes as a First Principle of our Religion, which falls not under
dispute: The other needs a Confirmation, and is to be proved by something more
evident than it self. The Proof of our Resurrection must be drawn from our
diligent application to those things which are above (quae sursum sunt
quaerite) or, as he expresses himself more clearly in the following Verse, from
setting our affections on heavenly things (quae sursum sunt sapite); from
leading a supernatural Life, and weaning of our Hearts from all that is below,
and non quae super terram. But there can be no Resurrection to a New Life,
unless by way of necessary Disposition there be a Death to the Old: To rise
again therefore, we must first die; Death being the Medium or Boundary between
these two Lives, this of the World, and the other according to God. For since
they are incompatible, and, in some manner, contradictory, the one must cease
to be, before the other can exist; and by consequence, the Presence of the one,
must demonstrate the Destruction of the other. Wherefore, that we are risen
again with Christ, is evinced by our being dead to the World; and this doubly
proved; first, by the Affirmative, seeking those things which are above; and
then by the Negative, not setting our affections on things below.

My Text thus expounded, divides it self, and calls upon me to speak a Word to
each of these Resurrections, that of Christ, and this of the Christian, which
jointly compose the Subject of our present Joy, and consequently are the
fittest Subject of the present Discourse, and of Your Royal and Favorable
Attention. But when I reflect, that St. Ambrose, Ambr. lib. 3. de Virg. versus
Med.
and after him the whole Current of Divines, piously suppose the Blessed Mother
of our Lord first saw his Resurrection, both saw it first, and was the first
who believed it; it being most agreeable to Reason, and a natural Consequence
of Affection, that so loving a Parent should receive the first Visit from so
loving a Son; that she who most eminently shared in the Pangs of his Death,
when the Sword of Sorrow pierced her Heart, should taste the First Fruits of
his returning to Life: Let us, before we proceed, beg her Intercession, that I
may speak of this great Mystery as one who is risen again with Christ; and you
attend unto my Words, as they who seek the things which are above. AVE MARIA.

If you are risen again with Christ, seek the things which are above, etc.
Ambrose calls it the Cornerstone and Basis of Faith, primum and maximum Fidei
Fundamentum. His Conception and Nativity were but the remote Preparations to
it; His Life and Doctrine, the Means; His Death and Passion, the immediate
Dispositions: But his rising the third day according to the Flesh, was the
ultimate End of his coming, as being the first in Intention, and the last in
Execution. In this consists the Strength, the Meaning and Intent of the
Apostle's Assertion, Romans 4.25.
That Jesus Christ was delivered for our Sins, and rose again for our
Justification. For, as the Church sings in the Office of Yesterday, Nihil nobis
nasci profuit nisi redimi profuisset. The Excellence of our Being had availed
us nothing, if a Redemption had not restored us to the End of our Creation,
forfeited by Sin; so a Redemption it self would not have answered our
Necessities, if a Resurrection had not perfected and crowned the Work of our
Justification.

But as it naturally follows, the further the Consequence draws from the First
Principle, the obscurer it grows; the deeper the Water is, the further we are
from discerning the Bottom; the greater the Miracle, the less comprehensible:
so we find the Mystery of the Resurrection to be the most profound, and
consequently the most obscure and difficult of all our Credends. For how
inexplicable soever the Heathen Philosophers judged the Immortality of the
Soul, they could not deny but the Light of Nature discovered it to be
reasonable: But all their Application, Enquiry, and force of Reason, fell so
short of the Resurrection of the Body, that while they admitted the one, they
derided the other as impossible, as chimerical, as the Dreams of Simple, or the
Reveries of Frantic Men. Thus when St. Paul, Acts 17. had discoursed the Point
to the most Learned of them, they called him (...), a Babbler, or Disperser of
ridiculous Novelties; to others he seemed to be a setter forth of new Gods: And
when he came to this Point in his Discourse on Mars-hill, before that
celebrated Bench, hi quidem irridebant, some mocked, ver. 32. Neither did
Festus, when he had heard the same Apostle upon that Subject, conceive a better
Opinion of him, than of a Madman, venting the wild Fancies of a disturbed
Brain; Insanis Paul; Paul, thou talkest like one distracted. Nay, the Apostles
themselves, after so many clear Predictions to prepare their Minds to the
Belief of this Mystery, when the Women brought the Relation of Matter of Fact,
that Christ was truly risen, putabant deliramenta quae dicebantur, thought they
were bigoted, and fancied Apparitions, till they believed them. So hard is it
for Reason to allow a Return from the Privation to the Habit, from Death to
Life.

Yet the Son of God proposing a Religion to Men, would have us act like Men,
when we assent unto it. Indeed, to exercise our Humility, and to found a Merit
in Believing, he requires our Assent to things above, but never contrary to
Reason. And therefore to render our Service Reasonable, Romans 12.1.
he has not left us destitute of Arguments to evince this dark and profound
Mystery; such Arguments, as no Rational Person, without ceasing to be so, can
reject; because they are sufficient, because they are the highest the Subject
Matter will admit. And such are all those Apparitions recorded by the Four
Evangelists, showing himself alive after his Passion, Acts 1.3.
in multis argumentis, says St. Luke, by many Arguments; or, as the Vulgar
Translation has it, by many infallible Proofs; that is, unquestionable
Instances; For in Matters of Fact, an Instance of the thing asserted, is the
highest Proof, and that which founds a Rational Conviction. Should we withold
our Assent, in expectation of a stronger Motive, we should never embrace any
Revealed Truth, we should never credit any History or Account of things distant
or past; because we should require a farther Evidence than the Thing proposed
can afford, than the nature of Credibility can bear. And in this appears the
Unreasonableness, and, at the bottom, the Infidelity of such as, under pretense
of Wit or Precaution, before they will render to the Articles of Faith, call
for the Evidence either of Demonstration or Sense, both which equally exclude
Faith, which is, according to the Apostle, Heb. 11.1.
the Evidence, that is, a Conviction of the Being of such things as do not
appear. Had these Modern Sadducees been present at the Glorious Resurrection of
our Lord, they would certainly have remained as incredulous as the old, who
even amidst Prodigies and Miracles asked for a Sign: For when their Eyes had
been Witnesses to the Life of his Body, they must still have submitted to the
Belief of his Divinity, which neither fell under the Verge of Sense, nor rose
so high as Demonstration in this Case, though it created as great a Certainty as
either, but from a less Evidence: And we that behold neither the one nor the
other, are as much obliged in Reason to believe both, upon the Credit of the
Apostles, the Testimony of the Scriptures, and of the Church which delivers
them.

Thus without entering the Monument with Peter and John; without any ocular
Testimony, or so much as inquiring into a Possibility of a Resurrection, we are
guarded from Error in our Belief; our Holy Faith is abundantly attested; the
submission of our Understandings and the firmness of our Assent to this dark
and inexplicable Mystery, are warranted to be a Reasonable Service. For the
greater Obscurity of any one Article does leave no more place for doubt, than
the Clearest Point of our Religion; since we do not believe This upon a
different Evidence from the other, but both jointly upon the Attestation of
such Works as never any one did, that is, John 15.24.
which could not be perpetrated by any Power less than Divine.

Thus we find a sure footing for our Hope, knowing, that he who raised up our
Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.14.
will also raise us up by Jesus; since the Resurrection of Jesus is not only
the Meritorious Cause of ours, but also the Efficient and Exemplar. For, as the
same Apostle argues, Philip. 3.21.
as we have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the
Heavenly. As he took our Nature upon him, and died to assimulate himself to us
in a Mortal Condition; so he rose again, Philip. 3.21.
that he might reform our vile and corruptible Body, and render it like his own
Glorious Body. By Dying, he merited our Resurrection; by Rising in Glory, he
gave us a Pattern of our future Happiness; and by assuming us into a
Participation of his Brightness and Immortality, he is the Cause Efficient of
our Resurrection. This Consideration obviates all Questions which a limited
Understanding might start as to the Possibility of it, and stops the Mouth of
the Animal Man, who does not comprehend the Power of God; and of corrupt
Nature, which is ever ready to speak perverse things. For, as it is evident, we
made not our selves, but, to find the Original of our Being, we must ascend to
a First Cause, which could have nothing distinct from it self coexistent to it
self: so is it clearly inferred, all things were made by him, and extracted out
of a mere Nothing. Aug. Ser. 91. de Verb. Apost.
Now St. Augustine inquires, Which you take to be the greater Miracle, the
commanding us to be and live out of Nothing, or the restoring us to Life, who
already had a Being, though we ceased to live? Doubtless, replies he in the name
of every reasonable Creature, it is more to make that which was not, than to
repair that which was: Utique plus est facere quod nunquam fuit, quam reparare
quod fuerit. And I ask you, adds the Father, why he cannot raise us after we
are turned into Dust, who, if we were reduced into Nothing, could give us a
Being?

But, blessed be God, I stand not here at the Bar, to be called in question by
you touching the Hope and Resurrection of the Dead. I appear in this Chair to
preach the Faith you have already submitted to; for, so we preach, and so you
have believed. I come here chiefly to declare to you the Extent of this Article
of our Creed, how far it carries us, to what it does oblige us. How far it
carries us, that we die to the old Life; To what it does oblige us, that we
walk before him in newness of Life. For two things are required, says the
Master of our Schools, to perfect the Justification of an Offender; the
Remission of the Sin, and the Amendment of the Sinner. The Sin was blotted out
by the effusion of Christ's precious Blood upon the Cross: The Amendment of our
Lives was merited, was supposed, but not effected by his Resurrection. The
Merits of his Death are applied to us in our Baptism, where we promise to enter
upon a New Life; but this Promise is fulfilled by acting consequently to it. The
Church answered for our Dying with Christ, before we were capable of knowing
what we engaged for; but this Engagement is to be made good after we arrive to
use of Reason, by approving our selves to be a New Creature, in the suitable
Conformity of our Lives, and seeking those things which are above: Your
Attention, and my Second Part.

IN the preceding Chapter of this Epistle to the Colossians, the Holy Apostle
delivers an excellent Moral upon the Principal Mysteries of our Redemption, and
shows how they are applied to us, and expressed in us; as, a spiritual
Circumcision, Col. 2.10.11.12.
by putting off the Body of Sin, signified by the Circumcision of Christ; a
dying and being buried with him in the Waters of Baptism, imported by the
shedding his precious Blood, and laying his dead Body in the Monument; that we
are quickened and revived together with him; and continues, Let no man judge you
in part of the Holy Day; In part diei festi.

(...).


for so the vulgar Latin and the Greek have it, where the common Translation
reads, in respect of the Holy Day. I know the sense of the Letter, according to
the general Interpretation, is, Let no one condemn you for neglecting to
observe the Jewish Festivals or Ceremonies. But some Expositors understand it
to be spoken in a larger and more spiritual sense, and by way of Caveat, that
we should not flatter our selves as if we had performed the Obligations of this
Day, for the purpose, by devoutly meditating upon the Resurrection of Christ,
(which is only one Part of the present Solemnity) without proceeding to the
other, to solemnize our own Rising again from the Death of Sin, which is the
Second Part, the Fruit and End of the other. But whether you allow of this
Interpretation or no, at least this is fidelis sermo, a faithful Saying, an
unquestionable Truth, If we be dead with him, 2 Timothy 2.11.
we shall also live with him. Die therefore we must, not only a natural Death,
which is the Punishment of Sin, but also a spiritual one, which is the Death of
Sin. We incurred the fatal Sentence of returning into Earth, by seeking those
things which are upon Earth; we revive into a Spiritual Life, by seeking those
things which are in Heaven. The one consists in the Separation of the Soul from
the Body; the other, in the Union of the Soul with Christ, 2 Cor. 4.11.
that the Life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal Flesh, as the
Apostle speaks; that our Conversation even in this World may be so pure, our
Actions so spiritual, and our Affections so fixed upon things above, as to
express a lively Similitude of our Lord's Resurrection.

Wherefore the Holy Fathers observe a threefold Analogy or Resemblance between
the Resurrection of Ch^^st, and that of a Christian. The first arises from the
Cause of his Resurrection, which the Apostle tells us was the Operation of God,
or the Omnipotent Hand of the Divinity reuniting the Blessed Soul of Jesus to
his dead Body, and not permitting his Holy One to see Corruption. Thus a Soul
once dead to God, can never by its own Strength, for it has none; by its own
Endeavors or Performances, which are inanimate; or by the practice of Moral
Virtues, which are dead in themselves, re-enter into the Life of Grace, without
the merciful Assistance, miraculous Operation, and the Change of the Hand of
the most High, whose sole Prerogative it is to command Light to shine out of
Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
as well to repair what has once ceased to be, as to make what never was
before. This is a Fundamental Truth, and as it were a First Principle of
Christian Religion, delivered by Jesus Christ, declared and frequently urged by
the Doctor of the Gentiles, and repeated by the Holy Ghost in many Councils,
and at last in that of Trent; where it is decreed, Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 1.
de Justificat.
to the condemnation of Modern Pelagianism, and to vindicate the Churches
Doctrine from the Calumnies or Mistakes of those who still misrepresent it, That
whosoever asserts, Man, by his own Works, perpetrated either by the Strength of
Nature, or by the Assistance of the Law, may be justified without the Grace of
God through Jesus Christ, Anathema, Let him be accursed. By declaring the
Insufficiency of Nature to a Good and Justifying Life, she condemns those Men
who think they may be saved by leading only a Moral Life, according to the
Dictamen of Reason, without the Practice of Religion. By excluding the Old Law,
she censures the Judaizing Christian, w^^ places it in equal Balance with the
New, or at least thinks this not sufficient, without the Observance of the
other. And lastly, By establishing the Necessity of Grace to perform every Good
and Virtuous Action, she warns us not to presume or rely upon our own Merits;
she directs us whither we are to lift up our Eyes, whence we are to expect our
Salvation; and points him out, who gives Birth to our good Desires, Warmth to
our Affections, and Life to our Actions; both the Velle and Perficere, Philip.
2.13.
the Will to rise again, and the Execution of it, by seeking those things which
are above.

This is the Second Analogy of our Resurrection with that of Christ, the Proof
and Experiment that we are risen from Death to Life. For as we cannot
distinguish an Animate from an Inanimate Body, but by the Palpitation of the
Heart, Pulse of the Artery, Heaving of the Lungs, or the Exercise of some
sensible Faculty; so cannot we discern a Soul informed with the Life of Grace,
from another which is deprived of it, but by such Operations as are proper to
that Life, as the Restraint of our Appetites, a Command of our Passions, a
Modesty in our Behavior, a Veracity in our Words, a Sincerity in our Dealings,
a Relieving the Poor, assisting the Distressed, embracing and doing good to our
Enemies. These are the Authentic Proofs of a Real Resurrection, and a lively
Resemblance of Jesus Christ's Surrexit Dominus vere; Our Lord is truly risen.
And how did he make it out he was truly risen? Multis Argumentis, says St.
Luke, By many Arguments, many infallible Proofs. And wherein did these consist,
but in appearing often to his Disciples, showing the Marks of his Death, eating
and drinking in their Presence, Acts 1.3.
and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. In like manner,
Matthew. 5.16.
if our light so shine before men, that they see our good works, we express the
Resemblance of a Glorified Body, Donum Claritatis. 2 Cor. 4.10.
If we carry about the Mortification of Jesus in our Bodies, we copy out the
Marks and Stigmata of his Passion. If we stand firm and unshaken in the midst
of Persecution, we become a lively Representation of his Impassibility, Donum
Impassibilitatis. Psalm. 118.32.
If we run with delight the way of his Commandments, when Charity has enlarged
our Hearts, and even the Lets and Impediments we meet with in the Service of
God are so far from retarding the Course of our Virtue, that, on the contrary,
they inflame our Zeal, and furnish new Matter to provoke and heighten our
Courage, we imitate the Third Quality of his Glorified Body, Donum Agilitatis.
In fine, If whether we eat or drink, 1 Cor. 10.31.
or whatsoever we do, we do all to the glory of God, as the Apostle advises; if
our Discourses and Familiar Entertainments savor of those things which are
above, and, at least indirectly, appertain to the kingdom of God, these are
Arguments we are truly risen with Christ, being of their own nature such Proofs
of a Spiritual Life, of a Spiritual Resurrection from the Death of Sin, as the
Exercise of the Animal Functions and Rational Powers are a Demonstration of the
Continuance or Reviviscence of the Natural.

2 Cor. 11.23.
We read, That the Spirit of Darkness sometimes transfigures himself into an
Angel of Light; sometimes takes a Body of Air, which the deluded Sense cannot
distinguish from a Solid and Real one; and sometimes as Artfully moves a Solid,
but Dead Body, as if it were Alive. Both Sacred and Profane History offer
innumerable Proofs of these Slights of Satan: I shall instance only in the
Second, which is most for my purpose. 1 Samuel 28.15
Thus the Witch of Endor is said in the First of Kings to have raised Samuel,
whose own Words seem to prove it a real Resurrection; Quare inquietasti me ut
suscitarer? Why have thou disquieted me to raise me up? Yet St. Augustine
assures us, Samuel did not rise again in his own, but only in a fictitious and
imaginary, or at most in an aereal Body. And through these Slights and Delusions
of Satan it happens that many seem to rise again with Christ, who in effect
rise only with Samuel. If we regard their Promises and Protestations, Sin shall
never reign any more in their mortal Body; their Eyes are opened to see and
bewail their past Transgressions; they have recovered their Speech, to declare
at the Feet of their Confessor those vicious Habits and secret Crimes which so
long had been locked up in Silence, and lay putrefying in their Breasts; at the
Voice of Christ they issue like so many Lazarus's from their Monuments, and run
to embrace their Life in the Holy Communion. And after all this, who can doubt
but their Resurrection is real, and they are truly risen again with Christ? But
if you keep your Eye a little upon them, you shall see them still playing about
the Flames which had scorched them before; you shall see them frequenting the
same licentious Company which gave them their Death, wantoning upon the same
Brink of the Precipice whence they so lately fell; like Ghosts, still hovering
about their Graves and Places of Burial; in fine, not advanced one step farther
off the imminent Dangers and immediate Occasions of Sin. And after all this,
who can doubt but their Resurrection was only in the Air, imaginary, or
Fictitious, a Stratagem of the Devil to delude them, and to amuse their
Confessors; while St. Paul's Declaration touching the State of the Widow, is
verified in every Soul, She that lives in pleasures, 1 Timothy 5.6.
is dead while she lives.

Haec praecipe, says the Great Apostle; teach, command, urge, and inculeate
this Doctrine. For the Resurrection of a Soul, cries St. Bernard, is not so
easy a thing as you imagine, it is a great and wonderful Sacrament, magnum
prorsus and mirabile Sacramentum animae suscitatio: Great in reference to the
Power of God; and Wonderful as to the Disposition requisite in the Sinner. To
break the Treble Cord of a threefold Concupiscence; to destroy all vicious
Habits Root and Branch; to lay violent Hands upon our own Hearts, and tear from
our Breasts what is as dear to us as Life, and almost as deeply ingrafted as
Nature; to turn the Stream of our Affections, to hate our own Souls, which we
so tenderly cherish and indulge; to love and embrace a Penitential Life, of
which we have so great an abhorrence, to which we carry such a strange aversion
and antipathy: Ah! Christian, this is not the work of a few Hours Recollection;
this is not the Fruit of a few superficial Tears, which dry and vanish as they
fall; this is not the Effect of a Sigh, which passes with the Wind; or of a
hasty Resolution, which is forgot almost as soon as made; this is not the
Violence that takes Heaven, which does not yield upon every faint or false
Attack. These indeed are Circumstances which ever attend a true Resurrection;
but they are not infallible Proofs: They are common to a Real and a Fictitious
one: They may be indeed the first Dawnings of a New Life, but are too often
only a gaudy Spectre, a mere outside, and an amusing Apparition, So true is
that terrible Assertion of the Holy Bishop of Barcellona, S. Pacian. Ep. 3. ad
Synphr.
Paucorum est labor qui vere resurgunt, Few there are who truly rise again,
because few will take the pains to extricate themselves from the Snares of Sin,
and remove every Occasion, as far as in them lies, of relapsing into it, after
the Example of the Holy King Josias, 2 Kings 23.
who not only broke down the Idols, banished the Artificers, demolished the
Altars, but also cut down the Groves, to efface even the Memory of Idolatry,
lest the Convenience of committing the same Crime might be an Invitation to
commit it. Yet this work of estranging our selves from the Dangers of Sin, though
attended with so many Difficulties, is but a remote disposition to a Spiritual
Resurrection, a removens prohibens; there are others and nearer required, not
only to the Introducing, but also to the Nourishment and Preservation of the
New Life.

This is the Third Analogy the Holy Fathers observe between the Resurrection of
Christ and that of a Christian, viz. the Duration and Perpetuity of it,
intimated by the Apostle, when he tells us, Christ being raised from the dead,
dies no more. Romans 6.9.
By which words, not only a feigned, but also a failing Repentance is struck
out of the Book of Life. And this Admonition is particularly addressed to you
of the Household of Faith, who after a sincere and unfeigned sorrow of Heart,
after a clear and undisguis'd Enumeration of all your Sins by Confession of
Mouth, after a serious Endeavor to apply to your selves the Satisfactions of
Christ by the exercise of Good Works, use violence upon your Hearts, in
exterminating ill Habits, and avoiding those Occasions which formerly prevailed
upon you, and, in fine, are truly risen again; but, alas! are not risen again
with Christ. For after you have set your hand to the Plow, you look back upon
the Ease and Pleasure of the World; after you have been feasted with the Bread
of Angels, your Hearts return into Egypt; you remit of your primitive Fervor,
you slacken in your Devotions, you inquire into a corrupted Moral, and hunt
after Cases to dispense with your Resolutions; you hearken to the Language of
the World, till you are insensibly seized with the Infection, it gains every
day upon you, preys upon the Life of the Spirit, and at last wholly consumes
it. Thus the very Means of your Salvation corrupt into the Occasions of your
farther Misery, and your rising again serves only to plunge you deeper into
Death, by adding to the weight of your former Commissions a heavy Ingratitude,
a sacrilegious Abuse of Divine Grace, a Contempt of Mercy, a Rebellion against
the Light, an evacuating the Death of Christ, and frustrating his Resurrection
of its chiefest End, that rising from Death with him, you should die no more.

And herein consists the difference between the Resurrection of the Body, and
that of the Soul. Both the one and the other are the Effects of a Supernatural
and Divine Power: But the one always supposes a Perpetuity and Settled state;
the other is subject to Decay, and of its own nature does not exclude
Corruption and Mortality. Thus the Sunamite's Child at the Prayer of Elizaeus,
the Dead Man at the touch of his Bones, Lazarus and others at the Voice of
Christ, and they who at his Death came forth of their opened Sepulchers, were
restored to Life, but to a dying Life, they lived to die again. But the
Spiritual Life communicated to a Soul by the Grace of Jesus Christ, is
invested, as far as concerns the Operation of the Agent, with Immortality, and
has impressed upon it a Resemblance of his Resurrection, a Jam non moritur. She
is commanded to cherish and perpetuate that Life, which nothing can corrupt,
unless she lay murdering Hands upon her self, and by consenting to Sin, fall a
Victim to it.

But can any one who believes in earnest the Advantage and Excellence of this
Supernatural Life, who has ever tasted the ineffable Comforts of a Spiritual
Resurrection with and in Christ, be so careless of the Advantage, so insensible
of the Excellence, so forgetful of the Comforts, as to lavish them away upon
every slight occasion, as to exchange them for every gaudy Trifle, as to wound
and destroy this Life at the persuasion of a Passion, or for the gratifying a
Concupiscence, or for the indulging an Appetite? If one did not find this
practically true, in speculation one would pronounce it impossible; Impossible
that the Reasonable Creature should persecute its own Happiness, run counter to
its own Desires, and contrive its own Destruction, contrary to the Dictamen of
Reason, to the Impressions of Faith, and even to the Inclinations of Nature.
And whosoever considers with how many Tears, Alms-deeds, and Mortifications,
with what Assiduity in Prayer, Modesty of Behavior, and Earnestness to hear
the Word of God, we have spent this Holy and Penitential Season, in order to
prepare our selves to rise again with Jesus Christ in this Day of his Triumph
over Death, will certainly conclude, that we are truly dead, Romans 6.2.
and our Life hidden with Christ in God; that being thus dead to Sin, quomodo
adhuc, vivemus in illo? how is it possible we should harbor a Thought of living
any longer in that wretched Condition? Yet this time of Penance is no sooner
elapsed, than we begin to provide Matter for a new Repentance: We take the
Reins off our Senses and Passions, and turn them loose to rove and wanton as
before, as if Sensuality were the Object of the Churches Indulgence; as if
Luxury, Excess, misspending our Time, superfluous Entertainments, and other
Practices which are at all times unlawful, were not at the most Holy of Times
more Criminal. It seems the Tide of our Vices was only stemmed for Forty days,
and now the Sluices are pulled up, to let them roll in their old Channels with
more impetuosity than before. We hear the Churches Invitations to rejoice and
to be merry, her Exultemus's and Alleluia's; we presently catch the Sound, and
like the Carnal Jew think it relates to Flesh and Blood; we presently unbend
the Mind, and impart the happy News to every Passion and Concupiscence.

But who would have imagined that Relaxations of our Manners could be thought
by Mankind the fittest Expressions and most unfeigned Testimonies of their
Rejoicing at the Resurrection of Christ? But since the World will have it so, I
am contented, provided it be made appear, that these are Arguments and Signs of
our Rising again with Christ. For our Lord reassumed his Sacred Body, that we
might rise in Spirit with him, and in Flesh after him. Our Resurrection then is
the principal End of His, and by consequence those Actions which demonstrate us
to be truly risen again with him, are the only proper Means to express our Joy,
to celebrate his Triumph. And I hope we are now agreed, that these consist in
seeking those things which are above, in setting our affections on heavenly
things, in transcending all Human Considerations, in leaving the World far
below us, and contemning its Vanities, Honors, and Riches, as much as we abhor
its Vices and Corruptions. 1 Cor. 15.50.
As for Flesh and Blood, their Inclinations and Concupiscences, which can never
possess the Kingdom of God, they become more than ever our mortal Enemies; we
have a new Obligation to persecute and detest them, a fresh Provocation to
distress and mortify them, because they hinder us from enjoying the Liberty of
the Children of God, they are a Clog upon the Heart, a Damp upon the Spirits,
they check the Flight of the Soul, and lure her down when she is upon the Wing
to have her Conversation in Heaven. Philip. 3.2.


And since this is your Belief, but your Practice so contrary, has not the
Apostle as much reason to expostulate with you, as he had with the Galatians,
Sic stulti estis, ut cum spiritu caeperitis, Gal. 3.3.
carne consummemini? Are you become so foolish, as to end in the Flesh, after
you have begun in the Spirit? Tanta passi estis sine causa? v. 4.
Have you so long bridled your Appetites, and denied your Senses even their
lawful Satisfactions, to let them break out at Easter, like a Vapor from some
Hollow of the Earth, more unruly, furious, and destructive than they could have
been, had you not penned them in and confined them? Have you suffered so many
things in vain? shed so many Tears without Fruit? given so many Alms to no End?
In vain, without Fruit, and to no end indeed, unless these happy Beginnings are
crowned with an answerable Perseverance, unless you died to Sin to rise again
with Jesus Christ, and are risen again to die no more. Which God of his
Infinite Mercy, etc.

The End of the First Sermon.
A SERMON Preached before Her Majesty THE QUEEN-DOWAGER, On Whitsunday, 1686.
Nolite contristare Spiritum Sanctum, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the Holy Ghost.
AS the Children of Israel (Most Sacred Majesty) received the Law Fifty days
after the Paschal Lamb was Sacrificed, in Memory and Thanksgiving for their
Miraculous Deliverance from the Egyptian Slavery; so the Church of Christ, in
the fullness of time, and after that mysterious number of Days elapsed from the
Sacrifice of the Immaculate Lamb, who takes away the Sins of the World, is
established by the solemn publication of a New Covenant, a Covenant of Grace.
But to express the Analogy and Relation between the one and the other, the
Shadow and the Substance, the Law and the Consummation of the Law; to insinuate
the same Spirit of God, who dictated the First, to be also the Author of the
Second, both are delivered upon the Mount, both in Fire, both with Sound and
Majesty. But as perfect Charity casts out Fear: so the Law of Perfection is
distinguished from the Imperfect, by introducing Charity in the place of Fear,
a gentle lambent Fire in lieu of Thunder and Lightning; by changing Mount Sina,
the Region of Terror, for Jerusalem, the Vision of Peace; a frightful Desert,
for the Place of Prayer, the Ministry of an Angel, for the immediate Presence
of the Holy Ghost. The first was written in Tables of Stone, the latter, 2 Cor.
3.3.
says the Apostle, in the fleshly Tables of our Hearts; the one was attended
with all the Circumstances of Terror, and repeated Menaces of Death, and all
little enough to make a stiff-neck'd People bend their Shoulders to a Heavy and
Galling Yoke; but the other, as gentle in the Declaration as easy in the
Execution, is published with the appearance of fiery Tongues, Emblems of
Softness and Eloquence, Hieroglyphics of Light and Charity, to express its
Efficacy, not by Constraint, but Insinuation; not by Compulsion, but
Persuasion; as Fire is the most bright, most piercing, and most active of the
Elements, and the Tongue the most tender in Substance, the most easy in
Operation, yet the most powerful of all our Faculties. In a word, the first was
delivered in Smoke and Clouds, to signify its Property, Imperfection,
Obscurity, Darkness, or, at the best, a Cloud which was to break up and
disperse, umbra futurorum, Colos. 2.17.
a Shadow which was to pass away; the second, under the Symbol of Wind, pure,
open, cleansing, to show the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, as requisite to
clear the Soul from the Corruption or Contagion of Sin, as the Wind is to
purify the Air, and the Air is to refresh the Body; and therefore his Divine
Presence is sometimes called a Blast of Wind, as the Spouse in the Canticles,
Cant. 4.16.
Veni Auster perfla hortum and fluent aromata; sometimes a Breath of Air,
tanquam Spiritus aurae lenis; sometimes Spiraculum vitae, the breathing of
Life; and generally a Spirit, (...), not only in reference to his Eternal
Procession from the Father and the Son by way of Spiration, or reciprocal
breathing of Love, but also in order to his Operations ad extra, working
himself into the Soul by insensible ways, giving her Action and Motion, as the
material Air does the Lungs, and the animal Spirits every part of the Body:
Spiritus Sanctus vita spirituum, sensificans, vivificans, says Richard of St.
Victor. Richard. de S. Vict. l. 6. de Trin.
Wherefore our Blessed Master, who on this Day fulfilled his Promise of sending
the Holy Spirit, compares it, John 3.8. to the Elementary, which blows where
it lists, whose sound we hear, but cannot tell whence it comes, or whither it
goes; so is every one that is born of the Spirit: By which last Words he
applies the Comparison, as if he had said, You are to believe the Influence of
this Spirit, as necessary to beget and perpetuate the Life of the Soul, as you
experience the other is to the Life and Welfare of Nature; and as he that
hinders the Air from passing into his Lungs, must immediately be stifled, or
soon burnt up with interior Heat; so he that checks the entrance of the Holy
Ghost, whose Property is to allay the Heat of Concupiscence with the nobler and
gentler warmth of a Spiritual Love, to assuage the Passions, to cool and
moderate the Affections; or he that ejects him out of his Heart after he is
entered, is said to contristate, to grieve the Holy Ghost, and frustrate the
end of his Coming; Nolite contristare Spiritum Sanctum.

This Consideration carried me upon these Words of the Apostle, and pointed
them out as a proper Theme equally fitted to the Sanctity and Solemnity of the
Time, to the Necessities and Capacity of every Hearer; and as the most
important Advice can be given Christians (who have already received, and are
supposed to possess the delightful Presence of the Holy Ghost) to cherish that
gentle Flame, to treat the Divine Guest as becomes the Children of Light; not
only not to expel him out of their Hearts by any criminal Action or Consent;
but not so much as to give him the least Offense, by remitting of the Devotion
they feel, or pious Resolutions they make at this Holy Time. Nolite
contristare, etc. But to maintain the Interests of this Holy Spirit, we must
have his Assistance, the Power of Persuasion being one of those Gifts of
Tongues which descend from above, and which is obtained by the same Disposition
the Apostles were in perseverantes in oratione, by continuing in Prayer; and if
you would learn the Method, the Evangelist delivers it in two words, Cum Maria;
the Blessed Virgin is the Pattern; the Holy Ghost found her in the same posture
at his second Coming, as he did in the first, when the Angel saluted her, AVE
MARIA.

Grieve not the Holy Ghost.
THE Essential Joy which God possesses within himself, and which is Himself,
places him above the reach of Grief; but not above our Attempts to afflict him:
His Immortal Godhead and Power may secure his Being, but not our Obedience; we
are as ready to take up Arms against him, as if we could dethrone him at our
Pleasure. His Majesty and Justice may strike a Sinner with Amazement and
Terror, but not always with that Fear which works a stable Repentance. Thus his
Love, and Mercy, and Glory, which establish his Beatitude; his Glory, that no
Evil can approach him; his Love and Mercy, that he would pass by the Injury, if
any such could be done him, exempt him from a possibility of grieving; and yet
we grieve him, that is, we are as criminal and injurious to him, as if he were
susceptible of our ill usage. For though every Sin be levelled at the Whole
Trinity, the Undivided Godhead against which it is committed, yet the Holy
Ghost, to whom the Work of our Conversion is appropriated, is said to be the
Principal Object of the Injury, as implying a horrible Contempt of his Favors,
Spritui gratiae contumeliam facientes. Heb. 10.23.
Our Faith teaches us to consider the Holy Ghost in two different States in
reference to Human Nature; the one, as hovering over us, and desiring to enter
into the Heart of Man, which belongs to him upon so many Titles; the other, as
striving to keep possession of it, which to maintain, he has been so liberal of
his Graces and Inspirations, of his Gifts and Promises, and even of himself;
Spiritus qui datus est nobis: In each of these Circumstances we may displease
and contristate him; First, If we refuse him admittance when he demands it: And
secondly, If we oblige him to quit his Hold, after we have peaceably admitted
him, and tasted the Comforts of his Presence. The Refusal is the Injury, the
Sin of Obstinacy; the Exclusion, that of Contempt: Two most execrable Crimes,
and high Provocations, the Apostle admonishes us to be aware of; and to enforce
his Admonition, shall make the Two Parts of this Discourse.

First, The Refusal to admit him; by which I do not understand as if he were
locally distant or absent from the Heart of Man; for he is essentially every
where by the Immensity of his Nature, and as necessarily in the Heart of a
Sinner, as in that of a Saint; because in him we live, we move, and have our
being. But this Distance implies only a Moral Separation, consisting in the
privation of Grace, by which he resides and dwells in us after a peculiar and
more excellent manner. But no sooner do we consent to a Mortal Sin, than we
violently thrust him out of doors, and dispossess him of this latter and better
kind of Inhabitation, while he, like an unwearied Lover, returns as calmly as
if it were his first Approach, as if he had never been expuls'd, and courts the
Soul with such melting Expressions as would reduce any Heart but that of a
Sinner; for it is not a peculiar Dialect to his Beloved in the Canticles, but
his common Language to every revolted Heart, Aperi mihi soror mea, sponsa mea;
Cant. 5.2.
Open to me, my Sister, my Spouse. Prodigious! The unfaithful Servant he calls
Sister, the Traitor and Rebel he vouchsafes to call his Spouse, to put her in
mind of what she was before she lost her Honor, and forfeited those glorious
Titles, which he continues to give her, that he may provoke her to Repentance,
that he may restore her Innocence.

These Instances, or knocking at the door, as the Holy Spirit styles them
himself in the Revelations, in the Council of Trent he calls the Motions of
Grace nondum inhabitantis, that has not yet procured entrance, but is laying
Siege to the Gates, and trying all the Avenues and Passages to get in. Such is
the State (Beloved Christians) to which most of us have reduced the Holy Ghost;
we shut our Hearts upon him, and while there is a Passion within to gratify, a
Concupiscence to indulge, we are insensible to his Impulses, and deaf to his
Voice; and has not he reason to be offended and grieved at such a Treatment? If
we may gather the vehemence of his Affection from his earnest Desires and
passionate Solicitations to be admitted, we may guess at the Malice and
Impiety of our Refusal, by his so deeply resenting it, that God who is Charity,
the God of all Consolation, is obliged to treat with the Sword in his Hand, to
change his Entreaties into Menaces, and threaten Punishments where he promised
Rewards. Wherefore, says a Learned Writer, his Eternal Wisdom could invent no
Emblem so proper and so expressive of his ardent Desires to penetrate into the
Heart of Man, as that of a Tongue and Fire, both piercing, both irresistible,
but in several kinds; to signify, that he will leave no Method untried, no way
unattempted; if the more gentle Assaults of the Tongue, Promises, Endearments,
Expostulations, and Persuasions cannot prevail, he will set upon us with all
the Flames of his Indignation, and eternal Ardors of his Divine Nature; Dominus
Deus tuus ignis consumens est; Deuteronomy. 4.14.
Your God is a consuming Fire, in comparison of which, the Fury and Rage of our
Elementary is but a glaring and harmless Vapor; the destroying and penetrating
Lightning, but a gentle and cooling Blast; the rending and dreadful Thunder, is
but a friendly Address, and soft Embrace. But thy God is a consuming Fire, that
is, Heb. 4.12.
in the Apostle's Exposition, The Word of God, or the Holy Ghost speaking in
our Hearts, is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow,
and is a discerner, an avenger of the thoughts and intents of the Heart; for
all things are naked to, and easily conquered by his Eyes. Et interficiet
impium Spiritu oris sui and illustratione adventus sui, 2 These. 2.8.
says he elsewhere; if he cannot destroy the Wickedness of the Man with the
Breath of his victorious Grace, he will destroy the wicked Man with the Glory
of his Presence, and Terror of his Approaches.

But this Attempt of the Holy Ghost to reduce a stubborn Heart, is not to be
understood of Force or Constraint; for he does not desire to possess it by
Necessity, but by Submission; he comes upon it in spiritu vehementi, with
Vehemence, but not with Violence, which takes away our Liberty; for he esteems
it the greatest Victory, to make us yield, while we remain able to resist. He
has a tender Compassion for the most rebellious Sinner; and in despite of all
Provocations, Acts of Hostility, and defacing the Beauty of a Heart he had been
so long adorning, the Print of his Finger still remaining upon the Creature,
and the indelible Character of his Sacrament upon the Christian, he
acknowledges the Work of his Hands, he remembers it was his Temple, he
endeavors to repair the Ruins, and consecrate it again with his Presence. To
obtain which desired End, he does not think it either beneath his Majesty, or
derogatory to his Power, to capitulate with the Soul, whose concurring Assent
is requisite to her own Happiness, to sue to her, to use Solicitations and
Persuasions, according to the Sense the Master of our Schools and other Divines
give to the Words of St. Paul, Postulat pro nobis; Romans 8.26.
he asks not only for us, but also of us, to be readmitted into our Hearts,
ubique petit ab omnibus recipi, says the Angelical Doctor, comparing this
Divine Lover to the Sun, who not only offers his Light to the Eyes of all the
World, but also darts it upon them, and with the Points of his Rays sollicits
them to open and let in the Day: Petit ab omnibus recipi.

From whence I make two Inferences worthy your serious Consideration. The
first, That the greatest exterior Glory the Holy Ghost is capable of, the only
Joy he takes ad extra, out of himself, is to find us yielding to his Desires,
acquiescing to his Motions and re-entring into the State of Grace. The second
That a Refusal on this occasion, irritates him to the highest degree, and of
its own nature is such a Subject of Grief, as a loving Parent feels when he
sees himself disrespected and injured by an ungrateful and disobedient Child.
He is not only troubled at his Miscarriages, but is far more afflicted that he
is obliged to punish him for them, foreseeing that his Disobedience will bring
him to an unhappy End. In like manner the Holy Ghost is said to grieve, when we
not only abuse his Patience, contemn his Love, and reject his Comforts, but
also draw upon our Heads his just Severity, while he foresees the Punishment he
is going to inflict upon his Children will not amend them; for the Crime is
irremissible, the Punishment is unavoidable; the Crime, a Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost; Matt. 12.31.
and the Punishment, never to repent of it; non remittetur.

Indeed Divines are much perplexed, and can hardly agree in what this Blasphemy
consists, which so much exasperates the Spirit of God, and turns the Meekness
of the Dove into the implacable Fury of the Lion. St. Augustine, whose Judgment
is of greatest weight, supposes it to be final Impenitency, as being the last,
and at the same time the Punishment of all other Crimes. It Is a Punishment, and
the severest of Punishments, because a dereliction of God: It Is a Sin, or a
Circumstance of Sin, because it renders all the preceding unpardonable. But how
come we to plunge into this bottomless Abyss of Misery, unless by refusing
Grace when it is offered us? There is the Crime; and are not we justly
sentenced to it for our so long continued Resistances against the Divine
Impulses, so frequent Contempts of Calls from Heaven, in Sermons, Advices,
Examples, Duties of Piety, Occasions of Charity presented to us, good Books put
into our Hands, Remorses started in our Consciences, Convictions rising in our
Understanding, and holy Desires breathed into our Hearts? There Is the
Punishment: And what more just than that our own Measures should be turned
against us, that there should be a resemblance between the Chastisement and the
Offense; as Contempt was the Crime, so Contempt should be the Condemnation? The
Sinner contemns God, and God revenges himself by contemning him; the usual
proceeding of slighted Love, qui spernis, Isa. 33.1.
nonne and ipse sperneris? He applies his Mercy, in quality of a Physician, to
heal the Soul; but sometimes he must in like manner exercise his Justice, by
giving her over when her State is desperate. Jer. 51.9.
Curavimus Babylonem and non est sanata; To cure thee, O wretched Creature, to
whom a Life spent in Disorders and Confusion has merited the Style of Babylon;
to cure thee, I have applied all my healing Graces, comforting Inspirations and
sovereign Restoratives; neither Oil nor Wine, neither gentler nor sharper
Remedies, neither Prosperity nor Persecution, have been wanting to thy Wounds;
sed non est sanata, but thou art not, because thou will not be cured:
Derelinquamus eam, thou art past recovery, I will leave thee to the Cogitations
of thy own Heart, in manu consilii tui, I will visit thee no more, I will call
thee no more, I will quite forget thee, I will not so much as be angry with
thee any more, auferetur zelus meus a te, Ezech. 16.42.
and quiescam, nec irascar amplius.

Now tell me, Christian, if such as refuse to give the Holy Ghost entrance into
their Hearts, so heavily contristate him; how grievously do they offend, who
thrust him violently out of their Hearts, after they had readily opened the
Gates to him, received him honorably, treated him friendly, and reciprocally
received unspeakable Instances of his Affection? This is the next thing I have
to consider: Be pleased to accompany me with your Hearts, as well as with your
Attention.

Elegit Israel in possessionem sibi, Psalm. 134.4.
He has chosen Israel for his possession, says the Royal Advocate of Heaven.
Now do we find our selves so nearly touched, and so vehemently exasperated,
when an Intruder comes to thrust us out of doors, and seize on our Inheritance?
and shall we allow no Resentment to the Holy Spirit, when he is wrongfully and
contumeliously ejected out of his Habitation, for he dwells in the midst of us;
out of his Temple, for you are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; out of his
Empire, for the Kingdom of God is within you; out of the Seat of his Pleasure,
for his Delights are to be with the Sons of Men? Do we not suffer any one to
dispute our Right to what we have made with our own Hands? Such is the Heart of
Man to the Holy Ghost. Do we not account it as abfurd as impudent, to demand
whether the thing be ours which we have bought? Such is the Heart of Man to the
Holy Ghost. Does not a long Prescription justify a Tenure, and long Possession
create a Title? Such is the Holy Ghosts to the Heart of Man. For he lays claim
to it, not only because he is the Spirit of God the Father who created us, of
God the Son who redeemed us, but also because he has Rights to us peculiar to
himself, by the Love he bears us, by the sanctifying Grace he has bestowed upon
us. This is what the Apostle seems to point at, when immediately after he had
exhorted the Ephesians, in the words of my Text, not to grieve the Holy Spirit,
he adds for a Reason, in quo signati estis, because you are sealed by him,
because you have received his Character; as Men use to imprint their Arms or
Mark upon such things they esteem most precious, and would not have usurped or
violated by any foreign Hand; Signati estis. The Holy Ghost impresses himself
upon our Hearts in every Sacrament; I shall instance only in two, Baptism and
Penance. In Baptism he imprints such a Character upon the Soul, as neither Time
nor Eternity can deface, neither Violence nor Sin can raze out; for since
nothing is destroyed but by its Contrary, the Characteristical Form must be
indelible, says the Master of our Schools, as having nothing contrary to it
self. The Sacrament of Penance leaves not indeed such an immortal Impress
behind it, but plains out all the Tracts of Sin, and imprints upon the Level an
habitual Love, which is the Seal of the Spirit, and which our Blessed Savior
makes a distinctive Character between his Friends and his Enemies. In quo
signati estis; we are marked as his Living Temples, according to the Custom of
all Religions, that ingrave on the Frontispiece of their Temples, or in the
most eminent Part of them, Hieroglyphics of the Divinity they adore. And do
you not know, says the Apostle, that you are the Temples of the Living God?
Your Heart is the Sanctuary where the Father is worshipped in Spirit and Truth;
Charity is the Priest, Faith and Hope are the Assistants, Penance and Prayer
are the Sacrifices.

And tell me now (ungrateful Christian) after so full, so free, so long and
solemn a Possession, to be turned out all on a sudden, in a moment, as soon as
a Mortal Sin can be committed, and this to make way for his mortal Enemy; to be
sold for the fulsom Pleasures of this World, for a Lust or an Ambition; to be
exchanged for the amusing Trifles, Vanities and Riches, is it not the highest
Injustice, and most foul and abominable Sacrilege? An Injustice, because you
prodigally cast away what belongs to another: Non estis vestri; Do not think
you have power to ruin your selves, or that you wrong no Body but your selves;
it is a vulgar Saying, and a vulgar Mistake; You are not your own. A Sacrilege,
because you rob the Temple of the Holy Ghost, where he had treasured up the
Riches of his Goodness, where he had made the Repository of his Graces. Is it
strange then he conceives so high a displeasure at such ill Usage, that he
breaths out such lamentable Complaints by the Mouth of the Prophet, Afflixerunt
Spiritum Sancti ejus, Isa. 63.10.
They have afflicted his Holy Spirit, they have grieved his very Soul, not only
for the Injustice, not only for the Sacrilege, nor only for the Expulsion, but
much more for the aggravating Circumstance, the Contempt. For though every Sin be
injurious to the Holy Ghost, and of what nature soever, involves a Contempt of
his Divinity, by disobeying his Commands; an undervaluing his Person, by
banishing him our Company; and a scorn of his Gifts, by casting them from us:
yet every considering Man will grant, the first Capital Offense a sanctified
Soul commits, is big with a particular Contempt and Slighting of the Divine
Spirit, because it not only thrusts him out of his Possession, but does it to
introduce the Spirit of Pride, of Luxury, of Ambition, of Covetousness, and the
like, in his place: By which the Sinner declares, that he sets a lower Value on
Jesus Christ, than the most trivial Satisfaction of the World. For whether he
makes a distinct Reflection on it or no, it is certain he virtually compares
the Good Spirit which is in possession of his Heart, with the Evil one which is
soliciting admittance; and by consenting to Sin, he declares his Judgment, and
shows which is preferable in his esteem.

There is no sort of Contempt like that of Comparison, which not only despises
a Man, but, to increase the Confusion and Affront, first sets another in
competition with him, and then gives that other the advantage over him: Which
Proceeding, though ever odious, in two Cases is most abominable, in the Rights of
Sovereignty, and in the Interests of Love. If a People should depose their
Prince, they would commit the foulest, the most unjust, and most unchristian
Action in the World; but if they stop there, it is only an absolute Contempt:
But if the giddy Multitude proceed to a new Election, and put up the mortal
Enemy of their Lawful Sovereign, then it is a Contempt of Comparison. If a Wife
suffer that Conjugal Affection to die, which Nature and Religion oblige her to
cherish toward her Husband, it is a horrible Injury, it is a Contempt; for there
can be no Indifferency in that Case: But if she turn her Affections upon a
Stranger, the sworn Enemy of her Lawful Spouse, such a Preference heightens the
Affront beyond all that can be expressed, beyond all comparison, and chases
Anger into Desparation and Fury.

Now what Resentment Passion raises in Men, Justice kindles in the Holy Ghost;
for he enters a Soul in both these Qualities, as Sovereign to make it the Seat
of his Empire, regnum Dei intra vos est; and as a Spouse, to contract with it
the nearest and most sacred Alliance, Sponsabo te mihi in sempiteruum. Yet
every idle Pretender, every rebellious Appetite, or unruly Passion, is admitted
to dispute his Title, while the Owner is forced to plead his Right before a
corrupted Judge, the Free Will of Man; while the Heart, an unfaithful Spouse,
is not only consenting to his Banishment, but also before his Face abandons her
self into the Embraces of a foul Adulterer, the professed Enemy of her rightful
Lord, preferring the momentary Pleasures of this World, before the eternal
Caresses of his Favor.

But he bewailing her Loss more than his own, (when the losing of him is indeed
the losing her self) follows her, with the Tears and unspeakable Groans of her
Mother the Church, begs of her to return, more to her self, than to him, Redite
peccatores ad cor; and is contristated that she will neither believe nor
prevent her endless and unconsolable Sorrow, Si cognovisses and tu.

And what do you now expect, Christians, but that, (to close up this Discourse)
I join my Voice to that of the Holy Ghost, and become his Advocate, who pleads
for himself to your Heart; and that I beg of you once with my Lips, what he
does every moment by his Grace, Nolite contristare? For his and your own sake
have pity upon your own Souls, and cease to grieve the Holy Ghost.

1. If you have not yet given him entrance by a faithful Obedience to his Call,
hear his Voice even this day, harden your Hearts no longer, put an end to your
Reluctances and Resistance. There are but two Wills concerned in your
Conversion, but two Consents required to the thoro' Amendment of your Life, the
Holy Ghost's, and your own. And I hope, from what I have discoursed, you are
very well satisfied, that the Holy Ghost wishes nothing so earnestly, desires
nothing so passionately, demands nothing so instantly: And do you deliberate
upon the matter? Do you entertain the Motion so coldly? Is your Salvation in
your own Hands, and you stand demurring whether you shall accept of it? Is that
freely offered you, which you ought to have su'd for with flaming Sighs and
unexpressible Groans, gemitibus inenarrabilibus? Is it not Crime enough to have
hitherto resisted his Inspirations, stopped your Ears against his Calls,
rejected his Counsels, and trampled upon his Commandments? Will you continue in
Rebellion till there is no Mercy left for you? Will you seal up your Ears till
the Invitation is past? Will you not render to his Counsels till it be too
late, nor acknowledge his Commandments till you are lost for ever? Will you
send back his comfortable Venite's, Come to me, with the Language of the
wicked, Recede a nobis, Depart from us, and force him to that bitter
Retaliation, Recedite a me, Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire?

And this you do, while you continue to neglect his repeated Instances and
Calls; for a continued Neglect is a Contempt, and a Contempt of the Holy Ghost
is that Basphemy which pronounces Sentence upon it self, the fatal Recede a
nobis, Depart from us for ever. Yes, hard-hearted Sinner, cruel to thy self and
to thy God; God will obey the Voice of Man, who would never hearken to the
Voice of God; he will depart from thee for ever. For the Scripture often warns
us, that there is a certain number of Sins, which, filled up, chase him away
irrevocably; that there is a certain number of Calls, which being rejected, You
shall call, says he, and I will not hear; and there is a certain number of
Graces summed up, and recorded by the Hand of Justice, after which no more are
given, or at least so imperfect and weak, as they leave the Soul in a moral
impossibility to break her Chains, or shake off her evil Habits.

Perhaps this is the last Opportunity shall ever be presented you; perhaps this
is the last time you shall ever hear the Holy Ghost speaking to your Hearts,
the last and peremptory Term of Grace, beyond which it shall never be extended,
and on acceptance of which, depends your eternal Predestination or Reprobation:
Perhaps this is your last Pentecost; and remember you are warned, that he who
appeared to day in the shape of Fiery Tongues, to express how ardently he
desires your Conversion, will one day appear in that terrifying Posture, the
Prophets beheld him, when a flaming Sword issued from his Mouth, Death and
Destruction walked before him, a Torrent of Fire streamed from his enraged
Countenance, and flaming Eyes, to consume his Enemies.

2. But above all, you that have already received the Holy Ghost, Nolite
contristare, do not grieve him, do not extinguish those Divine Flames he has
raised in your Hearts: Consider what a Happiness it is to be his Temple; give
him not the displeasure to see himself chased from that Place, whence his
Access had chased so many evil and tyrannical Spirits, and where he desires to
dwell in this Life by his Grace, that we may dwell for ever in his Glory. Which
I beseech, etc.

FINIS.

