C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other
Die Veneris 26. Iulii, 1661.
Ord of ye Lords
THe Lords in Parliament taking notice, That the Streets, Lanes, and other
public Passages in or near the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
Liberties thereof, and especially in Holborn and the Lane commonly called St.
Margarets Lane, leading to the Parliament House; As also the Highways about
the said Liberties of London and Westminster, are very much out of Repair: It
is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That the Justices of Peace,
and all others herein concerned shall forthwith upon sight of this Order take
effectual care that the said Streets, Lanes, and Highways, especially within
one Mile of the said Cities, or either of them, be speedily repaired according
to Law, as they will answer the contrary at their perils; And it is further
Ordered, That the Justices of Peace and other persons concerned, do take care
that no place be used for a Laystall, or for laying of Soil or other offensive
things in or near the said Cities, or either of them, which has not been used
for that purpose above or before the space of Twenty Years last past; and that
all such places now used for those uses, which have not been so used before
Twenty Years last past, be cleansed, and all Soil and other offensive things
removed thence within the space of two Months next ensuing.

Die Martis, 30 Die Julii 1661.
ORdered by the Lords in PARLIAMENT, That this Order be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Jo: BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.

At the KINGS Printing House in Blackfriars.


