engraving of Dr. Simon Episcopius SIMON EPISCOPIUS.

This Pictur's Substance was a matchless wight
In Learning, boldness and a life Upright.


THE Popish Labyrinth: Wherein is made manifest, That the Papists are entangled
in the Fundamental Article of their Faith, That the Church cannot Err.

Written in Dutch by that holy and learned Man, Dr. SIMON EPISCOPIUS.

Unto which is added, The Life and Death of the Author; As also, The Life and
Death of JAMES ARMINIUS: Both of them famous Defenders of God's Universal
Grace, and Sufferers for it.

Now published in the English Tongue, By J. K.

The memory of the Just is blessed. Prove. 10.7. LONDON, Printed for Francis
Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange; and at
the same sign first Shop without Temple Bar, 1673.

Christian and pious Readers,
IF you have but to any considerable measure conversed with the Writings of our
Protestant Writers either of late, or formerly, against the Papists; you will
find that they have abundantly proved them to be, if not an apostatical and
false, yet at least an erroneous and Schismatical Church, and one that has
little cause so to boast and magnify her self upon her pretended Privileges
of Truth and Infallibility above others as she does.

That many Worthies of the Protestants, both of former times, and of late, have
written sufficiently to have convinced the Popish Party of their gross and
palpable Errors, and to prove that they are nothing less than what they pretend
to, viz. Infallible, or such as are not nor can be obnoxious to mistake, any
one that has read their Writings, and is but master of an ordinary measure of
Reason, Ingenuity and Impartiality, will confess.

That many Worthies of the Protestants both of former and latter Times have
sufficiently, yea abundantly proved the Church of Rome, if not wholly an
apostatical and false, yet at least a most grossly erroneous and corrupt Church,
no man of ordinary Ingenuity and Reason will deny. To wave what has been
written for their Conviction by those more Ancient, one would think that what
some excellent Men of late, Mr. B. Dr. Tiliotson and Dr. Stillingfleet have
written against them, would have put to utter silence their Ignorance and
Folly; And that they would not have had a word to plead for their
Infallibility, who have been found to err so grossly and palpably concerning the
Faith in many the weightiest Doctrines of the Gospel as they have done; but
that they would have acknowledged the mighty Power of Truth, and have said, it
is worthy to prevail. But so little prevalent with them is the Light of Truth,
though shining never so bright both in the Scriptures and Reason, that their
Folly, though never so much brayed thereby, will not depart from them. They
still hold as fast as stiffly their grossly irrational, and anti-scriptural and
absurd Doctrines of Image Worship, Transubstantiation, Indulgencies,
Angel-worship, Saint-worship or Invocation of them, Purgatory, etc. as ever,
and will do. All Arguments drawn from Scripture and Reason, yea from common
Sense it self, are but as Brass with the Leviathan, they esteem them all but as
rotten Wood.

But you will say, Whence or how came this Spirit of Infatuation upon them?

Why the Apostle will tell you, 2 These. 2.10.

But you will say, This is an hard saying.

No not at all. If men show themselves so absurd, as not to be ruled by any
thing whatsoever that God has appointed for their right-Ordering and Guidance,
it is evident that they are wicked as well as absurd, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.

But you will go on to ask, How comes this Infatuation to be so inveterate with
them and impossible to be removed?

This our excellent Author in this little Treatise will tell you. 1. They take
it for an undeniable Maxim (than which yet there is nothing more false) that
the true Church cannot err. 2. They assume (which is also as hard, yea
impossible to prove, and so as false as the former) that they are that true
Church which cannot err, or is so infallible. Whilst they hold these two
Positions, you were as good dispute with a Post, as go about to convince them
of Error, let them commit Errors (if it were possible) Seventy times seven more
in Number and more gross and absurd in their Nature, than they do.

Well then, what shall or can be done for them for their recovery, and for
preventing others from incurring the like Distemper of Absurdity and
Unreasonableness?

I answer, By following the Directions here brieffly given, and taken
dexterously from them accordingly, these two Maxims. Now this you will
effectually do, if you put them to prove, or but to show you, 1. What is that
Church that cannot err, and who is the Head of it? This you you will find an
impossible Task for them to perform. 2. Put them likewise to prove (if they
could assign him, as they cannot) that the Head of their Church cannot err,
either from Scripture, Reason, or Fathers, and you will find them at the same
Loss. And indeed no better help will they find from Succession and Antiquity,
than from the former, for that proof of their first Maxim.

2. As to the second Maxim, that falls of it self, viz. That they are that
true Church that cannot err. For if they cannot tell what is that Church that
cannot err, or who is the Head of it, then cannot they say, they are that
Church, For so they would say they know not what. But enough of this. For your
Prevention and mine own, read this most excellent and learned Treatise,
written in Dutch by the pious and renowned Dr. Simon Episcopius, from thence
translated into Latin, and now rendered into English; which with the Blessing of
God upon your serious Perusal may tend to your Reducement from any Hankerings
after Popish Trumpery, and Establishment in the Truth, which is after
Godliness; And the Blessing of God go along with it. Amen.

The Popish Labyrinth, etc.
CHAP. I. Of two sorts of Men, with whom it is in vain to dispute.
THere is no Labor that is undertaken with greater Wearisomness and les^
Profit, than a dispute undertaken with those men, who either will not be taught
better; or as it were, being willing to learn better, and breathing after the
best and clearest Truth, dispute of no other things but those, which after they
have been fully disputed, leave the Disputants at as great an uncertainty as
they were before, whether the certain and necessary truth be found or no. The
first are willing to remain in Ignorance: The second, though they would not
seem on purpose and deliberately to love their Ignorance, yet do they waver to
and fro with uncertainty concerning the Truth; yea and that oftentimes then too
when after many and difficult Labors sustained, they shall seem to have
obtained the Victory in Dispute. To desire to dispute with either of these two
sorts of Men, is all one, as if one should plow the Seashore, or beat the Air.
To desire indeed to deal with those men with Reasons, who will not recede so
much as a fingers breadth from the Opinion they have undertaken to maintain, is
all one as by Arguments to persuade him the Sun shines, who shuts his eyes
against the Light thereof, and refuses to see its Light. Indeed for their
sakes (who continually fasten on such kind of Questions, as when they be fully
discust, do yet nevertheless not convince Consciences of the principal Truth)
to spend much pains, and to weary ones self with continual disputing, is
nothing else, but to draw water with a sieve, which if one take up out of the
water, immediately it appears empty and void of that Humor or Moisture which
it abundantly drew.

CHAP. II. Of that kind of Papists who will not be taught better.
Amongst the most of Christians, especially the Papists, or by which title they
love to be called, the Catholics, when any Dispute is had with them, we
ordinarily meet with these two sorts of Men. The first Sort is twofold: Some
fear not roundly and with full mouth to affirm, that they will not be taught
better, but that they will tooth and nayl and obstinately stick to their own
Opinion; Insomuch that though they should see with their eyes that the Wall is
white, yet nevertheless they would believe, their Church so believing and
judging, that it is black; because being forced by necessity, they find that
they must so speak. Whereupon although they find by all their Senses, that is,
see, smell, taste, feel, hear, that the bread in the Eucharist is nothing but
bread, yet notwithstanding they ought to be willing to believe that it is not
bread; but only the accident of Bread, which cannot be tasted, touched, or
smelt: Not considering that themselves do by this means give very many cause to
doubt of every thing, and so to call in question the chief Foundation of the
whole Christian Religion, that is, the Truth of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, which is built on this Foundation, that the Apostles and
Disciples of Jesus Christ, and amongst these Thomas, otherwise not
over-credulous, perceived Jesus Christ with all their senses, saw, handled,
heard, and veiwed him near to them; judging that that very thing ought to be an
irrefragable Argument to themselves and to the whole world, for to believe that
Christ rose from the dead not in show and appearance, but really in his proper
body. And they indeed call this very thing men's believing those things which
they do not see; who yet do quite contrary here, whilst they do not believe
that very thing, which they see, touch, smell, hear and taste. He that sees
not that this is a great Efficacy of error, he sees nothing at all: and if
Thomas had followed this Rule, he might by the same Parity of Right have
believed that it was not Christ himself whom he beheld before him, into whose
side he thrust his Hand, and his Finger into the Prints of the Nails.

CHAP. III Of some Papists that cleave so stiffly to their own Opinion, that
they will not give place to any Reason.
THere are others who seem not on set purpose to be willing, or to dare roundly
and openly to profess, that they will not be taught better; yea who protest to
the contrary, deeming that too gross and rustic a Saying, and yet nevertheless
they do not obscurely declare, when they see their Forces reduced to Straits,
that they neither can nor ought to yield to a better Opinion; much less receive
any Information from those whom their Church counts Heretics; and although
they perceive themselves in such sort wrapped in, that they can give no reason
of their Belief or Opinion, neither from the Sacred Scriptures, nor Councils,
nor Fathers, and that their own Reasons are so solidly and strongly refuted,
that they may, as it were, feel with their hands, that their Exceptions to the
contrary are of no Weight or Force at all; yet they defend or maintain their
own so obstinately, that they will rather persuade themselves, that those
Arguments, though they seem solid, and altogether Achillean, are more brittle
than Glass, and do only deceive under a show of Reason, which others, more
skilful than themselves, would easily and with no trouble solve or answer, and
so being blinded with a prejudicate Opinion, and also led with a Love and
Reverence of their Mother the Church, they count them mere Sophisms; by this
means indeed confessing on the one hand their own weakness, and on the other
hand, showing their singular Constancy, or Obstinacy in the Faith of their
Church; contrary Arguments notwithstanding, which press their minds, and force
them to doubt of their foregoing Belief, yea to believe to the contrary. We
may easily observe that these two Sorts of Men do not seek the Truth with a
pious and honest Mind; but that they only hunt after vain Glory, and the
Praise of Victory gotten by any means whatsoever; deeming they have always
sufficient Causes of glorying, whilst they dare affirm they are not satisfied.
That the case so stands, daily Experience shows. Nor is it to be wondered at:
The first and chiefest Article of the Papists is this, That their Church cannot
err; consequently that of all other Churches, that differ from their Church, we
are to conclude that they err, and that as long as they persist in their
Error, are liable to eternal destruction and damnation. With whom this
foundation does not remain wholly fixed and unshaken, he cannot be a true
Papist: but if any hold it tooth and nail, he openly professes that he is not
willing to be taught better, although he shall be convinced of his Error; or
if he make show of some desire to learn, yet does he with his whole Strength
and Might maintain his Opinion; although the Truth be proposed to him as
clearly and resplendently, as the Sunbeams are wont to be, when the weather is
fair and clear. This Foundation being laid, it necessarily follows, that to
dispute with a true Papist is fruitless and endless; and that it cannot be
hoped, that such an one should be taken off from his resolution, or by
Arguments be reduced into the right Way. Furthermore, a true Papist, as he
renders himself unmeet to embrace the Truth, and to acknowledge his own Error,
so does he unadvisedly cast himself into a Labyrinth or Maze of inextricable
absurdities, out of which he is utterly unable to extricate or free himself, as
it frequently uses to befall them, who receive not the Love of the Truth, that
they might be saved, as Paul shows, 2 These. 2.10. And this appears more clear
than the Noon-dayes Light, when any Dispute is undertaken with them, even
concerning any Point whatsoever of the Christian Religion, nor is it necessary
in many words to prove it.

CHAP. IIII. That the Papists cannot show, which is that true Church, which
cannot err.
THis chief and fundamental Point, which they have always in their mouth, and
on which they chiefly build, That the Church of Rome cannot err, is a
Labyrinth, out of which they cannot rid themselves. For first, they cannot
tell, nor intelligibly declare, which is that Church which they believe cannot
err. Secondly, it is impossible for them to bring any Demonstrative Argument,
whereby to persuade themselves, or any other impartial man (I do not say the
Roman, but) that the Church cannot err. I evince these two: As to the first
Member, I thus query with a Papist; When you say the Church or the Church of
Rome cannot err, what do you mean by the Church? Do you mean all Christians in
general, who take Jesus Christ for their Savior, and submit to all his holy
Commands, so that not so much as one of them can err? Doubtless he will deny
it. For every one of them considered singly apart, yea and all conjunctly
together, may err; For all are Members of one Body, which ought to have a
visible Head, from whom they ought to receive Spiritual Life, Senses and holy
Affections. Grant it be so, what then? Do you think that the Cardinals,
Archbishops, Presbyters and Doctors are the Church? He will deny it again:
Since all and every one singly may err, for the same Reason which we have shown
already. Do you therefore by the Church understand a general Council,
consisting of all the Cardinals, Bishops and Doctors, as representing the whole
multitude of Christians, whose Head this Council is? He will affirm it. But
granting this, although it be grounded on no Reason; I will ask further, Do you
believe then that this Council, as it is the Head of the Church, cannot err,
howsoever assembled, and whatsoever shall be decreed therein? In no wise, he
will say; it ought to be lawfully convocated. By whom, say I? he will say, by
the Pope of Rome. Grant this, though it be void of Reason, and without Ground,
yea and they determine or judge contrary to the Practice of the first General
Councils. Is this Council, so convocated, that Church, which cannot err in its
Decrees and Determinations? Or, is there that Head of the Church, to which no
Error is incident? Here he will stick or demur somewhat. For I will go on to
query, thus. Put the case that this Council decree any thing without the
Consent, yea contrary to the Judgment and Dignity of the Pope of Rome, whether
or no can it err therein? Here he must of necessity be wholly at a Loss. For it
is known, that not only diverse Ancient Councils, both particular, and General,
have past Decrees against his mind, and which did diminish the Pope of Rome's
Dignity, as appears by many Councils in Africa, and also in the fourth General
Council of Chalcedon, and many others. But further also it is evident, that the
General Council of Constance (held in the Year 1414. and called by the Pope of
Rome John the 23. or as others the 24. At which were present more than a
Thousand Fathers deputed or appointed by the Church of Rome, and among these
above three hundred Bishops) decreed with unaminous Consent, that the Council
was above the Pope; and therefore that it was in the power of the Council to
expunge Popes out of the Register of the Church, and to degrade them; even as
by the same Council were degraded three Popes, who then exercised the Office of
the Popedom, and among these even Pope John himself, who had called this
Council, and that for four and fifty, or according to others, seventie one
nefarious Crimes, among which were these two; First, that he had openly denied
the Immortality of Souls, supposing that Men dyed like Beasts; to which he also
added this Second, That he affirmed that there was neither Paradise, nor Hell,
as is manifest by the 11th Session. Here the Papist must say one of these two:
Either that such a general Council, is the Church that cannot err, no not even
then, when it determines any thing against the Pope, and to the prejudice of
his Highness; as was done in this Council: Or, that such a Council is not the
true Church, and therefore is capable of Error. If he say the Former, he will
find himself entangled in a Gordian Knot; and besides he will oppose the
greatest Part of the Popish Doctors, especially the Jesuits, who not only
affirm that the Pope is above a Council, but also determine that that Council
of Constance is in this respect to be blamed, wherein they decreed that the
Pope was inferior to a Council; as is clear out of Cardinal Bellarmin and
others: yea further, he will be forced expressly to confess that the Pope of
Rome, who has suceeeded to Peter's Right and Power, is not the chief or supreme
Head of all Churches; and by Consequence that the Pope of Rome may err in
Faith, and swerve from the Truth. If he say the latter, he falls into a new
Labyrinth; For then he does not only contradict Councils, but also many and
diverse both Churches, and Popish Doctors; And namely the most ancient School
of the Sorbon in France, which by some is called the first Daughter of the
Church; which with the greatest part of the French Churches, defends and
approves of that decree of the Council of Constance. Howbeit suppose that he
find no difficulty in this matter, yet there he will stick, that even then he
knows not, and cannot tell or show that Church, which affirms that it cannot
err. For if a General Council be not the Church, or if it may err, and does
err, when it determines any thing against the Pope, or without his approbation,
I pray what is that which makes the Church not liable to Error? Happily he will
say the Council is the Church, when it agrees with the Pope, and is confirmed
by Him. Here again is a new Labyrinth, for it may fall out, and it very often
has, that the greatest Part of the Council may not vote with the Pope. Imagine
therefore that the greatest Part of the Council do judge and decree something,
that the Pope disallows of; Or that the Pope agree with the lesser Part: Which
Part in this Case makes the Church? Not the greatest; For that is contrary to
the Pope. Does then the least Part make the Church? What Reason? What show of
Truth? What only, because the Pope favors it? Then the Pope is the Church; For
if these few make the Church, because the Pope is on their Side; then if they
were only two, who should judge against a thousand others? those two with the
Pope would make the Church? and what speak I of two? Although there were only
one, yea none, yet the matter would come to the same Issue, the Pope alone at
length would be the Fore-castle and Poop, and the whole Church, which cannot
err; Although he be even the veryest Knave in the World; Yea further, not only
a Heretic but also an Atheist, who denies the Immortality of the Soul, Heaven
and Hell; As Pope John the 23, of whom we have lately spoken of, did: For which
Cause he was degraded by the Council of Constance, with so severe a Sentence;
that he was never after to be so much as counted for a Pope: as appears by the
11. and 12. Session.

CHAP. V. That none can lawfully decide this Question.
LO in what an intricate and inextricable Labyrinth the Papist sticks, as to
the first and chief Foundation of his Religion, to wit, that even to this day
he cannot tell what that Church is that cannot err, or which is that Head of
the Church that is not subject to error, but he must contradict many and
diverse Catholic Churches and Doctors; Nor can the Mind of Man devise any
means, whereby to bring Him out of this Maze of Errors into the way. For who
shall determine and decide this without Error? For either the Pope or a
Council shall determine this Question, disjunctly or conjunctly, (that is,
apart or together.) Disjunctly it is impossible, because neither of them can
remove the Controversy. For as long as it does not appear, or it is not
agreed, whether is the true Church which cannot err, neither can decide this
Question by a Peremptory and infallible Judgment: And if either should assume
this right to himself, it would justly be suspected by the other Party: And he
would in very, deed make himself a Judge in his own Cause. For if either
deliver his Right unto other, he will not only commit an unworthy Deed (For to
deliver the Right of supreme Authority in the Church is a wicked and unlawful
Act: To whom that Right appertains, he must of necessity maintain the same.)
but he will also thwart or go against all the Decrees of other Councils,
wherein either a Council is defined to be above the Pope, or the Pope above a
Council. And supposing this were done, yet will it follow from thence, that the
Church of Rome has for so great a space of Time, either erred in so
fundamental a Point; or stuck in Uncertainty and Doubt, not knowing what to
determine concerning this Question. It is a Deep without Bottom, into which
hitherto the Church of Rome has been plunged, together with all those who
think her the only Church wherein alone Salvation may and ought to be had. Let
any one show himself, that can free himself from thence with show of Truth, and
solid Reasons.

CHAP. VI. That a Papist cannot demonstrate from the Sacred Scripture, that the
Head of his Church cannot err.
BUt suppose we indeed, that a Papist could tell the Head of his Church, (which
yet, as has been proved already, he cannot) by what Argument, I pray, will he
assure both himself, and others that this Head cannot err? What way soever he
takes to demonstrate this, he will see that he falls into another far more
intricate Labyrinth. For, that he may be certain, That this Head cannot err, it
is necessary, that either he will believe it simply, and without Reason, or
that he labor to prove it from the Sacred Scripture, or from the Fathers, or
by Reasons. If he will believe and persuade himself thereof simply, and have
others believe the same; all Dispute will be forthwith superfluous and void:
and if another on the contrary, will not believe the same, they will then be
both alike, and both continue to stick in the Labyrinth of their own carnal
Will. However it be, his Faith is not a Faith that cannot err; and
consequently, he cannot with Certainty rely thereon. If he endeavor to prove
it from Scripture, he entangles himself much more. For first, it cannot be
known, according to his Opinion, that the Scripture is the Word of God, except
the true Church first certify us thereof. If this be true as he believes it
is, and according to the Rules of his Church he is bound to believe, he cannot
take Arguments from the Scripture, whereby to maintain that the true Church
cannot err; Or whereby to prove, that his Church is the true Church that knows
not how to err. Secondly, suppose that it be even granted to him, to fetch his
Reasons from the Scripture, he will then find himself much more entangled. For
presently the Question will be concerning the true meaning of the Scripture.
And the Question that is raised, to wit, whether it be contained in the
Scripture, that the Church cannot err, who shall by an infallible Judgment
decide it? Shall his Church? This is no ways possible, because the Question is
concerning the meaning of the Scripture, to wit, whether the Scripture gives to
the Church this right or Privilege of judging authoritatively, and infallibly.
But Thirdly: granting also that the Scripture does give this Power to the true
Church (which it does not) yet the Question will remain, which is that Church,
which is the true Church, and to whom this Privilege in Scripture is given.
And in the Power of what Church shall the Power of deciding infallibly this
Question be? In the Power of the Roman? But the Question is moved no less
concerning it then others; besides it cannot pass Judgment in its own concern,
more than another Church concerning its. If he go about to prove it by Reasons,
he will rove without the bounds, because those Reasons are not Scriptural, and
we here treat or plead about the Scripture. But supposing, that Reasons be
opposed against Reaons; There will now straightway result from thence a new
Question, Which Reasons are strongest and infallible, whereby we may be
certain? That the Reason taken from Succession does not belong to this Place,
we shall demonstrate hereafter. That a Papist should emerge from hence, is
impossible.

CHAP. VII. That He cannot demonstrate this very thing from the Fathers.
IF he will prove this from the Fathers their Writings, he falls into the same,
and indeed into a more intricate Labyrinth. Into the same, I say: For
immediately the Question will be, whence does it appear certainly that this
Right or Power does belong to the Writings of the Fathers, that the decision of
this and other Controversies in the business of Religion ought to be fetched
from them? I say also into a more intricate. For first, it will be demanded,
what Fathers, and what Writings do they mean? If they say these or those, it
will secondly be asked, Why those rather than other, and why not all? For whosoever
puts this Difference between the Writings of the Fathers, he does by that very
Deed of his make the decision. And to whom shall it belong to make this
Decision? Furthermore, suppose that there be no Controversy raised concerning
some, yet thirdly the Question will remain still, Whether those writings, which
be attributed to the Fathers, be their Writings whose Names they bear? or
whether they might not in Tract of Time through negligence, through Deceit and
Fraud be corrupted, and depraved? or whether they might not be patcht up with
the supposititious Changling or forged Books of other Writers, as we see indeed
done at this Day by the Writings of Tertullian, Justin, Hierome, Augustine,
Chrysostom, etc? Who shall judge between the genuine or true, and the
supposititious or adulterate and false? For that there is required a skill in
Tongues, continual or diligent reading, an acute Judgment and an accurate
Examination of the Words and Phrasiologie or manner of expression of the
Fathers. But supposing also, that there is no Controversy touching these
Things; Then Fourthly the Question will be, whether all those Things, which the
Fathers believed and wrote, are to be believed and received as true. If you
deny it; I will query in the Fifth Place, why one more than another? If you
say, because they are all agreed in that or the one, then these Questions will
forthwith arise. First, wherefore should all those Things, wherein they are
agreed amongst themselves, be accounted or held by the Church of Rome for
undoubted and certain. The Second is, what are those things concerning which
they are agreed, and which are to be embraced. To know this, you must
attentively turn over the Writings of all the Fathers, Greek and Latin, from
Head to Foot, for the which some Years space is requisite. And Thirdly, if any
Doubt happen either touching the Sense of their Writings, as there is doubt
made of the Scripture, or of their Phrases and forms of Expression, which they
at that Time used, and now are both used and understood far otherwise, what end
will there be? But passing this, seeing the Fathers agree among themselves in
this, that they would have neither their own nor any Writings of Men, except
the Books that are Canonical, to be looked upon as free from Error; yea, seeing
they roundly confess that they may err, and by Consequence would not that their
Writings should be believed not to be liable to Error, but do expressly will,
that they be tried by the Word of God, desiring that they should be rejected if
they agree not therewith; What shall be done then? What Certainty can there be
had from their Writings against Errors? Certainly none at all. Yea rather, if
we make Use of them for this end, that we may from thence be assured in our
belief; we use them contrary to the Intention of the Fathers, and so against
their plain and express Protestation and Prohibition, wherein the Fathers are
all agreed.

CHAP. VIII. That the same cannot be proved by Reasons.
IF he at length have a mind to confirm his Thesis by Reasons, he falls out of
one Labyrinth into another. For first, what Reasons will sway with him whereon
to rely, when as in the main Article of his Belief he does not only not heed
Rea^ons; but does not believe so much as his outward Senses? Can there be given
any more solid Argument for the convincing of any one, than that which is drawn
from that which we see with our own Eyes, which we perceive with our Senses
being sound; and lastly, which we feel and taste? These things notwithstanding
the true Papist makes small Account of; Seeing that neither by Reasons, nor by
his own Senses he suffers himself to be induced to believe, that the
Eucharistical Bread, in the Lord's Supper, is essentially and substantially
Bread: Yea when he will undoubtedly believe that one and the same Body is in
many places together, and they far distant each from other, remaining
individed, notwithstanding that it be distant, and separate from it self one
hundred, yea a thousand, and, if it were possible, a thousand thousand Miles;
that one and the same Body at the same Time should be able to move in this
Place, and elsewhere not to move: That one and the same Body should meet it
self, and move with contrary Motions at the same moment of Time, that is,
together at once from East to West, and from West to East, Upward and Downward,
Foreward and Backward: That one and the same Body here should be as hot as
Fire, and at Rome as cold as Ice; That it should be alive here, and dead at
Venice? He that will believe these Things, which are diametrically contrary to
the Nature of Man, and right Reason, by what Reason shall he either dare, or be
able to persuade himself or others of any thing? Those who shame not to
question so clear a Truth, and obstinately to believe the cont^^ry, and as I
may so say, wilfully to draw a Film over their Eyes that they may not see; with
such, I say, Reasons are like Counters, which stand for so much, as they desire
they should stand for that use them in Accounts.

But be it, that they make Use of Reasons. What Reasons I pray you will they
here produce? Will they take them from the Scripture? But then the same
Difficulties will remain, as we have already recounted. Or, shall their Reasons
not be taken from Scripture? But those by other Reasons may most easily and not
without just cause be called into Doubt. For if the Church cannot err, this
must necessarily proceed from the Divine Will and Decree. For if God will not
have the Church to be beyond or out of all Danger of Error, what Reason will
there be given undenyably proving that the Church cannot err? Now the will and
Decree of God cannot be understood without the Scripture, much less can it be
drawn from men's Wit and Reasoning. From whence it follows that it is
altogether most absurd, by Reasons, which may be doubted of, to prove any
thing, which ought now long before without all Doubt and Controversy to be
believed, to depend upon the mere free Will and Decree of God.

By these Things it is manifest in how intricate and inexplicable a Circle the
Papists wander, in ^espect of the fundamental Article of their Faith, when they
will believe nothing but what their Church believes; yet cannot certainly show
what their Church properly is, or who is the Head of their Church; and although
they could show that (as they cannot) yet were it impossible for them to prove
that the Church, much less that their Church cannot err.

And thus far of the first sort of Papists, with whom we have said that Dispute
is always held in vain.

CHAP. IX. That the Controversy of Succession is useless, and endless.
THe second sort of them is those, who greatly desire always to dispute of
those Questions, which though they be weighed by the exact balance of Truth,
yet do they not assure the Consciences of Men, nor convince them of the Truth,
that is chiefly necessary to be believed.

These are they, who have the Antiquity and Succession both of their Doctrine
and Church always in their Mouth: concluding for certain that they have born
away the Palm, and gotten the Victory; if they may glory thereof. This they
sound forth as the Burden of the Catholics Song. And which is worthy of the
Highest Admiration, the chief Cryers and Boasters hereof are even those, who
happily not so much as ever thoroughly viewed the Books and Histories of those
Men, from whence this Antiquity and continued Succession is to be drawn and
maintained; or if they have viewed them through, are yet nevertheless no ways
fit to turn them over without Affection and Prejudice, to wit, being wont,
either foolishly to believe by a Proctour, to whom they persuade themselves the
Matter is best known, although he sometimes be void of all knowledge of
matters; or else foolishly and without Judgment to catch at all words and
syllables, which they deem do any way serve their Purpose and Design.

How tedious a thing it is to enter upon the Stage of Disputation with such,
every one easily perceives. For who sees not how hard and great a Labor it is
to dispatch or put an End to those Questions, which are to be demonstrated,
from the Memory of Ages, and so great variety of Books and Histories; and being
demonstrated so that all way to any further Exception be shut up, do produce no
Fruit in the Minds of the contrary Party? Wherefore those who trouble the
People with suc^ Things, what do they else, but involve them in an inextricable
Labyrinth, whereby the unskilful Multitude either despaireth of an happy Event
or End; or if they have any Hope, they nevertheless cease not to stick fast in
the same Mire of uncertainty, to wit, being dulled and stupefied with the
overmuch labor of search? This indeed is the readiest Way, whereby any one may
lord it over the Consciences of simple Men, and having entangled them in a
Gordian Knot, persuade them any Thing. But let us propose both these a little
more clearly. The first I prove thus.

None will be able to deny, that for the asserting the Antiquity not only of
the Church, but also of a continued and uninterrupted Succession of Bishops in
the Church, there is necessarily required, first a certain, undoubted, and
accurate Knowledge of Authors both Greek, and Latin, and of all Histories, that
have been written of this thing. And Secondly, that to this knowledge there
ought to be added a good and quick-sighted Judgment, whereby exactly to discern
their true and genuine Books from those that are supposititious and adulterate;
true Histories from those that are foisted in and interlaced; those that were
composed with Partiality, out of Affection, and fore-stall'd Opinion, from
those they composed void of Partiality and Prejudice; to reconcile
Repugnancies, and faithfully to supply Defects. How much Pains, Trouble, and
Time it requires, every one sees; even amongst the most learned for the whole
Space of a thousand and six hundred Years, there has been none hitherto, who
has been able to perform it. The first of them cannot indeed be so much as
sought for, much less found. Shall then the unlearned and unskilful common
People, who are counted unable to turn over one Book of the Scripture, be
sufficient to undergo so great a Work as accurately to enquire into all
Histories, wherewith even whole Barns may be filled, and Ships laden? The
Laics or Lay People in the the Papacy, who laying aside the holy Scripture,
always talk of Antiquity and Succession, bewray a mind stupid and foolish
enough; because they know nothing more, yea happily much less of true Antiquity
and Succession than they do of the Scripture, indeed being alike ignorant of
both.

It is true indeed, that there may easily be drawn up a Catalogue and Index of
Bishops, where, in their Course and Order wherein they succeeded each other,
they may be set down. But that is nothing to the Purpose. For the same do the
Grecian, the Ethiopick Churches and others. The Constantinopolitan does it,
says Bellarmine from the Times of Constantine Caesar, in an uninterrupted
Series; as also Nicephorus, who continues the Names of the Bishops, even from
the very Times of Andrew the Apostle. And yet Bellarmine denies, and all the
Papists with him, that the Grecians can of Right claim to themselves a
Succession. The Succession therefore of Persons is not enough, but it is
required withal that it be lawful and such, as that among the Bishops who have
succeeded one another, there have been no Heretic, Atheist, or Apostate among
them. First it is requisite that it be lawful, for as the Papal Decree has it
Did. 79. If any by Money, or men's Favor, or Popular, or Military Tumult,
without the unaminous and Canonical Election, both of the Cardinals and of the
following Clergy, shall be enthroned in the Apostolic Seat; let him not be
accounted Apostolical, but Apostatical. Secondly, it is required, that among
the Bishops that succeed each other, there have been no Heretic among them.
For, for this cause, as Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Pontificial Doctors
affirm, the Succession of the Constantinopolitan Bishops is not to be counted
lawful, because there have been Heretics amongst them. Lib. 4. of the Marks of
the Church, Cap. 8. He therefore that will judge aright of the Succession of
the Bishops of Rome, he must of Necessity be most certainly assured of both
these, even according to the Canons of the Papists themselves. But how is this
possible? Who can undoubtedly know, whether all their Bishops have obtained the
Episcopacy lawfully? Whether some have not obtained the Dignity of Succession
by Simony, that is, by Money and Gifts (as Simon Magus desired to do) or by
Force, Arts and Wiles, by Factions and unlawful Suits and Bribings for the
same? Again, if any desirous to read their Histories, do find of a certain that
even those Writers themselves who have been most devoted to the Pontificians,
do openly and roundly confess, that not only one or two, but that many and
diverse Bishops of Rome, have climbed to the Pontifical Dignity, who having
been condemned of manifest Heresy, have been counted impious Villains,
Atheists, Schismatics, Ruffians and Bands who by Gifts and Bribes, by Force
and Factions, without any precedent Choice, or consequent Approbation of the
Clergy, by dishonest and foul Devices and Guil^ ^^ve intruded themselves, or
by Harlots, and their Whores have come to the Succession: Who I pray, can
extricate himself out of this Maze of Doubts? If you say, the best and
faithfullest Historians are to be credited in this Case, you fall into a new
Labyrinth. For I demand who are they? and by what are they to be distinguished?
Why shall he derogate from the Credit of the Pontifician Writers? For they
cannot be termed Heretics, or mortal Enemies to the Church of Rome, because
themselves were sworn Vassals thereunto, and some of them the greatest
Flatterers and fawners upon the Popes, and the pontificial Dignity. He is
therefore forced to believe, that these Writers were impelled and constrained
by the Truth of the thing it self, to write these things. And suppose that they
were not Pontifician Writers; What Reason shall persuade that Credit is to be
denied to them as not faithful Writers, rather then unto others who were
Favorers of the Pope and his Dignity? Friendship is no less able to withold
a Writer from writing the Truth, than Enmity or Hatred is. He that will deliver
Truth to Posterity must write without all Affectation. And by what solid
Reason, and which will convince, the Judgment, shall we persuade our selves
that there has been any such Writer, especially if we live not in the same
age, and at the same time with him? He that considers these Things without
Prejudice, ought to be induced to believe, that those who endeavor to defend
or shelter themselves under Antiquity and Succession, do involve themselves in
a Labyrinth, in which one may easily be entangled, but hardly, nay nor indeed
hardly be disintangled or loosed.

CHAP. X. That Truth is to be preferred before all Antiquity and Succession
whatsoever.
BUt granting that any one could prove this Antiquity and Succession. What will
be evinced from thence as to the chief Point of the Matter? Nothing at all. For
Antiquity and Succession of Persons being proved; yet the Question concerning
Truth will still remain. If Antiquity and Succession be not joined with Truth,
what I pray do they make for the proving of this Business? Antiquity is not the
Cause of Truth, much less Succession. And if Antiquity and Succession ought
necessarily to be joined with Truth, then the Truth is first and chiefly to be
known, which whilst it is unknown, so long a man hangs in Suspense. Even as if
a man should find Money, which he certainly knows was coined many Ages before,
yet remains in doubt, whether that Money be made of good Metal, or no.
Antiquity does wholly differ from Goodness: Nor does a naughty Person cease to
be naught, because he is old. Not every ancient Custom is good. And this is the
Cause, Why the Fathers discoursing of true Antiquity and Succession, would have
us chiefly to Mind that Succession, which is in Conjuction with the genuine
Doctrine and Truth; Especially when we have to do with those, that reject the
Scripture either in Part, or in whole, (...), says Gregory Nazianzen, i. e.
For the one is a being of the same Mind or Judgment, and to sit on the same
Throne: The other is to be of a contrary Opinion or Judgment, and to sit on a
contrary Throne: The one has the Name, the other the Truth of Succession. And
Ambrose says, Qui Petri Fidem-non habet, is nihil a Petro haereditario Jure
obtinet, ac frustra gloriatur de Petri Successione; That is, He that has not
Peter's Faith, he inheriteth nothing from Peter, and boasts in vain of his
Succeeding of Peter.

This thing is so clear, that even the most learned Jesuit Cardinal Bellarmine
proves the same, acknowledging both these, 1. That the Argument concerning
Succession is not brought by his Party to prove that that Church, wherein is
the right of Succession, is therefore to be accounted the true Church; but
only to prove that that is not the Church, where there is not Succession. And,
2. That Antiquity and continued Succession does nothing at all avail the
Grecian, or at least the Constantinopolitan, nay nor all your Patriarchal
Churches, to prove that they are a true Church, because there have been
sometimes amongst them Bishops that have been heretical, whose Thread therefore
of Succession has been broken and cut off. From hence it most clearly follows,
that though Succession be already proved, yet the main Question concerning
Truth does remain still. For if when Succession is proved, it cannot infallibly
be gathered and concluded, that that Church is the true Church in whose Hands
the Succession is; And if farther it ought to appear for certain that no
Heresies or heretical Bishops have broken off the Succession; Reason it self
dictates, that Succession is proved in vain, or at least to no great Profit,
unless we be thoroughly informed concerning the Truth. For whilst the Truth is
unknown, it is impossible to know, whether any thing favor of Heresy or no.

But who shall show us the Truth? Or who shall most fully assure us thereof?
Shall the true Church? But where, and which is it? It cannot be. For when
Succession of Persons is proved, it is not yet certain and undoubted, that that
Church wherein is Succession, has Truth on its side, or has been always free
from Heresy, and by Consequence has belonging to it the Right and Power to
point out the true Church. What Church therefore shall it be, that shall
infallibly show us and say, that this is true, that that on the contrary is
Heretical? For the Church that wants Succession, according to the Jesuits,
cannot do it, nor the Church in which is Succession, as is manifest from the
precedent Grounds. What then? What End is there? It is impossible for a Papist
to untye this Knot. To which I add this over and above; Suppose that no
heretical Bishops have intervened or stepped in among those that have succeeded,
but such who, as we have said, have by Force, Faction, and popular Tumult, by
Gifts and Bribes thrust themselves into the Apostolical Seat, where I pray will
be the Succession? Must we indeed believe that holy and saving Truth may better
consist with these nefarious Wickednesses, than with Heresy and Error? Nay
rather, if farther it be found in Histories that at one Time, and that indeed
for fifty, or eighty Years together, there have been two or three Popes, the
one of which expunged the other out of the Catalogue of Christians, called him
in Reproach Heretic and Antichrist, pronounced him an unlawful Pope, cut off
two of his Predecessors fingers, drew up out of the Earth Bodies already
buried, and having shamefully abused their Ashes, cast them into the Tyber, all
which three Popes sometimes together have been condemned and degraded, and
taken out of the Number of Christians, by an universal Council, as false and
unlawful Popes, as Heretics and ungodly Villains, by whom notwithstanding
there were many Bishops and Clergy men ordained, what End or Bounds of
Succession will the Thread of Connection find? For if it be said for Examples
sake, That that Pope, which in the Times of the Council of Constance was by
common Votes substituted in the room of those three Popes, which were deposed
by the said Council, is to be accounted for the true Pope, who succeeded in the
Room of the last that deceased lawful Pope, the Apostolical Sea being in the
Interim vacant, and usurped by Force, he will fall into a new Labyrinth; for
that many of the Popish Doctors, and Bellarmine by Name, and all the Jesuits do
determine and urge, that this Council is so far to be judged for not lawful, in
that it decreed that the Council was above the Pope, because it was not
approved of either by the Pope, that is, that most impious Knave and Villain,
John the twenty fourth, or twenty third, who had called that Council, and was
by the Sentence of the same degraded, or by the Pope whom this Council
constituted in his stead. For if this Council in that Respect be not to be
counted for lawful, how then shall a lawful Succession be proved? Had then this
Council been in this Respect lawful, if that Knave and Varlot had approved of
the same? This is shameful to be spoken, and more shameful to affirm, that
therefore this Council was not lawful, because it was nor approved of by him.
Or had it then been lawful, if the succeeding Pope had approved of the same?
But now, forsooth, it shall be unlawful, because the Pope that was made by this
Council, said not of himself and those like him, that he was subject to the
Council, but on the contrary, Lucifer-like maintained that he was above the
Council. Howbeit it is altogether credible that the Decree of the Council was
approved of by Him, before he was chosen for Pope. Who here sees not a Circle
of Absurdities? However it be, if the Authority of the Council be no more than
the Popes, it could not depose the Pope, and therefore those ungodly Knaves
Popes are to be reckoned among the Bishops that lawfully succeed by a continual
Succession, not interrupted by Reason of their Heresy, Atheism, Simony, Force
and Villainies; or if there be granted an Interruption, there will now forthwith
be no Succession at all, upon the same Account, that Bellarmine denies that the
Succession of the Greeks is to be accounted lawful. He that sees not that the
Papists are wholly at a loss in all these Things, as in an endless Labyrinth of
Errors, he truly seeing is blind. For howsoever the Case stands touching
Succession, the Question concerning Truth will always remain. To what Purpose
therefore do they enter into so intricate a Labyrinth, and take so great Pains
for to prove a Succession? One of these must necessarily be concluded, either
that the Truth is sufficient to constitute a true Church, or that it is not. If
the former be true; To what End is Succession by these endless Windings to and
fro proved? If the latter; What does Truth avail, if it do not constitute a
true Church? It is contrary to the Nature and Property of Truth not to
constitute a true Church, whether those who teach the Truth, have it by
Tradition from others, or no, or at least know not the List of their Names,
from whom they have it delivered to them. Gold will be Gold, although it have
been hid, and buried in the Earth a thousand Years. But you will say, it is
requisite that there be some, before I know Gold, to teach me that that is
Gold. But, say I, shall the Church thoroughly do this? But then there is required
some one besides, by whom I may be sure that that this Church, which does
affirm that this is Gold, does know it most exactly, and cannot err therein.
Who shall that be? Here the Papists make a Circle. We assert that the Scripture
is Truth, which the Church of Rome grants us. But yet it is the Prerogative
of the Church, says he, to tell us that the Scripture is Truth. But, say I,
who shall tell me that the Church that affirms this, says true? She has not
this Privilege by Succession, unless it clearly appear that she never defected
from the Truth. This cannot appear, unless I know what is Truth. If the Church
herself assume this, she then sings to us the same Song, and so the Church
will be both Plantiff, and Judge, and that in her own proper Cause. Here will
be no End of contending. And that is it, which Tertullian meant, in that most
known Place, and commonly in the mouth of all the Papists, which they quote in
all their Writings, with a very perverse wresting of the Sense thereof, in his
Book of Proscript against Heretics, Chap. 32. Where he thus speaks: But if
any (Heresies) dare insert themselves in the Times of the Apostles, that so
they may be thought to have been delivered by the Apostles, because they were
in the Apostles Days, we may say; that is, we may in such Case demand of them
the Succession of which they boast, saying, Let them produce the Originals of
their Churches, turn over the Order of their Bishops, so running down by
Succession from the Beginning, as that first Bishop, had some one of the
Apostles, or Apostolical men, who yet continued with the Apostles, for his
Author and Predecessor, etc. And a little after, Let the Heretics feign any
such Thing: (which is to be noted, as serving our Purpose) yet though they
shall feign it, they shall prevail nothing. For their very Doctrine compared
with that of the Apostles, by its Diversity and Contrariety, will aloud declare
that it has neither any Apostle, nor Apostolical Man for its Author. For as
the Apostles would not have taught Things differing among themselves, so also
the Apostolical Men would not have published Things contrary to the Apostles,
except it were those, who revolted from the Apostles, and taught otherwise.
According to this Form therefore or Manner (note it well) shall those Churches
appeal, which though they can produce none of the Apostles, or Apostolic Men,
as their Author, as being long after, and which lastly are daily instituted:
yet agreeing in the same Faith, (to wit with the Apostles or Apostolic Men)
they are not the less deemed Apostolical, by Reason of the cousanguinity or
nearness of kin of their Doctrine; That is, (according to Tertullians style)
because they agree with the Apostles in Doctrine. These words of Tertullian,
which the Papists so shamefully abuse, and so violently wrest, do not obscurely
confirm what we have said. For Tertullian says three Things, First, that those
Churches, which have the Truth agreeable with the Doctrine of the Apostles, are
no less Apostolical Churches then others, although they cannot show their
Succession, for that only Cause, for that they have the Truth on their side.
Secondly, that those Churches which glory of their Succession, and Original
derived from the Apostles, and cannot demonstrate it, are justly to be
rejected, as those who obtrude upon us that which is false. And Thirdly, that
those Churches which demonstrate their Succession, whether lawfully, or
unlawfully, are not to be counted for true Churches, unless it appear, that
their Doctrine is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Apostles. What Churches
agree therein, the same are Apostolical, although they be destitute of
Succession. This is more clear then the Noondayes Sun. The same affirms
Augustine in that Place, which is also quoted as unfaithfully, and contrary to
the Meaning of Augustine, by the Papists, in his Book which he wrote against
the fundamental Epistle of Manichee, Chap. 4. For when he had said that he
clave to the Catholic Church, wherein from the Sea of Peter, even to his Time,
the Succession of Bishops and Priests had been deduced, he adds these words,
which are altogether agreeable with our Judgment, With you (he speaks of the
Manichees) where there is none of these to invite, and detain me, there is
only the noise of the Promise of Truth, which indeed were it so manifestly
showed, that it could not be questioned, were to be preferred before all those
Things, by Reason whereof I am detained in the Catholic Church What could
Augustine have spoken more clear to prove and show, that neither Antiquity nor
Succession can avail, so as that any one should be able to quit himself of the
Labyrinth of Doubts touching the true Church, but that the Truth alone only
can, and ought to do it.

CHAP. XI. What may be the Cause or Original of the Popish Labyrinth.
BUt some one will say, by this Means the Business indeed is made intricate,
but there is no way showed to untie this Gordian Knot. But, say I, the Way to
unty this Knot is not so hard, if we mind the Fountain, and very Original of
it. For it arises hence, that Men in this World desire an outward Ease and
Peace, an easy and delicate Religion, the which to obtain, they seek for an
infallible Judge speaking in the Church, who Authoritatively may decide all
Controversies, and to whose Award and Judgment the Consciences and Tongues of
all should be obliged or bound, so that it shall not be lawful to contradict
it; and if any refuse to acquiesce in his Judgment, he ought to be subdued by
Force under Pain of Death and his highest Displeasure: In a word, they
endeavor of the Church of Christ to make a wordly Policy, and for that End
forbid the Laics and common People of the reading the Sacred Scripture, lest
Confusion arise in the Church; and the Clergy that are admitted thereunto,
they command, that they read not the Scripture upon any other Terms or
condition, but to understand, and interpret it according to the Mind and Sense
of this Judge, or upon an express Proviso added, that they will not understand
it otherwise, although they do understand it otherwise.

This is the Spring and Original of this Evil, as long as this is not
withstood, the Labyrinth of Errors will remain. I grant indeed that at the
first Veiw it does not seem so unreasonable, that some Judge should be
appointed in the Church, because otherwise there can be had no end of Questions
and Controversies about Religion; But in very Deed and in Truth it is but the
Device and Appointment of those men, who either endeavor to introduce a
Tyranny, being desirous of Rule; Or study their own Accommodation, being indeed
Lovers of Ease more then of the Truth; Or at least shelter themselves partly
under a Desire of the Churches Tranquillity, partly under the Pretense of
Simplicity, Piety and Humility. The Matter is clear. For if God or the Lord
Jesus Christ, had thought it necessary or useful, that there should be always
such a Judge speaking in the Church, they would have declared it even expressly;
and not only that, but they would withal clearly and palpably have pointed out
who and where that Judge should always be, that we might not be deceived: And
so might have Recourse unto him, as unto a Place of Refuge. Yea farther, Christ
would first and chiefly have taken Care of this, and the Apostles would have
pressed it before all the Articles of Faith, because all Things ought necessarily
there to issue. For by such a Judge all things might have been decided and
composed. But indeed on the Contrary, because neither Christ, nor his Apostles
have done this, it cannot but be an humane Device and Project, built upon a
wordly and outward Tranquillity and Convenience, and favoring of Tyranny, and
usurped Domination: For, for any one of his own Head to appoint such a Judge,
is a piece of overgreat boldness, and the highest Treason against the divine
Majesty that can be again, and fit or apt to enslave the whole World under
everlasting Errors and Condemnation.

As to what they say, That Christ delivered or gave the Keys to Peter, it is
too light to build the whole Office of a Judge upon it. For seeing this is a
Business so hard, and so highly concerns the whole World, even Christ, who came
to save the World, would have declared, that this was the Sense of his Words,
saying; since I grant this Power and Privilege to Peter, I will that all the
rest of the Apostles be excluded: and furthermore, that those, who succeed
Peter, not at Antioch, or at Jerusalem, but only at Rome, should inherit that
Right or Privilege of Supreme Judicature, and that all Christians should be
bound or tied to this Judge even to the worlds End or Consummation of Ages.
Thus Christ would have roundly, and clearly, expressed his Mind and Menning; and
indeed, who in a matter so arduous, would have expected other from Christ, who
is a Lover of Men; Although the whole Scripture from Head to Foot, had been
nothing but a far-setcht Allegory, and continued Obscurity, it could nothing
have prejudiced us, because the Judge of the Sentence thereof would be known;
this one Thing if it were clear, and undoubted, all other Articles, although
seemingly difficult, would be most easily understood.

CHAP. XII That the judging of Truth according to, or out of the Word of God,
belongs to every private Man.
BUt Now, because we see the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, have in the
holy Scripture clearly and plainly expressed all Things necessary for a Christian
to believe, hope and do, and will that the said Scriptures, be with all
diligence read over and inquired into by all that are desirous of Salvation,
and the Way that leads thereunto, and that withal with an accurate Examination
and Trial of all things and Spirits, whether they be of God, under the Pain of
eternal Condemnation, and there be no one tittle any where in all their
Writings extant, of any such infallible speaking Judge, always to be in the
Church, much less where he is to be found; We cannot but judge, that those who
desire such a Judge in the Churches, are moved thereunto by Considerations far
otherwise then Divine, and that they render themselves guilty of the greatest
sin, and crime, to wit, of Dominion, and Tyranny or abitrary Power over the
Word of God, and the Consciences of Men.

That in wordly Concerns there are appointed Judges, by whose Judgment and
Award we must stand, the Case is far different. For to their Judgment the
Consciences of Men are not bound, it is free for every man to believe, or judge
of their Awards, Judgments and Decisions as he please. The Award of the Judges
is to be commended with our Mouth, not to be approved without Hearing. Withal
oftentimes their Judgments and Awards, a long while after, are by contrary
Judgments and Awards nulled, or corrected. But when the Business is about
Conscience, Religion, Salvation, eternal Life, or eternal Condemnation, there
ought to be no Judge there, but God, or he to whom God has expressly, and in
Terms committed and given this Power, that a man may most rightfully say, if
God has given this Privilege to the Church of Rome, it is the best, yea the
only Church; and on the contrary, if it be evident, that God has not given
this Right, it is the most abominable, pernicious, and filthiest Church that
can be again upon the Earth. But, you will say, what End will there be then?
This, say I, that the Word of God be impune and freely read by all, that no
man's Conscience be tied to the Judgment of others; that one man love another,
and by the best Means, out of the Word of God endeavor to instruct him, and so
we expect that Time wherein the Lord God and Jesus Christ, the only Judge of
the Quick and Dead, will pass Award of Life and Death. By this means
Consciences will be free, Christians all quiet and peaceble, and the Word of
God the only Rule and Square of all Men's Actions.

FINIS.
engraving of James Arminius JAMES ARMINIUS. For Learning, Mildness and for
Sanctity Few ever had with him Equality.



The Life and Death OF JAMES ARMINIVS, AND SIMON EPISCOPIVS.

Professors of Divinity in the University of Leyden in Holland.

Both of them famous Defenders of the Doctrine of Gods Universal Grace, and
Sufferers for it.

Now published in the English tongue.

The memory of the just is Blessed, Pro. 10.7. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliff
and Nath. Thompson, for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without
Temple Bar, 1672.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
THe Title Page of the Book presented here to thy view, does sufficiently
inform thee, what in the general thou art to expect therein. The book is so
little, and may be read over in so short a time, that it is altogether needless
to give a further account of its Contents. A large Preface me thinks would be
uncomely, as being unproportionable to the Building: And indeed thou had not
at all been troubled with any Proem how short soever; If I had not a few words
to speak touching my work in this English Narrative. Although I was much
persuaded and well assured in my self, that a Work of this kind might be of
great advantage to those of my Country men, who have ears for no other but
their Mother tongue, especially to them who have been abused by the Tongues or
Pens of any, that have exposed to obliquy and reproach the venerable names of
these two reverend men, which alas! many have done, especially as to Arminius:
for the other, I mean Episcopius, has not been so generally taken notice of,
and his name was not here so publicly known, till the Doctrine, which both of
them contended and suffered for, was more commonly known and received amongst
us: Yet was it far from me to undertake of mere choice this endeavor, being
not so well conceited of mine own abilities, as to thrust my self into this
Employment, nor so destitute of work as to need this for securing and keeping
my self out of idleness; but by the importunate solicitation of some good men,
I was prevailed with, and drawn unto it. The History of Dr. Arminius is
nothing else but that Elegant Latin Oration; here turned into plain English,
which learned Bertius delivered in such an Assembly, where he could not deliver
untruths and remain undetected. I have indeed scarce pleased my self in
translating so Grammatically and verbatim the Testimonies there produced: Yet
have so done, that some might not be displeased, who deem such a translation in
such cases to be at least convenient. That which thou have here touching
Episcopius, is taken chiefly out of that excellent and large Preface, prefixed
to one of the Volumes of his Works, and written by Stephen Curcellaeus of
blessed memory. In what I have done in the whole I am not conscious to my self
of any unfaithfulness; neither am I unwilling to constitute mine Enemies judges
of the performance, in case they be fit to examine, and not resolved to be
unrighteous in judgment. Reader, I shall no longer detain thee from the
profitable exercise of reading the following Narrative, which God almighty
bless to thy use. Farewell.

J. K.

THE ORATION of Peter Bertius concerning the life and death of that Reverend
and most Famous Man Mr. James Arminius, which after his sad funeral, was
delivered in a Theological Auditory the Divinity School in the Universi^y of
Lyden.
October. 22. 1609.
Magnificent, Reverend, Most noble, Most learned Auditors,
AS heretofore I have often experienced, how hard and how difficult a thing it
is, to speak of Excellent persons in an assembly of Renouned men: So now
especially I have thereof a sensible knowledge, it being my task at present to
speak in this place concerning that Reverend man Mr. James Arminius, Dr. of
sacred Theology, and this after the sad solemnity of his Funeral. For since
that a good man is the rule and measure of things, he therefore; that would
describe to others such a person, must be careful to choose out and offer such
things to their view, by which humane life may receive advantage in the study
of virtue. Good things that lie in secret, must be brought on the stage and
made public, and those things which either Modesty has concealed, or Envy
diminished, or Calumny defamed, or which others through want of skill have not
observed, those things I say, when the curtain's drawn back and a light brought
in, must be shown openly, and declared by words, that all may behold what in
every one is most praise worthy, and what is fit for their imitation. Whence it
comes to pass, that the greater every ones virtue is, the more difficult it is
to act the Orotors part in speaking of him: for the greatest Envy keeps company
with the greatest Virtue. And since that a wife man does nothing without Reason;
and it being difficult to explicate and unfold at every turn the principles and
causes of particular actions, on which the judgment to be made of every thing
does depend; it must needs be very difficult to judge of excellent persons, all
whose life is full of diverse examples, for the well instructing of others, how
to judge, how also to live. And this also may be added, that he who takes upon
him this employment must very frequently have recourse from the law to a man's
life, and from his life to the law: for these need each the other, and as the
law gives notice what must be done: so what may be done the life shows. Now a
wise man has both these in himself; just after the example of Christ our Lord
and Savior, who first said, Learn of me: and of his Apostle who thus
admonishes, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ And as heretofore
Polycletus, not contenting himself that he had written a book, wherein he had
noted all things to be observed by him that would artificially make the image
or statue of a man, did himself afterwrrds make the statue of a man, lest he
should seem to prescribe that to others which himself hap not observed, and
this statue made public he called the Canon or Rule, commanding that the
lineaments of art should be fetched thence as from a law of direction: So a
good man, when he has admonished others what they must do, does first himself
perform, what he prescribes to others. Now it is hard, either to bring all a
wise man's actions to their proper rule and law, or in one to find the Examples
of all laws. But as for me, who am at this day to speak in this honorable
assembly of learned men, concerning the life and death of that Reverend and
Incomparable man, Doctor James Arminius, not only those difficulties, which I
have now mentioned stand in my way, but many others also. My Grief, yet fresh,
for the loss of a friend presses me; the consideration of a sad family, an
afflicted wife, nine fatherless children disturbs me; the Lamentation of the
University moves me; but I am astonished to think of the Church and Common
wealth deprived of a man so greatly useful. All which things, in a wound so
fresh, not yet skinn'd over, may easily put to a loss the most eloquent and the
wisest man whosoever he be. To what has been spoken may be added, That he
himself, whilst he lived, greatly disliked all pompous funeral solemnities: for
he knew, that the first step to the veneration and worshipping of Saints was
hence, and he deemed, that it unbecomes us to desire and use such Solemnities,
that had such hazards attending on them. But seeing our present condition seems
to be such, that we need not in the least to be afraid of this (for alas!
hitherto are we come, that henceforth it may seem needful to use diligent
care, rather to bring in devotion, than drive superstition out) And since that
it concerns all men, that examples of virtue being drawn forth should be
proposed for all to look upon, I have, according to the custom, through the
request of friends, and the Senate willing it, undertaken that difficult task,
which I could not refuse without the violation of Christian charity, and the
breach of the obligation of that friendship, which I have maintained with him
from my very youth. Which things being so, I hope there will no reprehender of
this my duty be found in this assembly of excellent orators, in which there is
no one but is able more gravely and elegantly to perform this charge, than my
self. Notwithstanding, I beseech and most humbly entreat you, Magnificent,
Reverend and most learned Auditors, to suffer the things I shall speak to be of
credit and account with you,

We have committed to the bosom of the earth the body of that Reverend man, Mr.
James Arminius (or rather the temple of the holy Ghost) which has been shaken,
worn, broken with labors, watchings, conflicts, diseases, troubles. We have
committed it, I say, in certain hope of a blessed resurrection, which he
himself, whilst he lived, believed, and unto which he directed all his
thoughts and purposes.

The place of his birth was Oldwater, a little Town long since made famous by
the interflowing river Isala, and the pleasantness with the fruitfulness of the
adjacent country, and the frugality with the industry of its Inhabitants. He in
this Town first saw the Sun in the year 1560. in which year the Conference at
Possiack in France began; in which conference our Deputies pleaded the cause of
two thousand one hundred and ninety Churches, that did humbly and earnestly
desire of the King, peace and tranquillity, and the liberty of professing their
faith. This year, this Oldwater, as another Sparta, gave Arminius, as another
Lacon, to the world: which Town notwithstanding at other times brought forth
John de Oldwater, Cornelius Valerius, and that excellent old man, whom ye here
behold, Mr. Rudolphus Snellius, the ornament, not only of his native place,
but also of this whole University, and especially of them who are of the
Senatorie rank and quality.

Arminius whilst an infant lost his father: His mother, a widow burdened with
three children, lived all her life long in a mean estate, but honestly.

There was then in that Town a certain Priest, a man honest and grave, Theodore
Aemylius by name, whose memory, by reason of his singular learning and holiness
of life, is yet blessed among the living. He, when he had got a taste of a
better and more pure doctrine in Religion, determined with himself, that he
would not once more celebrate the abominable sacrifice of the Mass: therefore
he often changed his place of abode, and lived sometimes at Paris, sometimes at
Lovane, sometimes at Colon, sometimes at Vtrecht. He therefore took care, that
this fatherless child, James Arminius, so soon as his age was capable of
instruction, might be furnished with the first rudiments of the Latin and Greek
tongue, and with the principles of true piety and religion. And when he
perceived in him some appearances of an excellent disposition to virtue, he often
times exhorted him; that all considerations of earthly things being laid aside
and contemned, he would give up himself to follow after God and his conscience.
He told him, that the time of man's life here is but short; that there follows a
condition after this life, which should be estimated not by outward adversity
or prosperity, but by the Eternity of happiness or death. This Exhortation,
afterward confirmed by a diligent reading of the holy Scriptures, and pious
meditations, was settled upon his heart: And so he, through the hope of that
life, underwent every labor, all hazards, with a glad and cheerful mind. But
after he had for some years thus lived o^ Vtrecht, an unexpected calamity did
oppress him, by means of the death of that good old Religious man, which the
merciful God did suddenly mitigate; for presently upon his death Mr. Snellius,
who long before flying the Spaniards tyranny, went to Marpurg, came as it
happened out of Hassia into that Country. He therefore carried away with him
into Hassia, in the year 1575. this his Countryman Arminius, now destitute of
all humane help and succor. He was scarce set down there, when in the Month
of August the report of his Countries desolation is brought thither; He hears
that the Town was taken by the Spaniard; that the Garrison were slain; that the
Townsmen were killed, and the Town burnt. With this report he was so much
stricken at the heart and so greatly troubled, that he spent 14 whole days, in
continual weeping and tears: Therefore as one impatient he left Hassia and went
with speed into Holland, being determined either to see the ruins of his
Country, or to loose his life.

When he was come thither, he found nothing but where the Town stood, and the
ruins of it: and understood that most of its Inhabitants were finally slain,
together with his Mother, his Sisters, his Brothers and his Kindred: He
therefore returned even on foot out of his own Country, to Marpurg in Hassia.
In the mean while this new Ac^demy was erected and opened by the authority of
the most Illustrious Prince of Orange; which as soon as he understood, he
prepared for a journey home. He came therefore to Roterdam, to which place were
come from Amsterdam many faithful Exiles, and most of Old-waters Inhabitants,
that had escaped the sword of a cruel enemy. At that time my Father Peter
Bertius, was the Pastor of that Church: but Mr. John Taffinus was the Princ's
French Preacher and Counselor; both these were wonderfully pleased with the
young man's towardliness, readiness and wit. Now seeing it was long before my
Father was acquainted with learning (for he was 30. years old before he had any
knowledge even of the Latin tongue) he upon request of friends, took the young
man very willingly into his house. Now it was the purpose of friends to send
him to this new University; which occasion my Father thinking not good to
neglect, calls me out of England, when I was then a Student, applying my self
to learning: both of us therefore were sent together into this School: from
that time there has been always between us a very great intimacy, familiarity
and friendship: But I will not speak of the passages of that time. This one
thing I will say, that our young Scholars endeavor in learning and in the
study of wisdom, was so great, their reverence toward their Teachers so great,
their zeal and earnest affection in Religion so great, that greater could
hardly be: But in our rank Arminius was one that excelled the rest; if any thing
was to be written, if any thing to be spoken, Arminius was sought for: If then
arose any debate in learning that required a Pal^mon, Arminius was consulted
with. I remember when Dr. Lambert Danaeus, our Professor, did commend him
publicly for his natural endowments, and for his proficiency, and for his
virtue; and did excite us to enter on the study of Divinity with
cheerfulfulness, after his example. Why should I make mention here of his study
in Poetry, in which he excelled? Why should I speak of his study in the
Mathematics, and in the other parts of Philosophy? He touched nothing of
these, which he did not penetrate, he set upon nothing, which he did not
happily finish.

Thus we are come to the year 1582. in which year the honorable Senate of
Amsterdam sent him away to Geneva; for his more abundant proficiency in
learning. Whither when he was come, he heard that reverend old man, and of
blessed memory, Mr. Theodore Beza expounding the Epistle to the Rom^^s, with
the great admiration of all men; for there was in ^eza beyond other mortals a
flexanimous and persuasive eloquence, a prompt and ready utterance, perspicuity
of speech, pleasantness of voice, but excellent doctrine in the judgment of all
learned men. Him therefore above all others Arminius made choice of to imitate
and follow, But seeing he could not forth with procure to himself the favor of
some Principal men in this School, and that (to speak the truth) only upon the
account of Ramus's Philosophy, which with earnestness he defended publicly,
and did also in private teach it to his auditors, he was provoked to go to
Basil. Where what great honor was conferred, on the young man, what were the
presages and divinings of men of all ranks concerning his growing virtue, they
are able to testify, who were his fellow travelers, and companions in this
his peregrination. But he so heard these judgments and acclamations, that he
never waxt proud and arrogant, but showed in very deed, that he was unwilling
to endeavor by ambition, but was willing by true virtue to come unto that,
whereto he was designed by the goodness of God.

At Basile in the harvest Festivals the more learned Students are wont out of
the ordinary course, for exercise-sake to teach something in the University,
someties publicly. This labor our Arminius willingly undertook, for this he
was praised by that reverend man, Mr. James Grinaus, who also often times
honored his lectures by his Presence. The same man also in public
disputations, if any thing more weighty than ordinary were proposed, or an
intricate matter worthy a defender, did occur, was not afraid for honors sake
to call our Arminius, sitting among a great number of Students; and (that you
may know the candor of Grinaeus) to say. Let my Hollander answer for me. At
this time Arminius was in so great favor and renown for his learning, that
when he was about to depart thence for Geneva, the Theological faculty would
have conferred on him, even at the public charge, the title of Doctor, which
he, esteeming it too great a dignity for one of his years, did at that time
modestly refuse, and gave them thanks for their grace and favor.

When he was come back to Geneva, he found the minds of his friends more
pacified toward Ramus's Philosophy; also he himself thinking it something meet
to abate somewhat of his earnestness, did so order himself, that all might
easily perceive, that gentleness conjoined with so great a wit brought no small
ornament to his age. There were at the same time in the City the Sons of the
chief of our Nobility, most of which now are in eminent and honorable places
in our Republic. When some of these were gone into Italy, others of them
called home, he seeing himself alone, and destitute of all others his
companions, excepting one, a man of very great dignity now in Holland; he also
purposed to go with speed into Italy, being inclined thereunto especially
through the fame of James Zabarella, who then at Padua professed Philosohhy,
and was greatly followed. For his sake especially he stayed at Padua, when he
instructed in Logic some noble Germans. But afterward he took a cursory view
of the rest of Italy. on which journey he spent not above eight months, and at
Rome he was never absent from that companion of his, who was to him as another
Achates: for so it was agreed on before they went from Geneva. They ul'd the
same lodging, the same table, the same bed; they went in and out together; and
for the exercise of piety they carried with them the Greek Testament and Hebrew
Psalter.

I remember he was wont often to tell, That Italy brought to him many
commodities and discommodities. Among the commodities he placed this
especially, That he had seen at Rome the mystery of iniquity to be far more
filthy and abominable than ever he had conceived it in his mind: for he said,
that the things which are told or read concerning the Roman Court of
Antichrist, are Trifles in comparison of the things which he had seen. Among
the discommodities this; That the honorable Senate of Amsterdam was then
somewhat offended at him for that his Italian journey, some in the mean while
augmenting their their displeasure, who clearly had done better in suspending
their opinions till his return. Hence then an occasion being taken, it was
noys'd among the common people, That he had kissed the Popes, pantos^e; whom he
had never seen but as other spectators did, in a great throng and crowd of
people. (And indeed that Beast is not wont to give this honor to any but Kings
and Princes.) Also, that he was accustomed to hear the Jesuits, when as he
never heard them; That he was acquainted with Bellarmin, whom he never saw;
That he had abjured the orthodox Religion, whereas he was ready to contend for
it even to the loss of his life.

Now let our Youth that are pious and devoted to the Church learn this from
another harm, That it is better never to set foot in Italy, than with so great
an hazard of their repute to know the mysteries of Antichrist. Not because it
is more dangerous for them to see Italy, than neighboring Antwerp, or
Brussel^, or Brug^: for in Italy there is much more liberty, and in these
places more superstition by far. And it is safer to travel throughout all
Italy, than Brabant or Flanders: but because it is expedient to take all
occasions of evil speaking from the adversary, and all occasions of
evilsurmising from those that are unadvised and imprudent. And it is better to
prevent an occasion of offense, than to excuse it.

Being come out of Italy he stayed at Geneva, and some months after being
called home he returned to Amsterdam to his Patrons and Masters, furnished,
through the grace of Christ, with a clear testimony from them of Geneva, and
with a mind very well fitted to do office, if it might please the Lord God to
use his ministry, for his work in his Church: For these are the very words of
Mr. Beza's Epistle, the original of which I have in remembrance. At Amsterdam
he did easily, with grave and prudent men, clear himself as to his Italian
journey: but indeed the weak brethren went on inveighing against it, and in
their assemblings blaming it till he himself began to be heard in the Church,
in which as soon as he was beheld, it cannot be spoken, with how much respect
men of all ranks flocked together to hear him: For there was in him (as ye
know) a certain incredible gravity mixed with graceful pleasantness. His voice
indeed was slender, but sweet, and loud, and piercing, but he had an admirable
persuasive faculty. If any thing were to be adorned, he so did it, as not to
exceed the truth. If he were to teach any thing, he did it with clearness and
perspicuity. If he were to dispute any thing, he managed the same distinctly.
Now the Melody and altering of his voice was so fitted to things, that it
seemed to flow from them. And since he did not use a Rhetorical dress, and the
Greeks boxes of pleasant ointment: it was either because his nature did abhor
them, or because he judged it unworthy the majesty of Divine things; to use
curles, and borrowed ornaments, when as the naked truth is of its self
sufficient for its own defense: notwithstanding he so efficaciously persuaded
by force and weight of arguments, and by the pithiness of his sentences, and by
the authority of Scripture it self, that no man ever heard him, but confessed,
that his discourses much affected him. Some therefore at that time called him
the polishing life of truth; others the whetstone and sharpner of wits; others
called him the razor shaving off growing errors, and nothing in Religion, and
sacred Theology was thought to savor well, that did not relish with Arminius.
Also the Pastors and Preachers themselves of that City, men both learned and
eloquent, did reverence him for his learning, and ingeniously acknowledge
themselves to have been daily very much advantaged by his Sermons. And thus our
Arminius with spread out sails, prosperous gales, a full company of rowers,
and the good wishes of all that knew him, was carried toward fame and glory,
when it pleased God to excrcise his servant even with adversity, and to make a
trial of his patience and humbleness by the cross and afflictions. Now it is a
thing worth the knowing, to understand the beginnings and success hereof.

There was carried about as it chanced in the hands of some pious men a little
Book, written by some of the brethren of the Church of Delf, against Mr. Beza,
with this Title. An answer to some arguments of Beza and Calvin out of a
Treatise concerning predestination on the 9. Chap to the Romans. This little
book was sent over to our Arminius by Mr. Martin Lidyus of blessed memory, who
had been formerly a Pastor in the Church of Amsterdam, but then was professor
in the Friezlanders new Academy, and by him Arminius was requested to undertake
the defense of Mr. Beza against the brethren of Delf. For Arminius was verily
thought a man very fit for this business by Mr. Lidyus, who partly by report,
partly by experience knew the quickness of his wit, the sharpness of his
judgment, and what a wonderful force and power he had both in preaching and in
disputing, Neither was Arminius altogether strange from this design, being one
that newly coming out of the School of Geneva, carried about with him in his
ears the sound of Mr. Beza's lectures and arguments. He therefore betakes
himself to the work; But whilst he endeavors a refutation, whilst he weighs
the arguments on each side, whilst he confers the Scriptures, whilst he
torments and wearys himself, he was overcome by the truth. At first indeed he
followed that same opinion which he undertook to oppose, but he afterward by
the guidance of the holy Ghost was carried over to that doctrine, which he
constantly asserted even to the end of his life: Which was this; That Gods
eternal Decree in predestination, was not to elect or choose precisely and
absolutely some to salvation, whom as yet he had not purposed to create; (which
Mr. Beza would have) neither was it, precisely and absolutely to elect some to
salvation after the decree of their creation and the foresight of their fall,
but without an antecedent consideration of Jesus Christ; (which the Delfian
brethren held) Bus it was, To elect to salvation them of the created and
fallen, who in time to come would by true obedience of faith answer to God
calling them thereunto: Which by learned Melancthon and Nicholaus Hemingius,
and many more divines besides, has been asserted.

And although such in times past has been the liberty of our Churches, and
even now is in very many places, that in this Argument, in which no ancient
Synod has ever determined any thing, any one of the multitude, and a Teacher,
might always without offense to any one choose this or that: for to omit
others, Dr. Jo. Holmannus Secundus, who by the very grave advice of excellent
Divines, and especially of the Lords Curators was called forth, after Mr.
Pezelius and Mollenius and others were solicited in vain, taught it out of
this very place: He embraced (as we know) the opinion of Hemingius, and sharply
defended it. Not withstanding there were not those wanting at Amsterdam, that
in this matter were troublesome to Arminius, and that accused him for departing
from the common and received opinion in our Churches, but their vehemence and
fiercness was suddenly repressed and appeased by the authority of the Senate,
and the equanimity and moderation of the brethren; so that he always lived with
his Colleagues at Amsterdam quietly, yea friendly and brotherly, without any
cloud of displeasure, or hatred, or envy. And also this man of God was not only
naturally disposed to candor and gentleness, but also was moreover so formed
and fashioned thereto by the holy precepts and Spirit of Christ, that he did
quietly bear with him that dissented from him, and did not easily despair of
any one, that was but willing to hear Christ speaking in Scriptures: which by
his divine moderation and equinimity we all knew, and have by so much the more
admired it, by how much the further we, by the testimony of our own conscience,
perceive our selves yet to be from these good things.

Now when the University, deprived of her Professors by the death of those
famous and excellent men, Dr. Junius and Dr. Luke Trelcatius the elder, sought
for an Hercules that might sustain this Orb (which in the mean while that
Reverend man Dr. Francis Gomarus, being destitute of all his Colleagues, did as
another Atlas support alone) they by the general vote, and the public consent
of their country, came to Arminius, who thinking of nothing less, was taking
care for the church of Christ at Amsterdam which he had served now fifteen
years. But when they of Amsterdam professed that they could not be without his
endeavors amongst them, because as they said, they had chiefly him, by whom
they might oppose the growing monsters of heresies, it cannot be spoken how
great then the consternation of good men was. They variously deliberate and
advise, no stone is left unturned. The Curatours of our University, viz. most
noble Dousa and Neostadius, went themselves in the public name, together with
that most honorable man, Nicholaus Zeystius the Syndick of our Commonwealth.
To the same end Mr. Jo. Vtembogardus, Pastor of the Church at the Hague, was
sent by the most illustrious Prince. and also Nicholaus Cromhousius out of the
supreme Court. All these after a diverse manner did earnestly move and persuade
the most prudent Senate of this Common wealth, and the Consistory of the
Pastors and Elders. At length by many labors, entreaties, and also the
intercession it self of most illustrious Prince, it was hardly obtained, that
he should be dismissed from Amsterdam and serve the University. Nevertheless
petty Rumors of suspicions, which most commonly are wont to subvert the best
endeavors, did withstand him, against which he set the shield of his innocence
and candor and learning; Trusting in this, he confidently expected the
blessing of God in that which was behind. This matter therefore being heard and
debated at the Hague before the Lords Curators in the presence of some grave
Divines, it was found, That those suspicions were ill supported, and that there
was no cause why any one should have an ill opinion of that faithf^ll servant
of Christ: for they found, that he used the allowed liberty of prophesying in
the Church, had taught nothing which was contrary to the Christian religion. He
then first obtained in this University, with the good liking of God and men,
the degree of a Doctor, which in the year 1603 that reverend man Dr. Francis
Gomarus conferred on him here in this very place. Thus then James Arminius
succeeded Francis Junius, the Curators so commanding it. And that nothing might
be wanting here to his credit and authority by reason of those things that had
been given out at Amsterdam, it pleased the Ecclesiastical Presbyters to
commend him to all godly, honest and learned men, by adorning him at his
departure with a very fair testimony which sounds thus.

The Testimony of the Church at Amsterdam.
If the reason it self of equity, in the common society of men, was willing
long since to have it established for a law, That they should be judged worthy
of a singular good commendation, and more honorable testimony of truth, who
had any where very well merited of the commonwealth: they much more are worthy
of this honor, who laboring in the word of God, have been for many years
Ministers of the holy Gospel with singular fruit and praise in the Church of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore since that Mr. Dr. James Arminius, a Reverend
brother in the Lord, has now requested this same of us, we said, that we must
by no means deny it him. Therefore we would by this writing testify to all and
every one, that the very great integrity of both the unblameable life and sound
doctrine and manners of the forenamed worthy man, and to us all a most dear
companion in the Lord, has now by long acquaintance been so well perceived and
tried by us, that there is nothing of more account with us than always to enjoy
his counsel, labor, familiarity and intimacy, and to maintain that friendship
which now for a long time has been between us. But secing the most blessed and
almighty God seems to have appointed another thing concerning him and us, we
have cause of giving very great thanks to the Lord our God for that very great
benevolence oi his toward us and this our whole Church hitherto, through which
it has come to pass, that we can with very great delight see and perceive
fruits not to be repented of, from the study and labor of the foresaid our
very dear fellow laborer in the Vineyard of Christ, which he has with us
unweariedly and cheerfully undergone, here among ours. We all confess with a
most willing heart, that we are in all things indebted to this our dearly
beloved brother in the Lord, for his alacrity in continuing with us in the same
parts of his function, and for his very ready Council communicated to us,
whenever we desire it. Wherefore that we may briefly say all in a word
(because his very great both piety and probity, and his singular learning,
seems after a sort by their proper right to challenge it to themselves) we so
commend to all godly, virtuous, and learned men, this honorable Gentleman, and
our most reverend brother in Christ, that with greater affection and more
heartily we are not able to commend,

Dated in our Consistory at Amsterdam, September 8th 1603. In the name of all,
John Vrsinus Minister of the Divine Word, etc. President of the Consistory.
John Hallius Preacher at Amsterdam. John Halsbergius Pastor of the same Church.


Yea and the whole Classis gave to him their commendatorie Letters which thus
run.

The Testimon of the Classis of Amsterdam.
To all and every one that shall read or hear this our present Testimony,
Salvation and Peace through the only Mediator Christ.

Because the most accomplished and learned man Mr. James Arminius has by the
illustrious and for learning most famous Lords Curators of the University of
Leyden, been called from the holy Ministry (which now for many years he has
discharged with very great commendation in the Church at Amsterdam) to the
public profession of sacred Theology, and has been inaugurated publicly
thereunto: we were willing at his departure to commend him to the same
(Curators) and to all virtuous men by this our present writing, although but
little, and to honor him by our Testimony, as the manner is. We therefore the
servants of Jesus Christ, together with the Elders of the same Classis of
Amsterdam, do testify, that the foresaid Mr. Dr. Arminius has been now fifteen
years a member of our Classis, in which time he has taught with much fruit
sound Doctrine purely, administered the Sacraments according to the Lords
institution, and propagated with great zeal the true and Christian Religion,
and by his diligent presence has always adorned our Classical meeting: also by
his prudent Counsel has with others composed matters hard and of great moment,
has always readily sustained all imposed burdens that respected the Churches
Edidification, and has by honesty and goodness of life adorned to this very
day his holy calling. In a word, he has showed himself such both in his holy
Office, and in his manner of life toward all, as becomes a true servant of
Christ, that we give to him very great and immortal thanks for his benevolence
and humanity toward us, by which he has embraced every one of us. We
therefore entreat all and every one, of what order soever they be, to have,
acknowledge, embrace and favor the foresaid Mr. Dr. James Arminius, as such a
one as we have said. Also to affect him with such honor, as he, for his
eminent and singular gifts shining in him, is worthy of; and according to their
ability to help forward his holy endeavors; for the Glory of Gods name, and
the Edification of the School and Church. Unto which end we all his Colleagues
and fellow servants do heartily desire for him the manifold grace of the Holy
Ghost. At Amsterdam, from our Classical meeting on the Calends of September,
1603.
John Halsbergius, President of the Classis.
John Hallius, Preacher at Amsterdam.
Scribe of the Classis, and in the name of the Classis.


Have the Brethren honorably and laudably enough testified of Arminius? thus
then he came into the University. From this time all his Colleagues have had
experience of him as a most Falthful friend; The Schools as a Senator,
Professor. Rector; all the Students as a most gentle Father.

Suddenly after his entrance into the University he found, that the Students of
sacred Theology, did entangle themselves in the thickets of questions, and did
follow Thorny Theormes and Problemes, the Scriptures being neglected. This
evil, after the matter had been communicated to his Colleagues, he studied to
amend, and did in a great measure effect it, for he brought back the ancient,
and masculine, and mighty kind of studying; and drew back as much as in him
lay: the wandering youth to the Fountains of Salvation (those pure and slimeless
Fountains) that out of them Religion might be sought for: not that Religion
which being satisfied with wrangling debates or bare speculation is gotten to
feed the fantasy; but that which breaths out charity, and follows the truth
which is after godliness, by which youth learn to fly youthful lusts, and
having subdued fleshly allurements, to shun the pollutions of the world, and to
do and suffer those things, that make a distinction between a Christian and an
Heathen. That saying of our Savior, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: he did repeat often to fix the same upon their memories.

In the mean while the consideration of Christians so miserably divided, and
driven asunder one from another, troubled him; he seldom spoke of it without
tears, never without deep and hearty sighs. He declared, that he wished all the
scattered members of Christ might grow together in one body, according to the
Lords Commandment. He rightly judged, that the Papal Court sought not the
things which are of Christ; but the pleasures, the honors, the lucre, the pomp
of this present world, and Tyranny over the souls as well as the bodies of men:
And therefore that no man could or ought to consult with that Harlot about
matters of Salvation, and the establishing of a common peace. He judged, that a
great part of others were conscienciously and piously affected; and were not
divided not so much through an evil intent and purpose, as through doubtful
ambages or obscurities in which many were driven from peace and concord by
ignorance, many by the authority of their Ancestors; many through pertinacy or
stiffness in those opinions which either themselves had devised or long
defended, many through shame of revoking and retracting their writings, lastly
many through prejudice and an ill opinion of their brethren. All which he
thought might be remedyed, not by killing one another, but by prayers, and by
peaceable and friendly instruction, and by the example of an holy conversation.
He therefore both exhorted all to piety, and especially took care of this, that
when thornie questions and the huge luggage of vain and empty assertions were
removed and taken away, with which the Schools make an huge confused noise;
those things might be fetched only out of the Scriptures which might be useful
to bring them to the belief of necessary things, and to lead a good and blessed
Christian life. Which endeaur of his, Satan going about to elude and frustrate
endeavored to persuade the inconsiderate, that these things were done by him
to get honor to show the strength of his wit. to cause innovations, to
maintain contention and wrangling. Some therefore through suspicion, that ill
counselor, moved again old Camarina, or were the cause of mischief to
themselves; but the Professors themselves and the Colleagues, by the prudent
advice of the Curators did quell and quash it at its first shooting up: for
credit to which matter I have thought that this Instrument out of the Acts of
the Vnoversity is fit to be produced.

The Professors of the Theological faculty, when it was related to them; That
the Classis of Dort had laid down among other this Grievance [Seeing there is a
rumor that some controversies about the doctrine of the reformed Churches have
risen in the Church and University of Leyden, the Classis have thought it to be
necessary that the Synod deliberate concerning these Controversies, and how
they may most safely be composed, that all Schisms and offenses which thence
may arist, may seasonably be removed, and the union of the reformed Churches to
preserved against the calumny of the adversaries] did, when the Lords Curatots
and the Consuls asked, whether any controversies of this sort were certainly
known unto them, answer unanimously, after the matter had been first privately
among themselves examined and weighed, That they wished, that the Classis of
Dort had in this matter, acted better and more orderly; That they thought that
more things were disputed among the Students, than it liked them should be; but
that among themselves, that is, among the Professors of the Theological faculty
there was nodifference which may appearto be in the fundamenralls of doctrine;
Also that they would endeavor that the disputations of this sort which arose
among the students might be lessened. Acted the 10th of August, 1605.

James Arminius, Rector of the University pre tempore.
Francis Gomarus.
Luke Trelcatius, Subscribed.

The very same day, when the same thing was also proposed to D. John Kuchlinus
Regent of the Theological College, be answered; That he gave his suffrage to
those things that had been said by the Professors.

Subscribed, John Kuchlinus Regent.

And thus indeed these things passed at that time; Afterward the Senators of
the High. Court, by the will of the illustrious States at the Hague, took
cognizance of those things that were reported. What their opinion of the whole
matter was, I should now relate, but that I think all here present have the
knowledge thereof.

But whilst Christ's Champion thus wrastles, he was at the length laid on his
sick bed by a disease, which by his labors; continual sitting, constant
studies and conflicts incurting without any discharge, he had at the last
contracted. Now what wonder is it, if he were moved and troubled at that, which
might expose to lose his good name, his salvation and his labors: since that
nothing is of more account to a good man than his good name; nor to a
Christian, than his salvation; nor to a Dr. of Sacred Theology than
demonstrations taken out of the Scripture. Oppression, says Solomon, makes a
wi^e man mad. That same brought him grief, his grief brought his disease, and
this was the cause of his death. Oh horrible evil and viperous, and raised from
the lowest part of Hell! How often have we heard him privately crying out even
with sighing, in the words of the Prophet? Woe is me my mother, that thou have
born me a man of contention to the whole earth: I have neither lent on usury,
nor any has lent to me on usury, and yet all men curse me. Notwithstanding he
himself recalled himself to the enclosures of reason and tranquillity, being
always courageous, always patient and gentle toward his brethren, for whose
sake he was ready to suffer patiently, or as it were to devour, any reproaches
whatsoever from the malevolent, and to forget or concoct them, not with a
Cato's stomach, but that which was wrought in him by the Spirit of Christ.

But his disease lurking in his bowels brake out especially on the 7th of Feb.
this year: which at that time so discovered it self, that the Physicians
forthwith judged, that there was need of a slow and cautious curation. Now
although at the beginning of his sickness he could hardly move himself:
Notwithstanding when he could, having now and then some ease and respite, he
omitted not the labors of his lectures and vocation; nor was he wanting to his
cause when need was. Therefore again and again, being called, he with speed
went to the Hague, and there published a famous profession of his faith before
many witnesses, and after that last friendly conference he with this one thing
after God and the testimony of his own conscience comforted himself, that in a
common assembly of all Holland he was patiently heard by his most gentle
Masters, to whose prudence he attributed so much, that if he should dye, he did
hope, that there would not be those wanting that would defend by the patronage
of their wisdom and favor the equity of that cause, which they once heard
debated. Being carried home from the Hague, he had scarce set himself to that
which his masters commanded, viz. To write out that exactly which he had
proposed in the friendly conference, but the force of disease again assaulted
him by so much the more vehemently, by how much the more it had increased by
delay and the weakness of his strength. Therefore being pressed with his
disease, he by letters written to the illustrious States modestly excused
himself, that he could not at the day appointed obey their will: saying, That
by sickness he was for^t to keep his bed; that he had written a great part,
which God so willing it, he was now compelled to break off from. That he had
been at another time heard, and that the whole matter was then exhibited in
writing; that that might be as much as necessity required: Notwithstanding if
they should at all desire those same things he had written that he would take
care, that they should have them either full and perfect, if he by the grace of
Christ should be restored, or abrupt and broken, if he should die. Moreover tha
he was so far from doubting any whit of that confession he had published, that
on the contrary he did steadfastly judge, that it agreed in all things with the
holy Scriptures: Therefore that he did persist therein, That he was ready at
that very moment to appear with that same belief before the tribunal of Jesus
Christ the Son of God, the Judge of the quick and dead.

In the mean while the force of his disease daily increased, whilst the most
famous and most expert Physicians, Dr. Pavius, Dr. Sebastian Egbert, Dr. Henry
Sael, Dr. Reener Bont, resisted it as much as was possible by Art and.
Industry, and pleasingly allured natures forces, but in vain; for the untamed
obstinacy of the disease scorned art it self; For it was deeper planted than to
be plucked up; it stirred up daily new Symptoms, Fevers, the cough, the
extension of the hypoconders, difficulty of fetching of breath, oppression
after meat, troublesome sleeps, an atrophie, the gout, and gave to him no
intermission of rest: Afterward came the Iliac passion, and the Colic, with
an obstruction of the left optic nerve, and an obfuscation or dimness of the
same eye; In the mean while calumny was as cruel, and abated nothing of its
accustomed fierceness; of which I shall here mention, a cruel unworthy and
abominable instance, which is fit to be recorded for after ages. When that
dimness of one of his eyes was known, there were some that durst account this
among those punishments, which God threatens to his enemies, and wicked
contemners of his name, and did affirm even from this punishment, that he was
very wicked beyond others. And that there might not be wanting a pretext and
color to this so filthy and cruel a deed, the sacred Books are consulted with,
which a Christian may not approach without reverence and prayer. A place is
found in the Prophet Zechary concerning the consumption of the eyes and the
whole body, sounding thus. And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will
smite all the people, that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh shall
consume away, while they stand upon their feet; and their eyes shall consume
away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth, Zech.
14.12. And another place; Woe to the Idol shepherd that leaves the flock: the
sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: His arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened. Chap. 11.7.

This place was wrested against this holy servant of Christ, who indeed was
afflicted in body; but in his soul always happy, but now even most happy and
blessed. I tremble at the remembrance of so enormous. and detestable, and
ungodly deed. Who, art thou, oh man, that condemnest thy brother, for whom
Christ shed his blood? What do thou revile that servant of God with oracles
fetched as it were from heaven it self, whom they that shall come after us, and
shall not be ungrateful, will acknowledge to have exceeding well deserved of
the whole Church of Christ? Why do thou take unjustly to thy self a power of
condemning thy brother, whom the Lord has commanded thee to love. Hear him:
Neither this man has sinned, nor his parents, but these things are done, that
the works of God may be made manifest Hear him again; Judge not, that ye be not
judged. Hear the Apostle; It is with me a very small thing, that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgment. He that judges me is the Lord; Therefore
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
heart: And then shall every man have praise of God. Art thou so assured of what
shall happen to thy self, as to know for certain, that thou thy self shall not
be tormented with more bitter pain and dolor? And yet 'twas not his right eye
that was amiss; neither was it blindness, but only a dimness, and his arm was
not dried up, but swelled. His tongue truly even to the last moment of his life
readily discharged its office. Thus things above, things below, things on the
right hand, things on the left, things divine, things humane, wait together on
these wretched Hierophants [Expounders of divine mysteries] to serve them when
they will.

There were somes who playing on his name, devised, Vani orbis amicus: [ i. e.
A friend of the vain world.] as if impiety was not sometime bold to do the same
on the sacred name of Christ. Go your ways for beetles, the unprofitable
things of the world; What will ye not attempt to do on the servant who have not
spared God himself and the Lord of life? But I return to that which I made
digression from: He although tired with all these evils, yet notwithstanding
kept a steadfast courage and quiet mind; He therefore never abated any thing of
the pleasantness, and comely gracefulness, and accustomed cheerfulness of his
countenance, and candor of heart, his most ardent prayers ascending to God for
himself and the concord of the church. How frequent, how fervent in his
sickness were his ejaculations to Jesus Christ? What joys did he promise
himself? With what perseverance of faith did he expect his last day in the
world? If the brethren did compose themselves to prayers, and he himself was
hindered by pain, he now and then desired them to stay till he should come to
himself, that he might together with them perform this brotherly office.

These few forms of prayers among many more were noted.
OH great Shepherd of the sheep, who by the blood of the everlasting covenant
wast brought again from the dead, Oh! Lord and Savior Jesus, be present with
me thy weak and afflicted sheep. Oh Lord Jesus the faithful and merciful High
priest, who wast willing to be tempted in all things like unto us, but without
sin; that thou learning by experience it self, how hard it is to obey God in
sufferings, might have compassion on us in our infirmities; have pity on me,
and succor me thy servant, who am sick an pressed with many afflictions. Oh
God of my salvation! make my soul fit for thine heavenly kingdom, and my body
for the resurrection.

Now when upon the increasing of his disease he was admonished by the
physicians, that by reason of the doubtfullness of his life, he would set his
house in order, and that if any thing were to be given in charge by his last
will and testament, he would take care to do it; he then composed himself for
death, with such great quietness of mind, that friends standing by, who had
observed the whole manner of his life, admired at his so great and so heroic
moderation in the last act, and they took from him the last example of dying
blessedly, of whom long before they had learned many things for the well
ordering of their lives; He then perceiving that the time of his dissolution
was at hand, and not being ignorant of the Devils stratagems, took special
care, when he made his will, to give a brief Account of his designs and of his
life. This, because it contains the duty of a faithful Teacher, I shall recite
for an Example and for a Testimony.

Out of his will or Testament.
BEfore all things I commend my soul, when it shall depart out of its body,
into the hands of God its Creator and faithful Savior, before whom I witness
that I have with a good conscience, singly and sincerely walked in my charge
and calling: taking heed with much solicitousness and carefulness, not to
propose or teach any thing, which I had not found by a diligent search out of
the holy Scriptures, to agree exactly with the same Scriptures; and that I have
taught those things which might conduce to the propagation and amplification of
the truth, the Christian religion, the true worship of God, common piety, and
holy conversation among men; Lastly, to tranquillity agreeing to the Christian
profession and peace according to the word of God, excluding from among these
Papacy, with which no verity of faith, no bond of piety and Christian peace can
be kept.

These things being thus finished, some days were spent in the invocation of
Christ, and in thanksgiving and the meditation of a better life; In which time
Mr. Jo. Vtenbogardus and Mr. Hadrian Borrius did more frequently visit him then
others did; Both of them were his old and most faithful friends; But Mr.
Borrius was even always present in the daily performance of prayer with his
sick friend.

Now at length on the 19th of October, about noon, this faithful servant of
God, being discharged of his warfare, having finished his course, fought the
good fight, kept the faith, did render his soul now weary of cares, now glutted
with the miseries of this world, now desiring deliverance, now having a
fore-tast of the joys of the Saints, now seeing Christ his God and redeemer,
did I say, with his eyes lifted up to heaven, render quietly among the holy
prayers of them that were present, his soul to God the Father his creator, to
the Son his redeemer, to the Holy Ghost his sanctifier, all crying out, Let me
dye the death of the righteous.

Thus even this our Sun did set; thus that just man dyed of whom this world was
not worthy; thus the father of so many prophets was taken away; thus James
Arminius by the charet of Israel and horsemen thereof was carried from us into
heavenand now is free and delivered from miseryes, has the crown sought for by
so many labors, by so great holiness, and enjoys the heavenly Jerusalem, in
the great assembly of many thousands of Angels, and the Church of the firstborn
that are written in heaven, and he sees the Judge of all, and the Spirit of
just men made perfect, and Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, and the
blood of sprinkling speaking better then that of Abel; But he expects that
day, in which God will make his dead body, which we have laid in the earth, to
be conformable to the glorious body of his Son, according to the power whereby
he is able to subdue all things to himself.

But we so long as it pleases God shall be tossed with these waves, till he,
having at sometime compassion on us also, shall call us, every one in his own
order, out of this miry clay into heavenly joys; keeping in the mean while in
the church of the saints the blessed memory of Mr. James Arminius, with this
Elogy.

That he was a Hollander, whom they that knew him, could not sufficiently
esteem; Whom they that esteemed him not, did never sufficiently know.

Finally, most worthy Au^itors, being desirous to exhort you to the Churches
amiable concord, I shall use no other than the words of the Apostle John.
Beloved, let us love one another, because love is of God. And whosoever l^veth
his brother, is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not
God; for God is love.

FINIS.
A short and Compendious History of Simon Episcopius. Professor of Divinity in
the University of LEYDEN in HOLLAND.
Candid Reader,
THat in a very great part, which learned Bertius in the preceding Oration,
has justly premised touching the difficulty of his task and Province, who was
to describe so excellent a man as Reverend Arminius, may be as justly (to say
no more) taken up by him that undertakes a descriptio nof Episcopius, a man
well nigh incomparabl i^ all things commendable in a man, in a Christian, in a
Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

It Is one of Amsterdams chiefest Ornaments, and deserves to be recorded with
letters of Gold in the memorials of that famous City; that Simon Episcopiue in
the year 1583. was born there.

His Parents, Egbert and Gertrude, are worthy remembrance, not only for their
pious Offspring, I mean their eldest son Rembert, also John, but especially the
youngest, our Simon; (for their other children, four sons and three daughters,
all died in their youth or infancy) but also for their own piety, being then
zealous professors of the truth, when extreme dangers closely attended on every
side those that followed her; Simon Episcopius, that renowned Person of whom we
are now to speak, brought with him into the world many rare natural Endowments,
which aftterwards by good education and much industry were greatly improved,
and were in his conversation choicely employed to the end of his days. Rembert.
his e^dest brother, soon espying in him grounds of hope as to his usefulness in
the best of employments; did earnestly solicit his Parents to denote him
wholly to learning; His Parents; notwithstanding their Estate, was insufficient
(by reason of their numerous offspring) to yield him at his studies a competent
maintenance: yet, having assistance freely and privately, offered by Cornelius
Benning, a man of Consular dignity, were persuaded to dedicate their Simon to
the study of learning. He therefore was committed, as soon as possible, to the
care and discipline of Peter Vekeman, a Schoolmaster at that time famous; under
whose manuduction he in so little time made so great a progress in Latin and
Greek, that he was commended by diverse great men to the honorable Senate of
Amsterdam, which took and received him into the number of their Scholars, when
his parents by the advice of Mr. John Kuchlinus and Mr. James Arminius, and by
their persuasion, gave their consent; for at the first they were somewhat
averse thereto. When he had at Amsterdam run out his course there in the
Grammar school, the Curatours of the School did. in the year 1600, declare him
by Solemn sentence meet and worthy to be promoted to the University, that he
might there apply himself to more high and manly studies; He was therefore sent
away to the University of Leyden, into the College of the illustrious States
of Holland and West-friezland; in which College was then President that most
learned man, John Kuchlinus, who when he was minister at Amsterdam, had
contracted a firm and intimate friendship with the father of our Episcopius.
This hopeful Plant had not been long in the Academical nursery, but he lost his
most loving and beloved Parents; for Anno 1602 his father dyed, in the next
year his Mother. He though much afflicted with this adversity; yet being
thoughtfull, and desirous of his transplanting into some place of usefulness to
the Church of God, neglects not the present opportunity of furnishing himself
with things convenient and necessary thereunto. Wherefore having sukt in as
much knowledge, as was needful, of the liberal Artts, he extends his
endeavors for getting acquaintance with the secrets of Philoosophy; In which
having spent about three years, he applied himself most seriously to the studys
of Divinity, and with much diligence labored therein; yet so as to have now
and then a recourse to Philosophy. At length, the Statutes of his College, and
his own privte affairs requiring it, hesought the title of a Mr. of Arts, and
was, being after a severe examination judged worthy, adorned therewith
publicly, in the year 1606, by Dr. Rodolphus Snellius, that most renowned
Professor of the Mathematics there. After this he purposes and resolves to
give himself wholly to the study of Divinity only, in which he had already made
a considerable progress. And seeing he could not accomplish his earnest desire
of visiting foreign Universities, he continued yet two years and above at
Leyden, where he was a diligent hear of the Divinity Professors, namely,
Francis Gomarus, Luke Trelcatius, James Arminius; and was so diligent and
industrious in disputations, and exercitatory Sermons, that he left far behind
him most of his equals for age and standing, and was thought worthy to be
called to the Ministry. But seeing afterward, especially after the death of
Dr. Trelcatius, that unhappy discension about Predestination, which afterward
gave a disturbance to all Holland, did not only secretly glow between the two
remaining Professors, but also at length break forth openly; and seeing our
Episcopius showed himself more addicted to the opinion of Arminius, he found
therefore the Pastors, who were of the other party, to be so disaffected
toward him, that they, when the honorable Consuls of Amsterdam, who had
knowledge of his singular learning and good conversation, were desirous of
promoting him to the office of a preacher, did by delays, and other their
subtle devices, srustrate and elude the good design of the Consuls. Episcopius
therefore in the year 1609, in which year Arminius dyed, left Leyden and went
to Franeker, the Friezlanders University, whither he was drawn especially by
the fame of Jo. Drusius, Professor there of the Hebrew tongue. Here Sibrandus
Lubbertus, the Professor of this University, took great offense at our
Episcopius, who was somewhat too hot and fervent in Theological disputations,
as young men of prompt and ready wits are wont to be. He therefore a few
months after departed thence, and went into France, where in a short time he
got so great acquaintance with the French tongue, that he was able not only to
understand it, but also to speak French readily and purely. In the year 1610 he
returned home, and found the Ministers of Amsterdam no better affected toward
him than before. But his verttue and learning, which could be no longer hid,
and which were commended by clear and notable testimonies from the Churches and
Universities where he lived, break through at length all obstacles, and so, that
he was, with the consent of the Classis, called by the honorable Senate of
Rotterdam to the Pastoral office at Bleyswyck, and hamlet belonging to their
jurisdiction.

After the death of Arminius, they of Calvin's persuasion, whose notions of God,
reprobating absolutely the greatest part of the world, to make known his power
in making his creatures miserable, had framed and disposed to fierceness, begrn
to endeavor the ejection of them out of their places who adhered to Arminius;
hereupon these perceiving the designs that were against them, did exhibit to
the most illustrious Stales of Holland and West-friezland a certtain
Remonstrance (whence they were afterward called Remonstrants, as their
adversaries were called Contra Remonstrants, from a paper they had written in
opposition, and entitled, A Contra-Remonstrance) in which Remonstrance after
they had declared their judgment comprehended in five heads or Articles, they
humbly petition, that they in that belief and persuasion might be protected
from the violence and force of their Adversaries that much threatened them.
Afterward in the year 1611 was that famous Conference at the Hague, where by
the appointment, and in the presence of the States of Holland and
West-Friezland, Six Remonstrant, and as many Contra-Remonstrant Pastors
conferred together about the things now in controversy. Forth determining of
these Controversies, the Remonstrants then declared themselves for mutual
forbearance, but their adversaries were for a Synodal Decision, as being no way
doubtful of out-voting them, in case the Remonstrants were admitted members of
the Synod, which indeed their adversaries denied them, when they had gotten a
Synod, and the arm of flesh on their side.

But the illustrious States of Holland and West-Friezland, knowing well, that
only the oppression of the contrary party was sought after, and that the
controversy was obscure and difficult, made a decree, that both parties should
live together in brotherly communion, etc. which decree had preserved them in
peace, if might had not then overcome right, in casting those peaceable
Governors out of their places, and substituting those in their rooms who would
be ready to do what the Contra-remonstrants would have.

But we must return to our Episcopius, who was one of the six Remonstrants that
managed the Conference at the Hague, whereas on a famous Theater he made
manifest his great abilities, both natural and acquired, and gave all men
occasion to conclude, that his knowledge and skill in the holy Scriptures, and
in Theological disputations, was not ordinary. After this, the fame of his
learning and eloquence spreading in the United Provinces far abroad, he was
solicited by diverse eminent Cities, chiefly Vtrecht to be their Preacher; but
seeing they of Bleyswyck would by no means be induced to give their consent for
his departure, he therefore continued in the exercise of his ministry among
them. Put at length in the year 1612, when he was about 29 years old, he was
called by the Curators of the University of Leyden, to the Professorship of
Divinity there, in the place of Francis Gomarus, who voluntarily had deserted
it; Now although the modesty of this worthy man Episcopius, was so great, that
he judged himself unmeet for a work so difficult in such d^fficult times; yet
suffered he himself to be prevailed with, and overcome by the judgment of
others concerning him, and especially by the authority and exhortation of some
very great men in the Commonwealth and Church to accept it. In this honorable
place, worthy a man so learned and venerable, he lived friendly and peaceably
with Dr. Jo. Polyander, his Colleague, though of an opinion differing from his
in the controversy of predestination; and most painfully labored in his
Office, as even to us is apparent from his Commentaries on some parts of the
holy Scriptures, then composed, and his disputations there, which since his
death have been exposed to public view. But his Cares were so many and great,
that they far surmoun^ed all his other labors and did much exceed them; For at
this time the Controversy about Predestination had swelled over the Academical
banks, and had filled the pulpits, whence (as usually) it spread as an
inundation among the common people threatening a devastation of the Churches
unity, and to the Commonwealth no less then ruin: For the governors
themselves, who were to have kept the peace, were divided among themselves,
designing variously for their several parties. In this evil day and contentious
time, good Episcopius, a man greatly desirous of peace, a manstudious,
laborious and solicitous for the good of others, became a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs. Now to give a few instances of this man's sufferings,
may not only he serviceable to his commendation, they being the trial and an
evident proof of his sincerity, and that which brought to light his Christian
fortitude and patience, wherein he greatly excelled; they may expect, who are
of the first in discovering errors, that have been long and more generally
embraced for truths, and for such, which men have much gloryed in, as a
treasure more peculiar to themselves than others; and also to let us know what
are the usual effects of blind zeal in matters of religion, which will appear
to be the worst of Guides, leading men to most injurious, inhumane and
barbarous practices.

We will begin with that which happened at Amsterdam, in the second year of his
Professorship; The story in brief in this, Episcopius being at a church in
Amsterdam and (as they commonly speak) standing as a witness with others at the
baptizing of his brother John's Daughter, Caspar Heydan, who then did officiate,
asked him and the other witnesses, Whether they did confess that to be the true
and perfect doctrine of salvation, which was contained in the old and new
Testament, and in the Apostles Creed, and which was taught in that church, to
wit, of Amsterdam; adding moreover these words: What say ye to these thing?
Episcopius, the chief among them, answered; That he did account whatsoever was
taught there according to the word of God, and the Ap^stles Creed, to be the
true and saving doctrine, as the words of the usual form, out of which the
interrogation is made, do intend; Which answer, though mild and modest, so
moved the spleen of Mr. Heydan, that with contempt he called him Young Man, and
upbraided him as one very audacious and presumptuous in daring to speak so in
the Church of God. To which Episcopius again replied, saying; That he would
depart ^f the Preachers would not admit that limitation, comprehended in the
form of Baptism, where after mention made of the old and new Testament, and the
Apostles Creed, these words are added, and consequently is taught in the
Christian Church. But when Heydan had the second time upbraided him with
audaciousness, and Episcopius made no further reply, he at length christened
the Child. And when Episcopius was going out, he was reproachfully handled, and
called a seditious man, and a disturber of the Church, by some of the baser
sort, whom Heydans words had excited to such opprobrious speeches; and when he
was gone out of the Church, he hardly escaped beating or stoning, to which some
instigated the youth that were then present. But God out of his fatherly care
protecting him, and restraining the fury of those wicked men, brought him at
length to his friends in safety.

Not long after this it happened in the same City, That a certain Black smith,
seeing Episcopius passing by his shop, run out with a bar of Iron that he was
forging on his anvil, and called him Arminian, and a disturber of the Church,
and so pursued him, as one having a mind to murder him, which danger he
escaped by flight and the assistance of others, that hindered and restrained
this villainous Zealot.

Now if we should here insert a short but sad story of some Contra-remonstrants
Plunderers, we should not go far out of our way, nor much digress because
Arminianisme (so called) was the occasion, and Rembert, the brother of our
Episcopius was the person pillaged, and that in the time we have now under
consideration. The story thus runs; There was in the year 1617, and on the 19th
of February, a false rumor raised and spread abroad, that some Remonstrants
were met together to hear a Sermon in the house of Mr. Rembert Episcopius, who
in Amsterdam was well known to be much addicted to the Remonstrants opinions,
and was for that cause much hated by the vulgar sort, Upon this report many
hundreds of vile persons run thither, who first breaking the windows with
stones, then with a bar breaking up the gate, enter the house in an hostile
manner, and as a Company of Robbers, when they had drank up or spilled the wine
and beer in the Cellar, they scorch and sack the house, opening forcibly above
12 chests, carrying away what was portable, for they stole thence a bag of
money, wearing clothes, linen, pictures, books, household stuff, plate, etc.
and what they could not carry away tore and broke, leaving nothing there whole
and untouched, When they had emptyed the house, they begin to demolish it and
make it an heap of rubbish, which they had done, if the coming of the
Magistrate had not hindered them. The Gentleman and his wife escaped their
fury; she by flying to a neighbors house; he by hiding himself on the top of
his own house, whither he got by a ladder that he drew up after him. His loss
was estimated to be above six thou and florans. And if he had not had some
space (while those religious Felons were breaking open his doors) for the
casting of his money and some part of his better household stuff into a
neighbors house, he had in that one day been well nigh spoiled of a good
estate, and reduced to poverty, The other brother Mr. Jo. Episcopius, being
also of the Remonstrant persuasion, though he was not pillaged as his brother,
yet was he often and much reproached by the dregs of the people, a sort of
malignant Zealots. But to return now to our Episcopius, who was a sufferer in
his Relations, and Christian Associates, and met with many great personal
afflictions, especially at the time of the Dort Synod, and afterward, of which
we will here take a Superficial and cursory view.

In the year 1618 began the Synod of Dort, which how unjustly it carried it
self toward the Remonstrants, the Acts and History thereof, long since
published; do, says Curcellaeus, abundantly testify. We will briefly mention
here a few things that more nearly touch our Episcopius; Although from that
which happened not long before the convening of this Synod; namely the violent
ejecting of those Magistrates that favored mutual forbearance, it was not hard
to conjecture, that no good issue would attend this Synodical meeting; yet
notwithstanding our Episcopius, being invited to it by the Letters of the
Illustrious States of Holland, and to sit there with the other professors of
the United Provinces, did with some other Remonstrant Preachers make his
appearance at Dort soon after the beginning of the Synod; but the Synod, which
was the adverse Party, and which shamefully took to themselves a power of
judging in their own cause, permitted neither him, not any other Remonstrants
to be present in their assembly, but as cited persons, appearing at the Syneds
tribunal, and submitting to the authority of the Synod, as having power to
order them, when to speak, when to hold their peace; and also at length, by
majority of voices, to judge and censure them; Which how far from all equity it
was, let all judge that have eyes to see, and are impartial. The Remonstrants
notwithstanding^ lest they should seem wanting to a good cause, did yield to a
necessity, and with a great and undaunted courage entered the Synod, and there
Episcopius with great grace and Oratorial gesture (and as our learned Hales
expresses it) recited that excellent Oration, which is to be found in the Acts
of the Synod, and in the second volume of his works. After this, when the
Remonstrants declared, that they were ready to confer with the Synod, the
Ecclesiastical President in the name of the Synod answered, That they by an
authority granted to them from the States General, were come together, not to
confer with them, but to judge them; Notwithstanding this, yet the
Remonstrants, having protested, that they could not acknowledge that Synod as a
lawful Judge in the present controversy, because the greatest part of it
consisted of their professed adversaries, who had already condemned them, and
separated from them, did address themselves freely to propound, explain and
confirm their sentence or judgment, before the Synod, so far as they could and
did judge necessary; and so to do, they were not only exprespermitted, but
also enjoined, by the Deputies of the States General in their Citatory Letters.
But when the Synod would again circumscribe that liberty by these limits, to
wit, that they should propound, explain and confirm their sentence or judgment,
as far as the Synod should judge might be sufficient and ought to be; then
could not the Remonstrants satisfy their consciences to submit to such unequal
and unrighteous conditions, by which they should betray their cause, and so
they were at length cast out of the Synod, as persons unworthy for the Synod
any longer to treat withal.

Concerning the manner of their ejection I shall here add something out of the
letters sent from Dort to Sir Dudly Charleton, at that time Lord Ambassador
from K. James to the States General, and written by Doctor Belcanqual, a member
of the Synod, and one of the English College there, and of a different
persuasion to the Remonstrants, and by our own renowned Countryman Mr. Hales,
then Chaplain to the said Ambassador, but for a time resident at Dort, to
observe the Synods proceedings there; The letters may be found in Hales his
Golden Remains: When the voices says (Belcanqual) only of the foreign
Divines were asked (who are not above a third part of the Synod) then were the
Remonstrants called in, and dismissed with such a powdering speech, as I doubt
not but that your Lordship has heard with grief enough. I protest (says he) I
am much afflicted, when I think of it; For if the Remonstrants should write,
that the President pronounced a sentence, which was not the sentence of the
Synod, they should not lie. The Civil Lawyers and Canon of France, who write
much about the formalities omitted in the Council of Trent, are exceptions of
less moment then these; So neither was there above a third part of the voices
asked, ex quibus sententia fieri nequit. Neither was the sentence conceived in
writ, and approved by the Synod; And the bitter words of the sentence were not
the words of any of the suffrages, unless that some of them were spoken by one
man only. So far he; There are says (Mr. Hales) some exceptions taken by the
Deputies themselves against Mr. President his rough handling the Remonstrants
at their dismission. The next day in the morning there was a private Session,
where a repetition was made of the last Synodical Acts, but when they came to
the Act of the Remonstrants dismission Ludovicus Crosius of Breme signified,
that he perceived, that Mr. President in that business had been paulo
commotior, [somewhat too passionate] and had let slip Verba quaedam acerba
[some bitter words] which might well have been spared; That in so great an act
as that was, a little more advise and consideration might have been used, That
the Synod ought to have been consulted with, and a form of dismission conceived
and approved of by all, which should in the name of the Synod have been
pronounced and registered, whereas now the Synod stands indicted of all the
unnecessary roughness which then was practiced. So far our Hales.

After the dismission of the Remonstrants, the Synod prepared to judge them out
of their Writings. But they in the mean time, whilst the Synod was thus
occupied, did privately, by the command of the States Deputies, compose for the
confirmation of their doctrine, those accurate Writings, which together with
the Synodal Acts were published a little after, and deservedly obtained the
approbation of very many of the most learned men in Europe; One of chief
authority when he had seen them, said, That the Dort Synod had condemned the
Remonstrants; but they by their Writings had triumphed over the Synod.

And indeed one substantial argument is better than a thousand Synodal
suffrages. The chiefest part of these Writings ought to be ascribed to the
indefatigable industry of our Episcopius. That nervous Dissertation touching
Reprobation had for its Author, that learned and reverend father Mr. Charles
Niellius, a preacher at Amsterdam. To his memory we are indebted not only for
that piece, but for other things also in that volume; and debtours we are to
all the rest of them for that share of their labor we have in those Excellent
Writings.

At length the Synodical Sentence against the Remonstrants was pronounced, by
which they are condemned as men of a corrupt Religion and deposed and put out
of Office.

The hard usage of the Remonstrants is not much to be wondered at, the Synods
temper being considered; For although there was much candor in some of the
sorreign Divines, especially our English, yet there was much want of it in the
Provincials. Not to speak any thing of the unworthy usage which some of the
sotreign Divines, experienced in the Synod, and particularly they of Breme, who
were upon the point of leaving the Synod, by reason of offenses there given
them; I shall only in a word discover their ill disposition toward the
Remonstrants: Prejudice prevailed much among the Dutch Contraremonstrants; They
are (says Belcanqual in his letter of April 17) so eager to kill the
Remonstrants, that they would make their words to have that sense which no
Grammar could find in them; We have given a remarkable Instance of the
Presidents good nature and manners. And as for Gomarus, the then visible head
of the Fatalists, of what a froward and turbulent Spirit he was, I am even loath
to express in the words of Belcanqual, who thus writes to the Ambassador; If
the Synod (says he) had wanted but two men, I mean Sibrandus Lubbertus [one of
the principal Contraremonstrant leaders] and Gomarus, we had wanted a great
deal of contention, which I fear will not forsake the Synod as long as they are
in it; They have their fits of madness by course; The last fit before this came
to Gomarus his turn, and this day Sibrandus flew out with such raving and
fierceness of countenance, and such unheard bitterness against our College, as
I desire no other revenge on him, than the very speaking of the words, which
while they were in his mouth were checked by the President Politic, etc. In
another letter, thus; The Palatine Divines are the only Magistrates Doctors
next to Gomarus in all the Synod, and think every thing they speak should be
taken for Text. Let me add one passage more, wherein Gomarus is mainly
concerned; In the business of the Remonstrants of Camps, they of Breme
persuaded to a middle course in dealing with them. But Gomarus (says
Belcanqual) fell foully upon Martinus, a man very learned and very honest, who
has been so uncivily dealt with, that the Foreigners take much offense
thereat, and he and his Colleagues have been ready to leave the Synod. Because
he dislikes, as others do the Contra remonstrants broad speeches in many
points, they use him with so much discourtesy; Though one be against the
Remonstrants in all the 5 Articles in substance; yet if he differ from them
[the Dutch Divines] but in manner of speaking, they hold him as not sound. So
far Belcan^ual, I thought not indeed to meddle with this business relating to
them of Breme, but fell into it unawares, and cannot but learn from it, that if
the Contra remonstrants behaved themselves so, in such a place, against persons
who in the main were of their persuasion, then certainly the Remonstrants to
whom they were professed Adversaries, had cause to expect from them none of the
softest usage. But there is one passage more that I shall recite out of
Belcanqual concerning Gomarus. In Session 85, Gomarus in his disquisition of
the 3 and 4 Articles, delivered a speech against the Bremenses, which none I
think but a mad man would have uttered, and he delivered himself with such
sparkling of his eyes, and fierceness of pronunciation, as every man wondered
that the President did not cut him off; at last he cut off himself, I think for
want of breath, and then the President gave celeberrimo Duo Gomaro very many
thanks for that his learned, grave and accurate speech. The Exteri [the
foreign Divines] wondered at it, Martinus only said, that he was sorry he
should be so rewarded for his long journey. In another letter; All I will say
my Lord, is this; There are two men in the Synod, Sibrandus, but especially
Gomarus, who are able to set it on fire, unless they be looked to. Thus far he:
I shall say nothing of the generality of the Provincial or Dutch Divines, how
they were at the devotion of those that were chief Actors in the
Contra-remonstratical Tragedy.

We are come now to the Execution of the Synodical Sentence against the
Remonstrants; They being thus discharged, other Pastors were put and
substituted in their places, how unwilling soever the Chuches were to receive
them; In some places these new Pastors were brought in by force of arms. Now
lest the ejected Remonstrants should teach privately, therefore the
States General propose to them a certain engagement, to abstain in the future
both directly and indirectly from all even private exercise of their Ministry.
To which when some could not in conscience subscribe, they were condemned to
perpetual banishment. Alas! who could expect such cruelly amongst Protestants,
that had condemned Papists for the like unchristian practices? He that takes a
view of our Episcopius and some others of the Remonstrants in their deportment,
when this dismal Cloud appeared, will see cause to admire their faith and
fortitude. For so dear was the truth unto them, and their zeal for it so great,
that a promise of the same wages or stipend which they formerly enjoyed, could
not induce them (though some of them had but a very mean Estate) to oblige and
bind themselves unto silence, which was commanded them; Moreover these Generous
spirits did with much boldness, after the pronouncing of the of sentence of
Banishment, defend openly to the States General their own and their associates
Innocence, appealing to God, the avenger of them that are unjustly oppressed,
who would at the last day take cognizance of their Cause, and judge, without
respect of person, as well their Judges as them.

Hereupon these Stout Champions for truth were so hastily carried away by the
States Officers out of the limits of the United Provinces, that they after
their detaining eight months at Dort, whether they were called, as they
thought, to a free Synod, had not granted to them so much as one day, in which
to bid their families farewell, and to set in order their domestic affairs,
notwithstanding they petitioned for it.

Episcopius therefore, and the rest, betook themselves to Brabant, and
inhabited at Antwerp, during the peace between the King of Spain and the
States. This place these Exiles made choice of for their abode, not to join
with the enemies of their Country in a conspiracy against it, nor to endeavor
any thing detremental to the Reformed religion, as some malevolent persons were
bold enough to suggest slanderously against them; but because that place was
near, and from which they might more commodiously, than from any place remote,
take care of their beloved Churches, and Families. How faithfully those
employed their talent, received of God, I shall here pass over in Silence,
being now to speak only of Episcopius, whose disputations with Peter Wadingus,
a Jesuit of Antwerp, and his Antidote against the Canons of the Synod of Dort,
do abundanly testify his great care and diligence; And also the Confession of
faith, which he, with the other Remonstrant Pastors there, did compose and
publish, that they might stop the mouths of them who calumniously gave forth,
that the Remonstrants cherisht in their breast, monstrous and strange opinions,
which they durst not expose to public view.

When the war was renewed between the King of Spain and the States, our
Episcopius, see ng he could no longer with safety remain in Brabant, departed
thence into France, and inhabited sometime at Rhoan, sometime at Paris. If thou
inquire how in these parts his time was spent, those Writings of his there
compiled, will give thee a worthy Account, in case thou art able to peruse his
Paraphrase and Observations on the 8, 9, 10, and 11 Chapters of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans; also his Bodecherus ineptiens; his Examen Thesium Jacobi
Capelli; his answer to to the Defense of Jo. Cameron; his Treatise of Christian
Magistracy. and that of free will, with other works of his, labored there. He
that with these considers his sollicitous Care for the Churches of his own
Country, which in this time of persecution being destitute of their ordinary
Pastors, he by diverse Writings and Epistles instructed, comforted and
encouraged to presevere in the Faith; also the many conferences he had with
learned men concerning Religion, by which he endeavored to bring them to a
more accurate search and inquiry after the truth; he, I say, that considers
these things, will be so far from thinking that he had many wast hours that he
will greatly wonder, where time was found for so many and great Atchievments.
Here Stephen Cureelleus got with him his first Acquaintance and professes that
he heard him discourse of some hard points of religion, and learned so many
things of him, that he always afterward esteemed it a singular happpiness to
him, that he had acquaintance with so worthy a man Here also Episcopius
contracted such a friendship with that most cordial man and eminent
Mathematician, Mr. Edmund Mercer, which afterward no distance of place, or
length of time, could dissolve or weaken. This was he that published this Book,
by which Camerons opinion of Grace and free will is examined, and entitled it,
Epistola viri docti; and he that was so familiar a friend with Hugo Grotius,
that Grotius, when he last left France, committed to him the most precious
Treasures he had, his Elaborate Manuscripts, that by him they might be
communicated to others.

At length Episcopius, being desirous to have a perfect Survay of France, who
as yet knew little more than the Northern part of it, went from Paris to Lions;
After that he visited Marseille, Nismes, Mompelier, Toulouse: Afterward
Bordeaux, Rochella, Poictiers, Angiers, Tours, Orleance, and other places. And
when he had finished his perambulation, he returned to Paris and Rhoan; where
when he had remained a while; and had heard that the fervor of the
persecution, raised in his own Country against the Remonstrants, was some what
alayed, he purposed to return thither. Leaving therefore France in the year of
our Lord 1626, and in the eighth year of his banishment, he came to Rotterdam,
that he might with other brethren lay out his abilities for the gathering of
that very numerous Church, which is there out of the dispersed Remonstrants:
And that afterward he might take care for other Churches in the United
Provinces. In the mean while by his Writings both in Latin and Dutch he
strenuously defended the truth. He published in Latin An Apology of the
Remonstrants confession; An Answer to the Essay of the Leyden Professors, with
other Books. In Dutch he wrote a Treatise of true Antiquity against the
Papists; Three Treatises against James Triglandius, then Preacher at Amsterdam,
since Professor of Divinity at Leyden; with other books,

In the second year after his return, he entered into a Matrimonial state,
(there being then hope of a more peaceable time) marrying at Rotterdam that
most choice and virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs. Mary Pesser, the widow of Mr. Henry
Niellius a Preacher of that City, and the younger brother of Mr. Charles
Niellius abovementioned. They lived together, but without issue, most piously,
peaceably and comfortably to the end of the years 1641, at which time she
finished her course.

But before this in the year 1634 He went to Amsterdam, to be President in the
Remonstrants Scholastic Nursery or College, which was erected there to be as
an University, for the instructing of Youth in Divinity, that were intended for
Ministers of the Church,

How faithfully and diligently he exercised himself here, we have an
illustrious testimony from his copious, learned and most useful Theological
Institutions; and the Answer of 64 Questions proposed to him by his Disciples;
also from his learned and eloquent Sermons to the people; also his true
Remonstrant Divine; and his Answer to the 10 Dilemma's of a certain Popish
Doctor, and other works of his.

Whilst he was thus laboring, some occasions forced him to Rotterdam, where
Anno 1639 he fell dangerously sick, and for some months kept his bed, and so
far was he gone, that there was little hope of his recovery. But at length God
restored him to health, and so strengthened him, that he returned to his charge
at Amsterdam, and as diligently labored among them as before.

After his return it seemed good to the Remonstrants to publish a plain
Catechism for the instructing of the more ignorant sort. Then Abraham Heydan,
at that time a Preacher at Leyden, afterward Professor of Divinity there,
published an Examination of this Catechism, the defense of which our Episcopius
undertook, and finished in a considerable large Volume, which came not forth
till after his death. For in the beginning of the year 1643, when he was well
nigh 60 years old, he fell mortally sick. His disease is called Ischuria, a
dangerous suppression of the Urine, which was so pertinacious and obstinate,
that for eleven days he could not make one drop of water; although some
skillful Physicians used the utmost of their art to master, or at least
somewhat to mitigate this his mercyless and stubborn enemy. This Excrement (of
which he afterward avoided but little) mixing it self with the blood of the
whole body, so corrupted the Crassis and temperature thereof, that he could not
possibly long subsist.

He lay sick two months and above, and for some weeks before his death was
deprived of sight. Which loss, whilst there was any hope of his recovery, had
been exceeding grievous unto him, had not his deep and almost continual
sleeping lessened the same; For sometimes he complained of it to his friends
that did frequently visit him; saying, that he should not be able any more to
serve the Church of Christ,

At length on the 4th of April about the 8th hour in the morning, (at which
time the moon was in the Eclipse) he peaceably fell asleep in the Lord. And the
4th day after was carried forth (a great multitude of all sorts of persons
following the hearse) unto the West-Church, and was there interred by his wife.
His death many much lamented, and many Epicedium's, or funeral Verses of his
praise and commendation, were published both in Dutch and Latin.

Caspar Barlaeus, the most renowned Poet of that time, and who lived not full
two years after him, published a most excellent Latin Epicaedium in his
commendation, which is prefixed to the first Volume of Episcopius his works.

Thus we have taken a short view of Episcopius from his birth to his death. His
life was unblameable, and illustrious for zeal to the glory of God, and man's
salvation; His Love to the Churches peace and concord added much to his
commendation. He was indeed much conversant in Controversies, not of choice,
but through necessity; He was often wont to complain of his constraint to this
kind of exercise. His patient bearing of jnjuries, and readiness to forgive,
after the example of his Master Christ, contributed not a little to his praise.
In alms-deeds he was to his power ready and cheerful; And such was his modesty
and humble temper, that his rare endowments and great Atchievments he esteemed
as nothing. On his sickbed his Speeches were gracious, full of piety toward
God, charity toward men and confidence in Christ. His name now and memory is
blessed with them especially, that without prejudice peruse his works, that in
two considerable Volumes are now public in the Latin tongue, which I could
wish that all men well understood, were it but to read Episcopius. I doubt not
but there are many, who have much improved themselves by his writings. Our
famous Hales is not doubtless without companions of whom this is reported by
Mr. Anthony Farindon, his familiar friend: that he himself often told him, that
at the well pressing of Jo. 3, 16. by Episcopius, he bade Jo. Calvine
Goodnight. It would be in vain for me here to enlarge, who am speaking to
those, that through unacquaintance with Latin, ^ are incapable to see the great
knowledge and eloquence of our Episcopius: as for those who converse honestly
with his Writings, they need not me. But I would not that any should think of
me, that I take all his sayings for gospel; No, I believe that his Writings as
well as other men's must be read with judgment: for I nothing doubt, but that
Errata's may be found in his works, not only such that are justly imputable to
the Transcriber and Printer, but such also that are the Authors, who was
subject to err, though much more free from errors than many.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Francis Smith at the Elophant and Castle without Temple Bar.
BAptism before or after Faith and Repentance largely discussed; not only in
public Disputations; Managed by many Ministers before Thousands of people, but
also Mr. Baxter, Dr. Holmes, Dr. Featly, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cook, Mr.
Cotton; Their arguments for and against truly controverted being a subject very
useful in these inquiring times, for general satisfaction in this point so much
controverted, in folio 10 s. 6. d.

Hooles Latin and English Grammar, fitted not only for the use of all Schools,
but very useful for any person desirous to Learn the Latin tongue, being a
more plain and speedy help then any yet extant Sixth Edition; 8o. price bound 2
s.

A Caution to Christians against Mistakes in their Faith, opening the nature
and difference of effectual faith that will not, and of the Dead faith that
will at last deceive men in their hopes of Justification by it; showing also
that holiness in men as well as the happiness of men is Gods aim in Contriving
the terms of their Salvation in 4o, 2 s. 6 d. bound.

One thing needful, or a serious meditation on the 4 last things, Death,
Judgment, Heaven and Hell unto which is now added Eball and Gerizzim; or the
Blessing and the Curse. third Edition 12o. 6. d. bound.

The Young Scholars pocket Book containing the first Rudiments in Arithmetic,
with the Rule of 3. also the way to find the Content of Board, Glass, Land,
Timber, Stone, Globes. third Edition, 12o. 8. d. bound.

Youths Tragedy, a Poem drawn up by way of Dialogue, between Youth, the Devil,
Wisdom, the Nuncius, Time, Death, the Soul, for Caution and Direction of the
younger sort. third Edition 4o. 4. d, bound.

Symptoms of growth and decay to Godliness, in 80 Signs of a living and dying
Christian, with the causes of decay and remedies for recoveries in Large 8o.
third Edition at 1. s. 6. d. bound.

A new and useful Concordance to the Holy Bible, whereunto is added beyond any
extant the chief acceptations and various significations of words contained in
the Old and new Testament, with marks to distinguish the Commands, promises and
Threatenings; also a collection of those Scripture prophesies which relate to
the Call of the Jews and the Glory that shall be in the Latter Days in 8o, at
2. s. 6. d. bound. in 120. at 2. s. bound, where it is also to be had printed
on a fine page and bound with the Bible in 80. or 12o.

FINIS.

