A Word in Season. Most humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable
House of Commons.
Being a prospect of Public Grievances, with some particulars relating to the
Imbezling of PRIZES and Prize GOODS; together with the Proceedings of the
Commissioners for Prizes.
MOST Worthy Senators,
having made Observations of some Miscarriages in the Public during the late
Wars, and finding it is morally Impossible to bring the Offenders to
Punishment, unless this Honorable House will vouchsafe to take cognizance
thereof; and being no way doubtful of your Honors good Intentions of
Redressing Public Grievances, which like a raging Pestilence or violent
Torrent, running many years without control, has greatly impoverished and
almost ruined this Fruitful and Populous Kingdom. True it is, that War begets
Poverty, but the present and extreme Poverty of this Nation, proceeds not from
the War it self, but from the Warriers, viz. those employed in the management
thereof, who has made the same not only expensive but tedious and doubtful. I
do not intend to make repetitoins of what Sums has been given by Parliament to
prosecute the War with Vigor, and what Sums has been given to carry on the War
with France, this Honorable House has no need of Intelligence thereof; and
therefore I shall omit that, and give your Honors a hint of what I have
observed in general, during the said War, viz. how his Majesty's Royal
Undertaking has been betrayed and obstructed, his Public Treasure profusedly
wasted and purloyned, his Trading Subjects and Seamen oppressed and ruined, his
truly loyal and faithful Subjects discouraged and rejected, the War retarded
and prolonged, Justice perverted, and his Royal Perogative contemned and
rejected; his Enemies and Criminals, the occasion thereof, supported and
protected, to the almost Ruin of his Majestys great and glorious Undertakings;
whereby this Nation is miserably fallen from that glorious Prospect it had in the
beginning of the Revolution. But passing by the particulars of each Grievance,
as being too many to enumerate at present, I shall only present your Honors
with what I have observed touching the imbezling of PRIZES, and Prize GOODS,
together with some Proceedings of the Commissioners for Prizes; whereby it is
notorious Evident, that his Majesty has been Defrauded of several hundred
thousand Pounds, and the Seamen and Mariners almost wholly deprived of their
Shares and Proportions allowed (by the late Act) for their encouragement. And
although this Honorable House (with intent to discover those Frauds) has been
pleased to order the said Commissioners, to lay before them, an Account of what
Ships has been taken during the War, and how they have been Sold, and how the
money arising thereby has been applied; and that the said Commissioners
pursuant thereunto, have produced an Account thereof, yet it is morally
impossible your Honors can have a true state of that matter from them, for the
following Reasons, to wit, several Ships has been taken this War which with
their whole Cargoe and Furniture has been Imbezled by the Captors, and no
returns made thereof to their Office: other Ships has been taken and put into
the Custody of others the Kings Officers, and not entered or accounted for in
the said Prize Office, or elsewhere: And this liberty of imbezling and
purloyning of Prize Ships and Goods, has chiefly happened through the
indifferency and negligence of the Commissioners, who not regarding his
Majesty's Interest, or their own Duty's, have frequently connived at their
Offenses; for when discoveries has been made to them of this kind, they have
been pleased to Brow-beat the discoverers, and to tell them, that the matter
discovered was committed a great way off, or a great while ago, and that the
Person accused for such Imbezzlement had given them an account upon Oath of
what he had taken; and that that was sufficient for them. So that the King, and
Mariners, was thereby defrauded of their Shares and Proportions, and the
Discoverers (tho promised a Reward at first) was only looked upon with an evil
Eye, and branded with the Name of an Informer. True it is, to please the
Discoverer, and send him a wild Goose chase, they have sometimes put the King to
a considerable charge to condemn such Ships, and the Discoverer to the charge
and trouble of producing Evidence to prosecute the same, rewarding the
Discoverer with a no^-payment of such Shares and Proportions of Prize Money as
he was justly entitled to receive. But after all, the same has lay dormant,
being buried in Oblivion, and the Imbezlers never called to any further
account: whereby his Majesty has not only been defrauded of immense Sums of
Money, but the Mariners and Seamens shares of Prize Money, who by the ill
usage of their Commanders are Q and run, is remaining in the hands of the said
Commissioners, or paid to their Captains, as a reward for their severity. So
audacious have they been in countenancing and carrying on those Clandestine
Pr^ctises, that when some Commanders has been justly multed a considerable Sum
for such Immbezzlements, at another Board they have been pleased to refund and
pay them, out of the public Cash, at their Office. Other Prize Ships and Goods
being delivered into their custody, has suffered the same fate, several
prodigious Imbezzlements having been likewise made of their Cargoe, to the
great prejudice of his Majesty, and others concerned, who notwithstanding their
utmost endeavors, could not prevail with them to enquire into those
miscarriages, in order to make Restitution for the same; whereby several
Offenders (by such Imbezzlements) are grown so flush and full of money, that it
is a task of the greatest difficulty to bring them to a Trial in any of his
Majesty's Courts, upon the greatest Breach of the Law. These and many other
illegal Practices, too many here to enumerate, has frequently been occasioned
through the ill conduct of the Officers for Prizes; which, the better to cover
the crime, they have Retaliated themselves, with an extraordinary Reward for
their signal Services, as by their Books of Accounts will evidently appear: To
which I humbly refer, and shall only hint, that it would be a Work of singular
Use to his Majesty, and the Public, to Examine their particular Accounts, of
Disburstments, Contingencies, promiscous, incident, and accidental Charges,
together with their great Salleries and Rewards, with their little, or no
attendance, whereby the mystery of the whole matter may soon be unfolded, if
this Honorable House will be pleased to command a Discovery thereof: which
being most humbly intimated, may readily be proved.

The premises thus truly stated, the Consideration thereof is most humbly
offered and submitted to this most August and Honorable Assembly; from whence a
Redress of all our Grievances are desired and expected.

GEORGE EVERETT.


