LIVING TESTIMONIES Concerning the Death of the Righteous.

OR The blessed End of Joseph Featherstone and Sarah his Daughter; Written by
Sarah his Wife, and Thomas Brown her second Husband; Not unworthy the
knowledge of Friends and their Posterity; that all may be encouraged to Live
well, that their latter End may be Blessed.

Also something concerning Charles Wray, Grace Brown, and Katharine Brown her
Daughter, Writ by Thomsa Brown the Elder, in Partney in the County of Lincoln.

All of them being a sweet savor of Life, laid down their Heads in Peace.

Printed by Andrew Soul: And sold at the Three-Kyes in Nags-Head. Court in
Grace Church Street, 1689.

Courteous Reader,
THE Ensuing Testimonies are tenderly recommended to thy serious Perusual, with
an earnest desire thou may Read them in Meekness, and the Fear of God; and
if a Parent, wait upon the Lord in his Holy and Heavenly Gift, to receive that
Wisdom which is truly profitable to direct thee, and to endue with a right
Understanding, and a godly Care and Zeal to Train up thy Child in the Fear of
God, and Admonition of the Lord; and not only to Admonish thy Child to that
which is Good, and not to follow or delight in the foolish Fashions and vain
Dresses of the evil World, but also while under thy care to Feed, Cloth and
Provide for, to restrain from those things which are unbecoming the Truth and
our holy Profession thereof, and not to lay out and exspend thy Substance which
God has made thee a Steward of, to gratify that mind in thy Child, which thou
have known and felt the Judgment of the Lord to be executed upon in thy self,
because it was not subject unto the Law of God, neither indeed can be; and
therefore ought not to be given way unto in thy Child, nor complied with by
thee, least thou become guilty of thy Child's hurt, to the dishonor of Truth,
and thy own Grief; but rather then thus humor thy Child, let the like care be
on thee, as was upon our Deceased Friend, who on his dying-Bed, Desired that
his Child should be brought up in the Nurture and Fear of the Lord, and
Educated in the Plain and Decent parts or things that belong to a Woman, But
upon a needless Seam, nor any thing Superfluous, not to lift her Hand to do,
for that, said he, will bring Dishonor to the blessed Truth, and be a Burden
to the Simple-hearted: Observe the Godly Care of this good Man: Oh, that many
Parents may be filled with the like Godly Care and zeal for the Education of
their tender Offspring.

And now, oh, Courteous Reader, if thou art young, and not yet become the Parent
of Children, Read in Seriousness, and the Fear of God, the following Testimony
concerning these young Maidens, who may be truly esteemed as wise Virgins, and
such that had more regard to the inward then the outward Adorning, whereby they
became so Comely, and their Conversation so Commendable and Examplary, that
Sarah Featherstone, its said, was not one that had only a Love to faithful
Friends, and their Religious Meetings, but also when there, was preserved out
of Drowsiness, Sleepiness and Heaviness, (which over took the foolish Virgins,
so that their Lamps went out, and they were unfit to enter with the
Bridegroom) but she sat in Meetings in a sweet frame of Spirit, and was often
tendered in the Meetings, a thing very commendable in Young and Old: She also
when she was sent abroad to be Educated, was careful to improve her Time, a
thing worthy of Praise and of thy Observation; for with Grief may it be said,
there are too many Children, that when their Parents send them abroad to be
Educated, and are at great Charge and Expense by reason thereof, they too to
much neglect that which their Parents send them forth to Learn, and in Play,
Wildness and Idleness squander away their precious Time, often talking what
Portions they have, or their Parents can give them, and observing what this and
the other wears, and how this and the other Dresses themselves, and then
endeavor to do the like, and thus stir up one another to that which is Evil;
and sometimes by giving way to this Evil mind, come to have a proud Look, which
is an Abomination to the Lord, and a Lying Tongue, which he hates. Oh,
therefore who-ever thou art, which Reads these and the following Lines,
consider seriously these things, and remember thou must Dye and come to
Judgment; and though thou art Young, yet know not how soon thy change may
come, and thy Body must return to the Dust, and become Meat for the Worms:
Therefore while time lasts improve it, and mind the Grace and good Spirit of
God in thy own Heart, hearken and return at the Reproofs of it, that thou
may know and be led in the way of Life, and become a Comfort to thy Parents,
and a Companion of them that fear the Lord, and rejoicing to thy Friends, who
have no greater Joy then to behold their Children walking in the Truth, the
which Truth and Spirit of it, if thou will love and obey, it will lead thee to
make a right improvement of thy time, to be Obedient to thy Parents, and
Subject to thy Tutors, to be meek and lowly in thy mind, and to be afraid to
commit that which is Evil, though in a secret Corner, or to wear that which is
needless or superfluous; for this Truth is that which will teach thee all
things, if thou will learn of it, thou will become more Excellent then thy
Neighbors, and wilt not be seduced by the way of the Wicked, nor let thy mind
out after their vain and foolish Fashions, nor delight in their evil Practices
and proud Dresses, and false Speech, and corrupt Communication, but in the
single Language, the plain and decent Dresses and Apparel that the godly of Old
were, and now are Adorned in.

John Field.
September the 26th 1689.
There has something lain as a weight upon my Spirit for sometime, to write
this Testimony as follows, Concerning my dear Deceased Husband Joseph
Featherstone, for the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance.
AND this I can truly say concerning him, that he was a Man whom the Lord had
endued with much Wisdom and Meekness, as his mind came to be retired inward to
wait upon the Lord, his Strength was daily renewed; and when the Lord was
pleased to reveal his Son in him, then did the Lord wonderfully appear for him,
and by a strong Hand brought him out of Egypt's Darkness, and from under the
Hand of the Enemy of his Soul, who would not be willing that he should go forth
to serve the Lord his God. Oh the deep Exercise of the Travel of his Soul for
Days and Months, when he went bowed down under the weight of his Sins, then
they that were his Teachers before, could speak no Peace to his wounded Soul,
for they were Physicians of no value: Oh the Sense of the Lords great Love to
his Traveling Soul, how he brought him through the Wilderness, and from off
the barren Mountains; and bore up his head above many Temptations and Trials
within and without, and set his Feet upon a Rock, and established his goings;
so that he could call to his Neighbors and Acquaintance to come and taste how
good the Lord is to them that wait upon him; and many a time could speak a Word
in season to such as were seeking the Living amongst the Dead; and his
circumspect Walking reached the Hearts of many, for he loved Truth in the
inward parts, and to do the Will of the Lord was his great delight: He was
Convinced of Gods Everlasting Truth, the Twenty ninth Year of his Age, whom the
Lord made Instrumental in his Hand toward my Convincement; he was a true
Yoke Fellow indeed, his Company to me was very dear, and my Soul has often
been refreshed in his savoury Life, which has caused my loss of so dear a
Husband, and so true a help-meet to be the greater, but knowing it to be of the
Lord, I desire to be submitted to his blessed Will, that he alone may have the
Glory of his own Works, for he is worthy who is God blessed for ever. In the
time of his Sickness the Lord was pleased to bear him up in much Patience, and
he was freely given up to the Will of the Lord; the day aster he fell Sick, I
sitting by him, he perceiving I was much troubled, he said, Dear heart, give me
up to the Will of the Lord, for said he, I can freely give up all; and when
some Friends came to visit him, he Exhorted them to Faithfulness, And then the
Lord would make a Dying-Bed Comfortable to them; and said, though he felt much
Sickness and Pain upon his Body, yet the Refreshments that he felt from the
Lord, made all his Troubles easy; then he spoke many comfortable Words to me,
saying, How good the Lord had been to us in many Exercises and Trials, and
through his great Love bore up our heads above them all; and his Prayers was to
the Lord, that we might be preserved in his holy Fear and undefiled Way, to
bear a Testimony to the blessed Truth, to the end of our days: And then he
desired me that his dear Child should be brought up in the Nurture and Fear of
the Lord, and Educated in the plain and decent Parts that belongs to a Woman,
but upon a needless Seam, nor any thing superfluous, no not to lift her hand to
do, for that said he, Will bring dishonor to the blessed Truth, and be a
Burden to the simple-Hearted, and draw out the minds of the young ones after
Vanity, which thing, said he, my Soul hates. The day before he was taken away,
he seemed to be something restless, I said, dear Heart, thou art Restless; then
he with a cheerful Countenance said, Do thou not know where the Weary go to
Rest; and said, my Rest and Fellowship is with the Lord: Some Friends came to
Visit him, who asked how it was with him, he said, I am well, I feel no
Sickness; and told them, he was glad to see them, and was much Refreshed in his
Spirit; and many sweet Refreshments from the Lord ran through him, to the great
Comfort and Refreshment of the honest-Hearted; then he desired to be alone,
saying, I would see if I could get a little Sleep, and so rested a pretty time;
and then I asked him, how he felt himself, he said, I am well blessed be the
Lord, and desired me to be satisfied, for he was satisfied, and lifting up his
Hands, said, O Lord, thou art the Eternal God, and so fell asleep in the Lord,
where he is gone far above the reach of his Persecutors, to praise the Lord
that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb for evermore; in the undoubted sense
thereof my Soul does praise and Magnify the Lord on his behalf, who counted
him worthy to suffer for his Name sake, by bearing a faithful Testimony against
the Hireling Priests, who like devouring Wolves seek to lay Waste Gods Heritage

And now having somewhat eased my Spirit, I humbly desire of the Lord, that he
would be pleased to bear me up through all my Exercises and Trials, that he may
be pleased to suffer me to be tried withal; and to endue me with Wisdom and
Understanding to govern my dear Child and Family in his most holy Fear and
undefiled Way, to the Praise of his most holy Name, Amen; That when time shall
be here no more, I may have a Resting Place with the Lord for evermore.

He departed this Life, the 26th day of the 9th Month, 1682. in Postland, in
the Parish of Crowland; and was Buried the 27th day in Friends-Burying-place in
Crowland, being Accompanied with a pretty many Friends, Relations and
Neighbors. Postland in the Parish of Crowland, being the place of my Abode,
the 12th of the 3d Month, 1683. Sarah Featherstone.

A brief Relation of the Life and Death of my dear and only Child, Sarah
Featherstone, a Maid of the Age of fifteen years wanting one Month; who
Departed this Life at Partney-Mills in Lincolnshire, the 17th day of the 7th
Month, 1688.
THere has a weight lain upon my Spirit for some time, to Write this Testimony
concerning my dear and only Child: For the Righteous shall be had in
Everlasting Remembrance; and truly it was the Lords great Love to me in giving
me this dear Child, which I acknowledge as a great Blessing; but that which is
chiefly in my Eye, was the Lords great Love to her, who had inclined her Heart
to hear Wisdoms Voice, which often calls to the young Ones, To remember their
Creator in the days of their Youth; and Blessed are they that hear and obey in
their measure, and with meek Moses chose rather to suffer Afflictions with the
Children of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season. And blessed
be the Lord for ever, who had inclined her Heart to Love, Serve and Fear him
from her tender years; for from a Child she was tender and harmless, in true
Submission and Obedience to her Parents, so that I know not that in her young
time, that we ever had any just cause to use the Rod, for she was very
Tenderhearted, and of a comely Behavior, kind and courteous to all people, of
a meek and quiet Spirit, therefore beloved of most that did know her. Her dear
Father Departed this Life when she was about nine years of Age, who desired
upon his dying-Bed, That his dear Child should be brought up in the Nurture and
Fear of the Lord, and be Educated in the plain and decent parts that belong to
a Woman, but upon a needless Seam, nor upon any thing Superfluous, no not to
lift her Hand to do, for that says he, will bring Dishonor to the blessed
Truth, and be a burden to the simple-Hearted, and draw out the minds of the
young Ones after Vanity, which thing, says he, my Soul hates; and his
Breathings was to the Lord, that we might be perserved in his most holy Fear,
and undefiled Way to the end of our days; and blessed be the Lord for ever, who
gives Understanding and Wisdom to them that fear him; and is a sure Help in
the time of Trouble to them that wait upon him; and in this my great Exercise
in parting with so dear and tender a Husband, and so true a Help-meet; my dear
Child was a great Comfort and Blessing unto me, and was very loving and tender
over me, surpassing most of her equals that I knew of; and as she did grow up
in years, was a good Example in our Family, for her harmless Life and loving
Behavior appeared to the World what Stock she was of, but more especially her
dear and tender Love to faithful Friends, of which she ever had a good esteem,
and would mind me often of the Want of poor Friends and others, And she her
self would be helpful in what she had of her own, when need required; for her
Life and Delight was in doing good, and in that she reached the better part in
all, and from a Child she did take great delight in going to Meetings, and was
much preserved out of heaviness, or having her eye abroad, but sitting in a
sweet frame of Spirit, and would often be tendered in a Meeting, which has
often refreshed my heart in the great Love of the Lord, and to him be the Glory
and Honor over all his own Works for evermore, Amen says my Soul.

And when I Married the second time, the Innocence of my dear Child did much
appear in her Tenderness and Obedience to us her Parents, and her love to all
she came amongst, for her Life was in Peace, and could not abide Discord should
have place in any: And when she went abroad to be Educated, she would be very
careful in improving her time, and was a good Example where she went, amongst
Friends and others, and has left a good savor behind her, and her removal
has tendered the hearts of many that did know her; and when my dear Husband was
taken to Prison from me and his tender Family, she was a true Simpathizer with
me, many times willing to take part with me in my Exercises, for she was very
dear and tender over me, willing to be governed by me, and to take up the cross
to her own will in any thing I could not allow of for her to wear or do; and
her dear Fathers dying Words did take deep impression upon her heart, and
though Temptations sometimes did lie near, yet through the Lords great Love to
her, her heart was kept low, and she with Mary chose the better part, which
shall never be taken from her; so that I am satisfied that her Life was not in
those perishing things; in which my heart is often refreshed and comforted, and
the remembrance of her is made sweet to me; for through the Lords great Love to
her, I know not any that can charge her with any wrong done to them, either by
word or deed, for her life and delight was in Innocence and Love, adorned with
Meekness. Oh, the consideration of my great loss of so dear a Child now in my
old Age, has caused me sometimes to say in my heart if David said of Absalom,
would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my Son! surely I have far more cause
then David had, I having no more of my own to be a Comfort to me, (this being
the last of Ten, Nine of them were Buried before her Father) whose old Exercise
the lord is pleased to renew, but when I consider of Eternity, and the Joy that
they are entered into; and how good the Lord has been to me in the days of my
Afflictions, and has born up my head above all my Sorrows, and that they are
taken away from the evil to come; in this I am stayed, believing that my loss
is their everlasting gain, and that I shall go to them as I in faithfulness
abide.

In the seventh Month on the ninth day, about the eleventh hour of the night,
it pleased the Lord to visit my dear Child with this Sickness whereon she dyed,
and when my maid came and told me my Child was taken Sick, my heart was much
troubled, and it seized upon me very deeply, that my dear Child would be taken
from me; and when I came at my Child she did lie in a sweet frame of Spirit,
under a great weight of Sickness, and when I had been with her some time, she
told me, she thought she should be taken from me, which caused my Exercise
every way to be the greater, but to the Will of the Lord I was brought who gave
me her, and he alone was worthy to dispose of her as he pleases; and so my
dear Child did lie in a sweet frame of Spirit, often breathing to the Lord to
bear her up above all her troubles, and did speak little to us, but her
weakness increased daily upon her, and much pain, which this dear Babe endured
with much patience; and when we would have sent for a Doctor, she would not,
but said, she was freely given up to the Will of the Lord, whether to live or
dye; and said, dear Mother, give me such things as thou think convenient for
me, that I am able to take, for I am weak; and said, dear Mother, it has been
laid before me sometime, that I was not of a long Life, and if this be the time
of my Change I am content; and so did lie still, not seeming to be concerned at
any thing, but keeping her mind inward, often breathing to the Lord to bear her
up above her weakness, and to be her support to the end of her days; my heart
would often be bowed down and tendered when I did see her under the great weight
of her Sickness, at which she would be troubled; and say, dear Mother, thy dear
and tender love to me has been very great, and in that Love I desire we may
rest, freely given up to the Will of the Lord, for the Lord may not see it meet
to trust me in this wicked World any longer; and then she said, dear Mother,
who would desire to live in this abominable wicked World any longer? Oh, the
abominable Pride of this wicked World; and there is some amongst us, which can
take liberty to fashion themselves in many things like unto the World, both in
their Habit, and other needless things; Oh, but the Christian Life is another
thing; this is not the adorning we are to put on, for if the Righteous scarcely
be saved, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear? then she did lie still for
some time whilst the violence of the Fever troubled her much; and then she
said, Ah, my dear Mother, in all my Sickness that I have had, I never felt the
like I think, but I hope the Lord will be pleased to bear me up above all my
troubles to the end of my days; Ah, my dear Father, never so sick in my Life;
Oh, sick at my heart, which often tendered our hearts, to see our dear Child
pass through these great troubles at some times; and then she would say, Oh
Lord in mercy remember me, and bear me up above all my Afflictions, for my
heart trusts in thee; I said, my dear Child, if the Lord should be pleased to
take thee from me, where have thou a desire to be Buried, will thou be Buried
by thy dear Father, in Friends Burying-place, in Crowland where we came from?
she said, I have some thoughts formerly to have been Buried by my dear Father,
but considering the greatness of the Journey, and so many Buried near him, I am
satisfied, I leave it to thee and my Father; I said, my dear Child, art thou
willing to be Buried in our Burying-place, where I hope to be Buried by thee;
she said, dear Mother, Bury me where thou and my Father pleases, I leave it to
you, its no matter how many Miles distance these Bodies lies, our Souls shall
one day rejoice together; then I asked her, what she would have disposed of, of
that which was hers, she said, I would have my poor Relations have something,
and poor Friends Children where we came from, what thee and my Father pleases,
I leave it to you, for my Father is a good Man, and has been very tender over
me, and my Love to him has been very dear; and then she said, dear Mother, do
not trouble me with any thing, but let us be submitted to the Will of the Lord
in all things, do not speak to me, nor give me any thing without I desire it;
and so lay still in a sweet frame of Spirit, and with as sweet a Countenance,
and as cheerful as if she had no such Weakness upon her, only sometimes a great
trouble in her head, which the Lord was pleased to bear her up in much patience
to pass through, not a discontented word was heard to pass from her, but true
Contentedness in much Patience, often saying, Ah, my dear and heavenly Father
come away, come away, for my heart trusts in thee: some time before she
departed her Speech failed her, after which a sweet harmony often ran through
her, often lifting up her Hands with a very cheerful Countenance, and so she
fell a sleep in the Lord; who I then felt a stay to my mind, living Praises to
his most holy and powerful Name, who is a God of endless Mercies; my Spirit was
much comforted in the Lord in the behalf of my dear Child in the time of her
Sickness, who endued her with much patience, and wonderfully bore her up above
all her Sickness and Pain which was upon her Body, at sometimes not knowing
where to lay her Head to have a little ease, which she through the great love
of the Lord was born up in much patience to pass through, in true submission to
his blessed Will, and I do believe is at rest with God her Maker, being
asscended above all her Sorrows and Troubles, to praise the Lord that sits upon
the Throne, and the Lamb for evermore; in the undoubted sense of which my Soul
does Praise and Magnify the Lord on her behalf, and indeed the same does
out-ballance the great loss I have of her as to the outward, well knowing my
Loss is her everlasting Gain; and desiring that I may be subject to the Will of
the Lord, in what he may be pleased to try me withal, and that he may have the
Glory of his own Works, for he is worthy who gave me her, and now has taken
her away, Blessed and Praised be his most holy Name for ever.

Partney-Mills the place of my abode the the 20th of the 12th Month, 1689.
Sarah Brown Her Mother.

A POSTSCRIPT.
SInce I writ this Testimony concerning my dear Child, there has often fresh
springs of the Lords great Love concerning her arose in my Heart which I had
omitted my Duty in; when this Child was in the eleventh year of her age, it
pleased the Lord to suffer Persecution to come upon us (for the trial of our
Faith) for Meeting together and Worshipping God as he requires, that is in
Spirit and in Truth; we being at a Meeting about eight Miles from our outward
Dwelling, the Meeting being ended, and Friends ready to depart, some in the
yard, some in the highway, comes two Informers after a very rude manner,
calling of us Rogues and Whores, and Swearing desperately to many untruths, my
Husband reproved one of them (called Chipsam) for Swearing, he was very angry,
and held up his Stick, and said, He would break his Head, did he tell him, he
was the Kings Officer. [Observe, the said Chipsam was not long after carried to
Linclon Goal for Debt, and their dyed, and was there buried after a very mean
manner in the Castle yard, etc.] But before the Meeting fell to be there again
by course, which was a Month, (they had made much spoil of Friends Goods) it
pleased the Lord to visit my dear Husband with much Weakness, so that we could
not go to the Meeting; but my dear Child having a great desire to go again with
her Brothers, we wear freely willing, and they had a peaceable Meeting, and
Friends ready to depart as before, came the same Informers as rude or worse
then before, and within a few days Levied my Husbands Goods again upon the
account of one of his Sons, but she being under Age, they could take nothing
from her Father in Law upon her account, at which she seemed to be troubled,
(she having a considerable Portion in his hand) and said, If they be suffered
to take all that my Father has, he shall not want to give up to serve the Lord
so long as I have any thing, (and would sometimes say to me, I do believe I
shall never want any good thing which the Lord sees convenient for me) in which
she manifested her Love to him upon her dying Bed, as it is fully declared in
the foregoing Testimony; so having eased my Spirit, and discharged my Duty
which I did owe, I desire to rest in Peace with the Lord, and in Love to his
Truth and People, to the end of my days and time here in this mortal World, so
that when time here will be no more, I may lay down my Head in Peace, as my
dear Child has done; and then as she said upon her dying Bed, Our Souls shall
rejoice together.

Written at Partney: Mills the 11th of the 3d Month, 1689. by Sarah Brown.



Thomas Brown his Testimony concerning his dear Daughter-in-Law Sarah
Featherstone.
THis Testimony I have to bear concerning my dear Friend and Relation Sarah
Featherstone, first let me say something of her outward Abilities; she was Born
of honest Parents, and Educated in the plain and decent parts, her dear Mother
thought convenient, as Sowing, Kniting, Reading, Writing, etc. In which she
exceeded most of her equals, she was Womanly about Business, and what she did
she did it with all her might; she was of a singular good nature, and of a
comely, cheerful, quiet, modest Countenance, ripe Wit, quick of Apprehension,
mild and loving Behavior to all, and especially to Friends, but more
especially to them that were poor; at Monthly Meetings when Women Friends had
Contributions for the service of Truth, this dear Child would freely throw in
her Mite; a poor Widow Friend use to come to our House, when she went away, if
this dear Child did not see her, she would sometimes run after her, (not like
Gehazi) and give her something she had of her own, as sometimes half a dozen
Eggs, which showed a tender regard she had to the Poor; her dear Father dyed
when she was about nine years old, and after a convenient time her dear Mother
became my Wife, so I had a certain knowledge of her for about six years, in
which time I cannot remember that she ever gave me one angry word, but was as
loving and tender to me as though she had been my own Child; I was carried to
Prison for bearing my Testimony against Tithes, and there the Lord was pleased
to visit me with Sickness and other great Troubles, in which time this dear
Child came several times to visit me, though the Journey was long and difficult
sometimes, but her dear and tender Love to me out-ballanced it all. This dear
Child ever since I did know her, had a great desire to go to Friends Meetings;
I never see her in the least concerned in sleep or heaviness, but when I looked
upon her I found her in a sober and weighty frame of Spirit, which often caused
my Heart to rejoice, and the remembrance of her is very sweet to me at this
time. When the Lord was pleased to visit her with this Sickness whereon she
dyed, which was in the fifteenth year of her Age, she bore it with great
Patience, considering the violence of the Distemper (it was a very high Fever)
of which she lay just a Week, in which time she would often breath unto the
Lord, and say, Ah Lord help me; and say, Ah dear Father, what must I do? Ah,
dear Mother, what must I do; never so sick in all my Life? we tenderly exhorted
her to keep her mind stayed upon the Lord, then she would lie still a pretty
while, whilst the violence of the Distemper sorely troubled her, then she
would cry out as before, and say, Ah Lord help me; and several times did lift
up her hands and say, Lord have mercy upon me, Ah Lord help me; thus this
patient innocent Lamb finished her Testimony in a good day, and I do verily
believe is at rest with the Lord for evermore; this dear Babe, which was the
only Child of her tender Mother, Departed this Life the seventeenth day of the
seventh Month 1688. about mid night, and was honorably Buried the twentieth
day following at Tumby-Wood side, in the Parish of Lirkby upon the Bain, in
Friends Burning-Place, being accompanied with pretty many Friends, Relations
and Neighbors unto the said place, where there was gathered together a pretty
many Friends and Neighbors, where we had a good Meeting held by our very dear
and well-beloved Friend John Whitehead, who very tenderly accompanied us
thither, where we were livingly refreshed together, for there was Milk for
Babes, and Meat for them of riper Age, with living Testimonies concerning the
sober Life and harmeless Conversation of this innocent Child, by our dear
Friend John Whitehead (who had certain knowledge of her) she being sometimes
before Tabled at his House) and William Birks likewise, she having been at his
House a pretty time, a little before she fell Sick, was constrained to bring in
his public Testimony concerning this dear Child, all which greatly refreshed
and comforted us her Relations, and was of good service to the whole Meeting,
and may be a sweet savor to Generations to come; much more I might say
concerning this dear Child as to her sober and loving Behavior to all; her
comeliness in her Apparel, etc. (who like meek Moses) chose rather to suffer
Afflictions with the despised People of God in scorn called Quakers, then to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season, and did truly (I believe) remember her
Creator in the days of her youth; this is Written for this and Generations to
come, to stand upon Record, that young People may consider their latter end,
and whilst they have time prize it; Written in love to the Lord, his Truth and
People, having had a weight upon my Spirit for some Months, and now having
eased my mind, and done my Duty which I did owe, I desire to rest in Peace; And
if I in this, or at any other time, have said or done any thing that may tend
to Gods Glory, or be serviceable to any, my real desire is, that he alone may
have the Glory, Honor and the Praise, for he alone is worthy, not only at this
time but henceforth and for evermore, Amen says my Soul.

Partney-Mills the 4th day of the 11th Month, 1688, 89. Thomas Brown, Which was
her Father in Law.

Some Testimonies; Concerning Charles Wray, Grace Brown and Katharine Brown her
Daughter, Writ by Thomas Brown the Elder, in Partney in the County of Lincoln;
who all dyed in the Faith, and left a sweet savor behind them; the said
Charles Wray having received a heavenly Gift, which he exercised to Gods glory,
and the refreshment of his People.
SOmething lies weightily upon my mind, and has done for several Months, to
Write as a Testimony concerning our dear Friend Charles Wray, being one that
was very well acquainted with him for several years, I thought it my Duty to
mention something concerning his tender care over the Church of Christ while
amongst us; he was taken from us in the flower of his Years, the Lord was
pleased to take him away (as he has done many honest Friends before and since)
from the evil to come; he was Servant to me about half a year, (and Tenant to
me about twelve years) in which time he was very serviceable to me and my dear
Wife as to our Convincement, not only by his Words, but by his wise Walking; he
met with great Exercise in his time, but the Lord was pleased to carry him
through it all, and make him instrumental in his Hand, to the strengthening of
the weak, for the Lord was pleased to open his Mouth to declare of his great
love to Mankind, in which service was his chief delight; toward the latter end
of his time the Lord was pleased to visit him with weakness of Body, so that he
lay in Bed some Weeks, in which time I went several times to visit him, and was
very much refreshed together, for the Presence of the Lord did attend him; In
his Weakness he was very Comfortable both to Friends and others, for he could
speak a Word in season to most Conditions; the Lord was pleased in the time of
his Weakness to send two of his Messengers amongst us, and he having a great
desire to see them, they with some Friends went one Evening to visit him, and
we had a heavenly Meeting together, for the Power and Presence of the Lord was
plentifully manifested amongst us, and our Weak Brother, whom I am speaking of,
was at that time made Strong, to declare of the Goodness of the Lord, and to
praise his most holy Name, to the great comfort and refreshment of the
Faithful; he often desired of the Lord that he would be pleased to endue him
with a good Understanding to the end of his days, and lay no more upon him then
he would give him Patience to bear, all which the Lord (in his great Love and
Mercy) was pleased to answer, Praises to his most holy and powerful Name for
evermore, Amen says my Soul* for he did speak sensible Words a little before
he departed, and was born up with much Patience all the time of his Weakness;
he said to a Friend a little before his Death, That the Candle did burn dim,
and presently departed without either Sob or Groan that was heard; he remembered
his Creator in his young time, and made his peace with God whilst here, and
now is gone to receive the Fruits of his Labors, and to rest with the Lord for
evermore; so hoping I have done my Duty which I did owe, and eased my Spirit, I
desire to rest in peace with the Lord in whom is my chief delight.

Written in Partney the Tenth day of the Eleventh Month, 1682. By Thomas Brown
the Elder.

I felt a weight laid upon me to Write this Testimony concerning my dear and
truly loving Wife Grace Brown, whom the Lord has been pleased to take to
himself.
THis I can say, she had an honest desire after the Lord in the Summer of her
days, as I may say early, when I had little in my mind that was good, she did
often breath unto the Lord for me, and my dear Child Eliabeth likewise; (who
was a Loving, Tender and Obedient Child to us both, whom the Lord has been
pleased to take to himself likewise, about a eleven days before her dear
Mother) and he was pleased to hear their Cries and Tears, and change my mind to
that which was good and acceptable to himself, Praises to his Powerful Name for
evermore, Amen says my Soul.

We were both Convinced of Gods precious Truth about the year 1669. Our dear
Friends John Whitehead and Charles Wray were very tender over us, being chief
Instruments in the hand of the Lord toward our Convincement, etc. she was a
true, faithful and loving Wife to me, a true Yoke Fellow, a help-Meet indeed,
Zealous for God and his Truth, which was very precious to her, which she
delighted in more then any thing in this World; she was freely given up to the
Will of the Lord, and bore things with great Patience, to the admiration of
some in the time of my Confinement in Lincoln-Castle, where I was thrown in by
a Hireling-Priest for bearing my Testimony against Tithes; whom she bore a
faithful Testimony against (when he sent his Wife to demand Tithes, when I was
in Prison for not paying the same) and said, She did believe that Tithe was not
due according to the Law of God now in this Gospel day; she was made willing to
part with me at that time, though I was very dear unto her as a Husband could
be to a Wife, but it was that recompense of Reward which she had an eye unto,
and was made willing to suffer for, that now through Mercy she has obtained by
Faith; she took great delight in going to Meetings, and entertaining honest
Friends; in the latter end of our time (I speak it to the Praise of our God who
was so good unto us) several times as we lay in Bed together with broken and
contrite Hearts, we did earnestly desire of the Lord that he would be pleased
to give us of his Power and Spirit, that we might spend that little time that
was yet behind, in his most holy Fear and undefiled Way, to the Glory and
Praise of his Powerful Name; we lived in true Love together, her Company was
very pleasant to me, and I took more delight in it, then in any thing in this
World, she said mine was so to her; about three or four Weeks before her Death
she did Write these following Words, viz. It is the real desire of my Heart to
walk humbly before the Lord, for his Love has engaged my Heart unto himself;
she was one of few Words, (ready to hear, slow to speak) in her Health and in
her Sickness; and so Departed this life like a harmeless innocent Lamb, as
though she had been a sleep, so good was the Lord unto her at that time,
Praised be his powerful Name for ever and for evermore, Amen says my Soul;
much more I might say concerning her faithful Walking, and tender Care over her
Children, to bring them up in the Fear of the Lord, etc.

She Departed this Life the Thirty first day of the Tenth Month, at
Partney-Mills in Lincolnshire, in the year 1682. about the Forty eight year of
her Age; she lived with me about Thirty years, we had eight Children together,
five of them dyed before her; I Buried her decently, and according to good
Order practiced amongst us, the second day of the eleventh Month, and in the
year aforesaid, (being accompanied with a pretty many Friends and Relations) at
Tumby-Wood-side, in the Parish of Kirkby on the Baine, in Friends
Burying-Place; and so having somewhat eased my Spirit, I himbly desire of the
Lord that he would be pleased to endue me with his Power and Wisdom, to Govern
my Children and Family in his most holy Fear, and undefiled Way; to the Glory
of his most holy Name, Amen; so that when time here in this World will be no
more, I may lay down my Head in Peace, as my dear Wife has done, Praises to
the Lord over all for ever and for evermore, Amen says my Soul.

Written in great tenderness of Spirit, by a lover of Peace and Truth, the
Twenty fourth day of the Eleventh Month, 1682. at Partney-Mills, being the
place of my outward Habitation, Thomas Brown The Elder.

The Name of the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting remembrance.
This Testimony I have to bear concerning Katharine Brown my dear Child, it
has remained as a weight upon my mind for several days to Write to this
effect, etc.
IT was the care of some in days past, to keep in remembrance the Words and
Works which sprang from the blessed Power of God; and one said, The Righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and said, The Name of the Righteous
was precious, etc. This Child, that I am speaking of, was from her Childhood
very desirous to go to Friends Meetings, insomuch as one time it was with me to
examine her what she went for, she very tenderly gave me this answer, To wait
upon the Lord, it was not distance of Way, nor difficultness of Weather, that
did hinder this Child from going to Meetings, and though she was up early, and
the Journey pretty far, five, seven or eight Miles, and went a foot sometimes,
yet this Child was never the least concerned in sleep or heaviness that I did
perceive, for always when I looked upon her, I found her in a solid, sober and
weighty frame of Spirit, which has caused my Heart many a time to rejoice in
the Lord on her behalf; at the time called Christmas, she went to a Neighbors
House, they having pretty many Children, and they were playing at Cards, this
Child sat her down by the Fireside, where the Woman of the House was, and
said, Had not thy Children better be exercised in Reading, etc. the Woman said,
she thought they did no harm, but before this Child was gotten half way home,
which was about half a quarter of a Mile, these Children fell out as they were
at their Game, and were ready to fight, then the Woman remembered the Child's
Words, and confessed to the truth of them; this Woman came to visit this Child
in the time of her Sickness, and told us this Passage. One time it was with her
to Write to her Brother John, he being something wild, viz. Dearly beloved
Brother, in the Fear of the Lord do I exhort thee, to Leave off Liteness and
Vanity, and then to wait upon the Lord, and desire of him to forgive thee that
which is past, etc. In the fore end of her Sickness, one night she being in
Bed, and I and her dear Mother also in the same Room, the Power of the Lord ran
through her, and she being very much troubled with a great Hoarsness all the
time of her Sickness, in so much that one could hardly hear her speak, but at
that time with a very clear voice she broke forth in Praising and Magnifying
the Lord with a very sweet Harmony, and said, Blessed and Praised be the Lord,
for he is gathering a People to himself to do his Will, Praises to his most
holy Name for ever, and kept Praising and Magnifying the Lord a pretty time,
but her Words were something lower, so that we could not hear them all. This
Child did take great delight in Reading Friends Books, that is, Epistles to
Friends, and in William Bayly's Book, and in the Prophecy of the Prophet
Isaiah, about the 51st Chapter, where God Calls and Exhorts his People to trust
in him; if she had but a little spare time she would employ it in either
Reading or Writing; she had an excellent Gift in Reading, which greatly
comforted and refreshed most that heard her, for sometimes it would take such
impression upon the tenderhearted, that Tears would trickle down their Cheeks,
for she did read with the Spirit and with the Understanding also; many things
more I might mention as to her sober behavior to all she was concerned with,
her comeliness in her Apparel, a needless thing I never did see her wear, she
has left a good savor behind her, and is gone to her everlasting Rest with
the Lord for evermore, for she did truly Remember her Creator in the days of
her youth. She departed this Life the 21st day of the 11th Month, 1680. in the
17th year of her age, at Partney-Mills in Lincolnshire; I Buried her decently
the 23d day following, at Tumby-Wood-side, in the parish of Kirkby upon the
Baine in Friends-Burying-place; so desiring not to be tedious, and having
somewhat eased my Spirit, I desire to rest in peace with the Lord, and in
Charity with all Men.

Written in Partney, By Thomas Brown the Elder.
THE END.

