JUSTIFICATION. Only upon A SATISFACTION: OR, The Necessity and Verity of the
Satisfaction of CHRIST, as the alone ground of remission of sin, asserted and
opened against the Socinians.

Together with an APPENDIX in vindication of a Sermon preached on Heb. 2. 10.
from the exceptions of H. W. in a Pamphlet called, The freeness of Gods grace
in the forgiveness of Sins by Jesus Christ.

By Robert Ferguson.

^sa. 53. 6 The Lord said on him the iniquity of us all, H^b. He made the
iniquity of us all to meet on him. ^7. He was ^p^r^ssed and he was afflicted,
H^b. It was exacted, and he answ^red. 2 Cor. 5. 21 He has made him to be si^
for (...) no sin, that we might he made the righ^o^sness of God ^n him. Gal. 3
13. Christ has redeemed us from (...) curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us. LONDON, Printed for D. Newman, at the Ch^^(...) geo^s Arms ^ea: ^^. ^
sp^(...)l in Little Britain, 16^8*

To every Christian judicious Reader, who is tender of the Honor of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Faith delivered to the Saints.
REader,
There are several things which I desire to bespeak thee, which ^it is not fit,
both in respect of thy self and the Truth, that thou should be ignorant of.

1. The Doctrine here asserted, is one of the most important in the whole
Gospel: for though all in the Scrip^ture be true, yet every thin^ is not alike
weighty, nor a^ like necessary either to b^ known or believed. Ther^ are some
Truths which w^ are bound only to believe^ in case we know them to b^
revealed; there are other^ necessary to be believed and known in order to our
being saved. The first depend only upon Gods veracity that he cannot deceive
us in any thing he makes known ^ The second upon the necessary connection which
God has established betwixt such a Doctrine and such an^ End; so that
happiness is not to be arrived at, but through ^he knowledge and belief of ^uch
a Truth: so that there pure ignorance or nescience is damning; whereas it is at
most but damnable to err in ^he other, in case there have ^een sufficient means
and opportunities of conviction. ^ome Errors do only scratch ^he face, others
stab the very ^eart of the Christian Reli^ion; some do only deface ^he
Building, others over^hrow the foundation. There ^re some mistakes of well
meaning men, Romans 15. 1. and every error is not incon^istent with salvation, 1
Cor. ^. 12. neither are we upon all differences to renounce mutual communion,
Phil. 4. 15. But then there are also Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Which
whosoever continues to profess, are to be rejected, Tit. 3. 10. Neither are we
to bid such, God speed, 2 John v. 10. Now if there be any Doctrines in the
world of this quality, that here disputed against, with some others of the like
complexion held by the Socinians, are.

2. The Truth here established, is a Doctrine which the Churches of God have
been in all ages in the possession of; not but that some men have gainsaid, but
they have been still upon so doing disclaimed for Heretics. The rise of this
abomination of denying the satisfaction of Christ, is charged upon the
Pelagians, which being afterward cherished by one Abailardus, was at last
fully ripened by Servetus and Socinus, etc. men whose names have been justly
accounted hateful, by all to whom the glory of Jesus Christ has been dear.

3. The denial of the satisfaction of Jesus Christ is but one part of the
Gentlemen's Divinity; the denial of the Deity of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy
Ghost, with several Opinions of the like tincture, make up their Creed: That
Socinianism is but a kind of Turcism, is proved by several; see Hot^ing. Hist.
Orient. lib. 3. c. 3. And that they are not Christians, however they mistile
themselves so, is demonstrated by others; see Hoornb. apparat. ad Controvers.
Socin. p. 73. etc.

4. This is not the first attempt they have made in this City and Nation, to
overthrow the Faith of the Saints; one Biddle went before them, some years ago,
in the same undertaking; and how much soever by some those times are branded
for heretical, wild, and licentious, yet it is well known what entertainment
the persons who then governed gave both the man and his doctrine, for besides
the burning of his book, and the imprisoning of himself, they appointed a
learned person to refute him, whose labors in that affair have been admirably
useful. What countenance or success they have of late had, and to what number
they are increased, is fitter to bewail than to recount. However I cannot but
say that I was greatly surprised to hear that such a Pamphlet should be
Licensed: Mistake me not Reader, as if I were positive in it, for I should
rather think that supposing some of the Chaplains were not under the restraint
of their conscience, yet that they should consult more the favor and credit of
their Masters, than dare to do such a thing; but I leave this to be inspected
and debated by others: only I must say that he behooves to have first,
renounced the 39. Articles, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, whoever
either in this, or in any other point befriends the Socinians; and I am ready
to believe that should any of them arise to the support of that abomination, if
others should be silent, yet the learned Dr. Gunning would take notice of them,
having so worthily the last Commencement declared himself in opposition to the
whole body of the Socinians.

5. It is fit thou should know, that they boast of giving a speedy Answer,
and several have been named as ready for that undertaking; we have had a taste
of the strength of one of them already, in his whole Christ a mere creature;
and seeing he abides still in that persuasion, he may do well to vindicate it
from the confutation of Mr. Eaton. If his friends do not belie him, he is about
publishing a Commentary on the 53. Chap of Isaiah, to discharge Christ from
being meant or intend^d in all or any part of that Chapter. I suppose it will
hardly receive the favor (though it be in a certain persons hand to that
purpose) to come abroad cum permissu; but when or however it comes, there will
not be those wanting to refute it. They talk high of a Forraigner who is lately
come over, but if he find himself par negotio, he had best attempt the
vindication of his Father, either his book de uno Deo, from Plaecaeus, or his
book de satisfactione, from Essenius. I do not carve them out work elsewhere,
to avoid being fallen upon my self, but to show that what they bring fresh upon
the stage, has been again and again refuted, without the least attempt of a
reply. I confess at the rate they confuted my Sermon, they may soon answer the
present book, and a hundred more of this nature, and if they take that course,
the world will not think me nor any other obliged to rejoin; but if they shall
think fit to do it methodically, and (...), they shall be attended to: though
the doctrine would not be the less true, should I fail in the defense of it.

6. The occasion of the Sermon which has proved the rise of thi^ debate, was
merely a regard to the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ* and the faith delivered
to the Saints, which as I was informed, begun both clandestinely and openly to
be undermined and assaulted; and I find now that I was not mistaken in my
information. The way of managing it on my part, I hope both first and last has
been such as becomes a Preacher of the Gospel. If any think it a trespass that
I preached, I must leave it to them who have power, to act as they see good.

7. If any should be offended at my asserting the absolute necessity of a
satisfaction, on supposition of God's saving sinners; I must tell them, but
without reflecting upon those who refound a satisfaction upon the alone
pleasure and wisdom of God; that those who have managed this truth most
advantagiously have taken the same ^ethod. Scholars may consult Essenius,
Voetius, Hoornbeck, Amy^aldus, Dr. Owen, and of late Tur^etinus.

8. I know not whether the Ad^ersaries will vouchsafe to read ^ver what I have
written, but if ^hey do that, yet I know the nature of the men too well, and
their pre^ossessions to expect that they should be the better, the confessi^n
of Socinus bars me from all be^ief of reclaiming men of that ^idney. For thus
he writes speak^ng of satisfaction, Ego quidem, ^tia^si non semel, sed saepe id
in ^acris monimentis scriptum extaret: ^on idcirco tamen ita rem prorsus ^e
habere crederem, ut vos opinami^i, de Servat. l. 3. c. 6. But I ^ope I may
desire of others that ^hey would seriously peruse what ^s here tendered; do not
look upon ^hese things, as things at a distance wherein you are not concerned;
and be sure to improve the belief of these doctrines to a Gospel strictness,
otherwise your being orthodox sets you never the more out of eternal danger*:
but if you will be faithful in this, I then refer you to John 7. 17. If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self. That the Lord would give the much of the anointing,
and thereby lead the into, and establish the in the truth, is the prayer of him
who desires according to his trust and gift to approve himself.

The Servant of Christ to thy advantage. R. F.

CHAP. I.
In what sense to justify and just^fication are to be taken and understood in
this affair.

TO justify, is either I will not insist on the words (...), jus, ju^i^^ia,
justific^re.
taken in a moral sense, or in a judicial* for the working a change in a man's
person, or ^he making a change in his estate. By the first, he is made a new
crea^ure: By the second, he is absolv^d at the Bar of Justice. The Pa^ists
contend wholly for the first ^nse; namely, that justification ^ught to be taken
for the infu^on of holiness, and the Reformed ^r the second, viz. the
discharg^^g and absolving one in Law* Now that this, and not the former must be
the meaning and sense of the Holy Ghost in this affair, appears,

1. Because otherwise we should Voces quibus utitur Sp. S. null^bi in to^a
Scriptura, in^usa iustitia justu^ face^e, notant. nec apud proba^os latinitatis
Authors, hoc sensu usurpan^ur.
confound justification, and sanctification, which the Scripture every where
distinguishes, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, Romans
8. 29, 39. whom he called, (namely, to a conformity to the image of his Son)
them he also justified. 1. In sanctification, the change is absolute and
inherent; in justification, relative and juridical, 2. Sanctification is
gradual and successive, justification is instantaneous, and complete at once.
3. By the first we are made like God, by the second we are taken into the
favor of God. 4. Sanctification is the subduing the dominion and power of sin
in us. Justification is the removing the obnoxiousness to the curse which was
against us. Though these two ^n the case we speak of beever un^^ed, yet they
are not to be confounded. They differ as to the praedicate, though they be not
separate as to the subject; though where the one is, there the other be also,
yet the one is not formally the other. In many other cases they are separable,
one may be morally just, and yet not juridically justified; as Christ, who
though he was every way Innocent, Pilate himself being Judge, Joh. 18. 38. Joh.
19. 4. 6. yet he was condemned; and on the other hand one may be morally
unjust, and yet judicially acquitted, daily experience bearing witness: however
in all cases they are distinct. But to say the truth, the Papists acknowledge
no pardon of sin distinct from sanctification, for though they speak of
remission, yet they always understand it by renovation, which is a stumbling at
the very threshold, and an argument of their little insight into this mystery
of God.

2. Because the Apostle, who so often uses the word, never uses it for the
Infusion of holiness, but for a judicial absolution and therefore opposes it
not to pollution and defilement, but to accusation and condemnation, Romans 5.
18. As by the offense of one judgment came upon all to condemnation, even so by
the righteousness of one, the freegift came upon all men unto justification of
life, Romans 8. 33, 34. It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns. And
accordingly he describes it by remession of sin, not by renovation of nature,
Romans 4. 7. and by Imputation of righteousness without us, to us, not by an
Infusion of holiness, or working of grace in us, Romans 4. 6.

3. Because the question betwixt the Jews and the Apostle, was not whether we
were renewed in our souls by the works of the Law, or by Faith, but by which of
them we were acquitted at the Ba^ of God. This is clear throughout the whole
dispute.

The word then is to be taken in a judicial legal sense, and so is opposed to
condemn; now in this sense it is used two ways in Scripture.

1. For the declaring of one Ju^um judicare. vid. Mat. 11. 19. Mat. 12. 37. Luc
7. 29 and 16. 15.
just, 1 Timothy 3. 16. justified in the spirit the Son of God, having assumed our
nature, being made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. taking flesh and blood, Heb. 2. 14.
and manifesting himself in the flesh, he was judged by the world, not only to
be a mere man, but condemned as an Impostor and Malefactor; now he was
justified in the spirit, that is, in and by the spirit; He was not only
vindicated, and proclaimed innocent from all the accusations of his enemies,
but withal approved and declared to be the true and the great God; partly by
the attestation of the Holy Ghost, in visible descent on him at baptism, Mat.
3. last, partly by audible voice both then, and at other times, Mat. 17. 5.
Joh. 12 28, 29. partly by the testimony of miracles, which he wrought by the
spirit, Heb. 2. 4. Act. 2. 22. partly by that great testimony of raising
himself from the dead, through the eternal spirit, Romans 1. 4. Act. 13. 33. 1
Pet. 3. 18. partly by the testimony of the Prophets and Apostles, who as they
spoke by the inspiration of the spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Joh. 16. 13. So they bare
witness to the divinity and Godhead of Christ. This also is the import of the
word, Jam. 2. 21. was not abraham our father justified by works, i. e. declared
to be just; by the offering of Isaac, Abraham testified his faith to be true
and right, Gen 22. 12. by this I know that thou fear me, upon which God
renews unto him the promise, as a testimony and declaration that he was
justified.

2. But most properly, and also Justum judicare, vid Deuteronomy. 25. 1. ps. 143. 2
Romans 8. 33, 34.
most frequently, it is made use of to signify to absolve and acquit in
judgment; Act. 13. 29. by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which he could not be justified by the law of Moses, Romans 2. 13. not the
hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be
justified, Romans 3. 20. by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight, see Romans 5. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 4. 4. Gal. 12. 16, 17. Now this is the
sense we are to understand the words in, in this affair, to discharge by
accounting righteous in law.

CHAP. II.
Somethings proposed in general, toward the better clearing the common notion
of justification. Justication is an act of justice. Only just men can be
justly justified. Those who are once unjust cannot be acquitted as just without
a satisfaction. No necessity that satisfaction be made in kind, or that it be
made by the party offending. May be made by doing, or suffering, or both.

HAving established the sense of the words, that in the affair before us we are
alone to take them in a judicial sense; some things are to be offered in the
next place for the rendering more easy and clear the common notion of our
justification.

1. Justification is an act of justice, and not of mercy, Romans 3. 26. To
declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of them
which believe in Jesus. This is the difference betwixt for^iveness and
justification, that the ^^rst is an act of mercy, the latter ^n act of justice.
The word justi^e is a judicial word, and in all Courts of Judicature,
proceedings ^ught to be according to right, and not according to favor; and
^entence should not be according ^o mercy, but law; grace, but equi^y, Exodus
23. 2, 3, 6.

2. None but just men can be ^ustly justified; a man must be just, or made just
before he can be justly justified, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. If there be a controversy
between men, and they come unto judgment, that the Judges may udge them, then
they shall justify the righteous and condemn the wicked. There is a woe
denounced against him that shall justify the wicked, Isa. 5. 23. Solomon tells
us, that he who justifies the wicked, is as much an abomination to the Lord as
he that condemns the just, Prove. 17. 15. Not but that it is lawful sometimes
for a Prince or others to pardon an offender, but without calling good evil,
which God denounces a woe against, Isa. 5. 20. An offender cannot be justified.
Joseph pardoned his Brethren, but he could no ways justify them: according to
all lines and measures of justice, it is as criminal to justify the Nocent, as
to condemn the Innocent, Prove. 24. 24. He that says to the wicked, thou art
righteous, him shall the People curse; and this not only holds with reference
to Men, but God, Exodus 34. 7. He will by no means clear the guilty, Mica. 6.
11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances? There is a strong
negation in ihe question, I cannot: To strengthen this a little further, and
render it more plain; we must distinguish between pronouncing the sentence of
guilt and death, and the execu^ion of the sentence: A prisoner may be found
guilty and condemned, and yet ^ot execute; forasmuch as he may produce a
pardon, or obtain a reprieve, but he can no ways be justified, and acquitted as
not guilty. Thus God by Nathan pronounced against David the sentence of guilt,
yet pardoned him as to the execution of it, 2 Samuel 12. 7. 13. God neither did
nor could pronounce him guiltless of the murder, etc. though he could and did
remit the sentence of death. That none but those who are just or made just, can
be justly justified, appears further here. (1.) Because all Gods judgments are
according to truth, Romans 2. 2. but it were contrary to truth, to say to a man
he is guiltless, when he is guilty. (2.) All God's judgments are according to
justice, Psalm. 119. 75. But it were contrary to justice, to acquit and declare
a man innocent, when he were nocent.

Possibly it may be objected that God is said to justify the un godly, Romans 4.
5. and that therefore those who are unjust, may be justly justified. Answ. It
is true, God justifies those who are guilty of sin, and does justly in so
doing, in that Christ has made satisfaction for their sin, and through says
they can plead an interest in it, so that it becomes theirs, and is accounted
to them for righteousness.

3. Those that are once unjust, cannot be made just again, or acquitted as
just, without a compensation and satisfaction made to the party injured for the
offense; whatsoever else can be thought of, or may be pleaded, is not enough
for the acquitting of a person as just. We will briefly view all that is, or
can be said in the case.

(1.) Sorrow for the offense committed is not sufficient, for the constituting
of the offender just: The Heathen said, Quem ^nites peccasse, paene est
innocens, almost innocent, but not alto^ther. The Law proceeds against
Malefactor, be his sorrow for ^s crime never so great: He that ^stains a wrong
is not righted by ^s sorrow that does commit it. ^od himself proceeded against
David, for his sin of numbering the ^ople, though David heartily sor^wed and
repented for it, 2 Samuel ^. 10.

(2.) Confession of the fault, is ^ ground in Law for absolution, ^ more than
repentance and sor^w; when a person stands ar^gned, his confession of the fact
^th not at all tend to the acquit^g him of guilt, but on the con^ry promotes
his condemnati^. And therefore when the A^stle says, if we confess, etc. ^ is
just to forgive us our sins, Joh. 1. 9. It is in reference to ^od's promise,
but that which is the ground of it with respect t^ Hoc interest inter
condonationem m^ram, and justificatio^e^ acquisi^am; quod ibi pana relaxatur,
hic meritum paenae G^tak. Remissio non justos, sed a p^na pecca^i liberos,
statuit, G^mar. Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed n^ peccetur; revoca^i
enim praeterita non possunt, futura prohibcantur, Sen. Hence punishments are
called (...).
justice, is the blood of Christ, v. 7*

(3.) Remission and forgivene^ does not make a man that i^ guilty to become
guiltless; thoug^ a Thief be pardoned, yet as t^ guilt he is a Thief still;
this i^ only the gratifying of an offendo^ not the justifying of him: this i^ a
mere Act of Grace, not an Ac^ of Justice. Forgiveness can only release from the
penalty, whereas justification releases from the demerit.

(4) It is not the sustaining the penalty that makes a man who i^ unjust to
become just; I know there are many of another mind but the ground of the
mistake ^ apprehend to be this, that they d^ not consider, that the end of the
Law, in all criminal matters, i^ obedience, and that the penalty i^ added for
other ends; as to d^ter men from doing the like; Deuteronomy* 13. 11. and 17. 13. and
to dive^ ^he wrath of God; which if sin go unpunished, is kindled not on^y
against the Offenders, but the whole Land, Deuteronomy. 13. 15. 16, 17. But the
sustaining the penalty never makes a man that is unjust to ^e just in Law. A
Perjured person, though he has lost his ears; ^et he is reputed a perjured
person still, and if introduced into a Court of Justice to take an Oath, ^e
will be rejected and refused, as unworthy and incapable in Law. Though a Thief
be Burned in the Hand, yet he is accounted a Thief ^till: The sustaining the
penalty, does not save and make up the wrong done to the party prejudiced. If a
Traitor take away the ^ife of the Supreme Governor, ^is undergoing the utmost
tor^ure cannot compensate the wrong he has done the State. However should it
be so in other ^ases, yet it is most certain, that ^n the case we are to treat
of, a man that is unjust, cannot by undergoing the penalty be made just again:
for to undergo the penalty of sin, is to be ever damned, and never justified.
So that it Satisfacere, est tantum facere quantum satis est ^rato ad vindictam
remains, if a man has been once unjust, he can only be made just again by a
satisfaction; and this is able to do it; for plenary satisfaction for a fault,
and the non commission of it, are of equal justice, if there be an equivalency
and just value in that satisfaction that is made, to the honor of ^he party
offended, and law that is broken, Satisfactio pro solutione est, says the
Civil Law.
so that as much benefit arises by the satisfaction, as there was damage by
the offense, then the satisfaction is full, and justice it self acquits that
man.

4. The fourth thing I would offer to be observed in general is this, that it
is not needful that the satisfaction be always made in kind, but it is
sufficient if it be made in value. If a Beast be stolen, satisfaction may be
made by paying down as much money to the party wronged as he demands, as well
as if the very Beast were restored. It was ordained in the Judicial Law, that
if a man smote the eye of his servant, that it perished, he should let him go
free for his eyes sake, Exodus 21. 26. so that God himself being judge, the man's
liberty was esteemed Vid. etiam Exodus 21. 18, 19, 32, 33.
valuable satisfaction for the loss of his eye.

5. I would propose this to be considered, that it is not always ^eedful that
the satisfaction be made by the party offending, but ^t may be made by an
other. If ^he Surety pay the Debt, it is all ^ne to the Creditor as if he that
^ontracted it, paid it. This uni^ersally holds in pecuniary mat^ers; if the
Debt be paid, the ^aw does not enquire who paid ^. But in criminal matters it
is ^therwise, there noxa sequitur caput, put, a Man has dominion over his
money, and in that respect, may in way of suretiship engage himself to pay
another man's debt; but no man has a dominion over himself, or his own life,
and therefore may neither part with a member of his own in commutation for the
member of another, no^ lay down his own life, for the redemption of another.
This does admirably display the Grace o^ So that there legis is both Impletio
and relaxatio; solutio debiti, and debiti condonatio.
God, as well as his Justice, tha^ though he would have his Law satisfied, yet
he would allow ^ commutation, where the rigou^ of the Law allowed none. An^ it
also shows the full dominion that Christ had over his own life that he could
part with it for the life of others.

6. Let this be taken notice o^ that satisfaction may be made b^ doing, or
suffering, or jointly b^ both: If a man owe a summ^ money, and cannot pay his
Cr^ditor in kind, he satisfies him if he does it in service; if he work as ^ong
freely for him, as the Credi^or shall count valuable to the ^ebt. If a Person
having injured mother should afterward hazard ^is life for him, this might be
^eemed satisfaction for the former ^njury. Or one that is in debt to another,
may pay him part in mo^ey, and part in service.

CHAP. III.
^omethings more particularly proposed, toward the clearing of our
justification. We must be charged. Must plead. Cannot plead not guilty, nor be
justified upon the Plea of mercy for the sake of mercy. Nor upon the Plea of
satisfaction made by our selves. Only upon the Plea of a satisfaction made by
another.

WE must in order to being justified, be arraigned and charged, otherwise, as
on^ well notes, If a man be pronounced righteous, that was never endited, he is
only praised, not justified. Now we all stand arraigned and charged, Joh. 5.
45 There is one that accuses you, eve^ Moses, i. e. the Law of Mose^ This was
one great reason wh^ after we had lost and darkened the transcript of the Law
which w^ in our natures: God renewed the Law by Moses, Gal. 3. 19. It (...)
added because of transgression. N^ only to curb and restrain from si^ but to
charge and accuse for si^ For as the Apostle says elsewher^ 1 Timothy 1. 9. the
Law is not for t^ righteous, but the disobedient, ^ e. it is not to accuse and
conde^ the righteous, but only to accu^ and threaten the disobedient. W^ stand
all endited and charged b^ the Law, Gal. 3. 20. By the L^ is the knowledge of
sin. We shou^ not have known our selves so w^ to be guilty, unless the Law had
Meminerit deum se adhibere testem, idestut arbitror, mentem suam, Cic.
charged us with guilt, Romans 7. 7. And that the charge is true, our own
consciences come in for witnesses, Romans 2. 15. we need none else to prove the
Indictment, our own hearts giving testimony against us.

2. Being thus charged we must Plead, he that refuses to Plead abandoneth
himself to the Law. Now there are but two Pleas, that of guilty, and not guilty.

1. As I said before, we cannot plead not guilty, being under the ^mpeachment
of our own consci^nces, Utut alios latere possis tute tibi conscim eris. Men's
quoque namen habet.
as well as of the Law. Illo ^ocens se damnat quo peccat die. This might have
been the Plea of Adam before he fell, but of none ^se, 1 King. 8. 46. There is
no man that sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. ^here is not a just man upon earth ^^at
does good and sins not. ^ome understand it, that sins ^t in doing good, 1 John 1. 8. If we say, we have no sin, we deceiv^ our selves, and the truth is
not in us, Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from
my sin, James 3. 2. In many things we offend all. In a word, all have sinned,
Romans 3. 23. All, though not all a like see, Romans 3. 9, 19. Whatever be the Plea
of the Sons of Men, that cannot.

2. Our Plea then must be Guilty, and in this Case we must either Plead mercy
for the sake of mercy, or mercy for the sake of a satisfaction. There is no
third.

1. There is no being justified upon the Plea of mercy, for the sake of mercy.
For as one well observes, it were not to plead, but to beg. Nor were it at all
to be justified, but merely to be pardoned, it were to be dealt with alone upon
the score of grace, not at all upon the score of righteousness; and we have
already proved, that justification is an act of justice, and not of mercy. It
is true, in the salvation of sinners, both grace and justice meet; we are both
pardoned and justified. God is as merciful as we can desire, and yet as
righteous as himself can desire: There is the freest Grace, and the fullest
Justice. As God pardons sin, he displays his mercy; as he justifies us from
sin, he manifests his righteousness. The ignorance of this is the (...) of a
late Socinian Pamphlet, written in oppositian to a Sermon, which was late^y
Preached in behalf of the satis^action of Christ: That because there is
forgiveness, that therefore there is no justification; and because God acts
toward us in a way of mercy, that therefore he does not also act toward us in
a way of justice: As if God, for the advancing the honor of one ^roperly and
perfection of his Nature, must Impeach and Eclipse all the rest. But if the
Author of that discourse be as teachable as he is ignorant, he may once for all
take notice, that the freeness of remission does not consist in the want of a
satisfaction, or in any defect in the satisfaction that is made; but in these
four other things.

1. In that though he exact a satisfaction, he does not exact it, at the hand
of the delinquent. In the rigor of the Law, the Criminal himself should bear
the punishment! and here si alius solvit, aliud solvitur. Now is not this
grace? that though he will have his justice satisfied, yet he will dispense so
far with the offender, Solvere dicitur qui per se pretium numerat, satisfacere
qui quod alius debet selvit.
as not to demand solution from himself, but he will allow the substitution of
a Surety to make the satisfaction, and take satisfaction for solution.

2. In that he both contrived the satisfaction, and gave his own Son to make
it. Supposing that he would have accepted a satisfaction, yet he might have
left it to the offender, to have found out the way and the means to have made
it: whatever diminitive thoughts the Sociniaus may have of this, I am sure the
Scripture every where delivers it as a fruit and result of inexpressible love;
Joh. 2. 16: Romans 5. 8. 1 John 4. 9, 10. In this was manifested the love of God
toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him. Herein is love, that he loved us, and sent his Son to
be the propitiation for our sins. Was there no grace in Christ his Interposing
for us, and not for Angels? was God under any obligation to fallen man, that he
behoved to recover him more than fallen Angels? Might not God have honored his
justice in the damnation of both alike, and that without the least derogation
to his mercy? was there no grace in translating o^r sins from us to Christ,
Isa. 53. 6. and exacting full payment at his hand in our room, Isa. 53. 5, 10,
11? In a word, however these Socinian Gentlemen style themselves Vindicaters of
the Grace of God, as they wholly subvert his justice, and darken his holiness,
they will also be found to any sober enquirer, greater eclipsers, of his mercy,
and derogators from his love and grace, than any of their adversaries.

3. It consists in a gracious acceptance of that satisfaction in our steads,
for so many, and no more; for such, and not for others, he might have refused
it for all, or accepted it for others, not for such. That the death and blood
of Christ is of infinite wort^ proceeds from the dignity of his person, and
greatness of his sufferings; yet that it is a rans^m^ or satisfaction for many,
and particularly for such, does not immediately arise from its sufficiency and
worth, but from the intention and agreement of the Father and Son, using and
accepting it to that end, and in behalf of such. There is a value in the blood
and satisfaction of Christ, to have purchased both grace and pardon for all
mankind, if the Father and Son had so intended and pleased. Now that grace and
life should be bought by it to some, and not others, as it is solely to be
ascribed to the pleasure of the Father and Son, designing and using it to that
purpose; so it is the effect and issue of high mercy and distinguishing love at
leisure, see Joh. 17. 19. (...) significat se Deo in Sanctam victimam
consecrare, vid. Heb. 2. 10. Heb. 5. 9. Ephesians. 5 2, 25. Heb. 10. 14. Tit. 2. 14.
Is there no grace in this, that the death of Christ should be intended and
accepted as a satisfaction in behalf of some, so that in due time the Father,
because of that, should bestow grace upon, and be reconciled to such; others,
in the mean time, being left under the power of their lusts and sins, and
obnoxious to God's wrath and enmity? Whatever apprehensions that sort of men
have of it, there are others who desire to take notice of, and admire it.

4. The freeness of God's grace toward sinners, stands in the free and
effectual application of the death and satisfaction of Christ to them; his free
donation of the spirit to some, to work faith in them, and to bring them up to
the conditions, upon which the satisfaction of Christ and pardon through it is
only pleadable. The Father and Son having contrived and brought about this
satisfaction, without any help or rise from us, We could have no actual
interest in the benefits of it, but upon such terms as the Father and Son
should agree to. It is true, if we our selves had made the satisfaction, that
then without the intervention of any new condition, both Law and Justice would
have discharged us. But that being done by others, without any contrivance or
influence of ours, the benefit of it is not to be expected by us, but upon such
conditions as those who brought about and accomplished that work think fit to
appoint. Now it having pleased the Father and the Son to constitute and
appoint, believing as the condition upon which the satisfaction of Christ
should be accounted ours, and without which we should have no interest in the
benefit of it; and we being both unable and unwilling to believe, our moral
impotency and insufficiency to this, being no less than our Physical inability
and incapacity was to the former, Joh. 16. 44. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Joh. 6. 29. Is it
not then eminent mercy and grace? that while the generality are left under
their unwillingness, enmity, and inability; God should in some work both to
will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. Give them to believe, Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Draw them to Christ, Joh. 6. 44. Fulfill the work of faith in them with power,
2 These. 1. 11. Certainly whatever low imaginations some have of this, there are
others will not cease to adore that distinguishing and eminent love and mercy
which unfolds it self in it.

Having thus briefly shown wherein the Grace of God in the pardoning of sin
consists; though he pardon none but with respect to, and upon the account of a
satisfaction. I return to that which I was upon, namely, that to be justified
upon the Plea of mere mercy, is both perfect nonsense, and a formal
contradiction. Whatever these high masters of reason think of it, we poorer
mortals use to account it nonsense, to say a man is justified, when he is
merely gratified, and according to our little Philosophy we esteem it a
contradiction, to make that the alone effect of mercy, wherein justice has
only to do. And our adversary must give us leave to retort his own Phrase, with
this little alteration upon himself, that he and his friends are absurd not
only in their Faith, but in their Reason: As we are justified, God acts only
toward us in way of righteousness; as we are pardoned, he acts only toward us
in way of mercy. But as in being saved, we are both pardoned and justified, so
in the whole of our recovery, there is a wonderful combination and union of
mercy and justice.

Now though this were enough to overthrow our being justified upon the Plea of
mercy, for the sake of mercy. I shall yet for the fuller clearing and
establishing the truth that we are discoursing, endeavor to prove, that as we
have already said, it is a contradictio^ to be justified upon the sole term^ of
mercy and grace. So secondly, It was not possible for God i^ a way of
consistency with his truth and justice, to save sinners and pardon sin, but
through the Intervention of a satisfaction. And let thi^ be noted once for all,
that wha^ God cannot do in agreeableness t^ his truth and righteousness, he
cannot do at all.

That it was not possible for God to pardon sin and save sinners without the
intervention and consideration of a satisfaction, may b^ demonstrated, First,
From the truth of God's threatenings. Now for the better understanding the
strength of this Argument, an^ that exceptions and cavils may b^ obviated, I
shall premise these things.

1. Though threatenings precisely Loquuntur de debito, non de eventu.
and universally taken, do only signify what is due, not what shall actually
be; yet forasmuch as God in giving his creatures a law, intended not only to
tell them that according to that they must live, but also that according to
that they must be judged; therefore though in the primary sense of all
threatenings, the meaning only is, such a penalty in case of offense shall be
due; yet in that God signifies he will govern according to his law. He
seconda^ily declares, that he will inflict the penalty, and give to all their
^ue. As it was necessary that Taci epermiti tur, quod sinc ultione prehibet^r,
Tert.
God in the enacting his law, should annex a penalty, so in the ^romulgation of
his law, he in^ended that the world should be^eve he would execute the pe^alty
in case his law were violate.

2. There is a difference betwixt ^rticular threatenings denounced in some
singular cases, to some special ends, and a General commination or threatening
annexed to an universal law; and however the first sort may be relaxed or
dispensed with, Isa. 38. 1. with 5. Jonas 3. 4* with 10. yet the second is as
unalterable as the law it self; because without it the end of the law cannot
Qui ratione duci non possunt, metu continentur, Quint
be compassed, though the end of the law be not the inflicting o^ the penalty,
but obedience, yet the annexing of the penalty to the law is necessary to the
enforcing o^ obedience.

3. We must distinguish betwixt those threatenings which import only temporal
punishment and those which denounce eternal^ For suppose God does suspend the
infliction of temporal judgments yet this is no violation of the Sanction of
his law, forasmuch a^ what he forbears here, he may inflict in severer kind
hereafter; b^ on the other hand should he rela^ and dispense with those
threatenings which denounce eternal judgments, no crime were possibly punishable
according to its demerit, seeing all that creatures are capa^le of having
inflicted on them in ^his life, is infinitely still below ^he desert of their
least sin.

4. We ought heedfully to note ^he difference, betwixt Evangeli^al threatenings
and legal: Evan^elical I count those that form ob^gation to fatherly and Gospel
^hastisements; legal, such as de^ounce unmixed and unallayed ^urse and wrath.
These two widely ^ffer not only in their nature but ^d; the end of Gospel
threatn^gs, This is it which Aut^ors call (...), cum pan^ infligitu^ ^mendandi
causa.
is the recovering us to, and ^e keeping of us within the bounds ^ Child-like
obedience, and there^re God has not only signified, ^t the nature of the
affair re^tires, that they should be exe^ted only in case need be, 1 Pet. 6.
Supposing then that the business of these threatenings be done to the hand of
God without the execution of them; it clearly follows, that the obligation of
the believer to them, as they have respect to such an end, dissolves an^
cease. That which is God's intent by them, being obtained without them, the
execution of them without the least derogation to the This is that which
Au^hors call (...), cum paena adhibetur ani^o ulcis^ endi. Hoc interest inter
castigationem and ^oe^am* poena vindictae rationem habei, castigatio ve^o habei
rationem* ^mendationis, Gamet.
truth of God, or impeachment of h^ other properties, may be suspen^ed. But
legal threatenings being ^ another nature, and having anoth^ end, namely, the
vindication ^ God's holiness and justice upon pr^soners and rebels, they are no
wi^ dissolvable, but must necessari^ be inflicted, that the perfection and
government of God may vindicated, and sin may be ^ venged. All sin is a
contemp^ God's authority and governme^ and casts dirt upon his glory, a^
punishment is the vindicating God's honor in the revenging ^ evil which is
committed. On^ let this be noted, that in case of Though I use these words in
stead of better, yet I would not be understood as if there were any mutatio,
abrogatio, dispensati^, ^ut rel^xatio legis; ni* hill tale hic locum h^bere cre*
do, tantum per additionem legis fidei ad leg^m operum divini juris and lat^
legis, exhibetur interpreta^io.
such a proportionable satisfaction, by which the honor and equity of his law
is vindicated, his justice, holiness, and hatred of sin demonstrated, the ends
of government attained, he may relax and dispense with his threatenings as to
the party offending, which is the case here, for by executing the threatening
upon Christ, and receiving a valuable consideration and satisfaction from him,
he has given as eminent demonstration of his righteousness, purity, and hatred
of sin, and as fully vindicated his law from contempt, as ^f the offenders
themselves had suffered, and therefore by an admirable mixture of grace with
^is justice has released us. I do ^ot say, he has released his law ^or I
think, that is only interpreted; ^ow interpretation does not take off the
obligation of the law, only declares that in such a case it was not intended to
oblige. Having now premised these things, I reassume the argument, namely, that
the truth of God's threatening would not allow him to pardon sin and save
sinners, but upon the consideration of a satisfaction.

1. God having denounced death, and the curse against sin, Genesis 2. 17. Deuteronomy.
27. 26. The veracity and faithfulness of his nature, obliged him to see it
inflicted. Never any entertained a notion of God, but they included in it that
he spoke truth; could ever any threatening of God be of awe upon the conscience
of a sinner, should the first and great threatening be made so easily void?
should it be granted, that notwithstanding God's solemn denunciation of wrath
in case of sin, that yet he has taken the offender into favor, and pardoned
the offense without any satisfaction or consideration at all; what would
creatures imagine? but that God either intended his threatenings for mea^
scarcrows, or that he were subject to mutability; which apprehensions being
once recieved, what boldness would men assume in sin? believing that the
comminations of the Gospel, would be no more executed than those of the law.
But let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3. 4.

2. To suppose that God has abrogated his threatening, is at once to overthrow
the whole Scripture, for that expressly tells us, That not one jot of the Law
was to perish, Mat. 5. 18. That every disobedience received a just recom^ence
of reward, Heb. 2. 2. see Heb. 8. 28. Heb. 9. 22, 23. That without blood there
was to be no remission.

3. If the threatening annexed to the law be released, it is either by virtue of
the law it self, or by virtue of the Gospel. It is not by virrue of the law,
for that was (...) significat inutilem. otiosum, inanem reddere. (...). i. e
^^are facimus, firmam effic^c^m redd^mu^ h^no ^m ei suum defendimus. (...).
significat abel^r^. aebrogare factis, vel dictis legem oppugnare. q^d. coelum
terroe miscebitur potius, quam ut id fiat.
wholly inexorable, requiring either perfect and constant obedience, or
denouncing unmixed and unallay'd wrath, Gal. 3. 10. Not is it released by the
Gospel, this the Holy Ghost clearly informs us, Romans 3. 31. Do we then make
void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law. Beza his
Paraphrase here is very good, Christi satisfactio quid aliud quam legis minas
ostendit minime irritas esse, quam illas luere Christum opportuerit? and
Christi justitia quid aliud est quam legis praestatio? See also Mat. 5. 17, 18.
Think not (says Christ) that I come to destroy, the Law or the Prophets: I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily, I say unto you; till heaven
and earth pass away, one jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law,
till all be fulfilled. As all the predictions of the Prophets were fulfilled by
him, and in him* so was the whole law in his keeping the precepts of it, and
teaching others to do the like, and in his bearing the penalty of it, and his
fulfilling and answering the types of it. The Gospel is so far from repealing
the penalty of the law, that the very Gospel is founded in Christ's undertaking
to bear the penalty of it, Heb. 9. 15, 16. There could have been no Testament,
but in and through the death of the Testator. There could have been no such
thing as a Gospel, or tender of glad tidings and mercy to us, but through
Christ's undertaking as our surety to bear the curse of the law, Gal. 3. 13.
And so much for the first argument from the truth of God's threatening.

2. It was not possible for God upon the Plea of mere mercy, without any
consideration or satisfaction, to forgive sin and release the sinner, because
the justice, holiness, and righteousness of his nature would not allow it. The
necessity of a satisfaction is Mirum quantum pe^ile^tissime Socino
gratificentur, qui aliter sentiuns, Amyr. These. Salm de neces. satisf. See this
Text vindicated in the Appendix.
not only founded in the wisdom and sovereignty of God; God thought it
convenient, and would have it so: but it is founded in the holiness, justice,
and righteousness of God: His nature would not otherwise admit him to forgive
sin and save sinners, Heb. 2. 10. It became God, this refers to God's nature,
not his mere will. This will the better appear,

1. If we consider the nature of sin, which in it self, abstracting from any
constitution of God about it, deserves to be punished. I do not speak
universally of all sins, for there are somethings indifferent, and become evil
only by virtue of the Divine prohibition; but there are other things naturally
evil without any enacting will of God about them, As to love, fear, and
reverence God, are duties founded in our very natures, to which we had stood
obliged though there had never been any positive precept of God enjoining Dic
ergo cur adulterium male steri putes, an quia id facere, lex vetat? non sane
ideo malum est quia vetatur lege, sed ideo vetatur lege, quia malum, August.
li. 1. de libero Arbit.
them. So to deny or hate God are essentially evil, previously to any
prohibition of God about them; otherwise they might have been duties supposing
God had commanded them, which he might have done, if they were in themselves
things indifferent, and became evil only from his free prohibition; but that
these could have heen duties, I think no man dare say, that knows whereof he
affirms. As there is an eternal comeliness, that a reasonable creature should
love and honor God; so there is an everlasting indecency and horridness, that
a rational soul should hate or contemn him. That these things are good and
evil, does not depend so much on God's will, as his nature, and for God to will
that the one should be bad, and the other good, were for him to change his holy
and unchangeable nature, which is impossible; he cannot do it, not through any
defect, but through infiniteness of perfection, see 2 Timothy 2. 13. Tit. 1. 2. It
being then obtained that there were somethings evil, antecedently to any
determination of God's will about them, Si non reddit faciendo quod debet,
reddet patiendo quod debet, August. Nemo malus felix, Juven.
it naturally follows, that there belonged a dueness of punishment to those
things, there being an indispensable connection betwixt moral evil and physical.
He that does ill, deserves to suffer ill: Neither divine wisdom nor
righteousness can allow, that sin and impunity should for ever dwell together.
It is the highest point of reason, that he who provokes God, should forfeit his
favor, and feel his anger; and if so, then without a satisfaction it cannot be
otherwise, for the justice of God requires that every thing should have its
due, though it be under the Freedom of God's will, whether he will punish sin
in the person of the sinner, or the surety; yet it is not under the freedom of
his will, whether he will punish sin or not. Though the putting forth of
justice in these or in other effects, be under the liberty of the Divine will,
yet the punishing of sin in a way of vindictive justice is not; but it results
necessarily from the nature of sin, to which punishment is indispensably due.

2. It further appears; if we consider the nature of God, and the account
Scripture gives us of it, with reference to sin and sinners. He is every where
represented as hating them, Psalm. 5. 4, 6, 7. Thou have no pleasure in
wickedness, thou hate the workers of iniquity, Jer. 44. 4. Do not the
abominable thing, which I hate. Psalm. 11. 5. The wicked, and him that loves
violence his soul hates. See Deuteronomy. 12. 31. Mal. 2. 16. Zech. 11. 8. Levit. 16.
30. Levit. 20. 23. etc. and why does God abhort and loath sin and sinners? is
it only from the determination of his will he has decreed and determined so?
No, not only so, but from the purity and justice of his nature, because without
ceasing to be a holy and righteous God, he cannot do otherwise. Hab. 1 13. Thou
art of pur^r eyes, than to behold iniquity, and can not look on evil. Josh.
24. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God,
he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins. The principle in God, by
virtue of which he punishes sin, is not so much any free act of his will, as
the justice and purity of his nature. See 2 These. 1. 6. It is a righteous thing
with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, Romans 2. 5. Rev.
16. 5, 7. Rev. 19. 11. Justice in God is a property of his nature, See Heb. 10
30, 31. Nahum. 1 3. Deuteronomy 4. 24. Number. 14. 18.
as well as his mercy and goodness are, Exodus 34. 7. Exodus 20, 5. It is a
contradiction to suppose a God, and not suppose him just* there is no
possibility of framing a notion of God, without including justice in it. And if
it were not thus, it is not imaginable, how the heathens should come to have an
ingraft notion of God's punishing sin; for what depends merely upon the will of
God, is no other ways to be known but by revela^ion: but that the Gentiles
without revelation are under a know^edge that God will punish sin, ^he Apostle
informs us, Romans 1. ^2. Knowing the judgments of God, that they which commit
such things ^re worthy of death. It was from ^ence that their accusations of
^onscience arose, Romans 2. 15. From ^ence also sprung their several en^eavours
and attempts to appease God by lustrations, hecatombs, sacrifices, etc. From
all which i^ clearly follows that vindictive justice is an essential property
o^ God. If justice be to give ever^ thing its due, we must needs ascrib^ it to
God, unless we will suppos^ him to act contrary to the principles and measures
of all equity. If in man, it be a virtue and perfection becoming a rational
nature, we must either give it to God, or suppose him to be an unreasonable
Being.

3. This may be further strengthened, if we consider God actin^ toward us as
Supreme Governor Ruler, and Judge. God havin^ created Man a rational creature
behoved to give him a law. It i^ a contradiction for a man to be ^ man, and not
obliedged to love fear, and obey God. These things man became obliedged to,
without any other constitution of God will about him, save only his making him
a man, though God might ^ave chosen, whether he would ^ave made such a creature
as man ^r not, yet on supposition that he ^akes such a creature; it neces^arily
results from his very nature, that he should reverence, love, and serve God.
Now this being ^nce established, that man beloved to be under a law, it as
ne^essarily follows, that God as the ^oly and just Governor of the ^orld,
should make punishment ^ue to him, in case he broke that ^w. Duty being once
consti^ted, though there had been no ^enalty annexed to the law, yet ^e dueness
of punishment arises ^om the nature of sin. Reatus ^lpae, and reatus poenae,
howso^er they may be separable in some ^ses in humane laws, they are not ^ in
divine. In brief, if there ^ere not penalties annexed to ^ws, they would be
contemptible ^ings, and Government would be ^t an empty notion. Now the dueness
of punishment bei^ granted in case of sin: It follow^ by a like necessity, that
in case punishment become actually due* God as righteous Judge and G^vernour
should execute it. Ge^ 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of ^ Injusti judic^ est be
neagentem non r^m uncrar^* and negligent^m non corripere, Seen.
the earth do right. Execution is ^ needful a part of God's governin^ his
creatures, as Legislation; an^ if this were wanting all laws we^ ridiculous
things: the forbearin^ to execute punishment, would b^ nothing less than to
invite and i^courage sin. To conclude, the^ is no presumption ingrafted mo^
into the hearts of men than this,

-- Prima est haec ^ltio, quod s^
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur.
And thus I have overthrown the first plea of a guilty sinner; nam^ly, that of
mercy for the s^ke ^ mercy; and shown that it is n^ only a contradiction that ^
should be justified upon that plea, but likewise that it was not possible, that
upon that plea we should have been so much as pardoned.

But it is objected, that there could be no need of a satisfaction, unless we
will deny that to God, which we daily allow to men: we admit them to forgive
injuries without any satisfaction, and shall we not allow God to do the like?
we grant that men may remit of their right, and shall we say that God cannot
remit of his? To this I offer these several things by way of Answer.

Luke 17. 4, ^ ^^ thy Vid. Grot. in Luc. ^. 4.
Brother trespass against ^^ee, (...) return, saying, I repen^ ^ thou shall
forgive him. Though, as we have said before, confession of a fault, and
deprecation of wrath be no satisfaction to the law, nor compensation for a
crime; yet in cases of private injuries betwixt Brother and Brother it is a
kind of a satisfaction, and as much benefit and honor may arise to the injured
party from it, as he sustained damage by the offense: But if by remitting
injuries be meant only the not persuing revenge against the offender, I grant
that in some cases this both may and ought to be, notwithstanding he should
prove obstinate in his offense: But now that which is intended by God's
forgiving us, is not only his superceding to execute wrath upon us, but also
the taking us into friendship and favor with himself again, and the wrong
being done to the law, and God being in this whole affair to be considered as
judge, there is no arguing therefore from the one case to the other.



the State. Supposing that the Papists should be convicted of having burnt
London, though the Judges in that case might forgive the crime so far as their
own houses were concerned (which I also question) yet they are bound to punish
it, as it is a wrong to mankind, to all communities, the whole Nation, and the
Protestant Religion: Now God in this Transaction is not to be considered as an
absolute Lord, or as a mere Creditor, but as Supreme Rector and Governor. It
is true, he that is Rector, is both absolute Lord and also Creditor, yet we are
in this affair to consider him only as Rector; and therefore, though it were
possible for him to pardon sin as he is, Pars laesa, The party wronged (though
to pardon or to punish, appertain to none under that relation) yet he is
obliged to punish it, as he is the holy and righteous ruler of mankind,
otherwise he should be unjust in his rectorship, the end of the law would be
subverted, and he should not act as becomes a just Governor: For delicta
puniri public interest. And as Lactantius says very well, Non est enim fas,
cum, cum talia fieri videat, non moveri, and insurgere ad ultionem
sceleratorum, and pestiferos, nocentesque delere, ut bonis omnibus consulat.
Now that God in this transaction is to be considered only as Rector, appears,

(1.) Because, to absolve and condemn are acts no wise peculiar to any but a
Governor: None may administer these acts, under the relation of being either
an absolute Lord, or an offended and provoked party, but only under the
relation of being vested with Government. ^urgimus ad vindictam, non quia laesi
sumus; sed ut disciplina servetur, mores corrigantur, licentia comprimatur;
haec est ira justa, quae sicut in homine necessaria est, sic utiqu^in deo, a
qu^ ad hominem pervent exemplum, Lact.

(2.) Because for one to exact his debt or to remit it, to use his right or
release it, are no wise acts of justice: We do not call it justice, for a man
to claim or remit that which is owing to him; or for a person to pursue or
release his right, where he has an absolute power: But now the Scripture
styles it an act of justice in God, both to inflict punishment upon sinners,
and also to justify belivers: for the first see 2 These. 1. 6. Heb. 2. 2. Rev.
16. 5, 6, 7. and 19. 2. The inflicting punishment upon sinners, is that which
the justice of God requires, hence called (...), The judgment of God, Romans 1.
32. and therefore not only the punishment inflicted is called (...), Vengeance,
Jude. 7. but the principle and property in God, that constitutes and ^nflicts
it, is also so styled, Act. 28. 4. For the last see, Romans 3. 25, 26.

(3.) Because, for a person to re^mit his right where he has abso^ute power,
or to forgive a debt where he is sole creditor, are in no ^ases, contrary to
the lines of ju^tice, and no person becomes un^ust for doing so; but in some
^ases to remit sin, for example, where it is not so much as repent^d of,
according to our very ad^ersaries, is inconsistent with ju^ice, and by
consequence God ^ the punishing or pardoning of ^n, does not act as Creditor or
lord, but as Judge and Gover^our.

(4.) Because the end of a Lord ^s pursuing his right, and a Cre^tor his
exacting of his debt, is ^eir own benefit and interest; ^t the end of
inflicting punish^ent, is the interest of government, and the benefit of the
world; s^ that these two differing in their ends, and the ground of God hi^
inflicting punishment being the last, it necessarily follows, that h^ is to be
looked upon in this whol^ transaction: as a Governor, no^ as a mere Creditor,
or as an absolute Lord.

^ronged us, and does not so ^uch as repent of it, but perse^re in it, yet
nevertheless to for^ve him; shall we therefore in^r that God should forgive a
man ^s sins, as well in case he persevere ^ them and repent not, as in case ^e
reform and repent?



whereas the question ^ not what God in way of unlim^ted power can do, but what
^ agreeableness to the righteou^ness of his nature is fit for him ^ do. It is
not through want of po^er, that he cannot pardon s^ without a satisfaction, but
because he is infinitely holy an^ just as well as powerful, and ^ thereby
obliged to do nothin^ unbeseeming the purity an^ righteousness of his nature.



But it is again Objected, that sin every where said to be forgiven, ^ardone,
remitted, and the for^veness of it attributed to mercy ^d grace, and
consequently that ^ere can be no satisfaction made ^r it, there being nothing
more ^ntrary to forgiveness, than com^nsation, nor more opposite to grace ^an
what is paid for. Thus the ^amphleter, p. 6, 7, 8, 9. out of his ^asters,
Socinus, Crellius, etc. ^o which I offer these things by ^ay of return.

Romans 3. 24, 25. ^eing justified freely by his grace, ^rough the redemption
that is in jesus Christ, etc. Where though ^rgiveness be held forth as free ^d
of grace, yet it is also declared to be through Christ, as a pro^pitiation, and
by virtue of the redemption, which by his bloo^ he had purchased and wrough^
See also Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. ^ is said to be free and of grace i^ reference
to us, to exclude the m^rit of our works; not in respect ^ Christ, to exclude
his satisfact^on. Herein God has display^ the depths of his wisdom, the
pardon is both of grace and ^ merit, that it is at once an act^ mercy, and an
act of righteou^ness.



(3.) The clearing of this shall be further essayed in the Appendix.

2. The second and only plea then of a charged sinner is to plead for
justification, upon the account of a satisfaction made to the party offended
for the offense, and this satisfaction must be pleaded, either as made by our
selves, or made by another in our stead.

1. It cannot be pleaded, that we have made any satisfaction our selves: There
are but three ways can with any seemingness be insisted on to this purpose, and
it is altogether impossible it should be made any of these ways.

1. Some may be ready to imagine, that satisfaction might be made by sacrifices
and costly offerings, and that by them God's wrath might be appeased, and the
guilt of sin expiated. Sacrifices were of God's own appointment, and after the
fall the first piece of instituted worship, Genesis 4. 3, 4. Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11.
4. By faith Abel offered; which implies the warrant of a command: and if this
were not necessary, there would be no such thing as will* worship in the world,
and faith would differ nothing from a blind venturous boldness. Now sacrifices
may be considered tw^ ways.

First, As an Appendix of the Covenant of works, and as they were intended to
testify guilt^ and in that sense the Apostle is t^ be understood, Col. 2. 14.
The hand writing of Ordinances which was against us, which was contrar^ to us.
Ephesians. 2. 15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, eve^ the law of
commandments contained in Ordinances.

Secondly, They are considerable as subservient to the Covenan^ of grace. As
they were our Schoolmaster to lead to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. As they were
shaddows and he the body, Col. 2. 17. And as they were types of the great
sacrifice which he was to offer, Heb. 9. 9. God having made man a promise of
recovery and redemption, through the ^eed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. and it
being necessary that this should be accomplished in the way of death and blood,
Heb. 9. ^5, 22. God therefore appoint^d sacrifices, to typifie and prefi^ure
the great sacrifice of the ^essiah; and in this sense among others may Rev. 13.
8. be under^ood, (if that be the right read^g of the place) The Lomb slain ^om
the foundation of the world; ^ot only in the virtue and the effi^cy of his
death, but also with ^spect to the sacrifices, which ^efigured his death. Now
the ^nerality of mankind soon sunk into an ignorance of the right end of
sacrifices, and instead of considering them ^s Divine appointments, to
represent the sacrifice of the Son of God, and to strengthen their faith in
that: they begin to rely upon them alone, for expiation of guilt and right to
life But that no satisfaction can b^ made by sacrifices, appears.

(1.) In that Scripture expresl^ Sacrificia considerantur, vel qua^enus typi
crant futurae satis facticnis Messia, vel quatenus illis vis expiandi per se
adscribebatur; priori modo Deu^ illa voluit, posteriori carejecit, Walth.
rejects all sacrifices, when truste^ to for that end and purpose, Psal^ 40. 6.
Sacrifice and offering the did not desire, mine ears have the opened;
burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required, i. e. h^ did not desire
them as means b^ which sin could be expiated. S^ Psalm. 50. 8. to 12. Micah 6.
6, 7 Heb. 9. 9. and 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Go^ in Scripture expresses his disli^ of
sacrifices upon three occasion^ (1.) Because of the profaneness ^ the Offerers,
Isa. 1. 11 12. etc. ^ 18. Isa. 66. 5. Jer. 6. 20. (2^ When they were preferred
to moral obedience, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Hos. 6. 6. Jer. 7. 21, 22. (3.) When trusted
to for justification and life, as we have just before expressed.

(2.) There is no worth in the blood of a Bull or Goat, to make reparation for
the dishonor done by sin to God; he must have very mean thoughts both of sin
and God, that thinks his justice can be satisfied, or the guilt of sin expiated
by the blood of a Calf or Lamb. The wrong done by sin being infinite, justice
requires that the satisfaction should be proportionable.

(3.) Nor was there any propor^ion nor relation either, betwixt the sinner and
the sacrificed beast, that the blood and death of the one, should pass for a
satisfaction ^or the sin and offense of the other. There should be a
conjunction in Nature, betwixt him that commits ^he offense, and him that makes
the satisfaction; in what nature the sin is committed, in that nature the
reparation should be made; there being therefore no communion in nature betwixt
a beast and a man, the blood of the one cannot pass for a satisfaction for the
crime of the other.

(4.) Because it is necessary that whoever makes satisfaction for another,
should consent and willingly submit to such an undertaking; now a beast is
altogether incapable of stipulation or agreeing to such an exchange, Psalm. 118.
27. and therefore can no wise make satisfaction. The Heathen could say,

Quum sis ipse nocens moritur cu^ victima prote,
Stultitia est morte alterius sperar^ salutem.
So that upon the whole it is clear we cannot plead a satisfaction b^ sacrifice.

2. Others possibly may be ready to insist on moral obedience as if by that we
could make God a valuable compensation for the wrong we have done him. This was
the the great refuge of the Jews of old, Romans 2. 17. They rested in the law.
Romans 9. 31. They followed after the law, i. e. they expected life and
righteousness, in and through the observance of the law; not that they thought
themselves able so universally to keep it, as not at all to sin, but they
apprehended that they sufficiently kept the law to justification, if they
performed the outward acts of duty, and forbore the outward acts of sin, or if
their good works were more than their evil, Mat. 19. 18, 19, 20. Phil. 3. 6.
but that there is no coming off on this Plea,

(1.) The Scripture every where informs us, in its disclaiming all possibility
of being justified by works, Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the law, there shall
no flesh be justified in his sight. Gal. 3. 21, 22. If there had been a law
given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the
law, but the Scripture has concluded all under sin, etc. Romans 8 3. what the
law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, etc. The law, had we
kept it, by continuing in the s^ate wherein we were created, was both appointed
and able to have given life, but man by* sin becoming flesh, the law stood by,
as altogether insufficient to help such an one; and is therefore called the
ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3. 7. and of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 9. and
though it was afterward continued for other ends, yet it was never intended
that they should have life and righteousness by it.

(2.) The obedience of the law is such as never any sinner did or can perform,
Psalm. 143. 2. In thy sight shall no man living be justified, i. e. upon a
personal righteousness of his own. Psalm. 130. 3. If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand. The law required not only a personal, but
an universal, perfect, and perpetual obedience, and as to all the last three we
are sadly defective, and accordingly those Saints, who had as much to plead
this way as any, yet constantly disclaimed being justified on this score, Psalm.
19. 12. Psalm. 40. 12. My sins are more than the hairs of my head. As if he had
s^id, I may sooner tell my hairs than reckon my sins, Job 9. 2, 3, 15, 20, 21,
30. read it at leisure. See also 2 Cor. 4, 4. Though I know nothing by my self,
yet am I not hereby justified, Phil. 3 8, 9.

(3*) Were it possible that we could give God a perfect and universal obedience
(which we never can) yet it were no more than a debt which we owe him, as we
are his Creatures, and therefore could be no satisfaction from us, as we are
his delinquents. Whatever we are or have, it being from God, we owe him the
farthest improvement of all, without rendering him beholding; yea, in the state
wherein he created us, he might have obliged us to the utmost obedience, and
after all that, instead of any reward, have reduced us* into the state of
nothing, out of which he raised us; being fallen, more than we can yield, is a
debt we owe him as our Maker, and therefore can be no satisfaction to him as an
offended Judge. One debt uses not to go in payment for another, if a man
commit one treasonable act, and for a time make an escape, but be afterward
apprehended, it will be no Plea in Law, to say he is Loyal now, because he was
bound to have been so before, and therefore must satisfy for his former
disloyalty.

(4.) All the obedience we are ^er able to yield to God, it is ^rough the alone
strength and in^uence of his grace, Joh. 15. 5. Cor. 3. 5. And therefore
instead ^ being a satisfaction to his ju^ce, we are made fresh debtors to ^s
mercy.

(5.) One sin dishonours God ^ore than an eternity of obedience ^n recompense;
all our service ^ings no accession to God to me^ any thing at his hand. Job 22.
3. Can a man be profitable to ^d? is it pleasure to the Almighty ^at thou art
righteous? or is it ^in to him, that thou make thy ^ys perfect? Job 35. 7. If
thou ^ righteous what give thou unto ^m? or what receives he at thine and?
see also Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Luc. ^. 10. Romans 11. 35. Acts 17. 25. ^t the least sin
is a derogation ^m his honor, and lays us under ^ obnoxiousness to eternal
wrath.

(6.) Justification upon the ple^ of obedience is that which the Apostle
through the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians so largel^ disputes against,
and therefore w^ must either make nonsense of a^ his arguments, or we must els^
confess that there is no being justified upon this plea.

by our selves, which is ^artly born in punishments in this ^fe, and partly in
purgatory tor^ents in the future. This they ^alliate by distinguishing betwixt
^moving of the fault, and re^oving of the punishment: The ^ult is the offense
committed against God, which is done away ^ remission; the punishment is ^e
penalty, which after the fault ^ removed, remains, say they, ^ll to be
suffered; and by the ^aring of which, either in our own ^rsons, or one for
another, we ^ake God formal satisfaction.

But (1.) we have already prov^, that the bearing of the penal^, does
constitute no man who is ^ce unjust, just again. The first ^ention of the law
is obedience, ^d nothing does satisfy the pri^ary design of the law but that.
^grant that in humane laws in ^me cases it may be otherwise, ^mely where the
law is purely penal, the intention of the la^ giver being neither precisely ^
command nor forbid any things but on a penalty to allow the which otherwise he
prohibite^ As for example, that if a person be chosen Sheriff of Lon^on, ^
shall either hold, or pay such fine: The paying the fine do^ here satisfy the
law, forasmuch ^ the law did not precisely enjoy^ the party to hold, but only
boun^ him to the payment of such ^ sum in case he would not. Bu^ in Divine
Laws the case is different, the end of all God's Law^ being obedience, and the
penalt^ being annexed only for other ends

(2.) The distinction upon which the Papists here proceed, implie^ one of the
absurdest things imaginable; namely, that the fault should be remitted, and not
the punishment; that the debt should be forgiven* and yet payment exacted;
seeing the forgiving the ^ebt, is nothing else but the dis^olving the offenders
obligation to ^unishment. See Mat. 18. 17.

(3.) Sin being of an infinite de^erit, requires an infinite penal^y, ^ow a
penalty can be infinite only ^ne of three ways.

(1.) Through the infinite worth of the person sustaining the punishment, and
in this sense I suppose none will say that man is of ^uch value and dignity, as
that any suffering he undegoes should be accounted infinite.

(2.) A penalty may be infinite from the infinite weight of what is inflicted
and sustained, and in this sense no man can undergo an infinite punishment*
forasmuch as no finite creature can bear any weight but what is finite.

(3.) A punishment may be infinite as to length and duration, but for to think
that a person can satisfy by bearing a punishment which is infinite as to
continuance, involves,

(1.) A plain contradiction, being for ever to suffer, and nev^ to satisfy;
for ever to be damne^ and never acquitted.

(2.) Such kind of suffering do^ not satisfy the primary intention of the law,
seeing law and justi^ in their first intention, require the the punishment be
commensura^ to the crime in the weight of i^ rather than in the length. S^ that
upon the whole we cannot b^ justified upon the plea of havin^ made a
satisfaction our selves.

If we plead justification then* upon the account of a satisfaction* it must be
alone, because of a satisfaction made by another: an^ this leads me to the next
point, the ground and matter of our justification, viz. the satisfaction o^
Christ.

CHAP. IV.
Other supreme ends of the death of Christ disclaimed. That he did not dye
primarily to seal and confirm the covenant, nor to give us an example of
suffering with patience.

2. THE second and only Plea of a guilty sinner is, that Christ has made
satisfaction. To this end he was incarnate, and for this end he died. That
there were other subordinate ends of his Incarnation, Obedience, and Passion is
not denied; but that any thing else was either the supreme, or the only end,
must not be granted. That which is first pleaded by the Socinians, is that all
which Christ underwent was to ratify and confirm his Doctrine; having preached
the freeness of remission to such as should repent. And men finding a witness
in themselves of their liableness to wrath and death, being ready to suspect
every proposal o^ grace and favor; t^erefore Christ by his death (say they)
made fait^ of, and gave assurance of what h^ had taught. Now that what w^ have
to offer in opposition to this, may be the better secured against all
exceptions, we premise these three things to be first taken notice of.

1. That Christ answerable t^ the threefold necessity that w^ were in, stood in
a threefold office* As we were ignorant of God, h^ was our Prophet, Joh. 6. 14.
Act* 3. 22, 23. As we were under the guilt of sin, he was our Priest, Heb* 2.
17. Heb. 7. 26, 27. As we^ were in bondage to sin and Satan* he was constituted
our Captai^ and King, Isa. 55. 4. Heb. 2. 10. Dan. 9. 25. Now as he is ou^
Prophet, he not only reveals and makes known the Father to us, Joh. 1. 18. but
has also by his death sealed and confirmed his doctrine Joh. 18. 37. As he is
our ^riest he has by his death ex^iated sin, Heb. 9. 15. 1 John 2. ^.
purchased remission to us, Mat. 26. 28. Ephesians. 1. 7. and ^ought grace for us,
Phil. 1. 29. ^ Pet. 2. 1. And as he is our ^ing, he has by his death conque^ed
our enemies, Col. 2. 15. Heb. ^. 14. and left us an example of ^ffering and
patience. 1 Pet. 2. 21. ^ow one or more of these ends ^e not exclusive of the
other, because some of these were the ends ^ his death, we must not say that
^hers are not. But the Socinians ^ they confound the Priesthood of christ,
either with his Kingship ^ with his Prophetical Office; so ^ey confine the ends
of his death, ^ what merely was done as he ^od in these relations: but as ^e
shall (God willing) hereafter ^monstrate him to be properly Priest, as well as
a King, or ^ophet: So for the present we distinguish what were the ends of his
death as Priest, from those which were the ends of it, as he was King and
Prophet.

2. We would have it observed, that there were some more primary and principal
ends of Christ's death, and others that were less princip^ and only secondary.
The more primary and principal end of his death, was that he might give himself
a ransom for sinners, 1 Timothy 2. 6. be a propitiation for our offenses, 1 John
2. 2. and become a sacrifice for sin, Heb. 9. 26. and 10. 12. The secondary and
less principal were, that he might ratify the truth of his doctrine, and leave
us an example of patience in suffering: Now the adversaries insist only upon
the subordinate and secondary ends of his death, and altogether shut out the
more principal and chief.

3. We would distinguish betwixt the proper end of his death, and those things
which are the fruits and consequences of it, through his having obtained that
end. The proper end of the death of Christ, was the satisfying of God's
justice, and the vindicating his Law and Government, Romans 3. 25. and 4. 25. but
the fruits and consequences of it through his having compassed that end, are
our deliverance from the curse and condemnation of the law, Gal. 3. 13. Romans 8.
34. The remission of our sins, Col. 1. 14. justification at the Bar of God,
Romans 5. 9. and a right and title to life, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Romans 5. 18. Having now
premised these things, we come to prove that the confirmation of the doctrine
of the Gospel, could not be the only not yet the principal end of the death of
Christ.

1. Because the truth of his doctrine was otherwise sufficiently established;
for being demonstrated to be from God, there needed no* further evidence of the
truth of it; and that it was from God was abundantly proved,

(1.) By those motives of credibility, and inbred evidence which it carried in
it; if we consider the Purity, Majesty, Plainness, Fullness, Method and Manner
in which delivered, it is not possible, but that without further means of
conviction, we may be ascertained that God is the Author of it.

(2.) God himself by the Testimony and Attestation of Miracles gave
irrefragable evidence that it was true, and from himself, Heb. 2. 4. -- God
bearing witness, with signs, and wonders, and diverse miracles, etc. Act. 2. 22.
Jesus a man approved of God amongst you, by miracles, wonders, and signs, which
God did by him in the midst of you, etc. and it was to these that Christ so
often appealed for the truth of his doctrine, Joh. 5. 36. I have a greater
witness than that of John; for the works which the Father has given me to
finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent
me; Joh. 10. 25. The works that I do in my Fathers Name, they bear witness of
me. So Joh 15. 24. and alibi. And it was upon the conviction and evidence of
these, that the world received his doctrine, Joh. 2. 23. Many believed in his
Name, when they saw the miracles which he did. Joh. 3. 2. We know that ^hou art
a Teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou do,
except God be with ^im, Joh. 7. 31. And many of the people believed on him, and
said, ^hen Christ comes, will he do more ^iracles, then these which this man
^ath done. So that there was no ^ecessity for Christ to have dyed in ^eference
to this end, his doctrine ^eing by other mediums suffici^ntly confirmed, had
there never been any such thing as the death of Christ, yet there wanted not
sufficient grounds by which a Divine Revelation might be known. Those that
lived before the incarnation of Christ, were not without sufficient evidence of
the truth and divinity of the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, yet they had
not this argument to establish and confirm them in the belief of it.

(3.) The needlesseness of Christ's dying in relation to the ascertaining the
truth of his doctrine appears hence, in that the highest argument and motive
the Holy Ghost instanceth in, in reference to the confirming any declaration o^
God is God's Oath, Heb. 6. 17, 18. So that if this had been the supreme end of
the death of Christ I do not see how it was any wise necessary that Christ
should have dyed, there having been other way^ and me^ns every way sufficient
for the attaining of that end; yea, cannot understand how it is con^istent with
the wisdom, good^ess, and righteousness of God, ^o have put an innocent
person, and one so dear to him as his own Son to death, when he might ^ave
spared him, and yet arrived ^t all he propounded by his suf^erings.

2. If the confirming the truth of the Scripture, had been the ^upream end of
all the sufferings of Christ, and if it be upon that ^ccount that he is so
often said to ^ave dyed for us; this is no more ^han what men are capable of
do^ng, yea, than what the Martyrs ^ave actually done, for they by sufferings,
blood, and death have ^ealed and confirmed the truth of the Gospel, and yet
they are never said to have dyed for us, or to have reconciled us to God by
their blood; yea instead of this it is expressly denied, that they ever did, or
could dye for us in that sense, and to that purpose tha^ Christ did, 1 Cor. 1.
13. Act. 4. 12. and by consequence there behoved to be other and greate^ causes
of the death and suffering^ of Christ, then the sealing o^ confirming the truth
of his doctrine.

3. It may from hence be further demonstrated, that it was no^ the supreme end
of Christ's dying, only to encourage us to believe the certainty of God's
promise, in reference to the free remission of sin, because the Scripture every
where assigns other ends, namely, that he might bea^ our sins, Romans 4. 25.
destroy th^e mity betwixt God and us, Ephesians. 2. 16. save us from perishing, an^
give us a right to life, Joh. 3. 16. So that the first Plea of the Sociniars
remains confuted and overthrown.

2. The second end instanced in, and pleaded for as the impulsive cause of the
sufferings and death of Christ is, that he might give us an example of
suffering with patience. It is not denied, but that the death of Christ is of
singular import to these purposes, 1 Pet. 2. 21. and 4. 1. Heb. 12. 2, 3. but
yet these were not the principal ends of his sufferings and death, neither were
they indispensably needful upon that score.

(1.) Because the Old Testament Saints were patiently carried through
suffering, who (though they lived in the faith of the death of Christ) yet had
not the lively example of the quality of his sufferings, nor of his patience
under them.

(2.) Because upon these terms Christ should not be properly our Savior, but
the act of saving us should be our own: Christ should only chalk us the way to
salvation, whereas we should go in it, and consequently the act of saving us
should be altogethe^ ours.

(3.) Because God by the strength and influence of hi^ grace could have carried
us through suffering with patience, without setting us the pattern an^ example
of his Son; and this he actually does in that which is every way as difficult;
for example, the mortifying of indwelling corruption; wherein the adversary
dare not say, that Christ was capable of being our pattern. These being
disclaimed then from being the supreme ends of Christ his suffering, it follows
that we demonstrate the true and principal end of his dying to have been that
he might make satisfaction to God for us.

CHAP. V.
The satisfaction of Christ established from Christ's bearing our sins. No
impeachment of God's justice, that though innocent, he should suffer the
punishment of the nocent. That he has undergone what we should have undergone.

WE being in debt to God, Christ undertook to be our Surety, Heb. 7. 22. I do
not deny but that he is also God's Surety to us, for the making good of all the
promises, which are therefore said to be in him, yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20 and
he is (...) Sponsor proprie est qui pro alio spondet, vel ut debitum solvat,
Prove. 22. 26. vel ut paenam l^at, Gen* 44 32, 33. Turret.
in reference to this called God's Witness, Isa. 55. 3, 4. But withal he is
our Surety to God for the discharging of our debt: And that that is the
intendment of the Apostle in the forequoted place appears from the context, in
that he is there treating of the Priesthood of Christ; and particularly
treating of it in reference t^ those things which were to b^ done with God for
m^n. It i^ true there were two parts of the Priests office; one was to declar^
God's statutes and ordinances t^ the people, and to oversee hi^ worship,
according to his ow^ institution and appointment: an^ in this sense Christ is
called, The High Priest of our profession, an^ said to be faithful in God's
house, Heb. 3. 1, 2. which is also the import of Zech. 6. 13. He shall buil^
the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule
upon his Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne. The other part was
to offer sacrifice for men to God, and to reconcile God to the people, and this
was the principal part of the Priest's office, Heb. 5. 1. the other being only
secondary, and consequent to this. And in this sense the Apostle in the
foregoing place understands Christ's Priesthood, and in reference to this
notion of ^, styles him surety, forasmuch as ^t had our debt charged upon ^im,
and suffered the penalty which we should have born, Ere ^e attempt the proof of
this, we ^esire first to establish these two things.

1. It is not against justice in ^od to cast pains upon an innocent ^erson.
This the adversary dare ^ot deny, forasmuch as it was ^one in reference to
Christ. I do ^ot now dispute, whether those ^ains were satisfactory; all a^
^resent I intend is, that God without injustice may inflict pains upon an
innocent, as it is mani^est he did upon Christ. Though amongst men it be
against all ^rinciples of justice, to take away ^he life of a guiltless person,
see^ng we have no natural and abso^ue dominion over one another, neither is
there any such power allowed us by the supreme Sov^raign; yet God having an
abs^lute dominion over the lives, b^dies, and fortunes of men; he ha^ a right
to act, what none els^ without the grossest injustice ca^

2. It is not in every case unj^ for one to be made undergo the punishment of
another sin. The I^fants of Sodom, were involve^ in the punishment of those
crim^ of which themselves were n^guilty, Genesis 19. Cham commi^ted the sin, and
the slavery w^ entailed upon Canaan, Genesis 9. 2^ 25. The lie was singly Gehezi^
but yet the Leprosy clave not t^ him alone, but also to his post^rity, 2 Kings
5. 27. Scriptu^ furnishes us with an infini^ number of instances, where Go^
makes use of the Sons misery, t^ punish the Fathers offense. S^ 2 Samuel 21. 8,
14. and 24. 15, 1^ Josh. 7. 24. 1 Kings 14. 10. Ja^ 22. 30. God threatens to
visit t^ ^niquity of the fathers upon the Children, unto the third and ^ourth
generation, Exodus 20. 5. Neither is this any more, then what in one instance or
other has ^een, and is still practiced among ^en in all Nations. If a person
^e convicted of Treason, his in^eritance escheats to the Crown, and all right
of claim cease from his posterity. In pecuniary ^atters it cannot be denied,
but that punishment may redound to ^he Surety: And in criminal cases,
^autionaries have been often pu^ished for others whom they have ^e presented.

Now to render such a trans^ction just, that one be made to ^uffer for another
fault, there are ^ut these things necessary.

1. That the innocent person ^ave a dominion over that which ^e parts with;
hence a person ^aving a dominion over his estate may alienate it to pay
another debt, and had we as absolute pow^ over our lives as over our money* we
might likewise dispose ^ them for the preservation of the lives of others. And
among the Heathens, who apprehended tha^ they had the same right over the one
as over the other, there wan^ not instances of that nature; neither were those
commutations among them ever blamed of injustice. The example of Dam^ and
Pithias is obvious. That which alone renders such transactions unjust is, that
we have not a domini^ on over our lives, and so cannot alienate and part with
them: But now Christ had a plenary domini^ on over his own life, and so could
freely dispose of it for the lives o^ others, John 10. 18. I lay down my life
of my self, I have power to lay it down.

2. That there be a willingnes^ in the parties concerned, in the Judge and
Ruler, to allow and accept such a commutation in the ^bses and Surety to
condescend to, and engage in such an undertak^ng: There is no wrong done, ^^en
all parties are willing. Now ^oth parties are here agreed; the Father in
calling and inviting Christ to it, John 10. 18. -- I lay ^own my life -- this
commandment have I received of my Father. The Son in readily, submitting to
and engaging in the work, Heb. 10. ^, 6, 7, 8, 9. -- lo I am ^ome, etc.

3. That the party stipuluting be ^ble to overcome all he exposes himself to,
and that those in those stead he does it, do there^y escape what they
themselves ^ood obnoxious to. If either ^e be sure to perish in the engage^ent,
or they for whom he under^akes be likely to receive no ad^antage by it, then
the whole un^ertaking is altogether inconsistent ^ith wisdom, whatever it be
with righteousness. But now Jesus Christ know himself able t^ discharge all he
became bound for, Joh. 10. 18. I lay down my life, and I take it up again. And
certai^ deliverance was to attend those i^ whose room he became substitute^
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed u^ from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us.

4. That there be some near conjunction in him that suffers, with those that
should have suffered. Justice does not allow that a person altogether
inconcerned in the offense, should be subjected to the punishments due to those
with whom he has no relation. But now there is the nearest union betwixt
Christ and those in whose behalf he became engaged.

(1.) There is an union of nature, the satisfaction is made in the same nature
in which the offense was committed, Heb. 2. 14, 16. There could have been no
possibility of ^aving sinners, without a satisfa^tion in the nature that
sinned; and there was no need at all of Christ's having assumed our nature, but
only in order that he ^ight suffer and dye in it: And ^he Apostle in forecited
place, ^aketh his assuming our nature, ^he very foundation of his fitness ^o
undertake in our behalf, and the ground why the benefits of his suf^ering do in
justice redound to us.

(2.) Being one with us in nature, he became also one with us in ^aw: Though
Physically the Sure^y and Debtor be two different ^en, yet Juridically and in
conspe^tu fori, in the account of the ^aw, they are one and the same ^erson.
Thus Christ being our ^urety, was one with us legally, and in a law sense
became chargeable wi^h, and pu^suable for all ^ur sins, Isa. 53. 6. -- The Lord
said on him the iniquity of us a^^, ^ Cor. 5. 21. He made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin.

(3.) He became also one with, u^ in a mystical and spiriturl sense, on^ with
us as head to members, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. One with us a^ husband to wife, Ephesians. 5.
31, 32. And one with us as King to Subjects. Now as a husband may b^ justly
sued for his wives debt; and if the hand offend the head may be smitten. So is
Christ without any unrighteousness impleadable for our sins.

5. That the inducements moving to such a transaction be weighty and
considerable: It is not f^ that the criminal himself should be released, nor
that an innocen^ person should be substituted i^ his room, but upon a cause
that i^ momentous and great. Therefore do Historians justify the Decii in
devoting themselves to death in that it was for the preservatio^ of the
Commonwealth. No^ there was most important reason ^ns for the transfering our
guilt upon Christ, and exacting satis^ction at his hand.

(1.) Because otherwise the ^hole race of mankind had been ^terly lost. In the
fall of Angels ^ere was only a certain number ^at sinned, millions being
preser^d in their obedience to God, and ^ condition of blessed enjoying of ^m.
But in the fall of man the ^hole race was involved. not so ^uch as one of the
whole kind ^uld have ever come to the frui^on of God; and besides God ^ould
have mist that, which was ^art of his end in the creating of ^em, viz. active
glory in a way of ^anksgiving and praise. Now ^ough their was no necessity
arose ^om hence upon God, but that ^ might have left them in their ^ and
misery; yet there was a ^eat agreeableness in it to the Di^ne wisdom, that a
whole species ^ rational creatures should not be lost; but that as there we^
some of the Angels who stood ^ give God the active glory of h^ perfections and
works; so some of fallen mankind should be recovered to join forever with the
in that employment.

(2.) Because otherwise God ha^ lost the opportunity of glorifyin^ his mercy
and grace. God in the creation of the world had glorified his power, wisdom,
and bounty; and in the preterition of fallen Anctels, he had glorified his
holiness and vindictive justice: No^ without the recovering of fallen man, his
mercy and grace had no^ been equally honored and manifested with his other
properties* And it is observable, that there i^ no one attribute of God's
nature* by which he loves and chooses to m^ke himself more known, ther^
goodness, clemency, and mercy* Exodus 34. 6, 7. 2 Chronicles* 30. 9. Psalm. 86. 5, 15.
and 3. 4. and alibi.

(3.) Because otherwise all reli^ion had been necessarily extin^uish'd in
despair. It is not pos^ble to serve God without hope ^f reward, Heb. 11. 6. Had
man ^een unavoidably left obnoxious ^o wrath he would through des^air have
resigned himself to all ^in and villainy; being left equally ^opeless with the
devils, he would ^ave been as opposite to the love and obedience of God as
they. Now it was very becoming the Divine wisdom, that obedience and service
should not utterly perish from the earth.

6. The last thing needful to render such a transaction just i^, that the honor
of the transactors be heightened, at lest secured by the transaction. It were no
ways consonant either to wisdom or righteousness, to allow the interposure of a
fidejussor or substitute, if more could be had by retaining the offender. But
now by the exacting satisfaction from Christ as our Surety, the glory of the
perfections of God's nature, the honor of his law and government are much more
enhanced, than if God should have inflicted punishment personally upon us.
First, for his Law, that is honored both in the precept, and threatening of it;
Christ having both fulfilled the command and born the curse: whereas had God
confined himself to the sinner, he had forever lost the honor of the obediente
of his law, and could have only honored his threatening. 2ly. For the
properties of his nature. (1.) Had he detained the offender, he had compassed
only the honor of his justice, but he had mist the glory of his grace: His
justice indeed had been conspicuous, but his mercy had never come in view. He
had rendered himself dreadful and terrible to his creatures, but not endeared,
whereas now he has given evidence and demonstration of it to the utmost, 1
John 4. 10. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7. (2.) For his justice, though it had been enough
that it did not suffer through the the releasing the offender, yet it is
moreover exalted above whatever it could have been, had God resolved on the
destruction of the sinner. (1.) Had he executed the punishment upon us, his
justice had been glorified only passively, but by inflicting it upon Christ, it
is glorified not only passively, but also actively. Christ loved the Majesty of
God at the same tim^ he satisfied his Justice, but the damned while under the
effects of God*s justice, they hate both it and his holiness: The voluntary
sufferings of Christ do infinitely more honor the justice of God, than the
forced torments of the ungodly can. (2.) In that had he confined himself to the
sinner, his justice should never have been satisfied. The damned are alwise
paying their debt, but yet never pay it. Now Christ has satisfied to the full.
(3.) In that justice has not only all its demands, but is obliged with a
surplusage; he that was our creditor, is become our debtor; there is more honor
arises to God from Christ's sufferings, than he suffered dishonor by our sins.
3ly. For his wisdom, how wonderfully is that displayed in the whole
transaction* the debt paid, and yet the debtor forgiven; sin punished, and yet
the sinner acquitted: God at once infinitely righteous, and withal gracious.
Death submitted to, yet conquered, etc. See Ephesians. 1. 8. Ephesians. 3. 10. and as the
Father is honored through this transaction, so is the Son; hereby he gives
demonstration of his love to mankind, Rev. 1. 5. is rewarded for his sufferings
with a numerous seed, Isa. 53. 10, 11. And in recompense for his depression and
humiliation, he has a name given him above every name, Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9. Ephesians.
1. 21, 22. and to overweigh his cross and shame, he is crowned with dignity,
honor, and glory, Heb. 2. 9.

Having thus far cleared our way, by demonstrating that it is not against
justice for one to be made suffer for another sin, and having opened what
conditions are necessary to render such a transaction righteous, and that they
all meet in the affair before us. Before we come to the proof of Christ his
having suffered what we should have suffered, we desire further to premise
these three things.

1. We are to distinguish what is essential in the punishment, from what only
is accidental in it, what it includes in its own nature from what ensues
through the weakness of the subject. If we consider only what is absolutely
included in the threatening, we shall find no more but this, namely, that the
sinner ought to undergo, both as to sense and loss as much as it is possible
for a creature to bear. The law principally eyes the quality and the weight of
the punishment, not so much the duration and continuance. The living and dying
in Prison is no part of a man's debt, neither is that the primary intention of
the law toward any, yet this comes justly to be his lot, that will not, or
cannot pay his debt. That which lies then formally in the threatening is death,
Romans 6. 23. wrath, Romans 2. 5. and the curse Gal. 3. 10. but that this is
eternal, arises merely from the finiteness and weakness of the creature: If a
sinner could at once bear that which is proportionable and equal in justice to
his crime, and by so doing make satisfaction, there might in time be an end of
his punishment, but this he cannot do, and therefore must suffer forever
according to what he is capable of bearing. Now Christ was to undergo only what
was formally in the threatening, to bear the weight of it, and having by bearing
of it made satlsfaction, he was no ways concerned in the eternity and duration
of the punishment, justice it self discharging him, the debt being paid.

2. We must distinguish betwixt those effects which flow naturally from
suffering, and those which through the corruption of the party punished, flow
only accidentally from it. If the Socinians would be pleased to take notice of
this, they would ease us the trouble of that threadbare objection, viz. that
in case Christ underwent the punishment of the law, he behoved to despair and
blaspheme, forasmuch as these do not flow naturally from suffering, but proceed
merely from the corruption and imbecility of those that suffer. A person may
undergo punishment, without either murmuring at the Judge who sentenceth him,
or reproaching the law by which he is condemned. The blasphemy of a damned
sinner arises in way of causation merely from his own corruption, his pains
are at most but occasional of it; and while he had mercies they issued in the
like effects. For the despair of a damned person, it proceeds hence, that he
knows he shall never make satisfaction, nor extricate himself from under what
he feels. Now it was not possible, that either of these should fall upon
Christ; not the first, seeing he was perfectly holy in his nature, without any
principle of or inclination to sin: Not the second, in that he knew himself
able to make God a satisfaction, and foresaw, and believed a glorious issue
from all his pains.

3. We must make a difference betwixt those sufferings which were directly in
the threatening, and those that were only consequentially ^in it. Those, that
the humane nature may be made obnoxious to, though it be holy and innocent; and
those that follow the humane nature, as existing only in our sinful persons.
Christ assumed only the common nature of man, and not the person of any man;
and therefore was neither subject to passionate disorders of mind, nor painful
sicknesses of body; seeing these do not appertain to the essence of the humane
nature, but only attend it as it exists in our sinful persons.

These things being premised, I come now to prove that Christ has suffered
what we should have suffered; and that the same penalty which was due to us was
inflicted on him: the death and curse which the law denounced against the
sinner, Christ as the Surety bore.

The punishment which was due to us consisted of two parts, death and the curse
to be inflicted upon us; and the favor of God to be suspended and withdrawn
from us.

1. That which was expressly denounced, as the penalty of sin was death and the
curse, Genesis 2. 17. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Rom 6. 23. Romans 5. 12. Gal. 3. 10. And this,
and no less; this very punishment, and not an other did Christ undergo: the
same sentente of the law, which should have been executed upon us, was executed
upon him. There was a change of persons, the Surety suffering for the Debtor,
the just for, the unjust; but no change of punishment at all. Christ tasted
death, Heb. 2 9. was put to death, Joh. 18. 31, 32. became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. bore the curse, Gal. 3. 13. Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. The
Apostle having asserted in the 10. verse, that every person who continues ^ot
in all things, which are writ^en in the Book of the Law to do them, is cursed:
He here opens ^ow believers, notwithstanding that commination, come to be ^eed
from the curse; namely, because Christ has born it; and for ^he proof of this,
he refers them ^o Deuteronomy. 21. 23. where they were ^aught so much. (...),
Execra^o, a Curse, the abstract for the ^oncrete (as is usual in Scripture, 2
C^r. 3. 9. and 5. 21 Ephesians. 5. 8. John 17 17. Romans 3. 30.
^e the Texts in the Margin) that is, ^e underwent all the wrath which ^e law
denounced; particularly, ^at death to which it only affixed ^ curse. By curse
we may either ^nderstand the sentence of the law ^ecrating and condemning the
sin^r, which is called the curse ^tively, or we may understand the execution of
punishment according to that sentence which is the curse passively; for in both
respects Christ was made a curse. I would have well observed here, that though
hanging was reckoned always an ignominious kind of death, ye^ that it alone was
an accursed death, arose merely from the constitution of the Lawmakers, and the
declaration of the Law. Whatever malefactors were hanged before the enacting
and proclaiming of this Law, we have no ground to believe that they were
accursed; and originally the curse was ceremonial, being intended by God as a
type of the moral curse, which Christ was to bear. Suspensus, secundum legem
ceremonialem est execrationi Deo: nam alicqui neque secundum naturae legem, nec
secundum jura civilia, neque per seipsum denique, qui suspensus est, Deo
execrabilis, Jun. Paral^ll. l. 2. And here the providence of God is very
observable, that whereas suspension was not any o^ the capital punishments
prescribed by Moses, neither was it the custom of the Jews to punish their
malefactors with that kind of death, Christ should dye by a Roman and not a
Judaical law. It is true, that some after they were stoned to death, were
sometimes for the enormity of their fact, put to the ignominy of Deuteronomy 21. 22.
And he be to be put ^o death, and thou hang him on a Tree; ough^ to be read,
and he be put to death. and thou hang him on a Tree, See Grot. and Fag. on the
place.
the Gibbet, but otherwise it was no Judaick punishment; and had Christ been
executed according to a Mosaic law, he could not have been Crucified. But
among the Romans, it was a death to which they often used to put Traitors,
Thieves, Murderers, and Seditious persons. Authors Seditionis aut tumultus*
pro qualitatis d^gnitate, aut in crucem tolluntur, aut bes^tis obj^c^untur,
Paulus. l. 5. tit. 22. Now Christ being condemned by Pilate upon accusation of
affecting the Sovereignty, disturbing the Nation, and being an enemy to Caesar,
Luc. 23. 2. Joh. 19. 12. underwent the death of the Cross, which was the Roman
punishment for these crimes. Crucem autem irrogatam Christo, tanquam seditionis
auctori verissime a multis notatum est* eam enim p^nam ei crimini statuunt
Romanae leges, Grot. in Mat. 27. And as of all deaths it was the most painful
and shameful, summum supplicium, Paul. in Se^tent. Extrema poena, Apul. Servile
supplicium, Tacit. Pone crucem servo, Juven. So over all these there was in the
death of Christ the curse of the law, and the wrath of God. And this, together
with the apprehension and sense of the withdrawment of his Fathers love (of
which more anon) was the rise of that grief and horror in the soul of Christ,
which the Holy Ghost by the several Evangelists so largely expresses. His soul
was exceeding sorrowful, Mat. 26. 38. (...), undequaque tristis, Bez. It*
signifies the soul surrounded and encompassed with an excess of sorrow, beset
with grief round about. The soul depressed and bowed under dejection of mind,
the Holy Ghost seems to ^ave respect to Psalm. 116. 3. The ^orrows of death
compassed me, and ^he pains of hell got hold upon me: ^ found trouble and
sorrow. See ^lso Psalm. 22. 14. Mark expresses ^t, He began to be sore amazed
and ^ery heavy, Mar. 14. 33. (...), ^ signifies an high degree of hor^our and
amazement, Medici vo^ant horripilationem, when the hair ^ands up through fear,
(...). ^ravissime angebatur, Bez. It im^lies much fear attended with
rest^^eness and anxiety of mind: Prae ^oerore pene concidere animo. John
^presseth it, Now is my soul trou^ed, Joh. 12. 27. (...), it sig^fieth great
trouble through fear or grief: Hence tartarus, hell, (...), quia terret omnia.
Luke satth he was in an agony, Luke 22. 44 (...), it signifies fear and
commotion of mind, upon the feeling and foresight of evil and danger, yet not
so as to be dispirited, or disheartened. From hence also proceeded his bloody
sweat ibid. his sweat was as it were great drops of blood. Tears were not
sufficient evidences of his inward sufferings, nor could the sorrows of his
heart be vented enough at his eyes, but the innumer^ble pores of his body must
represent and speak the bitter anguish of his soul. There is no instance can
parallel it: That a person under no distemper of body, who before hand had
agreed to lay down his life, and was now willing to do it: A person perfectly
innocent both in nature and life, under no accusation of conscience as to
personal ^uilt, free from all solicitude in ^eference to the cares of the
world, and c^^tain of a Crown of Glory, should be under such ^nguish and
const^rnation; which ^lea^ly argues that it did not pro^eed from the
consideration of mere natural death, but from the ^ense of Divine wrath, and
the ^eeling of the curse. I here are ^wo instances in Thuanus, which though
very strange yet do infi^itely differ from this. Dux quidam indigna mortis metu
adeo con^ussus animo fuit, ut sanguineum ^udorem toto corpore fudit, Hist. ^.
11. Juvenis ob^le^em causam a S^xto 5. ad mortem damnatus, prae doloris
vehementia lachrymas crucn^as fudisse, and sanguinem pro su^dore, toto corpore
mittere visus est, l. 80 I might also add, That his strong cries and tears arose
from the same spring, Heb. 5. 7. (...). It denotes a most ardent kind of
praying: A^dentior orandi ^o^ma, cum lachrymis, gemitu, aliisque gestibus
conjuncta. Luke expresses it, (...), he praye^ more earnestly. To say that all
this was only from a preapprehension of his bodily sufferings, is a most
irrational as well as a false suggestion; for what were this but to abase the
valor and courage of Christ below that of thousands of men, who have
undauntedly, at least with less consternation, encountered death in its most
terrible shapes. The ground then of all this anguish and agony which Christ was
in, was his conflicting with Divine wrath, and the curse of the law in death.
There was not the least change of the punishment in reference to the Surety,
from what was denounced against the sinner. The consideration of this
overthrows, First, the Popish fancy, of Christ his suffering formally only in
his body, and in his soul only by way of simpathy; he suffered the very same
that we should have suffered, i. e. he suffered both in soul and body. In
neither did God spare him, but both gave him up to death, and made his soul an
offering for sin, Romans 8. 32. Isa. 53. 8, 10. Secondly, It overthrows the
fancy of others, that if God had so pleased, one drop of the blood of Christ
might have been a compensation for our sins; whereas seeing it was death,
wrath, and the curse which was in the threatening, nothing less could have made
a satisfaction for sin. It is a note of Camero's, Dignitas personae (...)
satisfactionis detrahere nil potest, (...) potest; ratio est, (...) est
satisfaction^ essentialis, (...) non est.

2. The second part of the curse was separation from God, and the sense of the
loss of his favor, and this also Christ underwent, being for a time under the
with drawment and loss of the feeling of God's love So much was before hand
prophesied concerning him, Psalm. 22. 1. and himself declares that he bore it,
Mat. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken m^? It is true, he was not
left as to the dissolution of the personal union with the Divine Essence ^on.
14. 11. and 10. 30. Heb. 9. 14. n^r as to the virtue and support of God's power
and providence, Psalm. 16. 8, 9 Joh. 16. 32. nor as to grace and sanctification,
Col. 1. 19. It was needful that he should be always holy, otherwise he had
failed in the work which he came about, but ^t was not needful that he should
be always joyful; yea, considering his undertaking, it was impossible that he
should be so: and therefore he was left only as to the communication of the
effects of Divine love and favor, which is that which the damned ^ye under in
hell. And this, with what I delivered under the former head, was the ground of
his fear, agony, and bloody sweat, etc. Having proved that Christ suffered the
very same which we should have suffered; it naturally follows, that he did it
in way of a satisfaction, for there is no other reason imaginable, why God
should thus punish a person who in himself was altogether innocent, and one so
dear to him as his own Son, but that he stood charged as a Surety with our
sins, to make satisfaction to Divine Justice for them.

CHAP. VI.
The satisfaction of Christ further established, in that he suffered in our
room. He underwent death as a penalty, our sins were laid on him. He was made
sin, dyed for us, bare our iniquities.

THE next thing which comes under consideration for the more full clearing,
that Christ has satisfied for us is this; that as he suffered the same which
we should have suffered, so he suffered it all in our room and stead. It was
before hand told, that the Messiah should be cut off, but not for himself, Dan.
9. 26. He was to be penally cut off, not upon his own account, or for himself,
but for us. This particular will be fully made out by considering these five
things.

1. In that he underwent death, which God had constituted the punishment of
sin, and there being no ^use in himself why he should suf^r that penalty, It
unavoidably ^llows, that it was because he stood ^arged with our offenses. I do
not ^ow dispute, whether God might ^ave made man obnoxious to ^ath in case he
had never sinned, ^e only question is what he has ^one: I will not deny, but
that ^od having given us our beings and lives, might without inju^ice have
taken back, what he ^ad given, he might in way of do^inion and sovereignty have
sent ^ into the world to act our parts ^or a time, and then remanded us ^to our
state of not being again; ^e only question is what he has one, and that in
condecency to is wisdom, goodness, and righte^usness as governor of his
crea^res; and here we affirm that ^eath was appointed by God to be ^e wages of
sin, and that if man ^ad not sinned, he should not have ^yed, notwithstanding
the possibility of dying, which was in man nature, he should by the power ^ God
have been preserved from actual dying. Whatever he was ob^noxious to in the
constitution ^ his nature, he should for ever na^ been free from death in the
even^ And it was very consonant to Di^vine wisdom and goodness, the perfect
righteousness and puri^ should have been attended wit^ life and immortality,
and the God should not take away the being which he had bestowed but upon a
faileur in reference t^ the end for which it was given God appointed death to
be the punishment of sin, Genesis 2. 17. I^ the day that thou eatest thereof, the
shall surely dye. This being denounced only in case of sin, w^ are thence fully
informed, that i^ man had not sinned he should no^ have dyed. To this it were
^asi^ to subjoyn many other places o^ Scripture, Romans 6. 23. The wag^^ of sin
is death. Romans 5. 12. Death entered into the world by sin. It came not in as a
consequent of the frailty of humane nature, but as the deme^it of the fall.
Hence death is called an enemy, 1 Cor. 15. 26. God made not death, says ^he
Apocryphal writer. Now Jesus Christ having suffered death, which was the
punishment of sin, and having had no sin of his own for which he could be
punished, it results by a necessary consequence, that he suffered death as the
penalty of our sins, and as he stood in our room.

But possibly it may be ^bjected, that this interferes with our own doctrine.
For if death be the ^enalty of sin, then for as much as Christ by bearing the
penalty has de^ivered us from every thing that is ^enal, he should have
delivered us from death too, but not having delivered us from death, we
contradict ^ur selves in calling death the pu^ishment of sin.

Answer, All those for who^ Christ has satisfied, are delivered by him from
death, so far as it is penal: So that though it be continued, yet it is not as
it is a punishment, but in order to other ends; sin and the curse being
separate from it, it is no more poisonous but medicinal. Instead of a
punishment, it is become a privilege. Christ having unstung it, and swallowed
up the curse which was in it, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55. it cannot hurt them, though it
seize them. Instead of being an inlet to wrath, it is an entrance to glory.

2. Christ his suffering in our room, will be made further out, if we consider
that our sins were laid on him, Isa. 53, 6, 7. The Lord laid on him the
iniquity of us all; he was oppressed, and he was afflicted. That it is the
Messiah and none other, who is intended throughout that whole Chapter has been
abundantly justified against the Jews: and it is utterly impossible with any
congruity and sense to apply it to any other. And several testimonies taken
hence are in the New Testament expressly applied to Christ, ver. 1. Joh. 12, ^7,
38. ver. 4. Mat. 8. 17. ver. 7, 8. Act. 8. 28. ad 36. ver. 12. Luke 22. 37. The
attempts of Grotius in accommodating the whole to Jeremiah, have been
a^undantly refuted by Hoornbeck, Alex. Morus, and the learned Dr. Owen, to
whose writings I profess my self more beholding for a clear understanding of
some things in ^he mystery of the Gospel, than to any man's besides. Taking then
at present for granted, that it is to be understood of the Messiah: Is it
possible that we should desire, in ^eference to the affair in hand, a Text
either more plain or full? He said on him the iniquities of us all. The word is
(...) hiphgiang, from the root (...) pahang. Now (...) signifies properly to
meet* and therefore (...) must signifi^ he made to meet. They were s^ made to
meet on him, that h^ bore them ver. 11. It were nonsense to render the words,
The Lord made him to intercede the in^quity of us all upon him. It s^ true, the
word is sometimes s^ translated, where the subject matter requires it, as Jer.
7. 16. bu^ neither Grammar nor context wi^ allow it to be so here. See ver. ^
5, 10. He has born our grieffs, an^ carried our sorrows -- he wa^ wounded for
our transgressions, ^ was bruised for our iniqu^ties. Go^ does not remit sin
only in favou^ of his Son at his entreaty, as King sometimes pardon Malefactors
a^ the earnest request of a favourit^ No, Christ prayed that if man without his
death could have bee^ saved, the Cup might pass from him, Mat. 26. 39. but it
would not do; they were so laid on him, that God exacted of him a satisfaction
for them. He was oppr^ssed and he was afflicted, so we render it: but it might
be better rendered, It was exacted, and he answered. how (...) nagus, with: sin,
signifies to exact and require; and how (...) naaneh, signifies to answer, as
well as to be afflicted, and how translated either ways, it admirably
establishes the satisfaction of Christ; see our Annotators on the place. That
Christ was to suffer, through having our sins laid on him, was the faith of the
Old Testament Church; typified in their imposition of hands upon, and
confession of sin over the head of the sacrifice, Levit. 16. 21. Levit 5, 5, 6.
Their confessing of sin over the sacrifice, and their laying their hands on it,
was both to signify their earnest desire that their sins might be taken off
from them, and laid on the sacrifice, and that the punishment which was How far
the Heathen did in this imi^ate the^, see Herodot. lib 2. c. 29. and Plutarch
in I side.
due to them might be upon it: Quicquid a me peccatum est, sit in hujus
victimae caput; i. e. paenam peccato commeritam ab illa reposc^t Deus: As also
a profession of their faith in Christ, as the true sacrifice to be slain for
sin, and that the present sacrifice was only a type thereof. And this for the
second consideration, for the confirming that what Christ suffered, he suffered
in our room and stead.

3. That Christ suffered in our room, and as being charged with ^u^ sins, will
be yet more fully established, if we take notice of that of the Apostle, he was
made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin. Now sin is either to be taken properly or metonymically; metonymically,
either by a metonymie o^ the cause for the effect, Isa. 53. 12 He bore the sin
of many. i. e. the punishment, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Wh^ his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the tree. i. e. The punishment of our sins in his body, Genesis 4.
13. My punishment is greater than I can bear, so we render it; but in the
Hebrew, It is my iniquity is greater, etc. See also Genesis 19. 15. Zech. 14. 19.
or else by a metonymie of the adjunct for the subject; sin put to denote a
sacrifice for sin, Levit. 4. 29. and 5. 9. and elsewhere frequently in that
book, we render it sin offering, but in the Hebrew it is sin. See also Hos. 4.
8. Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin; so we read
it, but it is in the Hebrew trespass or sin. Now whether we pitch upon either
of these or both, the Text proves this much, that Christ who had no sin of his
own to suffer for, suffered the punishment that was due to ours; he that had no
crime of ^is own to expiate, became a sacrifice of expiation for our crimes. Or
if you will take sin here properly, as the context by stating sin in opposition
to righteousness, seems to incline it. Non per tropum est explicandum, sed
(...) sumendum est, pro ut oppositio monstrat. Walth. Then the imporr will be,
that Christ who had no sin in his nature, nor committed any in his life; who in
a moral sense was altogether free from sin, was yet in a judicial sense made
sin. Our iniquities were charged upon him, and satisfaction exacted of him for
them, as if they had been his own. Lutherus non male Christum nominavit maximum
p^ccatorem. It is a most frivolous civil of the Socinians, that Christ his
being made sin, signifies no more than that the world esteemed of him, and
treated him as a sinner. Sinit cum tractari tanquam scelerosum, Grot. in loc.
Wonderfully betraying the truth, even after he had once defended it. There
might have been some plea for this exception, if it had been he was accounted
sin, or if it had ^een man made him to be sin: But ^s (1.) they can hardly show
that ^o be made sin, is in all the Scri^ture of the same intendment with being
esteemed a sinner: much ^ess (2.) can they show that to be made sin by God,
should be ever ^sed to imply the being reputed a ^inner by men. (3.) That this
cannot be the meaning, the next words ^at out of question; For as our ^eing
made the righteousness of God, ^s not that the world holds us for ^ighteous,
but that in a law sense ^e are constituted as righteous through Christ, as God
ei^er desires or can require: So is being made sin is not that the ^orld
esteemed him a sinner, or ^at God suffered him to be treat^d by the world as a
sinner; but ^e intendment is that he was l^^ally, and in a judicial sense
cha^ed with our sins, and that whatever the law made the punishment of them he
bore.

4. Christ his suffering in our room and stead, will be furthe^ strengthened by
considering those expressions and places, in which it ^ expressly affirmed that
he died f^ our sins, and that he suffered for us There are four prepositions
the Holy Ghost uses to this purpose that if one be more emphatica^ that
another they may all conspir^ to justify this truth. First, o^ Romans 4. 24. Who
was delivered f^ our offenses; this particle joyne^ with an accusative does
general^ signify the impulsive cause, a^ not the final. See Mat. 10. 2^ and
13. 5. and 14. 9. Joh. 20. 1^ 2 Cor. 4. 11. and particularly wh^ used in
reference to sufferings, has that signification and ^ other, see Levit. 26.
18. 28. De^ 28. 11. 2 Kings 23. 26. Jer. 1^ 22. Joh. 10. 32. in all the places
it necessarily signifies the meritorious and impulsive cause, and no wise the
final. And so in the foregoing place (...), for our offenses must needs be
undestood that our offenses were the meritorious and impulsive cause of
Christ's suffering. Another particle that the Holy Ghost uses, is (...), Romans
6. 8. For when we were yet without strength Christ died for the ungodly, Romans
8. 32. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up to death for us all. 1
Pet. 3. 18. Christ has once suff^red -- the just for the unjust, Tit. 2. 14.
who gave himself for us -- 1 Timothy 2. 6. who gave himself a ransom for all,
Heb. 2. 9. he tasted death for every man, Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my life for
my sheep, Luke 22. 19, 20. This is my body which is given for you -- This Cup
is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for you. Now the particle (...)
among other significations that it has signifies sometimes the impulsiv^
cause, Phil. 2. 13. Ephesians. 5. 20. Romans 15. 9. Sometimes the substitution of one
in the room of another, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Philem. v. 13. (...). Demost. Ego pro te
molam, Terent. Particularly when the sufferings of one for another is expressed
by it, it always signifies the substitution of one in the place of another,
Romans 9. 3. (...). Eurip. Unum pro multis dabitur caput.

Virg. Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte Daretis Pers^lvo. When ever
it is used to imply ones dying for another, it always signifies the dying in
his stead. Another Preposition made use of in this affair is (...) 1 Pet. 3. 18
Christ also has once suffered for sins, Gal. 1. 4. who gave himself for our
sins, 1 John 2. 2. and he is the propitiation for our sins. Now this particle
though it has several significations according as the subject matter requires,
yet among others it often signifies the impulsive cause, Luke 19. 37. Joh. 10.
33. especially when it refers to sufferings, Jud. 15. The last particle made
use of to this purpose is (...) Mat. 20. 28. even as the Son of Man came to
give his life a ransom for many. Repeated again Mark 10. 45. Now this
Preposition when ever applied to persons or things, it always imports a
substituting of one in the room of another, or an exchanging of one for
another, Mat. 2. 22. Mat. 5. 38. and 17. 27. Luke 11. 11. Romans 12. 17. 1 Cor.
11. 15. 1 Pet. 3. 9. So that from the whole we may confidently conclude that
Christ not only suffered for our good, but in our room and stead.

5. That Christ dyed not only for our advantage and profit, but in o^ place,
will be fully demonstrated, i^ we observe that he is sa^d to have born our
sins, 1 Pet. 2. 24. who hi^ own self bare our sins in his ow^ body on the tree,
Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, (...) he carried
up our sin^ on his body on the tree; they were made to ascend on him. Now to
bear sin is usually in the Scripture phrase to bear the punishment o^ sin,
Levit. 5. 1. and 7. 18. and 20. 17. Numb. 14. 33. Exodus 28. 43. Ezekiel. 28. 20.
and 23. 49. and 18. 20. Lament. 5. 7. And though it should be granted that to
bear sin sometimes signifies only to remove sin, yet that this is not the sol^
meaning of it in reference to Christ his bearing sin, the Holy Ghost puts out
of question, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 8, 10. He has born our griefs, and ca^rie our
sorrows, -- he was wounded for our transgressions -- for the transgression of
my people ^as he stricken -- he shall bear ^eir iniquities. The two words which
the Holy Ghost there uses ^e (...) nasa, and (...) saball; ^w though (...)
signifies some^mes only to take away, Job 7. 1. and to forgive, Exodus 34. 7.
^um. 14. 18. Psalm. 32. 1. yet (...): ^gnifieth ever to bear, or carry a ^urthen
by taking it on, nor is it ^nce used otherwise in all the Scri^tures. And
besides, however (...) in other places may be allow^d to signify only to
remove or ^ake away; yet that it should sig^ifie so here, the context will not
^dmit, In that it is said he bore our ^ns so, as to be wounded for them,
^rieved, bruised, chastised, and put ^o pain for them, which clearly ^hews the
ground and cause of his ^ufferings, and not only the issue and the event.

Object. But it is objected, that ^his of the Prophet of Christ his ^earing our
diseases is applied, Mat. 8. 16, 17. in reference to Christ ^ healing of
diseases, and therefore if the bearing our sickness^ be only his removing of
them by c^ring them, in like manner ^ bearing our sins is not the takin^ them
upon himself to undergo the punishment of them, but only his takin^ them away
by forgiveness and he^ing.

To this I return these things b^ way of Answer. (1.) It may ^ denied that
Christ his bearing o^ diseases, is to be understood on^ in reference to his
removing ^ them; but that it imports also h^ traveling under them as a b^then*
He had a fellow feeling ^ the pains and griefs he cured: ^ was affected and
afflicted under t^ sense of them, as if they had be^ his own, Heb. 4. 15.
besides ^ underwent great trouble, pain, an^ travel in the curing of them. S^
much at least is employed in t^ word (...). Est in hac voce ^ne^ quaedam and
^olestiae significatio, Grot. Nuspiam non portare significat, and bajulare,
vid. Mat. 3 11. and 20. 12. Mat. 14. 13. Luke 7. 14. and 10. 4. and 14. 27.
Joh. 19. 17. and 20. 15. Acts 15. 10. Romans 15. 1. Gal. 6. 5. Rev. 2. 3.

(2.) We meet with a great deal more in Scripture to induce us to believe that
Christ bare our sins by taking them upon him, than that he bare our diseases by
taking them upon him; for our sins are said to have been laid on him, Isa 53.
6, and he is said to have been made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. whereas we do not
read that our si^^nesses were laid on him, or that he was made blind, or lame,
etc. for us.

(3.) A Scripture may be alleged to be fulfilled, not only when the thing
foretold and principally intended comes to pass, but when something like it
falls out: when there is only an allusion or accommodation to the Prophecy,
though in the primary and literal meaning of it, there be something else
intended; though there be but one literal and coordinate sense of Scripture,
yet there may be diverse senses o^ several kinds one subordinate to another.
Compare Psalm. 78. 2. with Mat. 13. 35. Isa. 29. 13. with Mat. 15. 7, 8. Jer. 7.
11. with Mat. 21. 13. Isa. 1. 9. with Romans 9. 29.

(4.) A Scripture may be said to be fulfilled, either when that which is
chiefly designed is brought forth* or when that which only typisie^ and
represents the other comes t^ pass. Many things in Scripture ar^ spoken of the
type, which principally belong* to the Antitype, s^ 2 Samuel 7. 14. compared with
He^ 1. 5. and Hos. 1. 11. with Mat. 2. 15* and Jer. 31. 15. with Mat. 2. 16*
17, 18. Now Christ his healin^ of bodily diseases, being a type o^ his curing
the diseases of the sou^ therefore the Holy Ghost appli^ that which firstly and
chiefly be^ongs to the one, to the other, that ^ they might not look on Christ
^s a mere bodily Physician, but ra^er as one whose work and end ^ was to heal
their souls, where^f the curing the infirmities of ^eir bodies was only a type
and ^mbol, see Mat. 8. 2.

(5.) A Scripture may be said ^ be fulfilled, when the accom^ishment of it is
demonstrated ^ the effects. Multa fieri dicun^r, quando facta esse
intelliguntur, ^e Psalm. 2. 7. with Acts 13. 32, 33. christ in the day of his
resurrecti^ is said to be begotten of the ^ather, because he was then most
^idently shown to be the Son of ^od. So Jam. 2. 21. Abraham ^ the offering of
his Son Isaac is ^id to be justified by works, be^use that great work gave
demon^ation of his being justified. Now christ his taking away bodily di^mpers,
being an evidence of his taking away sins, which is done b^ bearing of them;
therefore tha^ which the Prophet spoke in ref^rence to the cause, the Evangeli^
applies in reference to the effect^ So that having dispatched this objection,
we presume to conclud^ from the whole of what has bee^ offered, that as Christ
suffered the same penalty which was due to us so he suffered it in our room an^
stead, and as a satisfaction an^ compensation to God's justice for our sins.

CHAP. VII.
The satisfaction of Christ further established, from his having redeemed ^ The
import of the word. A ransom^ paid for us. Accepted of God, an^ thereupon we
set free.

THat Jesus Christ has man satisfaction for our sins wi^ ^rther appear, if in
the next place ^e consider, that he has effected ^d accomplished what in other
cases ^eth to be the effects and results of a ^tisfaction; namely, he has
re^emed us from the wrath and curse ^ which we were obnoxious. To ^^eem in the
general import of ^e word, is either to deliver from ^ndage and misery, through
the ^tervention of a price; or to re^ue out of a state of slavery ^rough force
and power. In this ^uer sense the deliverance of ^ael out of Egypt is often
called ^demption, Exodus 15. 13. Deuteronomy. ^8, and 9. 26. and 13. 5. and 21. 8. ^al.
77. 15. and in many places ^sides. And Moses having been ^nally employed in
that affair is ^lled (...), deliverer, Acts 7. ^. and let this be observed by
the ^ay, that as the redemption of ^e people from the bondage of ^gypt was
typical of the Redem^ion from the wrath of God; so it is called redemption, not
so much from the general nature of deliverance, as from the respect i^ had to
the redemption to be wrought by Christ, whereof i^ was a type. And besides, as
tha^ temporal deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, was typical o^ the
spiritual redemption from the curse; so there was a typical pric^ exacted and
paid suitable to tha^ typical redemption, to point to u^ the real and proper
price which Christ was to pay for our prop^ and spiritual redemption. An^ in
reference to this it is that Chri^ is called our Passover, 1 Cor. 5. ^ and as
they were redeemed from temporal wrath, and typically r^conciled to God by the
blood ^ the Paschal Lamb, so we are r^deemed from eternal wrath, a^ really
reconciled to God by t^ blood of Christ, who is therefo^ called the Lamb of
God, Joh. 1 2^ and a Lamb without spot and blemi^ 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

But to redeem in its first and most proper intendment, signifies by the
payment and solution of a price and ransom to set free.

Quid agas? nisi ut redimas te captum quam queas minim^, si nequeas paululo ac
quanti queas, Terent.

Si fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit, Virg.

Now one may be in bondage, either as a Debtor to a Creditor, or ^s a Criminal
to a Governor and Ruler; he that is in Prison on the first foot of account,
must con^nue so, unless satisfaction be made by the payment of the sum of
which he stands charged; and ^e that is detained on the second ^ccount, is not
to expect delive^ance, unless the penalty be under^one, to which his offense
has ^endred him obnoxious. And those who upon other terms come ^o be free,
cannot proberly be said to be redeemed, but only to be released.

Having stated the signification of the word before I come t^ prove, that
Christ through the payment of a price has in a proper sense redeemed us; I
desire to premise these three things.

1. That we stood obnoxious t^ God's fiery indignation and wrath. His law we
had broken, and by his sentence we stood condemned* ^ is his judgment, that
they who commit sin are worthy of death. (...), God's constitution and
appointment. The precept of the law being broken, we lay liable to the curse as
the penalty of it, Gal. 3. 10. Divine Justice had made us prisoners, Isa. 61.
1. and we were subject to Satan as God's jailer, and without payment there was
to be no deliverance.

2. That as we had for feited the favor of God, and were become subject to his
wrath, so we had lost his image, and were fettered in our own lusts. Therefore
as we were to be redeemed from the justice and wrath of God, so we were to be
set free from the dominion and power of corruption; as a Captive delivered from
the penalty of the law, is also released from his prison and irons; and as the
delivery of a Traitor from the wrath of the Governor, and sentence of the law,
is the primary and principal thing intended in redemption, and the loosing of
him from his fetters and jayl; follows as consequential and secondary upon
that: So Christ having as the chief end of his suffering, satisfied the justice
of God, and redeemed us from his wrath, he has through a redundancy of merit,
which was in his blood consequentially purchased grace for us, and set us free
from the power of our corruption. Hence as he is said to have redeemed us from
the curse of the law, Gal. 3. 13. so he like wise is said to have redeemed u^
from iniquity, and from our vai^ conversation, Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18*

3. We must distinguish betwix^ pecuniary debts and penal, betwix^ a mere
Creditor and a Governor* In pecuniary debts something material is paid and
received, by which the Creditor is made richer: In penal, it is enough that the
Law be satisfied, though the Governor be not formally made the richer. A
person that is wronged may account himself satisfied, i^ the party who has
offended him hazard his life for him, though h^ formally pay him nothing. S^
here it was not needful that Go^ should properly receive any things it was
enough that he should accept what was done. To mak^ good God's acceptance of
the price, it is sufficient that his law is satisfied, and that his justice
suffered not by the delivery of the sinner, though he be not formally made the
richer; and this is not only true that the justice of God suffers nothing by
our release, Romans 3. 25. but besides, it is more glorified, than it could have
been in the destruction of the sinner.

These things being premised, we come now to prove that Christ, by the
interposition of his blood as a price, has properly in way of solution and
payment redeemed and delivered us. And this will appear if we consider these
three things.

1. If we observe that there was a price paid; and this the Scripture fully
informs us, 1 Cor. 6. 20. for ye are bought with a price; and what this price
was, we are expressly told, 1 Pet, 1. 18, 19. Ye are not redeemed with silver
and gold -- but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish
and without spot. Of what use silver and gold are in other cases to redeem
captives, of that use is the blood of Christ to redeem sinners. Hence Christ's
death is called a ransom, Mat. 20. 28. He gave his life a ransom for many,
(...), it is all one whether it come from (...) to loose, or (...) to pay. As
we were held prisoners by the law and justice of God, we are by this (...)
redeemed and set free. The Ancient C^ot. in Mat. 28. 20.
Jews used to style the Messiah (...). It is not improbable that the Romans
derived their lustrum from (...), when many were delivered from destruction by
one or more suffering, to purify and ^xpiate the sin of the rest. Hinc Dec^i
dicuntur lustrasse Romanum exercitum. Now Christ was such a (...), instead of
many. Hence he is styled (...), 1 Timothy 2. 6. Quum alius solvit, quod reus non
potera^, Ar^t. Est tale pretium in quo liberator simile quid sub^t et ^alo quod
ei imminebat qui liberatur, Scult. It signifies a counter price, that which
one undergoeth in the room of another. When one gives his own life* for the
saving of another. Such were those whom the Greeks* called (...), who gave
life for life, and body for body; who used to devote themselves to death to
deliver others; as Alceste did for Admetus, Philumene for Aristides, An^inous
for Adrian, the Decii for their Country. So Christ laid down his life to redeem
ours, he bore* the curse that we might escape it, he shed his blood in our
lieu, and offered up himself a valuable compensation for our release.

2. That it was paid and accepted in our lieu* and stead. There is no other
ground with any consistency to Scripture or reason can be assigned of the
payment of it; for not being paid for himself, it must meeds have been for us.
It is chiefly and principally in reference to this, that he is our Mediator; it
was God's law and justice which was against us, and the only way for a Mediator
to deal with them, was in bearing the penalty to give justice the satisfaction
which it did claim. So that should it be granted, that the word is sometimes
used to signify only an interpreter and intermessenger, yet the nature of the
case betwixt God and us does necessarily require, that whoever interposeth in
way of mediation, must do it by price and ransom. And the Apostle puts it out
of doubt, by asserting this as the cause, ground, and end of his mediatorship,
in those places where he so styles and mentions him, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. There is
one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
ransom, Heb. 9. 15, He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
death, for the redemption of transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to
the blood of sprinkling* In all which places the Apostle clearly assigns this
as the cause and reason of Christ's being Mediator, namely, that he gave
himself a ransom, and by his blood made reparation for transgression.

3. This will further appear by observing that by virtue of the solution and
payment which Christ has made we are said to be redeemed, Ephesians. 1. 7.
repeated, Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, etc. Though there be forgiveness, yet it is only through
the redemption wrought and accomplished by the blood of Christ, etc. see Rev.
5. 9. Heb. 9. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. Romans 3. 25. In all these places both our
redemption is asserted, and the blood of Christ h^ld forth as the meritorious
and procuring cause of it. The words are (...), and (...), never so far as I
remember, made use of in the whole New Testament, but to denote a proper
redemption; save that* (...) is once metaphorically employed, Heb. 11. 35. to
signify a temporal deliverance. From what has been offered we may now
confidently infer the truth and certainty of a satisfaction.

But it is Objected. That Moses as a type of Christ, in reference to his
bringing the people of Israel out of Egypt, is called a redeemer, who yet paid
no price for them, and consequently that the intendment of the Scripture, when
it speaks of Christ's having redeemed us, is not that he paid any ransom for
us, but only that he has set us free, which he may have done by other ways and
means than the solution of a price.

Answ. To this I offer these Answers, (1.) It is a strange way of arguing, that
because redemption is taken sometimes Metaphorically, that therefore it must
always be so taken; because we so interpret it in such places, where it is
expressly said to be done in a way of power, must we likewise interpret it so in
such places where there is express mention of a price and ransom.

(2.) We have shown before, how that temporal deliverance out of Egypt, was not
wrought without a typical reconciliation and price, to intimate that the
spiritual deliverance was not to be effected but by a proportionable price and
ransom.

(3.) Though I do not deny but that Moses was a type of Christ, and that the
redemption out of Egypt was a type of that which the Messiah was to work; yet
it no ways follows, that because the redemption out of Egypt was without any
ransom of price, therefore the redemption from sin must likewise be so; for it
is not needful that the type and the thing typified be in all things alike, it
is enough if they agree in that, wherein the one was designed of God to be the
type of the other. Jonas his being in the belly of the Whale, was a type of
Christ's being in the bowels of the Earth; must we therefore infer, that
because Jonas was alive in the belly of the Whale, that Christ was so in the
grave? So here, it was sufficient to render Moses a type of Christ, that they
were both deliverers, and that they both wrought deliverances; but it was no
wise needful either that their deliverances should be of one kind, or
accomp^ished after one manner. The deliverance which Moses wrought, was a
tem^oral deliverance; who will therefore say that that of Christ was but a
temporal deliverance? ^o more ought we to allege, that because the one was
accomplished without a price, that therefore the ^ther must be effected so also.

(4.) Moses was not a type of Christ in all his Offices. Now that wherein Moses
was a type of Christ was Christ's Kingship, and therefore we are not to expect
an agreeableness betwixt what Christ wrought as he was Priest, and what Moses
did; but we must seek ^he resemblance in that wherein ^he one was the type of
the other. Now there is a resemblance be^wixt Moses's redeeming Israel from the
tyranny of Pharaoh, and Christ's redeeming us from the power of Satan.

But is is further ob^ected, that redemption in this whole affair must be
understood in a Metaphorical sense, because we are sai^ to be redeemed from
iniquitie^ Tit. 2. 14. and from a vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. but it
cannot be said that there was a pric^ paid to sin, or that there was a
satisfaction made to our vain conversation, and consequently that to redeem is
no more in this affair but t^ deliver.

Answer, (1.) The objecto^ at once proclaim themselves ignorant both of Law and
Religion; i^ there any thing more usual, tha^ when a person pays to the
Creditor the debt of one that is in Prison; or the ransom of one that i^ in
bondage, to him that detain^ him; to say that that person has redeemed such a
one out of Prison* and from the Gally, though the satisfaction was not made to
the Prison or Gally, but to him or them* by whom they were held and detained in
these conditions. In al^ cases satisfaction is to be made to him who detains
the captive by way of law, power, and authority; and not to them who detain him
only in subserviency to the principal Creditor and Judge. Now it was God that
we were debtors to, and criminals against; it was his Law we had broken, and it
was by his Sentence that we stood condemned. Our sins were the debts
satisfaction was to be made for, not to be made to: Satan was only an
instrument of our vexation and bondage, in subserviency to God's leave and
commission; neither they, nor he were properly our detainers, but only as the
Jailer and Irons detain a Malefactor at the Action of the Creditor, Sentence of
the Judge, and Authority of the Law.

(2.) We have before distinguished the principal end of Christ's death from the
subordinate, betwixt that which was the primary end of his dying, and that
which was only secondary. Now the principal and primary end of the death of
Christ, was the satisfying the justice of God, the making him a compensation
for the dishonor which had been done to his Name, and for the contempt which
had been shown to his Law; the secondary, and that which was only consequential
on the former, was the purchasing the spirit and grace for us, that thereby we
might be enabled to resist and conquer Satan, kill and subdue inbred
corruption, have a conformity wrought in us to God's holiness, and be brought
again to a willing obedience.

CHAP. VIII.
The satisfaction of Christ further justified from his having made
reconciliation. The words used in this affair opened. Signify God's being
reconciled to us. Foretold that Christ should make reconciliation. This the
intendment of the Levitical Priesthood. Christ properly a Priest. Has offered
a true sacrifice. Through him we have atonement.

TO reconcile is to restore and recover lost friendship, it is the renewing of
peace betwixt persons once at an agreement, but now at variance; so that it
supposes these two things.

1. That there was once a peace and friendship betwixt God and Man. God
approved Man, and Man loved God. In the state of innocence there was a twofold
union betwixt Man and God; an union of nature, he was like God; and an union of
state, he was Gods friend.

2. By the fall there arose a breach of that peace and friendship We at once
lost the image of God, and forfeited his f^vour; we became alienated from God
through sin, and God became alienated from us for sin. The enmity is mutual,
not only on our part to God, Col. 1. 21. but on God's part to us. There is no
peace in him to the wicked, Isa. 48. 22. They are the children of his wrath,
Ephesians. 2. 3. And under his curse, Gal. 3. 10. Their persons are an abomination
to him, Psalm. 5. 5. And their services an abhorrency, Prove. 15. 8 and 21. 4.
Now Christ by a satisfactory sacrifice has appeased the anger of God,
purchased his grace to renew us, and so has brought God and Man into a state
of friendship and favor again.

The words the Holy Ghost expresses this by, are (...) Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 5.
18, 19, 20. (...) (...), Ephesians. 2. 16. Col. 1. 20, 21. (...), Col, 1. 20.
(...), Romans 5. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. (...), Heb. 2 17. (...) 1 John 2. 2. 1 John 4. 10. (...), Romans 3. 25. Now all these words signify to appease, to
render propitious, to turn away anger, to atone, to reconcile and import as
well God's being' reconciled to us, as our being reconciled to God. (...), in
S^phocles is to atone the Anger of the Gods, and to render them propitious and
favorable. (...) in Home^, is by sacrifice to appease God. It is that which
the Latins call Propitiare and placare. And in this sense do the Septuagint
most frequently make use of them, Exodus 30. 15, 16. and 32. 30. Levit. 4. 20.
and 10. 17. Numb. 28. 22, 30. In all which places, and innum^rable more, the
words signify by appeasing anger, to reconcile God to us.

It is not denied but that the words are used sometimes to import and signify
our accepting the tenders of God's grace and favor, as 1 Cor. 5. 20. We pray
you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled. But withal we affirm that in their most
frequent use, they signify the appeasing God's anger, and the reconciling him
to us. This we confirm from the ensuing Scriptures, Romans 5. 10. When we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Where by being
reconciled is principally meant, God's being reconciled to us, as appears,

(1.) Because the reconciliation spoken of here, is that to which justification
is equivalent, ver. 9. but justification is God's reconciliation to us, not our
conversion to him.

(2.) In that the reconciliation here intended, is that which is the immediate
effect of the death of Christ; and consequently we cannot understand by it the
reconciling of our natures to God, this being immediate fruit of the spirit of
Christ, (for though remotely it be founded on the death of Christ, yet in
Scripture it is made the immediate effect of the resurrection, life, and power
of Christ, Acts 5. 31. and latter part of this same verse 10. Much more being
reconciled by the death of his Son, we shall be saved by his life.) But we must
necessarily understand the reconciling of God to us.

(3.) Because the reconciliation here spoken of is that which is tendered to us,
and which we receive, ver. 11. -- have received the atonement, and therefore
cannot be meant of our reconciliation or conversion to God, forasmuch as we are
not said to receive our conversion, or to have our conversion tendered to us,
but must needs be spoken in reference to the appeasing of God's anger toward
us, and our acceptance with him; and accordingly the Syriack renders it,
Reconciliatus est nobiscum Deus, God was reconciled to us. Another Scripture
which offers for the further establishing of this is, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. All
things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has
given us the ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation, now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Besides the reconciliation of man to
God by conversion, mentioned in the latter end of the 20 verse. and to which we
are there exhorted: There is also mention of God's reconciliation to us, and
that this is the main thing insisted ^on, and intended by the Apostle appears,

(1.) In that he expresses it by God's not imputing our sins to us, not by our
conversion from sin to God; and what is it now for God not to impute sin? it
is, not ^o charge our sins upon us, so as ^o condemn us, but in considera^ion
of the death of Christ to lay aside his anger, and receive us into ^avour.

(2.) Because the reconciliation ^ere intended, is that, the declaration
whereof is committed to the Ministers of the Gospel: Now that which they have
in trust to Preach, is not that we are actually converted to God, but that God
in consideration of the sufferings of Christ is willing, upon terms of faith
and repentance, etc. to take us into favor and friendship.

(3.) Because, if the intendment of all these Verses, were only our conversion
to God, we should be necessitated to fasten nonsen^ upon the Apostle, for at
this ra^ of expounding, the import would be, ye are converted, therefore be ye
converted. Many more testimonies speaking clearly to the same purpose, if I
studied no^ brevity, might be alleged: Se^ Ephesians. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Col. 1. 20.

Object. But it may be objected, that we often read of our being reconciled to
God; but we do not once read in the whole Bible that God i^ reconciled to us.

Answ. It is true, but the reason is because God is the offended Ruler and
Judge, and we are the offending Subjects; now in every case the party who
offends is said to be reconciled to the party offended, and not on the
contrary, so Mat. 5. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 7. 11. See that pertinent place to this
purpose, 1 Samuel 29. 4. where the Philistines ^efusing to let David march along
with them to the encounter against Saul, assign this as the reason of it: For
wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his Master? should it not be with
the heads of these men? Now David had no enmity nor anger against Saul, only
Saul was angry with David, and yet it is expressed that David should reconcile
himself to Saul, i. e. that he would endeavor by such a stratagem to make Saul
his friend. God having given us no cause then why we should be angry with him,
but we having given him cause of being provoked against us, it lies with us to
go and reconcile our selves to him, but how? by the appeasing of his anger,
which forasmuch as we could not do, Christ has done it. That Christ by the
appeasing of God's wrath and anger has wrought reconciliation, and by
consequence our very adversaries being judges made satisfaction, will receive
full establishment, if we consider these things.

1. That this was prophesied before hand of the Messiah, Dan. 9* 24. -- and to
make reconcil^ation for iniquity. Which the Apostle expressly applies to Christ,
Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unt^ his
brethren, that he might be* ^ merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. (...) is
by an enallage put for (...), to make reconciliation with God for iniquities;
not merely, Peccata a^ferre, aut purgare a peccato; to take away (...) apud
graecos Scriptores omnes poctas, hic oricos, alios est placare. G^ot. de satisf
sin, or to cleanse from sin; as Grotius in his notes, contrary to himself
elsewhere, but expiare, placare, to atone, to reconcile by removing wrath
according to the constant use of the word in all Greek Authors. It is
equivalent to that phrase, Heb. 1. 3. -- when he had by himself purged our
sins. Namely, by the attoning and pacifying God's anger, through the sacrifice
of himself, that we should not be condemned for them; not by the sanctification
of believers from them. It is an observation of the reverend and learned Dr.
Owens, that wherever sin, not sinners, are made the object of any mediatory
acts of Christ, that act immediately respects God, and not the sinner. So
Heb. 9. 15. For the redemption of transgressions, i. e. to redeem from the
wrath due to transgression, by making God a reparation. And Heb. 9. 26. -- he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, to take it away by
satisfaction, so that it should not be charged.

2. Christ's reconciling us to God by propitiation and atonement, will receive
further strength and light, if we observe that this was the great truth and
mystery which was signified and intended in the Aarenical Priesthood, and
Levitical Sacrifices. That these did in their institution and end typifie the
sacrifice of the Son of God, the Holy Ghost puts out of question by calling
them shadows, Col. 2. 17. Heb. 8 5. Heb. 10. 1. figures, Heb. 9. 9. patterns,
ibid. ver. 23. (...). Now atonement and reconciliation is every where ascribed
to these, Levit. 4. 20. and 5. 6. and 6. 7. and 10. 11. Number. 5. 8. and 28. 22.
and 31. 50. and alibi. And that not only in reference to some sins, or to
lesser sins, but in reference to all sins, to the very greatest, Levit. 16. 21,
22. Levit. 5. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 14. etc. Number. 5. 6*

Object* If it should be objecte^ that there were some sins from which by the
law of Moses the^ could not be justified, Acts 13. 39* and therefore that their
sacrifice^ did not serve to make atonement for all sins.

I Answer, (1.) All that the Apostle intends is, that the sacrifices of the law
could expiate no sin further than typically, and that it was Christ whom they
typified who could alone absolutely justify from any sin. The sacrifices of
the law could not of themselves so much as atone for one sin, Gal. 3. 13. but
typically they ser^ed to make atonement for every ^^n: The Jews in reference
to whom ^he Apostle discourses, trust^d solely to sacrifices for righte^usness
and life, and in this he ^firms that they were mistaken, ^^d that it was only
the blood ^^d sacrifice of Christ which they ^gnified and shadowed, that could
^ally free the conscience from the ^ilt of the least sin.

(2.) It may be Answered, that ^der the law there was a twofold ^ilt, a
Ceremonial, and a Moral; one external binding over the transgressour unto
temporal punishment, another spiritual binding over the offender unto eternal
wrath. Now sacrifices as the^ were incorporated into their policy as well as a
part of their worship were in many cases appointed, an^ accordingly served to
deliver from temporal guilt, Heb. 9. 15. b^ there were other cases wherei^ they
were not at all allowed to deliver from the temporal punishment, Psalm. 51. 16.
but accordin^ to their political constitutions death was without mercy to ^
inflicted on the offender. No^ says the Apostle, these sins from the temporal
guilt of which a^ your sacrifies could not dischan^ you, the blood of Christ is
su^cient to acquit you from the ete^nal guilt even of those.

This objection being discha^ed, it stands established that ^ tonement and
reconciliation ascribed to sacrifices, and that not only in reference to some
sins, but to every sin. Now this expiation was not real, but only typical; all
their sacrifices were not able to acquit them from the moral guilt of one sin,
Heb. 9. 9. and 7. 19. and 10. 4. For it is not possible that the blood of Bulls
and Goats should take away sins. But the sole intendment of all their
sacrifices was to shadow forth the great sacrifice of the Messiah, and the
at^onement and expiation which were to be made by it. This will arrive with
more light to the Reader, if we present it in these three ^eads.

1. Christ is our true Priest in ^atters pertaining to God, whom all he other
Priests did but shadow. All others were only called Priests because they
represented him, and ^utwardly by type expressed, what ^e was really to
accomplish and ^o: and never one could do the proper work of a Priest, namely,
make reconciliation for the sins of the people, but he. That he should be a
Priest then only in a metaphorical sense, is such a contradiction to Law and
Gospel, as it could not possibly receive the entertainment of any, who had not
first set themselves in opposition to the whole mystery of God* but that Christ
was properly a Priest, may be many ways rendered evident.

(1.) From the definition of a Priest properly so called, Heb. 5. 1. Every high
Priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God,
that he may offe^ both gifts and sacrifices for sin That this is the definition
of ^ Priest properly so called, is bot^ clear in the thing it self, for if suc^
a one as is here described be no^ properly a Priest, there was never a Priest
properly so called in the world; as also in the Apostles a^commodating it, ver.
4. to Aaron who was unquestionably a Priest in a proper, and not in
metaphorical sense. Now that Jesus Christ is such a Priest as is here
described, is manifest in that all the parts of this description do admirably
appertain to him; he was taken from among men. To this very end principally,
and none other, did he partake of the humane nature, Heb. 10. 5. He was also
ordained for men, see ver. 5, 6. and herein he excelled all other Priests that
he was constituted only for others, and not for himself, Heb. 7. 27. Lastly, he
was ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, yea herein he transcended all other
Priests, that he had something of his own to offer; other Priests had indeed
something to offer, but nothing of their own; they only offered the bodies of
beasts, which the people brought them, but Christ had a body given him to be at
this own disposal to this purpose. That this description of a Priest belongs
properly to Christ, yea, that it is he whom the Holy Ghost principally
describes, may be put out of question, by observing that the Apostle applies it
ver. 5. particularly to him.

(2.) That Christ was properly a Priest, may be further established from Heb.
8. 3. Every high Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it
is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. Now if Christ be not
truly a Priest, this way of arguing is altogether impertinent; for it might be
easily replied, that though it be needful that a Priest properly so called,
should have somewhat to offer, yet it is not necessary that he who is only
metaphorically a Priest, should have any thing to to offer; for it is no ways
needful, that whatever appertains to that which is true and real, should also
appertain to that which is figurative and improper. Though a man be a rational
creature, yet it does not follow that the picture of a man should be so. And
therefore the Apostle by concluding that Christ behoved to have somewhat to
offer, because he was a Priest, mvst needs intend that he was a Priest in a
proper, and not in a metaphorical sense.

(3.) It appears further, that Christ was truly and properly a Priest, in that
he was a Priest of a true and proper order, namely, of the order of
Melchisedeck, Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 5. 10. and 7. 17. 21. I do not now dispute who
Melch sedeck was, all that I affirm is, that according to the Holy Ghost he was
a real Priest, and that his order was a real order, and therefore Christ being
of a true order, behoved also to be a true Priest. As the Levitical Priests
were truly and properly Priests, because of the order of Aaron, which was a
true and proper order of Priesthood; so Christ being of the order of
Melchisedeck, which was a true order of Priesthood, must also have been a true
Priest. And this is the reason why believers though all Priests, Rev. 1. 5. yet
are alloted to no order, because they are not properly Priests, but only
metaphorically so.

(4.) That Christ was properly a Priest, may be demonstrate^ from the design of
the Apostl^ throughout the Hebrews, especially from the 7. chap. to the 10
which is to exalt the Priesthoo^ of Christ above that of Aaron Now this were
the most incongruous way of disputing imaginable if Christ were only
metaphorically a Priest, Aaron having been properly one; for howeve^ Christ
might be more eminen^ t^an Aaron in other respects, ye^ in respect of his
Priesthood he would be less excellent, forasmuch as what is so only
metaphorically, is beyond all contradiction less than what is properly so.

(5.) This may be yet confirmed from the more solemn institution and
confirmation of Christ's Priesthood, above that of any other; for the more
solemn and sacred the institution of a thing is, the more excellent is the
thing it self. Now Christ was established a Priest by oath, which none other
ever was, Heb. 7. 20, 21. and therefore his Priesthood is more excellent than
the Priesthood of any else, and consequently must be a true Priesthood, and not
a metaphorical.

(6.) Christ was properly a King and Prophet, and consequently properly a
Priest, forasmuch as the Scripture declares him to be a Priest, as well as any
of the former, and he was typified in that, as well as in these.

2. He is the true sacrifice; being a true Priest he must have a tru^
sacrifice, Heb. 8. 3. yea, all other sacrifices were but merely typic^ of the
sacrifice which he was t^ offer. No other sacrifice could make the comers
thereunto perfec^ or take away sins, Heb. 10. 1, ^ They were only appointed to
be ^ shadow of the great sacrifice ^ Christ, Heb. 8. 5. Heb. 10. 1. H^ alone in
the offering of himself offered to God a true sacrific^ That the death of
Christ is a s^crifice, the following Scripture may be sufficient to render
clea^ Ephesians. 5. 2. He has given himself for us, an offering and a sacr^fice to
God for a sweet smelling s^vour, 1 Cor. 5. 9. Christ our Pass^over is
sacrificed for us, Heb. ^ 14, -- through the eternal spirit ^ offered up
himself to God, Heb. ^ 27. He needs not daily to offer ^ sacrifices, for this
he did once when he offered up himself; Heb. 9. 2^

^ow once in the end of the world, he ^ath appeared to put away sin by ^he
sacrifice of himself, Heb. 10. ^0. -- we are sanctified by the of^ring of the
body of Jesus once for ^ll. It is one of the most ground^ss figments of the
world, which ^e Socin^^ns here suggest, namely, ^at none of all this is to be
interpre^d in reference to any thing Christ ^id on earth, but that it is only
to be ^xpounded in reference to his entering ^to heaven, and his appearing
before ^od for us. We do not deny but ^at Christ continues to be a ^riest in
heaven, and shall do so, ^ll the whole mediatory work be ^ver; but withal we
affirm, that ^y the shedding of h^s blood and ^eath, he perfected his whole
sa^rifice here on earth. Redemption ^as obtained before he entered into ^e holy
places, Heb. 9. 22. Sin ^as purged before he sat down on ^e right hand of
majesty on high, ^eb. 1. 3. where by purging is not meant purging by
sanctifyin^ grace,

(1) Because that spoken o^ here was perfected ere Chri^ went to heaven, which
sanctific^tion is not.

(2.) Because the purging her^ spoken of is that which is done by Christ alone,
without the u^ and intervention of any oth^ means -- when he had by himself
purged our sins, but sanctific^tion is accomplished by the wor^ and spirit; so
that the purging ^ sin here, is the expiating of si^ which is expressly asserted
to have been finished are Christ ascende^ That Christ's Priesthood was o^
earth, is further demonstrated b^ all those places where he is said t^ have
offered himself once, an^ where there is mention made ^ one offering, Heb. 7.
27. and ^ 28. and 10. 10, 14. for this cannot refer to what he does in he^ven,
seeing what he does there, h^ ^oes always, and is continually in ^oing of it;
it must necessarily ^fer therefore to what he did on ^rth. That his Priesthood
was ^n earth, may be further confirm^d, by considering the parts of ^e
Levitical Priesthood; there ^as in that, besides the high ^riest's carrying the
blood into ^he Holy of Holies, and sprinking the Mercy Seat with it, the laying
of the beast without: Now ^s Christ's intercession in heaven, by which he
continues his Priest^ood) answers the last of these. So there behoved to be
Christ's offering of himself a sacrifice on ^arth, to answer the first;
otherways there should not have been ^ correspondency in the heavenly things to
the earthly. Lastly, Christ his being Priest on earth, will be yet
strengthened, by observing that there were many sacrifices, the blood whereof
was not at all carried into the Holy place (for that was done but once a year,
Heb. 9. 7.) and that these sacrifices were types of Christ, and therefore what
Christ wa^ mainly to do, behoved to be before he entered into heaven, otherwise
the Antitype had not answered the type, and that in the very thing wherein it
was a type. S^ that we see Christ is both tru^ Priest, and true sacrifice, which
the Socinians themselves being judges establishes the satisfaction of Christ.

3 It is by Christ alone, that w^ have the true and real atonement All the
Levitical propitiations and reconciliations were at mos^ but typical of this.
He alon^ has purged away our sins, Heb^ 1. 3. i. e. He has removed the guilt
of all sins from the conscienc^ and the obnoxiousness of the sinne^ to
punishment for them, Heb. ^ 14. for as the sanctifying of t^ flesh, ver. 13.
was the setting the offender free from temporal punishment, so the purging the
conscience is the setting the offender free from eternal punishment. He has
made reconciliation for sins, Heb. 2. 17. Through him we have atonement, Romans
5. 11. He has slain the enmity which was in God to sinners, by his cross,
Ephesians. 2. 16. He is our (...), propitiation, 1 John 2. 2. and 1 John 4. 10. Our
placamen, that by which God is reconciled toward us. He is our (...), Romans 3.
25. It is much at one whether you take it in the Masculine, or in the Neuter;
if you take it in the first, then the import is, that it is Christ who
reconciles God to us; if you take it in the second, then the meaning is, that
he does it by himself as by a placamen, an anger appeasing sacrifice. Most take
it in the Neuter, and so it is either by way of allusion to the propitiatory
sacrifices, by which God was said to be attoned and reconciled, Levit. 6. 30.
and 8. 15. Hence the Ram was called the Ram of atonement, Number. 5. 8. (...),
Septuagint. So Christ has put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb, 9.
26. Or else by way of allusion to the Mercy Seat (which the Apostle calls
(...), Heb. 9. 5.) either because the Mercy Seat covered the Ark; the law which
charge and condemns us for sin lay in the Ark, Exodus, 25. 16. Now the Mercy
Seat covered the Ark, to signify that through Christ the law should not
condemn us, Exodus, 25. 20, 21. Exodus 36. 34. So Christ has blotted out,
removed, and cancelled the handwriting which was against us, Col. 2. 14. Or
else because through sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifice upon the Mercy
Seat, God signified himself pleased and attoned, Levit. 16. 15 16, 1^, and it
is very remarkabl^ that the High Priest durst not go ^ear the Mercy Seat, but
with the blood of the sacrifice which was ^ppointed to make atonement. ^o in
and through the blood of Christ we are accepted, Ephesians. 1. ^6. but without
coming in the ver^ue, and under the sprinkling of ^he blood of Christ there is
no ^cceptance. Or else, because it was ^om the mercy seat, that God as
^econciled communed with his people, Exodus 25. 22. Number. 7. 89. ^o in and through
Jesus Christ we ^ave access with boldness and con^dence, Ephesians. 2. 18. and 3.
12. We hope now that from this which has been tendered in the ^resent chapter,
especially, toge^er with what has been deliver^d in the preceding chapters, we
^ay boldly infer and assert the truth of Christ's satisfaction.

Object. 1. But it is objected, that ^od before hand loved us, foras^uch as in
demonstration of his love, he sent his Son to dye for us and consequently that
he cannot be sai^ to have been angry with us, or that b^ needed to be
reconciled.

For Answer 1. It is true, God'^ love was carried toward us as hi^ creatures,
but at the same time h^ hated us as sinners. Deus mir^ modo quando nos oderat,
diligebat^ odit in unoquoque nostrum quod s^ ceramus, amavit quod fecerat, Be^
He did not love us and hate us ^ the same time, and in the same respect. He
loved us as his cre^tures whom he intended to recover, he hated us as rebels
who ha^ transgressed his law, and contemned his government.

Answer 2. There is a twofol^ love in God, a love of benevo^ lence, and a love
of friendship; ^ love of good will, and a love ^ delight. The first we ascrib^
to God antecedently to the consi^deration of the death of Christ as that which
was the spring an^ ^untain of his giving Christ, and ^his we own to have been
superla^ve in its kind, Joh. 3. 16. 1 John ^. 10. Neither was there in God any
hatred or anger opposite to ^is love; but then this love was nothing else but a
purpose of con^iving, and by such means of ^inging about our reconciliation,
^hile in the mean time we were ^e objects of his wrath, Joh. 3. ^6. Ephesians. 2.
3. God's eternal ^urpose of reconciling himself to ^s, did not in the mean time
ex^mpt us from being the objects of ^is wrath, but supposes both that ^e were,
and behoved to continue ^, till by such ways and mediums ^ur peace was
purchased. It im^lyes not the least contrariety to ^firm that God hated us, but
yet ^ as to purpose by such means his ^turning into friendship with us. ^ the
42. chap. of Job ver. 7, 8. ^e read of God's being angry ^ith Jobs three
friends, yet so as to signify by what means he would again accept them.

Object. 2. It is objected 2ly* That upon supposition that God would not pardon
us without a satisfaction, and that Christ undertook an^ has made
satisfaction, we should b^ more obliged to the Son, than to the Father.

Answ. We are infinitely, an^ alike obliged to both; to the Father in giving
his Son to make the satisfaction, and in taking us into favor upon it, being
made; t^ the Son in condescending and undertaking to make it. And accordingly
the Scripture mention^ equally the love of both, the lo^ of the Father as the
rise and sprin^ of our reconciliation, Joh. 3. 16 1 John 4. 10. Romans 5. 8. and
in r^ference to this he is called our Savior, 1 Timothy 1. 1. Tit. 1. 3. The love
of the Son, as the means ^ carrying it on, and accomplishi^ it, Ephesians. 5. 2. 25.
Rev. 1. 5. Gal. ^ 20. Ephesians. 3. 19. So that to make the comparison betwixt the
one and the other, argues not only bold presumption, but also ignorance of this
whole mystery of God.

Object. 3. But it is alleged thirdly, that by asserting the satisfaction of
Christ, we must be exposed to one of these two absurdities; either that Christ
has satisfied himself, or else that he is more merciful than the Father, and
pardons sin without any satisfaction.

Answer 1. To this I return these two things. 1. It is no ways absurd, to say
he has satisfied himself. The Court of Aldermen having a Citizen before them,
who ^s obnoxious to a mulct, and which they in consistency with the
preservation of Government cannot remit, and the offender not having
wherewithal to pay, may not one of themselves make solu^ion in the offenders
behalf to the Court; and so by making satisfaction to the Bench, he makes also
satisfaction to himself, forasmuch as he is a member of it. So God being in
this whole affair considerable a Governor, and not as a mere Creditor, it is
no pageantry to affirm that he might satisfi^ himself.

Answer 2. Upon supposition that Christ has made satisfaction, yet it does not
follow that adequate he has made it to himself, seeing he made it as God man,
and it was made to him only as God. Now as there is nothing more usual in
Scripture than to affirm contrary things of Christ under different respects;
for example, that the Father is greater than he, Joh. 14. 28. and yet that the
Father and he are one, Joh. 10. 30. that he is Gods equal, Phil. 2 6. and yet
Gods s^rvant, ibid. ver. 7. So under different respects he both made the
satisfaction, and had it made to him. Having at great length demonstrated the
satisfaction of Christ, which is the alone plea upon which we can be justified,
the next enquiry is how upon this plea, we come to be justified.

CHAP. IX.
How upon the Plea of a satisfaction made by Christ, we are justified. The
satiffaction of Christ effectual before made, as well as after. None actually
justified till they believe what justification is.

HAving fully established the satisfaction of Christ, which is the only plea a
guilty sinner has why he should be justified, that which falls next under
consideration is how upon this Plea we come to be justified, or how we come to
have an interest in the satisfaction made by Christ, so as by virtue of that
Plea to be acquitted, I had intended and accordingly digested my thoughts to a
considerable length on this subject, and treated the whole interest both of
faith and works in this affair; but finding this treatise already lengthened
beyond what the Reader may desire, though much short of what the subject
requires; and not knowing to what bigness the Appendix may grow, I shall not
proceed as I had designed, but refer it to another season, if not wave it
forever. Only that the present tract may not be wholly imperfect, it will be
necessary to suggest a few things.

This then I would first premise, that the satisfaction of Christ was as
effectual to justification and life to those who could plead it, before it was
actually made (he having undertaken it) as it is to those who can now plead it,
it is made: the Father acted in the same way of justifying believers then that
he does now. The blood of Christ had the same efficacy then which it has now,
Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past.
The Old Testament Saints were saved upon terms of justice, as well as the New.
God by exacting afterward full satisfaction from Christ, declares himself to
have acted toward them as a righteous Judge, as well as a gracious Father.
This I take to be the intendment of the Apostle, Col. 1. 2. And having made
peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.
Whereby things in heaven is meant the Saints already in heaven, who are said
now to be reconciled, because the price of their reconciliation was now paid.
See Gomar. on the place.
All that were saved then, were saved alone through faith in Christ, Heb. 11.
13. In this federal transaction betwixt the Farher and Son, about the recovery
and pardon of sinners, Divines take notice that there is a mutual trusting of
each other; as Christ having paid the price and ransom, takes the Fathers word
now, for the bringing in and justifying of all those in due time, in whose room
and stead it was paid; so the Father before received many into favor and to
glory, upon the Sons promise, that in the appointed time he would make him a
full satisfaction.

Having pr^mised this, there is a twofold justification, one fundamental in
Christ of all the elect before faith, yet so as they abode under wrath till
they came actually to believe; wherein that consists I had at length drawn out,
but must now forbear it.

2ly. There is an actual justification of all the elect in Christ upon their
believing. The Father and Son having contrived and brought about this great
affair of our recovery without any rise or help from us, we can have no actual
interest in the benefits of it, but upon such terms as the Father and Son have
agreed unto. And here I would observe these two things. 1. The necessity that
we should not be justified, but upon some condition. 2. That it was most
agreeable to the Divine wisdom that faith should be the condition.

1. It was not fit that we should be actually justified, but upon some
condition; and this is the main hinge upon which the compact betwixt the Father
and Son* in his undertaking the work of redemption, turns, Isa. 53. 11. By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, i. e. by the knowledge of
him, where knowledge (as often elsewhere in Scripture) signifies faith. It was
not fit that the justice of God should acquit us to the impeachment of the
Divine purity. The holiness of God was a bar to our being received into favor,
as well as his righteousness; it was needful therefore that a respect should be
born to that as well as this; and that though justice had received a
satisfaction, yet that the benefits of it should not redound to us, but upon
terms of conformity to the purity and holiness of God.

2. So far as can be imagined by us, it was most convenient that faith should
be the condition. (1.) Because that alone quites all pretensions of being
justified any other way, and trusts solely to be justified this way. It is the
nature of faith to take us of from whatever else we are apt to confide in, and
to engage us only to depend upon the righteousness of Christ. It is the
constitution of faith, and no other grace to trust the promise of God, and to
receive and embrace what is there tendered. Hence faith is set in opposition to
self, trust, and confidence, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 9. 31, 32. Romans 4. 15. Gal. 5. 4,
5. It is faith alone by which the soul owns Christ for its surety, rolls over
it self upon him, so that in conspectu fore in the account of the law, Christ
and the pleader are but one. (2.) Because it is by faith that Christ and we
come to be spiritually united, and as it were concorporated together. Christ is
brought to dwell in us by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and we are implanted and rooted in
him by the same, Col. 2. 7. by faith Christ and we become one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.
17. This being then the bond of union betwixt him and us, it was most
convenient that it should be the condition of our interest in him, and of our
right to all the benefits of his satisfaction and purchase. What this faith is,
how it is called our righteousness, and how none are actually justified till
they believe, though prepared to have been here inserted, yet to prevent the
excess of this discourse, shall be wholly superceded.

Only a little how upon our believing we are actually justified. Justification
is God's act, Romans 8. 33. A man is then justified, when he is constituted
righteous in law; now this is done by God's imputing and accounting the
righteousness of Christ ours, Romans 4. 11. 24. Romans 5. 19 So that he is made our
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Jer. 23. 6. and we are as righteous through him as
God can require or does desire, Phil. 3. 9. It is no more harsh that his
righteousness should be thus made ours, then that our sins should be made his,
which the Apostle expressly asserts, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and we have before opened.
Now God may be said to justify such a person two ways.

(1.) In his secret acquitting of him within himself, accounting of him as
righteous, and in a state of favor. He that was in a state of hatred before,
the obligation to punishment being now dissolved, is accounted of as in a state
of friendship.

(2.) In the constituting and proclaiming in the Gospel, that whoever believes
is justified. As a person is condemned by a law, and said to be condemned when
the law condemns him: so we are justified by the Gospel patent, and may be said
to be so, when that Charter declares us justified, which it does if we believe.
Now the effects of this are a non-imputation of sin, and a donation of a right
to life; our obligation to punishment is dissolved, and we are vested with a
title to life.

1. Sin shall never be charged upon us in the legal guilt of it, Romans 8. 1, 33,
34. The legal guilt of all sins past is removed formally, and the legal guilt
of all sins to come is removed virtually: That is thus, justification takes of
legal guilt where once it was, and keeps it of where else it would be.

And (1.) It is no more harsh that sins should be legally disimputed to us
before committed, than that they should be legally imputed to Christ before
committed, which all the sins of the elect, who have lived, and are yet to
live, since the death of Christ, were.

(2.) Because the guilt of sin may be as well disimputed to believers before
committed by them, as the satisfaction of Christ was imputed to believers
before made by him, which it was to all the Old Testament Saints.

2. Being constituted righteous, by having the righteousness of Christ
accounted ours, (...) only our obligation to punishment is ^issolved, but there
also emergeth and arises a new title to life, Christ purchased not only
redem^tion from wrath, but a right to ^he heavenly inheritance. And this shall
suffice at least at present to ^ave been discoursed upon this whole affair.

AN APPENDIX.
In vindication of the Satisfaction of Christ, from the frivolous Objections of
^ late Socinian Pamphlet^ made against a Sermon o^ mine preached at the Morning
Lecture.

SECT. I.
The Title examined. The Scripture prefixed, proved destructive of the which
they were brought to establish.

IT is not needful to give a^ further account of the induc^ments and grounds of
^ Preaching upon that subject, s^ what the Preface to the foregoing discourse
intimates. The cost of that exercise was before hand considered, and whatever
may be the consequences of it, I hope to have satisfaction* and peace in the
bearing and encountering of them.

The party who has appeared in opposition to the doctrine then held forth,
has (from what motives himself best knows) been pleased to conceal his name,
and therefore (seeing it may be omitted without prejudice to the cause ^
manage) I shall not concern my self about him, though I could particularly
declare him and assign his character: Only it had been ^ut ingenuous, when he
had published the name of another, and in that exposed him to the law, to ^ave
given a more particular account of himself than what can merely be gathered
from two nu^erical letters: wherein he has either endeavored, or may be able
to wrong me, I pardon him; but what he has attemped in opposition to the
truth, cannot in consistency to conscience and duty be overlookt.

The Title of his Book is very specious, for what can more invite a Reader,
than the Freeness of God's grace in the forgiveness of sins by Jesus Christ.
But all is not gold which glisters; a Box of poison may have a fair
inscription; the Prince of Darkness transforms himself into, and desires to
pass for, an Angel of Light. Error loves to appear in the garb o^ truth. I need
not to tell whose character that is, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.
13. But we shall endeavor to unmask^ them here, by animadverting these three
things.

1. That it is the great endeavou^ of these men to present us as enemies to the
grace of God. Whereas (1.) There is nothing we desir^ more to exalt and admire,
and whatever doctrine of ours, either directly or indirectly reflects upon the
Freeness of God's Grace we disclaim and renounce it: but we boldly affirm the
Grace of God to be as free in the forgiveness of sin upon a satisfaction, as it
would have been, if it had been possible to have forgiven sin without a
satisfaction; and how it is so, you may see opened at large from page 23. to
page 30. of the preceding discourse. (2.) We a^sert our adversaries to be in
this particular the only men who are tardy, in that they establish
justification by works, which the Apostle every where excludes as opposite to,
and in this business utterly destructive of grace, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Romans 11* 6.

2. We would have observed that it is the method of these Gentlemen, ^o cry up
the grace of God, to the ^verthrow of his holiness and righte^usness. We
acknowledge God to be infinitely gracious, but withal we affirm to be
infinitely pure and just. We dare not exalt one perfection of God, to the
diminution of another. We know God cannot be gracious, if at the same time he
may not be righteous also. God can as soon cease to be God, as that one
property of his nature should be exalted to the dishonor of the rest. Having
therefore in the foregoing discourse from page 38. to 51. demonstrated the
inconsistency of forgiveness, without a satisfaction, with the truth, justice,
and holiness of God, it necessarily follows, that there can be no such grace in
God. He cannot be kind to us so as to be cruel to himself.

3. We take notice, that according to the Socinian Divinity, they might have as
well styled their Book the Freeness of God's Grace in the forgiveness of sins
by Paul, or some other of the Apostles, as by Christ. For that which they
assign as the ground of God's forgiving sins by Christ, being only that he
preached the doctrine of forgiveness, and afterward sealed the truth of it
with his blood, accords to Paul, and other of the Apostles, as well as to
Christ; for they Preached the same doctrine, and that by immediate revelation,
and also confirmed the truth of it by martyrdom and death; so that according
to the opinion of these Gentlemen, I see no cause but that they might have
given their Book the title I allege, as well as that which they have given it.

The next thing which comes under consideration, is the examination of the
Scriptures which he prefixes* And he could have quoted few in the whole Bible,
which are more destructive of his cause; and herein God displays his wisdom,
that that whereof his adversaries hope most to serve their design, proves
utterly subversive of it. The first is Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by
his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Now the opening of
this Verse, together with the two following, will without any more ado
sufficiently evidence, how disserviceable it is to the design it was brought
for. We have in these three verses justification set sorth in all its parts and
causes. First, the efficient impulsive cause of it in God, Causa impulsiva
(...), justified freely by his grace, (...). Justification is free in respect
of the love that gave Christ to merit it, Heb. 2. 9. Given by the grace of God
to taste death for every man. The alone moving and impulsive cause of God's
bestowing Christ* was his eternal good pleasure and love. It is free also in
respect of any works performed by us to deserve justification, Tit. 3. 5. Not
by works of the law which we have done, but according to his mercy he has
saved us. Nothing required or done on our part to merit it, and this and no
more is intimated by grace and freely; for that the excluding the merit and
satisfaction of Christ is not here intended, the opening of the next words will
confirm and demonstrate. 2ly. There then is the material and meritorious means
procuring justification. Causa impulsiva (...), and this is the blood of
Christ, through the redemption that is in Jesus, and in his blood. Though
justification be free in respect of us, yet it is merited in respect of him.
The import of redemption we have formerly opened, and proved it to be a
deliverance by solution and payment of a ransom. See from page 146. to 161.
though there be nothing done by us to merit justification, yet we have it only
by the intervention of Christ as the deserving cause; this the Apostle
amplifies from God's exhibiting of him to this purpose, whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation. What the intendment of (...) is, is before opened, God
set him forth to be a means of atton^ing him, and appeasing his anger, that by
him, as a meritorious cause, we might be set free from the wrath to which we
stood obnoxious: To this end God constituted and appointed him Mediator,
proposed him in the types and shadows of the law, actually exhibited him in the
flesh, and offers him to the world, as he through whom, as a placamen, God's
wrath is appeased, and his favor recovered. 3ly. We have the final cause,
First, the finis cujus, the end on the part of God -- to declare his
rightousness, (...), to show his righteousness; ut justus agnoscatur: By
righteousness here, we can by no means understand God's benignity, kindness,
and mercy; not that we deny, but that it may admit that signification in some
other places, where the subject matter necessitates to it: but here it clearly
signifies that property in God, by which he is inclined to punish sin; and this
is the proper and usual import of it in the Scripture, Romans 2. 5. 2 These. 1. 6.
Rev. 16. 5, 6. And it is from this principle of his nature carrying him against
sin, that he is compared to fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Isa. 33. 14. Heb. 12. 29. and in
respect of this, wrath and anger are often ascribed to him, Romans 9. 32. Exodus
32, 10. Psalm. 6. 1* Romans 1. 8. That this is the intendment of righteousness
here, is evident from hence, that Christ in the shedding of his blood is set
out to be a propitiation, which fully argues both that God was angry, and that
by Christ, as a propitiator^ sacrifice, his vindictive and ang^ is appe^sed.
Then we have the finis cu^, the end with respect t^ us, -- that he might be the
justifier^ The design God had in all this* namely his giving Christ in ^ way of
death and blood to be ^ propitiation, was the taking ^ company of poor
creatures, wh^ lay obnovious to his indignation* into his grace and favor
again* 4ly. We have the instrumenta^ cause, or the means by which w^ come to be
interested in Christ, and to have the redemption an^ justification purchased by
him applied to us, and that is through faith in his blood. By this time I hope
the Reader perceives, not only how impertinent, but how destructive this Text
proves to the Pamphleters design, and how he falls by his own weapon.

The second Text which the Gentleman has been pleased to prefix, ^ Col. 1. 14.
in whom we have re^emption through his blood, even the ^orgiveness of sins. And
this is ^ltogether as unanswerable to the and it was brought for as the for^er:
For do but observe, here ^ur salvation is expressly asserted ^o be by way of
redemption, and ^he price of this redemption to ^e the blood of Christ, which
is ^n plain terms to affirm that we ^re saved by the intervention of a
^atisfaction for to be in a proper sense redeemed, and redeemed through blood,
is to be set free through the sufferings of Christ as a valuable compensation
for our release. But here is the (...) of the Socinian party, and that which
has imposed upon the Pamphleter in his quotations, that because there is
mention of forgiveness, therefore all satisfrction must be excluded; but the
falsity of this is already demonstrated, and to suppose an opposition, where
there is so perfect a harmony, is to profess (...) unacquaintance with the
Gosp^l* It is forgiveness in that it is no^ merited by us, but does this any
way hinder, but that it may b^ purchased by Christ. We know no inconsistence
betwixt these two, that it should be of pur^ grace in reference to us, and ye^
of justice in reference to Christ.

The third and last Scripture mustured up by the Author in his Title Page, is
Prove. 12. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both ar^ an abomination to the Lord. Is it possible, a Scripture
should be produced, more destructive to the design of the bringer? is it an
abomination that the wicked should be justified? and shall we afix such a thing
on the righteous God? can no Judge acqui^ the guilty without a satisfaction,
but he must act that which in its own nature is an abhorrency? and shall we
ascribe this to the holy and righteous Governor of the world. See the
foregoing Treatise from page 8. to 16. But I suppose the Gentleman thought of
serving himself by one part of the Text, not considering how ruinous to his
whole enterprise the other part would prove; and indeed there is nothing more
usual with that sort of men, than to urge their mistaken sense of one part of
Scripture, to the overthrow of the true meaning of another, but to reply to the
place.

(1.) I deny that it is against justice to condemn one that is personally
innocent, when he has put himself legally in the room of criminals. It is no
ways against equity to send a person to prison, who possibly may live and die
there and have his whole posterity beggered, who never contracted one penny
deb^ of his own, only became bound for another: So here though Christ was
personally innocent, yet he stood legally in the room of the guilty, and it was
that which he had chosen, and in a matter wherein he had as much power as any
of us have in our estates; see before from page 93. to 107.

(2.) I affirm that these words which the Adversary seeks relief to his cause
from, do utterly disserve it; For if he that condemns the just be an
abomination to the Lord? how will they salve the righteousness of God in
condemning Christ who was an innocent person to pain and death, which is the
punishment of the nocent, who as he had no sin of his own, so according to
them, he stood charged with no sin of ours: Death being constituted the penalty
of sin, could no^ without unrighteousness have been inflicted upon Christ,
forasmuch as he had become answerable for ours; see this proved page 124. to
127. And therefore our adversaries by denying the last, and not daring to
ass^rt the first, ^re the only men who fasten that upon God, which the Text
styles ^bominable; and now we hope that we have not only wrested ^hese weapons
out of the enemies ^and, but also wounded himself ^y them.

SECT. II.
^t guilty of any of the three faults ^ inexcusable in a Preacher* The doctrine
momentous, Heb. 2. 10. opened, and the necessity of a satisfaction justified to
be the truth of that Scripture.

^HE three faults proposed as inexcusable in a Preacher, ^ too confessedly so,
to be apo^gized for: but whatever other ^aknesses, I may have been guil^ of,
yet that I am innocent from the whole of that charg^ comes now to be justified.

1. That the Doctrine I discours^ is of the highest import, and tha^ to mistake
in it, is to err in a matte^ of the greatest concernment. readily acknowledge,
and do fu^ther add, that it is of such weig^ in the matter of a Christians
b^lief, that not to be sound there, ^ to err in a main fundamental, a^
consequently to be unavoidab^ obnoxious to damnation. When as their are some
truths whi^ we are only bound to believ^ in case we know them to be ^vealed;
this is a truth we ^ bound to know and believe ^ be revealed, in order to be^
saved. If there be any fun^mentals of faith at all, these ^ctrines wherein we
and the S^nians differ, are maxims of t^ nature. As to that exception have
heard of a certain pers^ whose name out of respect I ^ ^ea^, that they cannot
be fundamentals, because controverted by learned men; if it concludes any
thing, it concludes that there is ^o fundamental at all, there being ^o one
truth so evident, which ^ome have not denied: yea, it will not be a fundamental
that ^here is God, forasmuch as there ^ave been some, and still are, who ^are
gainsay it. The matter then ^herein my Adversary and I differ, ^eing of this
moment, I would ^eset it to the Reader to arbitrate, ^n whose side the truth
lies; whe^er with them who can demon^rate their Opinion to have been ^e belief
of all the faithful down ^om the Apostles to the present ^ge, not one
dissenting, who has ^ot been by all the Churches of Christ branded for a
Heretic; or ^ith those who in some whole ^ges can instance none of the same
^ntiments with them, and those whom in other times they produce are such as the
Catholic Church has from time to time voted unworthy the name o^ Christians.

2. Whether the Doctrine I the^ insist^d on, be the truth of any Scripture, the
former tract has accounted for, where I hope it is no^ only made evident to be
a truth but one of the most considerabl^ truths of the Gospel, the very b^si^
of our Religion, the foundation of our present comforts and futu^ hop^^.

3. The third, and at present man particular, and that which ^a^ now under
consideration is, wheth^ it be the truth of that Text, from which in my Sermon
I deduced i^ And here I must complain of t^ unworthiness and disingenuity ^ my
Adversaries, that when I h^ endeavored at some length ^ prove, that the point
then insist^ on, arose not only naturally from the place, but was one of ^ main
doctrines intended in the words, they have been so far from refuting what was
alleged to that purpose, that they have not mentioned one word of what was
offered in that matter. Was ever such tergiversation known, as publicly to
reproach a person for a conclusion, without examining either the premises
whence it is drawn, or the method of inferring ^t. The least I could have
expect^d, was either the overthrowing ^he principles upon which I raised ^t, or
else the evidencing some mis^ake in the way of deduction. At ^his rate of
procedure, there is no truth deducible from any Text of ^he Bible, but by
saying it is not ^ightly drawn, they may with the ^ame facility refute. The
Reader ^ad been spared this labor, if my ^dversaries had been but so just, ^s
in common honesty they ought, ^amely, if when they declaimed against my
doctrine, they had taken notice of the foundations upon which I raised it: but
seeing they have put me upon this task, the speediest way to bring it to an^
issue, will be to open the Text I then discoursed on, viz. Heb. 2. 10. For it
became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing
many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through
sufferings. The Apostle in the preceding Chapte^ having largely treated of
Christ as supreme Prophet, and having advanced him above all other ministerial
revealers of God's will, so far as a Son is preferable to a servant, after some
improvemen^ made in the beginning of thi^ Chapter of what he had delivere^ to
that purpose in the foregoing by an admirable thread and line o^ wisdom he
slides from the Prophe^tical office of Christ to his Sacer^dotal: and having
affirmed tha^ Christ through the benignity an^ grace of God was given to taste
and suffer death for men, he here assigns the impulsive reason or procuring
cause of Christ's suffering, It became God, etc. i. e. if God would save
sinners his essential justice and righteousness could not allow that it should
be otherways. That this is the intendment of the words a little further opening
of them will confirm. We have first then a design of God toward fallen
rebellious mankind, and that is the bringing many of them as sons to glory. The
making a company of enemies who lay obnoxious to hell and wrath, to be God's
Sons, and the bringing them to life. 2ly. We have the method and means pitched
on for the compassing of that design, and that is the dedicating and
consecrating Christ by suffering to be a Captain of salvation, (...), we render
it to make perfect, and that sense sometimes it has; but it signifies here to
consecrate or dedicate unto an office, and in this sense the Septuagint use it,
Exodus 29. 35. and Lev. 21. 10. -- (...). And the same Apostle several times in
this Epistle, see Chap. 5. 9. (...), consecratus, Bez. being consecrate or set
apart, he became the author of eternal salvation, etc. And chap. 7. 28. (...)
consecrated, hence Baptism among the Greek Fathers was called (...) and (...),
because they were thereby consecrated and dedicated to the service of Christ.
This was the method pitched on by* God for the bringing sinners to glory;
namely, the dedicating and setting apart Christ by sufferings to be a leader
and Savior. 3ly. We have the ground and reason of this procedure of God, in
making Christ to suffer, and thereby consecrating him to be a Captain. It
became God, etc. (...), decebat. It was just and meet, and upon supposition
that God would save sinners, it could not without injustice otherwise be. The
word signifies frequently that which is incumbent upon one and ought to be
done: (...), paena quam infligi decet and par est, (...), are often equivalent
to (...) and (...). It signifies in many places that which is so decent and
meet, that either the omission of it, or the commission of the contrary is
unjust and evil, Ephesians. 5. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 10. Tit. 2. 1. Mat. 3. 15. And in this
sense our Apostle uses it elsewhere in this very Epistle chap. 7. 26. For such
an high* Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, etc. It was just and
necessary that our High Priest should be such an one, otherwise he had neither
been fit Priest nor Sacrifice. So that the clear intendment of this expression,
it became him, is, that upon supposition that God would ^ave sinners, the
holiness and justice of his nature required, that it should be by constituting
Christ to suffer in their stead, and so to become the Author and Captain of
their salvation. This is admirably strengthened from the next words, it became
God for whom are all things, and by whom are all things; where we have clearly
the rise and ground of this becomingness, or the necessity o^ God's acting
after this manner, i^ case he would recover man; ^ little opening of the words
will fully enlighten the whole matter Man being of God, and made b^ him an
intellectual and rationa^ creature, in an aptitude and fitness for moral
government, it wa^ necessary that he should appoin^ him to be for him, that is,
tha^ he should govern him, and a^cordingly precribe him a law b^ which he
should signify his ow^ will, and declare man's duty: No^ man having broken the
law of h^ creation, and therein shaken off his dependence upon God, and his
obedience to him as Governor, it was meet and right that God as Rector and
Governor should punish this rebellion and disobedience; for if this rebellion
should not be punished, either God were not the Governor of the world, or else
he governs it not in justice, and therefore on supposition that he would not
inflict the punishment on men himself, but that he would recover him by Jesus
Christ to be for him again, it was necessary that Christ should be made suffer
in their steed. So that by this time I hope the Reader will be satisfied, that
the doctrine then insisted on, was not only agreeable to other Scriptures, but
the very truth of the Text I drew it from: Neither is there any such vast
difference betwixt the terms of the text and the doctrine, but that a person
unpr^possessed, provided he be insighted into Scripture may easily reconcile
them. As to that ^e say^ that supposing Christ has made ^ satisfaction, yet
that it does not follow, but that we might have bee^ saved otherwise, etc. I
answer, God was under no necessity of saving us at all, he was free to have
damned us, as well as to save us ^ but supposing that he would save us, it was
necessary he should save us, in ways agreeable to his justice and holiness.
Though h^ was under an absolute freedom^ whether he would do it or not, yet he
was not under a freedom whether he should do it in a way of righteousness or
not. The first absolutely depended upon his will, but he is restrained as to
the second by his nature; And therefore when my Adversary can show me, how the
justice of God could have been satisfied without the intervention of the
sufferings o^ Christ, I shall then think my sel^ to have been too presumptuous
and dogmatical in my doctrine; but forasmuch as he has not hitherto attempted
it, and I am sure will never be able to perform i^, I abide in my former
persuasion, viz. that there was no other way possible for God to bring sinners
to glory, but by the death and sufferings of Christ, who was set apart and
consecrate to be the Author and Captain of salvation.

Whereas he says, that the intendment of the Text is only Christ's being a
Captain to lead, pity, assist, and supply his people. I absolutely deny it, it
is only part of the intendment of the Holy Ghost in the place, but not the
whole; yea, he had never been a Captain of salvation to us, but in the way, and
upon the terms of making God a satisfaction: It was only by this means that he
was consecrate to be a Leader. And I would have it observed, that the doctrine
I propounded was the very scope of the whole verse, which is a better way of
deducing doctrines, than to draw them from words and expressions. Not that I
deny but one may rationally offer from them, that Christ is our Captain, but I
affirm that his being so is only consequential upon his undertaking, and being
ordained to make satisfaction. So that' upon the whole, the Adversary has both
wronged the truth and me, in affirming my Doctrine neither to have been in the
Text, nor yet deducible from it.

SECT. III.
Forgiveness upon a satisfaction, not contradictory to it self. Nor to the
Scripture. The freeness of pardon not in ^ consistent with a satisfaction. Its
being attributed to grace, does not over throw its being paid for.

The first attempt made by the ^amphleter against the satisfacti^n of Christ,
is, that it is contra^ictory to it self, forasmuch as to ^xact satisfaction for
sin, and yet ^ot to impute sin, are destructive ^ne of another. page 6.

I Answer, that to exact satis^action for sin of us, and not to ^mpute sin to
us, would be con^radictories; and Heaven and ^arth might be as soon blended
together, as that these two should Harmonize and meet: ^ut to exact
satisfaction from Christ, and on consideration of that, not to impute sin to
us, ^e no ways contradictory. Contradictories must always ^e in reference to
the same thing, or person. The satis^action is not exacted of us, it ^as only
exacted of Christ; and it is to us that sin is not ^puted, but it was imputed
to ^im; for he had it laid on him, and was made legally to answer for it, Isa.
53. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. now the demanding satisfaction from Christ, upon his being
charge^ with our sins, and the not imputing sin to us upon consideration of the
satisfaction which he has made, are so far from being contradictories, that
the conspiration of these two together is the very sum of the Gospel. A short
acquaintance either with Scripture or reason will salve these from being
contradictions.

And whereas he adds, that t^ pardon sin, and yet to demand ^ satisfaction, is
alike as if we should say, that a King cannot pardon ^ Rebel without punishing
as the Law requires, when in the mea^ time to pardon, is not to punish ^ the
Law requires.

I Reply, (1.) It is observable that these Gentlemen insi^ always upon the
word Pardon without taking ever notice of the Word justify; whereas the
Scriptures every where inform us, that we are justified, as well as pardoned;
which implies that we are dealt with according to Law, as well as Grace: that
right, as well as mercy meet in this affair. (2.) There is no arguing from what
man does, to what God may do; both because men are only restrained by Law,
which is often arbitrary, whereas God is confined by his nature, which is
unalterable; as likewise because men and justice are two distinct things, but
justice and God are the same. A man is a man, though he cease to be
righteous; but God, if he should cease to be just, he would cease to be God.
(3.) There are cases wherein ^en without the highest un^ighteousness cannot
pardon; ^f a Son should kill his Father, it were the grossest injustice not to
punish it; and if in men it be against justice not to punish vice, we must
suppose it to be so in God, or else we separate righteousness from his nature.
(4.) I affirm that a State may both pardon a Rebel, and yet punish his
Rebellion; as supposing they have mulct a person in a 1000. Talents, of which
he is not able to pay one farthing, and that then one or two of the Senate pay
the mulct; here is mercy to the criminal, and severity against the crime, for
they who paid the fine, being a part of the Senate who inflicted it, they at
once express grace to the offender, and justice against his offense. The Story
of Zaleucus is not in this case impertinent.

As to what he adds, That n^ man would account himself pardoned a debt, if
either he, o^ another paid it in his name.

I Answer, (1.) There are cases wherein it is possible that the debtor may be
pardoned, and yet the debt paid; as in case he that paid it was not procured by
the Debtor himself, nor did it at his entreaty, but was rather assigned by the
Creditor. (2.) These Gentlemen all a long confound pecuniary debts with poenal;
and a mere Creditor, with a Governor, which is wilfully to err in the case;
see the foregoing discourse, page 50. to 58. sin is properly a crime, and only
metaphorically a debt; and God is properly a Governor, and only metaphorically
a Creditor. Now the Socinians desert the proper consideration both of sin, and
God; and in this whole affair, pursue only the metaphorical; which in plain
English is to resolve to mistake. Thus we have seen that the Doctrine of
forgiveness upon a satisfaction, is not contradictory to it self.

Let us see in the next place whether it be disagreeable to the Scripture; and
first the adversary represents it as contrary to those Scriptures, which speak
of Gods pardoning, forgiving and remiting sins, through Jesus Christ, or
through his blood; and here he quotes several places, where there is mention of
forgiveness, and remission in the blood of Christ; as Luke 3. 3. Mat. 26. 28.
Act. 2. 38. and 3. 19. and 5. 31. and 10. 43. and 13. 38.

To all which I Ans. (1.) That these Scriptures are so far from being
serviceable to the design they were brought for, that they are destructive of
it; for we have already demonstrated, that to be pardoned in the name of
Christ, and through the bloo^ of Christ, is to be pardoned upon a satisfaction,
and by virtue of Christ's blood as a price and ransom. (2.) This whole Argument
runs upon the old mistake, which we have so often taken notice of, viz. that sin
cannot be forgiven, because it is satisfied for, whereas satisfaction is so far
from diminishing the freeness of forgiveness, that it exalts it: it is the more
free to us, that it was bought by Christ; God expresses more grace in giving
Christ to purchase it, then (supposing it had been possible) if he had remitted
sin without the intervention of such inducement and means: majus beneficium,
quod cum tanta molestia praestitum. The freeness of remission is so far from
being hereby darkened, that it is rendered the more illustrious. For us to have
bought it, had been altogether inconsistent with its being free; but for Christ
to have bought it, enhanceth its freedom.

As to what he adds, That we are taught to Pray, That God would forgive us our
Debts, as we forgive our Debtors, Matthew. 6. 12. and that our Heavenly Father
forgives us our Trespasses, as we forgive men theirs.

I Answer, that in these places, res comparatur cum re, non modus cum modo. We
are to distinguish betwixt mercy, and the manner of mercy. The as is not a note
of universal parity, but a note of some similitude; we are to be sincerely
merciful, as God is, but in the manner of bestowing mercy, God takes one way,
and we another; this is evident in that we are obliged to forgive our enemies,
though they abide Enemies, whereas this Gentleman's friends confess (and I
suppose he will not dissent from the Tribe) that God cannot in honor forgive
sin, but in case of repentance.

As to the Parable which he quotes, Matthew. 18. 32, 33. I Answer, We must not
set Parables upon more feet than they will go, nor compel them more miles than
they do intend. The scope of a Parable is always the Key of it: and the scope
of this, is only to show that they who are implacable to their Brethren, shall
find others implacable to them; and that they who expect mercy to be shown to
them, should express mercy to others. But the intendment of it is neither to
show that God is a mere Creditor, nor that he forgives sin without a
satisfaction, but at most that he has received no satisfaction from us.

Having seen the Adversaries faileur in this assault, let us try the next. To
forgive sin upon a satisfaction, is contrary to all the Scriptures which
attribute our salvation to the grace mercy and kindness of God, and to prove
this, several Scriptures are brought, Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 103. 8, 10, 13.
Jer. 3. 3. Joel 2. 3. Jonah 4. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Luke 1. 77, 78. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col.
1. 14. Romans 3. 24.

For Answ. Let not the Reader be surprised with the multitude of Scriptures
misalledged: the letter of Scripture, brought against the intendment of the
spirit of God in it, is not Scripture. He does here as before Eadem semper
oberrare chorda that remission and Salvation are of Grace, we readily
acknowledge and affirm, but tha^ therefore Christ has not satisfied, is a mere
non-sequitur There is not the least contrariety betwixt satisfaction, and
grace, but they are the one subordinate to the other. The fullest and freest
grace in the giving Christ to satisfy, in the accepting that satisfaction in
our stead, and applying the merit of it to our souls, and yet still the
holiness and justice of Gods nature was such, as that he could not pardon sin
without a satisfaction: the consistency of these two is largely treated and
opened before, and we referr the Reader thither, to avoid repetition here.

But says the adversary, there is nothing more contrary to grace, than to give
nothing but what is paid for.

Answ. It is true, if the payment had been taken of us, to whom the favor is
shown; or if the satisfaction had been of our contriving and procuring; but
nothing being paid by us, nor the least influence of ours into the affair. It
was mere grace that was the impulsive cause, of Gods giving Christ, Joh. 3. 16.
1 John 4. 9, 10. Romans 5. 8. It was mere grace that gave him for such a number,
Joh* 17. 19. (to sanctify there, is to separate and set himself apart to dye,
as Joh. 10. 36. Heb. 10. 29.)

But there is one text that the Gentleman seems to reckon on, more than the
rest, it is Jam. 2. 13. -- and mercy rejoices against judgment; where he
says mercy is opposed to satisfaction.

Answ. (1.) It is not certain whether by mercy, we are to understand Gods
mercy, or man's; many Interpreters understand the last. (2.) Granting him his
principle, that it is to be understood of Gods mercy, yet I deny his inference,
that therefore there is no satisfaction; in order to the better understanding
of these, I say that as justice is an attribute of God, he has no less of
that, than of mercy; ^he is as just as he is gracious, that is, he is
infinitely both: but ^f we take mercy for the effects of his mercy, then, in
this life God is more ready to show effects of mercy, than of justice; hence
the Lord is now said to be slow to anger; and the present time, is called the
time of long-sufferance: whereas the day of Judgment is called the day of
wrath. God is infinite as well as merciful, but the meaning of the Text is,
that in this life he is more in the discoveries of his mercy, than his justice;
but this is so far from excluding a satisfaction, that it supposes it. There
is one Scripture I made use of in my Sermon, viz. Exodus 34. 7. and that will by
no means clear the guilty. Which the adversary would wrest out of my hand, but
without giving the least reason, to prove that it i^ otherwise applicable,
than ^ applied it. As mercy is a property of Gods nature, so i^ justice: sin is
contrary to God* and his nature inclines him to punish it. It is remarkable
tha^ Socinus himself acknowledges, that where the sinne^ is obstinate, God
cannon but punish him; now obstinacy in reference to its own nature is not
punishable ^ for obstinacy in good (being nothing but constancy) is laudable;
and therefore obstinacy is not punished for it self, but only in reference to
evil; and consequently it is evil which is punishable, and which God cannot but
punish, and obstinacy is only punishable in respect of sin, to which it is
joined. And thus we have seen that to pardon sin upon a satisfaction, is
neither contrary to it self, nor to other Scriptures.

SECT. IV.
Arguments for the necessity of a satisfaction vindicated, that from the truth
of Gods threatening justified. Likewise those from the holiness and justice of
God; the nature of sin; and Gods being Governor; vindicated from the
adversaries exceptions.

HAving seen the impertinency of the Gentleman's own Arguments, and how
insufficient they are to establish what ^he intended by them; let us see next
how happy he will prove in the answering (as he styles them) my Argumentations.
Though I must tell the Reader, that he has abused both the World, and me, in
calling a few notes imperfectly taken, and that by a professed Enemy, my
Sermon; and imposing upon his Readers only the shreds of Arguments, for the
sum of what I produced: sure the man had either an itch to be in Print, or was
in an humor of quarrelling. But if he took these for my Reasons, he had both
lost his own Reason and his Conscience; and he that takes his Replies for
Answers, either never suspected the controversy, or else has a mind to be
deceived. But this being a confident age, and those I have to do with, being a
sort of men who suppose their dreams should pass for demonstrations, every
thing they say, however inconsiderable, must be attended to.

1. Whereas I argued from the P. 10.
truth of Gods threatening against the pardonableness of sin without a
satisfaction, he desires to know where the threatening allows a surety?

Answ. The Texts I produced namely, Genesis 2. 17. (not 1. 17. as the adversary
misciteth it) and Deuteronomy. 27. 26. hold clearly forth Gods judicial denunciation
of punishment against sin, ^ut the purpose of God for the execution of it upon
the sinner, ^s not there expressed: and that ^his was not the intendment of ^t,
in reference to all, the event ^emonstrates, in that it is not ^xecuted upon
the Elect, and ^et it behoved to be executed against sin, otherwise the truth
and justice of God should have ^ailed: and therefore the Ad^ersary must either
deny salva^ion to the Elect, or truth in ^od. It being then obtained that the
threatening abides firm, God himself is the best interpreter of his own meaning
in it, and this he has done in the Gospel, both in reference to the stability
of the Law it self, Romans 3. 31. and also in reference to the execution of it
upon Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 18. To render this clearer, I
desire the Reader to observe that threatenings do primarily signify only the
dueness of punishment; not that God will always execute it upon the offender:
God might altogether release his threatenings, were he not restrained by his
holiness, wisdom, righteousness, and honor, and it being against none of all
these to release the personal offender, seeing by punishing sin (though i^
another than the personal offenders) he both secures hi^ honor, and at once
gives evidence of the purity of his nature in the hatred of sin, and of the
wisdom and righteousness of his Government, in the execution of his Law.

But he adds, that the Scripture P. 10.
says, The soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 4. and therefore that it is
against truth it self, to affirm that another dies in his room.

Answ. The intendment of that place cannot be, that never any was, or should,
or might be made suffer for another sin, for the Scripture furnishes us with
an express threatening, Exodus 20. 5. and also many instances to the contrary:
but the meaning of the place is, that whereas a company of wretches had raised
a Proverbial reproach on the providence of God, namely, that their Fathers
having been the only offenders, yet they were the sufferers, v. 2. Lament. 5.
7. (1.) He either tells them that hereafter they should not have that occasion
to complain, forasmuch as he intended to be more speedy in the execution of
judgments upon the immediate offenders. Or (2.) That there should be no more
cause for that report, there being an end put to the captivity and those
calamities which occasioned it.

Whereas the Gentleman bids me P. 10.
take heed of the curse denounced against him that adds to the Scripture,
because in the opening o^ some Texts, I mentioned surety.

Answ. Surety is a part of one Scripture Text, Heb. 7. 22. and in reference to
others, I only mention it as a true explication of the words, not as a part of
them; as a consequence naturally arising from them, no^ as lying in so many
syllables i^ them. And he cannot be offende^ with this method of disputing,
without condemning the procedure of Christ who has gone before us in this way
of Argumentation, Mat. 22. 31, etc.

2. He says that I Reason from the P. 11.
condecency that was in it to the wisdom, righteousness, and other attributes
of God, to pardon sin upon a compensation.

Answ. I suppose the Gentleman trusted to his Friends account, but he was
disingenuous in relying upon so slender information, and his Friend was
unworthy in abusing him, the world, and me; there was not any such thing
delivered in the Sermon, as is here alleged, ^hereof the best evidence, will
^e the presenting what was truly ^elivered. In my discoursing the ^atisfaction
of Christ, I alleged ^he several ways which were ^sisted on, in the affair,
particu^arly that there were many, who though they believed that other ways of
saving sinners were not wanting to the divine wisdom, yet that the saving us,
by the satisfaction of Christ had a great condecency in it to the honoring of
the divine perfections, this was at large treated, and many Scriptures which I
then judged very pertinent and serviceable to the design, were produced; but
forasmuch as none of them save one, are taken notice of, I am not concerned to
repeat, much less to vindicate them; and as for that which he cites, namely,
Romans 3. 25, 26. we have already secured it, and evidently shewn^ that
justifying gratis, is very consistent with a plenary compensation. See Sect. 1.

3. But I disputed from the holiness, P. 11.
purity, and righteousness o^ Gods nature to the necessity of punishing sin.

Answ. I did so, and how pertinently, I leave to the forgoing discourse to
instruct, from p. 45. to 51.

But says he, is it not as much P. 11.
against holiness, and justice for God to punish the innocent, as it is to
acquit the guilty?

Answ. We have proved before that it is no ways against justice to lay pains
upon an innocent, providing, there be a concurrence of such conditions, as we
there mentioned, see p. 94. to 107. I shall now therefore only reassume one
thing, and enlarge it; namely, that there is no wrong done to a willing person,
especially in a matter wherein he has full dominion; and Christ was admirably
willing, there neither was, nor could be any necessity laid on him, it was his
own election and choice, Prove. 8. 31. he freely tendered himself to it, Psalm.
40. 7. his will was as forward in the undertaking, as the Father's was; he
entered upon the work with cheerfulness, Psalm. 40. 8. and was bent upon the
accomplishing of it, Luke 12. 51. he voluntarily put his name into the
obligation, though then he became in duty responsible for the whole debt.

Whereas the adversary calls this P. 12.
horrible cruelty, etc.

I dare not return him the Answer which he deserves, remembering that railing
did not become the Angels mouth, though the devil deserved it, Jude. 9. I shall
only join issue in that Prayer, Zech. 3. 2. How the sufferings of Christ were a
valuable compensation, for the sins of all those, in whose behalf he suffered,
the Adversary is far from understanding, and is too far prejudiced to learn. To
those who are humble and teachable it is enough to know that he was God-man,
God over all, Romans 9. 5. the true God, 1 John 5. 20. and that his blood was the
blood of God, Romans 20. 28. and that he offered up himself through the eternal
spirit, Heb. 9. 14. there was a real condignity in the price paid, to atone
for the offense committed, and to purchase the mercy obtained.

Though we abhor such unsavory P. 12.
expressions, as the putting the thousands of pounds of his Godhead, into the
scale with the penny of his manhood; yet we affirm that the dignity of his
person, puts an infinite worth upon whatever he did or suffered. His
satisfaction is the satisfaction of God, and it is that which the infinite God
is satisfied with; he looks for no more, nor better; yea there can neither be
more, nor better. The rest which the Adversary in reference to thi^ head
suggesteth, I refer it t^ any Reader whether it be an^ thing else, than a
bundle o^ blasphemy and nonsense.

That which he next falls upon, P. 12.
is my asserting in case o^ pardon, the necessity of a satisfaction from the
nature of sin ^ and how effectual the Argumen^ is to that end, I referr to the
preceding discourse, page 42* to 45. Two things the Gentleman here objects,
(1.) That if so, the^ the punishment ought to be inflicte^ upon the criminal.

Answ. This he could not bu^ know, if he knew any things that we would deny,
and ye^ not the least word added for the proof of it. This then is o^ easy
dispatch; for we affirm^ that though it be necessary that sin should be
punished, yet it is not indispensably needful, that it should be punished in
the person who offends, let him ra^ionally attempt the probation of the
contrary, and I assure him he shall be attended to.

(2.) That suppose sin does in P. 12.
^ts own nature, deserve punishment, ^et this does not necessitate God to
^unish sin.

Answ. (1.) If by necessity, they mean coaction, or a necessity inconsistent
with Gods counsel, purpose, and will, we confess God cannot be subject to any
such brutal necessity; but if by necessity, they mean (as they ought) a
rational necessity, a necessity not destructive of freedom; as God necessarily
loves himself, and yet freely does it: the glorified Saints necessarily
magnify and praise God, and yet most freely: the Devils sin necessarily, and
yet from freedom and choice: In this sense we affirm* God is necessarily
inclined to punish sin; his nature inclines him to punish it, yet so as that he
wills, purposes, and decrees the punishing of it. (2.) This Gentleman
confounds justice with the effects of it; actual punishing, with the principle
whence it arises and proceeds: actual punishing depends upon the divine
decree, but the inclination to punish is founded in the divine nature.

He adds that we men have a P. 12.
natural right to our Limbs, and he that maims us deserves to be punished, yet
notwithstanding we may forgive the offense.

Answ. (1.) There be cases wherein being wronged, we cannot without injustice
forgive, but are bound to prosecute revenge upon the offender; see page 53. of
the former discourse. (2.) He argues from what a private person may do, ^o what
God who is the su^ream Rector and Governor ^ught to do; whereas even among
men, that which is law^ull for a private person, is not ^awfull for a
Magistrate, vid. ^bi supra. (3.) The Gentleman ^n this whole affair confounds
^us and justitia, power and equi^y. We may have a physical ^ower to do that,
which we ^ave not a moral right to do. ^ Father may (if we speak as ^o power)
connive at rebelli^n in his Son; but it is mo^ally wicked, and destructive ^f
Paternal Government to do ^o; so here we do not argue about the unlimited power
of God, what in a way of abso^uteness he may do, but what in agreeableness to
his justice, wisdom and holiness, is ^it for him to do.

Whereas he adds that sins give P. 12.
^od a right to punish, but that he may dispense with his right, if h^ please,
or else he were more impo^tent than we contemptible worm^ are.

Answ. (1.) If this prove an^ thing, it will prove more tha^ the Adversary
desires, namely, that God may forgive the obstinate and impenitent, seeing we
not only can, but in some cases are bound so to do; bu^ the contrary hereof,
both Soc^nus and Crellius affirm, and I suppose the Disciple will not var^ from
his Masters. (2.) It is tru^ that he who sins, gives God ^ right to punish him,
and tha^ God may remit his right, bu^ then it must be upon term which may
secure his honor now it is against his honor to do it otherwise, than upon
the conditions we allege, an^ upon these we affirm, that i^ demonstration of
his grace, h^ does it. Neither is it through impotency that God cannot
otherwise act, but through infiniteness of perfection.

His next assault, is upon my P. 13.
Argument from the nature of God, and the account that the Scriptures give us
of it, in reference to sin and sinners, to which purpose I ^ited, 2 These. 1. 6,
7. upon which ^e replies, that God is said to be ^ighteous in recompencing rest
to them who are troubled, as well as ^ribulation to them who trouble; ^ut
forasmuch as that is not from ^he necessity of Gods nature, but from his
merciful determination; ^o neither is this from the incli^ation of his nature,
but the plea^ure of his will.

Answ. (1.) God having pro^ised to reward obedience, cannot without faileur in
his ve^acity and truth, but perform ^t; for though his promise was ^n act of
grace, yet the keeping ^f it is an act of justice, and therefore the Scripture
asserts that God cannot otherwise do, without being false and unrighteous, Heb.
6. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 8. and by consequence God having threatened to punish sin, is
obliged by his veracity to do no less; his truth is as prevalent with him in
the one case, as i^ the other: so that this exception is so far from
prejudicing us, that it clearly overthrows his cause who brought it. (2.) God
being infinitely good, is inclined by his nature to love virtue, and though it
were no^ against his justice not to rewar^ it, forasmuch as it is impossibl^
that a creature should lay an obligation upon its maker, yet i^ is that which
his wisdom and goodness will not admit him to do. How much more then is i^
contrary to his nature, not to punish sin, that being formally against his
justice, as well as unbecoming his wisdom. (3.) We affirm that there is a
difference betwixt obedience and sin as to the point of ones being punished,
and the other rewarded; for ^e owe the utmost of Service ^o God, as we are his
creatures, and withal there is that in the nature of duty, which deserves that
it should be pursued; but ^n the contrary sin is so far from ^eing a debt which
we owe to God, that he commands us on the ^ighest peril to avoid it; and ^here
is nothing in the nature ^f sin, that should invite us to ^ommission of it; and
withal ^ is contrary both to Gods na^re, and government, and ^erefore though
God be obli^d by his nature to punish sin, ^t he is under no such obliga^on to
reward obedience, obe^ence being a debt we owe to ^od as our maker and ruler,
^ereas sin is both an opposing his nature, and a rebelling against his
Rectorship. The Apostle asserts the same distinction, Romans 6. 23. for the wages
of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

The next attempt, is upon my P. 13.
arguing for the necessity of sins punishment, from the sense and notion, which
the Heathens without revelation have of it. Against which he excepts that the
same light taugh^ them that God was merciful pardoning sin, without a
satisfaction.

Answ. If we consider in thi^ affair the sentiments of the Heathen, our
Adversaries have clearly the disadvantage, for i^ is most certain that they
believed God to be offended, an^ therefore sought by costly offerings,
lustrations, etc. to appeas^ him. (2.) We readily gran^ that the Heathens had
some light of Gods being merciful^ herein he left himself nowhere without a
witness, Act. 14. 17. and the common discoveries which he made of his goodness,
were intended in a kind of objective way, and had a great tendency and
usefulness to that purpose, to lead us to Repentance, Romans 1. 19, 20. Romans 2.
4. but that they had any notion of Gods pardoning sin without satisfaction, we
deny and challenge him to prove it, if he can; yea their whole Worship employed
the contrary; to what end were all their Sacrifices, but, upon a steady belief
of Gods being angry, to atone him? It is very remarkable that of all the parts
and principles of justified Worship-Priesthood, and Sacrifice made the largest
spread, there being scarce any People or Nation which has arrived to our
knowledge among whom we do not find some Prints and footsteps of them. And
though the Heathens mistook the right end of Sacrifices, yet the first Rise of
them among them, was some traditional conveyance from the Church, to whom God
enjoined them as Types of the great Sacrifice of the Messiah.

As to what the Gentleman alleges in reference to the Ninivites, it is
altogether impertinent. (1.) In that it was but Gods withholding of a temporal
judgment, and that also but for a time, for about forty years after they were
destroyed, and their City taken and overthrown. (2.) All the mercy they could
suppose in God, was only upon consideration of some effectual means and way to
appease him, though they had no distinct notion of the right way and means, by
which it was accomplished.

My last Argument, why sin should not be pardoned without a satisfaction, was
from the consideration of Gods being Governor, and) that if he should permit
sin to go unpunished, his Laws would have been ridiculous. You may see this
Argument managed at further length, p. 48. to 51.

Against this he excepts, saying P. 13.
all men hate and abhor that Government as cruel and tyrannical, where every
the least breach must be fully avenged.

Answ. That you may once for all see, at what kind of rate these Gentlemen
dispute, I will ask him these Questions. (1.) Whether God might not have damned
all (mankind, without being a Tyrant or cruel? and yet I suppose, we should
pronounce it cruelty in any Governor, to destroy all his subjects, even
supposing them guilty of a very heinous fault. (2.) Is it cruelty for God to
condemn men for little sins, when continued in without repentance? (or will he
say that there are some sins in their own nature Venial) and yet I think we
should call it cruelty for a Magistrate to cut of his subjects for every little
fault, though persevered in. (3.) Are there not some cases, wherein Governors,
without destroying the ends of Government and exposing their Laws to contempt,
cannot forgive offenses? and shall we call it Tyranny in God to secure the
honor of his Government, and to preserve his Laws from reproach and derision
(4.) It no ways follows that because men may in some cases pardon without a
satisfaction, therefore God should; both because men's Laws are often arbitrary,
and in many cases only ad terrorem (where summum jus, would be summa injuria)
as likewise because justice is of the nature of no Governor, but God.

Whereas he adds that I cited Genesis 18. 25. in a quite contrary sense to its
true meaning, because Abraham urged it against Gods destroying the few
Righteous with the many wicked; but I urge for the many righteous, or of one
equivalent to many, that a few wicked may go free.

Answ. (1.) The end I produced it for, was that seeing sin in respect of its
nature deserves punishment, therefore God as just Governor was obliged to see
that it should have its due; and whatever the Gentleman says to the contrary,
I do not see but that it was pertinently alleged. For seeing he ought as he is
judge and Rector to do right, and punishment being that which in right belongs
to sin, he was bound to see that it should not miss it. (2.) Abraham treated
with God only in and through Christ, and what ever was the matter of his
Prayer, it was tendered in the virtue, and accepted through the merit of Christ's
Satisfaction; for it is only upon the consideration of the blood of Christ, that
it becomes Righteous with God to pardon any. (3.) How Christ is equivalent to
many, and how no pains were thrown upon him but upon his own election, and
consequently how there was no cruelty in inflicting; what he had chosen to
undergo, is all at large before opened, and I have more mercy both for my self
and my Reader than to repeat it. I know no more under this head added by my
Adversary, but a Blasphemy which I care not to mention, but shall leave it to
God to avenge.

SECT. V.
The impossibility of having a satisfaction made any other way. Gods being
reconciled to us. Christ's satisfying himself, bearing what we should have
born. Doing it in our stead. Purchasing grace for us. All vindicated from the
exceptions of the Adversary. The Conclusion of the whole.

HAving seen that a satisfaction is neither contradictory to it self, nor
contrary to Scripture; and having vindicated what for the necessity of a
satisfaction, in case of pardon I alleged in my Sermon; I had expected next a
confutation of what I produced to evidence the impossibility of its being made
any other way; but I perceive that my Adversary out of a persuasion, that he
had overthrown both the verity and the possibility of a satisfaction, passes
by all that I said on that occasion, as impertinent; save only two or three
little things which he pretends to observe. First, That in citing Psalm. 51. 16.
and 50. 12. upon the warrant and authority of which; I disclaimed the
possibility of satisfaction by Sacrifice, I did not take notice of the
sacrifice of a broken heart, and of thanksgiving, etc. To which I Answer, (1.)
That when I cite one verse in a chapter, I hold not my self concerned to cite
every verse; I observed what was pertinent to the subject I was treating, and I
suppose I was engaged to take notice of no more. (2.) A broken heart, and
thanksgiving are styled Sacrifices only in a metaphorical sense, as all
be^ievers are called Priests, Rev. ^. 6. and therefore to have ^amed them under
the head I was then handling, had been to ^ave talked at the rate, which ^his
Gentleman writes, that is, wildly and not to the purpose. (3.) To what end God
appointed Sacrifices, in what re^pect he accepted, and in what ^ense, and upon
what account he ^ejected them; is largely before opened, page 63. to 69. and ^
love not to trouble either my ^elf, or the Reader with Repe^itions.

His second exception is in refe^ence P. 14.
to my saying that Christ did, ^ud suffered, what was a just com^ensation for
our release; upon which he asks how we dare affirm, ^at God who loved his Son,
more than millions of righteous men, should yet lay upon him the punishment due
to sinners.

Answ. He laid no more upon him than what himself chose to have laid on him,
and what he knew him to be able to bear and overcome; but this whole matter
being treated of above page 108. to 123. I wave here all further pursuing of it.

Having in my Sermon proposed several things, toward the proving Gods being
reconciled to us, through the death of his Son; this fine disputant without
once essaying to Answer one P. 15.
word of what I alleged, confidently affirms that it is impossible to show one
Scripture, where Christ is said to reconcile God to us.

Answ. The contrary is above demonstrated p. 166. etc. yea so happy is the
Gentleman in his reasoning, that the two Texts which he here cites to the
contrary, do demonstrate that very thing which he brought them to destroy, see
p. 166. etc. for though we have it not in so ma^y words, yet we have the thing.

But he adds what need of recon^ling God, who so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son; ^oh. 3. 16.

Answ. God without any im^eachment of his justice, did pity ^ankind, and find
out a way for ^eir pardon and salvation, but ^ctually to pardon and save ^em,
he could not without a ^tisfaction. A judge seeing a ^alefactor condemned by
the ^aw, may out of some just in^cements so exceedingly pity ^m, as to think
of and contrive ^me way, whereby the Law ^y be satisfied, and the per^n
acquitted, yet actually he ^nnot release him, unless he ^ill be unjust, till
the Law be satisfied. But this objection is fully answered before p. 193. to
196.

But he adds if Christ has satisfied the Father, who has satisfied the Son
and the Holy Ghost?

Answ. (1.) When we say Christ has satisfied the Father^ we do not thereby
intend to exclude his having satisfied himself, and the Holy Ghost, for when we
use such expression^ we do not consider the Father personally, but essentially:
we d^ not consider him in respect ^ his distinct subsistence from the Son and
Spirit, but in respe^ of the divine essence, wherei^ Father, Son, and Spirit
are on^ as Matthew. 6. 9. (2.) We affir^ that Christ has satisfied himself,
neither do we know an^ absurdity in so saying; for b^ing in this whole
undertakin^ considered as God-man, so the^ is a distinct respect from himse^
merely as God. But this being Replied to before, p. 197. to 199. we shall not
further insist on it.

His next attempt is upon P. 15, 16.
my saying, that Christ underwent that, which we should have undergone: from
whence he endeavors to infer that upon these terms Christ should have
suffered for ever, and should have despaired, etc.

Answ. (1.) I would have it observed once for all, that this Gentleman never
troubles himself to Answer my Arguments, only produces a few frivolous cavils
and exceptions: and indeed it is their way, if they can but darken the
expositions which we give of Scripture, they never offer to assign an
Exposition of their own. Whereas I brought several Texts which I appehended
full to the proof of Christ's bearing, what we should have born; not one word
offered by way of formal Reply to any of them, only two or three general
Cavils. (2.) It does not follow that because Christ bare, what we should have
born, therefore he behoved to suffer for ever, and despair, etc. as you may see
fully opened, p. 107. to 111.

That the Agony of Christ proceeded not merely from a foresight of temporal
death, was asserted and proved in my Sermon. Now at this the Adversary P. 16.
Cavils, but instead of alleging any thing to the purpose, he only tells us
that Christ being our Captain, was to experience as great trials, as his
Soldiers meet with, and seeing they are often by their sufferings, put into
Agony, therefore it was convenient that in the same he by his example should go
before them.

Answ. Did ever a person who had not lost his reason, argue so to the prejudice
of his own cause, for (1.) Many of his Soldiers bear the worst that befalls
them, with less consternation than he did: how many of the Martyrs have hugg're
their gibbets, and sung in the flames; now surely if it had been only the
apprehension and prevision of bodily death which influenced and operated upon
Christ, it had been unworthy that less courage, fortitude, and spirit, should
discover it self in the Leader, than does in the followers. (2.) I think it
will be hard if not impossible, to give one instance among all the Saints, who
have ^n all particulars, expressed in their sufferings, such sense, pain,
anguish and grief as Christ did, which infallibly argues that he suffered what
never any of them did. (3.) There is a reason at hand, why the best of
believers should manifest something of infirmity and weakness in their
sufferings, because they are both mere and sinful men, are not got to a full
resignation of themselves to God, nor have that plenary assurance of support in
their sufferings, and of glory after them; whereas Christ was not only man bu^
God, had fully resigned himself to his Father, was infallibly certain of being
born through hi^ trials, had the greatest inducements to cheerfulness in his
sufferings, namely, the recovery of man, the vindicating hi^ Fathers Law,
Government, and honor, and was fully assured not only of a glorious issue but
a reward; and therefore supposing that we poor worm should by sufferings, be
throw^ into fears and agonies, i^ is a non sequitur that Christ should.

After I had declared in my Sermon, that Christ suffered what we should have
suffered, I endeavored next to prove that he did it in our room, and to that
end brought many Scriptures, three or four of which the Adversary is pleased to
recite, but instead of invalidating the Expositions which I gave of them, or
answering the arguments which were raised from them,

He only tells me (1.) That in P. 17.
his judgment they are not the most probable I might have brought.

Answ. (1.) His judgment is of small value with me, neither am I to enquire of
my Enemies, what Weapons I should fight with. (2.) That they are effectual and
pertinent to the end they were brought for, I have before proved, p. 128. to
141.

He adds (2.) That he suffered P. 17.
for our example, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

Answ. It is confessed, but that that was either the only end, or the principal
end of his sufferings is denied: yea, if that had been the only end of his
sufferings, it had not been necessary for him to have suffered at all, nay, it
had not been agreeable to the goodness, justice, and wisdom of God, that he
should have at all suffered* but) see this discussed before, p. 80. to 83. and
p. 88. to 91.

He adds (3.) That he who does P. 17.
any thing in another st^nd, does i^, that the other may not do it.

Answ. Neither do we suffer to that end, that Christ suffered. Our sufferings
are only disciplinary, his were poenal and satisfactory. Ours are the
chastisements of God as a Father, Christ's were the punishments of God as a
Judge.

But he adds (4.) That he is P. 17.
said to have entered into Heaven for us, Heb. 6. 20. Which is to be understood
of his doing it only for our good, not in our stead, and consequently that
whenever he is said to have dyed, or have suffered for us, we are so to
understand it, and not otherwise.

Answ. (1.) I deny the sequel, It is a strange kind of arguing, because a word
has such a signification sometimes, therefore it must always signify so.
(2.) I have already proved that* whatever significations (...) has in other
cases, yet when the sufferings of one for another are expressed by it, that it
signifies always the substitution of one in the room of another, p. 137, 138.
and when the Gentleman has overthrown what we have said there to that effect;
we shall judge him worthy to be hearkened to; in the mean time he speaks
nothing to the purpose.

The next thing he falls upon, is my alleging that Christ by virtue of the
satisfaction which he had made, and the redundancy of merit which was in his
obedience and suffering, had purchased grace for us, so that God in
righteousness was bound to give it to so many as he had bought it for, to which
purpose I had cited, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Now what he brings by way of exception, will
be rendered of easy dispatch, by tendering an exposition of that place. (1.) We
have there an account of something obtained, and that is faith. (2.) We have
the means and ground of obtaining it, and that is through the righteousness of
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; (...): Some interpret righteousness in
reference to Gods faithfullness in his promises; now all Gods promises of grace
are founded in Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and through him it is, that they are stable
and firm, 2 Cor. 1. 20. and as in consideration of his merit, it is matter of
justice in God to justify believers, Romans 3. 25, 26. So it is matter of
justice, to give, to so many as Christ has satisfied for, that they may
believe, Phil. 1. 29. Others by righteousness understand the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, who is here called our God, (where by the way this is an
excellent testimony for the Deity of Christ, for it is not said of God and of
our Savior, but of God and our Savior, there is but one single article
assigned to all the words, (...); it is parallel to Tit. 2. 13.) Now faith is
said to be given through his righteousness, (...), (...) used often for (...):
Mat. 6. 7. Mat. 11. 6. Act. 7. 29. 1 Cor. 12. 9. and alibi.
which may be taken either for (...), per, propter, For, and then the import
is, that in consideration of the satisfaction, merit, and righteousness of
Christ, God bestows faith, and consequently cannot without injustice but bestow
it upon such, in reference to whom Christ has bought, merited and purchased
it; or it may (...) for (...) Luke ^. 26. Petrus hoc capite v. 5, 6, 7. voce
(...) pro (...) septies utitur.
be taken for (...) or (...), cum, with, and then the import is, that they had
received faith, and with it the righteousness of Christ made over and imputed
to them. Now in my Sermon I took it as put for (...), and accordingly argued,
and I find no cause to recede from my persuasion.

But the Gentleman excepts, P. 17.
that this is to make that of Debt, which is merely of Grace.

To this I briefly Answ. That it is both of Debt, and of Grace; of Debt in
respect of Christ, of Grace in respect of us, and he must invent a new
Philosophy, as well as a new Divinity, before he can be able to prove these two
to be contradictories. His other exceptions are obviated in the Exposition, and
indeed he wholly mistakes the sense in which I cited the words, and shows
himself altogether ignorant of the scope of them.

We are now come to the Adversaries last exceptions; The first whereof is, that
to say P. 18.
God would have a satisfaction, and yet that himself procured it, is to render
the whole transaction, a matter of Pageantry.

Answ. This is spoken to before, p. 152. and 197. and therefore I shall only
say, that whatever it would be in pecuniary debts, it is not so in poenal,

He adds secondly, That though P. 19.
according to this procedure, there would be mercy shown to the sinner, yet
there would be none shown to sin.

Answ. There neither ought nor can any mercy be shown to sin: but is not this
fine Divinity? that God must not only be a friend to the Rebel, but to the
Rebellion? not only justify the offender, but the offense? what is this but in
plain English, sin must cease to be sin, or God must cease to be just and holy,
otherwise he cannot be merciful. Are these the Masters of reason? or is this it
they intend by the freenes^ of Gods Grace in forgiveness? does the Gentleman
reproach P. 19.
us for mysteries? sure this is mystery, and mystery of iniquity too.

He has one touch more upon P. 19.
the old string at parting, namely, That it is unrighteous to punish an
innocent in the room of the nocent.

Answ. Though this be fully Replied to before, I shall yet further subjoyn
this, namely, That by the common consent of ^ll Nations, in some cases, the
^nnocent may be made suffer ^ the room of the nocent; ^r example, suppose a
person ^oth render himself a ho^age, for the security of the ^ith of that state
where^f he is a member, (which he ^ay do, in that a part owes ^ self, unto the
preservation ^ the whole) and that State those fidelity he was bound to secure,
break their faith, the Hostage though personally innocent, being bound to
Answer for the guilt of the State, may without any Unrighteousness be put to
death.

I have gone now through the Pamphlet, and have not omitted the least thing
that is material, but whether the Answers I have returned be satisfactory, (I
do not mean to the Adversary, for I know that sort of men too well, to have
cause to ^ope any such thing of them) must be left to the judgment of the
Reader to decide. I had thought to have presented the World with some few of
the many unsavory and blasphemous expressions, which the book is stuffed with,
but this discourse being already swelled beyond what I imagined, I shall only
mention two or three. P. 12. He tells us it is horrible cruelty that the
punishment due to us should be inflicted upon Christ. And in the same page.
That the ^hole transaction of a satisfacti^n, is Childish and Ludicrous. And p.
14. That the Phoenicians and Carthaginians in Sacrificing ^ few men (he should
have added ^o the Devil) in behalf of the ^holw people, came short of the
^ruelty of God in punishing Christ in ^ur room. And p. 15. That it ^ould grieve
a man of ingenuity, ^o be saved at that rate; i. e. ^o be beholding to Christ
for ^alvation. Ex ung^e Leone^. ^ou may know what the whole ^s, by a taste.
That the great ^eacher of the truth, as it is in jesus, would lead us into, and
^stablish us in it, is and shall ^e the Prayer of the Author.

FINIS.
Reader, Besides several mistakes in the misplacing of Letters and Points,
there are these which corrupt the sense, which, that neither thy self, nor the
Author may be wronged, thou art desired to Correct.
Page 3. lin. 24. read by it. p. 5. l. 2. m. judicare* p. 8. l. 18. blot out
our. p. 11. l. 17. r. hence* p. 14. l. 7. m. justificatione. p. 27. l. 21. r.
(...) which is equivalent to (...). p. 37* l. 14. m. r. aut. p. 140. l. 8. r.
(...). p. 169* l. 3. add the. p. 224. l. 12. r. disserve. p. 224* l. ult. and
page 225. l. 1. r. unl^ss instead of fo^asmuch. p. 225. l. blot out as, ibid.
after had, ad^ either had sin of his own, or had. p* 226. l. 6. pu^ for. p.
235. l. 13. r. man. p. 265. l. 16. add the* p. 267. l. 21. r. instituted. ibid.
add (,) after Worship. p. 271. l. 12. add it.


