THE THIRD PART OF No Protestant Plot: WITH Observations on the PROCEEDINGS
UPON THE BILL of INDICTMENT AGAINST THE E. of Shaftsbury: AND A Brief ACCOUNT
of the CASE OF THE EARL of ARGYLE.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin. 1682.

To the READER.
IT IS not more out of Respect to our own Innocence, and the Honor of our
Religion, that these Papers come abroad into the world, than it is from that
Love and Respect which we bear to the King, whose Interest in the hearts of his
People is greatly supplanted and undermined, by the courses which have heen
lately taken to destroy his Innocent and Loyal Subjects, upon a forged and
groundless pretense, That they are engaged in a Conspiracy against his Person
and the established Government. For some men, whose crimes have made them
obnoxious to the justice of Parliaments and the severity of the Laws, could
bethink themselves of no other way to escape the punishments which they have
deserved, but by possessing the King, That the Peers and Gentlemen of England,
who are most likely to call them to an account, while they are complaining of
their Misdemeanors and Offenses, are themselves combined to destroy both the
Regnant Prince and the Monarchy. The hazards which our Names, Fortunes and
Lives are brought into, do not so much afflict us, as to see the King lose the
Love and Confidence of his People at home, be forced to abandon his Allies
abroad, and leave his Crown and Dignity, as well as these Nations, exposed to
the Power and Ambition of a neighboring Monarch. Nor can we express greater
Fealty to the King, than by plainly informing him, that he has no Enemies,
save the Papists, unless it be in the imaginations of ill men, who to render
themselves innocent, would make others guilty. And were they capable of being
instructed, to forbear the prosecution of their forged Plots, upon the Baffles
which they have received upon prosecutions, supported merely by perjury and
falsehood, we would have had that compassion for the honor of the Government
and the safety of the Nation, as to have suppressed these sheets. But seeing
they obstinately persevere in their malicious designs, and are as industrious
as ever, to bribe and hire mercinary Rascals to swear Treason against the best
and most loyal Subjects which His Majesty has, as well as against the chiefest
Patriots of our Religion and Liberties; We hope the world will pardon us, in
defending our own integrity, and exposing their rage and wrath. And let me
assure them, that while they fondly imagine they work under ground, we are able
to trace them in the steps which they take. It Is not above a week or two ago,
that by offers of five hundred pound a man, they attempted to suborn several
persons to swear Treason against the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Shaftsbury, and
others. Nay, we could tell them of a Consult which they had, to examine and
digest the forged Evidence, which by greatexpence, and mighty labor, they had
procured, and how they went away wonderfully disturbed that it would not answer
their desires, nor support the design which they were upon. As the people of
England are not of a temper, to suffer their throats to be cut in a way of
massacre, without a manly and generous resistance; so they are not of a
complexion, to lose their Lives unjustly, by a legal process, without speaking
in their own defense. What we have here written, is with a freedom that becomes
innocent persons, though we must acknowledge, that we have fallen short in the air
and style that are proportionate to so just a cause. The righteeousness and
innocence of our case, needs no pickquancy; and it were but to obscure and
darken our Loyalty, to make it resplendent by colors. But if our Enemies
persevere in their ways of impudence, we hope all mankind will acquit us, if
from henceforth we lay aside bashfulness and modesty.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 20. r. ministered. p. 18. l. 23. r. another, p. 25. l. 17. r.
procss. p 26. l. 28. r. over all. p. 27. l. 27. r. secure. p. 32. l. 7. r.
fill. p. 44* l. 28. r. both. p. 45. l. 14. r. superstructing. p. 51. l. 18. r.
process. p. 58 l. ult. del. as. p. 59. after bitterness put for. p. 64. l. 23,
and l. 24. r. cr^dible. p. 69. l. 6. r. Truth. p. 71. l. 3. after with, r. it.
p. 73. l. 7. dele ^ p. 85. l. 23. after Rascal put; p. 86. l. 17. after of put.
p. 87. l. 24 r. Mr^ p. 89 l. 1. for conceived. r. could. Ibid. l. 21. for an,
r. a. p. 93. l. 28. for (...) man, r. that a man. p. 103. l. 24. for both, r.
not only. p. 104. l. 27. for ^ (...)y. p. 131. l. 2. r. Memoir's. p. 133 l. 26.
for the, r. this. p. 139. l. ^ before in add is. p. 142. l. 20. r. time.

HOW much the Papists are not only justified in destroying those who differ
from them in Faith and Worship, but obliged by the Principles of their
Religion, to extirpate all Christians, who have withdrawn from the Communion of
their Church; we may be easily informed, if we would but give our selves the
trouble of consulting the Canons of their Councils, the Decrees of their Popes,
and the public Writings of their most approved Authors. Nor is there any crime
or villainy so tyrannous and barbarous, but it becomes sanctified, and is
declared meritorious, provided it be found subservient to so useful and pious
Design, as the rooting out those whom the Papal Church has judged and
pronounced Heretics. For besides, millions of Men and Women professing and
obeying the Gospel, that have been destroyed in other Nations, for no other
offense, but because they dissented from the Church of Rome; there have several
hundred thousands been murdered, killed and massacre'd in these three
Kingdoms, merely because they could not believe as the pretended Church
Catholic does. And as neither Obedience, or Loyalty toward Magistrates, nor
Righteousness toward Fellow Subjects, have contributed any thing toward the
security of the Lives of Protestants, when the Papists have apprehended
themselves able, and found that they were countenanced by Authority to destroy
them; so no Obligations by Oaths or Promises, have been sufficient to restrain
those of the Papal Communion from washing their hands in the Blood of
Innocents; but in defiance of all that ought to be preserved sacred, they have
first murdered them, and then not only gloried in their bloody and (...)
Exploits, but in the falsehoods and perjuries by which ^hey wheedled honest and
credulous people within the Circle of their power and rage. And while those of
that Religion retain the same Principles, which influenced men of the Romish
Belief, to such inhuman and barbarous Actions heretofore; the Protestants of
this Age have no reason to expect more mercy, or fairer dealing from them, than
our Forefathers and Predecessors received at their hands. And sure the Papists
must esteem the Protestants of these Nations an Unthinking sort of people, and
very ignorant of the Transactions of their own, as well as former days; See the
three great Questions concerning the Succession, p. 19.
otherwise they would not have the Impudence to affirm in Print, That as there
were but 277. that suffered in all Queen Mary's Reign upon the pretense of
Religion; so above 200. of them were profligate Persons: And that instead of
the vast numbers alleged to have been massacred in the last Rebellion in
Ireland; There were slain on both sides, during the whole Rebellion, not above
36000. and this in a War set on foot for their Liberty and Estates, not for
Religion. Whereas all men that are not wilfully ignorant, know that the Irish
never enjoyed more liberty as to their Religion, or more security as to their
Persons and Estates, than immediately before they broke out into that horrid
Rebellion, wherein they perpetrated such salvage and bloody Cruelties, as no
part of the Pagan World could parallel. Nor were the quiet and tranquillity
which they then possessed, the fruits only of a Connivence from the Government,
but the effects of many Acts of Grace, which had a little before past in favor
of the Irish Papists. And as that Rebellion sprung from no other cause, but the
obligations which those of the Roman Religion are under, by virtue of the
Doctrines and Principles of the Papal Faith, to root out Heretics; so we are
well assured from impartial Historians, and authentic Records, that they
Murdered above Two hundred and fifty thousand in that Kingdom, without any
other provocation save that they were Protestants. And instead of Two hundred
seventy seven, whereof above Two hundred are said to have been profligate
persons that suffered during the reign of Queen Mary; there were, according to
the truest account, no fewer than 284. Honest and Conscientious Christians,
that in little above five years were burnt at the stake for the profession of
the Gospel, besides those that were driven into exile, and such as dyed in
prison merely for being Protestants. Nay, the Author of the Preface to Bishop
Ridley's Book de Caena Domini, who is commonly supposed to have been Grindal,
that was afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, a person who by his circumstances
and troubles in the time of that Bloody Reign, and by his station and quality
under Queen Elizabeth, had as fair advantages as any, of being informed
concerning the number of those that suffered, tells us that there were above
Eight hundred put to most cruel kinds of death for Religion in the first two
years of Queen Mary's persecution.

Yea, so pestilent and infectious a thing is Popery, that when once it has
insinuated it self, into, and possessed the minds of Princes, it not only
infatuates them to depopulate their Kingdoms, by destroying and driving into
banishment the best and most useful subjects of their dominions; but it so far
fascinates them, as to make them forget their own protection and defense, as
well as to abandon the safety and preservation of those of their people that
agree with them in the same belief; and to choose rather to expose their Crowns,
Territories, and Subjects, to be subdued and conquered by an Aspiring and Rival
Monarch, or to enforce their subjects, pursuant to principles of self
preservation, to revolt and rebel, than they will be persuaded and prevailed
upon to exercise Indulgence, Compassion, and Forbearance to Protestants, though
at the same time they cannot but know that the people whom they persecute,
would sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes in the defense and service of their
Persons and Dignities.

Thus the Second and Third Philips of Spain, chose rather to embroil the
Low Countries in an expensive and bloody War, and at last to lose the Obedience
of Seven entire Provinces, and see them shake off their dependency upon the
Spanish Monarchy, and establish themselves in an Independent and Sovereign
Government, than to allow and permit that People to differ and dissent in
matter of Religion from the Church of Rome. And as the Revolt of those
Provinces, which was occasioned merely by the Persecution of Protestants,
proved at first the great obstacle to Spain's obtaining the Universal Monarchy,
which they were in a condition to have bidden fair for, had not that War and
the withdrawment of so many great and rich Countries interposed; so the expense
of Wealth and Consumption of men which the Spaniards were at during those long
and bloody troubles, with the loss of the Provinces which renounced their
Allegiance to Spain, and erected themselves into a Free State, has laid the
foundation of abridging the Interest of that Crown in Europe, and is like to
issue in the ruin and subversion of that Mighty and Large Monarchy.

Thus likewise the present Emperor, notwithstanding the urgency of his Affairs
through the impression which the French have made upon Germany, rather than
abate the persecution of his Protestant Hungarian subjects, he has hitherto
chosen to venture the ruin both of the Empire and his own Hereditary
Countries. And though that poor people have been always ready to render an entire
obedience to his Imperial Majesty, and strengthen and increase his Armies with
a brave and large Military Force to oppose and withstand his Enemies, provided
only that their Religion and Legal Rights might be secured unto them; yet that
Prince through the influence of the Popish Clergy, and especially of the
Jesuits, has preferred the exposing himself and all Germany to the Power and
Ambition of France, rather than gratify the Requests of his Protestant
subjects, albeit the whole which they have demanded and insisted upon, was
stipulated unto them by the Oaths of his Ancestors. And seeing his own
Necessities, and the sober Counsels of his best Friends, have at last brought
him to terms of Agreement with that people, I shall only wish that they may not
through the liberty which the Popish Religion gives him of violating Promises
made to Heretics, be departed from and forgotten as soon as the apprehension
of the danger he is in from the French blows over and vanishes.

I might also here add, That there is a certain Gentleman in the world, who
though he have at present no other pretense to the Government of Affairs, save
what he enjoys by the Favor and Indulgence of his Prince; yet through his
being corrupted and infected with Popish Principles, he seems to prefer the
entangling Three Powerful and Opulent Kingdoms in Intestine Wars, or the
leaving them naked to the Invasion of a Mighty and Ambitious Neighbor, than
lose the opportunity of extirpating the Northern Heresy, and reducing the
Nations, where his Counsels and Interest can prevail, into a Vassalage to the
Triple Crown.

And we may yet more fully satisfy our selves, what we are to expect from
Papists, and what their Religion guides them unto, and justifies them in, if
we will but consider what the Sufferings of the Protestants in France at
present are, and what methods are pursued for the extirpating of them. For as
all the persecution which they undergo, is commenced against them for no other
cause but barely that of their Religion; so to give the French King his due, he
is so just as to acknowledge it, and scorns to palliate the true cause of their
Oppressions, Banishment, and Slaughter, by pretending that they have conspired
against his Person and Government, and that their Assemblies for the Worship of
God, are intended for, and employed in the stirring up Sedition. He is so
generous, as not to mention the several Wars which those of the Reformed
Religion undertook and managed for their own defense against Charles the Ninth,
Henry the Third, and Lewis the Thirteenth; but he tells them that they have
been always very loyal to him, and that he apprehends no trouble or danger from
them on the account of their Principles; only he is resolved not to suffer any
in his Dominions who will not embrace the Popish Religion; and that they must
either renounce the Faith which they profess, or submit to be destroyed. It
would require a Volume rather than a Paragraph, to recount the many late Edicts
which have been published against them, and the several steps and methods which
have been taken to ruin them, without their being guilty of any other crime or
provocation, save their having withdrawn themselves from the Communion of the
Church of Rome. Thus the King has not only demolished an infinite number of
Churches, and suppressed the exercise of Religion where it had for a long time
been legally enjoyed; but the Protestant Ministers are every where exposed to
be proceeded against and punished, whenever any suborned wretch shall but
depose, that they delivered something in their Sermons that was scandalous upon
the Church of Rome. And they have not only ordered, under great and severe
Penalties, That no Papist shall turn Protestant, and that none who have
forsaken the Protestant Religion, though out of infirmity, lightness or fear,
shall return to it again; but they have also ordained, That the Children of
Protestants shall be admitted to abjure their Religion at seven years of Age,
and in case they have no mind afterward to live with their Parents, that their
Fathers and Mothers shall be obliged to maintain them wherever they please to
continue or be. It were endless to recount the hardships which the Protestants
in that Kingdom are under; for besides their being turned out of all offices,
wherein they got a Subsistence for themselves and Families; their Wives are not
to be brought to bed, but by Midwives or Chyrurgeons that are Papists; nor
their Children taught, unless it be merely to read and write, save by Popish
Schoolmasters. Nay, as if it were not enough to forbid them to be Stewards,
Bailiffs, Solicitors, Registers, Clerks, Notaries, and to remove them from all
Employments in the Affairs of the Finances or Customs, and turn them out of all
Military Commands by Sea and Land; they have commanded all Chyrurgeons,
Apothecaries, Watchmakers, and diverse other Artificers, to shut up their shops,
which is in effect to require them, either to turn Papists, or to subject them
to starve. And to all the other miseries, which that poor people are made
liable unto for their Religion, this is not the least, that they will not
suffer them to die in quiet, but have enjoined, that when they are sick, they
shall suffer themselves to be visited by a Popish Magistrate in the presence of
two Popish Witnesses, without allowing any Protestants, though their nearest
Relations, to be by. And as we may easily apprehend, that their errand is
either to disturb them, that they may not expire in quiet; or by the utmost
Cunning and Art to prevert them from departing in the same Faith, which they
had all their days professed; so they think it not only a lawful, but a
meritorious Act to say, that they died in the Faith of the Church of Rome, though
they know the contrary to be true. And thereupon they take away all their
Children to breed them in the Popish Religion, and seize the Estate to preserve
it, as they pretend, for the Children of such Catholic Parents. In a word, the
sufferings and calamities of the Protestants in France, are grown to such a
height, that many thousands have forsaken their native Country, Relations,
Friends and Estates; and the rest are ready to do the like, were they not
debarred all ways of departure and escape. And as the severities exercised
against those of the Reformed Religion in that Kingdom, are but a Copy of what
we in these Nations are to look for, in case we should come under a Popish
Prince; so the time has been, that the Rulers of these Kingdoms, and such as
Minister at the helm of of public Affairs, would not have silently looked on,
and suffered those of the same Faith with themselves, to be thus oppressed and
destroyed for no other Reason, but merely because they are Protestants. Nor
will it be hereafter to the Honor and Reputation of some people in the World,
That the first Edicts of any fatal Consequence to the Hugonets in France, bore
date in 1660. as if the French King had presumed upon the Connivence of his
Neighbors, and therefore adventured to begin the Persecution which has been
by several steps advanced all along since, and is at last arrived at
inexpressible, as well unsupportable severities and rigours. And I may say,
that it is not without grief and sorrow, that they who love his Majesty, are
necessitated to observe, how through the influence of ill men about him, he
has suffered himself to be persuaded to neglect interposing so effectually in
behalf of that people, as was expected from a Prince professing the Protestant
Religion, and whose interest it is to show himself upon all occasions the
Patron and Defender of all the Reformed Churches. And whosoever they were that
advised His Majesty to abandon the concerning himself in the favor of
Protestants beyond the Seas, they neither consulted the Glory and Honor of
their Prince, nor yet the Maxims which His Royal Father, as well as others who
have swayed the English Scepter, were guided by. And though no good subject can
think of the Usurper Oliver Cromwell, but with an abhorrency of the Crimes
which he was guilty of toward the Royal Family and these Kingdoms; yet all the
World took notice, and continues to acknowledge, both with what Sympathy,
Courage, and Zeal, he appeared in behalf of the Protestants in Piedmont, when
their Prince the Duke of Savoy had employed Forces, and given Orders to
extirpate them; and how by a Letter to the late French Cardinal, he checked and
stem'd a Persecution which some Protestants in the South of France were likely
to have fallen under. The poor Hugonots did not only long ago foresee all that
has hitherto overtaken them, but they likewise made some near His Majesty
acquainted with it, and were ready to have proposed such measures as would have
been able to have prevented their own sufferings, and the disturbance which the
French Monarch has given since to Europe, had they been believed and hearkened
unto. But alas! instead of taking that poor people into our protection and
care, or entering upon those Counsels with other Princes, which the preserving
the Peace of Europe, and the securing unto the French Protestants the liberty
of their Religion called for, all the Intelligences we received were
communicated to the French King, upon which they became not only discouraged
from placing any confidence in our Ministers for the future, but one poor
Gentleman who had ventured to treat with a certain person near his Majesty, had
the misfortune to be broken upon the Wheel, and some others are forced upon the
like account to live in perpetual Exile from their Country. And yet even they
by whom they were betrayed dare not say, that ever they found them inclined to
depart from their Allegiance unto their own King, or to enter into any
Confederacies unbecoming good Subjects and natural Frenchmen; but that all
which they aimed at, and were willing to have transacted about, was only, that
in preserving their Loyalty to their Prince, they might not be suffered to be
sacrificed and rooted out merely for their Religion.

Nor are the Stipulations of Kings, or the established Laws of Kingdoms, any
security unto Protestants for their Lives or their Religion, if once the
Papists esteem themselves furnished with a sufficient Power, and a seasonable
Opportunity to subdue and extirpate it, or them. For as the Pope can Absolve
all such Princes from the Promises and Oaths which they make to their Subjects;
so it is a known Principle of the Romish Church, That no Faith is to be kept
with Heretics. And where the Prince, by not having the whole Legislation in
himself, is restrained from repealing Old and Enacting New Laws at his
pleasure, he will either mould and influence those who have a share with him in
the Legislation, to a compliance in what he designs; or he will venture at the
trampling upon all Laws, and through the efficacy of the Principles of the
Popish Religion, will pursue the Extirpation of Heresy, in defiance of all
Boundaries prescribed unto him by the Law. For what greater assurance could the
Protestants in France have for the Liberty of their Religion, and the
preserving unto them all the Rights and Privileges of Frenchmen, than they
enjoyed by that Edict of Henry the fourth, commonly styled the Edict of Nantes,
from the City where the King was, when it was concluded; and yet
notwithstanding that Edict, they are treated as if they were neither Christians
nor Frenchmen; being deprived of all that was therein granted unto them, and
brought to suffer every thing which that Edict was purposely made to defend
them from. For whereas by the said Edict they have a great number of Churches
allowed unto them for the open exercise of their Religion; and it is ordained,
that it shall be left free for any Papist to turn Protestant, and that those of
the Reformed Religion shall be as capable of enjoying public Charges, Honors,
Royalties, and of exercising any Art or Trade, as the Roman Catholics
themselves shall be, and that there shall be no difference betwixt Protestants
and Papists as to the security of their Lives, the ways and means of their
subsistence, their authority over, and freedom of educating and disposing their
Childred; yet through an implacable hatred which Popery inspireth men with
against all that differ from them in Religion, they are robbed of all that was
therein established in their favor, and subjected to all the mischiefs which
the fury of their malicious enemies, and the power of a Prince guided by Father
le Chaise the Jesuit, can inflict upon them. And as the Edict of Henry the
fourth, tho confirmed by Lewis the thirteenth, proves no security to the French
Protestants against the present Persecution which they are groaning and
perishing under; so it is to be feared, that the Laws which the Protestants in
other parts of the world do trust unto for the preservation of their Religion,
Lives and Legal Rights, will be as insignificant to the securing these unto
them, in case they should fall under the power of a Popish Prince, or that the
Counsels of Ministers Popishly inclined should prevail, as the Edict of Nantes
has been to the Hugonots. For it is observable, that as the Scots have at all
times testified as much Zeal for the Reformed Religion as any people in Europe
have done, so they took care to establish the continuance of it to them and
their Posterity, by as good Laws as any Nation in the world could; yet upon
finding how useless such Laws, as I shall name, are unto the ends for which
they were made and enacted, there is a wonderful Jealousy possesses the
generality of that Kingdom, That nothing can preserve them from being enslaved
again to Popery, but His Majesty's outliving the Duke of York. For it is
Ordained by the Law of Scotland, That no man is to James 6. p. 6. Act. 9.
bear any public Office within that Realm, but such as profess the Protestant
Religion: And that none who shall not make profession James 6. p. 3. Act 47.
of the said Religion, shall be reputed a Loyal and Faithful Subject to the
King, but be punishable as a Rebel: And that whoever shall at any time happen
to Reign and bear Rule over that Realm, shall at the time of his Coronation,
and the receipt of his Princely Authority, make his faithful Promise James 6.
p. 1. Act. 8. Charles I. p. 1. Act. 4.
by Oath, in the presence of the Eternal God, That during the whole course of
his life, he shall serve the same Eternal God, according to the uttermost of
his power, as he has required in his most holy Word, revealed and contained in
the old and new Testaments, and shall according to the same maintain the true
Religion then professed and received within that Realm, etc. And therefore
seeing these Laws have not been so observed but that one who does not profess
the Protestant Religion, has contrary unto them wrought himself into the chief
administration of Affairs there under His Majesty, has presided daily in
Council, and sat as the Kings Commissioner in Parliament; they begin to
apprehend that other Laws may prove as ineffectual for the securing the
Protestant Religion to the Nation, as these have been to the excluding one from
the highest Places of Authority and Trust under the King, who has not declared
himself for the Protestant Religion, as the foresaid Laws do require.

Besides, it is not to be questioned but that the Protestants of this Kingdom
in the time of Edward the sixth, thought they had gotten their Religion so
established by Laws, that there was no fear of the reintroduction of Popery,
whoever should afterward ascend the Throne; and yet Queen Mary was no sooner
come to the Crown, than contrary to the Law of the Land, as well as her promise
to the Suffolk men who had espoused her Title and Quarrel against the Lady
Jane, she published a Proclamation to forbid and inhibit all Preaching and
Expounding of the Scripture, without her special License. Which was to subject
the Reformed to punishment if they offended, whereas the Papists were sure not
only to be pardoned in case they transgressed, but were thereby in effect
countenanced to restore the Romish Worship and Service. And when a Parliament
was called, there was not only violence used in diverse places, to hinder the
Commons from assembling to choose, and the election of several who were judged
fit for the Queens turn, promoted by force and threatenings; but there were many
false Returns made, and some duly elected forcibly turned out of the House.
Upon which all the Laws against Popery came easily to be repealed, and new Laws
made for the suppression of the Reformed Religion, and the persecution of
Protestants. Which as it serves to convince all that have not wilfully shut
their eyes against light, and who are not resolved with a brutish obstinacy to
withstand reason, what we are to expect from a Popish Successor,
notwithstanding all the Laws which we enjoy for our security; so the rage
wherewith the Papists are at present transported and inflamed against the
Protestants of these Kingdoms, and the temper of the Gentleman whom they labor
to see advanced to the Throne, may cause us reasonably to fear and apprehend
severer persecutions in case he should attain the weilding of the British
Scepter, than ever our forefathers under Queen Mary suffered or met withal. For
the Scheme which he has set in Scotland, while he is but a Subject, and
greatly restrained by the Wisdom, Goodness, and Authority of His Majesty, from
accomplishing half of what we are to suppose him inclined unto by his
Principles, may sufficiently satisfy all mankind what he is like to prove,
should he ever come to act with an uncontrolled liberty, and have an
opportunity to display the complexion of his mind. His proceedings against the
Earl of Argyle, do not more surprise all the World, than they proclaim how
little he values the Lives of the Greatest and most Innocent Peers, if they
will not become subservient to his Interest, and instrumental in his Popish and
Arbitrary Designs. And as the Earl's offering to explain in what sense he was
willing to take the Test, is a thing which no Law can justly forbid, and which
a Cobbler might have done in England, in the like case, without being so much as
liable to a rebuke; so it is not unworthy of the knowledge of the World, that he
communicated the Explanation to his Highness beforehand, and desired to know
whether he might not be allowed to take it with the Proviso's which he
afterward mentioned in Council. And as the Duke did not prohibit, but seemed
to permit, at least to connive at what was proposed; so it is remarkable, that
the said Earl was suffered to take his Place in Council after he had taken the
Test in the sense which that Explanation did import. But his Interest in the
Kingdom, and his stedfastness and zeal for the Protestant Religion,
administering matter of dislike and jealousy, seeing nothing more material or
really Criminal did occur, were thought fit, after some Nocturnal thoughts, and
private Consults, to be laid hold upon for the ruining a Person, whom as they
could not manage to the service of their purposes, so they dreaded the
prejudice he might do them by running cross to their Designs.

Nor is the Earl of Argyles entertainment more severe in having that called
Treason, which the common reason of mankind, and all the Law of the World
justifies; than it is expressly contrary to the Law and Practice of Scotland,
to condemn, attaint, and forfeit any, unless they either are or have been in
actual Rebellion, but such as are personally present, or have had Warning given
them to appear. But the unpresidented Severity which this Great and Wise
Nobleman has had measured unto him, may be a Warning to all His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, what they are to expect, if this Commissioner in Scotland
arrive once to be King of Great Britain, France and Ireland; and how little the
Laws which we so much rely upon, will avail us, if we be found to thwart his
will and humor.

And as Laws are no security to Protestants against the Malice and Cruelty of
the Papists, when once they are armed with Force and Power sufficient to
destroy them; so neither the Liberty and Privileges which the Papists are
suffered equally to enjoy with our selves, nor the Favors and Civilities which
we have been ready upon all occasions to heap upon them, can restrain or hinder
our being ruined, whenever they are furnished with an opportunity to attempt
and aceomplish our extirpation. The Bloody Cruelties of Queen Mary to the
Suffolk Protestants, who in effect set the Crown upon her Head, and the
barbarous Severities exercised at present against the Hugonots of France, who
not only with the expense of their Treasure and Blood established Henry the 4th
on the Throne of France, when the Princes of Lorrain would have excluded him,
but by their Courage and Valor preserved the Sovereignty unto him, that at
this time persecutes them, when the Prince of Conde would have wrested the
Government out of his hand, are so many uncontrollable Arguments and
Demonstrations, that no Merits or Services can secure Protestants from the Rage
and implacable Malice which the Popish Religion inspireth men with. And as the
Irish Massacre ought never to be forgotten by the Protestants of these
Dominions, so it had this ingredient to aggravate the Barbarity of it, that it
was perpetrated at a season, when instead of having any reason to complain of
their usage by the English, they were in the quiet possession of equal
Privileges almost with themselves. But if we will descend to the present time,
and take a view of what the condition of the Papists has been since His
Majesty's happy Restoration, we shall easily perceive, what an ungrateful
generation of men they are, and that they are not capable of being obliged by
kindnesses. For, to begin with the Irish Papists, who of all men deserved least
lenity from a Protestant Government; it is remarkable that notwithstanding the
Rebellion, wherein they had been engaged, and the infinite slaughters which
they had committed in a time of Peace, without the least provocation
administered unto them; yet there has not any Law been made against them since
the King's Return, save one against their living in Walled Towns, which was
suspended by His Majesty's Command expressed in a Letter to the Lord Deputy and
Council from being put in execution. And as to the ancient Laws which were in
being and force against them, that whole Kingdom swarming with Priests and
Friars, and their celebrating Mass every where with as much openness as the
Parochial Ministers do preach the Word, or read the Liturgy, are undeniable
Evidences how little those Laws have been applied to their hurt or prejudice.
Nay, they have been not only connived at in the reintroduction of the whole
Popish Hierarchy into that Kingdom, and allowed the holding a Public Assembly
of the Papal Clergy by a Commission from the Duke of Ormond in the year 1666.
for their Sitting; but they have equally, with His Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, been advanced to several places of Civil Power and Trust, so that
when the Plot was to have been executed in England, Anno 1678. there were no
fewer than fifteen Sheriffs in Ireland, who were either professed and avowed
Papists, or such as bred and educated their Children in that Religion. And yet
while this Forbearance and Tenderness have been expressed to the Papists, such
of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects as in that Kingdom dissent from the
Established Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, have fallen under the
misfortune of having an express Law made against them, and diverse Loyal
Subjects, who profess the Protestant Religion in all its Doctrinal Articles,
have been prosecuted to Fine and Imprisonment upon it. And as to the Papists in
England, they were so far for many years after His Majesty's Restoration, from
having any new Laws made against them, that they never felt the weight of the
old ones. For saving the open exercise of their Religion, whereof they have
been restrained, they enjoyed the same safety as to their persons and estates,
which the Kings Protestant Liege people did. Nay, many of them besides their
having the personal favor of the Prince equally with others, they were
admitted into Places and Employments of Profit and Trust. And tho by their late
Hellish Plot they are made liable to some Tests, or to be disabled from sitting
in Parliament, and rendered incapable of public Trusts; yet notwithstanding the
provocation which the Nation might have justly conceived against them upon the
account of that Damnable Conspiracy; there has not to this day been any new
Laws made against them for their Religion; nor can they with any truth and
justice complain of the rigorous execution of those which had been enacted
before. Whereas notwithstanding the agreement that is between all His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in the Fundamental points of Religion, those that are
called Protestant Dissenters have not only been prosecuted since His Majesty's
Restoration, upon ancient Statutes which were purposely made and intended
against none but Popish Recusants, as well as upon that of the 35 of Queen
Elizabeth, which being also made upon the dangers that the Kingdom was in from
the Papists, as appears by the Speeches and Debates of the greatest Statesmen
who were in that Parliament, seems to have been originally designed against
none but them [ vide Townsend Historical Collect.] but there have besides been
no fewer in one kind and othet, than five several new Laws, and these none of
the gentlest, enacted against them. And while the Papists have hardly felt the
severity of the Laws, which are in force against Popish Recusancy; the
Protestants have unconceivably suffered by virtue of the Laws made against
Dissenters from the Government, Discipline, Rites and Liturgy of the Church;
and upon a Law for Regulating Corporations, whereof the most material terms
were judged inconvenient, burdensome and grievous, when intended to have been
imposed upon others in the form and manner of a Test.

Now having suggested these things both in the fewest words I can, and with all
imaginable regard and attendance to Truth; we shall in the next place with the
like sincerity and briefness, intimate and recount what Plots, Conspiracies,
and Designs, the Papists have of late years been engaged in, and pursued, to
the subversion of our Religion, and the destruction of our Lives and Liberties,
notwithstanding the tenderness of the Government toward them, and the
excellent Laws which we are provided with and enjoy, both for the security of
all these unto us, and for our protection from the Machinations of all Popish
Enemies. And though the methods wherein they have acted, and the steps they have
taken, have been so secret as well as various, that it is impossible fully to
trace and display them; yet so much is obvious to all who do not wilfully shut
their eyes, that by relating only what we demonstratively know, we may be able
to form a judgment concerning their Councels and Actings, which lie more
concealed and hid. It is to the influence which the Papists have had upon our
Public Ministers, that we owe the Enacting of those Laws, which as they were
directly calculated to ruin many of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, so they
have weakened the whole Reformed Interest in these Kingdoms, by increasing our
Differences, and inflaming Jealousies, Heats and Animosities amongst us. And if
it was not from some of our Counselors being under their Guidance and Conduct,
that we embarkt in a bloody and expensive War with our Protestant Neighbors,
Anno 1665* both to the weakening them and our selves, and the giving opportunity
to a Popish Prince to aspire to a formidable growth; It was certainly from the
Power and Interest which they had in some trusted with the manage of our
Affairs, that the Triple League came to be dissolved, an Alliance contracted
with the French, and a Second War, wherein we were abandoned and betrayed by
our new Confederate, begun Anno 1672. against the Dutch. I will not deny but
the Grounds and Causes of our quarrelling then with them, might be weighty and
just; yet seeing it appears since by the Declarations which the French King
caused to be made by his Ambassadors to the Emperor and the Pope, that his
invading them at that time by agreement and concert with us, Was to extirpate
those Heretics, and destroy Heresy; I suppose our Ministers may not only find
reason to believe, that Popish Councels did more influence our Resolves and
Affairs of State, than they were aware of; but to wish they had not encouraged
His Majesty to that War, and rather to have sought to adjust differences
betwixt them and us in an Amicable way. And since our being through that
ascendency which the Papists have over some great Persons near His Majesty,
engaged in a close and strong Conjunction with the French King; It is not to be
imagined what advancement the Papists have made to the ruining of the
Protestant Interest through all Europe, as well as in these three Nations. For
as the Popish Clergy do universally apply themselves to the promoting the
Grandeur, Empire and Sovereignty of France, in hopes that he will enslave all
those to their Religion, whom he subdues to an Obedience to his Scepter; so
they have all along, by the impressions which they make upon our Ministers,
been endeavoring to prevail over us, not only to remain Neutral, while he is
pursuing his Conquests, but to contribute to his Victories, by aids of Men and
Ammunition. Nor is it an inconsiderable step and advance, which by keeping us
linkt to France, the Papists have made to the ruin of these Nations, in that
they have hereby caused a wonderful misunderstanding between His Majesty and
his People, and filled the best and wisest of the King's Subjects with
jealousies, that it is through a concert with that foreign Monarchy, that
Parliaments are either Called, Prorogued or Dissolved. And as the Papists in
these Nations are emboldned by the Confederacy between us and France, to
maintain an intimate and daily Correspondence with that Court; so it is justly
to be apprehended, that they have made themselves sure of Supplies of Power and
Succor from thence, whenever they shall judge it convenient to set upon
destroying our Religion, and altering the Government. But besides all which
they have either endeavored, or been able to effect toward the destroying us
and the Reformation in these Nations, through the influence which they have had
upon Ministers of State and Public Councels; they have entered into
Conspiracies for the overthrowing Religion and extirpating Protestants, wherein
we are inclinable to believe, none have been trusted but themselves. And as the
Burning of London in September 1666. was the first plain and uncontrolable
Evidence, that the freedom of their own consciences, and the private liberty of
their Religion, would not content them; but that they were implacably bent upon
the ruin of all His Majesty's Liege people, who differ from them in Principles
of Faith and Worship; so we are well assured, that their Malice and Rage had
not terminated in the firing our Houses, but that they would have mingled the
blood of the inhabitants with the ashes of their dwellings, had not the courage
and spirit of some of their own party failed them, and had not the Citizens
been awakened to a sense of their danger, and appeared resolute to fell their
Lives at a dear rate. And tho we are most ready to believe that none had a hand
in the contrivance and execution of that Villainous Design, but the Papists; yet
the rescuing some out of the hands of Officers and others, who had been taken
in the very act of throwing Fireballs, and dismissing diverse without
prosecution, against whom the same Fact was sworn, clearly argues, that the
Authors and Instruments of that horrid Crime, had many great and potent
Friends, who were forward to protect them from the punishment and demerit of
it. But the Papists having missed the opportunity of cutting the throats of the
Heretics, when they were under a consternation and amazement; and finding that
the Flames of London had enlightened many concerning their Designs, who were
before both secure and possessed with more favorable thoughts concerning them,
and perceiving that notvvithstanding the Mercinariness of the Members of the
Long-Parliament, there was no hope of biassing them by Bribes and Pensions
either to establish Popery by a Law, or so much as give an universal
Toleration to the Roman Catholics; they arrived at last to these Devilish
Resolutions, of Murdering the King, and Massacring all the considerable
Protestants in the Kingdom. This was the Plot into which all their
Contrivances at last resolved, and which they had determined to have executed
in the latter end of 1678. For the constant expense which they were at in
carrying on the Conspiracy, being grown so burdensome, that they could not
much longer maintain and support it; and the Parliament being after the breach
of the Triple League, and the formidable growth of France, become less
manageable to the subserving their more calm and leisurely Designs; and finding
vvithall, that the Nation begun to fear and apprehend that the Papists had some
extraordinary thing in agitation; but especially the jealousy and dread they
were in lest His Majesty might not live the Duke of York, in whom they placed
all their hopes of obtaining the re-establishment of their Superstition and
Idolatry, should he once ascend the Throne, were the motives and inducements
upon which they determined to defer and adjourn matters no longer, but to put
all upon one desperate and bold adventure. Nor could they ever expect to be in
circumstances which could promise them a greater moral certainty of success,
than they were in at that time. For as the Power, Forts, and Strength of the
Nation, were either in Popish hands, or entrusted to such whom they might so
far rely upon, as not to fear any considerable opposition from them; so the
Duke of York who is known to be a person as zealous for the Papal Cause, as any
of themselves, was ready to have assumed the Crown; and if not inclined to
authorize directly what the Papists were to do, yet forvvard enough, as well
as capable through his possessing the Regal Power, to fright Protestants into
a quiet submission to the Svvords of their Enemies, or declare them Rebels that
should dare to arm for self defense. And as there was no less than Twelve
hundred thousand pounds payable at that time into the Treasury, being the money
which was granted for the carrying on a War against France, the thoughts
whereof expired with the passing of the Bill; so there was a formed Army of
Thirty thousand men; which having been raised upon the same pretense, would
have been ready to have received and obeyed the Commands of the King that was
designed to succeed. And if the Romish Conspirators in conjunction with that
Army, should have proved too few to dispatch and extirpate the Heretics in
these Dominions, all things were so well adjusted, the Peace of Nimmeguen being
at that time so near a conclusion, that the French King, whom for diverse years
the Papists have depended upon, and accordingly interested him in all their
Councils, could without the abandoning his concernments abroad, have assisted
and supplied them with large and powerful succors. Nor is it to be imagined,
how the murder of the King, which as it was to have been the first Scene of
this new Tragedy, was also to have been charged upon the Phanaticks, would have
enraged one half of the Protestants against the other. For having obtained Mr.
Claypool to be imprisoned about that time in the Tower, upon a forged
accusation of his having said, That he, and Two hundred more had resolved to
kill the King, they thereupon reckoned, that could they but succeed in the
designs which they had formed against His Majesty, the Protestant Dissenters
would both undergo the scandal and odium of it, and feel the revengful
resentments of the Nation. And then after that many of the Protestants had
embrued their Hands, and dyed their Swords in one another blood, it was
determined, that the rest should fall as a Sacrifice, to be offered up by the
Roman Catholics to the Holy See. Thus according to the best Rules and most
solid Foundations that men are to judge of the success of Designs, they might
very rationally think themselves secure of effecting and accomplishing
whatsoever they intended. Nor was the King ever in a more perfect security, or
they who were destined to be slaughtered with him, less provided of means for
their defense.

But God would not abandon his Worship and Truth, nor surrender an infinite
number of innocent people to the rage and fury of the enemies of his Name and
Glory: For it is to him alone, that we owe the discovery of this Papal
Conspiracy which as it has filled all Europe, as well as these Three Nations
with wonder and horror; so the truth and reality of it is supported, and put
beyond all doubt and question, by the most convincing, and uncontrollable
Evidence that a Matter of Fact is capable of. The King has testified his
belief of it by several Proclamations. Four several Parliaments, upon the most
impartial enquiry which they could make, have declared, that they are fully
assured there was such a Design, the Conspirators own Letters and Papers
confirm and justify the Depositions of the Witnesses who detected it; the
flight of some, and Condemnation of diverse of the principal Criminals, have
reconciled it to the belief of all who were not either interested in it, or did
not at least wish, that it might have succeeded. Yea, the preparations of Horse
and Arms, which the Papists had been known to make before hand, proclaim aloud
the Design upon which they were at so vast an expense; and the murdering one
Minister of Justice, and doing all they thought needful to Assassinate another
for discharging their Duty in the detection of it, are so many undeniable
Evidences of their being guilty of what they are accused of. But
notvvithstanding the Wickedness of what was intended, and the clearness of the
Proof to convict them; yet such is their Influence upon Public Ministers, and
so great is their Power in all our Councels, that we can neither obtain the
having the principal Conspirators brought to Legal Trial, nor procure any
effectual provision toward the saving our selves, and securing our Religion
from their Cruelty and Rage. Instead of seeing them prosecuted according to the
demerit of their Crimes, or finding any proportionate means used to discourage
and check their Designs, we have not only beheld such Justices turned out of
the Commission of the Peace, who were most zealous against Popery and
Arbitrariness; but we have seen four several Parliaments Dissolved before they
could bring Offenders to Justice, make a due and thorough inspection into the
Plot, or put the Kingdom into a posture of Safety from the dangers which
threaten it from Popish Counsels, and the claim which a Papist may pretend
hereafter to the Throne. And whatsoever His Majesty's care and zeal have been
either for the Discovery of the Conspirators, or the bringing them unto condign
Punishment; yet his Royal Intentions have been so ill seconded, that several
Priests, as well as others who stood accused, have been first harbored near
his Royal Palaces, and then conveyed beyond Sea in Yachts belonging to some
that are nearly related unto his Royal Person. The dread of displeasing one
Gentleman, does so prevail over the Obedience which every man owes the King,
that when His Majesty had commanded by his Proclamations that all the Papists
should be disarmed, scarce one of a thousand had so much as a Pistol or Sword
taken from him. Our Lieutenants and Justices have been under those impressions
of fear, lest they should offend great men, that neither the regard which they
ought to bear to their Native Country, and the Religion which they seemingly
profess, nor the tenderness which they are bound by their Fealty and Allegiance
to have for His Majesty's Safety and Life, have been powerful enough to cause
them to keep that hand over the Papists, which the Laws of the Land do at all
times require, and which the present circumstances we are in from those of that
Religion, render most indispensably necessary. Some are inclined to believe,
that it is not the least of the Earl of Argyle's Crimes, that he was the only
man of Quality in Scotland, who after the Discovery of the Plot, took out a
Commission for disarming the Papists. And it is not improbable, but that the
Authority which he has in the Highlands, and overawe the Papists there by
virtue of his being Lord Jushiciary in those parts and his being able upon any
occasion to check and bridle the Marquess of Huntley from attempting any thing
to the disturbance of the Kings Peace, and the prejudice of the Protestants,
was one main reason and ground of his late Prosecution. However this is not
unworthy of our observation, that My Lord Mac-Donals invading the Shire of
Argyle with an armed Force, merely for being required by the foresaid Earl, to
deliver up his Arms, was never called to an account, yea scarce ever received a
Reprimand from those in Authority under His Majesty in Scotland, though when he
had a Herald sent to him by the Council, requiring him to disband his Forces,
he tore his Coat from his back, and sent him home to Edenborough with all the
marks of contempt to them, and disgrace to the Officer. But may be, that Lord
being a Papist, his Religion is judged enough by some to atone for his
Treason. But as a further evidence that the Papists, notwithstanding their late
horrid Conspiracy, have been both protected from the Justice of the Law, and
left still in a capacity to execute their Designs against the Heretics, it is
remarkable, that though a Proclamation was published in Ireland for searching the
houses of all Roman Catholics for Arms, yet when the Sheriff of the County of
Galloway went in pursuance thereof to search the Earl of Clanrickards house,
where, as he was informed, all the Papists in that County had lodged their
Arms, the said Earl produced a Warrant from my Lord Lieutenant the Duke of
Ormond, that his House should not be searched. And do we not therefore upon the
whole see, that whereas the Papists were in a wonderful consternation upon the
first Discovery of the Plot, as apprehending from the knowledge which they had
of their own Guilt, what they deserved to have inflicted upon them, how they
are of late not only grown sceure and jolly, but more rampant and insolent than
ever?

Nay, so great is their Interest and Power, by means of the Duke of York, and
such whom he either overaweth or otherwise influenceth, that they do not only
escape the punishments which they are liable unto for their Treasons; but they
have obtained to have the Laws made against Protestant Dissenters, to be
executed with the utmost Rigor and Severity, while in the mean time themselves
are as good as connived at in the violation of all the Statutes Enacted against
Popish Recusancy. For this cannot be thought to proceed originally from the
King, being so inconsistent with that Princely Wisdom which he has always
manifested, when not overruled by the importunity of Ill Men. How unlikely is
it, that a Prince who receives and indulgeth Foreign Protestants, should at
the same time encourage the distressing his own Subjects, that do no otherwise
differ from the Church of England, than as those Foreigners do? Nor can it be
the advice of any sincere and true Protestant, to have the Laws executed at
this season and juncture against Phanaticks, it being so apparent a weakening of
the whole Reformed Interest in these Kingdoms, and a betraying all the
Protestant party into the power and hands of their worst Enemies. And seeing
none but the Papists can reap any benefit or advantage by it, it must be they
and none else that were the first Authors, and continue to be the promoters of
such Councels. And as some of these Laws were procured by the means of Sir
Thom. Clifford, Sir Thom. Strickland and others, who have since appeared to be
Papists; so it is not unpleasant to observe how they have endeavored to get
them either suspended or executed, according as this or that have lain in an
usefulness to their Designs. Nor can we otherwise believe, but that as some of
our Ministers obtained them to be dispensed with 1672. in favor of the
Papists, so others pursue the having them put in execution in 1682. out of
friendship to the same people. Thus the Laws, which were pretended at first to
have been made for the preservation of the Church of England, have been from
time managed to set forward the concernments of the Church of Rome, and advance
the projections of the Papists. Accordingly we have beheld them suspended for
diverse years, when both most of the English Clergy were earnest to have had
them executed, and when the execution of them seemed to lie in a subserviency
to support the grandess of the Church; But now when neither the Church can be
able to subsist, nor are any means left to the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, unless Moderation and Lenity be exercised to Dissenters, we are made
daily and sad Spectators of Oppression, Spoil and Havoc brought upon a quiet,
industrious and useful people, by the execution of these very Laws. And we may
be sure the Papists hug and solace themselves, to find that through the
Ascendency which they have over some Public Persons who influence all our
Counsels, they can apply the Laws to the ruin of many Protestants; and in
revenge for their having escaped their murderous and bloody hands, engage the
Government and Authority of the Nation against them. Nor is it less than a
matter of Triumph to them to think, that when the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled had not only read and committed a Bill For the uniting His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects; but Resolved it as the Opinion of that House,
That the prosecution of Protestant Dissenters upon the penal Laws, is at this
time grievous to the Subject, a weakening to the Protestant Interest, an
encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the peace of the Kingdom; they should
not only be able to alienate and exasperate us more from and against one
another, than ever we were, but procure one Protestant to prosecute another
upon the Penal Laws, to the scorn and contempt of the Wisdom of Parliaments,
and the proclaiming to all the world of how little esteem and value their
Counsel and Advice are. What effect these proceedings upon the Penal Law
against Dissenters may have upon others, who are not Phanaticks, is not easy
to be thoroughly apprehended; but it is certain that the English are naturally
inclined to censure whatsoever is extremely rigorous, and to compassionate such
as suffer merely for Religion, and not for Crimes against the peace and safety
of the Government. How soon did the Nation grow dissatisfied with the Cruelties
of Queen Mary; and even they who had no Religion themselves, came to abhor the
seeing their Countrymen burnt for Principles which had no influence upon the
subversion of Thrones, and disturbance of Societies? Yea, tho her second
Parliament revived the old Laws against Heretics; yet the minds of men were so
much altered in a little time, that the Commons in the third Parliament of that
Queen, would not pass a Bill which was brought in for incapacitating those from
being Justices of the Peace, that were suspected to have been remiss in
prosecuting Heretics. And it is remarkable, that not only our late Parliaments
were for the mitigation of the Laws against Dissenters, and for the uniting all
His Majesty's Protestant Subjects; but even the Long Parliament, which had been
the Authors of all the new Laws against Phanaticks, saw a necessity, if they
would preserve our Religion, and the Lives of Protestants from the dangers
which threatened them by means of the Papists, to take other measures than they
had acted by before, and to recur to Methods of Lenity. Accordingly the House
of Commons, in the Session that was held February 1672. sent up a Bill to the
Lords in favor of Dissenters, and about the Union of Protestants. Nor is it to
be imagined what jealousies it raises in the minds of most people concerning
what they and all Protestants are to fear in case of a Popish Successor, by
seeing many of the soberest in the Nation, and who agree with the present
Church in all Doctrinals of Faith, and Essentials of Worship, so severely
treated and prosecuted under a Protestant King, only because of their differing
from those of the established National way in some little and inconsiderable
things. And by how much all this rigor against Protestant Dissenters is thought
to have its rise from the counsels and importunity of the Duke of York, by so
much are all thinking men possessed with astonishing apprehensions of the
Cruelties which they must expect to undergo, if he come once to wear the Crown.
For being universally supposed and taken to be a Papist, and thereupon of a
Faith altogether opposite to ours; so we are not now to learn, that the very
principles of his belief will oblige him to extirpate all that will not own the
Tridentine Creed. Yea, such people as dare speak their thoughts, do commonly
say, That the reason why the Duke advises His Majesty to courses so contrary
to the Meekness and Compassion of his Royal Breast, as well as the whole tenor
of his Reign hitherto, is that he may darken and eclipse the Glory of His
hitherto merciful Government, and by putting him upon austerities toward
subjects who profess the same Religion that their Prince does, justify himself
hereafter in all the Slaughters and Barbarities which by virtue of the
malicious ferment of Popery, he may be inclined to perpetrate upon those whose
Religion he so implacably abhors, as he does that of Protestants. But would it
not be worthy of the serious consideration of those at the Helm, That it is not
only the Dissenters who suffer by the Execution of the Penal Laws, but the
whole Nation which participates in the profits and advantages of their
Industry. More especially all they who have any relation unto, or such as
manage any Commerce with them, do all bear a common share in their Calamities.
And besides the recentments which will spring up in the minds of men, by seeing
an innocent people harassed, whose Lives tho they do not imitate, yet they
cannot but commend; will it not be apt to impress their hearts with secret
disgusts, to see a Body of men ruined and impoverished, in whose hands three
parts of four through the whole Kingdom have less or more of their Interests
involved? And whereas none save the Informers are either desirous or likely to
gain by these violent courses, the King being too generous as well as good, to
sell his Treasury with the spoil of the oppressed; would it not become our
Public Ministers to consider, whether it be a congruous and wise thing, to
glut and satisfy the Avarice of an idle and unprofitable sort of people, not
only at the cost and expense of many honest and industrious Families that will
be ruined, but at the vast diminution of the Trade of the Nation, and
proportionably the lessening the King's Profit and Revenue? Nor are such as do
fully conform to the Worship, Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church offended
as well as surprised, at the seeing Distresses levied upon their harmless
Neighbors, only for their Consciences toward God; but they are wonderfully
alarmed at the manner in which they are daily disseized of their estates, being
without the Enquiry and Verdict of a Jury. Such was the care of our Ancestors
for the security of our Estates as well as our Lives, that by that which is
consigned to us as the Common Law of the Land, we have this fence and bulwark
to guard our Property, That we ought not to be dispossessed either of the whole
or any part, but upon a hearing and trial by a Jury. I know that by the Acts
for preventing and suppressing Seditious Conventicles, such and such Officers
as are therein named, have a power given them to levy the respective Fines that
are imposed upon Offenders, without the Enquiry or Verdict of a Jury; but I
also know, that an Act of Parliament has not heretofore been sufficient to
justify and protect those, who have invaded the Properties of men and
disseized them of their Estates, without a previous and Legal Trial. Though
Empson and Dudley thought themselves secured by the Authority of a Statute made
in the 11 Hen. 7. in what they did of this kind, yet that Act was not only
repealed in the 1 Hen. 8. for being contrary to the just Rights of the Subject,
and the Common Law of England; but they who ventured to act upon it to the
oppression of the people, were Condemned and Hanged for so doing. And as the
counsel and advice for the execution of the Penal Laws upon Dissenters, at a
season when both our Lives and Religion are in eminent danger and hazard by
reason of the Plots and Conspiracies of the Papists, can proceed from no other
persons but such as favor Popery, and would promote the bloody Designs of the
Church of Rome; so who knows but that the Phanaticks being a surly people, may
by way of reprisal Indict many of his Majesty's Conformable Subjects upon other
Penal Statutes, to which either upon one score or another, most of them will be
found liable. And as it would savor of too great Partiality in the Government
to grant a Noli prosequi for the Relief and Protection of such, should they
come to be prosecuted, when at the same time it is found countenancing and
encouraging the prosecution of Dissenters, upon Laws which are not in
themselves better, more just or usefuller to the preservation of the public
Peace, and the maintenance of good Manners; so it would be little for the
reputation and credit of such as superintend and guide affairs, to see the
whole Kingdom turned into a Cockpit, and one Subject scratch, pluck and harass
another. Nay, were the Phanaticks inclined to retaliate upon others, what is
daily measured out unto themselves, they want not considerable advantages from
Statutes, of lessening, if not wholly destroying, some considerable branches of
His Majesty's Revenue. For besides the damage and prejudice it would give the
King in the matter of the Excise, should Alehouse keepers be Indicted upon the
Statute of the 21 of James, cap. 7. where it is Ordained. That whosoever sells
a Pot or Quart of Ale for above a Penny, shall for every such offense forfeit
twenty Shillings, and which the Act of the 22 and 23 of this King can no ways
relieve them from, seeing the Clause by which they were indempnified from that
Penalty is wholly expired: I say, besides this, the Act concerning the Excise
is not so discretely and carefully penned, but that occasion may be taken by a
discontented people, to dispute and debate the validity of it in some
particulars, which if carried, would altogether overthrow it. Nor is it
improbable, but that the Severity which the Dissenters suffer and undergo upon
the Statutes against Conventicles, may so awaken and provoke them to enquire
into the Nature, Form and Quality of those Laws, that upon a Legal and fair
hearing they may be found to have no concernment in them, or the Penalties of
them. For as they seem not to come within the reason of those Acts, because
they were made, as the Title and Preface to them do declare, only to prevent
and suppress Seditious Conventicles, which the Dissenters by assembling for the
Worship of God, according to the revelation of his Word, are no ways chargeable
withal; so it does not plainly appear, that the body of these Acts which
subject those only to Penalties, Who worship God in other manner, than
according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, does any ways
extend unto them. The Disciples of Christ and all Christians may be as truly
and rationally accused of disobedience to their Teacher and Savior, whenever
they are found praying in any other words than those contained in the Lord's
Prayer, seeing Jesus Christ has bid us Pray after that manner; as the
Dissenters can be justly Informed against or Indicted, For worshipping God in
other manner than according to the Liturgy, merely because they read not the
Prayers of the Church. And to all that has been said, I hope this may be
modestly added, That should the Phanaticks by the execution of the Penal Laws
be driven to extremities, and left destitute of all other means of relieving
themselves, they may possibly become so far exasperated and incensed, as to
question and bring into debate the validity of the principal Laws upon which
they suffer. For though I do not take upon me, nor presume to say any thing
against the Force and Legality of them; yet no man can undertake what a rich
and courageous people may do, that is hampered by and insested upon them. And
should the Parliament that met the 8th of May, in the 13th of this King, be
found to have exceeded the time which the the Act of the Sixteenth; Car. cap.
1. For preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of
Parliaments, had appointed and limited for their continuing to sit, before they
once thought of Abrogating and Repealing that Statute, which they did not till
the Session that begun the 16th of March in the 16th of Car. 2. then the Laws
by which the Phanaticks are Disturbed, Fined and Imprisoned, will not be found
to have the Legality, Force and Power that some men do imagine. But the
Papists, who at the bottom are the promoters of the present Severities against
Dissenters, are no ways solicitous concerning the Inconveniences which may
ensue; all they aim at is to alienate the hearts of the People from the
Government, inflame Differences and Animosities among Protestants, foster
Jealousies in the King of the Loyalty of his Subjects, and by all this to
render us the easier a prey unto themselves.

And since the Romish Conspirators were prevented in the execution of the
Design which they had so carefully laid, and carried on with so much Industry,
Confederation and Expense at home; and which had it succeeded, they apprehended
themselves secure of a Foreign Succor, as well as a Prince of their own
Religion to support and justify; as they thereupon found themselves rendered
both obnoxious to the Justice of Parliaments, and the angry Resentments of the
Nation; so they have been making it their chief business, either to get their
own Plot wholly disbelieved, or to forge and sham one upon Protestants.
Accordingly when they could neither corrupt the Witnesses, who had made the
Discovery of their Villainies, to retract their Testimony and renounce their
Evidence, nor were able either by the persons whom they had suborned here, or
those whom they had brought from beyond Sea, to weaken and defame their Credit;
they do at last entirely betake themselves to the framing a Plot, wherein they
would have it believed the Protestants are involved and engaged for the
subverting of the Monarchy, and altering the Government. And as the
endeavoring to impose the belief of such a foolish and obvious Forgery upon
the Government and the Nation, is a clear demonstration of the Truth of their
own Conspiracy, and the desperate shifts which their Guilt and Fear have driven
them unto; so the entertainment which some have given to so dull as well as
Romantic a Fable, is both an undeniable Evidence, that there were more
accessory to the first Popish Plot, than yet are publicly accused, and that
there are a sort of people in the Kingdom, who are only sorry for the
miscarriage of it. We might very reasonably have thought, that upon the
detection of the Meal Tub Sham, in the year 1679. the Papists would either have
been discouraged to forge another perfectly of the same Figure and Make, in the
year 1681. or that the Government would have received the tidings of it with
neglect and indignation. For as it is the same Design whereof we are now
accused, that we were to have been charged with then; so these very persons
whom they have procured Witnesses to swear Guilty of a Design to seize the King
at Oxford, were the first in the List of Nobles and Gentlemen, whom they were
then to have Sworn against, That they resolved to raise a Rebellion against His
Majesty, and mustered Forces to that purpose. How strangely are we abandoned to
the malice and will of our Enemies, that the Papists having mist the destroying
us by a Massacre, they should be permitted by Perjuries and Subornations to
pursue our ruin in forms of Legal Trial. And as the countenance which the
vilest Miscreants have met withal, who tho apparently suborned and hired, have
come forth to testify a Protestant Plot, is an unanswerable Argument under
whose conduct and influence some of our Ministers are; so the baffles which the
Authors and Managers of this Intrigue have received upon the Three late
Adventures and Essays which they made toward the proof of a Protestant
Conspiracy, do proclaim aloud what opinion all wise and good men have both of
them and this whole Affair. Now tho the judgment of so many Juries upon a full
hearing of what our Accusers had to charge us with, be a sufficient vindication
of the innocence of all the Protestants of England in this matter, as well as
of those persons against whom the several Presentiments were brought; yet we
bear that respect to the Honor of our Religion, the Reputation and Integrity
of the last Parliament, as well as the Credit of our own Names, that we cannot
believe we have discharged our duty as we ought toward the World, till we have
both triumphed over the folly, and exposed the malice of our enemies to that
degree, as to render them the objects of the scorn and hatred of all Mankind.
And as we suppose our selves in this Undertaking secure of the Approbation of
His Majesty, it being in favor of that Religion which He not only professes,
but whereof He is the Defender, and in behalf of as Worthy and Loyal persons as
any in his Dominions; so in performing this most necessary duty, we fear not
the anger of Ministers, much less the barkings of little people, being
steadfastly resolved not to say any thing but what we can approve our selves
before God and man for the truth of. Nor can any without an open espousing the
Designs of the Papists, be offended that we should vindicate the Loyalty, and
Justify the Innocence of Protestants, which have been so impudently and
maliciously aspersed. Yea, it would be a transgression against all the Rules of
Justice and Equity, to allow or connive at the branding and arraigning us in
daily Pamphlets, if they should not permit us the liberty to detect the
Forgeries and Criminations by which our Honor and Lives are invaded and
brought into question. And while the Compendium, the Jesuits Plea, Staffords
Memoirs, and the Vindication of the English Catholics from the pretended
Conspiracy against the Life and Government of His Sacred Majesty, escape the
Censure and Animadversion of our Administrators of Justice, it would imply an
entertainment of undue thoughts concerning the Justice of the Government,
should we not instead of a Reprimaud, expect their Approbation. Nor will we
believe that it was either by the Authority of His Majesty, or the Honorable
Privy Council, that a Messenger and the Wardens of the Company of Stationers,
went to the several Printing-houses, requiring them to publish nothing in
favor of the Innocence of the Earl of Shaftsbury, or in justification of the
Ignoramus which was brought in by the Jury upon the Bill that was preferred
against him: but we rather ascribe the Order for so unpresidented and illegal
an action, to some officious Agent for the Papists, or to some little
Ministers, who were apprehensive of seeing themselves laid open and detected,
being conscious of their own guilt in the countenance and encouragement they
had given to this Forged Protestant Plot, for which many Noblemen and Gentlemen
were designed to have been destroyed. For as there is no Law whereby the coming
into men's Houses, the making a search after Books or Papers which may be in the
Press, or the laying an Inhibition upon them of printing whatsoever they judge
safe or convenient, is or can be warranted; so it seems no ways equal and fair,
to restrain any man from doing himself right, when he has been publicly as
well as eminently injured. And truly it looks like an imposing that upon the
implicit Faith of the World, which they know themselves unable to prove; or it
argues a distrust either of the goodness of their Cause, or that it has not
been managed with integrity and candor, when they are unwilling to admit both
sides the privilege of being openly heard. For tho it may become the Wisdom of
men in Power and Government, to preserve the Justice of Courts, and Reputation
of Juries, from being openly arraigned, when an Indictment after a full Enquiry
has been approved and allowed by such as are the proper and only judges of it;
yet such a procedure as the restraining men from defending their own Innocence,
and vindicating the impartiality of those who acquitted them after a full and
Legal hearing, can never adjust it self to the sense or reason of mankind. Nor
does such a course and method import any thing less, than that for having
missed the satiating their Malice in the Blood of one or two whom they mortally
hated, they will pursue their Revenge in endeavors to blast the Credit, and
diminish the value and esteem of all that have been instrumental in preventing
and defeating their Intendment.

NOW this Plot for Deposing the King, and altering the Government, whereof
Protestants were to be Accused and Impeached, was not only so contrived as that
it might reach most English Peers and Gentlemen, who stood in the way of Popery
and Arbitrariness; but the Protestants in Ireland were to be brought under the
charge and accusation of it. For the Popish Conspiracy having been carried on
with the same vigor against the Lives of Protestants and the established
Religion in that Kingdom, as it was in this; and the Parliament here being so
far satisfied and convinced of the reality of it there, as well as in England,
as to declare and testify the belief of it by the unanimous Votes of both
Houses; accordingly the Papists in both Kingdoms were equally and by the same
Artifices to be relieved from the imputation which lay upon them, and to be
rescued from the punishments which the Laws Adjudged and Condemned them unto.
Therefore the Protestants in both Nations were to be accused of having forged
the Popish Plot, and that having thereby amused His Majesty and the people,
they have in the mean time been fomenting and promoting a real one of their
own. This was that which St. Laurence the Priest would See No Protestant Plot,
First part, p, 33, 34, 35.
have Hired and Suborned Mr. William Smith to Swear and Depose, and whereof the
Evidence was so strong against St. Laurence at his Trial, that though he was
acquitted, yet he is still believed by all impartial men that heard it, to have
been really guilty. For it is not only reported from thence by persons who
deserve to be credited, that such especially were returned upon the Jury, who
were known beforehand to have reflected upon Mr. Smith; but it is most
certain, that whereas the Prisoner was allowed five Council to plead for him,
there was none of the King's Council, nor any one man of the Gown besides, that
appeared in behalf of the Evidence. Whether they forbore, from an opinion that
the Evidence was so plain, that it required no Plea to enforce or apply it; or
whether they did it out of deference to some great men, whom they would not
offend, by being concerned in any thing that may prejudice the honor and
integrity of the Papists; or whether it was in obedience to the commands of
such, who would not have an Intrigue detected, upon the discovery whereof the
Protestants may come to be thought peaceable and loyal again, as I cannot
certainly tell, so I shall not take upon me to conjecture and divine. But
besides that which was sworn against St. Laurence by Mr. Smith, which to any
who read it, will appear either the copy, transcript, or counterpart of what
they have been doing here, we have other evidence of the Papists laboring in
Ireland to sham off their own Plot, by representing it as a Forgery falsely
laid upon them by the Pratestants; and their endeavoring to possess the
Government with a belief, that during the noise and buz which the Protestants
had raised concerning a Popish Plot, they were themselves embarkt in a
Conspiracy against the King and the Monarchy. Thus whereas one Captain Morley
had appeared before the Committees of Lords and Commons here, and swore two
Consults which the Papists had in Ireland, in reference to the extirpating the
Protestant Religion in that Kingdom; they have procured no fewer than six or
seven Irish Witnesses, not only to Depose against the said Morley, That he was
Suborned by the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir Robert Cleyton and
others, to Swear Treason against the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Chancellor Boil,
and Sir John Davies; but that he himself had said, the King was on enemy to all
Protestants, and deserved to have his Head cut off, as his Father had. Here we
have an Epitome and Abridgment of what the whole Popish Party is laying out
their Money, improving their Wit, and employing the Power and Interest of their
Friends for and about. But why the Papists should in all their Depositions
introduce the Protestants affirming the King to be a Papist, and an enemy to
those of the same Religion which he not only professes, but which he has
sacredly and solemnly Vowed for ever to protect and defend, I think no wise man
is able to tell; unless it be that they have a mind to recriminate upon us,
what they have been proved guilty of themselves. It is not yet seasonable to
declare by whose means and by what Arts the foresaid Deposition was obtained,
nor how Handland and Murphey, two fellows that came over hither to Swear the
Popish Plot, were since their return transformed into Witnesses to prove a
Protestant Conspiracy; but all these things must be foreborn till his Majesty
in his Princely Wisdom, and from that Justice which he has hitherto governed
his people by, and in the discharge of his promise which his Loyal addressing
Subjects, as well as others, do rely upon, be pleased to call a Parliament, and
then both all these and many other things will be more fully disclosed and set
in a brighter light. In the mean time this must be acknowledged to the Honor
of His Majesty, and the Justice of the Council Board, that tho the foresaid
Deposition was received by some in Ireland with great fondness, and transmitted
hither not only with all expedition and speed, but accompanied with an earnest
desire, that the Gentleman might be sent thither; yet the King and Council
would neither do so illegal and arbitrary a thing, as to send a person from
hence to Ireland without his own consent, both born and bred here, and who
actually possesses an estate in England. Nor could it be done without great
Injustice, seeing the words wherein alone the Treason must lie, were owned to
have been spoken above two year ago. And for his being suborned by the Earl of
Essex, and the Earl of Shaftsbury, to Swear Treason against the Duke of Ormond,
my Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and Sir John Davies, it is remarkable, that he
never testified any thing of that nature against them; and what he did declare
in relation to them or any others, he referred himself for the truth of it to
the Council-Books of that Kingdom, or to such Depositions which had been either
taken by the Council there, or had been transmitted to them by others. And as
no man that is Master of sense, and has any knowledge of those two Honorable
Persons, will ever submit his Faith to receive so incredible a thing, as that
they should Suborn any man to swear falsely; so Mr. Morley, whose credit
infinitely surpasses that of the Witnesses who swore against him, absolutely
denies that they ever did, or that he ever spoke any such thing concerning
them. But they that can first invent, and then get so absurd and impossible a
thing as Transubstantiation received and believed, may be pardoned both in
forging and in hoping to vvin credit to things ridiculously foolish, as well as
abominably false. Nor could so dull a Fable proceed from any but people of an
Irish understanding; neither will it obtain with any men, but such as have
renounced Reason as well as Honesty. But there is yet a third, and that a more
signal Instance of the Papists endeavoring to involve the Protestants in
Ireland under the guilt of a Plot against his Majesty, and this displays and
unfolds it self in the Accusation sworn against Mr. Hawkins. The person charged
is known to be an ingenious Gentleman, and one who has always acquitted
himself as became Honor, Discretion and Loyalty; only it is his fortune to be
a Protestant, and was his unhappiness to be made acquainted with some of the
Popish Designs against the Government, which instead of furthering or
concealing, he communicated to My Lord Lieutenant. That wherewith he was
charged, does in all things so quadrate with what we have heard Svvorn against
Protestants in England, that we may boldly say, they were all coined in the
same Mint. For one Mac-Gennis svvears, That Mr. Havvkins told him, he went for
England to establish a Correspondency with my Lord of Shaftsbury, and that be
received a Commission from the said Earl for a Troop of Horse; and one
Mackoghlin deposes, That he was to be a Trooper under Mr. Hawkins, and that he
had three pounds from him toward the buying a Horse. The very counterpart and
direct parallel of what Booth informed against Capt. Wilkinson, and which he
and Bains would have suborned the Captain to swear against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and were both hammered in the same Forge. But as the Devil and the
Priests inspire the Papists with falsehood and malice, so God to overruled and
defeat their Rage and Treachery, deprives them of common Wit and Understanding,
and gives them up to all prodigious folly and madness. For as Mackoghlin never
spoke with Mr. Hawkins but once, and that in the presence of another person,
and then he only endeavored to have insinuated himself into his Acquaintance,
which Mr. Hawkins refused to admit him into; so it is most certain that Mr.
Hawkins never conversed with the Earl of Shaftsbury, nor so much as at any time
saw him. And whereas it was sworn by Mackgennis, That he should say he came to
London to establish a correspondence with that Nohle Peer; and that he received
a Commission from him for a Troop of Horse; The whole matter deposed is not
only false; but the condition which my Lord was at that time in, being a
Prisoner in the Tower, shows the impossibility that such an Affair should be
transacted between them at that season. Neverthelss, that Ingenious and Loya!
Gentleman was committed to the Castle of Dublin upon that Forged and Ridiculous
Information; and had not the Protestant Plot been so far detected, as to be
hissed off the stage by several Juries, it might not only have cost Mr. Hawkins
his Life, but laid a foundation for superinstructing a Conspiracy upon, wherein
most Protestants of quality and zeal in that Kingdom would have been included,
and first or last charged with the guilt of it. For there were no fewer than
between Twenty or Thirty mustered up of a sudden to testisie a Protestant Plot;
persons, who as they believe implicitly in matters of Religion, they would
likewise swear so for the Interest and Advantage of St. Patrick, and the Holy
Church. And besides what they may reasonably be supposed to receive out of the
Catholic Treasury for so seasonable and useful a Service as the Swearing
innocent Protestants out of their Lives and Estates, they had lately the
confidence to petition the Council in Ireland that a maintenance might be
allowed them from the State. And it seems but just and equal, that they should
be afforded the same encouragement, which those listed and employed upon the
like Service in England have; and that they should have some consideration for
the sale of their Souls, tho they will be so reasonable as not to keep up that
Commodity to the price which it goes at and is valued here. And whereas fellows
not only of a mere Irish understanding and breed, but such as had conversed all
their days in Bogs, and whose most refined and improved knowledge is how with
handsomeness to steal Horses and Cows, might be found deficient in art and
cunning to manage this Meritorious work of Swearing with some consistency to
themselves and one another; there are some lately arrived there from hence, who
having been trained and instructed here by the grand Masters of the Forgery and
Affidavit-School, may be able to edify and discipline those raw blades in the
necessary Virtues of Perjury and Impudence, and acquaint them with the laudable
method of rehearsing the Depositions which had been given them to con, without
administering any symptoms of their speaking by rote. But their understandings
not being so docile and flexible as their Consciences, they make daily some
unfortunate and fatal misadventure. And their having publicly accosted the
greatest persons with rude and insolent Menaces, and their having threatened to
accuse every one whom according to their knowledge of the measures of the World,
they do but apprehend to have offended them, they have already so enfeebled
their Credit with all sorts of men, that they are altogether become useless and
unserviceable. It is far from my intention to bring all the natural Irish under
this Character; for tho most of them who continue Papists, would esteem it not
only venial, but meritorious to cut a Protestants throat; yet there are
thousands of them who from some principles of Mankind and Bravery, do detest
the destroying Protestants in the base and creeping ways of Subornation and
Perjury. And we desire to be pardoned for this severe Censure which we have
fastened upon the Rascality of the Irish Nation, seeing besides the impressions
we retain of them by the remembrance of the Irish Massacre, and the fresher
intelligence we have received of their regardlesness of Truth and Justice, from
the manage of themselves before the Court of Claims, we have been lately
enabled to form an opinion of the Herd and Hive of that people, by the
observations we have made of those few that have flown over hither, and
especially by the little Colony which Justice Warcup is Governor and Overseer
of. However as I rejoice at the present stemming that Deluge of Sin and Misery
which was there so nearly threatening innocent and loyal Protestants, had not
some baffle befallen those suborned Affidavit folk, and did not a notorious
infamy attend their testimony; so I beseech Almighty God to prevent the
consequences and effects which the countenancing such a course, should it again
revive and prosper, would in all probability be followed and attended with. For
as the English Protestants in that Kingdom do thoroughly know the humor,
principles and inclinations of the Popish Irish, and how absolutely they are
under the conduct, and at the disposal of their Priests; so by being less
numerous than the Papists, they are both more apprehensive of, and watchful
against ruin and danger, and cannot but construe this method of destroying
them, as much more pernicious than a new War or Rebellion in that Barbarous and
Bloody people would be.

But tho the late Sham pretended Protestant Plot was so laid and contrived by
the Papists, as to comprehend under the infamy and guilt of it, the chiefest
persons in Ireland who profess the Protestant Religion, or have any regard for
the Liberties and Rights of Mankind; yet the primary and main end of this
horrid Papal design, was to ruin and destroy the Principal Patriots of the
Reformation, and civil Liberties in England. For upon the Fate of the
Protestants here, depends the safety or extirpation of all in these Kingdoms,
who profess separation from the Communion of the Church of Rome. For the
Protestants are not only most numerous here, and best able to defend
themselves, in case a Massacre should be attempted upon them by the Papists,
but it was a Parliament in England that Voted and Published the reality of a
present Popish Conspiracy, that did proclaim to all the world the dangers which
his Majesty and Loyal Subjects are in, from men of Papal Principles, that
caused some of the principal Conspirators to be arraigned and condemned, and
which has been endeavoring to hinder a Popish Successor from coming hereafter
to ascend the Throne. And therefore, though few elsewhere, that are either of any
note for zeal to their Religion, or worth saving for their ardour and courage
for civil Right, were to escape being entangled in the dangers, and loaded with
the reproach which they hoped to bring upon all the Protestants of these
Dominions, by a forged pretense and charge of our being embarked in a
Conspiracy to depose the King, and alter the Government; yet it was mainly the
Peers, Gentlemen, and others in England, who are resolved, not only to live and
die in the Protestant Faith themselves, but to do all they can to transmit it
as an inheritance to their posterity, that this Sham was calculated to retch
and overthrow. And albeit there have been but few hitherto named and accused,
yet could the Witnesses have been but once believed, they would have soon sworn
all into the same guilt, whom either out of malice, or for the facilitating the
Introduction of Popery, and arbitrary power, they had a mind to get destroyed.
For whatsoever has been either published in allowed Writings, or affirmed in
Courts of Judi^ature, concerning the narrowness of this pretended Conspiracy,
and that they know of no Protestant Plot, but that only a few discontented, or
desperate persons, had been designing Treason against His Majesty; yet the
matter is in reality quite otherwise; and this is only alleged to lessen the
horror of people at first, and to prevent the effects of their indignation,
should they understand the unlimitedness of Papal Rage. Nor have the Contrivers
and Managers of this Sham, been Masters of so much Wit, as to conceal the
boundlesness of their Wrath, and how extensive they purposed to render this
Protestant Plot. For by making Oxford the Scene where the King was to be
apprehended, and that at a time when he was surrounded with all his Guards,
they do plainly tell all the world, that had they obtained the Evidence to be
credited and allowed in relation to any one person of quality, they would have
soon brought the Lives and Fortunes of thousands to lie at their discretion and
mercy. Admit but once that His Majesty was to be seized, when encompassed with
so great and well disciplined a force, and it will necessarily follow, that
there must have been a very great number of Protestants engaged for the
accomplishing of it. Nay, the very Depositions of the Witnesses themselves, as
they are communicated to the world in Print, in the Trial of Mr, Stephen
College, and in the Proceedings upon the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury,
do sufficiently proclaim, that there were not only many Protestants of an
inferior Rank, but many of the principal Peers and Gentlemen in England, that
were designed to be brought within the circle and compass of this Protestant
Plot. Nor is it likely, that having designed to bring so many under the guilt
of the Sham Meal-Tub Conspiracy, they would now abate in the number which they
purposed to destroy. For besides the advantages which they enjoy, through
having Counselors more to their gust, they have either wheedl'd or bribed many
of our high-flown Churchmen, if not with a satisfaction to glory, yet with an
abject silence to connive at our ruin. But the bounds which the Papists
intended to set to their own malice, in forging and shamming upon the world,
that the Protestants had combined to depose the King, may be best and most
easily collected from the Testimonies of the Witnesses in the forementioned
Treatises. Accordingly we are told by Dugdale, That College not only advised
him to go with Horse and Arms to Oxford, because he expected there would be See
the Trial of Stephen College, p. 19.
something done there; but he further says, That he heard several
Parliament Men talking before that Session, of a disturbance that was likely to
happen at Oxford, and that it would be therefore best to leave some
Parliament Men at home in every County, who might manage the people. And Smith
not only affirms, that College told him, how the Parliament was agreed to seize
the King; and that in order thereunto, all the Parliament Men were Ibid. p. 28.
to come to Oxford well armed, and accompanied with Arms and Men; but that the
Earl of Shaftsbury should declare unto him, how the Parliament Men, who came
out of the Sea the Proceedings upon the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury, p.
19.
Country, were well provided with Horse, Arms and Men; and that if the King
offered any violence to them, they might oppose him; for the like had been done
in former times. And Haynes deposes, That College should tell him, Unless the
King should suffer the Parliament to continue to sit at Oxford, they would
seize him, and bring him Colledg's Trial, p. 30.
to the Block, as they did the Logger-head his Father; yea, that my Lord
Shaftsbury should declare, Unless the King granted the Pardon which was
demanded Proceedings upon the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury, p. 37.
for the said Haynes, they would raise the whole Kingdom against him Booth
likewise swears, how my Lord Shaftsbury told him, That he and others had
considered with themselves, that it was fit for them to have Guards at Oxford;
and that to this purpose he had established a matter of Fifty men, persons Ibid.
p. 21.
of quality, and that he had entrusted Capt. Wilkinson with the Command of
them; and in case any violence should be offered by the King, they would repel
Force with greater Force. Now though all this be nothing but a bundle of forged
lies; yet it plainly declares, that no fewer than all the men of quality in
England, who are zealous for the Reformed Religion and Civil Rights; yea, the
whole Body of sincere Protestants were to be drawn and hook't within the verge
of this Plot, and all their Lives and Fortunes brought to lie at the favor of
the Government upon the pretended guilt of it. For no man can think, that the
blood of the Earl of Shaftsbury and my Lord Howard, would have attoned for so
general and universal a Conspiracy, could they but once have enjoyed the good
fortune to have had credit given to these fellows Testimonies. The designs
which the Papists proposed unto themselves, in their forging of this
Conspiracy, were greater than to be compassed and accomplished by the murder of
Three or Four men in the way of legal proofs. For as nothing less was aimed at
by means of this Sham Plot, than the destroying all who withstand the
Introduction of Popery, and the establishment of a Popish Successor; so, many
hundreds were to be taken out of the way, besides those apprehended and
accused, ere ever the people of this Kingdom could be expected quietly to
submit to be Papists and slaves. But because the foregoing Depositions do only
speak in general of a Conspiracy wherein the Parliament and Nobles were
engaged, in conjunction with my Lord Shaftsbury, to apprehend and cut off the
King, we shall therefore give an account, from the Attestations of others, of
some few more, who besides those publicly named, were to have been charged
with, and perished under the pretended guilt of this forged Plot. And as we are
assured from the mouth of a Gentleman of great Reputation and good Quality,
that John Smith said to him, he could swear Treason against a hundred
Protestants; so Thomas Samson has deposed upon Oath, That John Macknamarra
told him, that Edward Ivy, Bryan Haynes, John Smith, and Edward Turbervile,
did intend to swear Treason against Sir Patience Ward, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir
Thomas Player, Mr. Bethel, who was then Sheriff (of London), Coll. Mildmay, and
others. Yea, to that confidence were the mercinary perjured Rogues arrived of
their being able to destroy men upon the suborned Testimonies that had been
dictated unto them, that one Mr. Shewin informs upon Oath, his having heard
John Macknamarra and Edward Turbervil, offer on the 11th of August last, to lay
a wager, That Mr. Sheriff Bethel, Mr. Best, and diverse of the London* Jury,
which had brought in an Ignoramus upon the Bill against Stephen College, would
be hanged before Christmas last. And that the world may be fully convinced, how
the Papists, and the Tools of one quality and another, which they work by,
designed to extend the guilt of this pretended Protestant Plot, we shall
subjoyn the Deposition of one Ashlock, who said, That Edward Ivy immediately
after Colledg' s Trial told him, That as they had gotten the said College to be
cast and condemned, so they were resolved to have the Duke of Monmouth, and
other Lords, to drink of the same cup, and to taste Colledg' s fate. So that no
man who is a Protestant ought after the knowledge of this, to believe himself
safe, or that he is exempted out of the number of those upon whom the Papists
under the pretense of a Protestant Plot, hoped to have wrecked their Malice and
Rage. For they that dare entertain thoughts of destroying a Prince, whom his
greatest Enemies can charge with no fault, save that he is a Protestant, and
zealous for the King's preservation and glory, are not to be supposed to
harbor any thoughts of Compassion and Mercy toward Protestants of an inferior
rank. Shall neither the Honor which the D. of M. has brought to His Majesty
and the Nation by his foreign Achievements, nor the peace and establishment
which he restored to the King and Throne by his prudent and valorous subduing
Insurrections at home, be sufficient to protect him from the danger and infamy
of a Scaffold, no more than they were able to secure him from being excluded
his Father and Prince's presence, and deprived of those Offices which his Merit
rendered him worthy of, had he not any nearness by Nature and blood to His
Majesty to plead for him? Will nothing satisfy the Romish Crew, unless they
can bring the King to forget the Affections of Father, as well as the Justice
of a Monarch, and make him abandon a person to their treachery and implacable
wrath, whom he is obliged by the Laws of nature to protect as his son, and whom
he is bound by the Laws of England to defend him as his Subject? And as all men
discern, whose Interest has been served, and whose revenge gratified in all
the mortifications of this Loyal and Innocent Duke; so we can easily guess, in
whose behalf, and for the promoting of whose concernments this whole Protestant
Conspiracy was invented and forged. And having succeeded so well already, as by
their mere importunities to alienate his Majesty from a person whom he once
seemed to value and love, they are encouraged to hope the King will be
prevailed with, by suggestions of Treasonable Crimes, to sacrifice him to their
indignation and ire.

Having now traced and pursued this forged Plot so far, as to see that it was
calculated for no less than the whole Meridian of Great Britain, and that all
the Patriots of Religion and Laws in both Nations were to be destroyed under a
pretense of being combined in it; we are in the next place to view it in the
complexion and figure wherein it opened and unfolded it self against the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, and those other persons who have been either
Indicted, or only Committed for an alleged accession to it. And as the Papists
very well know, that none had more opposed and disappointed them in all their
Idolatrous and Arbitrary Designs, and consequently deserved more to feel the
first and early effects of their wrath, than that wise and great Peer; so they
prudently foresaw, that should they adjourn their Revenge against him, till
they had made an experience of the credit of their Witnesses upon some other
considerable persons, he would by his Abilities and Industry not only have
easily detected and exposed the whole Intrigue, but have broken the Machine by
which they had projected both to overturn Religion and Property, and extirpate
Protestants in these Nations. Accordingly they thought it their best course to
assault him by way of surprise, and to hurry him to Prison upon an Accusation
of a Conspiracy, which people would be astonished at the noise of, but had not
enjoyed time to inspect and unravel. And we may rationally conceive the Papists
believed, that the Convicting My Lord Shaftsbury upon a charge of Levying War,
and Conspiring to seize the Person of the King, would be a kind of Moral Proof
against every other person whom they should think fit to have afterward
accused of the same Crime. For how easily would they have persuaded the world,
that a person of his great Sagacity and exact Conduct, would never embark in so
vast an attempt, without a proportionate number of persons engaged with him,
who for their Power, Quality and Interest might be supposed capable to effect
and carry it. And they would have pleaded, that such whom his artificial
Glosses and plausible Reasonings had not inveigled into Treason, the esteem
which he universally has among all sorts of men, that are not weary of their
Religion and Liberties, had swayed and biassed them to an implicit concurrence
in a Design, which they took not time to consider, and had not Abilities to
comprehend neither the dangers, nor consequences and issue of. And how would
every man have been exposed and ridiculed, that should offer to bring the
reputation of the Witnesses into suspicion, after they had been allowed for
good and credible Evidence against a Peer of the Earl of Shaftsbury's bulk and
figure? Besides, the Papists thought that the destroying this one Nobleman,
would have either frighted others to a compliance with them in their Designs,
or at least discouraged them from offering to withstand or control the Councels
and Projections which they are upon of enslaving these Nations, and extirpating
our Religion. These were the Motives and Inducements upon which they singled
out this great person, to have him the first man of Quality that should be
Indicted of this pretended Protestant Conspiracy. For having through the
influence which they have over our Ministers, and the power which some of that
party have upon His Majesty, proceeded so far as to prevail with the King to
turn him out of his Councels, and from the administration of his Affairs, for
no other reason that the world can take notice of, but because he would not
concur with them in their Designs against the Protestant Religion, and the
Established Laws; they hoped that by attacquing him at last upon an Accusation
of Treason, he might fall a Sacrifice to their Malice and Revenge. And as his
loss of the Chancellorship, with all the aspersions and obloquy that for diverse
years fell upon him, are to be ascribed to his Zeal and Activity in promoting
the Bill for disabling Papists from holding any Public Employment, which past
in the Session of Parliament that begun Feb. 4. 1672. so all the Perseutions he
has lain under of late, and all the dangers which his Life has been exposed
unto, either by secret Assassinations, or Legal Forms, are to be entirely
attributed to his inspection into the Popish Plot, and the endeavors which he
has laid himself out in, for preventing the Subversion of our Religion and
Laws, and the ruin of these Nations by the Romish Conspirators, and his
studying to defeat the hopes they have of compassing all at last by means of a
Popish Successor. Nor can there be a more indubitable and convincing Argument,
that this whole Protestant Plot under the pretended guilt whereof this
incomparable person and great Peer was to have been destroyed, came out of a
Popish Forge, and was formed and invented by the Romish Priests, than that
those of the Papal Religin abroad, and especially the Ecclesiastics, had both
the knowledge of it, and discoursed it to others, before the most inquisitive
Protestants in England could arrive at any intelligence concerning it. In
confirmation of the truth whereof, and for the ampler satisfaction of all
mankind, that the Papists were the Authors and Contrivers of this Conspiracy,
which they labor to sham upon Protestants: I shall subjoin the two following
Depositions, which were made upon Oath before a Magistrate of London.

Edward Dover of Stepney in the County of Middlesex, Mariner, aged thirty
years, or thereabouts, freely and upon his own motion makes Oath, That he the
said Deponent being in the Port of Bruges in Flanders with his Ship, and in the
managing of his business there, being in a public house, on or about the
eighteenth of June last New Style, he met with one James Morgan, which said
Morgan is a reputed Popish Priest, And being his Countryman, and having had
formerly knowledge one of another, they entered into the more free discourse; and
among other this Deponent asked the said Morgan, What News from England, Is
there an end of the Popish Plot yet? To which the said Morgan answered, What
Plot? There is no Plot but a Presbyterian Plot, and that now the Lord Howard
one of the greatest of them is clapped up for it; and by that time you get home,
Shaftsbury will be also secured. And further the said Morgan added, that he
hoped ere long to Preach in a public Pulpit in London, or words to that effect.

Jurat. Aug. 23. 1681.
John Coleuart of the Parish of St. Katherines, in the County of Middlesex,
Mariner, aged fifty years or thereabout, freely and of his own motion makes
Oath, that being in Bruges in Flanders with his Ship, in following his business
there, was in a public house on or about the eighteenth of June last, New
Style, where he met amongst others with a Popish Priest as he is reputed,
called James Morgan; and discoursing with him of the several affairs of
England, and of the Popish Plot; he the said D^po^ent heard the said Morgan
among other things say, (...) but a Presbyterian Plot; and that the Lord Howard
was already secured for it; and that it would not belong before the Earl of
Shaftsbury would be also secured, or words to that effect.

Jurat. Aug. 3. 1681.
And as the Papists were the Authors and Framers of this Sham Plot, so they
have chosen Tools every way adapted for the worst of Villainies, to m^^ge and
conduct it. For Justice Warcup the principal Broker for Witnesses, and one of
the chief Directors of this grand aff^^r is known both at the Council Board,
and in the High-Court of Chancery, to be a false and infamous person. Nor is it
to be wondered at, that he should become subservient in all base ways to the
Malice and Indignation of men, upon the promise and hopes of a valuable Reward,
who that he might obtain preferment to places of Trust and Profit, is said to
have turned Pander to his own Daughter, and have exposed her to men's Lust. But
it is long since this Justice was ambitious of being instrumental in the ruin
of My Lord Shaftsbury, seeing it was he that introduced Marchiamont Needham to
the Earl of Danby, in order to assist in the great Designs which were then in
agitation against this Lord's Honor and Life. And as Needham in pursuance of
this malicious contrivance, wrote both the Advices to the men of Shaftsbury,
wherein according to his wonted method of treating all he wrote against, he
loads this Honorable Person with all the Aspersions his Wit, influenced by the
Malice and Revenge of others, could invent and suggest; so I have seen the
Instructions that were given about the Arraigning this Peer, upon pretense of
his being Guilty of very Criminal matters. But as it is argued, that our
Ministers then were at a wonderful loss for Men of Wit and Conduct to promote
their Designs, while they had so many admirably qualified in the want of
Honesty, seeing they were forced by Money and Flattery, as well as by Promises,
which were never performed, to bribe over a fellow to defame this Noble Peer,
who had not only always scribbled on the other side, but reviled the late King,
his present Majesty and Monarchical Government, with the like freedom and equal
bitterness, And so ambitious was Warcup of being instrumental in the ruin of My
Lord Shaftsbury at that time of day, that not being trusted nor employed in the
Design, proportionably to his desires and inclinations, he bespake Needham in a
Letter to him, which I have seen, to recommend him to the Earl of Dunby, as a
person that would be zealous in agitating and promoting what they were upon.
And besides the Evidence that has been given elsewhere, of Justice Warcup's
suborning Witnesses to Swear the forged Conspiracy, whereof the Earl of See No
Protestant Plot, part 1. p. 22, 23.
Shaftsbury has been lately accused, I shall here subjoin one further Instance
of his Villainous carriage in this affair. For Mr. Sampson, among many other
things which he has Deposed upon Oath before a Magistrate in London,
positively swears, That Justice Warcup often solicited him with promises of
Reward, to be a Witness against the Earl of Shaftsbury and others of the City.
There are also other two, whose Depositions I shall forbear at the present to
rehearse, that directly restifie his endeavoring to have Suborned them upon the
same Design. So deplorable is the case of innocent Protestants, that if persons
accused do conceal the Witnesses who can discover the Accusations against them,
they abandon themselves and their own Innocence; and if they publish them, they
do become thereby exposed to the Rage of the common Enemy, and are brought into
danger of being suborned against themselves. And therefore the world ought to
pardon us, if we reveal no more than what is necessary for the vindication of
the Innocence of those that have been accused, and the justification of the
Integrity of the Juries that had the cognizance of the Bills which were
presented. The late Proceedings at the Court of the Verge against Mr. Everard,
do declare in the face of all the world, what kind of entertainment they are to
expect, who have refused to be Witnesses against innocent men, or who have the
courage to detect the subornations of such as traffic and barter for Evidence
against guiltless Protestants. But it is no ways strange, that the Justice who
can muster a Troop of Mercinary Rascals to perjure themselves for the service
of the Papists, should procure some of them to venture their Souls upon so
necessary a duty, as the preserving themselves and him from the Gibbet, or at
the least, the Pillory. Yet even most of these, whom he then produced, are so
publicly infamous, that their Testimony will never support an Indictment
against any man, before a good and impartial Jury; nor yet impeach the Credit
of the person against whom they swear. I know when and where one of them wrote
a Letter to the Justice, desiring him to draw up what he pleased, assuring him,
that upon easy considerations he would be ready to make Oath of it. Yet after
all the pains he has been at, to protect himself from the punishment of one
Crime, by perpretrating another, he will not only find, that Mr. Everard is
able to prove that whereof he has accused him, by undeniable Circumstances,
but he will also find, there are several others, whose Reputation he can no
ways detract from, that will be forth coming in due time and place, to lay
open, and prove the Villainy whereof he has been guilty, in suborning Witnesses
against the Earl of Shaftsbury. However, it is no ways fair nor equal, that
when Indictments could not be received, neither at the Old Baily nor
Hicks's-Hall, against the Justice and his Accomplices, for conspiring to take
away the Lives of innocent persons, yet a Bill can be immediately admitted in
another Court, if the matter and design of it be to stiflle the detection, or
asperse the Discoverers of this Conspiracy. Nor is Warcup the only person that
has been employed and entrusted in hiring and suborning Witnesses to swear a
Protestant Plot, but there are many others, and even some of the Gown, who to
gratify the Papists, and either to make way for their own preferment, in case
of a Popish Successor, or to testify their gratitude to such as recommended
them to the Places which they do now possess, have shamefully, and to the
dishonor of their Profession, co-operated with the Justice in the same
villainous design. For besides their secret correspondence, and mysterious
traffic with Haynes before his being apprehended, which alone is enough to
demonstrate their concernment in the whole forgery and intrigue of this
Protestant Plot: There is a person, who will appear upon occasion, that will
testify how much a certain Gentleman, retaining to the Law, did endeavor by
flattery and promises, to obtain him to become a Witness against the Earl of
Shaftsbury. It will not at length be found, to have been much to any man's
Reputation, to have the glossing, managing, or setting of the Depositions which
were brought them by the Masters of the Forgery Mint, but it will for ever
subject those to a character of Infamy, who contrary to the Justice, Equity and
Honor of the Law, wherein they are eminent practicers, have prostituted
themselves to be Factors for Perjury. And if men will not be bribed and
wheedled to forswear themselves upon so useful and sacred a design, as the
destroying loyal and harmless Protestants, who are guilty of no other Crime,
but their withstanding the establishment of Popery and Arbitrary Power, they
are then hectored and menaced, and in the Phrase of our English Cicero,
threatened with a new sort of advancement. Their method is, when they accost a
person, to insinuate into, and persuade him, that he must needs know something
of the Earl of Shaftsbury's designs against His Majesty; and that if he will be
so ingenuous as to confess, he has an opportunity presented him, both of
enriching himself, and obtaining the favor of the Government: But then in case
the party assaulted, prove so just to himself, and the person whom they would
decoy and Wire-draw him to accuse, as to tell them, he is altogether ignorant
of any ill design projected or promoted by that Noble Peer, he is in the next
place told, that they have an Information of a dangerous Nature against him;
and that seeing by declining to inform against my Lord Shaftsbury, he makes
himself unworthy of the Favor and Pardon of his Prince, he must therefore
expect to feel the rigor and severity of the Law. This was the course that was
steered toward Captain Wilkinson; and this was the way wherein Sir Richard
Graham, late High Sheriff of Yorkshire, and Sir Jonathan Jennings, a Justice of
the Peace in Rippon, used toward William Brownrigg. And as all the Nation is
sufficiently made acquainted with, and is fully sensible of what Captain
Wilkinson, for declining to be a false Witness, became exposed unto, so I shall
here subjoin the Mittimus, by which Brownrigg, upon his refusing to come in as
an Evidence against the Earl of Shaftsbury, was sent Prisoner by Sir Jonathan,
to York Castle, upon a pretense, that there was an Information of Treason
against him, and that it was no more but a pretense, or what is equivalent, a
false Information, appears from their discharging him sometime after without
any prosecution.

West Rid. Commit. Ebor.
Whereas an Information upon Oath of a Treasonable nature has been made
against Mr. William Brownrigg of Knares brough, Attorney at Law: These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name straightly to charge and command you, or some
of you, to take into your custody the said Will, Brownrigg, whom I herewith
send you, and him safely keep, till he shall be delivered by due course of Law.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 30th day os August, 1681.
Jonath. Jenning.

All men who have any knowledge of the Law of England will say, this is a
strange and unusual Warrant, and for which Sir Jonathan deserves to be called
to an account; but the true reason why Brownrigg was Committed upon a general
charge, was because really there was nothing against him, save that Baynes had
given Information to some here, who transmitted it to Yorkshire, that Brownrigg
had acquainted Mr. Stringer, Servant to the Earl of Shaftsbury, that there was
a Design carrying on against the Life of his Lord. Upon the whole it plainly
appears, that this pretended Protestant Plot, which the Nation has been so
alarmed with, and filled with the noise of, is nothing but a mere Invention of
the Papists, and of some ill men, who under the disguise of being for the Crown
and the Church, serve and promote their treacherous and wicked Designs; and
that the combination against our Religion, Laws, Lives and Liberties, is as
strongly and effectually carried on under a false Accusation of Treason, as it
was heretofore pursued upon the score and account of Heresy. And besides
several Informations which are to be met with elsewhere, relating to the
concernment of See no Protestant Plot, part 1. p. 25.
very great men in this Papal Intrigue, there are many other Depositions come
to our hands, declarative of the same Conspiracy, which to prevent the
increasing our Animosities, and the making the Settlement of the Nation
desperate, shall be at this time withheld and remain concealed.

And therefore without any further displaying or prosecution of this, we shall
in the next place address our selves to the consideration of the Credit of
those Witnesses, upon whose Testimony the whole Fabric and Structure of a
Protestant Plot is founded and built. And though we are told by the Reverend
Judges, That the Credibility of the Witnesses lies not before a Grand Jury, but
that they are to remain satisfied in having See the Proceedings against the
Earl of Shaftsbury, p. 33.
matter that is treasonable, sworn before them by Two Witnesses that are prima
facie credibil (where by the way, albeit prima facie credibil, be in the Print,
yet it is not in the Manuscripts which we have had the fortune and opportunity
to consult.) I say notwithstanding that we are told thus by the Judges, yet we
apprehend our selves justified both by the Law of the Land, and the common
Reason os Mankind, in taking upon us to affirm, that no man is to have his
Name, Reputation and Honor upon a Presentment detracted from, much less his
Loyalty to his Prince Impeached upon an Indictment, and thereby his Life and
Estate brought into danger, save upon the Evidence of persons of good Credit
and moral Fame. The very words of the Statute of the 13 Car. 2. upon which my
Lord Chief Justice Ibid.
was pleased to say, That the Indictment against the Earl of Shaftsbury was
principally founded, because it not only contains the Treasons declared in the
Statutes of the 25th of Edw. 3. but enlarges them in many particulars; I say
that very Statute requires, that the Witnesses be lawful and credible. Besides
it is a plain contradiction, that a person should be supposed credible, who
either never had or has forfeited his credit. No man is capable of proving a
Crime Legally, but he that is reputed Morally honest. All Histories, as well
Sacred as Profane, tell us, How men of depraved Principles, being influenced
by those in Power, or bribed and hired by Rewards, have conspired to Swear
against the Innocent. Thus was Naboth murdered at the instigation of the Court,
upon the Testimony of perjured and suborned Witnesses. And as his Crime was his
standing for his Legal Right, and not surrendering his Property and Inheritance
to the Despotical pleasure of the Prince; so he was both Tried and Condemned in
the way of a Legal Form. Nor ought it to appear strange, to find a guiltless
person Accused by false Witnesses of Treason, seeing the Holy and Innocent Jesus
was Indicted and Murdered for no less Crime, and that by the mouths of two
Witnesses, of the very complexion and stamp with ours, and procured in the same
way. Whoever has read Tacitus or Suetonius, will be supplied with Instances
enough, of the slaughter of the chiefest Patriots of the Roman Liberty, who
were destroyed by the Depositions of false Witnesses, set on and authorized by
the commands of Sovereigns, and encouraged by Rewards from the State. Yea, so
prevalent are Malice and Revenge in some, Pride, Envy and Emulation in others,
and the love of Profit and Gain in many, that neither the most provident and
severe Laws to the contrary, nor the Wisdom and Circumspection of the best and
most prudent Administrators of public Justice, have been able at all times to
prevent the ruin of the most useful, eminent and innocent persons, but they
have perished under the false Accusations and groundless Calumnies of perjured
and wicked Rascals. Thus Anthonio Foscarini, a Cavalier and Senator of Venice,
was Anno 1622. seen hanged upon a Gallows upon the Testimony of infamous
persons, whereof some turning Accusers, and others Witnesses, they destroyed a
Patrician of great Merit and Virtue, and brought an aspersion upon the Justice
of the Venetian Senate. But this See Nani's Hist. lib. 5. p. 180.
ought to be added for the Honor of that Republic, that as soon as they had
discovered the Conspiracy, under the fraud and villainy whereof he fell, they
not only inflicted a most remarkable punishment upon the principal Authors and
Instruments of his Murder; but by a public Declaration they both restored unto
him an honorable Name, and to his Posterity the ancient luster of his Family,
with an advancement to further degrees of Honor in the Commonwealth. And though
we hope that God will preserve all the Patriots of our Religion and Liberties
from perishing through the Combination of suborned and profligate Wretches, as
this unfortunate Patrician did; yet we expect from the Justice of His Majesty
and the Government, that having a more wicked, large and destructive Conspiracy
against innocent persons detected unto them, they will not think it unbecoming
the Glory of a Monarchy, to imitate a Republic in all the measures of Equity
and Righteousness, as well toward the unjustly accused, as the infamous
Accusers.

But to proceed, No man's life were secure, provided the Witnesses would but
swear things heinous, and with consistency and boldness, if a Jury were not to
judge of their Credibility and Fame. Not only our Laws, but the Laws of all
Nations declare some sort of men infamous; and Principles of Natural Light, and
Converse among men, instruct us to suspend giving credit to diverse, whom the
Laws have not branded with that ignominious character. And a persons being
Morally flagitious, though he be not in a Legal sense infamous, may render his
Testimony justly suspected; because he has abandoned all Principles which may
restrain him from speaking falsely. What a ridiculous thing were it to require
Grand Juries to use all possible means of discovering whether Indictments and
Presentiments be true or false, if they are not to judge of the Credibility of
the Witnesses, upon whose Testimony they are to give their Judgment and
Opinion? Were it not an unjust as well as incongruous thing, to make all Grand
Jurymen swear, They shall present nothing but the Truth, and the whole Truth,
if they be not to enquire how far the Oaths of the Witnesses, upon which their
Verdict depends, ought to be believed, seeing there are some, that Ne jurantibus
creditur. Now as to the Witnesses that Swear a Protestant Plot, there are in
general these Three Things to Impeach the Credibility of their Testimony.
First, They are remarkably Profane and Flagitious; and we usually say, that
Justitia cum scelerato non potest habere comercium, Truth and Righteousness
have no place, where Ungodliness and Villainy bear sway and reign. They perjure
themselves every day over and over out of Wantonness; and is it not then
probable, that they will forswear themselves for profit, especially if they may
be protected from the punishment which they become liable unto, upon the
account of it. Nor do I know any thing that should check or restrain them; for
as they live dreadless of God and Hell, so they imagine that the Interest and
Power of the party, whose Designs they promote in swearing a Protestant Plot,
will be able to defend them from the Gallows and Halter. Their Debaucheries are
so signal, beyond those of other men, that wheresoever they come, they are
known without enquiry to be the New Evidence by their excessive Debaucheries.
Their declining to answer Questions put unto them by the Jury, as supposing
that by their reply, they may bring themselves under a Subjection to
punishment, is demonstrative to all the World how infamous Rascals they are,
and how little they ought to be credited. In the second place, They are all of
them of a narrow fortune, and most of them miserably indigent. It was their
daily complaint a little before they became Evidence to prove a Protestant
Plot, that they were ready to starve, and wanted bread. The Civil Law tells us,
that vili personae non facile creditur; We are not easily to give credit to a
penurious person. And as all Nations take notice, that the Testimony of
necessitous persons, ought not to bear much sway with any man; so some
Governments have taken care, that such who have not a competency to raise them
above the Temptations of Hunger and Want, shall not in any Case that is
Criminal, be allowed to be Witnesses. The Poet tells us, that Quantum nummorum
quisque habet in arca, tantum habet and fidei; that is, he who cannot live
without being beholding to others, ought not to be admitted to have a
Reputation to support what he says in a Case that is Important, and where he
may reap considerable advantage by his Testimony. Agur knew what Temptations
there were in Penury, and therefore prayed, That he might not be poor, lest he
should take the Name of the Lord in vain. And the raking of Goals for
Witnesses, is an undeniable Argument, that there is little Reality or Trust in
that which they are produced for. Nor is it improbable, but that these Rascals
finding themselves disappointed both of Pensions from the Parliament, and
Contributions from the City, and having nothing of their own whereby to
purchase food and raiment, they thereupon bethought themselves of setting their
souls to Merchandise making a Subsistence by the sale of their Consciencies.
When they perceived, that by all their Importunities and Petitions, they could
not squeez Money out of our Pockets, they took up a Resolution in anger and
revenge to drink our Blood. Men that are necessitous, and withal See no
Protest. Plot. part 1. p. 26. and part 2. p. 10, 11.
wicked, will undertake to perjure themselves a thousand times over, provided
they may be put into a Condition of living in plenty and ease. But this having
been suggested and insisted upon elsewhere, I shall content my self to have
here briefly intimated it. Thirdly, They were the most unlikely of all men
alive, to be made acquainted with those things they swore about. No man who is
not forsaken of his Reason, would ever believe that they who had discovered the
Designs of their own Party, notwithstanding the Oaths of Secrecy which they
were under, should conceal a Conspiracy of ours. For the same inducements that
led them to discover the Popish Plot, must in all men's apprehensions, much more
influence them to reveal a Protestant one. Is it not enough, that the Authors
and Managers of this Intrigue, would have us believed to be Traitors, but they
must proclaim us arrant Fools? Instead of endeavoring to hang us, as
Conspirators against the King, they ought to beg us as Naturals; and instead of
sending us to the Tower and Newgate, they should send us to Bedlam, as the most
proper place. If we be so silly as they represent us, we ought not to be
indicted, but to have Physic prescribed unto us. And this Affair is not so fit
for the Council Table, and a Bench of Judges, as for a College of Physicians,
and a Company of Apothecaries. Whosoever considers these fellows either with
respect to their Morals, or their Politics; or takes a view either of their
Natural or their Civil Capacity, will easily conclude, that none but men wholly
bereft of their Wits would entrust them with the knowledge of a Design which
they were in no Condition to further; and which rationally they must be
conceived inclinable to betray. And if we should believe that persons who are
neither acquainted with the Histories of former times, nor have themselves been
conversant in any weighty Counsels, crimportant Affairs, should be guilty of
such a folly and madness; yet no man can believe such a thing of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, whom whatsoever his Enemies think, or say otherwise of him, yet
they do all acknowledge him to be a person of great Wisdom, Circumspection and
Conduct. When persons of a low Condition, and of such proffigate Lives, as the
witnesses are known to be, will pretend not only familiar access at all times
to a person of high quality, but their being upon the most weighty and
hazareous Secrets of one of the wisest of men, it is an Argument that all they
say, is Romance and Fiction.

Surely if there had been any Protestant Plot for the apprehending and deposing
of the King, either those of the Church of England, or the Fanatics would have
known of it; but as the latter do absolutely deny, that ever they either had
the least access to such a design, or were any ways made acquainted with, so
even those of the Church of England, who seem most forward, out of hatred to
Dissenters, to believe a Protestant Conspiracy, yet they are not able, after
all See No Protestant Plot, part 1. p. 10.
their enquiries concerning it, and the great noise and clamor they have made
about it, to arrive at any prints or footsteps of it. There is this to
evidence the truth and reality of a Popish Plot, That it was detected both by
Laics and Priests of their own Communion; whereas the first and principal
Discoverers of this pretended Protestant Combination against His Majesty and
the Monarchy, lately were, and may still be suspected to be Members of the
Papal Church.

But what we have said against the Credibility of the Witnesses in general, is
nothing in comparison of what we have to alledg against every one of them in
particular. And we shall take them in the same order, in our exposing of them,
as they were ranked and brought forth by the Heranlds, who best knew their
Quality, at the Old Baily. And forasmuch as Mr. Booth was produced first, we
shall accordingly begin with him. Though indeed to produce him at all, and
especially in the first place, was no less than to discredit the Testimony of
all the rest, had they been persons of much better Reputation than they were.
And after the many Reflections which I have often made upon the Proceedings of
that day, and the manage of them, I cannot but think, that either the Council,
for opening, disposing and applying of the Evidence, were strangely infatuated,
or that they never intended the Jury should believe one word that was deposed
and sworn before them; otherwise they would never have begun with the Testimony
of so infamous a fellow. This Booth has been guilty of, and publicly branded
with all sort of Crimes and Villainies. Having of a Serving man or Steward,
commenced Parson, he was justly suspended from the exercise of the Ministry,
and vvithal turned out of his living, not only for Symony, but for Debauchery.
He has been also Indicted and Convicted for Clipping and Coining; and had not
His Majesty, upon the importunity of some persons about him, vouchsafed him a
Pardon, the Papists would have been prevented of this Witness against
Protestants; for the Rogue had been hanged long ago. Can any man think, that he
is a credible Witness, to prove the best Protestants, and chiefest men of
Quality of England, guilty of Treason, who had been condemned himself, as a
Traitor for a crime of the basest and most ignominious kind. I know that a
Pardon may restore a person to be a Witness in Law; but after one has been
Convicted for Crimes so prejudicial to States and Societies, as Coining and
Clipping are, and which none are found guilty of, or liable unto, but Villains
of the basest Principles and most degenerate Natures, it cannot be supposed,
that a Pardon will ever give them a fair Reputation in the World, or restore
them to any considerable Credit amongst men; but that notwithstanding their
being pardoned, they will be always looked upon as fellows inclinable to be
easily corrupted, and ready to embark in any ill design. Yea, besides his being
Convicted and Condemned for Treason, he has been also Indicted for Murder; and
though he came off, yet all who were present at the Trial say, The presumption
was great, and accordingly preserve in their minds a suspicion of his guilt.
For the matter, as it appeared against him, lay thus; namely, That a certain
boy having had occasion to know diverse of his wicked and criminal practices,
Booth thereupon became apprehensive, that the lad by discovering them, might
bring him to the punishments which he knew he deserved; and therefore having
set the youth upon a Horse, he drove him into a River, and pursued him to and
fro, till he was overthrown and drowned. The positive swearing of a Varlet,
upon whom the presumption of so horrid a guilt does lie, cannot in the judgment
of all impartial men, so much as fasten a Reproach, much less support an
Accusation of Treason against any person. Nor will it in the issue turn to the
honor of any, that they have endeavored to destroy the Life of a great Peer,
upon the Testimony of this profligate wretch. I might add to those Crimes
whereof he has been Charged and Arraigned at Bars, his having passed under a
suspicion, and undergone Accusations of poisoning not only a Gentleman's Horse,
whose Company upon the Road, the designs which he had then in hand, made him
desirous to escape and avoid, but of poisoning a young Maid or Girl, from whose
death he expected an advantage. But there needs no more to blast the Credit of
this wretch, with all that are either wise or honest, save his endeavoring
first to suborn Capt. Wilkinson to swear falsely against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and then deposing Treason against the Captain, for not complying in
so wicked a design. And for a Jury to believe such a profligate Rascal's
Affidavit, were both to bring upon themselves the guilt of innocent blood, and
betray their own and other men's Lives into his hands, whenever it may be
profitable to him to swear Treason against them. Upon the whole, As my Lord
Chief Justice had some weighty Reasons, why he would not allow the Jury to ask
Mr. Booth, Whether ever he had been Indicted for Felony, so the Jury had
sufficient Reasons from common Fame, and the Informations of others, as well as
just grounds of suspicion from my Lord's Inhibition, and the Fellow's avoiding
to answer, to believe that he had, and consequently to judge, what little Credit
was to be given to his Testimony.

The next person who appeared upon the Stage at the Old Baily, upon the
preferment of the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury, was Mr. Turberville; and
accordingly we shall endeavor to satisfy the world, that his Depositions
against this Noble Peer ought to be no ways believed or regarded. I love to
tread softly upon the grave of the dead, and therefore shall not discover the
gross immoralities of his Life; I mean, such as detract from the Reputation of
a man's Word and Oath. For being delivered from his malice, I shall not load
his Memory, more than the being just to our selves, and the whole Protestant
party in this Kingdom, makes indispensably necessary. Mr. Sampson deposes upon
Oath, That he and Mr. Turberville being together, at the Sign of the Cock, by
the Pall Mall, Two or Three days before Colledg's Trial, Mr. Turberville told
him of a design that was on foot against Protestants; but swore, That he knew
nothing against the Earl of Shaftsbury, the Lord Howard, or any other
Protestants, save only of Colledg' s idle words, and Rous' s keeping back the
charity of the City from the Evidence. William Clerk, Esquire; informs likewise
upon Oath, That upon the 5th of July he went to see Mr. Turberville; and having
found him in a house in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, in bed, he told him; That he had
heard by Sir Allen Apsley, how he, the said Turberville, had given Evidence
against my Lord of Shaftsbury; and that Turberville replied to this, He would
meet Sir Allen any where but at his own house, and would justify, that he was
never in Town since my Lord Stafford' s Trial; and that he never gave Evidence
against the Earl of Shaftsbury, neither did he know any thing against him. Nay,
there are many other persons of Quality, such as Sir Francis Rolls, William
Herbert, Esquire, -- Hobbs, Esquire, John Trenchard, Esquire, Gentlemen of
great Honor and Truth, who do all testify, That after the Commitment of the
Earl of Shaftsbury, Mr. Turberville declared the same to them with many solemn
protestations, That he neither was, nor could be a Witness against this Noble
Peer. So that the Grand Jury, before whom the Bill against the Earl of
Shaftsbury was preferred, had just ground for the question which they put to
the said Turberville; viz. Whether, having been challenged by some, after my
Lord's Commitment, concerning his being a Witness against him, he had not
protested before God, and sworn deeply, that he knew nothing against my Lord.
And all men of Judgment and Sense, are wonderfully surprised, both at the
Attorney General's objecting, That they were not to be allowed to ask such a
question, and at my L. C. J. insinuating, That this was no ground to cavil with
the Witnesses upon: (for so, according to our Manuscript, though it be in gentler
terms in the Print, he was pleased to express it). For as a Jury are to take
equal care to defend the Lives and Reputations of the innocent, as to convict
suchas are criminal and guilty; so they are obliged to take notice of every
thing which lies in a subserviency to the discovery of the Truth, which way
soever it arrives with them, whether it be upon public fame, or by the
information of particular persons. Seeing therefore it plainly appears, that
what Turberville said in the Court, was contradictory to what he had declared
to diverse persons elsewhere; and that his Oath at the Bar, was directly
repugnant to what he had sworn before diverse Gentlemen in other places, we may
very reasonably conclude, that his whole Depositions against my Lord, were
either the invention of this perjured fellow, or that they were dictated unto
him by such who had hired and suborned him to come in as an Evidence, in order
to destroy this honorable Peer. But this is not all that we have to offer
against the credibility of this Witness; for besides this, we have the
Testimonies of several honest and reputable persons, of his acknowledging, that
he had been often tempted to go off from his Evidence against the Papists, and
to come in, and depose against Protestants. For not only Mr. Broadgate swears,
That Mr. Turberville told him, that he had great proffers of preferment and See
Colledg's Trial, p. 45.
rewards from the Court, if he would go off from what he had said, and come
upon the contrary, but Dr. Oats affirms, That the said Turberville declared
unto him, how Mr. Warcup had offered him any thing See No Protestant Plot, part
1. p. 26.
he would desire, provided he would swear against the Earl of Shaftsbury, my
Lord Howard, Mr. Rous and Mr. Whitaker. Yea, his being one of those that
subscribed the Petition to my Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and the Commons of
London, in Common Council assembled, wherein they declare, That the Papists had
not only so far wrought upon the necessities of some, as that for a present
supply, they had Ship-wrack'd their consciences, but that they were tampering
with, and laboring to corrupt others of the most considerable Witnesses; I say
his being one that subscribed that Petition, is enough to assure all unbiassed
persons, how and upon what Motives and Terms he came to be an Evidence
concerning a Protestant Plot. And whereas he had the Impudence to affirm in
Court, See the proceedings at the Old Bailey, p. 39.
That tho he signed that Petition, yet he never read it, nor knew what was in
it; I shall here subjoin an Information of Mr. Bellamy, the Scrivener who drew
it, which being directly to the contrary, may serve both to overthrow this
shameless evasion, and convince the world what a lying infamous Rascal this
Turberville was. Now the Information which Mr. Beliamy has both given under
his hand, and declares himself ready to Depose upon Oath, whenever he shall
be called thereunto, is in the words following; namely, That Mr. Turberville,
Macknamarra, Haynes and others came to his house (being near Guild-hal) the
Night before the Common Council sat, to desire him to draw a Petition to the
Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council, for their present support and
maintenance. And that when they had given him Instructions, he drew a foul
draught thereof, which he read to them the next Morning, as audibly and
distinctly as he could; and that they all seemed very well satisfied with it,
desiring only that he would add to the last clause of the body of the Petition
these words, viz. That they could not be supplied out of His Majesty's
Exchequer. And that when he had thus perfected the foul draught to their
satisfaction, and engrossed it, he read it to them again with the same
plainness and distinctness as before; and that all of them did very well
approve of it, especially Mr. Turberville, who was pleased to give it a
particular Character. Now whether we ought to believe Mr. Turberville, who
swears That he never read that Petition, nor knew what was in it; but that it
was drawn by the order of Mr. College, or believe Mr Bellamy, who affirms and
is ready to depose upon Oath, That Turberville and the rest gave Instructions
for the drawing of it, ordered the foul draught to be corrected by the addition
of several important words, had it read to them distinctly and audibly, and
gave their approbation of it; I shall refer it to the judgment of all sober,
discreet and unbiassed men. Nor is it unworthy of our observation, that when
the same Petition was objected against him at Oxford, toward the invalidating
his Testimony against Mr. College, he was provided with no such answer as this,
which he retreated to at the Old Bailey; which forced My Lord Chief Justice
North to endeavor to relieve him, by saying, There was nothing in that
Petition, See Colleges Trial, p. 47, 48.
that is a Contradiction to what he then Swore. But I humbly conceive all men
will not be of this Reverend Judges mind, especially when they consider that
Turbervile and the rest whose hands are to that Petition, do not only therein
declare how restless the Papists were in tampering with the Witnesses to
corrupt them to stifle and discredit the belief of the Popish Plot, but that
they were laboring to obtain them to impute the same unto, and devolve it upon
Protestants. And for the shift which Turberville has since betaken himself
unto, it is nothing but an evasion, either lately invented by himself, or
suggested unto him by those that Suborned him. And yet the Silliness of it is
as conspicuous as the Falsehood. For as it is incredible that any man should set
his hand to a Paper, which he had neither read, nor knew what was in it; so no
man that should draw such a Petition, provided he were wise, would admit it,
seeing it might give those very persons, at whose desire he had done it, an
advantage of turning upon him, to his prejudice. The whole ground and
foundation upon which Turbervile came to Swear a Protestant Plot, are laid open
See Colledge's Trial, p. 48.
and detected to us by Dr. Oats. For the Doctor has Deposed in Court, that
Turbervile justified his Swearing Treason against Mr. College, (though he had
said before, that he would not give any Evidence against him) Because the
Citizens had deserted him, and God damn him he would not starve. Alas! We poor
Protestants thought our selves safe in our Innocence, but behold a company of
indigent and mercinary Rascals have resolved to Swear us into Guilt, that they
might obtain Bread. Upon the whole it does appear, that the Testimony of
Turberville ought to be esteemed of no validity: And that the Jury could not in
the case of my Lord of Shaftsbury do otherwise than they did, notwithstanding
the Testimony of this Fellow, without becoming themselves unrighteous and
unjust.

The next person that mounted as an Affidavit-man against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, was Mr. John Smith, a person every way adapted to compensate the
deficiency of truth in what he says, with impudence in the manner of declaring
it. And because some who do not thoroughly know the man, seek more especially to
countenance the belief of a Protestant Plot from his Testimony, we shall be the
more careful to unmask him, and give the world a representation of him in his
just features, complexion and colors. What truly his Christian Name is, or
whether he have any or no, I cannot certainly tell; but I have made a shift of
late to learn both his Surname and his Country; namely that the one is Ireland,
and the other Barry. And seeing that See procedings against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, p. 69.
he was not brought to acknowledge the name of Barry, but after some
tergiversation; I do affirm, that that is the only name he ought to go by, if
it were not the temper, humor and interest of the man to walk always in a
disguise. And forasmuch as he has been ambitious to seek a Reputation by
pretending himself an Englishman, I do proclaim to all the world, that he was
born in Connaught* in the Kingdom of Ireland. It Is so habitual for some to lie,
that no ties nor obligations can make them speak truth. However, he has not so
much dishonored England, by pretending himself a Native here, as he has our
Lord Jesus Christ, by giving himself out for a Christian. For whereas England
owns many Villains and flagitious persons for Natural Subjects and free
Denisons, Christ will acknowledge none for Christians that only make mention of
his Name, when they blaspheme it. But if the world will account him for a
Christian that swears as often as he speaks, I say, that in all probability,
notwithstanding whatsoever he pretends to the contrary, he is truly and really
a Papist. For Mr. Sampson has deposed upon Oath, That John Smith, Stephen
Dugdale and Edward Turberville, having sent for him to the One Tun Tavern in
Hungerford Market, on the 23d of September last, Smith begun the Duke of York'
s Health, swearing, God damn him, that he therefore both loved him, and drunk
his Health because he was a Papist. I am so far from being angry at his
drinking the Duke of York's Health, that out of sincere love to His Majesty, as
well as the Protestant Religion, I wish no man may ever have occasion to drink
it under a higher Title. All that I would observe is, upon what motive and
inducement Barry's love to his Royal Highness is grounded and built. To this I
shall only subjoin one proof more, of what Religion, whatsoever he pretends, we
ought to esteem him to be; namely, that he said at Newark, He would sooner hang
Ten Protestants than One Papist. And his Reason was as considerable as his
Assertion, viz. because the Popish principles led them to Treason, which the
Protestant principles did not. It would seem, the fellow begun to apprehend,
that the Court would grow weary of his confidence and importunity, and
therefore he begins to commend principles which may justify his being another
Jaques Clement, or a new Ravilliack. And if he answer the Character I have
received of him, there is not a person alive, who is more likely to supply the
place, and undertake the Province of the Four Ruffians, who were disappointed
and prevented in their design against his Majesty, Anno 1678. than this lean,
long chapp'd Cassius featured fellow is; and the rather, to expiate the Crimes
against the Papists and the D. of Y. which he contracted, by pretending to be
the Author of a Narrative, which, save the Deposition, was none of his own. But
to make a nearer approach to the Credibility (and that I may usurp a modern
Phrase), the Veracity of this Gentleman, there are no fewer than an hundred
Witnesses, who can testify, how he usually reproached the Irish Evidence,
alleging, that their Credit was so mean, that it would not sustain the
Depositions which they had given concerning a Popish Plot; and that all of them
were such Mercinary Rascals, as would be induced, and were in a fair way of
being prevailed upon to swear, that there was a Conspiracy wherein Protestants
were engaged against the Government. And See Colledg' s Trial, p. 91.
the morning when Haynes was apprehended, and was said to have made a great
discovery to this purpose, Smith protested to Mr. Blake, a Linnen-Draper in
Cornhill, that it was all but Sham, and an acting over the Meal-Tub design.
Nay, the very day that Everard and he were called as Witnesses upon the Bill
against my Lord Howard, he told Mr. Wilmore, calling God to witness to the
truth of what he said, That he knew no harm by my Lord Howard, nor by any
Protestant in England; and that he knew no Reason, why he and Mr. Everard
should be subpoena'd, unless it were to gloss the business, and make Mrs. Fitz
Harris' s and her Maid's Testimony go down the better with the Jury. The same
he told that very day to Dr. Oats, with this addition, That he should be a
great Rogue, if he swore against any Protestant, whether Lord or other. And the
Evening after Mr. Fitz-Harris was Executed, Smith being in company with Mr.
Blake, Mr. Kelsey and Mr. Hamlin, Three persons of unspotted Integrity and good
Credit, and being discoursing concerning the Plot which Haynes was reported to
have sworn, he ridiculed it as mere Sham, and perfect forgery. And not only so,
but some days after Colledg's Trial, he affirmed to Mr. Gardener, a Common
Council-man, and to one Mr. Smith, an Apothecary, That he knew of no Protestant
Plot, neither did he know of any Protestant See Colledg's Trial.
concerned in a Plot, only that College had spoken such and such words, which
for his part he did not believe to be true. Nay, the Monday before the Earl of
Shaftsbury was Committed, he sent for a Gentleman, who when there is a just
occasion, will be ready to testify it upon Oath; and the Gentleman having met
him according to his desire, he not only told him, there was Treason sworn
against that Noble Peer, and by whom, but that a certain Lord in the other end
of the Town, had been dealing with him to swear likewise against him. Withal,
he further added, that he replied to that Lord, and said, He thought he knew
the Earl of Shaftsbuoy as well, and had as much Credit with him, as those whom
his Lordship had named for Witnesses against him, and yet he had never heard
him say any thing that was Treasonable, nor what had a tendency that way. And
this he desired to have communicated to my Lord Shaftsbury that night, saying,
it was his interest to know it as soon as might be, seeing there was a great
design against his Life. And yet after all these Declarations, made at several
times, and to different persons, this impudent and frontless fellow, has not
been ashamed to appear on the public Stage, and accuse this Honorable Peer of
most horrid Treasons. Nor is it difficult to conceive, how this came about: for
being a man of no Conscience, and ambitious of Preferment, he was easily
persuaded by Justice Warcup, upon the promise of a Deanery, to undertake the
accusing Protestants of a Conspiracy against his Majesty's Person and the
established Government. He had been often complaining, that he was neither so
much regarded at Court, nor rewarded by the Parliament and Kingdom, as he
thought he deserved, and had impatiently expected, for the discovery which he
gave of the Popish Plot. And therefore being accosted by Warcup, with promises
of preferment, beyond what he could hope for by adhering to his Evidence
against the Papists, he readily complied with the Justice's importunity, and
comenceth a Witness on the gainful side. This plainly appears by the
information which Dr. Oats has given; namely, That the Dr. having asked Smith,
what he had been at Windsor about? Smith, by way of reply, told him, he had
been there about a design which he supposed the Dr. would be glad to come into;
and that he might not only learn it of Warcup, but be happy, if he followed his
advice therein. Accordingly, the Dr. being curious to know what this great
project, which would render a man happy, should be, he addressed himself to the
Justice, who told him, That there was a design to take off my Lord of
Shaftsbury, and that he had brought over Smith, and several others to accuse
him, and swear a Protestant Plot. And if the design against the Lives of
Protestants, were to be carried by positive Swearing, there is not a Knight of
the Post in England that can parallel Smith in a bold and daring Affidavit. For
he that has so far abandoned all Modesty, and renounced all Fear, as not to
forbear to say, That if he pleased, he could See no Protestant Plot, part 2. p.
8. and Colledge's Trial, p. 49.
prove God Almighty a fool; will never be startled at Swearing an Innocent and
Loyal person, a Rebel and Traitor. And he that that is so dreadless of the
Tribunal of Christ, as to bid God damn the Gospel, will easily dispense with
murdering the guiltless. It is not improbable, but that the fellow being
originally an Irish papist, was nursed with the Blood of Protestants; and that
therefore he still thirsts after it, as his natural and genial drink. He knows
how to compensate the want of truth in the matter he is to swear about, by
impudence in the manner of declaring what he swears unto. And could he have
been but once believed by a Jury, there would no man have been safe, whom he
either hated, or whom his supreme Directors were desirous to have taken out of
the way. For there is one Mr. Shewin Deposes that he heard him say, That had
he but the knowledge of Mr. Jenks and several others who had traduced him, he
would make examples of them, and not fail to Swear that against them, that
should take them off. And there is a Gentleman of unquestionable reputation,
who affirms he heard Smith say, He could swear Treason against an hundred.
Protestants, had he but other Witnesses to join with him. Nor did Smith think
it enough to engage to perjure himself in order to destroy Protestants, but he
has turned Suborner of others to do the same. And I suppose I may lawfully and
fairly mention Balron's Deposition to that purpose. For though he be a profligate
Villain himself, yet he may be a good Witness against his Accomplices, and
especially such as debauched him into Perjury. That which he Deposes is
briefly this, namely, That Smith persuaded See Colledge's Trial, p. 57, 58.
him to Swear, that Sir John Brooks and others held a Consult at Grantham, and
that it was there resolved it was better to seize the King at Oxford, than to
let him go; and that if Balron would manage it rightly against my Lord
Shaftsbury and College, he would makehim for ever. And seeing Mowbray has been
lately produced by Just. Warcup at the Court of the Verge as a good Evidence, I
suppose we may likewise produce his Testimony, in proof of Smith's being a
Suborner. Now he Deposes, That Smith importuned him to Swear, That Sir John
Brooks had said there would be cutting of throats at Oxford, and that the King
would be seized there. And he says Smith added, That the Parliaments denying
the King Money, See Colledge's Trial, p. 59, 60.
and standing upon the Bill of Exclusion, was pretense enough sor any man to
Swear, that there was a Design against the King, and that the King was to he
apprehended. And as these Witnesses ought not to be disallowed by the managers
of this Protestant Plot, seeing they are made use of by themselves, so they not
only prove Smith to be an infamous and suborning Rascal. But besides the
Depositions unfold and declare the whole Mystery of this pretended protestant
Conspiracy. For whosoever are either against a Popish Successor, or unwilling
to give Money till they know how it shall be employed and applied, are to be
Sworn against as Guilty of a Design to Depose the King and alter the
Government. So that there is no mean, if these men have their Will, but we must
either submit to be Papists and Slaves, or else we must be content to be
destroyed as Rebels and Traitors, in the way of a Legal Process. I think we may
say now upon the whole of what has been declared concerning Smith, that that
man is not careful of his own Credit, who will give credit to this fellows
Testimony. And whatsoever Jury should find a Bill upon this Wretches Evidence,
may be justly esteemed to put their Neighbors Life in jeopardy, upon the Oath
of a suborned and perjured Rogue. Nor can they who shall hereafter bring in a
Verdict against Protestants upon Smith's Deposition, be thought to have duly
regarded or considered the quality of the Witness, or the credibility of the
Evidence; but rather be judged by all to have pursued either their own
Animosities, or the unjust Quarrels of other men.

The next Witness who at the proceeding at the Old Bailey swore against that
Honorable Peer the Earl of Shaftsbury, was Brian Haynes, a fellow stigmatized
and branded with the infamy of so many Crimes, that he disgraceth any Cause
which he is produced in the favor of For seeming Angels are not to be
believed, when they are in fellowship, and speak in consort with Hellish
Fiends. It were endless to recount the Enormities of his Life, all his days
having been spent in wickedness and profligacy. For besides the Thefts and
Robberies whereof he was guilty when at liberty: This is remarkable, that when
his Debaucheries and Immoralities had lodged him about six years ago in the
King's Bench, so prevalent was the habit of Villainy which he had acquired, that
among other Rogueries See John Whaley's Deposition in Colledge' s Trial, p. 44.
which he practiced there, he stole a Tankard belonging to the Drawer. And what
is this less than committing a Robbery in the sight of the Gallows, which we
say' is the highest Token of irreclaimabless and obstinacy in Wickedness. Yea
Perjury it self, which is the most fatal and destructive sin to the Safety and
Peace of Mankind, is a Trade which he has been long accustomed unto. For in a
Case between Mr. Bill and my Lady Windham, diverse years since, he gave a false
Testimony upon Oath, as he not only afterward acknowledged to my Lord
Chief Justice Rainsford, but for which he craved her Ladyships Pardon. Nor is
there any thing more obvious, than that he swore falsely at Oxford upon
Colledge's Trial. For whereas he there Deposes upon Oath, That College See
Colledge' s Trial, p. 31, 31.
should speak opprobriously of My Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, in the Month of
March, before the Parliament sat at Oxford, it is most certain and falls under
the knowledge of all Englishmen, That that worthy Gentleman of the Coif was not
made Chief Justice till about the middle of April following. So does God
infatuate men when they engage themselves in a wicked Design, that he
overrules them in some thing or other to betray themselves, and beyond their
intention to detect the Villainy wherein they are concerned. To that prodigious
Impudency was that Wretch arrived, that he has openly professed Swearing and
Perjury to be his Trade. For Mr. Hickman Deposes, That he heard Haynes say to
one Mr. See Colledge's Trial, p. 30.
Scot a Papist, God damn him, he cared not what he swore, nor whom he swore
against, because it was his Trade to get his Money by Swearing. This
brazen-faced Varlet that swears now so positively a Protestant Plot, did not
only Depose upon Oath before Sir George Treby, March 6. 1681. That David
Fitzgerald was pursuing a Design of shamming the Popish Plot, and f^rging a
Protestant one; but he presented the same in a Paper which remains at the
Council Board, a Copy whereof as it was extrcted by William Blathwayt the 5th
of October. 1681. I shall here annex.

Brian Haynes, of London, Gentleman, Aged Thirty years, and upwards, makes
Oath, That Mr. David Fitzgerald, one of the Kings Evidence, told this
Deponent, about the latter end of February last, that he the said Fitzgerald
possessed His Majesty, and also gave it under his Hand and Seal, that the late
Plot was a Presbyterian Plot, and invented by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Shaftsbury, of purpose to extirpate the Family of the Steward' s, and dethrone
his present Majesty, and turn England into a Commonwealth, or else set the
Crown upon the said Earl's head, which the said Earl told the said Fitz Gerald,
did more appertain to the said Earl, than to his present Majesty. And this
Deponent further says, That one Robert Power, agent for the Earl of Tyrone;
and likewise the said Fitz Gerald did diverse times tamper with the Deponent, to
speak with Mr. John Macknamarra, to the end the said Macknamarra would retract
his Depositions concerning the Popish Plot, against the said Earl of Tyrone.
And that in case the said Macknarra would deny what he deposed against the said
Earl of Tyrone, the said Robert Power and David Fitz Gerald, did to this
Deponent promise, the said Macknamarra should be provided for all the days of
his Life. And this Deponent further says, That the said Fitz Gerald told this
Deponent, he wanted but Mr. John Macknamarra to come in and join with him, and
he would have the Earl of Shaftsbury' s head cut off, and sham the whole Popish
Plot. By this Deposition we are plainly led into this whole devili^h Intrigue,
of charging Protestants with a Conspiracy against the Person of the King, and
the established Monarchy. For Fitz Gerald being corrupted by the Papists, and
such as manage their designs, to sham off the Popish Plot, and swear one upon
Protestants, he accordinly applies himself to every person, whom he conceived,
with any probality, entertain thoughts of prevailing upon. And by dealing with
men of no Principles, and of most profligate Lives, to whom were proposed great
Offices and ample Rewards, they have by degrees been able to muster up Nine or
Ten Rascals, most of which were before notoriously infamous; and having clothed
them with the style of the King's Evidence, they grow angry that their
Testimony is not admitted to the reproach of our Religion, and the destruction
of many innocent persons. Yea, this wretch Hayn's consessed to one Mrs. Hall,
That he had been dealt with to form a Presbyterian See Colledge's Trial, p. 42.
Plot, and that he was desired to corrupt and suborn one Everard and others to
come over and promote the same Design. And upon the Overtures which had been
made him, he not only told one Mr. Titon, That he could frame a Presbyterian
Plot, and that there was Money to be gotten by doing it; but he acknowledged to
one Mr. Richards, That he was employed and Ibid. p. 43.
had an hand in putting the Plot upon Dissenting Protestants; and that he was
offered a Pardon and 500 l, if he would swear such and such base things, That
is, if he would accuse the Earl of Shaftsbary and other Loyal Patriots of
Religion and English Liberties, of being guilty of a Conspiracy against his
Majesty, and the established Government. And the Fellow being in great want,
and having long before shipwrack't his Conscience, he was easily brought to
comply with this wicked and abominable Proposal. For as he told Mowbray, His
necessitous Condition made him take desperate Resolutions, and that to make his
Fortune, he would swear a Plot against the Presbyterians, in reference to whom
any plausable thing would be believed. And that the World may know of how long
standing this forged Conspiracy has been, I shall here add something of
Sampson's Deposition upon Oath before an Alderman of London, which may serve
further to enlighten this Affair. He swears, That John Macknamarra told him,
that Edward Ivey and Bryan Hayns agreed together in April last, to swear
Treason against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and that the Treason which they
resolved to swear, was, That the said Earl should say, That this King deserved
more to be dethroned than Richard the second; and that he the said Earl would
dethrone the King, and make England a Commonwealth; and that if the Bill
against the Earl of Shaftsbury were once found, that then they with Smith,
Turbervil, and others would swear Treason against many more. And as we may be
sure, that the Villan's being a Papist, disposed him the more readily to
venture upon a Design which was judged so subservient to the Romish Interest,
so it were worth the while to inform the World with what Court-Ministers, and
little Officers he secretly corresponded all the time he pretended to abscond.
But as those persons must be left to suffer by Justice of a Parliament, so all
the Discoveries relating to a close Converse between those Gentlemen and Hayns,
must be deferred till this whole matter fall under the Inspection of the Two
Houses. But so zealous of a sudden did the Rascal become in ruining Protestants
upon this forged Plot, That he not only called the Parliament at Oxford a
company of Rogues, because they would give the King no Money; but that by doing
Shaftsbury and other Protestants business, they Colledge's Trial, p. 44.
would help him to Money out of the Phanatiks estates; for they would rather
damn their Souls to the Devil, than that the Catholic Cause should sink. If
men did not choose the being imposed upon, and were not obstinate against
conviction, they might have been satisfied long ago, that there was no Truth
nor Reality in all the talk and noise which we have had concerning a Protestant
Plot; but that it is only the invention of ill men, instructed and acted by the
Papists, for the retrieving the sinking Cause and Interest of the Catholic
Church in these Nations. And they have pitched upon Tools who are either wholly
fearless of Damnation, or such who upon a promise of Happiness in this world,
are resolved to venture it. So that upon what has been here with all Truth as
well as Brevity represented concerning this Fellow Haynes, I hope that at least
all the sober part of Mankind will see cause for justifying the late Jury in
their not believing his Testimony. Nor have I insisted upon half the Crimes and
gross Immoralities of his Life, such as his forging a Letter to one Mr.
Harbottle of Lincoln, in order to cozen a Gentleman of Goods, to the value of
200 l. And his marrying one Mrs. Mansfield, and then turning her away, after he
had lived diverse years with her, and spent 500 l. which she brought him,
pretending she was but his Whore, because they were not married according to
the Form of the Church of England, but after the Romish Fashion; though he that
is guilty of such things ought not to be believed, unless the matter he swears
carry a probability in it, or be rendered morally certain by Circumstances which
are either notorious, or otherwise confirmed. No instead of recounting such
Wickednesses and Immoralities, I have rather chosen to make him appear an
infamous Rascal, and one to whose Affidavit concerning a Protestant Plot no
credit is to be given, by declaring his own acknowledgments of the whole
Forgery, and upon what Motives and through whose Instigation he listed himself
for a Witness, and what was the end which the Managers of this Design proposed
ultimately unto themselves, and with respect to which they reckoned the
murdering of innocent men would be esteemed a holy and meritorious service. And
I shall only add to what has been said, That the wretch plainly contradicted
himself in the face of the Court. For being asked by the Jury, Whether he had
not given an Information to a Justice of Peace, concerning some design against
the Earl of Shaftsbury, he twice denied his having given such an Information to
any, save Secretary Jenkins; yet upon my Lord Chief Justice's telling him, that
he did not observe the question, and proposing it again to him, he See
Proceedings at the Old Baily, p. 44, 45.
at last accknowledged, that he had given an Information to Sir George Treby,
how Mr. Fitzgerald had both told the King, and given it under his hand, That
the Earl of Shaftsbury was resolved to set the Crown upon his own head, or
otherwise, to turn the Kingdom into a Common wealth. I wonder how their
Lordships, and more especially, how the Kings Council, who seemed to lay great
weight upon his Testimony, could forbear blushing, to hear a fellow say, not
only once, That he had given such an Information to none, save to Secretary
Jenkins, but to add a second time, No, no; to none except Secretary Jenkins,
and yet upon the hint which my Lord Ibid.
Chief Justice gave him, to acknowledge in the next breath, That he had given
such an Information to Sir George Treby. And though the Court might take no
notice of this shameful contradiction, yet we may be sure, that the Jury, as
well as a great many Gentlemen besides, did.

The next person whom His Majesty's Learned Council at Law produced as a
Witness of my Lord Shaftsbury's being guilty of Treason against the King and
his Government, and upon whose Testimony they not only staked the belief of a
Protestant Plot, but ventured both the Honor of the Government, and their own
Wisdom and Discretion, was John Macknamarra, a fellow of the same stamp with
the rest and fashioned in the same mould for the present Design. His early
immoralities, as well as the straitness and penury of his condition, gave not
only the managers of this Sham against English Protestants, encouragement to
assault him, but rendered him disposed for, and capable of their impressions.
For both John Row and Francis Foulk, Gentlemen of good Quality, and Justices of
the Peace in the Kingdom of Ireland, do testify, That he was not only an idle,
lying and pilfering boy, but that being put upon his Oath, concerning some
goods which he was suspected to have stolen from one of his Masters Daughters,
he denied to have taken them, when nevertheless, upon search they were taken
about him. And his progress in Roguery, increased answerably to his growth in
years. For the same Gentlemen do not only declare, That he and his brother
Dennis, used frequently to bring Horses to graze on Camphaire Bogg, which
afterward, upon enquiry, were found to be stolen from some remote places, but
that his bouse was known to be the greatest receptacle in the County of Clare
for Rogues and Thieves. And now finding himself in a Kingdom where he could not
subsist by Horsestealing, nor take sanctuary in Boggs when pursued, as he did
in Ireland, he was glad to find such a Trade set up, as a man might get both
Money and Countenance, merely for forswearing himself, to relieve and advance
the Catholic Cause. For that his condition was become extremely necessitous,
appears not only from the Petition which he and others presented to the City
for a maintenance, but is attested by diverse, to whom in converse, he every day
complained of it. And whereas he (as well as the rest) does pretend, That that
Petition spoke neither his Language nor Case, but was framed for them by
others; particularly, That College was concerned in promoting that Petition, by
my Lord Shaftsbury' s advice; and that he neither read it, nor knew what was in
it. Mr. Samson not only swears, That he saw them dictate See Proceeding at the
Old Baily, p. 45.
it to the Scrivener who drew it, but that John Macknamarra told him, how they
intended to evade the stress laid upon it, for weakening the credit of their
Testimony, by affirming, that it was made for them by the City. And forasmuch
as this fellow being questioned by the Grand Jury at Rous's Trial, how he was
maintained, had the impudence to answer, That he did then rent a hundred pound
per annum in Ireland. That thing is altogether false, as is both attested by
Mr. Samson upon Oath, and confirmed by Letters and Informations from persons in
that Kingdom, who very well knew the Rascal, and are themselves of
unquestionable Honor and Reputation. Such a stranger was John Macknamarra to
the reality of a Protestant Plot, or the time when he pretends the Treasonable
words were spoken by that Noble Peer, that there are several persons, whom all
sober men will give entire belief unto, who not only depose, That he used about
that time to aver there was no such thing, but that he also used to fasten very
severe Characters upon such as took upon them to say there was. For whereas he
swears, That he heard the Earl of Shaftsbury speak such and such Traitorous
words in March and April last, Mr. Ibid, p. 44.
Wilmer deposes, That being in discourse with Macknamarra, about the time that
the Indictment was exhibited against my Lord Howard, the said Macknamarra did
affirm, that he knew nothing against any Protestant in England, and that none
would swear any Treasonable Design against them but David Fitzgerald and his
crew of damned shamming Rascals, who would swear any thing. And Sampson informs
upon Oath, That about two days before Macnamarra went to Oxford to Colledge' s
Trial, the said Macnamarra told him, that he knew the Design against
Protestants; but swore God damn him, if he knew of any Treason by any
Protestants, or knew of any Plot but the Popish Plot, or if he would swear to
any such thing. And as we have all that is needful to convince every man, who
is not either a Fool, and not capable of being instructed and undeceived; or
else a Knave, who from corrupt Princiciples and Motives, and in order to
Villainous ends, is willing to be imposed upon; that as Macknamarra, by his own
manifold Confessions sealed with Execrations and Oaths, knew of no Traitorous
Design wherein either the Earl of Shaftsbury or any other Protestant was
engaged or concerned; so we are fully acquainted with the methods and ways, and
by what means he came to be seduced to appear as an Evidence against that Noble
Peer, or to charge a Plot upon His Majesty's Protestant Subjects. For he not
only acknowledged to Mr. Samuel Harris, shortly after the said Macnamarra was
bailed out of Newgate, and also at diverse times afterward to Mr. John Wilmer,
That Coll. Warcup had been with him, and earnestly solicited him to come to
Whitehal, telling him that he might have great advantages by so doing; and that
the Justice spoke this in such a manner and way, as gave him reason to suspect
a Design of frustrating his Evidence against the Papists, and employing him in
some very ill Design: But he likewise confessed to Dr. Oats, Mr. Thomas Pain,
Mr. Samuel Bull, and several others, That Warcup had offered him several
hundred pounds, if he would recant his Evidence against the Papists, fall in
with Fitzgerald, and swear Treason against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and other
Protestant Lords and Gentlemen. And so gainful did the Justice and these
Gentlemen whose Purses, and Treasure, this grand Broker for, and principal
director of the Witnesses, has the use and disposal of for the service of so
good and necessary a service, make the Trade of Perjury to this mercinary and
suborned Rascal, that he has since not only lived at a high and extravagant
rate, spending commonly as Mr. Shown Deposes, Eighteen shillings for his own
share at an Ordinary, but he has laughed and derided Mr. Bourk, calling him in
the hearing of Mr. Samuel Chaffin, a Fool, that he did not put himself into a
condition of having Money enough, by closing with him and doing as others did.
And besides that, Mr. Brownrigg Deposes, How he saw two of the Witnesses
receive Money from Christopher Williams, servant to Mr. Marriot, both for
themselves and other two of the Evidence* Tribe that were not there; Mr. Shown
informs upon Oath, that having met John Macknamarra at the Golden Posts by
Charing Cross on the Tenth of August last, and having asked him why he went so
often to Sir L. J. house, the said Macknamarra to intimate his business with
that Gentleman, put his hand in his pocket and shook his money. And as we have
all the assurance imaginable, that this Rascal Macknamarra and the rest of the
Witnesses against Protestants were suborned by Warcup, so we have great reason
to believe that they were not only countenanced, but from time to time taught
and instructed by persons of higher Quality than the Justice is. For Mr. Shown
swears, That being on the 11th of August in company with Smith and Macknamarra,
the said Macknamarra told Smith, That the reason why he could not sooner wait
upon him that Morning, was because he had been with Sir L. J. who had given him
a long Lesson, which nevertheless he had learned, though it was very long. To
that height of Impudence and Villainy was this Varlet arrived, through the
encouragement and protection which he received from some great persons, whom it
would have better become to have employed their Authority and Power according
to the Rules of Justice and Honor, that as if it had not been wicked and
immodest enough to own his being suborned himself, he made it his business to
suborn others. For so much does Mowbray Depose against him, who though he is
become himself one of the Swearing Gang, yet his Testimony is not thereby
weakened, but is rather the stronger, being against one of his Accomplices. To
that Immodesty and Insolence was this mercinary audacious Wretch grown, that if
a person did but decline the gratifying his covetous and insatiable desires, he
was prepared immediately to Swear Treason against him. For Mr. Chaffin
Deposes, That he heard John Macnamarra say, He would Swear Treason against a
Merchant in the City, if he would not give him such a Sum of Money as he
demanded of him. Whether upon the whole, the original Authors and supreme
Managers of this Sham expected to reap any honor to themselves, or credit to
the Conspiracy which they would have fathered upon Protestants, from the
reputation of this Witness, I cannot tell; but I think it is evident, from what
has been said in relation to him, that no unbiassed persons, nor wise and
honest Juries, could have peace in themselves, nor approve their actings to God
and the world, should they in the case before us give faith to this Fellow's
Testimony. Nor would I have the Conductors of this malicious and forged Design
against the Lives of innocent persons think, but that as we Protestants are
very sensible, how unjustly and industriously they have been pursuing our ruin,
so we are not ignorant of their treacherous and wicked carriage, from first to
last, in this Affair. For let me tell them, That while they conceive they act
behind a Curtain, they do but dance in a net. And while they imagine, that they
remain safe through their standing in the dark, they are both as well known,
and their methods as fully understood, as if they had appeared and acted in a
meridian light. And whenever it is a convenient time, there are those in the
world, that know how to represent them stripped of the mask and disguise under
which they have gone.

The next Witness that stepped up to give Evidence against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, was Dennis Macknamarra, John's true Brother in all Wickedness and
Perjuries, as well as in Blood. For having acted in co-partnership so long in
the Horse-stealing* Trade, they were not to be separated in this new course of
Livelihood which was proposed unto them, provided they would perjure
themselves, and swear Protestants guilty of a Plot. Nor is this a groundless
surmise of mine; but Mr. Samson has deposed upon Oath, That both he and others
heard Dennis Macknamarra say, That he would swear any thing that his Brother
John would have him to swear. And whosoever acts implicitly upon the advice
and command of such a guide, ought to be esteemed and judged of, according to
the Principles and Practices of his Conducter. But besides, the fellow was
himself immediately tempted with promises both of a present Reward and a
standing Salary, if he would swear Treason against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and
such others as should be named unto him; and the silly Rascal wanting Wit, as
well as Honesty and Conscience, became easily conquered by so suitable as well
as great temptations. For the wretch knows no Law but that of his belly, nor
understands any more Sense or Reason, that what is declared in the offers of
food and money. And we are assured by persons, whose integrity was never
suspected, That Dennis Macknamarra told them, he was profer'd great sums of
money, to go off from his Evidence against the Papists, and to swear against
Protestants. This is directly and positively deposed against him by Dr. Oats
and Mr. Thomas Pain, with this addition, That Justice Warcup was the man who
endeavored to corrupt and suborn him. And withal, he laid open to the Dr. the
methods and steps in which the Justice did this base and villainous thing. And
though the success of Warcup's application to suborn him, be now evident in the
effects of it, yet I shall give an account of it from Dennis Macknamarra's own
acknowledgment to Mr. Peter Norris. For Mr. Norris being in company with him,
and representing that he wanted money, Dennis Macknamarra thereupon replied, We
are all Fools, for David Fitz Gerald lives like a Prince, wanting neither Money
nor Gold, while in the mean time, said he, we can hardly have bread; and damn
me, said he, if we had done as he did at first, we had been better than we are;
but damn me, we will do it yet; and with that, the said Dennis Macknamarra
pulled a paper out of his pocket, and said, If Mr. Norris would set his Hand to
that paper, he the said Macknamarra would warrant him they should do better.
But I shall not deduce, nor pursue what we have against him to any further
length; for seeing this little fellow is no otherwise to be considered, than as
an Appendix of his Brother, we may reasonably therefore hope, that the Credit
of the one, as to the supporting the belief of a Protestant Plot, being blasted
and overthrown, the Credit of the other runs the same destiny. The Reputation
of the Accessory falls with that of the Principal. Yet what we have here
offered from his own acknowledgments, concerning his being suborned, is enough,
should he be weighed, as abstracted from any dependence upon his Brother John,
to render him, and make him appear to be no less in this whole matter, than a
perjured and infamous Rascal. And we pity our Adversaries, as driven to very
low shifts, in that they had no other to produce, to prove the chiefest men of
England guilty of Treason, but such foolish wretches as could neither conceal
their own Mercinariness and Perjuries, nor the Villainies of those who had
suborned and corrupted them.

The next person whom the Managers of the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury
thought fit to venture the Truth and Proof of the Charge against him upon, is
Edward Ivey, one that is infamous to a very Proverb, and who disgraceth the
Name of a Gentleman, by pretending to the Title and Appellation. That he has
been Convicted and Condemned for Robbery, appears from the Certificate which I
shall here subjoin.

Somerset ss. Ad Assisas and General. Goal. Delibar. Dom. Regis de prisonet. in
ea existent. tent. apud Civit. Wellen. in and pro eadem Com. Die Sabbat. scil.
Nono die Augusti. Anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli Secund. Dei Great. Angl. Scot.
Franc. Hibern. Regis, Fidei Defensor. Decimo quarto, coram Roberto Foster, Mil.
Capital. Justic. Dict. Dom. Regis ad placita, coram ipso Regetenend. assign.
and Johan. Archer Servie. ad Legem Justic. etc.

Whereas at this present Assizes, one Edward Ivey was Indicted for robbing
himself and his Sister Joan Plympton; This is therefore to certify, that the
said Edward Ivey was Convicted for the same Fact, and had Sentence of Death
passed upon him; but afterward had His Majesty's Pardon.

Vera Copia, ex. per Fra. Stevens.

He that could be guilty in Robbing his own Sister, will decline nothing that
is Criminal, if the committing it be but subservient to his Ambition or
Covetousness. For having violated the Obligations of Nature, he can be under no
confinement from subordinate Laws. It were endless to recount the Enormities of
his Life, whereof almost every Action has been a Scandal: I shall therefore
only detect those Villainies which he has perpetrated, to the rendering him
infamous, as well as the proclaiming him prodigiously wicked. He was no sooner
pardoned for one Felony, but he committed another. For having listed himself
for a Trooper and gone to Portsmouth, he there married a second Wife, though his
first was still living. And finding it was discovered, and that there was a
Prosecution commencing against him, he thereupon fled to Ireland, being never
heard of again in his own Country, till he appeared as one of the King's
Evidence concerning a Popish Plot. For His Majesty having promised in his Royal
Proclamations, that whosoever came in by such a time to detect the Conspiracy
of the Papists against His Person and the Government, should thereupon be
pardoned; this cunning Rascal thought with himself he might safely venture
hither, as reckoning that his Felonies would be included in his Pardon as well
as his Treasons. To this I might add his having lived some time this last
Summer with a Woman, whom he swore God damn him he was Married unto, which
Woman proved in the end to be another man's Wife, and was accordingly taken out
of Bed from him by her Husband on the second of October at Night. But whereas
He said upon Oath at Mr. Rouse's Trial, that he came not over to England to
discover the Popish Plot; it is not only known to all who understand any thing
of the late Transactions, that this was his pretense, and that accordingly he
made a large Discovery; but withal Mr. Samson also swears, There was twenty
Pound allowed the said Ivey by my Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to defray his
passage hither, in order to his revealing the Popish Plot. Who can blame a
fellow of his Principles, that has a latitude to swear and forswear as he
finds it for his interest, if he disclaim the having come hither upon an errand
which he is so little thanked for, and which is not likely to conduce so much
to his profit as he imagined it would. The forming a Protestant Plot, and
suborning others as well as coming in himself to swear Treason against the Earl
of Shaftsbury and other Patriots of our Religion and Civil Liberties, is a
design that will turn to better account and give him an esteem with some men,
beyond what ever the former dull Trade would have done. And therefore it is a
fi^ter end, for one of his genius and stamp to bear himself upon as the grand
motive of his Journey hither. But whereas he Swore likewise the time when the
Bill was preferred against Rous, that the Earl of Shaftsbury did usually
dictate to him the Information he drew up and Deposed concerning the Popish
Plot; There are diverse persons, and amongst others Mr. Sampson, who do testify
they saw those Informations in his hand, before ever he knew the Earl of
Shaftsbury. And seeing he further declared at the same time, that some
Informations which he had given in here against the Papists were wholly false;
and that he made Oath of them only, because Mr. Rouse would not otherwise give
any Money, ought not all Mankind therefore to esteem him as a Villain, and as
one that is perjured upon Record. Nor could any thing more amaze the thinking
part of Mankind, than that when this miscreant had declared himself perjured in
open Court, he should yet be produced again the next Sessions; and that against
no less considerable person, than the right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury
is. But whether we are to ascribe it to excess of rage in some men against that
Noble Peer, or whether we are to attribute it to a Divine infatuation, upon the
Managers of the Bill of Indictment, I cannot tell; but I dare boldly say, That
both the Jury, and hundreds in the Court besides, were able to guess at the
maliciousness of that Prosecution, and to conclude within themselves, That
whatsoever was alleged to render that excellent Patriot guilty of Treason,
was all forgery and groundless invention.

But that we may yet further expose this fellow Ivey, and that at the same time
unveil this whole Combination, wherein some ill men have been engaged, in order
to the Subversion of our Liberties and Religion, or against the lives of the
greatest, and most innocent protestants; I shall in the next place observe,
that he both spoke of such a Design while it was in agitation and forming, and
embarked in it upon promises of Reward himself, but endeavored to corrupt and
suborn others to join in the same Villainy. Accordingly Captain Yarrington
informs, That being one morning in bed at Mr. Stephen Colleges, he there heard
Mr. Ivey acquaint Mr. College with a Desing that was then on foot, for framing
of a Plot against Protestants; and that they were to be accused of a Conspiracy
against the Monarchy, and for deposing the King. And Mr. John Jenks deposes,
That Mr. Ivey confessed to him, how he had great offers made him, provided he
would swear against Protestants. And Mr. Ashlock says, that Ivy one day told
him, He had been with the said Lord, and that my Lord Hyde had ordered him to
send at any time to him, and he should have money. And the said Ashlock further
adds, That he saw a Letter directed to my Lord Hyde from Ivey, which Ivey said
was for money. Now that Ivey was necessitous, and the more likely to be
suborned for money, to swear any thing that was false, appears not only by the
Petition presented to my Lord Major, the Court of Aldermen, and the Common
Council, which he among others subscribed; but more especially from his own
Testimony in Court, at the time when Mr. Rowse was indicted; seeing he then
owned, That he had falsely sworn such things merely, because he could not
otherwise get money. And that this Protestant Plot was hatched by this hired
suborned Rascal and others, who in order to promote the Interest and designs of
the Papists, had combined to asperse Loyal Persons with the imputation of
Treason, and to make the chief Protectors under his Majesty of our Religion and
Liberties, perish in the form and course of Justice, does appears by what Mr.
Sampson has deposed upon Oath, namely, That John Macknamarra told him how he
and Ivey, having been with the Earl of Shaftsbury, his Lordship had refused to
discourse with them alone, saying, He never discoursed with any but in the
presence of his Servants; and that I being thereupon very greatly disgusted,
contrived by way of Revenge, to swear High Treason against him. Not but that
the Design of accusing my Lord Shaftsbury of Treason, was laid by others, but
Ivey being suborned to be a Witness against him, he therefore sought an
opportunity of speaking with his Lordship alone, the better to obtain what he
should afterward say against him, to be believed. However having upon some
instigation or other entertained a Resolution of swearing Treason against this
Loyal and Noble Lord; his next business was to procure others to fortify his
Testimony, and second him in whatsoever he should say. Accordingly he applies
to Haynes; assuring him in the names of several Lords, That he should not only
have his pardon, but five hundred pounds, provided (as Mrs. Wingfield Haynes's
Mother-in-Law, told Mrs. Hall, and Mary Richards) he would fasten a Plot upon
Protestants, and swear against several Lords. Nay, Mr. Zell one of Justice
Warcups present Darlings, and whose Testimony he ought not to decline against
Ivey, having so lately made use of it in the Court of Verge, to vindicate
himself; I say, this Zell has deposed upon Oath, That Ivey would have
persuaded him to swear High Treason against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and by way
of Argument to influence him to a compliance, told him, That the E. of H. my L.
H. my L. C. and Mr. S. were a Commitee to give assurances of Pardons, and to
allow Gratuites to all that would swear against that Lord, and that there is a
Presbyterian Plot. And though I am not willing to believe those great Ministers
guilty of this which Zell says Ivey reported of them, yet it is something
strange, that knowing it from Prints as well as otherwise, they have not
endeavored to get that Rogue punished for defaming of them. And I do verily
think it would be as much for the Honor of the Government, and for the
Reputation of these Statesmen, to have this fellow, and the rest, who have
used the like Language concerning them, either prosecuted by way of Action or
Information; as it will prove in the issue that the Attorney General is
prosecuting one Baldwin for having published a Book called No Protestant Plot;
wherein so far as very good and wise men can see, there is not any thing
criminal, unless it be a Crime to detect the Designs of the Papists against
Protestants, and to vindicate the innocence of those, who (as it has appeared
by the verdicts of Juries) were falsely and unrighteously accused. But to
return, I suppose from what has been here declared, and laid open concerning
Ivey, there will not many be found who are credible persons themselves, that
will look upon him hereafter, as a credible Witness in reference to a
Protestant Plot. Nor is the bringing the Lives of Innocents into hazard, upon
the Testimony of a wretch branded with so many capital Offenses, and who
besides has been so evidently tampered with, to be any other way expiated or
attoned for, but by bringing both him and his Abettors to condign punishment.

The last Witness made use toward the proving the Bill against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, was Bernard Dennis, a fellow as lewd in his Morals as any of the
rest, and drawn and procured to be an Evidence against Protestants, by the same
means and arts that they were. Nor is he only an Irish man, but of one of the
most sottish bigoted bloody Clans's of all that Kingdom. See proceedings upon
the Bill against the Earl of Shaft. p. 48.
And upon the best enquiry I can make, there is not one Irish man of his Name
in that whole Nation, who is known to be a Protestant. I should not have
mentioned this, if the fellow upon being asked whether all his Kindred were not
Papists, had not answered, he could not say so. And yet were he put to it, he
will not be able to name one Person neither in the County where he was born,
where Ibid. p. 32.
he says there are so many of them, nor in the whole Country besides, that is
not a Papist, if withal they be not of the most violent and bloodily disposed
sort. And whereas he once told Mr. Wilmore (they two being discoursing together
about the principles of the Papists), that the Papists valued no more the life
of a Heretic, than they did that of a Dog, it is most probable, that he
therein spoke the Sense of his Kindred, and published what they had of old
infused into him. I will not enquire what Religion he is of at present, seeing
no form nor kind of Religion can give him a Reputation, but he reflects
dishonor upon whatsoever Religion he does profess. Only I wish, that the
Papists have not Shamed him upon the Church of England, that he may the better,
and under the fairer name, Sham a Plot upon Protestants. And who knows, but
finding a respect paid to his Testimony at the Trial of my Lord Stafford,
because he there professed himself a Papist, he might thereupon hope it would
advantage him in being believed against a Protestant, by listing himself in the
Communion of the Protestant Church. The forgery of this Plot would have been
too obvious, should Romish Priests have come forth, as the principal Witnesses,
to prove the best Protestants in England, concerned in a Conspiracy against His
Majesty and the Government; but the producing none for Evidence, but Members of
our own Church, does help to hide and conceal the Villainy. And I beg the rather
pardon for my jealousy in this matter, because though he told the Jury, that he
had been a Protestant since February last, yet he never sought to be received
into the bosom of the English Church, till about the month of June, which was
near the time that the Mine which had been long before laid against
Protestants, was just ready to spring. Nor were things so much better for the
Protestant Interest, and worse for the Popish Ibid p. 47.
in February, than they had been in November before, that a fellow who makes
Religion always subservient to his safety and gain, and who had been a Papist
in November, should think of abandoning the Communion of the Church of Rome,
for to be taken into the bosom and embraces of the Church of England in
February following. But be he of what Religion soever he pleases, I still say,
he is a wicked and flagitious fellow. For whereas he acknowledges, that in the
course of his Travels, he had been in Maryland, as well as in diverse other
Countries, he must give us leave to remember himself of, and acquaint the world
with a good token of it. For besides several Debaucheries, and lesser
enormities he was guilty of there, he was apprehended not only for felony, in
stealing a Watch, but for Sacriledg, in breaking into a Church and carrying
away the Communion Plate. But being I grow weary in raking so long in Sinks and
Kennels, I shall therefore wave the insisting upon these things, or the
deducing them to any further length. Since he came hither, he has been always
extremely necessitous, but never in greater penury, than immediately before he
started up a Witness in this new Plot. For as he wanted bread, otherwise than
as he was from day to day relieved by the Charity of such compassionate
persons, to whom he bewailed the miserableness of his condition, so I have
heard from a good hand, that being arrested for Fifteen or Seventeen shillings,
he was so poor, that he must have gone to the Counter, if a Gentleman that
passed by had not out of mere pity sent him a Guinee to discharge the Debt and
the Sergeants Fees. And how easy was it to corrupt and suborn such a fellow,
who as he had no Principles of Virtue or Honor, to preserve him against the
temptations wherewith he was assaulted, so the pinching wants, under which he
labored, rendered him a prey to any that would hire him with ready money, or
give him any assurance of a plentiful subsistence. Now it not only appears from
the Testimony of Dr. Oats, Mr. Boulter, Mrs. Mary Cox, Mrs. Norton, and diverse
others, that by his own acknowledgment and confession to them, both Warcup and
Fitzgerald had tempted him with great offers of Gold and Silver, if he would
depart from his Evidence against the Papists, and swear Treason against the
Earl of Shaftsbury, my Lord Howard, and several other Protestants, but it is
likewise deposed by Mr. Samuel Oats, that Dennis should say, If the Protestants
did not help him to money, it would cause him to do that which he never
intended. But what need I insist upon the Depositions of others, in proof, that
he had frequently confessed his being tempted with tenders of great matters, to
retract what he had sworn against the Papists, and swear, that the Protestants
were embarkt in a Conspiracy against the King, seeing he himself has deposed
all this upon Oath before Sir Patience Ward, when he was Lord Mayor. And as
this may fully convince all that are not in the Plot themselves, for the
destroying such as are the chief Bulwarks, under His Majesty, of our Religion
and Liberties, that whatsoever this fellow has sworn against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, or any Protestant else, is all mere Fiction, Romance, and
abominable Forgery, so we have besides all this, the Testimony both of Dr. Oats
and Captain Yarrington, That this wretch did protest unto them, at the very
time when he told them of his being tempted, that before God, he knew nothing
whereof to accuse any Protestant in the world; and that if he should do any
such thing, he should be the greatest Rogue under Heaven. And as their way of
living since, and their boasting, of having their Pockets full of money, does
plainly proclaim to all Mankind, upon what motives they have perjured
themselves, and how well they have been rewarded for their false swearing, so
there is one George Dennis, a Gardener, who deposes, That to his knowledge, the
Witnesses who swore against the Earl of Shaftsbury, had an Hundred, or an
Hundred and Fifty Pound a man for so doing; and that he might have had as much,
if he would have Sworn against the said Earl. Having thus truly and briefly
drawn and represented the Witnesses according to their just and true Features,
and having fully discovered the Combination which they and others are engaged
in against our Lives and Religion, and having particularly detected how these
mercinary Wretches have been hired and suborned to swear a Plot upon
Protestants, which themselves and their Abettors have out of hatred to the
Protestant Religion and English Liberties invented and forged against innocent
persons: I shall now leave them thus shown and exposed, to undergo the
punishments which these unparalled Villainies subject them unto; and in the
mean time till the Administrators of public Justice shall esteem it their Duty
and for the honor of the Government to make their Punishment as exemplar, as
their Crimes have been; I do here set them up as proper objects of the
abhorrency and detestation of mankind, and persons not worthy to be believed by
any honest rational Jury or Inquest. And I shall only add, that the late Grand
Jury, instead of deserving to be censured for returning an Ignoramus upon the
Bills which these Miscreants swore unto, they are rather to be blamed for not
immediately Indicting them of a Conspiracy against the Lives and Honor of
Noble and Guiltless Persons. Nor is it enough for a Grand Jury merely to reject
a Bill, which they find promoted from Malice, and upon a Combination; but they
are bound, both by the Laws of God and the Laws of the Land, to Indict the
Conspirators and all such as shall appear to have abetted them* And whereas we
have not only heard of several other Witnesses, who either had or were ready to
Swear Treason against the Earl of Shaftsbury, but have been told, that several
of their Names had been endorsed on the back of the Bill which was preferred
against his Lordship, who yet upon second thoughts were blotted out and
expunged. We shall only say, that we think it needless to attempt the exposing
of those, whom the Managers themselves judged so infamous, that they were
ashamed to make use of them. But as we may be sure that they produced all
these, whose Credit they could in any degree rely upon, so had they brought an
hundred more, whom we might neither have known, nor had opportunity to enquire
after, yet finding them in conjunction with such infamous Villains as these we
have named, it had been a most unreasonable, unjust, and unwise thing to
believe them. But can any man take Mrs. Teresia Peacock to be a credible
Witness, who besides her being a more common Prostitute than any in the public
Stews, was found to be a false and perjured hussy in the Deposition which she
gave against My Lord Howard, before the Grand Jury at Westminster, the last
Midsummer Term. For whereas her Mistress and she had Sworn Treason against that
Noble Lord, and accorded in every particular whilst they were together; they
plainly contradicted each other, when they once came to be examined apart. For
the Mistress being asked how her Maid came to hear My Lord Howard speak the
Treasonable words which were Sworn and Deposed, replied, that the Wench had
arrived at the knowledge of them, by standing and harkening behind a door; but
the same Question being proposed to Mis. Teresia, she affirmed she was as much
trusted by my Lord, as Mrs. Fitz-Harris her self; and that he had said so and
so to her, pursuant of the intimacy which she had with him, and the confidence
which he placed in her. Which as it was an uncontrollable Evidence of her
having perjured her self, so it was a happy means of discovering the Conspiracy
against the Life of that wise and generous Lord. And for David Fitzgerald,
there are not only an hundred Testimonies against him, to render him the most
profligate and infamous person alive; but the very Witnesses which were
produced in Court against the Earl of Shaftsbury, have testisied to several of
His Majesty's Justice upon Oath, how he had tampered with them, and what pains
he had taken to suborn them. So that I may boldly say, the Managers of this
Intrigue are liable to be called to account for not prosecuting Fitzgerald on
the Depositions of those, upon whose Testimony they took the boldness to Indict
this Great and Noble Peer. And whereas there is one Sir James Hayes, who upon
his swearing against Mr. Wilson, had been represented to the world in more
modest terms than he deserves, that nevertheless has had the confidence to
vindicate himself in a No Protestant Plot, part 2. p. 11, 12.
public Intellegence, from the Crimes which had been charged upon him. I do
therefore affirm, that he was not only guilty of all the Villainies whereof he
was there accused, but that there are many more Rogueries chargeable upon him,
than were there mentioned. For besides his having been heretofore in the Kings
Bench, for Knavery and Debt, and his being necessitated at present to conceal
himself from his Creditors; and his having been reduced to such necessities, as
to receive two pence of Mr. Peter the Chyrurgeon by way of relief; I say
besides all this, he is not only known to have been one of that Fellowship at
the Mews, which was called the Black guard, and to have cheated diverse
Tradesmen in and about the City, of Goods to a considerable value; and to have
been assistant to Norton, in selling the Privy Garden at Whitehall, by a false
Patent, to a Carpenter to build upon; but to have drawn several Bills of
Exchange, to the value of Four or Five hundred pounds, on Mr. Roger Moor,
Merchant in Dublin, for such sums of money, received of Mr. Henry Crook and Mr.
James Wale, here in London, which Bills were all returned protested. In the
mean time, let no man think, that this base and profligate fellow, is the Sir
James Hays who belonged to Prince Rupert, and who has married the Lady
Falkland, seeing this worthy Gentleman is a person of more Honor and
Integrity, than to fall under a suspicion of doing any thing that is ill. And
as they, whom I have mentioned, are the Witnesses whom some wise men thought
fit to have concealed, when the rest that pretend to swear a Protestant Plot,
were called forth, and produced upon the public Stage, so whether the
Directors and Managers of this Intrigue, do only reserve them till the much
desired season of having Juries who will act implicetly, or such at least, as
will prove more favorable to the Design; or whether they have chosen to lay
them wholly aside, as being really ashamed of them, I cannot tell. But so
secure are we of our own Innocence, and so much above the aspersions of such
vile Miscreants, that we neither envy our Enemies the having a thousand of
them, nor think either our Lives endangered, or our Reputations lessened,
through being sworn against by persons stigmatized and branded as they are.

And whereas there are some, either so silly or so knavish, as to say, that by
weakening the Credit of the Evidence, concerning a Protestant Plot, we do
thereby supplant, and in Sir George See Colledg's Trial, p. 91.
Jefferies Phrase, trip up the heels of all the Evidence and Discovery of a
Popish Plot; we presume to say, that they are greatly mistaken; and that though
they may be so foolish, as to believe such a thing themselves, yet they will
find it difficult to impose so ridiculous a Deduction and Inference upon the
Thinking and Rational part of Mankind. For this Sham Conspiracy, contrived and
carried on by the Papists means against Protestants, is both a most convincing
Evidence of the reality of a Popish Plot, and that there are some people
interested in it, which before we were not aware of. Nor was this Design of
bringing Protestants under the suspicion of Treason against His Majesty and the
Government, thought of, or undertaken upon any other or lesser account, but in
order to protect and defend themselves from the punishments which they know
they were justly obnoxious unto, for their own Treasons. And had the Papists
been guilty of no other Plot against us before, this alone is enough to tell
us, how implacably they pursue our ruin. Yea, we could sooner pardon their
attempting to cut our Throats by way of a Massacre, than their endeavoring to
destroy us in a course of Law, by accusing us of forged and suborned Crimes.
But besides, the Popish Plot remains confirmed many other ways, than by the
Oral Testimony and Deposition of Witnesses. Do not Coleman's Letters
effectually prove it, whereof, not only that directed to the Pope's Nuncio, and
bearing Date, Aug. 21. 1674. says, That they had great Designs in agitation,
and worthy the consideration of the Nuncio's Friends, and to be supported with
all their power; wherein says Mr. Coleman, we doubt not but to succeed, and it
may be, to the utter ruin of the Protestant party, if you join with us in good
earnest, and cordially second our enterprises: but in that directed to Father
^e Cheise, he further tells us, That they had undertaken a great work, being no
less than the entire subversion of that Heresy which had for so long a time
ruled over this Northern part of the world. And is not the murdering of Sir
Edmond-bury Godfrey, both an indisputable Evidence, that there was a Popish
Plot, and that their destroying him, was merely to prevent the discovery of
their design for destroying us? Yea, what any pretended to discover of that
Plot, was so agreeable to Popish Principles, and did so correspond with the
preparations that we had observed them to be making for many years, that were
there not one Witness alive, we could demonstrate the truth of a Popish
Conspiracy, from Matters, Facts, and such Transactions which were obvious. And
as the fellows who have been suborned to swear against Protestants, were not
the Original Discoverers of the Popish Plot, so Dr. Oats, who did first detect
and reveal that Hellish Conspiracy, is both forthcoming, and remains able to
support and maintain what he has deposed. And without doubt, his Testimony
will have a greater Reputation than ever, by his withstanding the many and
great offers whereby he was tempted to swear Treason against Protestants. For
his scorning to be bribed to swear against us, is a most convincing Argument,
that what he swore against the Papists, was not a Fiction of his own, invented
upon Design of getting money and preferment. Nor is it to be thought, that they
who make it their business to disparage Dr. Oats, and to lessen his Reputation,
should be either careful about the maintaining the belief of a Popish Plot, or
of sustaining the Credit of the Witnesses, in order to their continuing Good
Evidence in the business of the Popish Conspiracy.

And whereas there are others, and some of them not only men of Quality, but
Wit, who say, That the Witnesses having been believed against the Papists, they
ought also to be believed against Protestants; seeing, as they are pleased to
express it, What is sauce for a Goose is also sauce for a Gander: I reply, that
if Passion, Prejudice and Envy would give these men leave to think coherently,
as all sober men use to do, they would soon find such a disparity and
difference in these two cases, that there is no reason they should be credited
against Protestants, because Faith was given to their Testimony when they swore
against the Papists. For it is one thing to be admitted into the hidden
Machinations and Designs of Priests, who were their Confessors, had the
direction of their Consciences, and with whom they had been long and familiarly
acquainted, and another thing to be made privy to the most important and
hazardous Secrets of persons with whom they they never had any intimacy, and to
whom they never spoke, unless it were either concerning what they pretended to
know of the Popish Plot, or in reference to their getting bread and sustenance
allowed them. Surely there is a great disparity betwixt their being believed
about matters communicated unto them, before they were known to have deceived
those that had put confidence in them; and their being believed concerning
Designs, which they say were trusted with them, after all the world knew how
they had discovered and betrayed their ancient Friends who did rely upon them*
Nor is there any pari^y betwixt the giving credit to men about an affair where
both the Matter that is sworn, and the Circumstances by which it is enforced,
do demonstrate the truth and reality of what is Deposed; and the receiving
their Testimony concerning a business that is full of Contradictions and moral
impossibilities. Nay, it is one thing to believe a man concerning a thing, the
doing whereof was agreeable to the Principles which he professed, and for the
concealing of which he was under an Oath of Secrecy; and another thing to
believe him about a matter that was forbidden by the Religion both of those
that are said to have trusted him, and which Religion himself had espoused,
because it did prohibit such Villainies, and for the concealing whereof he was
never brought under any ties and obligations. No person that has not abjured
Honesty and common sense, but must needs acknowledge that there is a great
difference betwixt admitting the Testimony of one, who no ways appears to be
tampered with, and allowing such an one's Deposition for legal and true, who is
known to have been hired and suborned. So that upon the whole, we shall find
Sauce for their Goose, but in the mean time we defy them to find sauce for
their Gander* Nor is it equal, that because these Witnesses have been believed
about a Popish Plot, whereof we are furnished with an hundred Evidences besides
their Testimony; that they should therefore be believed in reference to a
Protestant Conspiracy against His Majesty and the Monarchy, whereof we have no
footstep nor symptom, but must take it upon their mere Affidavit.

Having now considered the quality and the credibility of the Witnesses, we are
in the next place to weigh and ponder the matter which they Deposed and Swore.
And if our Understanding and Reason do not deceive us, we shall: make the whole
Forgery palpable, from what they have taken upon them to say against the Earl
of Shaftsbury, though there were no antecedent Reasons for the bringing their
credit as to this affair into Suspicion. For if a business Deposed be either
contradictory to it self, or morally impossible, or in the principal strokes
and lines of it contrary to the universal knowledge of the Nation, or does
interfore with the indelible Principles of the party that is accused, or be
found to thwart the Passions and Resentments which he is supposed to be swayed
by, the Forgery does thereby become as obvious to all thinking people, as if
they had been present at the Consults and Cabals where the things to be Sworn
were devised, invented and laid. Nor is it unworthy of our Observation, that
though the Treason which they are pleased to swear and declare, be both so horrid
in it self, and importing so great danger to His Majesty's person, yet they did
not immediately reveal it as became them to have done. Bracton says, That he
who does not discover Treason Lib. 3. cap. 3.
with all the expedition imaginable, after it once comes to his knowledge, shall
not be heard or allowed as a Witness, if he come to discover it afterward. Si
ad tempus dissimulaverit and subticuerit, etc. and post intervallum accusare
velit, non erit de jure audiendus, nisi docere poterit se fuisse justis
rationibus impeditum. Now all the Witnesses against the Earl of Shaftsbury
acknowledge their concealing the Treason for several Months, which they came in
at last to accuse him of. And when we consider how much the King's Life, Crown
and Dignity were in hazard, if that be true which they Depose, we cannot but
judge of the Witnesses as a company of Disloyal Rascals, and that it was not
from Principles of Loyalty, nor from a sense of their Duty, that they were
brought at last to make this Discovery. Nay their concealing it without any
just and reasonable cause so long, is more than a presumption that this
Conspiracy, wherewith they charge this Noble Peer and other great and worthy
Protestants, is nothing but a late Forgery of their own, and that they take
upon them to detect what never really was, upon the Subornation of others,
and for the accomplishing some base, mercinary and villainous ends. Nor can
there be a clearer proof of the Folly of these Fellows and the Falsehood of
what they svvear, than that some of them represent themselves to have
discoursed all the while with the greatest Loyalty, when in the mean time they
introduce My Lord speaking See Proceedings at the Old Bailey, p. 24, 25.
Treason at every word. We must suppose that man distracted, who should
continue speaking Treason for half an hour together, when in the Interim all
the Answers and Replies of the person with whom he is discoursing, do manifest
a firm and steady Allegiance to the King. Smith's pretending to have spoken
with so much Caution and Circumspection, while as he swears, The Earl of
Shaftsbury talked nothing but Treason, betrays not only the folly of the
wretch, but plainly shows, that whatsoever he swore against that Noble Peer,
was false, and either forged by himself, or dictated unto him by such as had
hired and suborned him. Yea, all that they deposed, appears plainly to be False
and Romance, in that the persons whom they pretend to have been present when
the Earl of Shaftsbury spoke such Traitorous words against His Majesty and the
Government, do positively aver, that there was not so much as one syllable of
all that said, which these Miscreants have svvorn. For whereas Dennis affirms,
that Major Manley was in the Room, when my Lord told the said Dennis, That they
did really intend to have England under a Commonwealth; Proceedings at the Old
Baily, p. 31, 32.
and that his Lordship desired Dennis to advise those of his Name, and such as
were his Friends in Ireland, to be in a readiness to assist the Commonwealth
of England: Major Manley indeed acknowledges his being present at that time,
when Dennis was with the Earl of Shaftsbury, but withal he is ready to swear,
That my Lord spoke not one word to him, except the asking him with some seeming
passion and heat, what his business was? And forasmuch as Booth deposes upon
Oath, That Captain Wilkinson was several times by, when my Lord Shaftsbury
discoursed to the purpose that that Miscreant swore; and particularly, that the
business about the Fifty men who were to be my Lord Shaftsbury' s Guard, was
transacted before the Captain, this Honest and Loyal Gentleman peremptorily
affirms, That he was never at the Earl of Shaftsbury's with Booth but once,
and that in the hearing and presence of Sir Peter Colliton, and that the whole
discourse was about their going to Carolina. The falsehood of the whole
matter, which the Witnesses have deposed against the Earl of Shaftsbury, is
evidently detected and discovered by this, that whereas one of the Witnesses
pretends to have communicated the Treasonable design which my Lord had
acquainted him with, that very night which he heard it, to a Club, or Society
of Gentlemen, at the Queens Arms in Newgate street; all these Worthy and truly
Loyal Gentlemen, do positively and unanimously affirm, that there was no such
thing either mentioned at that time, or at any other season discovered unto
them. For whereas Smith svvears, That my Lord Shaftsbury having told him, the
King did walk in the same steps which his Father did, and would never be quiet,
till he came to his Fathers end: and that thereupon, he the Sea Proceedings at
the Old Baily, p. 25.
said Smith, came immediately and acquainted these Gentlemen with it, who were
met at the Queens Arms, they do all solemnly profess, there was no such thing;
and that Smith is a forsworn and perjured Rascal in saying so. However, here
was a Train laid for the Lives of all those Worthy and Loyal persons, could the
wretch have obtained Credit with the Jury, as to what he Deposed against My
Lord. And whereas Smith furt her says the Earl of Shaftsbury told him, (that
Evening which Major Manley brought him from the Club at the Queens-Arms to
Thanethouse) The King pampered Fitzgerald to stifle Ibid.
the Plot in Ireland, and that he was as well satisfied with the coming in of
Popery as the Duke of York; and that the Parliament was satisfied he was as
much for it as his Brother; (for so the Wretch swore in Court, though the last
words be left out in the Print) all this, I say, is feigned and invented,
seeing Major Manley, who was present and by all that time (albeit Smith
concealed that upon the giving his Evidence) is ready to Depose upon Oath, that
there was not one Syllable spoken by my Lord to the purpose which this
Miscreant swears. Let us add to this, Hayns's Deposing, That he had Ibid.
a long discourse with the Earl of Shaftsbury at a Cooks in Ironmonger-lane, in
a little Room next the Kitchen, (where by the way, that last expression is left
out in the Print) and we shall find this whole Forgery still more obvious and
palpable. For as My Lord was never there, except when he dined with diverse
Noble and Worthy Persons: So besides the improbability of his leaving the
company and society of men of the best Quality in England, to come and talk
with such a Fellow as Hayns, and besides the absurdness that is in supposing
the Earl of Shaftsbury to have staid an hour in a little Room by a Cook's
Kitchen; not only the Servants of the house do positively affirm the contrary
of all that this Rascal swears, but diverse Noble Persons are ready to testify
that the Earl of Shaftsbury never came down stairs out of the great Room, till
he was going away, and that he took Coach immediately, without withdrawing into
any Room below. But that which is extravagant beyond all imagination and which
proclaims to every wise man the falsehood of all they have sworn, is Hayns's
deposing, That the Earl of Shaftsbury should not only say, There are Families
in England which have as much pretense to the Crown as the King; but that the
Duke of Buckingham Ibid. p. 27.
has in Right of his Mother as good a Title to the Crown, as ever any Steward
had. Is it not enough to introduce the Earl of Shaftsbury talking Treasonably,
but he must be likewise exposed as talking ridiculously? Surely the
Superintenders and Managers of this Plot, in the guilt whereof they would
involve Protestants, must either be of very weak Understandings themselves, or
they must apprehend the generality of Mankind to be so, otherwise they could
never hope to impose upon the world by such nonsensical stuff as this is. For
besides that no man knows of any Title whereby the Duke of Buckingham can
pretend to the Crown, the Right of claiming by his Mother, as sprung from the
Plantagenets, being altogether groundless; so there is not so sublime a
Friendship between my Lord Shaftsbury and the Duke of Buckingham, as that for
advancing the Duke to the Throne my Lord should not only venture his own life
and fortune, but disoblige the best Friends he has in the Nation, and entangle
his native Country in Civil War. This misadventure in the Testimony of one of
the most considerable Witnesses, betrays not only their Folly, but that the
whole Plot, whereof the Earl of Shaftsbury has been accused, is a malicious
Forgery, in order to take away the Life of that innocent Peer. Nor can any, who
are not willing to sacrifice the Protestant Religion, the Liberties of their
Country, and the Lives of Guiltless Persons to the Hatred and Rage of the
Papists, give any Credit to Fellows, who Swear at so Wild and Nonsensical a
rate. Had the Mercinary vvretches designed to publish themselves for Liars and
Impostors to all the world, they could not have taken a more effectual way to
do it, than by affirming, that the Earl of Shaftsbury should be desirous to
enter into a Combination and Conspiracy with Irish Papists, in order to
prevent a Popish Successor, and for preserving the Protestant Religion. For at
the same time that Dennis charge this Noble Person with saying, That he
would extirpate the King and all his Family, he swears, That he desired him to
write to his Ubi supra, p. 32.
Irish Popish Friends, to be ready to assist. And though I do not much vvonder to
find a Caitiff of the size of Dennis's Wit and Understanding, swear a business
which disproveth it self before all Wise and Rational persons; yet I cannot
forbear marvelling, that they who vievv'd the Depositions, and were to gloss
and enforce the Evidence, would suffer such a Deposition to appear upon the
public Stage, which would not only make the Forgery notorious, but
infallibly expose themselves, as well as the perjured Rogues, to the laughter,
scorn and detestation of mankind. Nor is it unworthy of remark, that in the
expressions which they swear my Lord Shaftsbury used, they make him not only
forget the Loyalty of a Subject, but the Civility and Breeding of a Gentleman.
For the Terms wherein they represent him speaking of the King, are besides
their being Treasonable, too rude to proceed from any that knows the measures
of Civility, or has been occasioned to speak with any kind of Decorum. For not
only Macknamarra introduces him calling the King, a Faithless Person, and one
that was no way to be believed: But Haynes will have him both to say, That the
King had no more Religion than a Horse, and that he was degenerated into a
perfect Ibid. p. 28. p. 43. p. 27.
Beast, and that he durst as soon be hanged, as to meddle with the said Haynes,
if he stuck to his Information about Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey' s Murder. This is
a Dialect proper for such Rascals as the Witnesses to use; but it is not a
Style that men of Quality are accustomed unto, or can allow themselves to speak
in. For how much soever they may be offended with the ways and methods of
Princes, yet they constantly speak of their Persons with Respect and Deference.
Whether are we to esteem it a Subject fit for our mirth and laughter, or for
our disgust and indignation, to see a Fellow appear at a Bar, against a Great
and Wise Peer, and among other Treasonable Expressions, whereof he accuses
him, to swear, That the said Lord put a greater Respect and Valuation upon him,
than he did upon the King himself? Haynes having sent to the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and several other Noble Persons, That he would make considerable
Discoveries, if they would procure him a Pardon, the Rascal swears, That being
in Discourse with my Lord Shaftsbury about that matter, my Lord should say, If
the King would not grant the Pardon for him, that was desired, they would raise
the whole Kingdom against him; and Ibid. p. 27.
that he must not expect to live peaceably in his Throne, if he did not grant
it. For not to insist on this, That the Earl of Shaftsbury never spoke with
Haynes, nor would not so much as see him, both which will be proved as far as
Negatives are capable, can any man that has not renounced Sense as well as
Conscience, believe that the Earl of Shaftsbury would put the Life of the King,
and the Peace of the Kingdom in competition with Haynes's being pardoned or not
pardoned? For suppose that the Fellow undertook to make very useful and
important Discoveries, provided he might have a Pardon; yet we must be Bruits,
before we can be persuaded, that a person of Prudence and Conduct should, in
case a pitiful wretch were not secured against the danger of the Gallows to
which he stood obnoxious, threaten not only to dethrone a Monarch, to whom he
lies under many Obligations, besides those of Fealty, but to hurl a quiet and
peaceable Nation into War and Blood. And as if it were not enough for these
silly, as well as malicious wretches, to make my Lord Shaftsbury say a Thousand
things which are equally Ridiculous and absurd as they are Treasonable, they
will have him to have talked of matters ready to be done; which being duly
weighed, will be found to have been morally impossible. For so is all that is
sworn against him, concerning a Design to seize the King at Oxford, where he
was not only surrounded with his Guards, but, as our Enemies must acknowledge,
environed with many Loyal Peers and Gentlemen. Nor are we told of any
preparations that were suitable to an undertaking which was so difficult in it
self, and which would be extremely fatal to the Authors, if it miscarried. For
whereas they depose, That my Lord told them, the Members came well Smith, p. 26.
Horsed and well Armed, the whole Kingdom knows the contrary. Some of the
Members went so ill attended, as that they were not in a condition to secure
themselves from being Robbed by the way. And diverse of the most Martial persons
in the Oxford House of Commons, went thither in Hackney Coaches, with scarce a
Servant a piece to wait upon them. Yea, this very Earl, who is said not only to
have projected the seizing the King at Oxford, but to have corresponded with
others, in order to their coming provided thither with strength and force, for
the accomplishing of it, had neither Coach nor Horse there himself. So ignorant
was this Noble Person of any such design, and so unprepared for the execution
of an attempt of that nature, that he went down in an hired Coach, and was
forced to stay there after the Dissolution of the Parliament, till he sent to
London for Horses, to convey and accommodate him home. Was not the Concourse at
Oxford much smaller than was reckoned upon, considering the Greatness and
Solemnity of the Occasion? It cannot be thought, that the Peers of England, and
the principal Gentry of the Kingdom, should go to to so August and Solemn an
Assembly, without some Menial Servants to attend them. And if the having
supernumeraries in a Retinue, be Foundation to raise a just suspicion of a
Plot, the Lords and Commons to whom some give the Character of being more Loyal
than the rest of His Majesty's Subjects, will be most liable to suspicion. Our
Adversaries would greatly oblige us, if they would tell us, where the Forces
were raised that were to be employed in this Traterous Fact, and how they
remained invisible in their coming together, and parting again. It was the
indispensable duty of His Majesty's Officers, to have diligently enquired after
these things: And surely the Ministers have had opportunity, as well as
inclination to have done it long before now. And whereas we are told of
Fifty men, and those persons of quality, who had others to attend them, that
were listed for a Guard to the Earl of Shaftsbury; Ibid. p. 21.
and that Captain Wilkinson was to have the Command of them; the Captain,
whose Word is more valuable than Booth's Oath, does not only deny it, but has
demonstrated, that such an undertaking was inconsistent with the State of his
affairs. Yea, the Wretch, although he svvears, That himself was one of them, and
that he had accordingly provided Arms and a good Stone-horse; Ibid. p. 21.
Yet he could neither say, That he knew one man of them, or that ever he
conversed with any p. 36.
of them. Nor is the perjured Rogue able to give the world an account where he
bought the Stonehorse, which he pretends to have provided in order to the
Design, nor in what Stable he kept him to be in a readiness for that Service.
Would our Enemies have the world believe the incredible Crimes wherewith they
have gotten us charged? Alas, all men who have either a grain of Wit or Honesty
left, will sooner look upon them as Malicious and Blood thirsty Impostors. It
would require a Book, rather than a Paragraph, thoroughly to inspect and
discourse the matter which the Witnesses have Sworn, and from thence to unveil
the whole Mystery, and detect the Forgery of this Protestant Plot. What can be
more ridiculous in it self, or more discover the Villainy of this Intrigue, than
to hear a company of Wretches swear, that a prudent and wise man has been
engaged in a Conspiracy to destroy the Monarchy, and to establish a
Commonwealth, when the doing it were to ruin himself and all the Peerage of
England? No man out of Bedlam can be so distracted, as to embark in a Design
which would bring himself into a level with those above whom he is raised, and
upon whose Resolves those of his Order and Rank in the present Government, have
by the Constitution a perfect Negative. Ambition is that which usually inspires
men to great and hazardous Undertakings; and he must be supposed a Fool, that
would engage in an affair that would lessen and degrade both himself and all
his Posterity, as well as the Nobility of his Country. Nor could he expect any
man of Greatness and Interest to join with him in a Project so inconsistent
with their Honor and the Figure which under the Established Legal Government
they make in the State. Nor is the altering the Monarchy into a Commonwealth
more contrary to his Allegiance, than it is repugnant to his Interest and those
indelible Principles of Civil Knowledge and Policy which he is imbued with,
and has always professed. What can be imagined more absurd, than that the
Earl of Shaftsbury and the Protestant Peers and Gentlemen of England should
combine to accelerate their own ruin in Apprehending and Deposing the King,
who is our only Security and Protection against Popery, Slavery and
Arbitrariness? Though Princes have been sometimes laid aside by a discontented
people, when the people have had a prospect of bettering their Condition under
him who was likely to succeed; yet never any conspired to destroy a just and
merciful Prince, to make way for one in his room that implacably hated both
them and their Religion, and who had resolved and determined their ruin. Nor
has it been ever known, that the same Folly and Madness (especially when the
consequences have been fatal and destructive to the first Authors) has been
acted twice in the same Age. And therefore the reviving the memory of the late
War, instead of serving to raise Fears and Jealousies of another, does to all
thinking people demonstrate there can be none, unless the Papists should begin
a Rebellion and Massacre in England, as they did heretofore in Ireland; and in
such a case I know not but that Protestants may both endeavor to defend their
Lives against the Swords of their Enemies, and to be revenged upon those bloody
men. And were not some people forsaken of all Modesty, as they have abandoned
all Truth and Justice, they would be ashamed of filling the Nation with
Jealousies of a new Civil War; unless they know of such who are resolved either
to extirpate us, as well as to overthrow all our Rights and Liberties, if by
having recourse to Arms we do not defend both our selves and them.

To all that has been said concerning the Infamy of the Witnesses, and from
the absurdity of the matter which they have Deposed, in order to the detection
of this forged Conspiracy against Protestants; we might still render their
Testimony more palpably false, by observing how they studiously endeavor to
put an estimate and value upon themselves, beyond what they are capable of
having, and all this in order and subserviency to their being the better
believed concerning the Treasons whereof they had accused us. For knowing that
there was no reason why any Faith should be given unto them, and being
apprehensive they would not be believed, how do they endeavor by Protestations
and otherwise to support and fortify their own Credit? Accordingly Smith,
before he entered upon the giving his Evidence against the Earl of Shaftsbury,
desired leave to wipe off the Aspersions which lay upon him about Colledge's
Trial, ( which words by the by, are left out in the Print) namely, That whereas
it had been reported that he Swore a Proceedings at the Old-Bailey, p. 23.
general Plot against the Protestants and the City of London, (instead whereof
there is only in the Print, a general Design against his Majesty) he then said
that he never swore any such thing, neither could he swear there was a general
Design of the City. For not to insist upon this, that he swore at Colleges
Trial, That College told him, the Parliament was agreed to seize the King, and
that the City was provided; which is in effect the very things which at the
proceedings upon the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury, he would have
vindicated himself from, as aspersions only east upon him; I say, not to insist
upon this, what else meant that Apology, See Colledge's Trial, p. 28. 27.
but that he would have retrieved a credit with the Jury, which he knew he had
forfeited, and impose an opinion of his Honesty upon them, being jealous that
they might think he had lost all pretensions to any such thing. It is also
remarkable, and serves to discover their Falsehood in what they swore against
the Earl of Shaftsbury, that they endeavored to make themselves valuable and
worthy to be trusted by great and wise men, by pretending a knowledge of the
Transactions of the world, and affairs of Kingdoms, which as they were never
capable of attaining, so they had but betrayed their Folly and Vanity in
offering to discourse concerning such things to that knowing and sagacious
Peer. For to hear Hayn's depose, That he gave my Lord Shaftsbury See
Proceedings at the Old-Bayly, p. 27.
an account of all Transactions from King Charles the First's Reign, to this
very day; and that my Lord was mightily satisfied, pleased and free with him,
finding that he was a Traveller; Is as if he should have told all the world,
that what he Deposed against that great man was all Forgery, and that he was
only seeking to beget a credulity in the Court, by a vain ostentation of his
knowledge in Civil Affairs, and his being qualified to be admitted into the
secret and hazardous Counsels of the greatest Statesmen. Alas! an acquaintance
with the Occurrences of Princes Reigns, and a being able to declare the affairs
of two Regencies in their dependence and order, with the Causes and Reasons of
a War which few can penetrate into the grounds of, ^re not things agreeable to
the way of Hayns's Education, nor to be expected from one that is not
wonderfully conversant in the Memoire and Registers of Civil matters, and who
has enjoyed an intimate acquaintance with those that were interested in the
management both of Civil and Military Concernments. Their Malice and Perjury in
this whole Affair, are open and palpable, by their indirect and evasive answers
to plain and easy questions. Such was Booth's reply to Mr. Papilion, who
having asked him, whether he knew any of Proceed. p. 36.
the Fifty men which he had deposed were listed under Captain Wilkinson, said,
He never directly knew, or conversed with any of them. And such also was
Haynes's reply to the question which was put to him, concerning his having
given an Information to a Justice of Peace, of a design against Ibid. p. 42, 43.
the Earl of Shaftsbury: for as he wrigled to and fro a great while, before he
could be brought to acknowledge it, the answer was neither full nor ingenuous.
Again, Their not remembering times and seasons, when such things which they
swore should be spoken, or when they gave in their Informations about them,
does proclaim the Witnesses to be Impostors, and whatsoever they deposed, to be
nothing but Forgery. For several of the things which they declared they could
not remember, were such, as it is morally impossible they should forget them.
Thus Haynes could not tell the time when the Earl of Shaftsbury spoke Ibid. 44.
the Treasonable words, about making the Duke of Buckingham King: Nor could
either Smith or Turberville tell, when they gave in their Informations against
my Lord, nor whether it was before or p. 40.
after his Commitment. Nay, Smith could not tell in what month he did it. In a
word, the Demeanor of the Witnesses carrying things so, as if they would hector
people into a belief of what they swore, and their answering the questions
proposed unto them, either with great difficulty, or with great artifice and
cunning, proclaim to all impartial men, that the Design upon which they
appeared, was very ill, and that they were suborned and perjured fellows. There
was not that modesty to be seen in their Behavior, nor that simplicity in
their Evidence, nor that plainness, easiness and directness in their Answers,
which was agreeable to Truth; but their whole carriage, and the manner of their
delivering themselves, was starch't huffing, artificial, and full of trick.

But whereas there is a Paper styled, An Association, pretended to be found,
among other Writings, in the Earl of Shaftsbury's Closet, that morning he was
apprehended; upon which, great stress is laid toward the proving a Conspiracy
of this Lord, and other Protestants, against His Majesty and the Government, I
shall therefore with all that modesty which becomes me, in reference to persons
in Authority, and yet with all that freedom which the Innocence of Peers and
Gentlemen, unjustly accused, does require, take this Paper a little into
consideration, and make some just and modest Reflections in reference unto it.
An Association for the preservation of the King and the Protestant Religion, if
it be duly drawn, and contain nothing in it contrary to the Rights and
Prerogatives of His Majesty, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties
and Property of the People, will neither be found so new, nor so surprising a
thing, as that the Grand Juries of the several Counties should be influenced
and persuaded to abhor it. For our Ancestors in Queen Elizabeth's time, being
apprehensive, that the Queens Life, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the
Protestant Religion, were in danger from the Papists, upon the hope they had of
a Popish Successor, in case of the Queens Death, they thereupon entered into an
Association, for the preservation of her Majesty's Life, and the revenging her
Death, if she should have perished by violent hands; which instead of being
ridiculed and declared against, was not only unanimously subscribed by the most
considerable persons in the Kingdom, but both approved and ratified by an Act
of the Parliament that next followed. But whether it was, that our Forefathers
loved the Queen, and were more zealous for their Religion, than we love his
present Majesty, and are zealous for ours; or whether they thought there was
more danger to be feared from Mary, Queen of Scots, who was then the apparent
Popish Successor, than we think there is from a Gentleman of the same
Principles with her, that has the same and more palpable pretenses to the
Crown, I shall not take upon me to determine. However, it is not unknown, that
Two several late Parliaments being convinced of the dangers which His Majesty's
Life is in from the Papists, that they may accelerate the ascent of one of
their own Communion to the Throne, did after mature Debate, and as a Testimony
of the greatest Loyalty they could pay His Majesty, come to this Resolve:

Resolved,
That in defense of the Kings Person and Government, and Protestant Religion,
the House does declare, That they will stand by His Majesty with their Lives
and Fortunes; and that if His Majesty should come to any violent Death, which
God forbid, they will revenge it to the utmost on the Papists.

Yea, the last Westminster Parliament, being deeply sensible what Plots the
Papists were embarked in for the Destruction of the King, the extirpation of
the reformed Religion in these Kingdoms, and the placing the Crown upon the
head of a Popish Prince, they ordered a Bill for an Association to be brought
into the House. And whereas Secretary Jenkins deposes upon Oath, That tho he
heard of such a thing as an Association Proceed. p. 34.
spoken of about the Town, yet he was not present at the debate, to the best of
his remembrance; I shall only say, that either his memory is very slippery, or
there are a great many Gentlemen who have remembered more than is true. For it
is not only said, that he was present at the Debate, but that he opposed the
Bill as well as he could; and we may be sure no man could do it better, seeing
as he said upon another occasion, he had been all his days employed not only in
the study of the Laws of his Country, but in the Laws of Nations There is a
story which I do not in the least intend to apply to Sir L. for it may be
applicable to others for misrepresenting him. But the story is, That a Priest
being accused after the Assassination of Henry the fourth of France, for having
heard in Confession from Ravilliack, that he intended to murder that great and
generous Prince, replied that among other mercies which God had bestowed upon
him, He had given him the gift of forgetfulness. But to return; as there was
such a Bill brought into the House of Commons, so it is not only very likely
that there were several Copies of it, but we may rationally imagine that there
might be several Draughts of Bills prepared, before one could be pitched upon,
that would be agreeable to the fundamental Laws of the Land, effectual for the
preservation of his Majesty, and the Protestant Religion, and becoming the
Wisdom of that House. And as Mr. Attorney General has been pleased to
acknowledge to some Gentlemen, That among other papers seized in the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Closet, which were brought to him, there were two or three Bills
of Association different from that read and committed in the House of Commons;
all which we may suppose to have contained nothing but what was safe, seeing
there have been no endeavors to make my Lord guilty of High Treason upon them;
so who knows, but that if this Paper which was read in Court, was found in his
Lordships Closet, but that it might be a Draught of a Bill for an Association,
which this Noble Peer as much abhorred as any Country-Jury could. Nor is this
so wild a Fancy, as some men out of weakness of understanding, or prejudice
of mind, may believe; for seeing there was nothing in the Indictment against
this Noble Peer, that either related unto, or was grounded upon this Paper, we
may very rationally conceive, that the omitting it was built upon some such
Reason as we have now suggested. For if one of the ends of the Association
aimed at, be, as my Lord Chief Justice North was pleased to inform the Jury,
not only to destroy the Mercinary Forces in and about the City of London and
Westminster, but to settle the Authority in the Major part of the Members of
Parliament during the sitting of it, exclusive of the King; I can see no
reason, unless the Managers knew that they could make nothing of that Paper
before wise and honest men, as truly knowing of my Lord Shaftsbury's
unconcernment in it, why the Indictment should not rather have been
superstructed upon it, than upon the Testimony of any of the Oral Witnesses.
But besides all this, the bare having a Treasonable Paper in a man's house,
which as possibly he knew not whence it came, so he never communicated it to
any, to the prejudice of his Majesty and the Government, is not so criminal a
matter, as men swayed merely by Passion and Hatred, do believe it to be. And
were the having seen an ill Paper, or its being found in a man's Closet, to be
expiated with no less than his life, may be very few, even of those that are so
clamourous against the Earl of Shaftsbury, would prove innocent, or find
themselves to be safe. But what if after all the obloquy which this Noble Lord
has undergone, in reference to that Paper, it should appear that he never saw
it, nor has any cause to think it was there, where it was pretended to be
found? And I shall the rather enquire into this, and endeavor to unfold it,
because my L. C. J. North declared, There was a great matter to be presumed
upon it, it having been found under lock and key in my Lords Study. For as Mr.
Gwyn who seized the Paper, would not say, that it is the Earl of Shaftsbury's
Ibid. p. 34.
hand, though if he had pleased, he could have said positively that it was not
his hand; so I am apt to think, that upon a thorough enquiry into the conduct
of this affair, we shall not find reason to be confident, that it was found in
my Lords Study. Nay Mr. Gwyn cannot positively swear as to that Paper in
particular, That it was taken in the Earl of Ibid.
Shaftsbury's Closet; only swears in general, that the Papers which were put up
in a velvet Bag, were seized there. And it is remarkable, that whereas Mr. Gwyn
deposes, That as soon as he came p. 14.
to Thanet-House, my Lord gave him the keys of his Closets, and told him where
they were; this could no ways be, seeing the key of one of them, namely, that
below stairs, was always kept by some or other of his Lordships Servants; so
that Mr. Gwyn could at most but receive it by my Lords order. And as one or
other of the Earl of Shaftsbury's Servants had constantly the keeping of the
key of the lower Closet, so there were always many Papers of their own in it,
it being the Room where they manage most of their Business. But that which is
most surprising of all, is, That Mr. Gwyn swears, There were none present when
he put up the Papers besides himself, but my Lords own Servants; whereas it can
be proved by unquestionable Witnesses, that there were no fewer than five or
six, such as he brought along with him in the Closet when he was there, and as
busy in putting up Papers as himself. And that which still increases our
Suspicion, that things are not so fair in this matter, as they are represented,
is, That my Lord having offered to put his Seal on the Trunk, provided he might
first schedule and inventory the Papers; Mr. Gwyn positively refused to allow
him that Favor, I will not say Right and Justice. And this is a Consideration
of that Importance, that if duly pondered, my Lord will not be found, according
to Law and Equity, accountable for any Paper that was pretended to be taken
there. For no man ought to be called to answer for Writings said to be seized
in his house, to whom the scheduling of them was refused. When Monsieur Fouket
was committed by the French King, and all endeavors used to put him to death
for Crimes against his Master, which they alleged his own Papers were
sufficient to convict him of, yet because they had been taken from him without
allowing him to endorse and inventory them, the evidence against him from his
Writings was rejected and judged weak and invalid upon that alone account. And
yet all the World knows that as the French Monarch is more absolute, and less
merciful than our King, so their Laws are not more tender of the lives of the
Subjects, than ours are. But that some men can allow themselves a great
latitude in swearing when it is subservient to a Design, appears in that Mr.
Blathvvait not only swears that that Paper was put into his hand by Mr. Gwyn
Clerk of the Council, but that Mr. Gwyn had seized it among others in my Lord
p. 13.
Shaftsbury's house; whereas Mr. Blathwaite not having been there when the
Papers were taken, could have only Deposed, had he been careful in what he
said, that Mr. Gwyn told him so. How could he that was not there, Swear so
particularly that such a Paper was found in my Lord's Closet, unless he swore
implicitly and upon the instruction of another? He might as well have taken
his Oath, that they who went to apprehend the Earl of Shaftsbury, carried
Papers along with them thither, as that they found that Paper there and brought
it thence. And whereas Mr. Blathwaite further swears, That the Trunk wherein
the Papers were, which Ibid. p. 13.
was committed to his keeping by Mr. Gwyn, was sealed, and that it was opened
in the presence of Mr. Wilson and Mr. Starkey: This seems to be said only by
way of Artifice, to obtain belief, that the Paper styled an Association, was
truly found among my Lord Shaftsbury's writings, seeing if the Trunk was
sealed, neither my Lord or any of his Servants knew of the sealing of it; and
they who had the Trunk, had also the Seal wherewith it is said to have been
sealed, in their own custody, and might accordingly open it, and either put in
or take out what they pleased. Upon the whole, Did this Paper contain in it the
most Treasonable things imaginable, yet it does not appear that the Earl of
Shaftsbury is accountable for it; or that it is fair, just, or candid, to bring
it in Evidence against him upon a charge of High Treason, with a design and
expectation to take away his Life by virtue of it.

There is one thing more relating to the proceedings against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, which requires some Reflections upon it; and that is concerning the
manage and conduct of that business in the Old Bailey. I will not usurp that
French Term which has been lately naturalized in one of our High Courts of
Justice, and say that there was Chicanery in it; but things do not appear to
have been carried with that equality and impartialness betwixt the King and so
great and deserving a Subject, as the Law and common Usage do direct unto, and
prescribe. No kind of procedure is further for the King's Honor and Interest,
than as it is according to Law, which is the standard of the King's
Prerogative, Glory and Safety, as well as the Rule by which we are to be
protected in our Reputations and Lives if innocent, as well as cast and
convicted, if upon Trial we be found to have Capitally offended. Whatsoever
wrong is done against any of His Majesty's Subjects, in the sense of the Law
done against the King and the Honor of His Government; seeing he is the Spring
and Fountain of Justice to all his People. And it is a great Aspersion upon the
Justice as well as Goodness of his Majesty, to have things so transacted, as if
the King were more concerned to have a person that is barely accused found
guilty, than he is to have him appear and be pronounced Innocent. The
vindication and defense of the Guiltless, is more the Princes Glory and
Interest, than the Conviction and Condemnation of the Criminal. And when any
person comes to be accused, all that is for the Honor of the King, is to have
the Truth discovered, and Justice impartially take place. And whosoever are
produced by the Prosecutors to prove an Accusation or Charge, they are no
further for the King, though they be called the King's Evidence, than as they
declare the truth, and nothing but the truth. And if such Fellows be found, or
justly suspected to swear falsely against the Lives of His Majesty's Subjects,
they are in reality Witnesses against the King, by endeavoring to destroy his
Loyal People, pervert his Justice, and bring his Person and Throne under the
Guilt of shedding the Blood of Innocents. Now whereas there are several
Statutes, upon which a person is liable to be Indicted for Treason; namely,
that of the 25. Edw. 3. and that of the 13. of this King, it is no less
necessary than just, that the party accused should know upon which of those two
Statutes he is Presented and Charged. For seeing the one limiteth both the time
of Prosecution and the time of Indictment, while the other leaves the time
unfixed and indefinite, it is requisite, that the Jury, who are to enquire upon
the Bill that stands preferred before them, should distinctly understand upon
which of those Law the party is Indicted; for otherwise they cannot tell,
whether the Offenses whereof he is accused, fall within the time which the
latter of those Laws does prescribe and determine. For though as my Lord Chief
Justice truly said, That what is Treason by the Statute Proceedings at the Old
Baily, p. 33.
of 25. Edw. 3. is likewise Treason within the Statute of the 13. of this King,
yet this last Statute provides, That no person or persons, shall by Virtue of
that Act, incur any of the penalties therein mentioned, unless he or they be
prosecuted within Six months next after the Offense committed, and indicted
thereupon within Three months after such prosecution. Whereas the former
Statute of the 25. Edw. 3 leaves both the Prosecution and Indictment at the
pleasure of the Prosecutor, whether he will do it sooner or later. And the
declaring, upon which of these Statutes the Earl of Shaftsbury was Indicted,
was the more needful and material in this case, because the time presixed by
the latter Statute was elapsed diverse weeks, before any Bill of Indictment was
preferred against him. Nor could a Jury upon the best Evidence of the world,
find a Bill against him, supposing it grounded upon that Statute, seeing the
Indictment was not preferred within Three months after my Lord's Commitment,
which in the Language and Sense of our Law, is a Prosecution. Yea, the making
it distinctly known, upon which of these two Acts this Noble Peer was Indicted,
was yet of more concernment to him, as to his safety, and more needful to the
Jury, for the Guidance and Conduct of themselves in what they were about,
seeing words may be brought in, as Evidence of Treason upon the one Statute,
but signify nothing, without some further Overt Act, upon the other. For as my
Lord Chief Justice very well said, The latter Law had greatly altered the
former, especially in two cases: First, as Proceed. at the Old Baily, p. 34.
to the levying of War, and the compassing of the King's Death, these were not
Treasons before, unless War had been actually levied, and the designing the
King's Death had been declared by an Overt Act. Secondly, That the imprisoning,
or restraining the Liberty of the King, were not of themselves alone high
Treason by the old Statute, but were now made Treason by this last Law, during
His Majesty; Life. And as his Lordship added, That formerly it had been said,
and truly enongh, That words alone would not make Treason; but by this late
Act, words, if they import any malicious design against the King's Life and
Government, or any Traitorous intention in the party, such words are Treason
within this Act. Therefore the Evidence brought against the Earl of Shaftsbury,
being principally concerning words which he was said to have spoken, the
tenderness which the Administrators of public Justice ought to maintain for
the Lives of all men, and the Integrity which they should preserve in the
Execution of the Laws, should have obliged them to have been particular and
distinct in publishing upon which of the two Laws this Noble Peer was indicted.
For if he was indicted upon the first, then bare words without an over-act,
were not to be allowed in proof of the Treasons whereof he was accused; and if
he was indicted upon the second, then the Jury was to take no Cognizance of
words spoken, without the Circle and Compass of the time appointed by the
Law, for proceeding against him. Nor does the examining the Witnesses in
Court, leave any great Reputation upon the Managment of this Affair. For seeing
our Ancestors made it no less than Treason or Felony for a Grand Jury to
discover who was indicted before them, or what evidence was given them, it is a
most irrefragrable Argument, that Witnesses used not anciently to be examined
in open Court. And it seems something strange, that another way of procedure
should be chosen against a Protestant accused of Treason, than has at any
times been used against Papists, indicted of the like Crime. And forasmuch as
Bills are to be returned only by the Grand Jury, as found or not found, so it
would seem very rational, that they only are to be acquainted with the
Depositions upon which the Opinion or Verdict are given. The Jurors Oath,
namely, That the Kings Council, his fellows, and his own, he shall keep secret,
tells us what was the ancient usage in this particular. And whereas it was
said, That a Grand Jury is bound to conceal Proceed. p. 7.
the Kings secrets, so long as he will have them kept secret, but that it does
not deprive the King of the benefit of having them public. This seems not to
have been spoken by one that had well considered what he so openly delivered.
For the King cannot alter or change the usual or common Proceedings of our
judicial Courts. Law and Custom has both settled the power of Juries, and the
methods wherein they are to proceed in their Enquiries in order to a Verdict;
and the King can neither enlarge or lessen the first, nor yet appoint them to
vary in the second. But seeing my Lord Chief Justice North has been pleased to
tell us, That the Judges having agreed, that the Witnesses should be examined
Ibid. p. 8.
publicly, we are therefore to acquiesce, we shall readily obey him, being
persuaded that they did in this and all other things, as men that had a regard
to their Oath, and not as men bound to their good behavior, by holding their
places durante beneplacito. However we may make this use of it, namely, that
the Witnesses being taken by a Jury of wise and substantial men, to have
foresworn themselves in the face of the Kingdom, we may not only henceforth
look upon them as a company of infamous Rascals, but we may very well expect,
that the Attorney General should prosecute them in his Majesty's Name, for
combining to destroy innocent persons. But that which does most surprise all
men, in reference to the management of this Affair at the Old Baily, was the
Kings Council appearing in Court to lead the Witnesses, and not only open, but
enforce the evidence. For a Person barely indicted, stands in the sense of the
Law probably innocent, till the Bill be found; and therefore no man till then
ought to countenance one side more than another. And for the Kings Council to
interest themselves so far upon a bare Accusation, as to make the King a Party
for, or against the Person who stands charged, would seem to intimate, that
there was something else at the bottom of this affair, than merely to have
truth or falsehood appear. How easy is it by a leading question, both to
prompt and direct a Varlet what to say? And what encouragement do Mercinary
Wretches take to accuse innocent persons, with boldness and impudence, when
they find themselves countenanced in what they swear? How pleasantly did it
look, that when John Macknamarra had so far shut up his Evidence against the
Earl of Shaftsbury, as to affirm, he could remember nothing more, to have Sir
Francis Withins afterward ask him, Did you not hear any thing about deposing
the King? and Proceed. at the Old Baily, p. 28.
Macknamarra thereupon to add, Yes, he said, the King deserved to be deposed,
as much as ever Richard the Second did. Such things are not for the Honor of
the Government, and may subject them that did them, to the Justice of the Law,
which it is to be feared, they would have perverted in the Case of my Lord of
Shaftsbury.

I thought to have subjoined an account of the Additions, Substractions and
Alterations in the Printed Account of the Proceedings upon the Bill against the
Earl of Shaftsbury, as they have been compared with the Manuscripts which were
taken by some of the best Shorthand Writers about the Town: But this Discourse
being arisen already to a greater length than was intended, I shall wholly
decline the increasing it by things that are not essential to the vindication
of our Innocence, and which possibly would only reflect upon the Amanuenses
whom the Prosecutors employed. And therefore instead of that, I shall choose to
give the world some further light concerning the affair of the Earl of Argyle,
his Case being a pattern of what our own may come to be, if the Counsels of a
certain Gentleman in the North do prevail. No Person of Quality in the Kingdom
of Scotland had served His Majesty with greater Loyalty and Zeal when the
King's Affairs were lowest, than this Gentleman did. And accordingly his
Majesty, who when left to act suitably to his temper and inclinations, never
forgets the good Offices of his Friends, was pleased to testify what sense he
had of my Lord Lorn's Services by a Letter directed from Collen, December 30.
1654. in which having told this Lord, How he had heard from Middleton, what
Affection and Zeal he had shown to his Service, and how constantly he adhered
to him in all his Distresses; His Majesty was pleased graciously to add, that
he should find him very just and kind in rewarding what he had done and
suffered for him. But what this Earl acted and underwent for the King, when his
Lordship's Father and almost all the Scotch Nation had either fallen in with or
submitted to the Usurpers, will better appear by a Paper under Middleton's
hand, which I shall here annex.

John Middleton Lieutenant General next and immediate under His Majesty, and
Commandev in Chief of all the Forces raised and to be raised within the Kingdom
of Scotland.

Seeing the Lord Lorn has given so singular proofs of his clear and perfect
Loyalty to the King's Majesty, and of pure and constant Affection to the good
of His Majesty's Affairs, as never hitherto to have any ways complied with the
Enemy, and to have been principally Instrumental in the enlivening of this late
War, and one of the chief and first Movers in it; and has readily, cheerfully
and gallantly engaged, and resolutely and constantly continued active in it,
notwithstanding the many powerful Disswasions, Discouragements and Oppositions
he has met with from diverse hands; and has in the carrying on of the Service
shown such signal Fidelity, Integrity, Generosity* Prudence, Courage and
Conduct, and such high Virtue, Industry and Ability, as are suitable to the
Dignity of his Noble Family, and the Trust His Majesty reposed in him; and has
not only stood out against all Inducements, Temptations and Enticements; but
has most nobly crossed and repressed Designs and Attempts of deserting the
Service, and persisted Loyally and firmly in it to the very last, through
excessive Trials and many great Difficulties, and misregarding all personal
Inconveniences, and choosing the loss of Friends, fortune and private
concernments; and to endure the utmost Extremities, rather than to swerve in
the least from his Duty, or taint his Reputation with the meanest shadow of
Disloyalty or Dishonor. I do therefore hereby testify and declare, that I am
perfectly satisfied with his whole deportments in relation to the Enemy and
their late War; and do highly approve them, as being not only above all I can
express of their worth, but almost beyond all parallel, etc.

John Middleton.


What his after-Sufferings for His Majesty were, and how he continued six years
a Prisoner under the Usurpers for his Loyalty to the King, I shall content my
self to have only barely suggested them. And as no man in all Scotland was more
capable of serving his Prince, both by reason of the greatness of his Parts,
the height of his Quality, and the largeness of his Interest, than this Noble
Lord; so no person of one degree or another, has at all times, and in various
Employments and Trusts, more approved his Zeal and Loyalty to the King's Person
and Government, than he has constantly done since His Majesty's Restoration.
And if he have offended in any thing, it is by an excess of compliance with his
Majesty's Will, having as himself declared in his Speech at his Arraignment,
served him all along after his own way and manner. Nor can any wise man believe
that what he was accused of High Treason for, was either a Crime in it self, or
would have been charged upon this Earl as an Offense, if His Majesty's present
Commissioner in Scotland, had not upon some hidden and more important motive
and inducement, conceived an implacable hatred against him. For the declining
to swallow the Test abruptly, and without such limitations as might give it
both a determinate and a legal sense, cannot be imagined to be more criminal,
than altogether to refuse it; which not only many of the Conformable Clergy,
but diverse Peers and Gentlemen, without being accused of High Treason, have
done. And surely it was more becoming a man of Honor and a Christian, to
declare plainly and openly, in what sense he could, and was ready to take it,
than to take it with a pious and devout ignorance, as another Lord of His
Majesty's Privy Council did. And as the Council's publishing an Explanation of
it, is an unanswerable Argument, that it required some Explication, toward the
reconciling it to its self and the Laws of the Land; so wise men are apt to
think, that it is as lawful for a person to explain it for himself, as for them
to take upon them to explain it for others. But it seems very strange, that it
should be Treason in the Earl of Argile, to declare in what Sense he would take
it, when at the same time others have been allowed to put Senses and
Constructions of their own upon it, which were more remote from the meaning of
the words than his were. But that the World may be both able to judge of that
Affair, and of the hard and unpresidented usage which this Noble person has
met with, I shall first subjoin the Explanation of the Test, for which he was
Accused and Condemned of High Treason. Secondly, I shall annex an Explication
which he had prepared of that Explanation, and which he threw into such a
Texture with the words of the latter, that being read interwoven together, his
purpose, meaning and design, will not only more clearly appear, but justify
themselves to the minds of all rational men. And I shall add in the last place
the Opinion of several of the best Lawyers in Scotland, concerning the Case of
this Great and Loyal Peer.

The Earl of Argile's Explanation of the Test.
I Have considered the Test, and I am very desirous to give obedience as far as
I can. I Am confident, the Parliament never intended to impose Contradictory
Oaths: Therefore I think, no body can explain the Test but for himself. I take
it, as far as it is consistent with it self and the Protestant Religion. And I
do declare, That I mean not to bind up my self in my Station, and in a lawful
way, to wish and endeavor any alteration I think to the advantage of Church or
State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion and to my Loyalty. And this I
understand, as a part of my Oath.

The Earl of Argile's Explication of his Explanation of the Test.
I Have considered the Test, and have seen several objections moved by others
against it; and I am very desirous, notwithstanding of all that I have seen or
heard, to give obedience in this and every thing, as far as I can. I am
confident, whatever scruples any man does raise, The Parliament never intended
to impose Contradictory Oaths. And because their sense and genuine meaning is
the true sense, and seeing the Test that is enjoined is of no private
Interpretation, nor are the Kings Statutes to be interpreted otherwise than as
they bear to the intent they are made; Therefore I think no body, that is to
say no private person, can explain the Test for-another, But every man for
himself, as he understands it to agree with and suit the Parliaments sense,
which is the true sense. I take it, notwithstanding all these scruples made by
any, As far as it is consistent with it self, and which is indeed wholly in the
Parliaments sense and true meaning, which was the securing the Protestant
Religion founded on the word of God, and contained in the Confession of Faith
recorded Parl. 1. Ja. 6. And I declare that by that part of the Test, viz. that
there lies no obligation on me, etc. That I mean not to bind up my self in my
station, and in a lawful way, still disclaiming all unlawful endeavors To wish
and endeavor any Alteration I think according to my Conscience and Allegiance
To the advantage of Church or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion,
nor my Loyalty, which I understand no otherwise but the duty and allegiance of
loyal and faithful subjects. And this Explanation I understand as a part not of
the Test nor Act of Parliament, but of my Oath that I am to swear, and with it
I am willing to take the Test, if your R. H. and Lo. allow me it, or otherways
in submison to the Act of Parliament and your R. H. and the Councils pleasure,
am content to be held a Refuser at present.

The Opinion of the Lawyers about the Earl of Argyle's Case.
WE have considered the Criminal Letters raised at the instance of His
Majesty's Advocate against the Earl of Argyle, with the Acts of Parliament
contained and warranted in the same Criminal Letters, and have compared the
same with a Paper or Explication which is Libelled to have been given in by the
Earl of Argyle to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and owned by him as
the sense and explication in which he did take the Oath imposed by the late Act
of Parliament; and which Paper is of this Tenor, I have considered the Test,
and am very desirous, etc. And likewise having considered, that the Earl after
he had taken the Oath, with the explication and sense then put upon it, it was
acquiesced to by the Lords of the Privy Council, and the Earl allowed to take
his place, and sit and vote. And that before the Earl's taking of the Oath,
there were several Papers spread abroad containing Objections and alleged
Inconsistencies and Contradictions in the Oath. And that some thereof by Synods
and Presbyteries of the Orthodox Clergy, to some of the Bishops of the Church.
It is our humble Opinion, that seeing the Earl's design and meanin in offering
the said Explication was allenarly for clearing of his own Conscience, and is
of no contravention of the Laws and Acts of Parliament, and does not at all
import the Crimes Libelled against him; viz. Treason, Leising-making, Depraving
of His Majesty's Laws, or the Crime of Perjury: But that the Glosses and
Inferences put by the Libel on the said Paper, are altogether strained, and
unwarrantable, and inconsistent with the Earl's true Design, and the Sincerity
of his meaning and intention in making of the said Explication.

FINIS.

