THE CONFIRMING WORK OF RELIGION, In its necessity and use briefly held forth;
that each Christian may have a proper ballast of his own, of the grounds and
reasons of his faith, and thus see the greatness of that security, on which he
adventures his eternal state.

OR The true and infallible way, for attaining a confirmed state in Religion,
from these primary evidences and demonstrations of our faith; which the Lord
has himself given, so as it may be easy for the meanest in the Church to know
the same, and be ready to render an account thereof to all that ask.

With a short and confirming prospect of the work of the Lord about his Church,
in these last times.

BY R. FLEMING, Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

At ROTTERDAM, Printed by REINIER LEERS. M.DC.LXXXV.

The PREFACE.
THis small Essay, here offered, is on the greatest subject, can fall under the
consideration of mankind; and is a study, was never more pressingly called for,
then in these days, for men to be making peace with God, and to have such an
assurance of his truth, as can fully quiet and support the soul, though all
sensible props should be brocken, and fail. Great changes do surely hasten on
this generation, and the life of faith, is in an other manner like to be put to
trial, then since the Churches rise and recovery from Antichristian bondage.
The storm now visibly grows upon the Churches of Christ, though nothing is
thus to faint or shake, the spirits of any, who know their anchor is sure and
cast within the vail; but the strongest difficulties, in following the Lord,
when overcome, yields the greatest victory, and will be not only matter of joy
here, but to all eternity, in having with patience and hope endured, and got
well through a throng of temptations and assaults in a resolute adherence to
the truth. If men think it their wisdom to secure their private interest, by
dividing it in such a time from the public cause of the Reformed Church, and
make light of the greatest truths of God now assaulted, of the blood of the
Martyrs, yea of their own eternal state, by any coolness or shrinking from the
same; they will find no temporal motives, can ever compense that loss and
ruin which inevitably will meet such in the issue, yea that these words of
Mordecai to Esther, Esth. 4: 13, 14. have the same voice, and weight in this
day. What is held forth in the following work, I may with humble confidence
say, was under some pressure to have such clear evidence and quieting
persuasion of divine truth, as made it less easy to have my own spirit
satisfied herein, then possibly it may be to others; for if it were not from
that blessed assurance of the Lords being God, of the revelation of Christ, and
of the glory to come, I should not know what could be conforting or make a
rational being desirable. Some singular ingadgments I judge my self also to
stand under, for putting to my seal to the truth and faithfulness of God in
his word, from many signal confirmations hereof in the course of my pilgrimage,
if such a poor testimony might be of any weight. Let the blessed Lord,
graciously accept this small offering to him, and for the interest of his
truth, by so mean an instrument, and give some fruit hereof, that may abide,
and be found in the day of Christ.

I hope the Reader may find by a perusal of the I. Chap. of what serious use
and intent the II. is; yea that in this day it was not unseasonable or
incongruous to the forgoing subject what is held forth in the III. Chapter. But
oh it is sad and amazing to think how few are under that weight of Religion, as
once to have a serious inquiry on the grounds and reasons thereof, and to
account the most special assistances to their faith to be the greatest helpers
of their joy within time.

THE True and infallible WAY For attaining a confirmed state in RELIGION, etc.
CHAPTER I. The Primitive Confirmation in the truth of Christianity, held forth
and cleared, in its continued necessity and use to this day, in a few Positions.
THat nothing can have a more sad and threatening aspect on the present state of
religion in all the churches of Christ, Position, are these. I. That it is too
visibly manifest, how no men in the world know so little of their own
profession, were it of any human art or science, as such who bear the name of
Christians, or are so generally strangers to the truth and firmness of the
principles thereof, for maintaining either a due valuation, or powerful sense of
the same on their soul; so that an implicit and traditional profession is the
only part and propriety which most can claim in the truth, and doctrine they
profess. II. That so rare also is any such serious work amonghst men, as a
personal inquiry and trial, if there be indeed such a thing as an experimental
and soul quickening religion in the earth, that can bear the expense of the most
dismal and afflicting times, and has so great a temporal revenue lying thereto,
as peace with God, an immediate communion with him, the joy and comforts of the
H. Ghost, when under such pressours of trouble as are above the support of
nature. III. That the furthest account, why most go under the name of
Christians, rather then of any other form, can rise no higher then custom and
education, that it did bespeak them from their birth, and was the religion of
their ancestors, yea become in that manner natural to them, as the customs
and language of their country; which are grounds that should determine to the
very opposite profession, if they were stated under the same circumstances, and
had the same motives to be Mahumetans; since it is sure these can found no
other assent, then is suitable to the nature and strenth thereof IV. That thus
it cannot be under debate, how the most numerous part of visible professors,
are so destitute of any defense from internal motives, and solid conviction of
the truth they profess, upon its own evidence; as there was never more cause
to fear, some unusual apostasy from the very visible profession of Christ, upon
any violent trial and assault this way, when such finds it more easy to render
up their religion, then to adhere to the same, under strongh temptations, who
yet never knew that substance, advantage, or certainty herein, as could
preponderate with the want of all external motives for such a profession.

That thus one of the highest services of these times, the faith of assent to
the truth and doctrine of Christ, in a clear and firm certainty of the
judgment, on its own evidence, more vigorously promot, and the proper means and
assistances, which the Lord has given for this end, in some other manner yet
improven, then seems to be this day, for a more universal use. The grounds to
enforce the necessity hereof, are these; I. that its sure wherever the Gospel
is revealed to men, it comes with so full an assurance of understanding, and
sufficiency of objective evidence, as can admit no possible doubtfulnesse
herein, which is the credit and glory of our religion, that in no other way it
does require acceptance, but with the furthest conviction of evidence. II.
Because the express design and tendency of this blessed revelation, is no
less to found such a rational assurance in the judgment, of its truth, then to
ingadge their will and consent, for embracing thereof; and though such great
demonstrations for this end can only, in suo genere, have a convincing
influence to persuade the understanding, yet are they of such weight here, as
next to the demonstration of the Spirit of God, they are the greatest means to
bring up men's assent to a full and quieting rest on that security to which they
must concredite themselves for ever, and to let them see, that this even here
by the way, is assuredly full, though not yet their enjoyment. III. Because
this faith of assent, should be first followed in the order of nature, as being
the very first principle of conversion, to know and be sure, that God has sent
his son into the world to save sinners; wherein as the H. Ghost is not the
objective, but the efficient cause here of our faith, so is not the internal
work and testimony he gives on the soul the first testimony, but must still
have respect to the revelation of the word without, and such demonstrative
evidences thereof, wherewith it is revealed to the world, nor may ever be
separate, that which God has himself so indissolubly joined. IV. That so
convincing a necessity and use is hereof to the Church, and in a special way
with respect to the youth, for a more firm laying of the groundwork of their
Christian profession, and to be as the seed-plot of a blessed and desirable
grouth amonghst such in this day; that they might thus know early, something of
these primary grounds and demonstrations of their faith; so also is it a study
of that high importance, as I humbly judge, should be of notable use for a
Manuduction in the first place to students of Divinity, before they launch
forth in that vast and immense ocean of the speculative part thereof; and for
being at some greater advantage thus for carrying on such a confirming work in
the Church in their future service. V. Yea of what use might this be with
respect to many, who may be sore haunted, with hid and dreadful temptations to
infidelity, and to weaken them on the very foundations of their faith; who are
wholly unfurnished of any such grounds and arguments in their judgment to repel
the same: and it is sure, to believe firmly the history of the Gospel, that God
was manifested in our nature, to save man, is with respect to the object a much
higher act of faith, then to believe, that he will save us; since as the one
does unspeakably more transcend all human reason then the other, so does the
Apostle thus argue from the greater to the less, Romans 8: 32. That he who gave
his own son to the death; will he not also with him give us all things.

That such a confirming work, Apostles and Evangelists, to have this faith of
assent and doctrinal certainty thereof, on its proper grounds and evidences,
deeply founded in men's judgment; is so clear, as cannot come under debate. I.
That this way did the great author of our profession himself take, not only by
the authority of his word, and the power and energy of grace, but with that
convincing evidence and demonstration of his truth to men's understanding, as
might found also a firm and rational assurance hereof. II. That for this end,
he did pray the Father, Joh. 17:21. and was so much pressed herein, that so
great an external demonstration of the truth of the Gospel, in the concord and
unity of his people, might be kept clear, that the world might thus believe
that he was sent of God, and have a deeper conviction hereof served on them, by
such an evidence. III. That one special intent of the Evangel of Luke, was for
this end, Luke 1:4. that men might know not only the things themselves by a
naked relatation, but the certainty of these things, wherein they had been
formerly instructed. IV. That herein did the ministry of Apollos so brightly
shine forth, Act. 18: 28. and was then of most singular use to the Church, by
that clearness of rational conviction and demonstrative arguments for the
truth of Christ, as the greatest gain sayers could not withstand. V. That its
sure it was then without exception, expressly required of the meanest within
the Church, to be allways ready to render the reasons of their hope to all who
ask; and not only to know what they did believe, but why they did so, as is
clear 1 Pet. 3:15. yea that this could not be by bringing forth of internal
evidences, for conviction of others, but to give them an account of the most
cogent grounds and demonstrations of the Gospel, as might be most prevalent,
and confirming to the weak, and leave others inexcusable; and seems to have
been then specially pressed in these primitive times, as a proper test of their
Christian profession. VI. And we see herein also, how much these excellent
Bereans were taken up, and were so highly commended of the H. Ghost, Act.
17:11. to know the demonstrative part of Christianity, and by its own evidence,
with that entire harmony and consent of the Scripture therein, and their being
thus diligently intent in that comparing-worke of religion, to see the truth
thereof not singly and apart by themselves alone, but in that joint union and
coherence, wherein they stand, each in their own room, for confirming and giving
light to other. VII. That this was the way also, wherein the Gospel did come to
the Gentil church is clearly showed 1 Thessalonians. 1:5. Not in word only, but as in
power, and in the H. Ghost, so also in much assurance of understanding, upon
its own evidence; which was that way, it did so wonderfully prevail over the
world against nature, and stream of flesh and blood, that stood in the furthest
opposition thereto. VIII. That one of the greatest services of the Apostles in
their visiting the Churches, did expressly ly here Acts 14:22. to confirm the
souls of the Disciples in the first place on the certainty of their faith, and
then in exhorting them to continue in the same, so as they might follow the
Lord, with the furthest light and assurance of mind, amidst the great trials
of such a time. IX. That its this way also the world is rendered inexcusable for
their misbeliefe of the Gospel, when under such sufficiency of means given for
this end, by so great a discovery of the confirming evidences of its truth, so
as they can have no pretense herein, but an obstinacy and resolution not to be
convinced; on which ground does our blessed Lord testify, that it was no want
of light, upon the certainty of his truth, why men did not receive it, but that
they loved darkness better then light, because their deeds were evil; and when
such clear, rational, and convincing evidences are laid open to their view, how
most possibly can get these put by or rejected, is not easy to comprehend, but
that a real irritation and torment of spirit, from such clearness of evidence,
does thus more tend to harden then convince.

That there is a continued necessity of such a confirmation in the faith to
this day, grounds. I. Because it is sure, the Christian faith does still need
these assistances; and is a strange mistake, that only for Heathens, and
Atheists, such confirming evidences of the same should be adduced, but not for
any under a visible profession, when the whole of divinity, and doctrine of our
faith, is so full of demonstrative arguments, for the daily use of the most
established Christians in their passage through time. II. That as the highest
motives to all serious godliness and the moral duties of Christianity must
needs be from its known certainty to us, so is the continued use thereof to be
still the same. III. That these numerous trials and conflicts of Christians
now, do no less call for some higher establishment in the truth on which they
must alone rest, when all visible props fail in their judgments, then of
supporting grace; nor is it conceavable how men can this day walk in the light
of any true joy and comfort, without a more sollid assurance of their being on
safe grounds herein then most seem to reckon. IV. Because the revelation of the
Gospel and of an eternal state in an other world, is so great and wonderful as
its strange how this is not the highest interest of men's life, to have their
faith more deeply confirmed on the furthest trial of their security now by the
way herein, who must shortly make so great a trial thereof at death; for if we
were but once this length to ask our own soul, what the Christian faith indeed
is, and are thus called to believe, it could not possibly but beget some ecstasy
of wondering at the greatness thereof, and to reckon any light and implicit
assent to the same as a degree both of Atheism and indifferency in this matter.
V. Though there be no conflict with Heathens as in the first times, yet was
such a spirit never more aloft then it is now to take of all firm assent to the
greatest principles of truth, when Atheism seems to be at its ultimus conatus
in the world, and we are fallen in so amazing an hour of the power of
darkness as makes these latter times more remarkably perilous and trying then
the first. VI. Yea if such a confirming work, be one of the greatest means to
advance the repute and honor of religion, when its wonted awe and veneration
is so far lost, and to awake men to deeper impressions of its truth, when so
few seem now under any such weight; then it is sure there was never more need
of the same then in this day.

That such a service to the Church, whom this is necessarly required, is
evident on these grounds. I. Because each Christian should have undoubtedly
such a ballast on their own soul, of the solid and rational grounds of their
faith, as well as these of greater parts and induments: the promotting of which
were it more deeply considered, I dare humbly adventure to say, should be found
one of the choicest means to promot Christianity this day. II. Because this is
not to drive any to doubt or question the least sincere degree of assent,
though it be not with such strenght of evidence as in others, nor can by that
formal argumentation give the same account thereof; since a few grounds this way
may specially help to some solid conviction and confirming of their mind, when
they may be ignorant of many other cogent arguments for this end; but its sure
also the greater clearness of evidence does still in the appointed way of
means lead in to a more firm and strong assent of the judgment, to the truth
of our religion. III. Because the strenth of the foundation in it self cannot be
enough if it be not with such a known evidence, as men may build firmly and
with assurance thereon; nor has the Lord thus only designed to give his people
an infaillible and sure testimony to adventure on, but that it should be made
sure also to them. IV. Because none can in truth say that Jesus is the Lord but
by the H. Ghost, 1 Cor. 22:3. by which is not to be understood so much there,
the necessity of supernatural grace, for a saving faith, but that none can give
a true assent and confession of the same, but from these grounds and arguments
which are revealed by the H. Ghost unto men for this end; and as its sure that
these characters and evidences of divinity, which are imprinted on the whole
revelation of the Gospel, may be clear and demonstrative to our judgment, so
are they as truly divine, as the doctrine which is confirmed thereby. V. Because
there can be no possible cause for credulity of the truth from any intricate
obscurenesse of the same, when the Lord has given such great assistances to
our faith to be as milk for babes as well as meat to strong men. And though it
be objected that the furthest objective evidence of the Gospel, with so clear
and strong a conveyance thereof, is yet so little operative on most; the same
might be said also of the whole letter of the Scripture; but as this tends not
in the least to resolve our religion into any mere exercise of reason, and
leaves the whole work of the Spirit, in its energy and operation therewith on
men's souls, entire; yet does it fully evince such a sufficiency of evidence
with the Christian faith, as makes any doubtfulnesse herein simply impossible,
through want of the greatest advantage of means; yea such as are of another
kind then to induce only a probable persuasion of the same. VI. Because it is
one of the saddest symptoms of the present state of religion, that so few
almost in whole congregations can give any clear assent to the truth and
certainty thereof, but to amazement both live and dye strangers to the same,
yea how many of these who are otherwise serious in religion, yet have their
faith starved this way, and are destitute of any such support; but as it is not
the numberousnesse of professors, but the strength and solidity of their
faith, wherein the Churches strength most lies, and has more slowrished in a
few such to beget a greater awe and veneration of religion amongst men, then at
other times in the greatest multitude; so is it the glory of divine truth, that
it can subsist by its own proper evidence, and preserve its station in the
worst of times, when all external arguments does most visibly cease.

That its thus fully demonstrable and clear, general principles of religion,
can be the proper and adequate mean for such a faith of assent to the truth
thereof, on its own evidence, or answer that Apostolic pattern of laying the
foundation, Hebr. 6:2. but that some special duties else are called for to so
high an end; such wherein not only that true primitive confirmation in the
Christian faith might have some practical use, but we might also hope
therewith, for a more remarkable outletting of confirming influences of the
Spirit of God. What is to be understood herein I shall humbly offer in a few
particulars.

I. That it is one of the greatest concerns of the ministerial work, and of
the key of doctrine, to have all who hear the Gospel, in the First place
pressed to take religion so far to heart as to have a serious inquiry on the
grounds and reasons hereof, and thus to know their being on sure ground herein,
not because they know not another way, but because they know this is the alone
way of truth, to which they dar trust their immortal soul. II. That for this
end the supreme truths of religion be represented with that certainty of
evidence, and demonstration, as both such great and marvelous things does
require, and the temper of such a gainsaying age now calls for; and to have
this pressed more on men's judgment and conscience, that the things of God,
which are of the highest consequence, reality, and substance, can have no
possible reception by any implicit or probable belief thereof, nor can admit
any pretense for the same, when the Lord has given such kind of proofs and
evidence, as leaves men's darkness herein, without any shadow of excuse.

II. That it peculiarly belongs to the Catechetical work of religion to take
some account of the meanest professors thereof, and with a special respect to
the youth; of their faith of assent to the doctrine of Christ, on what grounds
and certainty of evidence this is founded, and for their instructing therein,
as well as in the general principles of religion; when one of the most ruining
things to the Church lies here, that the profession of most is laid in so deep
an ignorance, as they have almost nothing to say for the same, but a naked
affirmation. I know the difficulty hereof for the weak may be objected, but
without just cause; since as the prime truths of religion are few, easy and
plain for the meanest capacity, so also are the primary evidences and
demonstrations of our faith, if such once with that desire did search after the
same as for a hid and invaluable treasure; wherein this respect should be still
had, to difference betwixt what is initial and of a more fundamental concern
for the weak, and what may tend to an higher grouth and increase of others.

III. It should be of greatest use and advantage also for the same end, that
the young grouth now coming up in the Church were put to give some explicit
evidence of their consent and choice of the profession of Christ, so far as may
witness a ratification of the baptismal covenant, now as their own proper
dead, wherein they were implicitly ingadged in their infancy. Some special
grounds and reasons for this are; I. Because God will have his service freely
entered in and upon choice, as that way which is most agreeable to his honor;
for as the covenant binds mutually, so do the seals thereof also, and therefore,
upon our part is baptism a sacremental oath of aledgence to God. II. Because
it tends to a more resolute and firm adherence to the service of God, that
this bussinesse should be personally brought home to men's conscience,
especially before their first admittance to the Sacrament of the Lords supper,
and thus to ingadg them as Joshua did Chap. 24: 22. Ye are witnesses against
yourselves herein, and they said we are witnesses. III. Because this is
expressly held forth 1 Pet. 3:21. where baptism is called the answer of a good
conscience toward God, upon this ground, that such then who were come to years
of knowledge, were personally sisted to confirm by their own consent that
solemn ingadgment and dedication by Baptism to be the Lords, and therefore it
is called (...), which is vox juris, and signifies, sponsio, and stipulatio
publica inter Christianum, and Dominum Christum, as the most judicious
Commentators on that scripture does clearly render; and so this was a special
part of the primitive practice, not only with respect to such, who were
converted from Heathenisme, but were born within the Church and partakers of
that seal of Baptism in their infancy, to siste them upon answer to that great
demand of the Covenant, do you now consent upon evidence and choice to be the
Lords and to be a subject of his Kingdom, and embrace the laws thereof, and do
you thus in sincerity and truth declare the same wherein you have a good
conscience before God. And of what blessed fruit and advantage should this be
both for the increase and honor of the Gospel, if this were more deeply taken
to heart for some practical use, according to the rule, and primitive pattern
in the Churches of Christ.

IV. It were specially desirable also, that there be some clear view and
summary by it self, of the most cogent grounds and demonstrations of the
Christian faith, with respect both to the Doctrinal, Historical, and
Prophetical part thereof, and in that manner accommodate, as the meanest within
the Church might have such a help still at their hand, and thus with the least
expense of time, be provided of such arguments and reasons, as should tend
(through the blessing of God) not only to the furthest rational assent, and
certainty of the truth of their profession, but to give a most special support
of mind against that inward trial of Satan's temptations and fiery darts this
way; yea is such a mean, that in the serious improvement hereof by having such
evidences once brought in on men's judgment and conscience, so as to see with
their own eyes the truth of the same, I must humbly judge, there is nothing,
next to the internal work of the Spirit, of this kind might tend more to
promote the Kingdom of Christ in this day.

I shall but add this further on the present subject, signal periods of time, to
which a greater brightness and increase of light has respect under the New
Testament, so does there now seem to be some remarkable call and excitment, to
such a confirming work, in this day about the Christian faith; when we may hope
that a more solemn and restoring time of religion in the world, is on a near
approach, (though all sensible evidence would seem to control this) and may be
now more looked after, then prepared for, under any suitable impression of
these grounds for the same. I. That the promised time of the conversion of the
Jews does assuredly draw near; and whatever be judged by some of the Lords
immediate appearence herein by a miracle, yet is it unquestionable that nothing
in the way of means could be more promising and hopeful to promot this great
end, then in promoting so great a service as this for the Christian Church. II.
That a greater extent also of the profession of Christ amonghst the Gentiles,
and renting of the veil that is now over many dark nations, seems clearly
insured therewith; and what a hopeful evidence should this be if such a public
and catholic spirit were more seen, how to advance the highest ends of
religion on such an account without respect to any partial or divided interest;
yea that this blessed zeal of God might in that manner appear to have the dark
world get a more clear and convincing prospect of the highest rational
demonstrations of Christianity, as might through the Lords gracious concurrence
bring men once to an inquisitive and serious spirit about the same. Oh that
such may be thus raised up in this dismal hour with something of that ancient
spirit, to travel with desire for the salvation of mankind, and of whom it may
be said, as of blessed Nehemiah, these are indeed come to seek the welfare of
their people, in their greatest interest. III. And this farther excitment we
are now under for this end, in a time when Popery seems to be upon one of its
last and greatest assaults against the Church; since its so clear what ever
tends to confirm men in Christianity from their own trial and inquiry upon the
confirming evidences thereof, must have the same native result, to make such
confirmed Protestants; yea nothing is more demonstrable then that the method
and grounds that are taken both to ingadge and fix men in the Popish
profession, have the same rational tendency to promot Atheism, and to give
infidels the greatest advantage to reject the profession of Christ.

CHAPTER II. The confirming work of Religion, reduced to practical use; in
some clear view of these primary grounds, and demonstrations of our faith;
which none should pretend ignorance of, who enters the profession of Christ
upon choice, and certainty of evidence.
SECTION I.
QU. I. WHat reasons, and demonstrations, can you give for so great a faith of
the glorious being of God, when he is invisible to humane sense, since this is
the fundation of all religion?

ANSW. Though on the sacred truth and authority of his own word, this is
principally founded, yet I am with the furthest infallible evidence herein
confirmed; I. That it can be no more sure, this mavelous frame of the heavens
and earth has a being, and is the object of our sense, then that a supreme
infinite wisdom and power must be the first cause hereof, and it were simply
impossible it could ever otherwise have been. II. That he has thus made
himself visible to our eyes by such a visible world, and in so exquisite an
order and correspondence there to support the same, as nothing stands alone by
it self, but in a line of mutual respect, which runs through the whole
creation, whom we may as clearly thus see, as that there is an invisible soul
in a living body. III. That this harmony is amongst thinghs, in their own
nature so contrare and destructive to other, for to hold this wonderful frame,
as all must abandon reason, or see an infinitely wise conduct herein; and no
need of extraordinary miracles, to confirm what the whole constitutions of
nature do witness. IV. That this rare frame of man could never have come in
being, but by him who could unite such different substances as a material body,
and an immaterial soul, in so near and marvelous an union. V. That such an
universal consent of mankind is in all ages thereto, as shows religion to be
founded in the very nature of man, and as essential to his being, as his reason
is, yea how the ultimate difference of man from the beast, and most essential
property of human nature lies here. VI. That though every one be an enemy to
what torments him; yet was it never possible for an Atheist to free himself
from that unavoidable sense and fear of a Deity; nor, in a world so much lost
in wickedness, could ever extinguish the awe of religion, or make any rational
opposition to this greatest article of the common faith of mankind. VII. That
the reason of the whole constitution of nature, and vicissitude of things here,
is so great, as, without shutting out the use of reason, we cannot but see, how
nothing possibly could have been better; and that any want hereof in the whole
frame of the universe, would be as the dislocation of a joint of the body, and
were not conceivable to be otherwise then it is by infinite wisdom appointed.
VIII. That its simply impossible that God blessed for ever should not exist, or
that this universe, (which is a work so highly becoming the greatness of its
maker) could possibly subsist for one hour or minute of time, without a supreme
independent power and being, on which all visible beings have their dependence,
since they cannot depend upon nothing. IX. That such is the absolute necessity
of the faith also of a Godhead, as without this the state of mankind could not
morally subsist, or any possible order, subjection, piety, and justice, be to
support human society, but as Bradwardine says, O quam necesse est hunc esse,
quem impossible est non esse! O that men cannot but see these effects of his
power on the conscience, in the certainty of a profetick light and discovery,
as has been often given of future things, and in the undeniable truth of
miracles, so as such a prodigy as a professed Atheist, can have no claim to
human race, as a rational being, more then the greatest monster in nature to be
a true man.

QU. II. What does witness the worlds not being eternal, and its first
original and beginning from God, to confirm your faith herein, by the further
rational demonstration.

ANS. I. That as an eternity is only communicable to the first cause, so that
which is made up of corruptible and perishing things, as this visible world,
cannot possibly be in it self eternal; nor could ever produce it self, since
thus it must both exist and not exist at the same time, which is the greatest
contradiction. II. That if there be such a thing now as time, there can be no
judging of days, years and ages to be infinite, or how one thing in a
continued order, should thus go before another, without coming to some first
beginning. III. If there be a gradual advance of human learning on the earth,
and a further discovery of arts and sciences; and that the greatest experiments
and inventions there have been but of a late rise and date; then can there not
possibly be an eternal succession of mankind, with a continued progress and
experiency this way; nor that but of late one part of the world is known and
discovered to another. IV. That so short an history as we have in the most
ancient records of time, were wholly inconsistent with such an eternal
duration, or that infinite ages preceding, should leave no rememberance to
posterity, when so small a measure of time, as a few thousand years, have left
so much. V. Nor could men beget other eternally without going back to some
first man, who could not beget himself. VI. That if eternity be preferable to
time, then should not the excellentest being in the earth, man, be thus
corruptible, and only this inanimate mass of the earth eternal. VII. That
infinite ages past, though they should have but multiplied the race of man in
an age, to two or three more, should have come at last, that the whole precinct
of the earth could not possibly bear the product of such an infinite increase;
and no wears or extraordinary judgments were ever yet known to be such, as to
restrain such an unavoidable grouth.

QU. III. What infaillible evidence to reason is there of a supreme Providence,
both in the conservation, and government of the world; for confirming your
faith of the Scripture herein?

ANS. I. That it is so clear the support of this great frame of the Universe,
with that continued and regular coure of nature herein, are as simply
impossible without an infinite divine power, as its first being and creation.
II. That such an extent of providence as respects so innumberable objects, with
such a contrariety both of qualities and passions in the same, must needs be
from an infinite and intelligent cause. III. That all things to this day,
continue in that established order of second causes, wherein God has placed
them by a law so visibly imprinted on the nature of things without reason, that
they do as exactly answer the same in their proper course and station, as if
they had a rational knowledge of their duty. IV. That universal respect, the
sun in the firmament has to things here below, though at so great a distance,
yet does neither cease, nor weary to emit its beams and hid influences to the
meanest creatures, may let us clearly see, how it has the same visible use and
end to confirm an incomprehensible and infinite providence about the meanest
things, as well as the greatest. V. That immediate precedence of the soul in
that lesser world of man, bears the same evidence therewith; which though we
never saw with our eyes, yet does undenyably actuate the whole body in its
functions, as the proper spring of every act and motion there. VI. It is thus
further confirmed, by these continued vicissitudes of Summer and Winter, and of
day and night, that man might have, both light for his labor, and darkness as
a covering for his rest. VII. By such visible discoveries of divine judgment
and execution of his laws on men here, as all may see his hand therein, who yet
will not hear his voice in the word. VIII. By these extraordinare and
wonderful works of providence, which have been in all ages. IX. By so evident
a restrainct both over Devils, and wicked men, without which they would quickly
disturb the whole frame of this earth, and make it uninhabitable for human
society; if their being thus bounded and chained, were not as visible, as the
certainty of their being. X. By such a natural obligation to moral duties, with
the sense of a difference betwixt good and evil, as is founded in the very
rational nature of man, that none can possibly root out, even where the
Scripture is not known. XI. By that natural confidence also in God, and in a
recourse to him on any present extreme hazard, to witness, not only the most
high bears rule in the kingdoms of men, but that the sense and evidence
hereof is unavoidable.

QU. IV. But does this great administration of providence, about human affairs
as uncheangably appear, in a differencing betwixt the righteous and the wicked,
by some recompense to the one, and punishment to the other, as in the
established course of nature.

ANS. It is sure such as desire a confirming of their faith herein, wants it
not, with the furthest evidence, but may ever see that exact conformity in the
whole dispensation of providence, to the rectitude and perfection of the divine
nature, and how a firm belief that God is, and that he is a revarder of them
that diligently seek him, is one and the same faith; when we cannot but see, I.
That natural sense of good and evil, and essential difference betwixt the
same, which is so fimly founded in the reason of all mankind, as no human laws
or custom could ever take this off their conscience, or make an indifference
her in, without extinguishing the very nature of man; to show that eternal and
uncheangable difference, which the holy nature of God has put betwixt them.
II. That we see such constraint served on the worst of men, to an awful sense
and regard of truth and weal doing, and to acknowledge the lovelenesse and
excellency hereof, as does make them seek their own repute by a false show and
counterfite of the same; and gives such a being and rise to that dreadful
imposture of hypocrisy. III. That its the truths privilege ever to outlive
falsehood, and prevail over the same, yea to have the greater triumph after its
sorest conflicts; and how this is of as foundamental a constitution in the
course of providence, as the most firm establishment of nature. IV. That in no
time since man was formed in the earth, does true joy and serenity of mind,
cease to be the native result of weal-doing, or the fruit of righteousness, to
be peace and assurence of mind, nor has ever wanted a witness even before the
world of the Lords taking pleasure herein. V. That its so evident, in the most
dismal times, what a public blessing, such are, who by more extraordinare
trials have been put to the highest exercise of their grace and patience; yea
how visibly such have been promot to the most honorable service for God, and
to advance the credit of religion before men, who on the first sight and view
have been accounted the most miserable of any. VI. Whilst, on the other hand,
it may be ever seen, how with the greatest prosperity of the wicked here, there
are punishments of another kind dispensed, and more dreadful then any outward
affliction, such as judicial obstinacy, and blindness of mind in opposition to
God, even when their own ruin is made visible to them herein. VII. How often men
are thus evidently condemned to be happy in this world by some strange measure
of temporal success and prosperity, before some great fall and ruin, as the
issue hereof in the last shene of providence does fully attest. VIII. That its
seen also, how sin does ever bring its own punishment therewith, in some begun
degree both of shame and torment; and, as Seneca, an heathen could say, that
wickedness was the most exquisite contriver of human misery, so the world
likewise may see how a present immunity from judgment is no release, but when
its sentence is not speadily execute, yet is it at last surely execute. IX. And
how evident is it, that the greatest haters of godliness are yet enforced to
justify the same and the Christians choice herein, as the greatest wisdom,
upon any surprising state and extremity; yea how such would be glad to join
interests then with such in their death, whom they most contemned in their life.

QU. V. How is it convincing and demonstrable, that God has given any clear
and expres revelation of his will and council unto men, and that such a
wonderful record is undoubtedly extant in the world.

ANSW. That, I. it is not possible to believe the being of God, and not also
the truth of an established law, and rule of commerce betwixt him and man here,
so as to know both what we should do, and what to expect and hope from him.
II. That this also must be known and display its power and efficacy to the
world, in that manner and by such infallible evidence of its truth, as may
render all inexcusable, who give not entire credit thereto. III. I can be no
more clear and assured there is but one sun in the firmament; then that there
is but one fountain, and repository of sacred light about religion, which is
the Scripture, and its being the alone public standard of truth to the whole
world. IV. That no way was ever made known to recover mankind from a state of
bondage, darkness, and misery, compatible with the very use of reason, but by
this blessed light which shines there. V. Yea that there is as visible a
difference, betwixt the same and any pretended religion which ever was besides
in the world, as there is betwixt day and night, which is founded in the
immutable nature of these things in themselves. VI. That there is one proper
sphere, where this glorious light of divine truth is fixed, and wherein it
shines forth from one age to another; which is the Christian Church.

QU. VI. But what more peculiare evidences can you show of the divinity of the
Scriptures, that all may see to be of infallible truth.

ANSW. I. That its sure such a book is this day in the earth, which no created
wisdom could ever have done, and contains such things of highest conceirn to
mankind, as do infinitely exceed the bounds of human ability and invention, or
could ever have been discovered but by God himself. II. That it gives forth
such exquisite laws and constitutions of our religion, as men must needs see
the holy nature, purity, and perfection of God, most brightly shining forth
therein. III. Which does discover so great and proper a relief for all these
evils and miseries that do attend this fallen estate of man, as none but an
allsufficient God could only do. IV. That he alone must be the author of this
blessed record, who rules the world, and has determined the changes and
revolutions thereof, when it is not more evident how these visible heavens are
stretched forth over the earth, then that this line of the Scripture is
stretched over the whole work and frame of providence, and does most clearly
illuminate the same. V. That surely this was the product of infinite wisdom,
whence so great a variety of matter, does meet with so visible a concent and
harmony in one perfect and entire frame; yea knit in so closse a bond of union
together, as makes the whole Bible to be intirly one piece; though in the
writing of each distinct part thereof it could never have possibly been
contrived or forseen by humane wisdom, what we see here of so admirable an
agreement and correspondence, as is in all the parts thereof. VI. That none else
could have spoke to the world, in so majestic a way, and becoming the
greatness and soveraignity of God, to assume such a supremacy, and give forth
laws for absolute obedience from all mankind thereto, and on such a penalty of
eternal destruction; or that any impostures, either possibly could, or durst
have, in such a manner, personate the same. VII. That it must needs be his word
who perfectly knows what is in man, and has an absolute authority over the
soul, and is a discerner of the thoughts thereof, who thus not only gives law to
the conscience, and our inward parts, but does establish an internal religion
there, no less absolutely, then what respects our external work and actions.
VIII. Yea where all may see the whole penmen thereof under so entire a
subjection to the doctrine which they tought, and to be no contrivance of their
own, as they did record their own failings, and imperfections in behalf of the
truth; and did thus also require all just respect and obedience to the
Magistrates, when through the whole earth they were then greatest enemies to
the truth of the Gospel. IX. That this must be his word, who alone can derive
principles of life to his own institutions, and animate the same with a
quickening Spirit; and is a work above the contrivance of Angels or men, when
directed to each new trial of the Church, and personal case of Christians, as
though it had been alone writ for that time; so that I can be no more
persuaded in reason there is such a book as the Bible in the earth, then that
it came from heaven, and is the alone rule of religion, and of divine
revelation, for the governing of mankind.

QU. VII. How is the secure conveyance of the Scripture demonstrable amidst all
the changes of times past, and that no possible access could be for its
corruption.

ANSW. I. That its so undenyably the first rule which ever was given to mankind
of religion, and the alone public standard of truth, that has endured the
trial and inquiry of all times past, so as no pretenses in the matter of
antiquity could yet ever be to the contrare. II. That so exact an harmony is
betwixt the Old and New Testament, as the one is a visible transcript of the
other, in its accomplishment; that I can be no more sure of such a venerable
record as the Old Testament, and its unalterable conveyance to the Church, to
which the whole race of the Jews is yet a standing witness, then how it is
continued and perfected in the revelation of the Gospel, and but one entire
frame. III. That its deliverance was no private deed, but by a public trust to
the whole universal Church; so as it were more easy in the way of reason to
question the most fundamental statutes and laws of any nation, by which men's
private right and property is secured, then the truth hereof. IV. That under
the Gospel it has been so fully dispersed over the world, and in such various
languages; as an innumerable company of Christians these 1600 years past, has
been as a common library of the same. V. That these numerous versions and
commentaries transmit thereon in diverse languages, do fully evidence they had
the same Scripture, and no other then what we have this day. VI. That this was
delivered to the Church not only in write, but in that form of sound words,
for keeping closse thereby, as could admit no possible access to corrupt or
alter the same; besides the continued and public reference has been since the
first ages of the Gospel to its decision, which all these sharp controversies,
that have been in the Church on all sides, do inevitably require.

QU. VIII. What does confirm the fall of man, and entry thus of sin into the
world, this way, from clear and unavoidable evidences of reason.

ANSW. I. That there is such a thing as sin and evil in the world, with the
sense and conscience of guilt arising hereon, amonghst all mankind, can need no
proof or evidence. II. That it is simply impossible this should have been
originally created with man, or essentially belonging to his first frame and
constitution, since then there could be no conscience of guilt or remorse, for
what was given to be a part of himself, in his first frame; or be any sin, to
act thus suitably to their own original state. III. That it were not
conceivable also how one part of man should be in such opposition to another.
IV. Nor that such a thing as inherent shame could be in the nature of man, upon
the sense of guilt, and by so natural a result follow the same, or that such
should be ashamed of any part of his own being, if this were not upon ane
undoubted apostasy from what once he was, and that inevitable conviction of
conscience that he now is what he ought not to be, so as the certainty of man's
fall though alone revealed in the Scripture, as to the true cause thereof, yet
may be as evident to reason, as the truth of his being now is.

SECTION II.
QU. I. ARe there such assistances to the Christian faith upon that great and
astonishing mystery of the revelation of Christ to the world as can fully
answer the greatness thereof from clear and infallible evidence to men's
judgment?

ANSW. It is sure there could nothing possibly be desired more to satisfy the
most doubtful and suspicious mind then is given for the furthest certainty
hereof. I. That such a glorious person as the Messiah was to come, and be
anointed to that great work of redeeming mankind from sin and misery and bring
man back again unto God; and how this promise is the alone foundation, whereon
the church was founded since man fell. II. That all these numerous types and
sacrifices under the law, did so expressly tend to confirm their faith of that
one blessed propitiatory sacrifice which was to be offered up. III. That longer
the New Testament was writ, there was so clear and exact a portraicture of the
Messiah drawn forth in the old, with such peculiar marks whereby he should be
known to the church, and have infallibly taken place in the event as men could
not upon any Scripture evidence exspect his coming in another way. IV. That
his humiliation and sufferings were so expressly showed forth and foretold, with
the peculiar circumstances thereof in the 53. chap. of Isaiah, and 9. of
Daniel, as if they had been eye witnesses of the accomplishment thereof. V.
That even the special season and period of time for outmaking of this great
promise was so far made known, as upon diligent search and inquiry, its near
approach might be discernable and clear to what or what manner of time this
did specially relate; for which both the fall of the monarchies and Daniels
seventy weeks were set up as highway marks to guide men's faith herein. VI.
That its simply impossible according to the Scripture, how the promised Messiah
could be yet to come, except the Jews were put in the same state they were in
at his coming, when now for these 1600. Jeares there has been no Scepter, nor
lawgiver, no temple, or daily Sacrifice. VII. That this great mystery could
never possibly have entered in our thoughts, or be devised by any created
understanding.

QU. II. But are there as clear and infallible evidences of the truth of this
great promise in the event, that surely the blessed Messiah of the world is now
come, as that it is sure be was promised.

ANSW. Its beyond all possible debate. I. That so divine and wonderful a
person was in the days of Tiberius Caesar manifested then to Israel, with no
outward show or observation; who did so great and mavelous things, before all
the people, as were above all created power, yea, was crucified at Jerusalem,
under Pontius Pilate, and is a truth in the matter of fact, that both Jews and
heathens have been enforced to confess. II. That this special season of his
coming into the world as the great Epoch and period of time from which the
Christian church, has since to this day reckoned her state and succession, is
undoubted and clear also. III. That the time of his appearance unto the world,
did so exactly tryst with that which was foretold by the Prophets, as then the
Jewish church was with greatest advertance looking after the Messiah; so as
some remarkable impostors were thus excited to deceive the people herein. IV.
That in him who was then revealed, and whom the Christian church worships its
sure, was most exactly fulfilled, what ever was foretold, concerning the
Messiah in the Old Testament; and we do appeal herein to these records which
all the Jews even to this day do acknowledge to be divine. V. That this was
not done in a corner, but in the public view of men in these days, most
noture and famous; yea by the special destination of God at so solemn a time of
the passover in Jerusalem, where Christ our passover was then sacrificed. VI.
That no humane interest or policy can possibly be in this discovery of the
gospel; when nothing more visibly cross thereto or obstructive of its
success, then such a publishing of the death and sufferings of our Lord, with
all the ignominy and abasement which attended the same, had there been any
access here to consult carnal reason, or any other ground to bear it out then
the evidence and certainty of its truth. VII. That herein have all divided
parties and sects in the Christian world been enforced still to meet and
consent, in ane acknowledgement of the substance thereof. VIII. That in the
same light which was held forth in the Old Testament about the Messiah, did the
whole gentile church enter; and made claim to their right for being adopted
the seed and children of Abraham, on these clear and express promises given
for the same; which the Jews could not but confess to be of divine authority.

QU. III. What confirmation is to the Christian faith, that for 4000. years
the coming of the Messiah should be deferred after the promise.

ANS. Though the sovereign pleasure of God should silence and satisfy our mind
herein; yet is there such a sight to be had hereof, and of insinit divine
wisdom shining forth in the same as should be most confirming for these ends.
I. That there might be a more distinct representing of the glory of this
mystery to angels and men, in such a graduall opening up of the same. II. To
put that weight and high value on his own promise and testimony herein, when on
the alone credit thereof, he would thus both try, and bear out the faith of
his church, for so many ages, and draw forth their desires and longings in all
that long space of time after the same. III. To testify the greatness of his
wrath against sin and the Apostasy of mankind, by suffering the generality
thereof to ly so long under its fatal effects. IV. To prepare the church for
so great a reception, by all that long preparatory service of legal
institutions, as so highly becoming the greatness of this mystery, to have so
solemn and stupendous ane introduction thereto. V. That thus the world might
have its full trial of the insufficiency of natural abilityes, and of any
improvements of humane wisdom and learning, for help; after this had first
been at the furthest hight both in Greece and Rome, before the alone Redeemer
of the church came.

QU. IV. What can offer furthest conviction to the world of the truth of
Christianity from its nature and internal excellencies; and that it is no
less essentially good in its self, then evidently true.

ANS. I. That its so undeniable even to these that live at a distance, how such
is the truth of Christ that though all visible and humane props should faill,
it can subsist by its oun evidence, and authority over men's conscience, and
has thus ever preserved its station in the worst of times. II. That as it
holds forth the most exquisite rule of perfection to follow, so does bring the
greatest releef to the distempers of the mind, and these miseries which attend
humane state here; so as a higher glory does thus result to the holy God, by
this dispensation of Grace to fallen man then if he had stood in his primitive
state. III. That it is sure the truth and doctrine of Christ does natively tend
to fix men in a state of light and communton with God, and in a state of
separation of such in their principles, affection, and conversation from the
world. IV. That it does more brightly shine forth in simplicity, and truth and
in its internal and vitallacts, then in any outward form or show, yea in the
way of self denial, meekness, and poverty of spirit, does such ane
excellency appear, as in its oun nature, has as visible a difference from the
proud and vindictive spirit of this world, as the day has from the night. V.
How such is Christianity, as by no naked doctrinall discovery of the same, to
men's judgment, or such rules as any humane science is acquired by, can be
known, without ane inward power and principles of a new life; nor can there
ever be a right knowledge of divinity, until it be first ingrafted in a divine
heart; so far is this mystery above all humane rule, and contrivance. VI. That
it is stated in the greatest opposition to any false show or hypocrisy; yea,
brings such inforcements therewith of candor, and truth, and of love,
tenderness and sympathy toward others, as all must see is not only the
highest ornament and perfection of our nature, but the greatest blessing to the
world that ever was known. VII. That such a native luster and fragrancy does
attend the truth, and simplicity of the gospel, as its no more possible for
humane art or cunning to represent this, then to make the dead image of a man
to live, or to paint in a broad the vital scent of a violet or rose, to our
senses. VIII. That in this way of the gospels subduing men to the obedience
thereof, by the power of inward grace, the glory of Christ does more eminently
shine forth, then if he had appeared for this end with the greatest outward
majesty and attendance of Angels to our bodily eyes. IX. That it is so visible
how the whole world besides, that is without the revelation of Christ, is a
place where horror, falsehood, and impiety does manifestly reign.

QU. V. But how do you receive so wonderful a truth, as that of the Gospel
is, when its now so great a distance of time from its first promulgation.

ANS. I. That we can be no more sure and persuaded of the most visible and
present objects of sense, then, that this is the same gospel which is still
shining forth to the world, whereby ane innumerable company of all nations,
tongues and languages, has received the spirit, and been sealed; yea, has
made that change upon men, in turning them from ungodlynesse and idols to serve
the living God, as has been no less mavelous then the turning of so many
wolves, into lambs. II. That it is the same gospel which not only through a
series of 16. centuries has been attested, but by such innumerable witnesses
who counted not their life dear unto the death for sealing thereof, and found
it sweet to be offered up in the flames for Christ. III. Which in all ages past
has stood out the greatest opposition that ever the world made to any
interest, while the weapons of its warfare were spiritual, and not carnal; and
with that success as the time of the Churches hottest persecution from
heathens was that period of time also of a most remarkable spreading in the
world. IV. That the same Gospel is revealed this day, which has had such
discernable triumphs and success when no external assistance could be seen
herein; and no visible power by which it gained the most savage and dark parts
of the earth, to take on the yoke of Christ, and prefer the objects of faith to
the most desirable objects of sense. V. Yea, which has not only had such
vital influence on men's heart, and practice to change it into the same image;
but that herein the doctrine of the cross of Christ in the greatest simplicity
has still been the most effectual way of its conquest, and the greatest
attractive on men's souls to receive the same.

QU. VI. How is it demonstrable that such remarkable sufferings of times past
for the truth of Christ, were both founded on the alone certainty thereof, and
carried out by a divine Spirit above any assistance of nature.

ANSW. That it is sure, I. Here was no comedy, or personated sufferings which
the primitive Christians, and in after times did endure for Christ; or that
these unexpressable torments and pains were any dream, and delusion either to
themselves or the world, and that their adversaries did thus conflict and
wrestle with their own shadow in so continued and cruel ane opposition. II.
That such joy and exultation of Spirit these witnessed amidst their torments,
who otherwise wanted no sense or feeling of their pains and sufferings, could
have no rise but what was supernatural. III. That this could be no possible
dissimulation or counterfit when they were stepping in on eternity, nor the
product of a distempered judgment; whilst all might see what seriousness of
Spirit, tenderness, and bowels of compassion to their adversaries they did
then evidence. IV. That these greatest sufferings were upon choice, and to
endure rather then to be safe at the rate of receding in any thing from the
truth. V. Yea no natural reason can comprehend how such mean and feeble persons
as many of these were, should endure, what would have made the greatest natural
courage to faint, as if they had foregone humane passions which flesh and blood
must needs have herein, so as I am constraind to see something no less
mavelous and supernatural in the faith of martyrs, then in the faith of
miracles.

SECTION III.
QU. I. IS it fully demonstrable, that the faith of a deity, and of such an
establishment as a religious worship, must necessarly determine men to be
Christians, on this ground that they cannot but see how religion has not
another being in the earth, but in the truth of Christianity.

ANSW. It is simply impossible to make a rational trial herin, and not see the
certainty of this demonstration, to be thus clear. I. That there needs no more
for any of a serious spirit, but to come and see, what the whole frame of
Heathenisme was, and if it be possible to deny, even under any sense of the law
and dictates of nature, its being the highest reproach of mankind; and how the
very mysteries of that Heathenish worship, was so horrid and impure, as they
needed a vail then from the common view of the world. II. Nor can there be a
rational reflection this day, on that strange monster of Mahumitanisme, but of a
visible prodigy of the judgment of God, on these parts of the earth; upon their
apostasy from the Christian faith, by giving men up to such an imposture, as
exposes the very name and form of religion, to derision; and can never claim
a reception either from the purity of its rule or internal evidence of the
truth thereof, or of its having any possible consistence with it self. III. That
its sure also the Jewish religion had never another being but in the truth and
faith of Christianity, and where this fundation is divided from, it has none
at all; yea how that people unto this day are such a confirming witness to the
Christian Religion, as its strange this does not beget deeper impressions on
men's spirit. So that there is an absolute necessity, we must either forgo the
use of reason, or see, if there were not such a rule given and revealed for
commerce betwixt God and man, as the Scripture, where the laws and
constitutions of the Christian faith, are for this end held forth, that its
then sure there is no such thing, as any religion in the earth, but what were so
highly irrational and absurd, as should rather justify Atheism.

QU. II. What special confirmation to Christianity, can this visible state of
the Jews bear, who are in so express an opposition to the Gospel of Christ?

ANSW. If this were brought near our thoughts we should find it one of the
great assistances to our faith. I. That its sure there is such a people and
race, as a living and visible evidence to our sense, of the truth of that
renowned nation, and church of Israel, to which the oracles of God were
committed, and thus are still, as some part of the evident ruins of that once
flourishing state. II. That the world may see, such a people kept by themselves
and not mixed with the nations, whose fathers from one generation to another
did still own the divinity of the Old Testament; and does attest that doctrine,
in which the truth and substance of Christianity lies, even whilst with
greatest malice they oppose the Christian faith, to witness there can be no
possible collusion here. III. Their being under a stroke of that judicial
induration and blindness of mind, as no reason could possibly comprehend such
a thing, how they see not the light in the very noonday of the Gospel, if it
were not expressly fortold their being concluded under such an arrest of
judgment, until the fullness of the gentiles be brought in. IV. That so
immediate an appearence of God, is in the judgment of that people, both in the
manner and continuance thereof, as no instance could ever be found to resemble
the same, since man was formed in the earth; and thus as a conspicuous monument
of divin wrath, set up for every age and time of the Church, to turn aside and
consider this great sight, and inquire what means so strange and amazing a
thing, as the state of the scattered Jews is, now under the times of the
Gospel. V. That this desolation on them and stroke, had such special concurring
circumstances for giving light thereto; as being not above 48. years, after the
death of Christ, with their hands, as it were, hot and reaking with that blood
which they had wished on them, and their children; that it should be at that
time of the Passover, which was the very same of the sufferings of our blessed
Lord there, and pointing as with the finger at the same; as also by the Romans,
whose interest in their opposition to Christ they pretended to own.

QU. III. Is the way and manner of the Gospels promulgation such, as no other
profession could ever pretend to, and where all may see there can be no human
interest or contrivance in the same?

ANSW. It is undeniable, that no interest else was ever in such a way promot
and does exceed all natural understanding, how the truth of Christianity could
in this manner prevail. I. To persuade men without any motives, or inducements
from this present world, to embrace a doctrine so wholly repugnant to nature;
yea to prefer an interest of things not seen, and which none ever in the earth
saw, to the most desirable objects of sense. II. To admit no implicit reception
from any, but on their exactest inquiry and trial herein; or in an other way
claim an interest in men's affections, but by a full assent of their light and
judgment to the same. III. To admit no gratification to the most predominant
desires and inclinations of men upon any darling sin, which according to human
wisdom would be judged of an absolute necessity for gaining any acceptance
with such; yea to give no partial respect to the greatest Princes more then to
the meanest. IV. To pursue its interest, by so plain a discovery of the death,
and sufferings of our blessed Lord, with the whole ignominy thereof, when
nothing could more evidently control such an end by any rules of human wisdom
and policy, if there had been a possible access to consult flesh and blood
herein. V. And its sure there could be no design, without an immediate divine
power, in such a manner to plead the interest of Christianity with men, by
inserting affliction, and the cross in the first entry, as essential to the
profession thereof, and holding forth the necessity of taking on the yoke of
Christ, without which none can be his Disciples.

QU. IV. But wherein does the evidence of that great demonstration of the
Gospel most clearly appear, in the love and unity of Christians amonghst
themselves, which we find Christ does so specially press, for this end, that
the world might know, and have such a visible seal of his divine mission, Joh.
17:21.

ANSW. The greatness of this demonstration may be thus evident to all. I. That
its so clearly demonstrative of the purity of our Religion, which can admit of
no bitterness, strife, recrimination, or such indecencies of heat and passion,
which are these fatal effects of discord in the Church; and thus lets us see
the excellency of the spirit and rule of the Gospel. II. That thus also we may
know the power and efficacy of the truth thereof, which is according to
godliness, upon men's heart, in subduing these distempers of the mind and
judgment. III. That this does so specially tend to make religion lovely, and to
draw forth matter of praise and blessing to God from the world, when they see
such a native effect of Christianity as this, to make those who profess the
same in that manner shine forth in tenderness, humility, and brotherly love,
so that they become as a public good and blessing to mankind in the place they
are in. IV. This appears also from the nature of that union in the Church of
Christ, and amongst his followers, which only a divine power could both frame
and make effectual; and its sure no human society or constitution could ever
claim such an unity therein as this is; where not only persons of all nations
and languages and of all conditions, both high and low, but of the most
different interests, humors, and dividing circumstances in other things, do
yet in so marvelous an harmony meet in the body of Christ which is his Church
here in the earth. V. Because herein also does the glory and honor of our
blessed head, more eminently appear in securing this unity of his Church, under
a diversity of light and judgment otherwise, by a spirit of love, meekness
and condescendence amongst his people; then by imposing the most severe and
absolute uniformity in all things, to be the alone condition of Christian
communion.

QU. V. But what strength and evidence does this demonstration of the Gospel,
now bear in so divided a state of religion, and when the wounds and breaches of
the Church this day are like to blood unto death?

ANSW. Whatever just cause be of grief, yet is there none for darkening the
truth of this demonstration, on these grounds. I. That none can deny the
perfection of the rule of the Gospel, for the most firm and entire unity
amonghst all the followers of Christ on the earth. II. That no opposition which
is made thereto, but what has been fortold as one of the greatest trials of the
Church under the New Testament, and the Spirit of God does most expressly point
at in these latter times. III. Because the furthest opposition thereto can be
no more cause for any to stumble, or question the truth of this demonstration,
then that there is a Devil, whose greatest design has ever been to divide and
break Christians amongst themselves. IV. Because this union, which is chiefly
mistical and invisible, is much greater often, then what this way may appear to
the world, and of that kind as is not interrupted by distance of place, or any
want of local communion. V. That such a guard is set by the Lord unto this
piece of his glory, and to oppose any invasion thereon; that there stands an
Angel with a flaming sword, upon every hand in the commands and threatings of
the Gospel, to secure this blessed unity of the Saints amonghst themselves, so
as none can invade the same but on their highest peril, of opposing that which
is as the apple of Christ's eye. VI. That its ever found how this demonstration
has some clear evidence amonghst such who are indeed the Disciples of Christ,
and according to their advance in the life and power of Christianity does the
more brightly shine forth; so that the nearer the lines are to the center, the
nearer also are they amonghst themselves. VII. That in all times there has
been some tremenduous mark ^f the judgment of God made visible on such who are
contentious, and have made it their work to cause division in the Church and
sow discord among brethren.

QU. VI. But what has the Church now in these latter days to compense the
want of that great demonstration by miracles, and such extraordinare
confirmations of the Christian faith, as were in the first times?

ANSW. I. That we may see how far that seal of martyrdom, which came in the
room of miracles to the Church, has exceeded that which was in the first
times of the Gospel. II. That there has been since such innumberable shining
examples of holiness, yea these continued to this day, whom the world might
see did walk in the light and power of Christianity, as sure as men walks,
under the power and virtue of a living soul. III. That we now see what a length
the course of the Gospel and of the Church militant is come, and how far thus
the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, which once was so contrare to all
human appearence. IV. That so sure and exact a performance of the Scripture, is
now undeniable in the event, and of such great and marvelous things which were
fortold under the New Testament, that in an ordinare way none could have
believed, what we see with our eyes, and now have these things, which were in
former ages the object of the Churches faith, made the object of our sense; and
its sure this is such a seal and confirmation to our faith in these last times
as does much exceed the greatest miracles which were with the first planting of
the Gospel. V. Though we may not resolve our faith on any extraordinare
providence, or lay the least weight hereon to support the authority of the
doctrine we profess, since this only is founded on that sacred revelation of
divine truth in the Scripture, which is that infallible rule to discern true
miracles, and what is Gods seal herein under the undoubted signature and stamp
of his own power and working in the same; yet has there been such
incontrollable evidence of extraordinare signs and confirmations to confirm
the truth of the Reformed Religion, since the Reformation, as in no ages past
was ever known, but with the first planting of the Gospel among the Gentiles.

SECTION IV.
QU. I. IS it clear and demonstrable that the doctrine of Christ, is a soull
quickening and experimental religion, and the trial thereof, in its most
supernatural truths, of such rational certitude and evidence, as the world can
no more deny or question the same then these experiments of nature, that are of
most universal use?

ANSW. Though men looked but at a distance here or were come from Heathnism, so
for as to make a serious trial of Christianity, its sure they could not but
see, and be fully persuaded in their judgment, hereof on these grounds. I.
That such a discovery is undoubted and clear in the Scripture of so great
things, as, that there is a holy Ghost, and his workings on men's souls, of
peace with God, and the joy of his presence, which all who receive the gospel
are called to know and prove on their oun trial. II. That this witness of
Christian experience, has as discernable a consent and harmony there with as
face answers to face in the glass, and is clear to be no casual thing, but
where every step in this way of trial, is by Scripture light, and what they did
before read there, ere they knew it on their oun soul. III. That this in all
ages of the church and wherever such as served God in the spirit were found in
the most remote parts from others, has still been the same; and like a great
roll is transmit from one generation to another, with their confirmatory seal,
that God is faithful and true, in these truths of his word which seem most
incredible to the world, and now comes to our hand to require the same
attestation and witness. IV. That these who know and testify these things
once found it not easy to believe the same and did no less judge of such great
experiments of religion as a dream or imaginary thing then most now do, until
they knew them on their soul. V. That such also have been the most burning and
shining lights that ever were in the church and these innumerable in all ages
who declare the same, yea this in the mouth of the grave and entrance to ane
eternal state when no outward intrest could sway them here. VI. That it must be
a matter of greatest assurance which has then pressed the most tender parents
with their last and dying breath to commend the same trial to their children,
and to obtest their making earnest herein as the greatest interest they could
leave them. VII. That what ever differences be often among these in some matters
of truth: yet, in the certainty of this great trial of the life, power and
comforts of religion, is ane harmonious onenes in the same testimony in all
times of the church. VIII. That if any question this because so remote from
men's senses, and the judgment of carnal reason; the reality of its effects,
does unanswerably prove both the reality and excellency of the cause.

QU. II. What clear and rational conviction can you offer, of so great a thing
as conversion of men from a state of nature, to a new state by grace, which
does raise them as far above the residue of mankind, as reason does above the
state of the beasts?

ANSW. Though I should strive against the conviction of such a miracle, and
demonstration of the Gospel, as conversion is, yet were it not possible to deny
such demonstrative evidences as the world cannot but see hereof. I. That it is
sure such a change is made essentially requisite to the being, and constitution
of a Christian, by the whole consent of the Scripture. II. That there was never
yet ane argument in nature, for ones being a Christian in the life and power
thereof what ever may be for a naked form or show. III. That they are not a
few, but innumerable instances in all times and of all rancks and conditions of
men on whom so great a change and difference has been made thus evident, both
from themselves what once they were, and from the residue of the world. IV.
That this has been not only upon such as have been signally impious in their
practice, but who in their judgment were wont to deread holiness as a fancy,
so as Atheists must grant that there have been as professed Atheists sometimes as
themselves, who have been made such conspicuous monuments of the power of the
gospel. V. That none can object here, as once the Jews did, do any of the
rulers, or such as the world counts most wise, and knowing stand witnesses to
the same; when it is so known there have not been more wise, learned, and
judicious in the things of reason upon the earth, then such as have been
eminent examples of the power of conversion. VI. That its mavelous effects in
subduing men, to what once was there predominant interest and idol, and to part
from what had been as their right eye, or hand could only be from ane immediate
divine power. VII. That such as were greatest adversaryes to the truth, have
been made no less eminent instruments in the service of Christ, and choice
vessels of honor, then once they were in their enmity and opposition. VIII.
That this change has been so discernable in times of most visible persecutions
and hazard, when no outward advantage or gain could have the least influence
thereon. Now as these are demonstrably clear, so can there be no possible
access to question this. I. That the Scripture is faithful and true in so
great a discovery. II. That there is a divine spirit and a power above nature,
which accompanyes the same in such a change. III. That there are surely,
contrary states in ane other world, when they are so undeniably manifest here.

QU. III. But can so great ane experiment of religion as that of communion
betwixt God and men, here upon earth be made rationally convinceing to such as
are themselves strangers thereto; and for a further confirming of the Christian
faith?

ANSW. Though this be ane experiment of divine truth of a more transcendent
interest and value then all that ever were in nature, yet is it no less
evident, there can be no possible delusion herein; if I. to which so
innumerable a company bears testimony and has transmit the same, as that
which not once or twice they have proven but in the continued trial of their
life. II. That its known to the world, how such as testify what they do, and
have so often found in the retirement of their souls with God, are of as
discerning spirits to know the true value of things, as any else; yea such
whose testimony in other things the worst of men could not refuse nor deny.
III. How its undeniably evident, such must know ane other acquaintance and
society then that of men; that not only makes these hid exercises of godliness
so desirable, where all may see they more flee then follow any humane
witness, but thus makes so visible a change often both in their case and
countenance after most sad anguish and dounecastings of spirit. IV. That it is
so evident also how such as are most serious this way, have been visibly often
raised above their ordinary case, and frame in prayer, and other duties of
religion; yea, in that manner, as they who never knew, there is a holy Ghost
but by report, could not withstand so clear conviction of the reality hereof,
that can beget such liberty, humble tenderness and melting of heart, yea such
discernable joy and confidence. V. That no delusion or false show can be here,
when its ever seen, how such as are most serious and frequent in prayer and
these hid retirements with God, are the most flourishing also in the vitals of
Christianity, and have the most honorable luster, and appearance of any in
their profession. VI. That its such only whose joy and comfort is most
specially discernable beyond others when these lower springs of outward help
and encouragement are most visibly shut up.

QU. IV. Is that great, and experimental part of religion in the power of the
conscience over man, such as may be as demonstrable to the world, as the truth
of a rational being?

ANSW. It may be matter of wonder how men are not struck with deeper
convictions hereon, when they cannot but see. I. That though this be the
greatest tormentor, and troubler of the world, yet is there no possible retreat
from its power tho they should flee to the uttermost parts of the earth, but
does thus enforce the soul to a reflection on its self even when it trembles
at that sight. II. Which causes such fear and horror upon the commitment of
secret sins, when no dread of humane witness, or of visible hazard this way
could ever occasion this. III. Which admits no violence in any to outdare the
same, but is a power that the greatest monarchs find to be stronger then
they; and is such, as these often are enforced for a present ease, and relief
either to divert, or bribe the same by some false grounds of peace. IV. That it
constraines men to justify God, and judge themselves when his hand does pursue
them, and to find out their sin, and guilt, which was before hid. V. Which
makes men also afraid to be alone with themselves; and to tremble at the word
of truth, because its light does torment them, by that unavoidable application
the conscience makes hereof. VI. Yea makes men's guilt so legible often in their
countenance, even when they study most to conceal it, as all may see, there is
ane accuser within whose authority and power cannot possibly be declined. VII.
Which with so remarkable a considence, and security does support men's spirit
and makes it easy to sustain its greatest infirmityes from without, when it is
a friend; yea, thus upholds the oppressed with unspeakable peace and comfort,
when it does often cause the oppressors to tremble.

QU. V. But what does most necessarly result from so clear a demonstration as
the conscience is for confirming of our faith?

ANSW. I. That its infallibly thus clear, how there is a higher power and
judgment, to which all mankind is subjected, and gives the world an
unavoidable demonstration, both of the being of God, and the truth of his word,
in the great and supernatural discovery which it makes hereof. II. That there
is a supreme and infallible law also and invisible judge above us, under whose
power and authority this court of justice does without respect of persons both
summond, arrest, bring in witness and sentence great and small. III. That the
internal government of our blessed Lord, this way both in the severity of his
rebukes and most sensible enlargements of peace and comfort is unavoydably
demonstrat. IV. That it bears so clear evidence to that unknowen and undoubted
releef; and how none else could be ever found, to these wounds and stings of
the conscience, but in the light and power of Christianity. V. That it is
simply impossible for men to delight freely in a course of sin, when no humane
power can disarm the conscience of that so intolerable a sting, by which it
begins so early a hell within the soul. VI. That such is the power and peace of
a good conscience as can make it stand unbroken amidst the greatest ruins and
terrors of the world when under such a guard, as it is wrapped up in its own
innocence.

SECTION V.
QU. I. IS the evidence of a Kingdom of darkness, in a direct opposition and
contrariety, to that Kingdom of light, which Christ has set up by the Gospel,
such as the certainty thereof may be a matter of sense, as well as of faith?

ANSW. Since this is of such special use, both to confirm the christian faith
and awake such to deeper reflection on the same, with whom there seems no
access to deall, but by proofs from palpable experience; it is not possible
to deny. I. That there is such a power, as the devil and these wicked spirits
incompassing the earth, yea that have ane ordinar and familiar converse with
many therein. II. That these spirits though once originally excellent, have
fallen into such ane apostasy, as all may see their aim and only pleasure, is
to dishonor God, and destroy his image in man. III. That it is impossible to
deny the marks of that power and conquest, which the Prince of this world, has
every where amongst men; yea how visibly many are transformed into his image
into such prodigious and desperate acts of wickedness; as we should think
humane nature could not but tremble at. IV. That none can control the certainty
both of sense and reason which is in the truth of apparitions and bodily
possessions of men in all ages, and in all places of the earth; and can need no
demonstration for this, that in many places of the earth, the devil is both
visibly and audibly known. V. That he is so manifest in his appearence as a
spirit of blasphemy, which impetuously acts men to war against heaven with
their tongue in such oaths and cursing as has no casual pleasure, or gain
herein; yea, as a spirit of delusion in so visible ane excitement of others to
these extravagancies under a show of religion, as are incompatible with any use
of judgment or reason. VI. That so innumerable a company of humane race, has
in all ages been in a formal, and express covenant with these powers of
darkness is undeniable upon the most severe and impartial inquiry herein.

Qu. II. What special assistence to your faith does the certainty of these
powers of darkness bring therewith?

ANSW. I. That such a party both in their nature and continued actings, are in
a stated opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. II. That it is so visible the
prey which these mighty hunters do follow is not our body, or the things of
this life, but is with respect to ane immortal soul, and ane after state, and
that thus man might be made sharer of the same misery under which they are
concluded. III. That all may see their being under restraint of a supreme power
above them and under such chains as do irresistibly bound their rage, and
enmity against man by ane invisi^le guard and hedge which they cannot break
over. IV. How their greatest rage, and struggling is against the conversion, of
sinners to God, and to hold fast his possession in such, as the Spirit of God
does not, more clearly move for their rescue, then these do to cross that
blessed design of the Gospel. V. That there are none serious in the truth and
life of religion but find themselves pursued by such ane adversary; and to
have as discernably another party then themselves, or the world to conflict
with as if they saw them in a visible shape. VI. That by the Gospel and within
the precinct of the church, is so discernably a greater restraint of Satan's
dominion and power then in all the earth besides; yea that the advantage of
being within the external covenant of Baptism, is so demonstrable as the least
yielding or tendency to a renouncing of the same, or any acts of homage, for
making use of his help, has ever made way for some more extraordinary power of
the devil over such then others. VII. Thus also is a most undeniable
confirmation given of ane invisible world, and of such intellectual beings
there, as are far above man; yea that there is so undoubted ane intercourse
betwixt men and spirits, as may clearly show that interest men's soul has in
another state and world then this.

QU. III. Is that great truth of the immortality of the soull, and its never
dying state after death, as fully demonstrable to reason, as it is by the
furthest certainty of faith?

ANSW. Though it be so amazing a thing to believe ane immortal soull, and
eternal state, wherein it must shortly enter, as by few seems to be
apprehended, yet are its demonstrative evidences, such that except men lose all
sense and use of reason, it is not possible to deny. I. That there is such ane
immaterial and active substance as the soull, which can admit no cause, either
of its decay or dissolution, from the body, yea that the greatest excellency of
this visible creation, is here, that such a vital beam of life, light, and
immortality, as the soull of man is therein. II. Though we cannot see this rare
and wonderful being, yet it is here we both see, and feel it to be something
distinct from the body, and to have a distinct interest, both in its griefs and
comforts. III. How it can have no dependence on the body in its being, which
does no way depend thereon in its actings and exercise; but is often most
vigorous and clear, in its exercise, not only when most separat and abstract
from sensible things, but when the flesh is under the greatest decay, and near
its dissolution; to show the soull lies not a dying with the body, but has
its distinct subsistence, to live in a separat state, when it dies. IV. Its
being peculiarly framed for converse, and intercourse with spiritual beings,
yea is only of the visible creation admit to fellowship with the invisible God,
and to have reflex acts upon it self. V. How it is a being of a higher nature
and value, then the sun, moon and stars; which not only can know, and conceive
of things above the evidence and impressions of sense, but to make a rational
choice of good, though cross to any sensual pleasure; yea to rejoice, and have
its proper delights, when the body is afflicted and in pain; nor can be defiled
from the most loathsome sores and defilements of the flesh, so as I must needs
see both its dominion and pre-eminence over the body, and to have assuredly a
subsistence without the same. VI. That it is such a being, as is capable of a
happiness beyond the whole extent of the world, and has these intellectual
facultyes, which cannot possibly want, both objects suitable thereto, and
enjoyments, above the senses. VII. That the most choice and excellent, are
usually most afflicted, and crushed under the feet of their oppressors, whilst
these flourish in the earth and have no bands in their death, so as such were
of all men the most miserable, if in this life, both their being and
blessedness were founded. VIII. That there is so universal a sense of
immortality, as these who both fear and hate the evidences hereof, yet under
some constraint of reason has the same for a continued terror. IX. That it is
sure the certainty of death, makes it simply impossible, for things only suited
to this life of sense, to be the ultimate good, or fruition of man; since else
the beasts should have a greater happiness then such, if it were not from
respect to ane after and immortal state.

QU. IV. What confirmation to your faith does that great and amazing change by
death offer, when it would seem to be something merely natural?

ANSW. Though the only wife God moves herein according to the nature of second
causes, and that it has various ways of approach unto men, yet may all see
with the furthest conviction of rational evidence, as well as certainty of
faith, I. How death in its first constitution is penal; and comes by a divine
appointment unto all, not merely as men but as sinners, and to be thus no
natural accident and result of our primitive and original frames. II. That its
death, as a penalty which keeps the fear and dread thereof so much on all
living, as that last period, when the eternal state of men is then cast. III.
That the sting and bitterness of sin, is so manifest in innumerable diseases
and strokes of death, which many feel an 100. times ere they dye once, beyond
other of the creatures. IV. Though the sentence of dying is on all, yet so
great a difference is betwixt the saints and residue of men here, that its
penal execution on the ungodly, is such as nature can give no support herein.
V. That supernatural presages and warnings hereof ere it come, are in all times
so known and sure; yea such extraordinare evidences sometimes of the precise
time, as could have no possible rise from any natural cause. VI. That its
immediate commission from a supreme and invisible power, is so evident in such
executions often, of this sentence, by sword, famine and pestilence, as the
visible finger of God, in a just retribution unto men for sin, may be no less
seen, and a supernatural causality, then the effects have been undoubted and
clear; to show such is the state of man, as this great revolution by death,
does each moment depend on a call from heaven. VII. That the certainty of
something supernatural herein, as the King of terrors, is so known as no
relief can possibly be found, but in the truth and power of Christianity, to
set men both above the fear of death and ane after state, when once it comes
near. VIII. Yea that it is surely above the possibility of nature, which can
bear out in this great adventure and trial of men's faith, both in the truth
and strength thereof, at death, for which end the Lord has thus choised that
by so strange ane entry, and at so dark a port they should first pass to the
full enjoyment of that glorious state above.

QU. V. What evidence and demonstration can you show, to confirm so great a
faith of an eternal glory abiding the Saints in heaven, and of its earnest and
first fruits here, as may strike ane undeniable conviction hereof on the world?

ANSW. I. By that visible ripening and resemblance to such a state in all the
degrees of a Christians grouth, to a more full stature of the man in Christ, as
may be no less evident then the natural grouth of our body. II. That though
the opening of these gates of the second world be hid, as no humane sense can
discern the spirit in its ascent through these higher regions, to that
unconceiveable paradise and glory in the third heaven, yet is the triumphant
entry and passage of innumerable Christians at death, such as has often been, a
matter of sense and clearest evidence to the world. III. That such also were
both humble, tender, and sincere in their life, and then in so great a
composure of judgment, as all might see they knew what made them glade and
could swallow up both the fears and bitterness of death; yea that this was
not given for their own support only, but for a more public use, to the
conviction and confirming of others. IV. That the state of glory is
demonstrable and has been often brought down to men's sense, by these ravishing
joys of the Martyrs of Christ, and exultation of spirit even in the flames.
V. By such supernatural comforts as attend the life of Christianity, and can
have no possible rise from the flesh and outward causes, with that joy and
peace, which by so natural a result follows well-doing; and any service of
love for Christ as all may see to be the first fruits of that harvest which is
above. VI. By so rare and mavelous a frame of the new man, set up in this
lower region of grace, in so discernable a conformity to the blessed God, and
resemblence to another state then here, to which the world is but as a place of
pilgrimage, trial and a preparatory state only. VII. By such visible returns of
joy and comfort of Christians after saddest conflicts and downecastings, and
daybreak of these vital quickening beams of divine light, that have been no
less evident often, then that of the martyrs at the stake, who cried out, Now he
is come, he is come. VIII. By these breathings of love after ane unseen Christ
and visible effects of its power on men, as might show some begun translation
of the soull so far herein, as to be more where it loves then it lives. IX.
Though we cannot see here, that ineffable glory, which is above, but should
have our faith instead of eyes; yet such is the truth of holiness, as does not
only evidence, but in its own nature partake of a future glory; so as every
degree and act thereof does enter in a begun state of fruition and
blessedness, and makes it simply impossible for a good man in any true
exercise of godliness, not to be happy also, and thus in a more near capacity
to know that joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which is above. X. By so sure,
known, and tried a passage betwixt heaven and men's souls in prayer, with so
settled a trade of commerce this way, and certain returns, as with assurance
such can say, though they must change their place, yet not their company. XI.
That the whole dispensations of providence in Isra^ls passage through the
wilderness, and to so excellent a country as Canaan, is no less sure in it
self, then that i^ was given for an emblem and type of the jurt nying and
militant state of the faints hereand to be a solemn pledge of that Canaan
above. XII. That such is the magnificence, harmony, and order of these visible
heavens, and celestial bodies there, with their different degrees of glory,
(though all illuminated from the same fountain of light the sun) as we may
judge by a divine ordination have some peculiar respect to that end, to awake
and raise our thoughts thus, to these higher regions of glory, which are above
all these, by what is thus visible to our eyes; where the redeemed of the Lord
shall be ever fixed, and shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father.

QU. VI. What visible and awakning evidences are there of the truth of an Hell,
and that state of horror and torment in another world, which even to men's
senses here, might present the certainty thereof?

ANSW. I. That it can be no more sure, there is such a power and party as that
of the Devils, then the reality of some such horrid region and place also, to
which they belong, and are adjudged to. II. From so innumerable a company of
human race, as are not only in the visible service of these infernal spirits,
but partakers of the same nature and enmity against the H. God and his image,
as does clearly witness their respect and tendency to the same state and
place, and to be consederate in their judgment, as they were here in their
sin. III. From such visible impressions of vindictive justice on men's souls,
with such horror of conscience and unsufferable torments this way, as in all
ages have been known by most remarkable instances, when not in the least
distemper of their natural reason, that may present to men's senses something of
a visible Hell, as convincingly, as if one had risen from the dead, for the
same. IV. From such a trembling sense, and terror of divine vengeance, as often
follows upon horrid acts of wickedness and most eminently then breaks forth
upon a surprising sight of death, as all may see something more dreadful herein
then the dissolution of nature and the power and present arrest of a future
judgment made visible in the same. V. From such begun degrees, as that of
blaspheming and rage against God, because of his plagues, with these prodigies
of cruelty exerced by men here in the earth, as might be evident to all to be
more then human, and rather the effects of infernal spirits acting in a human
shape. VI. From so clear a prelude of the same in that judicial obduration, and
blindness, so many are given up to under the greatest discoveries of light, so
as all may see their being thus bound over in chains, and shut up in prison,
until death bring them forth to the execution; and how no relief or application
of the means of grace has then any more access. VII. From such a mape and
shadow of eternal vengeance, in these terrible acts of divine judgment
inflicted here on Apostates, and persecuters of the truth, and other flagitious
persons which with the very first view might present an awful and immediate
appearence of God in the same, and that some strange and supernatural punishment
is often visible on the workers of iniquity. VIII. And what ever be of natural
causes in such visible representations here in the earth, as that sulphurous
lake where once Sodom was, and these burning mountains such as Haecla, Etna,
and Vesuvius, yet we may truly judge their being thus set before the world as
some visible memorials of these infernal flames; and as it were so many
lumeheads thereof, for such who will not believe the same, because they do not
yet see or feal such a thing.

QU. VII. What assistances has our faith, of that great and wonderful truth of
the resurrection of the body, after its dissolution in the grave unto dust?

ANSW. I. From that visible and stupendous frame of the heavens and the earth,
when its sure that the same infinite power, that has not only made man, but
the whole creation, can as easily collect and recount the dispersed ashes of
the body, as form the same. II. From that greatest pledge hereof, in the
resurrection of the body of Christ. III. From that tribulation and sore pain,
that the saints here in their outward man are exposed to, since it is sure that
in the holy justice of God, he did not give such bodies for labor, and for
toil, and to his martyrs, to endure unexpressible torments for Christ, to
perish for ever. IV. From these visible resemblances and prefigurations of the
resurrection which the Lord has given to confirm our faith herein, in the
ordinare course and productions of nature; so as all may see how every night is
as the grave of the daylight, and each morning a new resurrection of the same;
and how visible an image of death is in each season of the winter, with so
marvelous and beatiful a resurrection of the earth, on every return of the
spring, in the herbs, flowers and plants, taking life and rising again, in the
leaves, blossoms and fruits; yea this in such a variety, as may no less
convincingly evidence an infinite divine power herein, then that the same body
of man should be raised at the last day. V. From that continued miracle of the
harvest, after the seed-time, with so amazing a production of the grain sown
in the earth, and its first dying there before it be quickened, so as to be at
last brought to 30, 60, yea sometimes an hundred fold, out of the very same
grain; which to these who had never before known the same would seem
incredible, and above all reason to conceave, or bear credit thereto.

CHAPTER III.
The confirming work of Religion, improven which respect to the times, to clear
the way of the Lord herein, before this generation, and let us see how nothing
is so strange in the events of this day, which should not more strenthen, then
shake, and that the God of the Reformed Church does still own the same
interest, according to his faithfulness: which is here briefly pointed at,
upon some special inquiry, proposed about the same.

SECTION I.
QU. WHat can afford both light, and confirmation to our faith, in such a time,
when we see the work of the Lord, about his Church, to be most remarkably now
a work of judgment, with such dark and searching trials therewith, as former
times have not known.

ANSW. It is sure, we have seen nothing, but what might have been too evidently
looked for, and that we can pretend no want of light herein, upon these
grounds. I. That the Trialls of a Church, should be suited to the measure of
their talent of light, and when this has been in some more then ordinare way
dispensed, that some remarkably searching times might be expected to follow;
nor can it be now strange to us, that such things fall in with this day, which
did not meet the Churches of Christ at the first entry of the Reformation, who
then had not so clear discoveries of the truth, and that measure of
confirmation therein, which has been since. II. That some unusual trials, and
conflicts, in the Lords usual method of providence, should be suited also, to
the greatness of that work, which he is bringing forth, may be no strange
thing; and to see a time of such sore wrestlings as this, when all things seem
to cry, be in pain as Micah 4:20. Yea when some great event of the Scripture is
to be revealed to the world, and near to its full hight, and period of
accomplishment, as we have safe ground for assurance of this ^ay. III. Nor has
this sad and dismal hour on the Church, been more obvious then the provoking
cause hereof, in which the holy righteousness of God, may be no less clear
then the cloud now is dark; when such a visible falling of has been from that
love, tenderness, and power of religion that did formerly attend its profession;
as for these many years past we might have seen that some sore and remarkable
judgment was coming, and that if we had not been in such a manner undone, we
were, under some sadder strock of spiritual judgment, ready to be undone. IV.
Yea it has been too visible, that such evils followed the Reformed Churches,
as in no time it was ever known, that the holy God, did pass such by, without
some signal evidence of his wrath against the same before the world. V. We know
that carnal confidence has a curse ever waiting upon it in the Scripture,
which none can take of, or make that thrive which God has himself cursed; and
it is too visible how far we have gone thus out of the way of our strenth, by
such eager seeking human props, and support, as we have for^ot the guide of our
youth, and convenant of our God, and what great things he has formerly done in
the greatest straits of his Church, when there was much humble trusting, with
little sense; as though the spirit of the Lord, had not done more to recover
his truth, then all human might or power, ever could do.

SECTION II.
QU. WHat talent, are we still accountable for to support our faith against the
greatest fears of this time, from these immediate appearances of God, and of
the glory of his power, for the same truth and cause of the Reformed Church, we
are now called to contend for, which has been since the reformation when so
strong and unusual a tide, now is against the same?

ANSW. If men shut not their eyes, and hide this great talent of the works of
God, under the ground, its sure none can question such a seal, which before the
sun, to the amazment and conviction of the world, has been put to the truth of
the Reformed Religion; that we are now sisted under such a call, as the Church
of Israel was, Deuteronomy. 4:34. to ask of the times, that are past, since Isreal's
coming out of Egypt, and since the first planting of the Gentil Church, by the
Gospel, whither there has been so great a thing as this in the earth, that God
has essayed to take to himself a people from the midst of other nations, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by
an oustretched arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord our
God has done for the rescue of his people, in these last times, from
Antichristian bondage and darkness; and settling them in a church state; but
unto us was this showed, that we might know, that the Lord he is God, and there
is noncelse beside him: yea are still called to see, and be as eye witnesses to
these things; I. How bright a day of the Gospel of Christ, did go before this
great darkness on the Church, and what a solemn triumph in these late ages
the truth has had over Antichrist, so as the full strock and ruin of his
kingdom, which is sure and established in the promise of God, seems not now
more marvelous and above human appearence, then what we have seen, in the begun
degrees of its accomplishment. II. In how few years also, there was, as a new
Christian world brought forth, in that swift course and progress which the
ingathering of the Reformed Churches had, so as between the year 1621, and
1560. such famous plantations of the Gospel, were settled in a Church state;
which all may see was the immediate work and power of God; to show that none
should fear, or stagger at his promise, though the waters yet swell, and come
to the flowings of Jordan, and difficulties appear unsuperable to human sense,
after this great things which the Lord has done. III. How extraordinare a
calling, and excitment of instruments, was then evident, for the service of
that time, and reapers thus eminently prepared for so great an harvest of the
Gospel, as might put the world to inquire whence these were, in so numerous a
concurrence, when a few of such a spirit, were so rarely to be found in many
ages before. IV. Yea such an accession also, of spiritual gifts, and induments
then for building of the Church, as had not been formerly known, since the
first coming of the Gospel to the Gentiles; wherein it may be said, the glory of
these last times has even in some degree exceeded that of the first. V. And
can the most dismal things of this time, countervail the confirmations of our
faith, who have so clearly seen, with the first breaking up of the pur doctrine
of Christ, the power and life of Christianity came therewith to the world, as a
seal, and attestation thereto, beyond any miracles; yea how innumberable a
company, in these last ages of different tongues and languages, and these so
remot from one another, did not only receive the same truth, but with such
resolution adventure their souls thereon, as might fully witness, they had
another prospect of Christianity, and to be in some other manner ravished with
the glory and beuty of the same, then is now in these times. VI. That such high
spring tides of the power, and efficacy of the Gospel, might be evident to all,
after so sad a restraint had been for so many ages before, under Antichristian
darkness; for whatever was then as a private seall, on the spirit of
Christians whilst the witnesses did prophesy in sackcloth, yet was there no
such evidence and demonstration of the H. Ghost, or a public confirmatory seal
to the truth, as was after the Reformation. VII. Yea was it not the most sober,
serious, and inquisitive part of men, upon a sure trial of the grounds of their
faith, who did most firmly embrace the same; and how many of these also were of
the greatest parts and abilities, whom none could judge to adventure so far
herein, without the highest assurances, that this was their undoubted interest
and upmaking. VIII. We have seen not only these of mean and low estate, but
such of the highest place and quality, most cheerfully adventuring whatever
interest could be dearest to them, in the earth for the truths sake; yea was
ever found, how such as were most acquaint, with the reformed religion in its
power, and living up in their practice, to what they professed thereof, were
these who with the greatest assurance, have most resoluty still adhered
thereto. IX. We have seen also, its most remarkable spreading in the world,
when there could be no possible pretense of a lucrative interest, or external
motives for the same. X. We have seen something not only extraordinare, but
even miraculous in the joy, and resolution of innumberable martyrs since the
Reformation who did bear out with a more then human strenth, against a cruelty
so visibly inhuman, and savage; yea which did in some degrees exceed that
measure of the Heathens, in the Primitive times, as being against a greater
light then theirs. II. And have we not seen of what spirit, such still have
been since the Reformation, who were the most notour instruments in the
Churches persecution, and how visibly such did act herein, under so impetuous
an incitment of the Devil, that as Tertullien, in his Apollogy speaks of Nero,
the truth might boast in having such adversaries. XII. It is sure we have seen,
how no human power, could yet ever undo this blessed interest of the Reformed
religion, tho no way, or change of weapons, has been left untryed; but we have
thus seen, whither so strong, and unite a confederacy, as the Catholic league
in France did at last resolve, and, not only in the ruin of the greatest
acters and contrivers therein, but to a further establishing of the Reformed
Church there, as though such had intentionally acted for the same; when if
second causes had brought forth their ordinare effects, it might have been
judged impossible to fail. XIII. We have seen that issue of the whole councels,
expense and cruelty of Philip the II. of Spain, to bear down the truth of the
Gospel in the Netherlands, which was to the furthest settling of this
illustrious state and the Church of Christ there; yea how their conspicuous
rise and flowrishing even in the externals, and their resolute adherence to the
truth of Christ did most visibly keep together. XIV. We know that deludge of
blood, which so quickly followed the French massacre; and the most dismal time
which ever that nation know, did then visibly contemporate, with such a time of
their greatest rage and persecution against the truth, and that event of the
third vial most clearly fulfilled herein, Revel. 16: 5, 6. Thou art righteous,
o Lord, which art, and was, and shall be, because thou have judged t^us, for
they have shed the blood of thy saints and prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink in great measure. XV. Yea have we not seen how four Kings of
France successively were in less then 30. years, taken away, in the same
continued pursuit, how to destroy the Church there, in whom that whole race of
the Valois was thus extinct; yea in the manner of their death, were most
remarkable monuments of divine judgment, as the most famous writers of that
time does attest. XVI. We have seen what marvelous effects did follow these
bloody years of Queen Mary's reign in England, to promot and commend the
Protestant doctrine to men's consciences there, with so great a triumph it had
in the sufferings of such choice and excellent witnesses for Christ, as has
brought in more rent to the praise and glory of their blessed head, then may to
the furthest compense all that blood of the Saints there, though highly
precious in the eyes of the Lord. XVII. We have seen likewayes the blood and
cruelty, of late against the Protestants in Bohemia, in a short time most
observably returned on the authors thereof, and how the immediate finger of God
might be seen in calling forth the Swedes to avenge the same, and in that
desolating strock which followed on Germany. XVIII. We have seen in these late
times the issue of that horrid massacre on the Protestants in Ireland, to the
utter ruin in a very few years after, of that barbarous party, who had thus
acted herein. XIX. We have seen what wonderful providence did attend the
actings of that poor handful of Protestants in the Valleys of Piemont since the
Reformation, upon the account of that bloody massacre which was set on foot
there against them, which was so astonishing as all might see an extraordinare
appearence of the Lord herein, as is clearly attested by the most faithful
Histories of that time. XX. And can it be forgot unto this day, how visibly a
divine hand did appear in breaking that great Spanish Armado, in the year 1588.
which had been for some years in contriving against England. XXI. As it was
astonishing, and specially demonstrative of the immediate power and presence of
God, it should be matter of wonder and praise also for after ages, that solemn
time of the Reformation of the Church in Scotland, for planting the reformed
Religion there; with that zeal and onnesse of spirit, as did then appear in all
ranks to embrace and adhere to the profession thereof, amidst the greatest
threatenings of their adversaries; so as a few years did bring forth that, which
would have seemed strange for an age to accomplish; yea that we find betwixt the
last Martyr for the truth there, who was burnt at St. Andrews 1558. and the
establishment of the Protestant Religion, and full abolishment of Popery, with
the full concurrence of civil authority herein, in July 1560. was but little
above two years; to show what great things the Lord can do, above all human
council or confidence. XXII. Its sure we have seen in what remarkable degrees
these last vials of the holy judgment of God, has taken place on the Kingdom
of Antichrist, and how conspicuous the event has been of that prophecy, 2
Thessal. 2: 8. in these great effects and consumption thereof by the ministry
of the Gospel, as an assured pledge of the full accomplishment of what remains
herein. XXIII. And as every step of the Churches rise, has been still advanced
in a continued conflict betwixt the truth and Antichrist, so have we still
seen, when the assault and opposition has been greatest, its most remarkable
tendancy to a greater victory; which were it rightly considered upon clear and
solid grounds from the Scripture, the most formidable appearences of trouble
from this adversary should with more comfort then fear this day be looked on;
so that whatever be the nearest and most immediate events, yet is it sure, as
the Lord is true, whose word is passed hereon, that whosoever gives their power
and strength to support that interest of Antichrist shall lose the day and find
their cause desperate, for the party with whom they contend herein is the Son
of God, against whom no human power shall ever be able to stand. These are but
a few, which are here mentioned, of the great acts of our God, in behalf of his
Truth, to be still as present in our sight, in a time when the spirits of many
are ready to stagger and faint; and here mentioned, to lay no stresse or weight
of the authority of the truth and doctrine of our profession thereon, but on
the alone revelation of the Scripture; but that they are such an undeniable
seal for confirming our faith, and of so known, public and famous evidence, as
should be no less considered and taken to heart now, then in the time when the
Lord thus appeared herein.

SECTION III.
QU. WHat present judgment are we called to have of this time, upon clear and
assured grounds from the Scripture; that we may know under what aspect thereof,
the present state of Religion and of the reformed Churches is under, when so
great a crisis is this day, as would seem to be in the very (...) of its
conflict, whither as to life or death?

ANSW. It is no present appearences of the time must direct our faith, nor
should we either streath our fears or expectations of things and events, beyond
what the God of truth does warrant in his word, but its clear, if we credit
the same, and admit the divinity of the New Testament, there is no just cause
of hesitation or darkness as to what the Lord is bringing forth for his Church
now in these latter days; nor can there be any pretense, to seek an other
light, either from the stars above, or the diviners of this time, when so woeful
a trade has got up in the world, that men will thus go to the God of Ekron,
as though there were not a God in Israel, or such a thing, as his written
Oracles to inquire at, when its sure these ly open, and with a clear and
distinct sound speaks to all who have a serious and unprejudged spirit. I. That
the Church under the New Testament has now passed and gone through that most
dismal and continued trial herein, which was to go over her head under
Antichrists reign and hight; and whatever appearence he now has in great
wrath, yet is it sure and evident that the winter is past and the Churches
spring begun; and a few steps further of that judgment which is now hastening
on, will at lenth end the quarrel; so that by a near converse with the word, we
may clearly see from what point the Churches course and motion this day lies,
and how exactly it keeps, in the certainty thereof, by that clear conduct of
the Scriptures of truth, where a full map of her whole course and passage
through time is clearly showed. II. That we may now with some clear evidence
judge, and have our faith persuaded hereof, that the Churches interest is upon
the rising hand, and on a present advance, though nothing would seem more
contradictory then all visible grounds now are; since this cannot sail, John.
3:30. that Jesus Christ in his kingdom in the earth must increase; yea that the
Scripture so clearly points forth Antichrists ruin and progress of his fall
and douncasting, with resemblance to that great judgment on Pharaoh as an
evident type hereof; in the same judicial strocks of induration, on both, and
gradual progress herein by one plague after another, until the last and
greatest assault, as was then at the Red Sea, has the same effect for a more
glorious appearence of God, in the greatest step of judgment, and victory over
this adversary, when not only the song of Moses but of the Lamb also shall be
then sung, Rev. 15: 3. as importing something more glorious and a greater
brightness to be put on this illustrious act of divine judgment, reserved to
these last times, when a more immediate appearence of the Lord will be seen,
then in any sormer deliveries of his Church. III. It is no conjectural thing,
but what by a clear Scripture conduct we may see, that this time of the Church
now under so notable a Crisis in her case, is evidently falling under that
remarkable assault and conflict, with that adversary, before the accomplishing
of that vial on his seat and throne, as we may see Revel. 17:13, 14. that when
so conspicuous a step of the Churches victory is near; the opposition thereto
also will be in some higher degree proportionable to the same, when the great
men of the earth, and such who shall receive power as Kings, one hour with the
beast, shall have one mind and give their power and strength thereto, and shall
make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, etc. Nor is it found through the Scripture where any
great thing, the Lord has done for his Church, but some unusual darkness, and
sore wrestlings has still gone before, and should be no matter of staggering
to our faith, whatever be of present fears, to see so dismal a time of trial as
now is, and amazing hight of trouble beyond what former times have known, when
one of the greatest events of providence in behalf of the Church, since the
revealing of Christ to the world, until his second coming, is assuredly near in
the fall and overthrow of the man of sin. IV. We have clear ground also to
judge, that so great an eclipse as seems almost universally over the state of
the Reformed Churches, is no goeing down of the sun thereon, whatever did befall
the most famous eastern Churches to an utter dissipation thereof; if these
different periodes of time be justly considered, how their sunset did then
fall in with the entry of that great Apostasy of the Christian Church and with
that long and dismal night of Antichrists reign; whilst now this hour of
trial on the Churches, does meet in that blessed period of Antichrists begun
fall, and of a growing light of the Gospel, and when the Scripture so clearly
warrands our faith herein, that the work of providence is to plant, and not
cut of, but to bring forward that interest of the Reformed Churches, in the
founding of which the Mediator has so eminently appeared in the glory of his
power in these last times. V. It is sure me now live in the evening, and
extremity of time, when the motions of providence may be expected to be more
quick and speady, as being so near the center, and to the last Epoch, and
period of all prophetic Chronology; wherein the glory of God in his truth and
faithfulness shall most eminently shine forth, and these Scripture truths
which were formerly dark and abstruse, with that evidence shine forth in the
event, as shall cause men to wonder at their former thoughts and stumblings
thereat. And here I must say, that there is such a sight now in the earth, as
the Romish Church, in its complex frame and state, in so different a mould cast
from any power or jurisdiction else, and such a compound of a civil, and
Spiritual Monarchy in one and the same person, is so solemn and undeniable a
seal to the Christian faith, and divinity of the New Testament; that its strange
why this is not improven more, against the Atheism of this time, that such a
visible event of the Scripture is now in being, which was so clearly fortold by
the Holy Ghost 1500. years ago, with its proper circumstances, as to the manner
of that Antichristian state, with its rise, grouth, and duration, as is to
admiration still evident to the world, when not the least shadow or appearence
of so strange future emergencies was to be seen or could have entered in men's
thoughts; to show it only could be revealed to the Church by him, to whom all
his works are known from the beginning. This I have looked on, as such a
confirmation to the truth of Christianity, that no miracles in the first times
of the Church could have more evidence for the same; yea if such a party were
not in being, both what it now is and in former ages has been, it might in
another manner stagger the faith of the Saints, to a questioning the truth of
the Scripture, then its most formidable appearence this day can do. VI. I
shall but add here, that we know and are sure the Lord has reserved his
greatest works to these latter days, wherein his judgments shall be manifest;
and that one of the most eminent manifestations of his glory before the close
of time shall be conspicuous in the fall of Antichrist, on whose ruins that
glorious house which Christ is yet to have for himself both of Jews and
Gentiles, shall be prepared and built up; and though this great eclipse of
Antichristian darkness, should yet more prevail, even over the visible
profession of the truth in the Churches of Britain, and Ireland, there is no
cause to be staggered in the faith of Romes fatal period, being near, but to
look hereon according to the Scripture as the Vltimus Conatus of that wounded
adversary, which will be found in the issue to have the most immediate
connection with his greatest downfall, and the reviving glory of the Church; for
strong is the Lord God who judges her.

SECTION IV.
QU. WHat is specially called for, in this day, of such as are accountable for
so great a talent of light, and confirmations to our faith?

ANSW. If this were suitably taken to heart, we could not but reckon our selves
under the greatest excitment and call, to such an improvement hereof.

I. That we account it not enough to have a faith, for quieting our own
spirits, but how to confirm others, by putting to our seal that God is true,
in the great assurances of his word, and to sanctify him before the world,
which is so important a duty, as the Lord was wroth even with a Moses, and
Aaron for one short-coming, when he called for the same, Numb. 20:12. and its
sure in no time was such a special trust more reposed thereon, then in this
age, both as a public debt on the Church, and personal on each Christian, how
to witness for the Lord, upon that great interest of his faithfulness and for
transmitting the same, to the ages to come, by a confirmatory seal, and
testimony thereto.

II. To reckon our selves also under some more then ordinare call this day,
each in their present capacity and station, how to appear for the credit of
the truth, and stemm so visible and impetuous a tide, as is now running of
distruct, and of a discreditable faint; for it may be said, never was the
Church under the New Testament so remarkably sisted under such a trial, as that
wherein the Lord did prove the Church of Israel, Numb. 14. or had a more
evident resemblance thereto, in the same circumstances as in this day, if they
were seriously pondered; as I how in the same manner, such a false and evil
report is too visibly raised upon the blessed ways of the Lord, to discourage and
faint the spirits of his people, as was then by the spies, that there were
insuperable difficulties in the way of the promise, by reason of the Anakims,
and of their walled cities, and did thus oppose the credit of sense, to all
these assurances which God had given to their faith. II. That this highly
dishonorable faint and distrust did so sease on that people, as was like to
resolve in a visible revolt, and to cry for a leader to go back to Egypt
again; which amongst too many in this time may be justly feared. III. That this
was after such extraordinare confirmations which the Lord had given to the
faith of his Church then, who had by his own immediate and outstretched hand so
latly brought them out of the house of bondage, and from the iron furnace in
Egypt, as rendered their misbeliefe to be a guilt under such aggravations, as
the holy God did in that manner plead, verse. 22. These ten times have they
tempted me, who have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in the
wilderness, etc. IV. But herein we hope, and are confidently sure of a blessed
disparity in this resemblance, as to the numberousnesse of such, who shall be
found of the Reformed Churches, to act something of that part, which these
heroic witnesses a Caleb and Joshua did and were then put to stand alone
therein, who through great shall yet appear with some measure of that spirit,
and withstand so high a tide of fears, discouragment and misbeliefe as is this
day, and thus to plead against the same as these did, Number. 14:9. if the Lord
delight in us, then let us not rebel against him, neither fear the greatest
difficulties can be in the way etc. V. And is not the same precedent of
providence, of so singular a respect as the Lord did then testify to his Caleb
and Joshua (who were of another spirit in following him fully, in that day) a
continued assurance, for all who shall be helped to any honorable appearence
of this kind, by making them see, and inherit the truth of his promise; yea
that such a residue who outlives this great and amazing storm shall have
something of that testimony to bear also which Caleb gave Josh. 14:8, 10. My
brethren which went up with me made the heart of the people faint, but I fully
followed the Lord my God, and now behold the Lord has kept me alive, etc. o
blessed they whose souls are raised with that holy zeal for the truth to stand
up in this great breach, by a resolute profession of their faith, and witness
to the faithfulness of God, as such great and extraordinar confirmations,
given thertho, now calls for.

III. It is one of the special duties of this day we stand also accomptable
for, how to stemm this high and growing tide of prejudice, and reproach against
the Reformed Religion which in some unusual way is now aloft; and by
manifestation of the truth to gain some more awful regard hereof on men's
conscience, that they may see something of the glory of our profession, and in
what manner it maintains its conquest as no way else can possibly claim; I.
Which reckons none else to be the true and genuine professors hereof, who
embrace not the same upon evidence, and with respect to its intrinsic
excellency and worth; nor does judge the interest of religion to go by number,
and poll, where this is wanting; but to pursue that end to have men ingadged
first to be Christians, that they may be true and sincere Protestants; and
therefore can admit no such methods of any base compliance with the humor and
interests of men, which its principles will not bear. II. Which in its course
is ever regulare and certain, according to that rule of an uncheangable and
eternal truth, without dependence on the will of man herein, or any mutable
revolutions of the time. III. Which does with the greatest luster shine forth
in the brightest light, and is maintained by the clearest knowledge; yea by the
furthest plainness, and opennesse of heart, toward all, commends it self; so
that the world may see, it espouseth not men's affection, before it gain on
their conscience; and to have their judgment fixed on a judicious trial, before
their resolution; nor accounts the truth of religion, can ever subsist by an
external show and profession, without is known evidence and the efficacy thereof
on men's soul. IV. Which sincerly follows the Catholic interest of
Christianity and public good of mankind, in promotting the great ends of the
Gospel, so as the world may see its highest intent is to exalt all divine
institutions, and advance the simplicity, and spirituality of Gospel
administrations, (according to the revealed rule) amonghst men, as that which
does most nearly conceirn the vitals of religion and ane inward life of
communion with God. V. Which pleads an impartial trial of al its adversaries,
whither the principles of our profession or of Popery, gives the greatest
security to Civil Government, and founds the strongest obligations to
Magistracy and to all Civil, and Moral duties, by which the awe and venerable
esteem of religion is kept up in a nation. It is high time that men should
cease to be implicit upon this greatest interest they have within time, which
is the truth of their profession in the matter of religion, when a deceit or
mistake here is of an eternal conceirn: upon which account without respect to
interest, party, or education, I have this day sought to know the truth, and
what adversaries could possibly pretend, to reproach, or prejudge any at the
Reformed Religion, which can only amount, to charge men's corruption and
offenses in their practice, upon the rule and principles of their profession,
that can never give the least latitude, or connivance thereto, but is clear as
the sun; when on the other hand I could know no other way, to embrace such a
profession, as Popery, but by turning Atheist, in the first place, and quite
both religion and reason at once: but may say, in a resolute adherence to the
doctrine of the Reformed Church, I fear not to adventure my soul, and enter
into an eternal state.

The CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. The primitive confirmation, held forth and cleared in seven
Positions.
POSIT. I. That sad aspect, which the implicit and traditional profession of
this day has upon the present state of religion. Page 1 POSIT. II. The
greatness of that service for the Church to have a clear founding of the faith
of assent, upon known and solid grounds herein, more universally promott. Page
3 POSIT. III. The true primitive confirmation as it was in the times of the
Apostles, hold forth and cleared from the Scripture. Page 6 POSIT. IV. The
continued necessity thereof, no less convincing now, for the Churches use, then
in these Primitive times. Page 9 POSIT. V. That such a confirmatory work
respects not only the more knowing and inquisitive part of men, but the meanest
within the Church. Page 11 POSIT. VI. What is specially called for in the
practical use of this primitive confirmation, held forth in some serious
proposals for this end. Page 14 POSIT. VII. What special excitment we are
under, for promotting the same in so remarkable a period of time as this, and
from that hope of a greater reviving yet of such a Catholic spirit, to advance
the highest ends of religion amonghst men. Page 19
CHAPTER II. For giving some clear view, of these primary evidences and
demonstrations of our faith, that the meanest Christian should know, and with
the least expense of time may improve for their daily use, on these greatest
principles.
SECTION I. I. Of the glorious being of God, which is the first foundation of
all religion. Page 22 II. Of the original of the world, and its not being
eternal. Page 25 III. Of a supreme providence in the conservation and government
of the world. Page 26 IV. Of that special providence, which in its continued
administration about human affairs, does unchangably difference betwixt the
righteus and the wicked. Page 29 V. How such a wonderful record as that of an
immediate revelation of God unto men, is so demonstrably extant in the world.
Page 31 VI. Of these special evidences of the Scriptures divinity, which men
must needs see to be infallible. Page 33 VII. Of the secure convoyance of the
Scripture through all the changes of times past. Page 35 VIII. Of the fall of
man and entry of sin into the world, as it is fully demonstrable to reason, as
well as by the certainty of faith. Page 37
SECTION II. I. Holding fort these great assistances to the Christian faith,
and of the Messiah being surely promised to the Church before his coming. Page
38 II. Of the truth and accomplishment of this great promise of the Messiah,
and how it is now as sure in the event as its clear he was promised. Page 39
III. Of that special advantage for confirmation of our faith herein, that for
4000. years the promised coming of the Messiah was deferred. Page 41, 42 IV. Of
the nature and internal excellency of Christianity, to bear furthest evidence
to the truth thereof. Page 43 V. That this is the same Gospel we now receive and
enjoy, which from the first promulgation thereof has had so great effects on
the world. Page 45 VI. That the sufferings of the saints in times past was so
demonstrably above the assistance of nature. Page 46
SECTION III. I. For holding forth on what grounds the faith of a deity must
determine men to be Christians. Page 48 II. What confirmations the Christian
Religion has from that visible state of the Jews. Page 49 III. That way and
manner of its prevailing on the world, as no profession else could ever pretend
to. Page 51 IV. The nature of that great evidence, which Christ has himself
given to the world of his divine mission in the love and unity of his people,
Joh. 17: 21. Page 53 V. How the strenth of such a demonstration stands still
clear and evident in these dividing times of the Church. Page 54 VI. What in
these last times is under our hand to compense such a confirmation by miracles,
which was in the first times of the Gospel. Page 56
SECTION IV. I. For holding forth with the furthest rational certainty, and
evidence the truth and doctrine of Christ, to be a soul-quicking and
experimental religion. Page 58 II. The truth also of conversion of men from a
state of nature to a new state of grace. Page 60 III. Of so great an experiment
of religion as Communion betwixt God and men here in the earth. Page 62 IV. Of
so great a demonstration of religion in the power and workings of the
Conscience. Page 64 V. Of that special confirmation to our faith, which does
result from such a demonstration of this power of the Conscience over men. Page
65
SECTION V. I. For holding forth the truth of a Kingdom of darkness in the
world, in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. Page 66, 67 II. What
confirmation to our faith, the certainty hereof, and of these powers of
darkness, does clearly afford. Page 68 III. That great truth of the
immortality of the soul, with the clearest evidence to reason, as well as by
the certainty of faith. Page 69, 70 IV. How confirming a seal to the Scripture
that great change which passes on all men by death is, and how its no natural
accident. Page 72 V. Some special assistances to the Christians faith of an
eternal glory in heaven, and to serve an unavoidable conviction thus on the
greatest Atheists. Page 74 VI. Some thing of a visible Hell, in some near
approach hereof even to men's senses, held forth to awake and convince the world
of such a state of horror and torment in another world. Page 77 VII. Some
assistances to our faith of that great truth of the Resurrection of the body.
Page 79

CHAPTER III. The Confirming work of religion further improven with respect
to this dismal and amazing time we are now fallen in.
SECTION I. To hold forth what may be both for light and confirmation upon this
great distress the Churches of Christ are now under. Page 81, 82 SECTION II.
How great a talent we stand accountable for in this day of such immediate and
extraordinare appearences of the Lord for confirming the same public cause of
the Reformed Church since the Reformation, which we are now called to adhere
to. Page 84 SECTION III. What manner of time is the present lot of the Church
now fallen in, and what judgment we ought to have hereof from the Scripture,
for our furthest confirming in such a day. Page 93 SECTION IV. Some special
service that we are now called to, and accountable for, in behalf of the truth,
and for sanctifying the Lord in the eyes of others, who are under so great a
talent of light and confirmation in the same. Page 99
FINIS.
AN IDEA, Of the confirmed state of a Christian in dismal and shaking times.
THo the same measure of Christians establishment in the truth be not alike to
all, but must have respect to the different trialls, talent, and improvements
of such for this end; yet may it be cause of astonishment, how rare any study
of this kind is now to be sound, when its not only one of the highest concerns
of Christianity, but in a more then ordinary way called for, as the work of
this day; yea, that this is a part of religion, which seems lest improven of
any, for the more general state of professors within the Church; under some
conviction hereof, was this essay designed, where with humble confidence (I may
say) the truth has been sought with that serious enquiry into the nature of
these things held forth, as I judged needful for such, who have so great ane
interest and venture not only through time, but for all eternity, to support
upon the alone certainty hereof, and er these days of trial, which we now
see, pass over this generation, it may be found this was not unseasonable, or
without cause directed to such a time, if the Lord graciously bless the same;
nor will it (I hope) be found incongruous and without use to present yet
further, in such a method, and way of example, some clear prospect of a
confirmed state in religion, and what these ought to be, who with light and
assurance of mind would follow the Lord fully, in such a day, as is here
offered in a 7 fold Character, under which a truly confirmed Christian in the
truth of his profession may be stated.

CHARACTER. I. That he is one who has ane other sense, and impression of this
great study for attaining to a confirmed state in religion, and is on higher
grounds pressed to follow the same, then what most of the visible Church seems
to apprehend; and should be thus considred.

1. As one to whom the glory of the Christian profession is in the highest
degree dear, and to have the world see, that such as embrace the same and does
most fully adventure on the testimony of God in his word, are these also who
walks on the highest principles of true, and enlightened reason; yea, who takes
deeply to heart that obligation which is on all, who desires to advance the
repute, and honor of the truth, to be in such terms therewith upon its own
evidence, as they may know how to serve a rational conviction both on
Atheists, and insidels, if called thereunto.

2. Who sees also, how such is the state of fallen man, as stands in need of
all the contributions that can be, not only to strengthen the Christians faith,
and bear out against the strong assaults of infidelity, but to gain also more
credit and veneration to the truth with these who are not easily dealt with, but
by such means, as bears some congruity to their natural light, and reason;
for which end the Lord has affoorded these ministerial helps, to render the
misbeleefe of the world, or any pretense of hesitation about his truth more
fully inexcusable.

3. He thus sees, how the most important, and fundamental truths of
Christianity, needs the greatest confirmation of his faith, and for these who
enter in so high and discriminating a profession from the residue of the world,
to know in what manner they embrace the same: yea that the natural order of
things does absolutely require to have the foundation sure laid, on which so
great a superstructure must rest, so as he judges it a work by its self, and
to need some peculiar retiring his soul in the most serious recesse, and
composure thereof, to attain a stedfastnes of his own in the truth, and to know
the strong and firm convoyances of that greatest mystery of the gospel, in
such a manner, as needs no paund of a miracle to confirm the same. But he
knows here that no sharpness of men's natural understanding about the truth
can ever attain a true rest, and settlement of mind therein, without a humble,
and serious spirit stooping down before the wisdom of God, and to enter as
little Children into his School; yea that by humble practice, and obedience of
the gospel there is ane undoubted coming up to the greatest assurance and
clearest demonstrations of the same, as Joh. 7: 17.

4. He knows that as nothing tends more to shake men's spirits, and stagger
them about the truth, then a light and transient view hereof, so does the
greatest establishment, follow on the nearest approach by a deep and serious
enquiry about the same, and thus clearly sees that if such who look but at a
distance on the way of religion, did but once come that length of trial, as to
have their spirits separat, by a more serious reflection thereon, the first
view they should have, could not but be matter of wonder, and amazement, to
think what can determine and support in so mavelous a way as the life and
practice of Christianity, which is so visibly above nature, and wherein they
must do violence to the same, where they must part with the multitude, and
oppose themselves to the strongest tide of exemple, and must endure also in
hope, and believe for things not seen, which were never the object of humane
sense, to any in this earth, and are often called to part with the most
desirable things of sense, upon the alone credit of their faith, yea, where
they must enter in that profession, on no other terms, then to be martyrs for
the same, and seall it with their blood; so that he must needs see a Christian
according to the rule and institution of the gospel, to be the greatest
riddle, and wonder of any sight within time; but when such come more closse and
near upon this trial, and have once understood the nature and greatness of
that security which these have to adventure on, yea what is the glory of their
hope, and the sure spring of their supplies, for their work and trialls within
time, then will this second wonder unspeakably exceed the first; how its
possible that such are not of a more raised, and enlarged spirit, in the
service of the Gospel, in that short season they have here for it on the
earth, and how their trial should not be more to bear the joy of so great a
prospect, and expectation, then any present griefs and troubles, yea how men's
life who indeed makes earnest of the Christian profession, is not in some more
continued transport of ravishment and wondering, to know that they are surely
made for an eternal state in another world, and are among these on whom the
glorious God has choised to have the exceeding riches of his grace showed
forth in these regions of blessedness above for ever.

5. He has another sight and prospect of the Christian Creed, then most who
give ane easy assent thereunto; and has his reason so dazeled with the
revelation of the gospel and of the wonders thereof as has put him to such
ane exercise as that 2 Chr. 6: 8. How to credit his eyes therewith, the more
deep reflection he has upon the same, but will God in very deed dwell with men
on the earth; and to judge their case, who after some fluctuating suspense, are
admit to see the truth of Christianity, with that certainty of its evidence,
as the greatness of such a discovery does require, may have some resemblance to
that transport which the Angels had at the first being of the creation, where
the morning stars sung together, and the Sons of God shouted for joy, to
see themselves thus, who were brought out of pure nothing, entered into that
inestable light of seeing God, and of their own blessedness in him, in so high
a degree; so that he accounts it one of the highest attainements of religion,
for a Christian indeed to believe the articles of his own faith, and have his
soul thus as fully persuaded, as of his being, that such a time assuredly was,
and now many ages since past, when the glorious Redeemer of the Church, the
second person of the God head came down from heaven and was revealed in our
nature, that on him as surety t^ divine justice in the room of the Elect
Church, was the whole guilt, and sin thereof transferred, and in this
mavelous way did the holy God take satisfaction to himself, by himself;
that thus our nature is exalted, by the incarnation of Christ above the nature
of Angels; that the time is near when the meanest afflicted Christian, shall
draw in no other air, then the breathings of the higher Paradise above, and
now has ane eternity of joy, and blessedness before him; that within a very
little time he shall know this welcome of our blessed Redeemer to his followers
here on the earth, come ye blessed of my father inherit the Kingdom, etc.
when he shall take off the cross, and put on the crown, when it shall be then
no more a matter of faith, but of sense to be partakers of that inheritance
with the saints in light, and know these proper mansions in that state of glory
and peculiar assignement thereunto which all the Redeemed shall then have, and
be adjoined in the same class with the Elect Angels to be as pure flames of
love, and joy, yea know what its to walk in these streets of the new Jerusalem
which are as gold transparent as Crystal, and what that meeting will be of
his soul perfected, and in a triumphant state with his glorified body, raised
incorruptible and never to part any more; and to have his proper share of that
blessed and greatest solemnity, that shall be celebrated in heaven of the
marriage supper of the lamb, with the whole triumphant Church, and hear that
honorable account which the great judge will then make of these trials of his
faith, and sharp conflicts which he had gone through within time, with that
solemn testimony of approbation which will be given thereof, and since its sure
these great things must be a part of the Christian faith, can it be strange,
that such, as would in that manner converse therewith (tho they be not yet
seen) as no less undoubted realities then any present objects of sense, be not
easily satisfied with a low degree of evidence and confirmation of their
judgment, but that their joy who are sure here should be perfected so far as
this state of mortality can bear, and thus find it easy to rejoice, and glory
in tribulation, and to weep now for a season, who are to rejoice for ever, yea
to say in the words of Mephibosheth, let them take it all, and enjoy the same,
since he who is their life and exceeding joy, lives and reigns, who is
infinitely better to them then all these things.

6. He accounts the strengthening of his faith, to be such a concern, not only
as it is his souls venture for all eternity, but as the highest way of
gloryfying God here, that what ever tends to a more full confirmation of the
same, he reckons also one of the greatest additions to his joy and comfort
within time; and that these manyfold assistances with such reduplication
thereof which the Lord has himself given for this end, are such as no
fragments of such a talent should be lost; and tho he knows the greatest
demonstrations of our faith can add nothing to the certainty of divine truth in
it self; yet are they thus given in regard of the strong trials of a
Christians life, and of what their weakness stand in need of for support.

7. Its in this study, he sees and takes to heart, how not only the condition
of man in the earth, but the profession of Christ also calls for such a
reckoning, that he may have trialls in that manner dispensed, when no visible
refuge will be found in the least to stand by, but all humane comfort and
assistance wholly to succumb; as needs his laying in such ballast now in its
season, and to be founded thereon with that assurance of judgment, as is
needful for that day, when he must either get through in the alone way of
believing, against sense, or perish, and tho no such seize of light can
bear out then without present and immediate influences from above, and that it
is sure according to the day, so must the Christian strength be, yet does he
see also, the want of ane established judgment, and of some proper stock laid
up of aides, and assistances this way forgainst a sharp storm, is like to make
sad work among the professors of this age, er the trialls of such a time have
done their work.

8. He sees also how the greatest contest, which is this day in the world, is
betwixt God, and man, upon the truth and assurance of his word; and that the
highest trial, and probation of a Christian, in which all the trialls of their
life does still meet, may be resolved here, if they receive the testimony of
God in his word as an absolute security to rely on, yea or not, and tho this is
the peculiar glory of the only true God, to have ane absolute dependence of his
whole work on himself, and to be the alone center of his peoples rest, yet may
nothing be more evident, then that with most he bears that name, of being
their trust, when the whole burden and weight thereof lies alone upon visible
grounds, so that those bonds, and promises which he has himself given unto
men does beat no more credit, then they have some external surety in the
earth, which they still look after, to stand as it were good and responsible
for the same, which is the highest indignity can be offered to the glorious
Majesty of God.

9. He does much take to heart this present period of time, wherein the
fluctuating suspense and halting of so many under a visible profession of the
truth is now one of the most dismal signs hereof; and that it seems to be
the time, wherein the Lord will in ane unusual way take this generation off
any implicit profession of the same; and when that great roll of visible
professors in all the reformed Churches may be er long in that manner called,
as each must answer to his own name, and put to stand to the proof before the
world, when no temporal interest, but internal motives and certainty of the
truth upon its own evidence, must bear out; yea that the most established may
er long find it not easy to be keept from staggering, and a few days come in
the Churches way, more remarkable for trial then has been in some ages before.

CHARACT. II. A truly confirmed Christian, may be thus also stated as one who
is in the first place most deeply taken up about that rare plot of man's
redemption, and to see these great and wonderful truths there, not singly, and
apart, but in that harmony, order and consent of all the parts thereof, as they
are linkt together in this mavelous frame, so as to make the whole one entire
piece, and where no part does in the least interfere with an other, which he
finds to be one of the most principal demonstrations of this great mystery of
the Gospel, that the Lord has given for confirming his peoples faith; and
thus in another manner then formerly can now entertain his soul herewith, and
have his joy unspeakably hightned, 1 to see at once the ruined state of fallen
man, and what a floodgate of all evil is let loose on that race, not only
morally in sin, but what is penal in the woe and miseryes thereof; yea such a
state, where all hope of relief is for ever cut off in the way of nature or by
any created help; and where the execution of a righteous sentence on such for
the voluntare violation of a law, just, holy and equal, can be no impeachment
in the least of the righteousness of God; But then therewith he does see such a
relief brought to light as can not only answer the whole extent of this ruin,
but the glory of God more eminently displayed therein, then if the law had been
obeyed, or absolutely execute in its penalty on the whole race of man, yea
which makes this more wonderful to see a higher dispensation of grace unto man
now under the gospel then was to Adam in his primitive state; whereby
innumerable Christians are made to endure and prevail over stronger assaults
then broke him even in his integrity, which is a conjunction so mavelous that
the great and infinite God only could find out and effectuat. 2. He does now
see how clear a consistence and harmony is here, that he who had no sin by
inhesion, but holy, harmles, and undefiled, should be under the greatest weight
of sin by imputation and by the exactest rule of divine justice made liable to
answer both the whole duty, and full penalty of the Law, having as surety
betwixt the creditor and debtor, put himself in his peoples room to answer
the full demands thereof both for debt, and duty. 3. It is here he does see
that blessed consent and harmony betwixt the spotles justice of God, and his
mavelous grace, so as his love is to the highest glorified, in that
mavelous way, as secures the full and complete satisfaction of his Law, and
all the rights of justice inviolable. 4. Whilst he is thus dazzled with the
greatness of such a light, and put to enquire what such a mystery can mean, he
is then further led on to see that rare plot and contrivance of the covenant of
reconciliation between God and man, here within time to be the very duplicat,
and counterpart of that eternal transaction and stipulation between the father
and the son; and thus sees what ever God has declared and promised in the one
to his Church, was first promised and secured to our blessed head in the
covenant of Redemption; wherein as with a reverend and awful distance, so with
the greatest evidence of light he is made to see here these reciprocal
obligations betwixt them, and mutual trust for making good the whole terms
thereof in the appointed time. 5. He does also clearly see that rare order and
harmony of time in these signal periods of the revelation of this great
mystery of Christ which from its more dark discovery and dawning did still more
gloriously open its self to the Church by a graduall light and unvailing of
the same, as the Sun in its course unto the perfect day; yea has his faith
thus unspeakeably confirmed to see herewith the gospel Church being still the
same, whither of Jews or Gentil's, and how that series and consent has yet
never been broken off since the beginning of one Church separat from the
residue of mankind set apart as a peculiar people for the Lord, where none
ever had right and privilege to be members of the same, but by faith in the
Messiah, and profession of their obedience to his Laws. 6. It is in this union
and harmony he sees the whole branches and parts of gospel obedience most
exactly meet, and terminat, to advance both the greatest excellency and
blessedness of man, and assimulat him to the blessed image of God, yea how all
the rules and precepts there does so entirly conspire for this end as may
constrain the world to see, and admire the glorious nature, and perfections of
him, whose laws these are, wherein he does so brightly shine forth. 7. Nor can
he look seriously herein and not see that sweet concord as a part of this
harmony, which is betwixt the promissory, and mandatory part of the gospel, so
as the Christians comfort is most fully established and no duty abolished; but
the very path rod to the must full enjoyments of the promise and proper way to
attain rest and tranquillity of spirit must be ever here by taking on the yoke
of Christ. 8. Yea to confirm this entire union and harmony more fully he now
sees that exact and mavelous correspondence which is betwixt that first
fundamental promise of the Messiah, and the event; betwixt the whole ancient
figures and types of the leviticall service and the revelation of Christ
himself, in which all these did meet as their proper center, and now have
their full end and accomplishment. 9. His confirmation thus grows to see that
wonderful consent of Christianity, and native result hereof to put fallen man
in a due postour toward God, toward his neighbor, and himself, so as he may
know by faith and adoration how to enjoy God, and his brother by love, and thus
by patience, meeknes and humility to possess his own soul, and enjoy himself.
10. Yea it is in this rare and wonderful frame he is made to see (and no sight
can be like this) that exact correspondence which is betwixt the foundation and
superstructure, how the whole tract of the gospel is but one entire and
complete mean to glorify God, and restore fallen man to the highest blessedness,
how that excellent stream of sanctification does flow from that fountain head
of ane eternal decree herein, which does still run under the ground, until it
break up at last in the heart of each Christian, by the effectual call of the
gospel; and thus runs down through time until it lose its self in that
unconceiveable deep of perfection and glory. Thus is it that each Christian
might attain some higher degrees of confirmation in his faith, then most seems
either to know or look after if he understood more how to improve this rare
comparing work of Religion by setting the great truths and principles thereof
in their order and dependence so as each may be seen, in its necessare
coherence with other and under its proper aspect.

But the more deep reflection and enquiry he has herein, he is the more made to
wonder and finds this one of the great assaults to his faith, that the
revelation of the Christ, and redemption by his blood should have no greater
effects this day amongst men, and that the Christian world is not in some other
manner awaked with the glory of this light, and pressed after a larger spreading
and diffusion of this highest and universal good to poor mankind; yea the
more he considers this it does highten his amazement to think how men's designs
in the matter of duty and service for the Kingdom of Christ, can be so low
within time, whose designs and hopes in the close thereof are so high in the
matter of enjoyment; or take so little to heart, that the whole day of the
dispensation of the Gospel, amidst the most dismal trials may fall in
therewith, is a continued time wherein we are called to keep the feast, and
from one age to another celebrate the same, as a perpetual Jubily of joy and
exultation, since Christ our passover was sacrificed for us; but oh how rare a
thing seems this to be, and how little of that flame and fervency of love to our
blessed Redeemer is now kindled on his altar, that might be expected on such
wonderful incitments thereto, and which once was in the Church.

CHARACT. III. Though a confirmed Christian must be specially stated as such,
who knows the internal part of religion, and sealing work of the Holy Ghost
on his own soul, which is not by words, but things of the highest truth,
substance, and reality; yet is he herein not alone satisfied to know this by
spiritual sense, until he can see the same with the furthest evidence of
light also to his mind; and have no less a clear and judicious trial of this
great mystery of experimental religion, for confirmation of his faith, then
to be sensibly affected with the felt power thereof. And in the first place why
this is necessarly requisite and called for, with respect to the confirmed
state of a Christian, may be thus considered, on some few grounds.

1. That the things of religion, which must be experienced within time, are
such sublime, and wonderful mysteries, as may be just matter of astonishment,
and make men a wonder to themselves, to think that these present pledges of so
great a hope which is to come, are no shaddows, no appearences of things, but
most sure and undoubted realities; and that such are this day in the earth who
knows so near a converse with an invisible God, and the supernatural truths
of his word, with the sensible fealing of that inestimable love of Christ, by
this demonstration of experience; yea who in such dismal times does assuredly
know what the joy of his presence, and an immediate fellowshipe with their
blessed head is, upon the greatest certainty of trial; since these are so
high, and marvelous things, which exceed all natural understanding, as the
felt sweetness of their enjoyment should not more deeply take men up, then to
see the truth, and surenesse of these principles, whereon they found herein.

2. Because this testimony of the truth of experimental religion, should be
understood not only as its of highest use for Christians personal comfort and
establishment, but with respect to the public interest of the Church, as a
special trust reposed thereon, to have the credit of this greatest testimony and
seal, demonstrably cleared, with the furthest strength of harmonious, and
argumentive reason, for such who look but at a distance yet thereon, as may not
only awake them to some deeper sense and impression hereof, but constrain them
to see, how no natural science has more clear, and firm demonstrations, then
the experimental part of Christianity, (which is the very life and soul
thereof,) may have to men's reason, and judgment, tho they never knew it within
themselves; yea for this end should such, as have experienced the truth, and
virtue of the Gospel, reckon themselves as witnesses who are judicially sisted
to put their seal thereunto; and is now more called for in an age, when no
particulare truth seems more strongly impugned, then the reality of
experimental godliness is, and become as a public theme of derision, tho men
must either quite the whole revelation of the Scripture, or see this to be as
essential to the constitution of a Christian, as vital principles are to a
living man.

3. Yea its sure herein, that such as take religion to heart, must needs look
to be put to the greatest trial of its certainty, and should most nearly
concern them to know if they can abide as firmly by their spiritual sense as
by that which is natural, and do thus know as surely in themselves the
operations and motions of a spiritual life, as that they have being by nature;
and that here is no doubtful or abstract notions, but who have had such deep
trial and reflection on the same as these who dare venture their eternal state
on the known certainty theirof, as they could thence reason their soul to a
steadfast adherence to the truth, if they were called to sacrifice their lives
thereto, from what rare experiments, and proofs, they have often had of the same
in their own trial.

4. It does more specially call for a demonstrative clearing of the credit of
this testimony, as one of the services of religion, to promote the Kingdom of
Christ amonghst men, which seems least improven of any with respect to the
general state of such who are within the Church, who are so great strangers to
the same; yea should be judged one of the great wants of this day, when Atheism
is now at so astonishing a hight, that it is not more studied to have the
experimental part of religion, (which in it self lies deep and hid, and is a
secret betwixt God and the Christians soul,) with such clearness, and by that
manner of evidence demonstrat to the world, as might tend to beget some more
awful sense and conviction hereof, (when such clear and unanswerable grounds
might be improved for this end) on these who look thereon as some strange and
dark riddle, so as they could no more deny or withstand the evidences hereof,
then that they have a living soul which yet they never saw, or could ever be
the object of human sense. And how sad a prospect should this give of the
greatest part of the Christian world, who not only know nothing of the true
glory, and spiritual powers of Christianity, but have not the very notion, or
any sense of the reality of such a thing.

But in the 2d place it is thus that each Christian, for being solidly
confirmed in the way of religion, may as clearly see, as he does sensibly feal,
the truth of his own experience, and have his faith as fully established by
this inward and great demonstration of the things of God, as his affections are
quickened, upon such strong and demonstrative grounds of the certainty hereof,
as these are.

1. By considering, his present and former state, that not in a dream, but in
the most deep and serious composure of spirit, he knows how once he was blind
and wholly estranged from this mystery of Christian experience, which now he
does see; and once had the same sentiment hereof with such who do most deeply
reflect on the same, but no sooner did the truth, and power of religion sease
on his soul, then he found himself entered into a new world to know the
dawnings of this marvelous light, and what belongs to these enjoyments, and
vital acts of Christianity, that has not the least dependence on any natural
cause.

2. By considering that marvelous superstructure of experimental religion,
which from the inward observation of Christians in all ages, is such as the
world could not almost contain the books, that might be write hereof, which yet
is so entirely founded on one and the same foundation, and does in all the
lines of this great circumference, still meet in the same center; yea thus how
entire and harmonious a thing religion in all the parts thereof is within upon
the soul, as well as without, so as every step in this way of the experience of
the saints is no groping in the dark, but what is by line and rule, with as
sure and demonstrable a connection with the external testimony of the word, as
there is in nature betwixt the cause and the effect; which affords a more
wonderful assistance to his faith, then the greatest external miracles could
ever do; and tho the spirit of God does sometimes in an extraordinare manner
reveal himself to men (as acts of his Sovereign prerogative which make no rule)
yet with the established constitutions of his word does the continued
experience of the saints most harmociously ever correspond.

3. By considering thus also the being, and reality of grace, not in its
effects only but in its proper cause and original, and how the truth of
holiness in the life of a Christian is so express a transcript of the Gospel,
in its external revelation, that the impresse does not more clearly answer the
seal on the wax then it does beget the same form and image of it self in such
as believe; yea also that conformity it bears to the ever blessed Architype, as
well as to the revealed rule, and how bright a discovery is thus of so glorious
a being, and nature, to which its conformed, who is the alone pattern, and
exemple of all truth and holiness; which is so great a discovery, as he is
made to wonder, how men in this age are so much awakened to find out the true
Phenomenon of nature, (though in its own room a most choice study, and specialy
desirable,) and will be as in a transport, upon some rare natural experiment,
as made one in that manner cry out (...); whilst here is another kind of
demonstration, and of more transcendent interest then all these could ever
amount to, on which the eyes of most are this day shutt.

4. By considering that uncheangable congruity, which is betwixt the nature of
these things, enjoined in the whole institutions of the Gospel, and men's being
made happy thereby, now in their present state, and how great a temporal revenew
of the fruits of religion, as inward confidence, peace, and serenity of mind,
does as natively follow the life and practice hereof, as the fruit of a tree
answers to its kind, and is ever found the alone true relief of mankind,
against all the griefs and bitterness of time; yea that its no distance of
place, but of men's spirit by impurity, and corruption that makes so sad a
distance betwixt God, and man here in the earth.

5. He is thus further confirmed upon this great testimony of experimental
religion, by considering that its sure such as does bear this witness are
known; 1. to be such who are of the most discerning and judicious in the things
of reason, as any else. 2. Whose walk and practice use to have the greatest
authority over men's conscience with whom they converse. 3. who are found most
intensly taken up in the retired work, and duties of religion, that can have
no respect to the witness and observation of others. 4. Who seeks no implicit
credit from any herein, but does obtest men to come and see, and prove the same
in their their own experience, with an appeal to the most exact inquiry, and
rational trial of all mankind, if here be any casual thing, and if that
testimony of the doctrinall, and experimental part of religion be not still
one and the same. 5. Who also out of the most remott places of the earth, and
otherwise strangers amonghst themselves, does yet most harmoniously meet in the
same witness, and are thus mutually disclosed to other, by a near and fealing
intercourse of their souls, from such an onnesse in a spiritual state and
these specific properties of a spiritual, and new nature, with as discernible
evidence as if one man should meet with ane other of the same kind, in such a
place of the earth which were only inhabited with beasts.

6. By considering also, (with a deep and serious reflection hereon,) that sure
and known conjunction, which is betwixt the most rare experiences of a
Christians life, and the most searching trials thereof, with that uniform
consent, that has in all ages of the Church been, in such marvelous things, as
these. 1 what solemn tokens and testimonies of the love of God, and his
acceptance, are found usually to meet his people in the entry of some great
trial, or service for him, even in some unusual manner then, in the sense
whereof, as it was with Elijah, they have been made to go many days after in a
wilderness state; yea how this does not respect persons only, but Churches,
that the word still uses to go before with some remarkable confirming work
to secure the heart, before the cross and some special trial of persecution
comes 2. That as each day has its proper burden, and work, so has it its
proper allowance provided for the same, which should be no less sought after
by a Christian, then his daily bread, and when the pressure of such a day grows
to some more singular hight, so also should the expense hereof be in faith
sought for and expected. 3. How the choicest mercies are reserved to the
saddest times of a Christians lot, and most usually cross to their own choice,
and thus has had the greatest struglings with these methods of providence,
which has in the issue tended most to their upmaking. 4. Yea how the returns
of a long deferred hope after much humble on-waiting, have been to such as a
Pisgah, whence they have not only had a clear and comforting prospect of their
bypast trials, but for being more fully confirmed of the time to come; and can
bear now that testimony, that the Lord has cleared all bygones to them, and
has taken the vail off his work, which for long had been as a dark and strange
riddle.

7. This likeways gives a most clear, and confirming prospect of that great
seal of experience, when he can now see, both in his own case and of others,
what the issue of believing in a singular exigence and trial and upon some
special act of trust and adventure herein does at last come to; which the more
deeply its considered he finds one of the most peculiare assistances to his
faith, and one of the greatest seize of experimental religion within
time, when he can thus see the same way of believing, (in some strong and
extraordinare assaults, which he has had to crush and break him herein,) which
has carried so many through in their saddest trials, bring him also in his
turn, to be an instance in the same kind, to bear an honorable testimony to
this sure, and excellent way of believing before the world, and that none fear,
after him, to hold by the promise of God and venture on that security, tho it
then seem against hope, whose dispensations, did yet never, never give his word
the lie.

CHARACT. IV. Such is a truly confirmed Christian, who in a dismal time, is
not staggered in his faith from the present signs and appearences thereof, but
has his soul ballast with such solid grounds of confirmation against the same,
as these providence, whereat others do most stumble, tends to his further
strenthning in the way of the Lord, when he does now clealy see;

1. How tribulation and the cross makes one of the most illustrious and
beutifull parts of the whole frame of Providence about the Church, and in the
lot of each Christian, so as there can be no possible stumbling to any for want
of light here, that sore trials, and distress should most remarkably follow
these in their journey, who have an eternal blessedness before them in the
clofe hereof, when so great a part of the Scripture is directed not only for
comfort but for a clear conduct of the Christians faith, through all the
intrcacies and labyrinths of such a dispensation, and thus sees how highly
congruous it is to the infinite wisdom of God, that so strait and narrow a way,
in such a state of trial as is here, should go before the state of
everlasting enjoyment; that there should be such a stage and theater also,
whereon the passive graces of the spirit, may not only be exercised, but
displayed in their true luster and glory before Angels and men; yea that thus
the Redeemed of the Lord be first trained in so sharp a warfare, as may not
only put a due value and respect on the greatness of that triumph and reward
which is to come, but be matter of ineffable joy and exultation, that ever they
were admit thus to evidence their love and adherence to their blessed head and
his truth here on the earth, and accounted worthy to be put on some hotter
service, and to peculiare trials and conflicts this way beyond others, for some
example and encouragement to the Church in their day; and here also he can now
see how the greatest enjoyments of comfort are more oweing to the most sharp
and afflicting trials of their life, then to the greatest external calm; and
that to endure patiently and suffer for the name Christ is such a privilege as
the elect Angels have not been admit to, yea that the Lords chastning work,
and sorest smitting of his own, is an act also of saving; so that thus the more
deeply he searches here, the more does he see, admire, and consent to that
glorious piece of the administration of providence about the Church, and finds
it to be one of the greatest confirmations of his faith within time.

2. He does now clearly see how the truth and faithfulness of God is
commensurate to his whole work of Providence and that all the lines hereof, as
they do lead from his revealed council in the Scripture, which is the adequat
sign of his eternal council and decrees, so do they return thither again,
to make this great demostration clear; that if a full History were write of
this world, and what has been conspicuous through the whole series of times
past in all these conjunctions of inseriour causes, whether necessare, free, or
contingent, and of such events that seem most casual, it should be nothing else
but an exact transcript and history of the Bible, to bear this witness, quod
mundus nihil aliud est quam Deus explicatus secundum scripturam; but though a
full discovery hereof be not attainable within time, yet is it a sad and
deplorable want, that the great acts of the Lord, in each age of the Church are
not more searched and sought out of all them that take pleasure therein, that
they may be seen, observed, and admired by that part of the creation, Angels
and Men, who are only in a capacity to know the same; which is a service for
the Lord wherein his praise, and declavative glory is so highly conceirned, as a
Christian should account the meanest room herein one of the most desirable
seize within time; yea it seems just matter of regret also that this
comes not under a more public care and nottice of particulare Churches and of
the Christian Magistrate, where religion has any true regard, to have such
solemn providence as occur in that time, and place, which may be called
experimenta lucifera to the Church, and of a further reach and extent then any
private use, both searched after and recorded as becomes so high a service to
the Christian cause and one of the highest conceirns of the posterity, to have
such not only possessed of a pure religion, but of that seal also; which the
Lord has in the great acts of providence appended thereto, and thus to have
that increase, which each successive age brings therewith to the public stock
of the Church, looked after, as a piece of the greatest trust reposed thereon,
so that the Children rise not up and say, we have not heard nor have our
fathers faithfully transmitt to us the wondrous works which the Lord has
wrought in their time.

3. He is thus also tought to see the (...) and demonstrative causes of the
most strange judgments on the Church, to be as clear in the Scripture as they
are in the event, and though the holy God in the day of his patience, and
longsuffering is not alike quick in the execution of the sentences of his word,
yet does he ever establish the authority of his Laws by the works of his
providence in the most opportune season; and as judgment deferred, is no
acquittance, so does it more threaten its being the greater, when it comes,
then a quick and present dispatch; yea though this tempest which now blows on
the Chruches of Christ, come to a greater hight, and the darkness be such, as
no Moon or Stars may for many days yet appear of any visible signs of hope,
yet is his soul thus at rest whilst he can see the credit of the truth cleared,
on which he has more in dependence then any adventure within time, and does
rejoice, whatever miscarrying may be of inferior ends, that this great and
ultimate end of the works of God is secured herein, and the glory of his truth
does shine forth in the most strange and amazing acts of his providence, whereat
many are ready to stagger, when they do not wisely consider the same.

4. He sees now likewise, so high a value which the Lord puts on the trial of
his peoples faith, and that the great dispensation whereby he deals with men is
by trust and on the credit of his word, as it adds further to his
confirmation, to see all human and visible refuges often taken out of his
Churches sight, yea his greatest works in the earth make the greatest delay er
they be brought forth, and his Churches case put so far beyond help before a
cure, as the first quickening of her crushed and almost dead hope, must be at
the mouth of the grave; and he is thus herein more singularly strenthned, that
when the Lord speaks the same in the way of providence, which he has spoke in
his word, not by might nor by power, that he does with unspeakable advantage
supply and fill the room thereof by the next word, but by my spirit says the
Lord, which in this day should with a full assurance of faith be both sought
and looked after.

5. It is in this rare study he attaines also the greatest confirmation to his
faith that could possibly be desired within time, to see now when its so near
the close thereof and after all the revolutions of times past, how the truth and
faithfulness of God, has, as the sun in its strenth, still keept its way
straight and fixed amidst all these dark clouds which have been to darken the
same and is now gone its course until it draws near to the full and perfect
day; yea thus to see how signally this present age is sisted upon that same
appeal and solemn testimony which as Josua gave, Josh. 23:14. that not one
thing has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke
concerning you, all are come to pass to you, and not on thing has failed
thereof; and Solomon did bear also at the dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8:
v. 56. Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his people Israel,
according to all that he promised, there has not failed one word of all his
good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant; so is this
now that great testimony of the latter days and the highest tribute of praise
to the glory of God in his truth which can be given by men, that this present
generation stands accountable to make the same yea much greater appeal to the
world, if they can instance one promise or prediction of that sacred record of
the Scripture which has ever failed or fallen to the ground, but may be this
day read in the event, and under these proper circumstances wherein it was to
take place in its proper season, as evidently as it was fortold, and must still
bear the same witness, Psalm, 18:30. that the way of the Lord is perfect, and his
word tried on all the adventures of faith, and trials which to this moment of
time have been made hereof, and of his being still a buckler to such as trust
in him, and are called to transmitt this glorious testimony to the succeeding
ages, that it may never cease to shine or want a public witness thereto before
Angels and men, until the whole mystery of God in his word be finished in that
magnificent close which shall be thereof at the second coming of the Lord.

CHARACT. V. A confirmed Christian in this day should be thus also stated, as
one who has not only attained a solid rest and settlment of mind, upon the
certainty of the Christian faith, but does know the pure genuine truth of
Christianity amidst such high oppositions betwixt the Romish and Reformed
Church herein.

And in the 1 place has in this manner sisted himself upon such a trial; I as
one who knows there is but one true and saving religion in the earth, to which
God has annexed the promise of eternal life which can never be divided
against it self. 2. Who knows that within a little his religion will be tried in
the truth thereof at the tribunal of Christ, where each must give account of
himself unto God. 3. As such who sees there can be no possible indifference in
the exterior profession of either way, but that so high a contrariety of
principles is in this opposition, that if the doctrine of Christ be on the one
hand, it is sure Antichristianisme must be on the other hand. 4. Yea who has
in that abstract manner sought to state the case herein with his own soul as if
he were come out of Paganism, to give a serious assent to the divinity of the
Scripture, and thus pressed to join in with that profession of the Christian
faith, which is most exactly conform to the same, in the genuine and
perspicuous sense thereof.

In the 2d place he has sought to know, how he could embrace the Popish creed
and adventure his eternal state thereon, or can extinguish his reason, and
conscience so far as to believe that the holy God would ever impose such a
faith upon men, as this is; I where he must abandon these principles of
natural reason in the most necessare use thereof, which God has himself
planted in man's soul, so as not to trust his own eyes but others in that great
interest of his eternal state, and with his own consent be shutt out from all
proper knowledge of the rule of his religion, yea account a blind and unlimited
obedience to men, amongst the highest excellencies of says. 2. Where he must
at once believe the fulness, and perfection of the Scripture, and to be not
only fitted for that great end of bringing mankind to God, but for such an
universal use herein, as to make the simple wise, and that the poor may
receive the Gospel; and yet believe also that it is a mass of dead, and
unsensed characters, until the Romish Clergy put a just sense thereon, tho its
sense and meaning is the very soul thereof, yea thus pass from the whole
letter of the same, or any certainty of its truth, from intrinsic evidences
and these marks and characters of its divinity, whereby the Christian cause
could be maintained against Pagans. 3. Where he must believe also that these
are the words of Christ Joh. 7:17. if any man do my will he shall know my
doctrine whither it be of God or not, and that men errs through not knowing the
Scripture Math. 22. and yet believe therewith, that these sacred fountains of
light should be shutt up, to keep men from going wrong, and that the sole right
of understanding the same belongs to a few, but not to the multitude, who yet
can pretend no extraordinare assistance or revelation herein, nor will
themselves come to these waters of Jealousy to be tried. 4. Where he must
needs believe that the Scriptures are the oracles of God committ to the Church,
to give answer in every dark case Romans 3:2. the type and form of sound
doctrine, Romans 6.17. unto whose sentence in all matters both of faith and
practice, we are expressly referred, Is. 8.20. and yet believe also that it
has no authority or decisive voice, but what is precarious and dependant on
the Romish Church, and thus consent to have the whole Christian faith visibly
unhinged of that foundation of the Scripture, and subjected to a supreme,
visible, and infallible judge here in the earth, with such a claim of dominion
over the faith of the saints, as the Apostles of Christ durst never own, but
did fully disclaim 2 Cor. 1:24. 5. Where he must believe that Jesus Christ
came for this end, to save lost man, and by one offering has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified Heb. 10:18. and yet join in the same faith
herewith a human satisfaction for sin, so as men may both merit, mediate, and
supererogate above what is needful for themselves, and be thus saved in the
same way of life, which was by the covenant of works; ascribing that only to
Christ to give salvation to their merits, which yet their own intrinsic value,
and condignity does require as a debt. 6. He finds not how in the same creed he
could possibly hold by one Mediator betwixt God and man, where a plurality for
this end is admit; and by the reality of Christ's human nature, and his having
a true and finit body, which is subjected to have a new created being, each
time in the Consecrate Hostia; or believe the truth of his sufferings as now
fully accomplished, and to be repeated no more, when it is in that daily
sacrifice of the Mess still offered, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the
liveing and the dead; so as on the most severe and impartial inquiry here, he
cannot find how one holding by these principles should go a further lenth then
Morality, or claim another standing then by a covenant of works. 7. Nor knows
he how to believe at once the truth of the Gospel, to be a doctrine of
Holiness, and infinite purity, and yet join in the same faith herewith such
an immunity and indulgence for men to sin, as money can stand for merit, and
the rich have the most easy and large entrey to heaven and account it a
privilege to destroy themselves; yea where some external severities and
penance to the flesh, like to the lanching and gashing of Baals Priests, are
reckoned enough to supply the room of Christian mortification. 8. Yea he finds
it not posible to believe, that sin by the blood of Christ can only be expiate,
and is his alone work, who has purged our sin himself, Heb. 1:3. or that
there are but two ways that lead to a twofold state of men, a strait way which
leads to a life, and a broad unto destruction, Math. 7:14. and yet believe that
there is a Purgatory after this life, where men must be tormented and suffer
extreme pains there, to expiate such venial sins, as their prayers and
pennances here could not do; yea is here made to wonder how any that believes
such a thing, can ever have true peace, or comfort in the world, but do either
take it as a fiction, or forget themselves when they are cheerful; where the
fear of such a place, the uncertainty of release, and how long a term it may be
er this purging work be complete, (when their own writers assign no less
time, then 10000 Years as needful to satisfy for some sins,) and least it
prove a real hell, must still be a present terror; nor can he believe that
such possibly do credit themselves herein, who assume this power to change the
condition of the dead, since were it really believed, that the keys of such a
prison were here in men's hand, and could, by the largest dotations to the
Romish Church, get a safe outgate thence, it were not strange, to see the
temporal state of Cristendome in a short time made over to these, and should
Judge they were in a strange manner indead privileged by the whole residue of
men, who by such a power over the world to come can make so easy a purchase
over this also which is present. 9. He finds and is sure he could never get his
reason and conscience brought to such a faith, even tho he made a simulate
profession herein, of that pretended supremacy of Peter as Bishop of Rome, on
which the whole frame and structure of the papacy leans, and the virtue of all
the pardons and absolutions founded thereon, on which so many have adventured
into an other world except he would thus build on the sand only, but not on the
rock. 10. He finds also how such an erection of the Gospel Church in her
militant state here, as the Papacy in its complexe frame is, unite in such an
head, as the Pope, who as the sole vicegerent of Christ in the earth, is at
once invested with a civil Monarchy, and universal impire over the Church, to
impose, and judge in the highest transactions that relate to the eternal state
and immortal souls of men, is a thing that as to matter of right is as
foreign to the Scripture and incompatible therewith, as Mahumitanisme can be,
and as to matter of fact is a trust that no created being could ever exerce.
11. he sees and is sure that he must either lose sight both of the rule, and
spirit of the Gospel, or have a just abhorrence at that way, where he should
be inevitably involved in a virtual consent, and accession to all that cruelty
and blood which for so many ages has been shed therein, when its so clear that
this was no exorbitance only of practice, but a native result of their tenets,
and principles, and not only dispensed with, but counted an highly meritorious
service; yea when it is sure that under no secular government of the most
tyrannical state that ever was in the world, has such arbitrary violence, and
oppression been exerced, or so much innocent blood shed, as by this party. 12.
And tho his judgment stood indetermined and in an equal balance upon this
great controversy, he could not exerce reason, and not see upon what hand such
a decision is as was in Solomon's time of the true mother of the child, and who
does most ruthfully seek to interesse themselves in the imminent hazard of the
Christian faith, and under least influence of any temporal motives does this
day stand for the truth and substance of Chistianity, and plead that it be not
destroyed in envy and hatred to them; or on what side it is likeways that this
manner of conquest is most followed to gain men to the profession of the truth
by a prevailing evidence of their own light and judgment herein, and to require
their exactest personal trial, and inquiry about the same.

In the 3d place, tho he sees there can be no pretense of doctrinall wavering
about the Reformed religion, and finds it not easy to comprehend how in one and
the same age, wherein the truth has so brightly shined, this way of Popery,
should have prevalence, or gain ground any more by seduction from arguments to
the reason or conscience of any; yet since it is an hour of temptation, and of
fainting, above all that has been hitherto known, and men's eyes arreasted with
such a prospect of the time, as is like to stagger the faith of the most
established, he is thus pressed, as one of the highest duties of this day, to
know and search out what may afford greatest assistance to his faith, from the
dispensations of providence therein, and to know the evidence and strenth of
such reslections as these are for this end.

1. That its sure, as the smallest things which the Lord does afford, to
strenthen and support against such a storm, should be seriously improven, and
taken to heart; so does it lay us in the way of that promise for having greater
things given to our observation; yea that now is the time when such as have
been most comforted by the word of promise, may be put to the forest trial in
their faith of any, to keep off stumbling at the work of providence, and be
thus tried according to the measure of these confirmations.

2. Tho the Churches declinings under greatest measures of light may be too
visible, and that religion gains not by persecution as formerly, with such an
amazing chang as is now in her external condition, yet sees it to be no strange
thing, when most signal warnings have gone before of such a trial with too
evident dispositions toward the same and discovery of its approach in all the
causes thereof; yea might be forseen by all, that the holy God would not still
bear with an impure, and uninlivned profession of the pure and glorious truth
of Christianity, which has now long been one of the most sad, and mortal
signs in the public state of religion; nor can it be found that ever any
Church did decline and fall from the purity of the truth and lose ground herein
by external persecution, where a judicial departure of its life and power did
not remarkably go before; so as it is not of late this has been too clearly
presaged, that some dark and unusual measure of trial from Amichrist, and that
ultima clades of the Reformed Churches, was drawing near, which would be sore
er it had done its work.

3. He sees also, how this present hour is not more searching and dark, then
it may be clear herewith, 1. that now after the issue of that opposition, which
was betwixt the Christian faith in the first entry of the Gospel and that
dying Apostate Church of the Jews, and next with the Pagan Impire, after that
new erection of the Gospel Church among the Gentiles, which is now over; so is
the greatest trial of the latter days fixed on the decision of that long
depending controversy betwixt Christ and Antichrist. 2. That according to the
Scripture we must believe that as after the manner of Egypt, that glorious
triumph and delivery of the Church from Antichrist will be surly carried on,
so the more near it comes to the last assault, and when this falls in to have
its proper room in the frame and administration of providence, the greater
extremity, terror and darkness may be expected also, as has not been in any
such manner formerly, yea with that unite and formidable conjunction of strenth
and growing success of this adversary for a time, as the most established
Christians may be in hazard to stagger. 3. That now is the day wherein the Lord
will have men know what it is to have the Bible as the alone security of the
Protestant religion, on which they must entirely rest no less then it is the
sole rule and standard thereof, which is a trial worthy of all that expense of
the pain, anguish, and wrestlings, that can now possibly attend the same.

4. Whilst the great standard of Antichrists Kingdom is visibly set up and
brought to the open field, as its this day in the Church of France, and all
human help taken out of sight; yet does he see herewith, 1 how this now is
concluded, as the most infallible remedy to recover Popery, and that argument,
to which they trust more then to Peter's keys to wit these sanguinary laws by
the sword, and rack, which they have again betaken themselves to, tho such an
argument the Scripture never knew, which sober heathens would abhor, and gives
up the credit of all religion to Atheism. 2. That there can be no more
evidence of a desperate and sinking cause then is here, and how nothing else
can support it but these weapons which are not against the Conscience, or by
any terrors of the 2d death, but of the first. 3. that this is such an
argument, (if they have not in a strange manner forgot,) which has within these
100 Years been so fully answered, and by such an immediate appearence of God in
the Kingdom of France, that according to these measures of cruelty against the
Protestants there, so was it returned in a deludge of their own blood, yea thus
both the public state of the Church and faith of the saints in the truth more
deeply rooted; and tho we yet see not the end of these wonders and the dark
side only of the dispensations of such a day, yet do we know this sore rod on
the Church is but as the saw and axe in the carpenters hand, who shall never
undo that glorious work which Christ has done and is still further
perfecting on the ruins of Antichrists Kingdom.

5. Tho some unusual deeps and methods of subtilty be now on foot also against
the truth, yet he cannot but see how nothing could more effectually tend to
confirm the protestant cause and take the credit of popery off the conscience
of these in their own profession who are considerate and in the least serious
herein; when the world must thus see, 1 how easy its for such to take any
measure and latitude in the doctrinals of their profession, when this can most
serve the juncture of such a time and highten or narrow the controversy betwixt
them and the Reformed Church at their pleasure, so as to sacrifice the Church
of Rome unto the Court of Rome, if no less can secure that end. 2. That the
most horrid Turkish Slavery over men's bodies comes no such lenth, as that
strange claim that these now make of an absolute impire over men's conscience by
the sword, and to put them to such a tribute of their obedience, and they shall
then be secure, if they but come the lenth to sin against their light, and
adventure on so small a thing as to go to Hell and perish eternally, since its
an external and simulate profession of such a way they do thus enforce from
these, whom they see cannot in faith be persuaded hereof. 3. Yea it has been
too visible how much that master-plot, and ingine, has in these times been
working, to take men first off all sense of religion, and destroy them in the
morals of Christianity, to make this conquest more easy, that such may have no
inward defense and support against the terror of human violence, yea in this
way, when they have sought how to divide Protestants among themselves and
betwixt Rulers and them, this seams the last and greatest ingine of all, how to
divide betwixt them and their God, and act the same plot, which was laid
betwixt Balack and Balaam, as knowing that its no naked show or profession of
the Reformed religion they nead fear, so much as that old protestant spirit in
the power and life thereof, before which their interest could never stand, and
dreads nothing so much as the reviving hereof, which as the handwriting upon
the wall did ever more threaten the fatal ruin of that Kingdom, then any
human power or strenth.

6. Here also he finds just cause of astonishment, how Kings or great men in
the earth should give their power to support the Romish interest, that has
been so visibly destructive to theirs, when its not possible to deny how its
first advance and progress to that supreme hight, which it once attained, and
the declining of the civil impire, did by the same steps go together, until
Magistracy was turned as unto a dead image and shadow, except its being
enlivened by their breath and authority, as it was during the whole hight of
that Antichristian power; nor will it be denied that in these late times the
French Monarchy was never more near its dissolution in its right line, then by
the Catholic league there; and would seem not easy to be forgot, how Henry the
3d, who had most sought to crush the Protestants there in pursuance of that
league, was at last constrained to flee to such for help, or by whom he was
killed; and that Heroic Prince Henry the 4. was first stobbed in the mouth and
then in the heart; yea that the public records of that nation cannot possibly
deny how the house of Burbon owes its power and preservation more to the
Protestants, (without whom it had been fully extinct,) then Ahaswerus did to
Mordecai the Jew for what he found written in the Chronicles of Persia, when
the decree was then past to destroy all the seed of the Jews.

7. As in no times past was ever a greater expectation then is now, which way
the scale will turn, and what will be the end of these wonders, when the
nearest events of Providence are so dark and amazing; so does he find this, in
some eztraordinare way called for, to be still, and see what God will do for
his Church, and with humble confidence look for some dispensation as has not
hitherto been in this extreme exigence, and tho he do not appear in that way
and manner as in former times, that it shall be in a way more signally
glorious, beyond what has formerly been; yea does in faith thus judge, that
then is the Churches day broke, and has found the sure way of her strenth, and
right lith of duty, when her hope and confidence is taken of all visible
refuges and entirely settled on her invisible head, and his promise put to suite
by prayer without fainting herein. It is sure the truth and faithfulness of
God stands ingadged for Antichri^^s fall, as well as for salvation by Christ,
and since he has said this adversary shall be broke and brought down, it must
surely be, tho the dust of the ground should rise for this end, and now is the
faith of the saints called for becoming the greatness of such an assurance, on
which are the eyes of men, of their own conscience, of the elect Angels, yea of
the glorious God, to see who does indeed credit him in this day, when there is
no sensible support herein; and tho it is now like to shake sore the departure
of many from the faith who had some visible profession thereof, yet may it be
hoped for, that the turn of the next tide shall bring in more, with a solid and
true increase to the Church, then these sad days do now take off.

CHARACT. VI. It is thus a confirmed Christian should be specially considered,
as one who is not only at rest on the known certainty of his says, but is
ready to render some account of the solid rational grounds and demonstrations
hereof, unto all who ask after the same, and does thus judge, 1 that these are
the proper and appointed means which the Lord has afforded for the greatest
confirmation of men's faith within time, yea preferable to any external
miracles, which are more extraordinare and remott assistances thereto. 2. That
these are given as so great an helper to his joy, and excitment of his
affections to follow the Lord fully, as makes him wonder how the greatness of
these things, which men are called to believe, can come near their thoughts,
and yet not more taken up about this confirming work. 3. That the too visible
neglect hereof, both with respect to the youth and community of professors in
the Church, seems one of the sad, and fundamental defects of this day. The
reasons hereof, with some clear view of these means which might most answer
such an end, are briefly offered, in this preceding work.

CHARACT. VII. A truly confirmed Christian may in the last place be herein
also considered, as such whose faith being often tried through all these stages
of Christianity he has been taken; has some proper record of the most choice,
and signal confirmations of his life, to improve the same not only for his own
support in that last warfare of death, but for strenthning the faith of others;
wherein he does thus judge, 1 that there could be no true support or relief from
religion here in the earth, if it cannot bear out then, and that death is the
great touchstone and trial, when the true value and difference betwixt things
of an eternal truth and substance, and the things of this world, will be best
seen. 2. He reckons each real Christian, by his profession then sisted and
accountable, even by some explicit personal testimony, to put to his seal that
God is true, and bear the same witness with his last and dying breath to the
truth of Christianity, which he gave in the whole course of his life; and of
that joy, complacence and assurance of mind, which he has found, and now has
in the way of truth, so as to press the same on his dearest relations as their
alone true interest. 3. He sees also, how honorable it is for the Lord, that
such whose faith has been often tried, (and when thus with joy and admiration he
can look back on the most pressing and conspicuous conflicts of time,) should
have it their last work to pay in some tribute of praise, unto him whose word
and promise unto them did yet never fail. 4. He accounts the more weighty
trials he has been carried through in his Christian warfare, does both give
more access to this service, and adds more to the value of such a testimony.
5. He judges this one special way and advantage, whereby one generation might
declare the truth and faithfulness of God unto an other, in a family line and
relation, to show forth thus that the Lord is upright, that he is their rock,
and with him is no unrighteousness; yea which should be matter of unspeakable
joy, when now in his turn he can say that such has the Lord been to him, what
was David's dying words 1 Kings. 1:14. Who has delivered my soul out of all
distress, how that in no trouble or exigence of his life he was ever left
without a door of outgate; and thus also with Caleb Josh. 14:10. to give in
some such witness for God I am now near the close of time, and does testify,
that the word of his truth, and promise he has surely accomplished, which has
brought me safe and honorably through, when such as did dicredit the same by
misbelief, and sought after another refuge, found all their confidences fail.
6. And knowing likeways how great a suprizall death may be, and that such as
have shined in their day, may yet fet under a cloud and go silent off the
stage, he judges it the more needful to have such a piece of his dying work
prepared, as one of the choicest legacies he can bequath to his surviving
friends, in a season when it has usually the greatest advantage of weight and
acceptance: it being still qualified with Christian prudence, and humble
sobriety, so as all may see its whole intent is to commend to men's conscience
the way of truth and godliness and not themselves, and thus only direct, for
the proper use, and improvement of their nearest relations. I know it may be
strange to some, what is spoke upon this head; but as its sure the present day
has its duty, and each time of our life has some proper work, so I humbly
judge, that this seems to fall in as the last service of a dying Christian to
his generation, to deliver of his hand the truth which he had received and has
often proven, with his confirmatory seal and testimony thereto, and now in some
more then ordinare way called for in this hour of great darkness, when if
that security of the absolute promises stood not good to the Church, we might
fear religion might quickly wear out, and truth perish from the earth; and as
so solemn and weighty a thing should be managed with much humble prudence, so
it may be judged that no serious and observing Christian but has some
peculiare ingadgments under which they find themselves sisted even beyond
others, yea some such singular confirmations in the journall of their life,
that should be not easy to hide under the ground, where the strenthning of
others hereby is conceirned, and that such should not then leave the cross of
Jesus Christ at a loss, or part therewith without their testimony, which has
left them at so great an advantage. And though this is not to offer particulare
rules in such a duty, but that Christian wisdom must direct herein, as the
present case is circumstantiate, yet might it be hoped, were this more taken to
heart, it should be a singular mean, to put a more deep impression of men's
dying work on their own spirit, even whilst they are in health, to excite
their surviving friends, and to keep religion thus alive in a family state, and
relation, and gain a more venerable respect to the same on men's conscience, yea
to fix also stronger ingadgments on the succeeding offspring.

Thus is presented here a short Idea of the solid and judicious work of
Christian confirmation in the truth, under these forgoing Characters, to show
how rare an atteanment of religion this is, yea to present herein a special
series and scale of the greatest steps in this confirmatory work, by which it
should be followed, and where none of these may be parted from other, though
some be of an higher and more absolute use for such an end. And if it should be
objected here, what needs any such expense of time or pains in this case, when
its sure the essential truths of the Gospel are not questioned, and that
without internal evidence of the spirit, no external means of this kind can
be of use. I know that its the alone work of the holy Ghost, to beget a divine
and supernatural faith, without which the furthest light, and objective
evidence, though backed with a continued dispensation of external miracles,
could never bear Christians out, either as to duty or comfort, in their passage
through time; yea nothing is in the least here to subject the credit of our
faith to men's rational comprehension, but rather tends to enervate wholly the
strenth of any such tenet and take off all pretense for the same: But its sure
also, I must quite all solid security in the way of religion, and any clear
founding in the light and certainty of the Scripture, or admit these things as
undeniable, 1 that supernatural faith is the most highly rational light that's
within time, and that none who profess the name of Christ can be of so low a
size, as should not be pressed and excited to be much about this ground work
of knowing the truth, and principles of their profession upon its own evidence;
yea are thus called as new born babes to drink in the sincere milk of the word,
1 Pet. 2. Which, as its clearly in the original, is the rational milk of the
word, to be thus received no less on conviction and certainty of the judgment,
then with the out going of their affections. 2. That as its not conceivable how
a true and firm assent can be to divine truth, but on its known certainty, so
here is no resolving of the Christians faith on the strongest rational
evidences hereof, yet must it still be resolved on the testimony of God, made
clear and evident to them to be such. 3. It is sure also, the Lord has not
given so large a measure of these grounds and demonstrations of his truth with
such redoubled arguments of that kind, to be of so small regard, as is with
most, but for some great, and universal use hereof to the wholl Church, and
knew how needful such assistances to the faith of his people would be, whilst
they are on the earth. 4. That these means, which tend most convincingly to
found a rational assurence in the judgment, are the proper vehicle of the
Spirit of God, by which his sealing work, should be both sought and expected;
nor can I judge how the credit and use hereof should be so small, and not on
the same ground quite any external ordinance of the Gospel, which without the
Spirit of the Lord can never profit, nor how we should expect and suite his
confirming work on the soul, when these greatest confirming means, which he
has given to the Church, have no just weight; but o how wonderful a teacher
is the holy Ghost, when such ordinare means fail, and are inaccessable, by
furnishing his people then with these strongest arguments of love and power,
who having had but small measures of light, yet were not unfaithful to improve
the smallest degree of such a talent. 5. Yea so great a thing is it, to attain
a solid faith of things wholly remott from our sense, and so far above the
reach and apprehension of nature, or to have an absolute relyance on an
invisible refuge, for our present and eternal state, as no common assent can
answer, when the very rest and quiet of the soul must needs ly in the sure and
firm persuasion hereof. 6. It is too visible also how little the practical
use of such a mean has yet been essayed in the Church, that all who are
members thereof might no less know the strenth and firmness of the foundation
of their faith by its own evidence, then the general articles of religion, but
whilst the most usual instructing work lies almost wholly about the noetick
part of Divinity, there seems not that serious regard to press the dianoetick
part hereof on men's conscience, as if this were to be restricted to a few who
are more knowing, learned, and of an inquisitive spirit about the rational
certainty of the truth, and for whom these choice and abundant helps of this
kind, which are in this age, seem more peculiarly directed. Its sure, that the
Christian faith in the first times did remarkably then spread and prevail, by
these clear evidences hereof to the judgment, made effectual by the spirit of
God, more then by extraordinare miracles, nor knew they otherwise what it was
to be Christians but by embracing the truth with a full assurance of
understanding, no less then of delight and affection. But if it be objected,
it is not the same case now, where religion is planted in a nation, and has an
uncontrollable public profession under the support of humane laws; I know no
weight this can have, except that should be admit therewith, quod nunc
nascuntur Christiani, sed non fiunt. 7. Yea is it not sure, (tho it seems
little understood,) that the primary grounds and evidences of our faith are not
only as to their and demonstrative of the truth and divinity of the Scripture,
but are upon the matter such demonstrations also which most natively result
from the same by infallible consequence, and are thus to be accounted not as
human but divine arguments, given us by the spirit of God. 8. I shall but
further add, how such as do seriously ponder things, will find this
demonstration to be not more important then clear, that to be a confirmed
Christian and a confirmed Protestant are convertible terms; and that if these
as are under that deplorable bondage and darkness of popery were but once
awaked to see the truth and certainty of the Christian faith, by its intrinsic
and objective evidence, and taken off that brutish credulity and dependence on
the alone credit of others herein, it might be said the strongest ingine to
hold up that profession were then broke, and should see the doctrine and rule
of faith to be of such full and perspicuous evidence from the Scripture, as
without blasphemy they could not seek from the Lord to give them a plainer
rule, then what he has there given.

READER.
ITs like you may think strange, how these few sheets in the close fall in here,
after the forgoing part was finished; but tho they meet in one design and
interest, yet was not this then intended until the former was done, and if it
might tend to a solid use and fruit unto any, I shall forbear a further Apology
herein, I may truly say, the weight of the subject has carried it some
further lenth then was designed, when I so much sought to be short, as I aim at
in any thing of this kind, that through my desir^ to avoid any unnecessare
multiplying of thords, I sar^ least it may make some things seem a little dark
at the first look, tho I hope not upon any serious perusal of the same. Two
things I must further crave leave to add; 1 that when some succinct view of the
great assistances and confirmations of our faith is here offered, which these
of the lowest capacity of the Church, might with that advantage improve, as in
a few hours, by reading it some times over, may be so far impressed on their
mind and judgment, that they could give some clear and judicious account
thereof; it may be by such but seriously weighed and taken to heart of what
conceirn the use hereof is: 2. That I would humbly judge also, it were a most
special service for the truth in this day, to have some short Directory and
remembrancer of the great acts of the Lord and monuments of his Providence now
under the New Testament, in that manner held forth as might most tend to some
universal use of all within the Church. I confess my desire pressed me to
some small essay herein, with intent to have joined it to this work, but
having with much conviction laid this wholly aside, as to any further
appearence that way, so is it with an earnest desire, that some more qualifyed,
might take to heart and under their hand so great a service both for their
generation and posterity. It is sure the Lord has designed his people to be
tought the greatness of his works as well as the precepts of his word, and as
no duty is more pressed then this under the Old Testament both as to Public
and Family instruction, so are we no less accountable i^ these last times for
this improvement of such as are of known, public, and uncontrollable evidence,
and should be the care of each age to have that solemn remembrance kept up
hereof, so as not a few, but the very multitude within the Church might be as a
public Library and Repository of the same.

FINIS.

