A LETTER FROM The Earl of Forth, to His Excellency Robert Earl of Essex,
Lord General, etc. dated 15 Feb. 1643.

AND His Excellencies Answer thereunto, dated 19 Febr. 1643.

March 8. 1643.
IT is his Excellencies pleasure these Letters be forthwith printed.

I Baldwin Secretary to His Excellency.



ALSO A PETITION of the well-affected Nobility and Gentry of the Realm of
Ireland, who have suffered under the bloody Rebels there; and presented to the
Lords Justices, to be presented to His Majesty, which was done accordingly; and
the Agents accepted to come to His Majesty.

Printed according to Order.

march. 13th LONDON, Printed for J. C. and T.G. 1643.

My Lord,
I Cannot so willingly write to you in any business, as in that of Peace. The
endeavor thereof being the principal duty of those who are trusted in places
of our Commands, especially, when the blood that is spilt, is of persons under
the same Allegiance, of the same Country and Religion. His Majesty continuing
constant in His pious and frequent desires of a happy end to those bloody
distractions. I do hereby desire your Lordship to send me a safe Conduct to
and from Westminster, for Mr. Richard Fanshaw, and Mr. Thomas Ofly, Esquires;
to be sent by His Majesty, concerning a Treaty for Peace. I rest

Your Lordships humble servant FORTH.
Oxford, Feb. 15. 1643.
My Lord,
YOu show your Nobleness in declaring your willingness to write to me in any
business as of that of Peace; and I join with you in the same opinion, that it
ought to be a principal duty of those who are trusted in a place of our
command. And therefore whenever I shall receive any directions to those who
have entrusted me, I shall use my best endeavors; and when you shall send for
a safe Conduct for those Gentlemen mentioned in your Letter, from His Majesty
to the Houses of Parliament, J shall with all cheerfulness show my
willingness to further any way that may produce that happiness that all
honest men pray for, which is a true understanding between His Majesty and His
faithful and only Council the Parliament.

Your Lordships humble servant. ESSEX.
Feb. 19. 1643.
TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of diverse of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Your
Kingdom of Ireland, as well Commanders of Your Majesty's Army as others, whose
names are subscribed in the behalf of themselves and others your
Protestant-Subjects in this your Kingdom;
Shows,
THat this your Kingdom reduced with a vast expense of Treasure, and much
effusion of British blood, to the obedience of the Imperial Crown of
England, has been by the Princely care of Your Royal Progenitors, especially
of Queen Elizabeth, and of Your Royal Father of ever blessed memory, and Your
sacred Majesty, in many parts happily planted, great sums of Money disbursed in
buildings and improvements, Churches edified and endowed, and frequented with
multitudes of good Protestants, and your Customs and Revenues raised to great
yearly sums by the industry of the Protestant Subjects especially, and great
yearly sums by way of Subsidies and Contributions cheerfully paid unto. Your
Majesty by Your said Subjects; in which happiness this Your said Kingdom has
flourished in a long continued Peace, and under Your Highness most glorious
and happy government, until that by the present Conspiracy and Rebellion
raised out of detestation of Your blessed government, and for rooting out of
the Protestant Religion, and so for the dispossessing of Your Majesty of this
Your said Kingdom, without the least occasion offered by Your Majesty or Your
Protestant Subjects. And notwithstanding that Your Majesty immediately before
had inla^ged, beyond president, Your Royal favor and bounty to them, in
g^anting all that their and our joint Agents did desire of Your Majesty. And
we continuing amongst them in all love and amity, without distrust; Your
Petitioners and others, who labored to oppose those damnable designs and
practices, have been driven from their Dwellings, Estates and Fortunes, their
Houses and Churches burnt and demolished, all Monuments of civility defaced
utterly, Your Majesty's Forts and places of strength thrown down, and the
Common and S^atute Laws of this Your Kingdom utterly confounded, by taking
upon themselves the exercise of all manner of Authority and Jurisdiction
Ecclesi^sticall and Civil both by Land and Sea, proper and peculiar to Your
sacred Majesty, being Your just Prerogatives, and the royal Flowers of Your
Imperial D^adem, to the disherison of Your Crown and Revenues brought to
nothing, and the Protestant Clergy, wi^h their Revenues and Support, for the
present destroyed. This Your Kingdom in all parts, formerly inhabited in all
parts by British Protestants, now depopulated of them, and many thousands of
Your Protestant Subjects most barbarously used, stripped naked, tortured,
famished, hanged, buried alive, drowned, and otherwise by all barbarous cruel
sorts of death murdered. Such as yet remain of them are reduced to that
extremity, that very few of them have wherewith all to maintain a being, and
all of them so terrified and afflicted with these barbarous and inhumane
cruelties (the true reports whereof being now spread abroad into the Christian
world) Your Suppliants conceive fear that Your Majesty's British Subjects
will be discouraged from coming again to inhabit this Kingdom, and the
remnant of the British left here will be enforced to depart. All this being
done by the Conspiracy of the Papists, who did publicly declare the utter
extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and all the British Professors
thereof, out of this Your Majesty's Kingdom. And to the end it may the better
appear in some measure, Your Suppliants have made choice of Captain William
Ridgeway, Sir Francis Hambleton Knight and Baronet. Captain Michael Jones, and
Master Fenton Parsons, whom they have employed and authorized as their Agents,
to manifest the truth thereof in such particulars as for the present they are
furnished withal, referring the more ample manifestation to Cap. Will.
Ridgeway, Fr. Hambleton, Michael Jones, and Fenton Parsons, or any 3 or more of
them, or any such other agents as shall with all convenient speed be sent as
occasion shall require, to attend Your Majesty, from Your Protestant Subjects
of the several Provinces of this Your Kindome.

We therefore Your Majesty's most humble loyal and obedient Protestant
Subjects, casting down our selves at Your Royal feet, and flying to You for
redress, and Suitors in these our great calamities, as our most gracious
Sovereign Lord and King; And next and immediate under Almighty God, our
Protector and Defense: most humbly beseeching Your Sacred Majesty to admit into
Your Royal Presence, from time to time our said Agents; And in Your great
Wisdom to take into Your great care and consideration the distressed estates,
and humble desires of your said subjects, so that the glory of God, Your
Majesty's Honor, and the happiness of Your Subjects, the Protestant Religion
may be restored throughout the whole Kingdom to its Iustre. That the losses of
Your Protestant Subjects may be repaired in such manner, and measure as Your
Majesty in Your Princely Wisdom shall think fit. And that this Kingdom may be
so settled, as that your said Protestant Subjects may hereafter live therein
under the happy government of Your Majesty and Your Royal posterity with
comtort and security; whereby Your Majesty will render Your self throughout
the whole World, a most just and glorious defender of the Protestant Religion,
and draw down a blessing on all other Your Royal undertakings, for which Your
Petitioners will ever pray, etc.

GEorge Kildare. Montgomery. Henry Blaney. Mr. Ridgeway. Ja. Montgomery. Cha.
Coote. Fra. Hamilton. Ar. Forbish. To. Hannah. To. Stuart. William Cooley. Ar.
Blundell. Fra. Shurley. Ja. Dumbettr. Edw. Peuey. Tho. Merideth. Ar. Loftus.
Will. Usher. Fra. Slingsby. Fra. Willougby. Ion Morris. Geo. Munke. Rob.
Sterling. Hen. Jones. Io. Pygot. Rob. Baliffe. Ed. Philpot. Anth. Trime. Will.
Parsons. Ioh. Edgworth. Will. Bodoley. Fran. Moore. Io. Nueman. Fra. Bows.
Will. Plankot. Jo. Turner. Io. Cliffe. Pet. Wyburne. Theod. Sceut. Brya.
Stapleton. David Dunbar. Tho. Hill. Geo. Launder. Ed. Montgomery. Hen.
Tilliard. Io. Colvell. Will. Johnson. Geo. Montgomery. Io. Reevonin. Art.
Hambleton. Will. Gibbs. Bob. Whitfeeld. Ioh. Camphell. Ios. Wheeler. Io.
Wheeler. Will. Alfrey. Dudley Loftus. Nich. Simson. Rog. Alinson. Will. Pigat.
Ant. Doping. Ratcl. Duckenfeeld. Will. Lucasse. Tho. Leigh. Dan. Foster. Io.
Sterling. Ad. Merideth. Rob. Sandersor. Tho. Coote. Geo. Bently. Tho. Lallis.
Will. White. Ed. Pygot. Ioh. Dernelle. Will. Knight. Will. Palms. Ed.
Spring. To. Percivall. Io. Cranford. Tho. Aglmen. Will. Aubrey. Io. Johnson.
Io. Doyley. Ios. Allen. Rob. Cole. Ioh. Kenedey. Nich. Pinner. Cooley.
Phillips. Rob. Stuart. Ioh. Hoy. Tho. White. Paul. Canning. Sam. Mullenex. Io.
Light. And. Brewarton. Will. Hamilton. Hen. Kenney. Io. Billingham. Will
Humphrey. Hug. Gerney. Io. Clark. Io. Feeld. Ed. Fisher. Io. Shenning. Iohnthor
Holt. Io. Combloody. Tho. Lawton. And. Crimlle. Nath. Higinson. Io. Walker.
Re. Holland. Wal. Fraser. Geor. Os^aston. Tho. Manley. Fra. Barbar. Will.
Bodington. And. Young. Ed. Barton. Will. Richardson. Io. Penrose. Rob. Mason.
Will. Medops. Mat. Sloghson. John. Roe. Will. Steward. Adam Jones. Will.
Teddey. Rob. Bowyer. Arno. Cosby. Will. Sands. Not. Hollington. Adam Watson.
Io. VVoods. Mat. Forester. Arnold. Boat. Io. Parsons. Will. Gilbert. Rob.
Jones. Francis King.


FINIS.

