SEVERAL Plain Truths Manifested and Declared from the SPIRIT of GOD, And born
Testimony to by Christ, the Apostles and Scriptures of Truth.

I. Concerning Mount-Sion. II. A Distinction betwixt Wars and Armor in the Old
Testament and the New. III. Concerning CAIN. IV. Concerning Uniformity and
Conformity. V. The Authority of the Church of Christ. VI. Concerning Exhorting
and Admonishing. VII. Concerning such as cry against Orders, etc.
By G. F.

London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane, Shoreditch, 1684.

Concerning Mount-Sion.
MOVNT-SION was a Hill higher than all other Hills, and it stands northwards in
Jerusalem, and therefore is called SION, that is, a Watchtower, because from
this Hill [Sion] from it one might see the Holy Land, and all the Countries
thereabouts; and upon this Hill David built his City, and blew the Trumpet:
which Mount-Sion and Jerusalem was a Type of a Heavenly Jerusalem, and Sion;
for the Lord said, I have set my King or Anointed upon my holy Hill of Sion.
Heavenly Sion is the Hill, or Mountain of Gods Holiness; beautiful for
Situation, the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount-Sion; let Mount-Sion rejoice,
Psalm. 48. For God will save Sion, the Salvation of Israel comes out of Sion (to
wit) Christ, who is elect and precious, laid in Sion, but not in the outward
Hill, or Mount-Sion; for Christ was born in Bethlem, and David says, by
Prophecy concerning Christ, O that the Salvation of Israel was come out of
Sion; when the Lord brings back the Captivity of his People, Jacob shall
rejoice, and Israel shall be glad, Psalm. 14. And again he says, Let Israel
rejoice in the Lord that made him, let the Children of Sion be joyful in their
King; for Sion shall be redeemed through Judgment, and her Converts through
Righteousness. Is not this Sion Gods People, and not the outward Hill? For out
of Sion shall go forth a Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Is not
this heavenly Jerusalem and heavenly Sion, that the Word of the Lord and his
Law goes out of, and not out of the outward Hill Sion? In the last days
(Isaiah says) that the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be established
on the top of all Mountains, and exalted above all the Hills, and all Nations
shall flow unto it: Is not this heavenly Mount-Sion, and heavenly Jerusalem?
And Isaiah says, The Lord is exalted, for he dwells on high, he has filled
Sion with Judgment and Righteousness; Sion is called a City of our Solemnity,
and Jerusalem, a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down;
not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the
Cords thereof be broken; Is not this heavenly Jerusalem and heavenly Sion? But
let the Hypocrites or Sinners of outward Sion or Jerusalem be afraid, which may
be removed or broken, which heavenly Sion or Jerusalem cannot; for no unclean
thing enters into it. O Sion! that bring good Tidings, get thee up into the
high Mountain of Jerusalem, that brings good tidings; lift up thy Voice with
strength, lift it up, be not afraid; Say unto the City of Judah, Behold your
God. So here is Sion and Jerusalem that bring good tidings.

Now, do ye think that this was the outward Jerusalem, or outward Hill? for
Christ was born in Bethlem, a Chief Corner Stone, elect and precious, laid in
Sion; but it does not say in the outward Hili Sion. Isaiah speaks by prophecy,
Isa. 51. He will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her Wilderness
like Eden, and her Desert like the Garden of the Lord; Joy and Gladness shall
be found therein, Thanksgiving and the Voice of Melody: I have put my Words in
thy Mouth, and have Covered thee, even in the Shadow of my hand, that I may
plant the Heavens, and lay the Foundations of the Earth, and say unto Sion,
Thou art my People. Here you may see, that Sion is Gods People; And how
beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that brings glad Tidings, that
publishes Peace, that brings good Tidings of good, that publishes Salvation,
that says unto Sion, Thy God riegns, when the Lord shall bring again Sion, (to
wit) his People; for the outward Mountain, with the outward Hill, was not
removed; and the Redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that are turned
from Transgression, Isa. 59. and Romans 11. And this Redeemer is Christ. And
Isaiah says Who has seen such a thing, and who has heard such things? Shall
a Nation be born at once? For so soon as Sion traveled she brought forth her
Chileren.

Now here you may see the wonder of Sion's Travel, which was not the Great
Hill, nor Watchtower in Jerusalem. And Zachariah says, The Lord shall yet
Comfort Sion, (that is) his People, Zach. 1. And Zachariah says, shout thou
Daughter of Sion. And again he says to Sion, Let not thy hand be slack: so
Sion was and is Gods People. And Micah says, In the Last days, etc. the
Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established above all the Mountains,
and it shall be exalted, above all the Hills: So here is Gods heavenly Mountain
or Watch Tower, which is above, all Hills and Mountains, and People shall flow
unto it, and many Nations shall come, and say, Come let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his Paths. Here God is the Teacher of his
People, and Nations; for these last days are the days of Cluist, in his New
Covenant or Testament, where the Lord goes forth, from heavenly Sion, the
Mountain of the House of God, established above all Mountains, and the Word
from heavenly Jerusalem, that is above old Jerusalem, which was the Word of
Faith, (the Apostles preached) in Peoples Hearts and Mouths, Romans 10. Micah 4.
Isa. 2. The Jews in the Old Testament they had the Law given to them at the
outward Hill Moum-Sion, who had the outward Hill North in Jerusalem, called,
Mount-Sion, and read the outward Law in outward Jerusalem; but the Mountain of
the Lord, or heavenly Mount-Sion, which is called the Mountain of the House of
the Lord, is established on the top of all the Mountains, and exalted above all
the Hills, so that all Nations may see it, and slow unto it. And Obadiah says,
Upon Mount-Sion shall be deliverance, etc. and saviors shall come upon
Mount-Sion, to judge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords. And
the Apostle says, Romans 9. As it is written, behold, I lay in Sion a Stone of
stumbling, and a Rock of Offense, and whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed. And Peter says, 1 Epist. 2. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner
Stone, elect and precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
Confounded; to all that believe in him he is precious, but unto them that are
disobedient, he is a Stone of stumbling and a Rock of Offense who stumbles at
the Word, the Stone which the Builders disallowed, (viz. the outward
professors) the same is made the Head of the Corner of Gods House, whose House
Gods People are, and this Sion, the chief Corner Stone, which is laid in Sion,
was not laid in the Hill called, Sion, in outward Jerusalem; for Christ the
chief Corner Stone, was born in Bethlem, as is said before. And the Apostle
writes to the Church in his Epistle to the Heb^ew, and said, They were not come
to the Mount Sinai, where they received the Law, but ye are come to Mount-Sion,
the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
Comp^ny of Angels; and they were come to the general Assembly, the Church of
the first born, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling etc. See that ye refuse not him
that speaks from Heaven; if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven,
whose Voice shakes not the Earth only, but the Heavens also, but if ye here the
Voice of Christ, and follow him, ye will receive his Kingdom that cannot be
moved nor shaken.

And Now, all ye Christions, that profess Christianity, are ye come to
Mount-Sion? or are ye under the Law, which came from Mount-Sinai, not
Mount-Sion? which Law commanded Tithes, Offerings, Sacrifice, Oaths, and
Swearing, with outward Tabernacle, Sanctuary, and Temple, and Priests Lips to
preserve Peoples Knowledge, commanded by the Law in the Old Testament; and if
ye be come to Mount-Sion, and heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the Living God,
then you see the innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just men
made perfect; and they that are come here, their Names are written in Heaven;
and such are come to Jesus, the Mediator of the new Covenant, who speaks from
Heaven, whose Voice shakes the Heavens, and the Earth, that are to be shaken,
that those things that cannot be shaken, may remain, Heb. 12. And John said
Rev. 14. He saw a Lamb stood on Mount-Zion, and with him a hundred forty four
thousand, having their Fathers Name written in their foreheads, which were
redeemed out of the Earth, and from amongst men, and they followed the Lamb;
and in their mouths were found no Guile; for they are without fault before the
Throne of God, and they sung a new Song, before the Throne, and no man could
learn that Song, but the hundred forty four thousand which were redeemed, etc.
Then surely this was spiritual, and surely this was heavenly-Sion, and not
Earthy, which the hundred and forty four thousand stood upon, which were
redeemed from the Earth, and so from Earthly Sion, and Earthly Jerusalem, and
all those Earthly things that followed Christ the Lamb, and was with him after
he was risen, before the Throne of God.

Gouses in Essex, 13th day of the 2d Month, 1683. G. F.

A Distinction betwixt the Wars and the Weapons, and the Arms and the Armor in
the Old Testament, and the New; for in the Old Testament they were Carnal, and
in the New Testament Spiritual.
THe Apostle bids the Church of Christ, Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil; for we wrestle not against
Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of
the Darkness of this World, against Spiritual Wickedness in High Places. So
this Wrestling was with Spiritual Weapons, Spiritual Men; for Carnal Men
Wrestle with Flesh and Blood, and with Carnal Weapons, and men's Armor, and not
the Armor of God. And again, the Apostle says, Take unto you the whole Armor
of God, that you may be able to stand in the Evil day; having done, and having
overcome all, to stand, having your Loins girt with Truth. So this is a
heavenly Girdle, not natural; and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness,
this is a Spiritual Breast Plate, not Natural, having your Feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, which is the Power of God, over the Devil,
and before he was; to be shod thus, is not with outward shoes, but with that
which will never wax old nor wear out; and above all, take the shield of Faith,
that Faith which Christ is the Author and Finisher of, wherewith ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked; this Shield of Faith is Holy,
Divine and Precious, and is the Victory; which Spiritual Faith, God and Christ
is the Author of, and not Men: And take unto you the Holmet of Salvation and
the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Phil. 6. This Helmet of
Salvation is Spiritual, and the Sword is Spiritual; so not a natural Sword, or
a natural Helmet; and the Word of God is called a Hammer, a Fire, and a Sword,
to hammer down, and cut down, and burn up that which has made a Separation
betwixt man and God; and it is called the Word of Reconciliation, that
reconciles to God. So the true Church and Ministers of Christ are to prove
themselves by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the
holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by
the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right hand and on the Left, 2 Cor. 6. For
though the Church of Christ do walk in the Flesh, yet the Apostle says, We do
not War after the Flesh; for the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but
Mighty through God, to the plucking down of Strongholds (to wit, of Satan)
casting down Imaginations, and every High thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought, to the Obedience
of Chirst, having in readiness to revenge all Disobedience. This is with
Spiritual Weapons, not Carnal, 2 Cor. 10. And the Apostle says to the Romans,
The night is far spent, and the day is at hand, let us cast off therefore the
Works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light: This Armor of Light is not
Natural, but Divine and Spiritual, to all the Children of the Light, and of the
day; this Armor of Light is before Darkness was and the Devil the Power of it,
and he the Power of Darkness cannot pearce through this Armor of Light; and
this Armor of Light is above all natural and carnal Armor; and all the
Children of the Light, that walk in this Light, and this Armor, they walk
honestly, and decently, as in the day; for they that walk in Rioting,
Drunhenness, Chambering and Wantonness, make provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof; such are naked concerning this Armor of Light, and
though they may make profession of Christ, they do not put him on as in, Romans
13.

And Christ says, When a strong man armed keeps his House, his Goods are at
peace, but when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he
takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and spoils his Goods, etc. Is
not Christ stronger than the Devil that has kept the House of the hearts of
People? And does not he disarm him and spoil his Goods? And is not Christ's
Weapon Spiritual? And the Lord says to Zachariah, Not by might nor by power
(to wit of men) but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts; Zach. 4. The Lord
says, Comfort ye my People, spoke ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and Cry unto
her that her warfare is accomplished, that her Iniquity is pardoned, etc. Is
not this Jerusalem Gods People, whose Iniquity Christ pardons, and warfare is
accomplished, Isa. 40. And again Isaiah says, Isa. 2. and Micah 4. (spaking of
Christ) He shall judge amongst the Nations, and shall rebuke many People, and
they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more, but they shall sit every man under his Vine, and under
his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid, for the Mouth of the Lord of
Hosts has spaken it: Is not this Vine Christ? And are not these the days of
his Gospel of Peace?

And David says, Come, behold the Works of the Lord, what desolation he makes
in the Earth, he makes Wars to cease unto the ends of the Earth, he breaks the
Bow and cuts the Spear in sunder, he burns the Chariots in fire, Psalm. 46. The
Lord rebukes the company of Spear-men, the Multitude of the Bulls, with the
Calves of the People, till every one submit himself (to wit) to the Lord who
scatters the People that delight in War: And are not these the days of Christ
in the New Testament, who ascended on high and led Captivity captive, and gave
Gifts unto men that the Lord God might dwell amongst them, Psalm. 68. and Ephesians.
4.8. where the Apostles shows the fulfilling of it; and the Apostle James
says, in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ, From whence comes Wars
and Fightings amongst you? Come they not even of your Lusts, that war in your
Members, (Mark, in your Members) James 4. So here is a War in your Members, the
ground of it is from your Lusts, before the Wars and Fightings were outwardly
amongst People, which Wars and Fightings without, comes from the Lusts of the
Members within. And the Apostle says to the Hebrews in the 11th chapter, who
by Faith subdued Kingdoms, stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched the Violence of
Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword; this was the Shield of Faith, a stronger
weapon than outward Swords, and is a stronger Weapon than Fire, and can quench
the Violence of it, that stopped the Mouths of Lions; this is beyond Carnal
Weapons, which Fire and Lions may overcome. And the Apostle exhorts Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus,
and endure hardship, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. But Timothy did not
War with Flesh and Blood, with Carnal Weapons, as he was as a soldier of
Christ, but with Christ's heavenly Arms and Armor; for as the Apostle Peter
says, in his general Epistle to the Church, For as much then as Christ has
suffered for us in the Flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind, (to
wit, of Christ) for he that has suffered in the Flesh, has ceased from sin
that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the Flesh to the Lusts of
men, but to the Will of God: for the time past of our Life, may suffice to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles or Nations. And the Apostle says to the
Romans, chap. 6. Yield not your Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness unto
Sin, but yield your Members unto God, as those that are alive from the dead,
and your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God. So its clear, they
that yield their Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness unto sin, are not
alive unto God; and the two Witnesses that had power to smite the Earth as
often as they would, do you think that they did it with carnal Weapons? And
there was War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and
the Dragon fought against his Angels, and the Dragon prevailed not, neither was
there any more place found in Heaven for him, but he and his Angels, were cast
out into the Earth, Rev. 12. Now the holy Angels of God are Spirits, so then
they had Spiritual Weapons, and not carral Swords, Muskets, Pikes, and Pistols,
etc. to sight with the Dragon. And John said, I saw Heaven open, and behold, a
white Horse, and he that sat upon him, was called Faithful and true, and in
Righteousness he does Judge, and make War, etc. and he was clothed with a
Vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name was called, the Word of God, and the Armies
which were in Heaven followed him, upon White Horses, clothed in fine Linen,
white and clean; and out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword, that with it he
should smite the Nations, and he shall Rule them with a Rod of Iron, etc. And
the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered together to
make War against him that sat on the Horse, and his Army, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; but the Beast was taken, and the false Prophet, etc.
and them that had received the Mark of the Beast, and had worshipped his Image,
these both were cast alive into the Lake of fire, burning with brimstone, and
the Remnant were slain with the Sword of him that sat upon the White Horse,
which Sword proceeded out of his Mouth, Rev. 19. And were these, think you,
carnal Weapons, that Christ and his Followers made War with, against the Beast
and the false Prophet, and they that worshipped the Beast and his Image, and
received his Mark, and took them, and overcame them, and cast the Beast and the
false Prophet in the Lake that burns with Brimstone? And was that an outward
carnal Sword that went out of his Mouth, by which he slew the Beasts
worshippers, that had his Marks, and Image? Do you think that Christ or his
Army, that sat on White Horses, and followed him, which were in Heaven, that
they had outward Swords, and Pistels, and Pikes, and Muskets, and Guns, and
Cannons, by which they overcome the Beast and the false Prophet? No; it is
said, that Christ's Army was clothed with fine Linen; and Christ's Vesture was
dipped in Blood, which Army followed him in Heaven. Nebuchadnezar lift up his
Eyes to Heaven and blessed the most High, and said, all the Inhabitants of the
Earth are reputed as nothing, and the Lord does according to his will, in the
Armies of Heaven, and amongst the Inhabitants of Earth, and none can stay his
hand, nor say unto him, What do thou? Here you may see Nebuchadnezar was made
to confess the great God who saw his Armies in Heaven, who abased his Pride.
And Jesus said unto Pilate, My Kingdom is not of this World, if my Kingdom were
of this World, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence (that is, of this World) John
18.36. Here you may see a distinction betwixt the New Covenant, and the Old,
and the Kingdom of Christ and the Kingdoms of this World, and their Arms and
Armor.

G. F.

THe Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, My Brethren, said he, be strong in the
Lord, and in the Power of his Might; put on the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil; for we wrestle not against
Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, Powers, and Rulers of Darkness of
this World, and against spiritual wickedness in high places: Wherefore take
unto you the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to stand in the Evil
day, and having done all, or overcome all, to stand. Therefore having your
Loins girded about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness,
and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, above all,
taking the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the siery
Darts of the wicked; and take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God; and praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit [Mark, in the spirit, they are to pray] watching
thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all the Saints. Is not
this generally to be practiced now by all true Christians, as it was in the
Apostles days? And the Apostle says to the Romans, The night is far spent,
the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of Darkness, and let us
put on the Armor of Light. So Light, you see, is your Armor, which will
defend you against Darkness, and the Prince of the Power of it, and their
Weapons, and all such that hate the Light of Christ, and are against it, are
naked, and are without the Light, which is the true Armor; and you may see
what the Saints did do and what Victory they had with the shield of Faith, in
Heb. 11.

And the Apostle said, He was set for the defense of the Gospel, which is the
Power of God, and that was in the Shield of Faith.

And David said, Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me, my Glory, and the Lifter up
of my Head; So he is now to all his People. And further, Thou have given me the
shield of thy salvation, and thy Right Hand has holden me up, and thy
gentleness has made me great. All must feel this Shield of Salvation from God,
and if they be held up, it must be by his Right Hand. And again, David says,
The Lord is my strength and my Shield, my Heart trusts in him, and I am
helped; therefore my hreat greatly rejoices; and with my Tongue will I praise
him. This was not an outward Shield, but the Lord was his strength and his
Shield; So God is to all his People in all their Troubles.

And David said, The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliv^^e^, ^y
God, my strength, in whom I will trust my Buckler, and the Horn of my
Salvation, my High Tower (Mark) a Rock, Fortress, Deliverer, Strength, Horn of
Salvation, High Tower, the Lord God was so to David, and is so to all his
People; God's Way is perfect, the Word of the Lord is tried, and endures
forever, and God is a Buckler to all those that trust in him. And again, says
David, The Eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, etc. to deliver their
Souls from Death, and to keep them alive from Famine. And David said, plead my
Cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me; fight against them that fight
against me, take hold of Shield and Buckler, and stand up for my help, etc. and
stop the way against them that persecute me, and say unto my Soul, I am thy
Salvation. Here David looked unto the Lord his Shield and Buckler, and his help,
to plead his Cause against them that strove and fought against him; and so
should all Gods People. And David says, I will Sing of thy Power; yea, I will
Sing a loud of thy Mercy; for thou have been my Defense, and Refuge in the day
of my Trouble. And therefore let all Gods People now know the Lord to be their
Defense, and Refuge in time of Trouble. And David said, The Lord is only my
Rock and my Salvation, he is my Defense, I shall not be greatly moved; so he is
to all his People.

David says, Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, they grow from
strength, every one of them in Sion appear before God; Behold, O God, our
Shield, look upon the Face of thine anointed; for the Lord God is a Son, and a
Shield, and the Lord will give Grace, and Glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly; he shall cover thee with his Feathers,
thou shall not be afraid of the Terror by night, nor for the Pestilence that
walks in Darkness, nor for the Destruction that wastes at the noon day, and
under the Lords Wings thou shall trust, his Truth shall be thy Shield, and
Buckler, so no outward Shield or Buckler, but the Lord is my Defense, and the
Rock of my refuge; So he is of all Gods People, O! Ye that fear the Lord, trust
in the Lord, he is their help, etc. their Shield that trust in him; for thou
art my hiding place, and my Shield; my hope is in thy Word; depart from me, ye
Evil Doers, for I will keep the Commands of my God, (Here is the bold
confidence and steadfastness of all Gods People) Blessed be the Lord, my
Strength, my Goodness, my Fortress, my High-Tower, and my Deliverer, and my
Shield, and he in whom I trust, etc. Here you may see the Lord was all to
David, who said, I know the Lord will maintain the cause of the Afflicted, and
the Right of the Poor, etc.

Therefore as the Apostle says to the Thessalonians, let us who are of the
day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate of Faith, and Love, and for a Helmet,
the Hope of Salvation: This was the Children of Lights heavenly Armor, and
Defense, which they had from God, and Christ, and not out of Smiths shops; for
such will not defend them from the Devil.

G. F.

Concerning Cain.
ANd the Lord God said unto Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? if thou do not well, sin lies at thy Door, and unto thee shall be
his desire, etc.

So here you may see, it is not only saying or talking well, but acting, and
doing well, if they be accepted with the Lord God; for if ye talk and say never
so well, and if ye do not do well, but evil, sin lies at the Door of your
Hearts, and gets into your Hearts, (if ye do evil) and then makes you
Persecutors and Murderers, like Cain; and so not doing well, ye do not rule
over sin, but sin gets into you, and rules over you, and the Lord God has no
respect to such, nor their Offerings, nor Sacrifices, nor fair Speeches, nor
good Words, that do not well: But if ye do well, then the Lord God will accept
you, as you may see in, Genesis 4. And Christ says, Blessed is that faithful
Servant, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find so doing (to wit, doing the
will of God.) Christ said to his Disciples, when ye shall have done all those
things, which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable Servants, we have
done that which was but our duty to do, Luke 17, So here you may see, that
which would beast of his doings is to be kept down, and keptout, for it is
every Servant of Gods duty to do his will.

And the Jews said unto Pilate, Crucify him, Crucify him (to wit, Christ) and
Pilate said three times over, What Evil has he done? Luke 23. But the Jews
that did evil, could not accuse him of any evil that he had done, for Ch^^^^ to
bruise the Serpents head, and destroy the Devil and hi^ Works, and to finish
Transgression, and to make an end of Sin, and to bring ever lasting
Righteousness into the Hearts of his People. And Peter said, Of a Truth, I
perceive that God is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, he that
fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him. So here you may
see, it is not he that talks of Righteousness out of the fear of God, and
works not Righteousness, is accepted with the Righteous God, as in Acts
10.35. For Christ says, Every one that does evil hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved.

Now here you may see, who are them that hate the Light of Christ, who is the
Life in him, who enlightens every man that comes into the World, every one that
does evil hates the saving heavenly Light of Christ, which they should believe
in, and become Children of the Light; and they that do evil and hate the Light,
neither come to the Light, lest their Deeds should be reproved; all these Doers
of Evil, and Haters of the Light of Christ, and will not come to it, lest their
evil deeds should be reproved, all such God nor Christ does not accept their
Offerings nor Sacrifices; and such that hate the Light of Christ, hate Christ,
though they may preach him, and profess him in words; yet they persecute, and
hate the Believers in the Light of Christ, which are the Children of the Light,
and walk in the Light, and are the Children of the day of Christ.

And again, Christ says, He that does Truth comes to the Light, that his deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. So it is not he that only
talks of Truth, but [Mark] he that does Truth, comes to the heavenly and
spiritual Light of Christ, that with his spiritual Light he may see his deeds,
that they are wrought in God; this is a blessed work, and a blessed sight to
see, and a happy comfort, and a satisfaction to every one, and such God does
accept, and respect their Offering; and all the Children of the Lord are to be
tender one to another; for Christ says, If I then, your Lord and Master, have
washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet; for I have given you
an Example, that ye should do as I have done unto you, as in John 13. And this
is a Practice of Humility, in condescending, in the tender Light of Christ, one
to another.

And John in his general Epistle, says, Little Children, let no man deceive
you, he that does Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he is Righteous;
whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, etc. So here you may see, it
is not the Puft-up Boasters and Talkers of Righteousness, but them that do it,
are of God. And was it not the Reason that Cain slew his Brother, because his
works were Evil, and Abel's were Righteous? And is it not the cause now of
Prisoning and Persecuting, both with Tongue and Hand, because their Works are
Evil, and of them that did and does persecute the Righteous now, but let them
not be weary in well-doing; for in due season they shall reap, if they faint
not; for they that do evil, sow to the flesh, and shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that is in the Spirit of God, sows to the Spirit, and shall
of the Spirit reap Life Eternal; And whatsoever good thing any man does, the
same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free; for there is no
respect of Persons with God, for he does accept all that are the Servants of
Christ, and do the Will of God from their Hearts; but he that does wrong,
receives for the wrong which he has done; for God is no respecter of Persons,
for he does render to every man according to his deeds; but them who by
patience continue in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality,
eternal Life, but unto them that are Contentious, and do not obey the Truth,
but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation, Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon
every Soul of man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile;
but Glory, Honor and Peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile; for there is no respect of Persons with God. And as
Christ says, Every good Tree brings forth good Fruit, and a corrupt Tree
brings forth evil Fruit. So by their fruits Trees are known; for it is not
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. So here you may see, that
it is not only the Talkers of God and Christ, that enter into the Kingdom of
God, but every one that hears the Sayings of Christ, and does them, is likened
to a Wise man, which built his House upon a Rock, that neither the Rain, Floods
nor Wind shall beat it down, because it is founded upon a Rock; but every one
that hears the sayings of Christ, and does them not, is likned to a foolish man
which built his House upon the Sand, and the Rain, and the Floods, and the
Winds beat upon his House, and it falls, and great is the fall of it. These are
them that do not the Will of God, these are the Sayers, and not Doers, these
are them that walk not in the Light, nor Grace, nor Truth, nor Spirit, nor
Gospel of Christ; these are the Hearers of the Word, but not Doers of the Word,
which deceive their own selves, and are likned to a man that beholds his
natural face in a Glass, and straight way forgets what manner of man he was;
but that man which is the doer of the Work, and the Word of God, is blessed in
his deed; to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin: And
Christ said, The Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, they say, and do not (that is)
they said Moses and the Prophets words, but they did not Moses and the Prophets
words; and now the Christians they have Christ's and the Apostles words, and say
them often over, but the same Woe will be to them (that was against the
Pharisees) that do them not: And Christ says, But all their works they do, for
to be seen of men; but such Works and Doers are not accepted with God and
Christ; for he cries, Woe against such Workers; and Christ commanded them that
improved their Talents, and said unto them, Well done, good and faithful
Servants, that he had been faithful in a few things, he would make them Ruler
over many things; and said, Enter into the Joy of the Lord So the Wicked go
into Everlasting Punishment and the Righteous into Life Eternal. And therefore
the Saints are to take unto them the whole Armor of God, that they may be able
to stand in the evil Day, and having done all, to stand in his Armor; for
every sin that a man does, is without his Body, and every one shall receive
according to the things done in his Body. So here you may see, he must have
Truth's judgment and sentence upon the sins done out of the body, and upon the
sins done in the Body, by Thoughts and Imaginations, before they be acted
outwardly. So every one shall receive a Reward and Judgment according to his
Works, whethey be good or evil; and therefore all the Saints have need of
Patience to exercise that Gift, that after they have done the will of God, they
might inherit his Promise of eternal Life; for so is the Will of God, that with
well-doing ye may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish men. So it is not
only well talking, but well doing; for it is said, That God hears not Sinners;
for they that go into sin, and do evil, go out of Gods spirit of Grace and
savor; but if any man be a Worshipper of God in his spirit and truth, and does
his Will, him he hears in his Spirit; and therefore are all Gods Children
exhorted to walk in the Faith, and by the Faith, which Christ is the Author of,
to walk in the Light of Christ, in which they have fellowship one with another;
and to walk in the Spirit of God, by which they are circumcised and baptized,
in which they have fellowship, and to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and to walk
in him. So it is not only Talkers of the Light, and Spirit, and Faith, and of
the Will of God and Christ, and his Will and his Doctrine, but them that walk
in his Will and do his Will, etc. that are accepted, and enter into his Kingdom
that he has prepared for them.

G. F.

Uniformity and Conformity Proclaimed to the whole World, in the Name of the
Eternal GOD, and his Son Christ Jesus.
GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; for as in Adam
all dyed, so in Christ shall all be made alive: And Christ by the Grace of God
has tasted Death for every man, and is a Propitiation for the sins of the
whole World, the one Mediator betwixt God and Man, through Death destroys
Death, and the Devil, the power of Death; for sin brought Death, and the Devil,
who abode not in the Truth, in whom there is no Truth, he is the Power of
Death; and Christ, who is the Truth and the Life, makes an end of sin, that
brought Death, and destroys Death and the Devil, the Power of Death; for the
Son of God was manifest that he might destroy the Works of the Devil, and
finish Transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to make a Reconciliation
for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness into Man and Woman.
Here is the work of the Son of God, who bruises the Serpents Head, breaks his
Power, and destroys the Destroyer, he is the Savior, called the seed of the
Woman, in which Seed, Christ, all Nations are blessed, which bruises the
Serpents head, which has brought man into the Curse and Sin, Darkness and
Corruption, etc. but in this seed, Christ, that bruises the serpents head, and
destroys his works, are all Nations blessed, and all in aniformity, unity and
fellowship one with another, and with the Son and the Father. And therefore all
must come into this eed, Christ Jesus, if they come into the beavenly unity and
uniformity, and that ye may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and
the fellowship of the suffering of Christ, being made conformable unto his
death, who by the Grace of God tasted Death for every man; for in Adam all
dyed. Now Christ by the grace of God having tasted death for every man, that
every man may be conformable unto his death: Here is a conformity unto the
Death of Christ; for ye must all dye with him before ye live with him, and ye
must all suffer with him, if ye reign with him; and therefore all Men and Women
in the whole world, of what Religion or Opinion soever ye be of, in old Adam ye
all dyed, and are dead, and Christ by the grace of God has tasted Death for
you all, and by Christ ye are all made alive; and therefore ye must all be made
conformable to Christ's death, and that is the Conformity ye are all to press
after, and to exhort one another to be conformable to the death of Christ, and
to dye with him, if ye do intend to live with him, and to suffer with him, and
to come into the fellowship of his Sufferings, if ye reign with Christ, or do
intend to reign with him, yea, all that do profess Christ the Son of God, they
ought to be conformed to the Image of the Son of God; and if that ye be not
conformed to the Image of God, who destroys the Devil and his Works, your
outward profession will stand ye in no more stead than the Jews Profession
without Life, but all that are conformable to the Image of the Son of God, in
his Image they are in uniformity, and in unity, Hallelujah, praising the Lord.

And the Apostle says to the Saints, Be not conformed to this World, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of the Mind, etc. to the Image of the Son of God,
and being made conformable unto his Death, Phil. 3.10. Romans 8.29. and 12. and
2. And now, all People, if ye be not conformable to the death of Christ, that
has tasted Death for you all, then you are yet alive in your sin; and if ye be
not conformed to the Image of the Son of God, who bruises the serpents head,
and destroys the Devil and his Works, what Image then are ye conformable to?
all your Profession, without ye be conformed to the Image of the Son of God, is
nothing; which who do so conform, are in the heavenly unity and conformity, and
Christ, who tasted Death for every man (for all dyed in Adam) he enlightens
every man that comes into the world, with his heavenly Light, which is the Life
in him, the Word by whom all things were made. Now every man and woman being
turned to the Light, which is the Life in Christ, and believing in it, and
walking in it, is the means by which they may be made conformable to the Image
of the Son of God, and so come into Unity, and Conformity, and Fellowship one
with another, and with the Father and the Son.

And the Grace of God which brings salvation, has appeared unto all men, which
Grace taught the Church of Christ, which Grace and Truth came by Jesus; now, I
say, this Grace taught the Church of Christ to live Godly, Righteously, and to
deny Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, and to live soberly in this World. Now if
all People will be conformed to the Image of the Son of God, it must be through
this grace that comes from the Son of God; and this grace is in their hearts,
to settle them, and stablish them, which teaches them to deny that which is
ungodly and unrighteous, and to receive and cleave to that which is godly and
righteous.

And so, here is Gods Love and favor to all men, who dyed in Adam, that his
grace and favor should appear unto all men, to teach them and bring their
Salvation, that they may be made conformable to Christ's death, who has tasted
death for them all, and dye and live with him, and suffer and reign with him,
and so be conformable to the Image of the son of God; and here is a heavenly
divine and spiritual Conformity and Uniformity.

And Joel says, by Prophecy, It shall come to pass in the last days, I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: Now these last days are the days of the New
Covenant and New Testament, and the days of the Gospel of Salvation, preached to
every Creature, man and woman, that all might be obedient and conformable to
the Power of God, the Gospel of Salvation; and so, as all are conformable to
this glorious Gospel of Christ, they will be conformed to the Image of the Son
of God, and so into a glorious peaceable uniformity and conformity, fellowship
and unity in the Gospel, the Power of God, which brings Life and Immortality to
light; and in this Power of God they will see over the Power of the Devil, and
before he was that has darkened them. -- And likewise, God who pours out of
his Spirit upon all flesh, both men and women, that all with the spirit of God
might mortify the deeds of the flesh, and in the spirit of God live, and that
all with the spirit of God might be circumcised, and put off the body of Death,
and fins of the flesh, that is come into them by transgression, and disobeying
of God, so that all in the spirit may be conformable to the Image of the Son of
God, and be in unity and a spiritual fellowship and uniformity, through the
spiritual conformity; for all the Sons and Daughters of God are led by the
spirit of God; and here is a spiritual conformity, and a heavenly uniformity
amongst the Sons and Daughters of God; and God having poured out of his spirit
upon all flesh, that is, all men and women, that all men and women might be
conformable to this holy pure spirit of God, which spirit of God will baptize
them, if they do not quench, vex, grieve and rebel against it, or err from it,
I say, it will baptize them all into one body, which Christ, the Lord from
Heaven is the head of; and so with this holy spirit that baptizes into one
body, are all made to drink into one spirit. Here is a spiritual conformity,
and a heavenly uniformity and concord, where there is no discord; for the
Apostle says, There is is one Lord, one Baptism, one Faith, etc. and the work
of the Ministry was to bring People into the unity of this Faith, and the
knowledge of the Son of God, who was the Author and Finisher of this precious
holy and divine Faith, in which Faith they had victory (over that which is
unholy) and access to God, in which Faith they pleased him, having victory over
that which displeased him; and this is called the Faith of Gods Elect, in which
they had all unity, and they were called, The Household of Faith, and through
this Faith did receive the Righteousness of Christ, through which Faith they
were made conformable to Christ's death, and conformable to the Image of the son
of God, through the Righteousness of Faith, which was before, and beyond, and
above the Righteousness of Man, and the Righteousness of the Law; and in the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Image of the son of God, here is the Saints
holy and righteous Uniformity, and spiritual and heavenly Unity and Fellowship.

And David says, Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell
together in unity. Now the unity and fellowship is in the Light, Grace and
Truth, and Spirit, and the Gospel, the Power of God, and the Faith which Jesus
Christ is the Author and Finisher of; and therefore all must be conformable to
the Light, Grace and Truth that comes by Jesus Christ, and to the Spirit of
God, that God pours upon them, and to the Gospel of salvation, and to the Faith
that Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of, if ever ye do come into
Uniformity, Unity and Fellowship in the Light, in the Truth, in the Gospel, in
the Faith, in the Image of the Son of God, one with another, and with the
Father and the Son, that the Saints are and were in, in the Apostles days,
glory and honor to the Lord over all sorever, who is teaching his People by
his Son, who bruises the Serpents head, that false Teacher, and now God is the
Teacher of his People by his Son, and I say was the Teacher of Adam and Eve in
Paradise before they fell, who is God all-sufficient, and a sufficient Teacher.

G. F.

The Authority of the Church of Christ.
THe Apostle says to the Corinthians, I told you before, and foretell you, as
if I were present, now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all
others, if I come I will not spare, 2 Cor. 13.2.

Here the Apostle used his Authority in the Power and Spirit of Christ, who
would not spare Sin and Sinners.

And John said, That I wrote unto the Church, but Diotr^phes who loves to have
the pre-eminence amongst them, received us not; wherefore if I come, I will
remember his Deeds, which he does prate against us with malicious Words. And so
John thought of this Diotrephes in the Power of God, and had Authority in his
Power to judge such Prating, puft-up Diotrephes's, and their malicious Words;
and so has the Church of Christ in his Power to judge such now, as in 2 John
v. 10. And therefore my Beloved, follow not that which is Evil, but that which
is Good, for he that does good, is of God, and he that does evil, has not seen
God. Here is the true Judgment of a true Watchman in the Power and Spirit of
Christ; as many as receive Christ, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of
God, which were born not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the
will of Man, but of God; these had Power from Christ to admonish, reprove, and
rebuke such as went out from the Will of God, into Sin and Evil; and the
Apostle said, Though I should boast some what more of our Authority, which the
Lord has given us for Edification, and not for your Destruction.

So here the Apostles had Authority, which the Lord had given them, for the
Edification of the Church, to keep them out of Destruction, 2 Cor. 10.

And the Apostle said to the Church of Corinth, I fear lest when I come I shall
not find you as I would, and yet I shall be found unto you such as ye wo^l^
not, lest there be Debates, Envying, Wrath, Strifes, etc. and lest when I come
again, my God will humble me amongst you, and I should bewail many which have
sinned already, and have not repented of your Uncleanness, Fornication and
Lasciviousness, which you have committed: I write these things being absent,
lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the Power which the
Lord has given me to Edification, and not to Destruction. Here you see the
Authority and Power from the Lord the Apostles had to judge such as these, for
the Edification of them that profess Christianity, not for their Destruction. 2
Cor. 11.12. And the Apostle faith, For to this end also did I write, that I
might know the truth of you, whether ye be obedient in all things, to whom ye
forgave any thing, I forgave it for your sakes in the Person of Christ. So here
you may see where there was an Obedience to the Truth, there was a Forgiveness
in Christ. 2 Cor. 2. And the Apostle says, For verily as absent in Body, but
present in the Spirit, I have judged already, as though I was present,
concerning him that has done this Deed in the Name of the Lord Jesus, when you
are gathered together, and my Spirit with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, etc. Know ye
not, a little Leaven leavens the whole lump; purge out therefore the old
Leaven, that ye may be a new lump, 1 Cor. 5. Here you see the Apostle and the
Church of Christ had Power and Authority from Christ to cast out, and to purge
out that which is Evil, or the old Leaven, out of the Church of Christ, that
they may be a new lump; for the Apostle said, He would shortly come to the
Church of the Corinthians, if the Lord will, and I will not know the Speech of
them which are puffed up, but the Power (to wit) of the Speech, for the Kingdom
of God is not in Word, but in Power. So here the Apostle in his Authority in
the Power of Christ, would know the Power of Christ in others, and would have
the Church of Christ to do the same; for the Apostle says, Do ye not know that
the Saints shall judge the World. So the sanctified, which are made holy, judge
the unholy World. And again, Know ye not that ye shall judge Angels: Angels are
Spirits, they that keep their habitation in the Truth, and are in the Spirit of
Christ, do judge the Angels, and Spirits that are ^a^^^ from the Truth, and
their Habitation in the Truth; yea, I say the Devil and his Angels, in whom is
no Truth, they that walk in the Truth, and live in the Power and Spirit of
Jesus do judge such, and therefore it was a shame to the Church of Christ, who
had this Power to judge small things, to go to Law one with another before the
u^b^lieving World, whom they had Power to judge, and not to set up the least in
the Church to judge of outward things pertaining to this Life, seeing they had
the Power to judge of greater matters.

So here you may see the Church of Christ has Power from Christ to judge the
Angels, to judge the World, and to judge in outward matters of things that
pertain to this Life, 1 Cor. 6.

Concerning Exhortation and Admonition.
COncerning Exhortation, Judas and Silas, etc. exhorted the Brethren with many
Words, and comforted them, Acts 15. And the Apostle confirmed the Souls of the
Disciples, and exhorted them to continue in the Faith, and that we must through
many Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God; when he had ordained them
Elders in every Church, etc. they commended them to the Lord, whom they
believed, Acts 14. So you may see here was Elders ordained in every Church; and
the aged Women are commended as well as the Men, as in Titus 2. And Barnabas
exhorted the Church of Antioch, yea, he exhorted them all that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11.

And the Brethren wrote, exhorting to receive Apollos, who when he was come
into Achia helped them much, who had believed through Grace. Here you may see
it was the practice of the Church of Christ of exhorting, and did help them
which believed through Grace, Acts 18. And you may see in Acts 20. how the
Apostle had given the Church of Macedonia much Exhortation, and this
Exhortation was in the Spirit and Power of Christ; for Christ gave to his
Disciples Power and Authority over all Devils, etc. Luke 9. And the Apostles
exhorted the Thessalonians to exhort, 2 These. 3. and in These. 4.1. and said, We
beseech you Brethren, and exhort you by the Name of the Lord Jesus, that as you
have received of us, how ye ought to walk and please God: And said, Moreover,
ye know how that we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you, etc.
that ye walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory, 1
These. 2. wherefore comfort your selves together, and exhort and edify one
another, even as ye also do; and we exhort you Brethren, warn them that are
Unruly, and comfort the Feeble-minded, and support the Weak, and be patient
toward all Men. Here you may see the Church has Authority, both to support,
and comfort, and exhort, and warn the Unruly, 1 These. 5. And you may see how
the Apostles did command and exhort such as walk disorderly, in 2 These 3. And
the Apostle did exhort, saying, Save your selves from this untoward Generation,
Acts 20.40. And the Apostle exhorted the Mariners that were in the Ship, To be
of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of any man's Life; I believe in God,
and that it shall be even as it was told me (to wit) by the Lord, Acts 27. And
the Apostle says to Timothy, Give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine; neglect not the Gift that is in thee; and bad Timothy, Teach and
Exhort, and to be an Example to the Believers in Word, Conversation, Faith,
Charity and Purity, 1 Timothy 2.4, 6. And the Apostle exhorts Timothy, Preach the
Word in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
Long-suffering and Doctrine; the time will come when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but turn their Ears away from the Truth, and heap to themselves
Teachers, having itching Ears. And therefore ye see the Churches authority, to
Exhort, Rebuke and Reprove such, 2 Timothy 4. But the Apostle says to Timothy,
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and the elder Women as
Mothers, etc. 1 Timothy 5. And the Apostle says to Titus, in Chap. 2. Exhort,
rebuke with all Authority, and exhort Servants to be obedient to their own
Masters, etc. that they may adorn the Doctrine of God in all things. And the
Apostle exhorted Titus, To set in order the things that are wanting in Creet,
and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee: And they were to be
such as were able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince Gainsayers;
and the Apostle exhorted Titus, To rebuke sharply the Unruly, and vain Talkers
and Deceivers, Tit. 1. And Titus received the Apostles Exhortation, when they
sent him to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8. And the Apostle said, A man that is a
Heretic after the first and second Admonition, reject.

And the Apostle says, Let us consider one another, to provoke one another
unto good Works, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see
the Day approach (to wit) of Christ Jesus, Heb 10 24, 25. And the Apostle said,
^eseech you Brethren, suffer ye the Word of Exhortation, etc. Heb. 13. And the
Apostle says to the Colosians, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in
all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, etc. Col. 3. So here you may
see the Church of Christ, from his Word dwelling in them, were able to teach
and admonish one another from the Word of Wisdom in them. So it seems then they
did not set a Priest over, them that he might be always teaching of them, and
they might be always paying of them. And the Apostle says to the Romans, Romans
15.14. I my self also am persuaded of you my Brethren, that ye are full of
Goodness, and filled with all Knowledge, able also to Admonish one another. So
here you may see the Church of the Romans were able to admonish one another
then, without setting up of Colleges to make Priests to admonish them; and
therefore as the Apostle says to the Philippians, in Chap. 2. That ye may be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
Crocked Generation, among whom ye shine as Lights in the World, holding forth
the Word of Life: And the Apostle says, I have sent Tythicus unto you, the
Ephesians, that he might know your Affairs, and he might Comfort your Hearts,
Ephesians. 6. Here the Churches knew, and made known the Affairs one of another in
the Lord. And Jude exhorted the Church in his general Epistle, That they should
earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints or
sanctified Ones, which Faith Christ is the author and finisher of. And now, had
all Christendom contended for this Faith or Belief, then they would not have
made so many Faiths or Beliefs to kill and destroy one another about, which had
they kept in Christ's saving Faith, which saves and does not destroy, and with
that Shield of Faith ye do not War with Flesh and Blood to destroy it. And the
Lord sent Jeremiah to admonish the Children of Israel, that they should not go
into Egypt, but they disobeyed the Word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, and went
into Egypt; therefore Jeremiah told them, They should dye in the Land of Egypt,
and should be consumed, Jer. 42.43, 44. Here you may see what became of them
that disobeyed the admonishment of the Lord and his Prophet; and therefore
Solomon says, Better is a poor and a wise Child, then an old and soolish King,
who will no more be admonished, or knows not to be admonished, Eccles. 4. And
Solomon says, The words of the Wise are as Goards and as Nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies. etc. by these my Son be admonished, Eccles. 12. So it is
good for all to receive the Exhortations and Admonishments from the Power and
Spirit of Christ; and Christ bad John write unto the Church of Thyatira, and
that he had a few things against them, because they suffered Jezabel to teach,
etc. Rev. 2. And so you may see this Church came under Reproof, because they
did not make use of their Power and Authority, in the Spirit of Christ to judge
Jezabel's Spirit; and therefore the Church of Christ now is not to suffer
Jezabel's Spirit lest they come under the same Reproof, if they suffer that
Jezabel's Spirit to teach, now as then. And here you may see how that Christ
has given his Church Power and Authority in his holy Spirit to admonish,
exhort, judge, reprove and rebuke in his Power and Spirit.

G. F.

Concorning such as cry against Orders.
GOD is a God of Order, and not of Consusion; and the Apostle says to the
Church of Christ, Let all things be done decently, and in Order. [Mark, all
things in the Church of Christ.] So then there is nothing to be done
undecently, out of the Order of the peaceable Truth; for God is not the author
of Confusion, or Tumults, or Unquietness, but of Peace in all the Churches of
the Saints; and therefore if God be not the Author of such Confusion, Tumults
and Unquietness, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints; therefore then
confused, tumultuous, unquiet, undesent and disorderly Spirits, with the Power
and Spirit of God they must be admonished to the peaceable Spirit of God in
them, and with it judge out the contrary, else the Church of Christ, in its
power and peaceable spirit can have no unity with them, but with the spirit and
power of Christ, judge that undesent, confused, tumultuous, unquiet, disorderly
Spirit; for God, (as I said before) is a God of Order, but the Devil, which is
the Worlds God, has made the World like a Wilderness, which lies in
Wickedness; and this Devil or Satan, in whom there is no Truth, the power of
death, and darkness, and confusion, got into Adam and Eve by their
disobedience, and rules in the hearts of the Disobedient, where all tumults,
disquietness, confusion and disorders are; for who went and go into
disobedience from God, they went and are gone from his Image, from the
innocence and simplicity, and his power and spirit within, and so go out, and
from his Power, Spirit and Image (in which his holy Order is) and go out of
simplicity and innocence, into subtilty and craft; for the Devil, that abode
not in the Truth, and his followers, that disobey God and his Truth, which
follow the Devil, in whom there is no Truth, there is no order, but confusion.
Truth has an order for all things that God did make by Jesus Christ, upholds
all things by his Word and Power: So with his Word and Power he keeps all
things in their places, and in their order, in their times, and in their
seasons, the Summer and the Winter, the Night and the Day, the Sun, Moon and
the Stars, all things are kept in order by the Word of God and his Power, and
the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and the Sea, and the fullness
therein. So both the Earth and the Sea, and all things therein are kept in
their order by the Word and Power of God, by which they were made, by which
they are upheld: So all the works of the Lord praise him, and all men and women
that are in the Truth, which makes them free from him that abode not in the
Truth, in whom there is no Truth: So all Gods free People or Children, that are
made free indeed by the Truth, are in the order of the Truth, and in the order
of the Spirit of God, and in the order of the Gospel, and are in the order of
the Light, the Life in Christ, and are over the foul Spirit of Disorder, in the
Land of Death and Darkness; as the Scripture says, A Land of Darkness, as
Darkness it self, and of the shadow of Death, without any Order, [Mark] without
any Order, where the Light is as Darkness. This Spirit may cry out against
Orders, whose Habitation is Darkness, without any order; but as the Lord says,
Who offers up Praise, glorifies me, and he that orders his Conversation aright,
shall see the Salvation of God. Now here is a particular Order for every man
and woman to observe; for the steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and
he delight in his way, Psalm. 37. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent,
speaking of Christ, Thou art a Priest forever after the order of Melchizedeck,
Psalm. 110. Heb. 5. and Christ is not called after the order of Aaron, Heb. 7.
Here you may see, Melchizedeck the Priest was not made without an Order, and
Aaron's Priesthood was made by an order of God, according to his Rod's budding
in the Tabernacle; and Christ was not a Priest made without an Order, which is
after the order of Melchizedeck; and his Royal Priesthood, which offers up
spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God, are in his spiritual Order, and in the
Order of the spirit of God. And Isaiah says, chap. 9. Unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulders. So
here, Christ bears up his Government, and of the increase of his Government and
Peace, there shall be no end; for Christ orders it and establishes it, etc. So
Christ's Government is a peaceable Government, and there is no strife in it;
and Christ's Government is peaceable in his Power, Light and Spirit. And the
Apostle, after he had exhorted the Corinthians of many things, said, The rest I
will set in order when I come; and this was by the Power and Spirit of Christ.
And the Apostle says to Tit^^, I left thee in Creet that thou should set in
order the things that be wanting, and that thou ordain Elders in every City, as
I have appointed thee. And in the 2d chapt. ye may see how he speaks of the
Qualifications of the aged men and the aged women, that were to be teachers of
good things, and of the younger, etc. Now here you may see the Apostle was for
good Order, and established good Order in the Church of Christ, and encouraged
Titus to set in order, and ordain Elders in every City in Creet, which were
wanting, so that all the Church of Christ might be kept in the Order and Power
and Spirit of Christ. And the Apostle says to the Colosians, Though I be
absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your
Order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ; and as you therefore have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. Now here you may see, the
Church of Christ had a spiritual order, though the Apostle was absent in the
flesh from them, yet he was present with them in his spirit, with which spirit
he rejoiced, and beheld their spiritual order; so in this spiritual order must
all Gods People live, though they be absent in Body one from another, yet in
the spirit they may rejoice, beholding the spiritual order that is in the
Church of Christ, and the stedfastness of one another Faith in Christ Jesus,
who is the Author and Finisher of it.

G. F.

THE END.
Books lately published, and sold by Andrew Soul.
HUmphry Smith's Books collected into one Volumn. Price 2 s. 6 d. A handful
after the Harvest-man, or a Collection of the Epistles and Testimonies of
Richard Samble. William Penn's No Cross, No Crown. -- His Letter from
Pennsilvania, giving a brief description thereof. Concerning Meetings in
Houses, Streets, By ways, etc. By G. F. A brief Treatise of Religious Women's
Meetings. Truth's Vindication, or a gentle stroke to wipe off the foul
Aspersions and Misrepresentations cast upon the Quakers. By E. Bathurst. 8o.
Some Fruits brought forth through a tender Branch, named W. Sixmith. The good
Housewife made a Doctor: Or, a plain way of Natures own prescribing to prevent
and cure most Diseases incident to Men, Women and Children by Diet and
Kitchin-Physick only. 8o. bound 1 s.

