FOR THE KING AND HIS COUNCIL, THESE.
OH King CHARLES,
our desire is, that thou may live for ever in the fear of God, and thy
Council: we beseech thee and thy Council to read these following Lines, and in
tender Bowels and Compassion to read them over; for we write in love and
compassion to your souls, and for your good.

And this consider, we are above four hundred imprisoned in about this City, of
men and women from their Families, in close Holes and Prisons, besides in the
Country Gaols above ten hundred: And this we desire, that our Meetings may not
be broken up, but that all may come to a fair Trial, that our innocence may be
cleared.

Oh! how have you given us up, who are innocent, to be butchered, who wrong no
man, nor lift up a hand against any man, neither against you nor your
Soldiers! But oh how have you let all men, that have neither reason, nor
mercy, nor distinction upon us, which we are known all along, by all the Powers
before you, to have been trodden upon by them, as sheep for the slaughter; and
now we are bruised; stoned, prisoned, men and women knocked down, trodden down
in the streets, and dirt crumbled in our mouths; the simple, innocent and
harmless, that envies no man upon the earth, cannot pass up and down in the
streets: And its known, that our Principle is, and has been, not to revenge
our selves; and it is known, that them that you have numbered us amongst, who
never denied the bearing of Sword nor outward Weapons, but whose Principle is
to avenge themselves.

Oh that you should make no more distinction, and should have no more
consideration! For it is Sin, and Wickedness, and Filthiness that we have
always declared against, that brings people to Ryots, and Plots, and
tumultuous Meetings: Therefore, oh that the innocent should be numbered amongst
such, even we who seek the peace of all people, and the good of all men; and
the Lord God Almighty judge for us, betwixt us and them that we are numbered
amongst, and plead our Cause; for we are given up to all the wild people in thy
Dominions, that have neither mercy nor manhood, but lost the state of very
Nobility; for we have been a People known in all thy Dominions, and in all thy
Islands about it, and in many other Nations, to whom the Lord has made many to
go out of this Nation, where they have had their passage amongst the heads of
other Nations, and had liberty to preach the Gospel, so that many have through
the Gospel been turned to God, yea the very Heathens. And now that we should be
reckoned amongst a people whose Principle is to fight and swear upon occasion,
and to avenge themselves, which astonishes all them which know it; I believe
your own consciences tell you, that we are harmless, and would do you no harm
nor hurt, but wish your good: Therefore how can you now make us amends, and
clear your selves in the sight of God, for bringing guilt of the innocent upon
you, who are in God's hand, to whom we do commit our selves, our souls, and
cause, and innocence? and if we be thus wronged, the Lord is our Helper, and we
know we are in his hand; therefore can we give our backs to the smiter, and our
cheeks and hair to them that will smite, and pluck it off.

But oh how we are grieved for you, who has thus numbered us, and given us up
to be a prey to the Wicked, and are put in your Declaration to be amongst the
Plotters and Fighters, so that in all parts, without Mercy or Compassion of Men
or Women, young or old, with Swords and Pistols, Clubs and Staves, Dirt and
Stones, they fall upon us; yea before Thy Declaration came out against us; but
now the wicked rejoices.

But oh! our sorrow and grief is for your own selves, though we do suffer on
every hand; and many of our friends are made a prey upon by armed men, drawn
out of houses, and taken up in the streets to get money of them, under a
pretense as taking of them up in suspicion, and making thy Name for a cover;
and for money might many have their liberty: This is for the liberty of all bad
people, now to spoil, and to make havoc, and to make a gain upon the Innocent:
Oh that we should be thus sold! and oh that violent men without mercy, and
compassion, and distinction, you should put the Sword into their hands:
Therefore who should order the multitude, who should order the rude people, who
should give understanding to the placing of Soldiers, and distinguish unto
them what they should lay the Sword upon, but you that have the Authority?
Vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it; we cannot revenge our selves,
though by your Declaration we are published as amongst the Plotters, to all
Nations; but the Lord shall plead our Cause, to whom we commend our selves, and
to the hearts of all People our Innocence appears, who tries us: Therefore our
desire is, let all the Prisoners be brought forth to a Trial, out of their
Holes and Dungeons; And all that lie in the Commonwealths Name before you; For
there is a Testimony that we have been sufferers by the Powers before you; for
that is for your honor to do Justice, and let Justice be done, and let the
Offenders be punished, and let the Guiltless be set free. And now we must not
meet to Worship God, neither must we meet together to Edify one another,
according to the Apostles Doctrine, and stir up the gift in one another; they
that feared the Lord spoke often together, as you may read in Malachy; but this
is forbidden, we must not meet. And did not the Council forbid the Apostles to
speak any more in the Name of Jesus? and did not they preach up and down from
house to house? and had not they Meetings in several houses? And did not Paul
preach together two years in his own hired house, in the seat of the Emperor at
Rome.

And now if you suspect us, or have jealousy of us, which you need not, let
men come in all our Meetings without violence, and see our Order and manner of
our speaking in our Meetings. For it cannot be said that we have forfeited our
liberties which was given unto Tender Consciences, so as to be numbered amongst
them that are Fighters; Therefore take not away the Liberty that You have given
to Tender Consciences, that cannot defend themselves with outward Weapons: For
they that Fight and Kill, and rise up with Carnal Weapons, and plot and rise up
against Brethren to kill; they cannot be said to love Enemies. Therefore expose
us not to all Kingdoms upon the Earth, nor number us among the Plotters; when
many of us are to go into many Kingdoms and parts of the World, to declare the
Everlasting Truth and Gospel, which is no disgrace to thy Kingdom and Family,
that there should be a family of Prophets in it of the most High GOD: But if we
be numbered amongst Plotters and Fighters, who never were any Plotters, which
was never our Principle; yet in truth we are the Sufferers, and have suffered
all things for Christ the Elect sake, and do keep to Yea and Nay in all our
Communications; who desires that our lives only may preach to all people upon
the Earth. So this we desire, stop the violence of the rude people, this will
not be to Your disgrace: Stop the violence of the Soldiers, that we may not
be made a prey upon, nor abused, who cannot defend our selves against them; for
you have our Tribute and Assessments: And you know this, we might have our
liberty in Turkey, as both Christians and Jews have, and other parts of the
world: And let not our Meetings be broken up, but let us have our Meetings
peaceable in the fear of the Lord God, and edify one another to pray in the
Holy Ghost, and to build up one another in the holy Faith: For what good will
it do you to cast us into Prison, and to make your selves Examples to other
Nations and Kingdoms for so doing? Would you separate us from the love of God
which we have in Christ Jesus?

London, 16 day, 11 Month, 1660. From friends of Truth and Innocence, G. F. and
J. S.


Oh KING!
WE would have thee to do nothing against thy Prosperity and Nobility. Oh! Has
the like ever been done, as is done to us, (who are an innocent People, and Thy
Friends, and not Thy Enemies) among all the Princes in Christendom, to mingle
the Innocent among the Transgressors? Oh! thou should have sent for half a
dozen, or half a score of us, and have examined us, that Thou might have
been further satisfied concerning our Fidelity and Principles, and that would
not have been against Thy Nobility: But oh! how is the Innocent mangled by
merciless men, as though they neither feared God nor man! Oh! limit not the
holy One, and quench not the Spirit; nor go about to take away the Lives of the
Just and Innocent from the earth; Let none persuade Thee to root out the Saints
of the Most High God, nor to destroy the Meetings of such who meet in the fear
of God, and call upon his Name from a pure heart, and are gathered together in
the Name of Jesus: Nor let none persuade Thee to destroy the Heritage of God;
for that will not be for thy own comfort with the Lord in the end, for to
destroy and waste, and let up the rude people upon the meek and innocent.
Neither lay the Law upon such as it was not made for, tha seek the Peace of
Thee, and all Men upon the Earth. Oh stop those hasty Decrees, Declarations, or
Proclamations, and call them in that does offend the Righteous and upright in
heart; for what could You have done more against us, if we had been as the
Plotters and Fighters, and such as will take Covenants, and swear, and break
them upon occasion? For our Principle is known (I believe) throughout all
Christendom, and many other parts of the World, That we can neither bear Arms,
nor Swear; And I believe that Thou in Thy Conscience has a Testimony so for
us, and believes the same. And now the Prisons in every place is filling, and
many now full with the innocent and meek of the Earth, and the Lambs of Christ,
which cannot defend themselves, which many now in Thy Name will dishonor
themselves with, or through their violence and cruelty against them; and honest
men coming out of the Country about their business, being Tradesmen, are taken
up, and the Oath put to those whom they know for Conscience Sake cannot swear,
and so are cast in prison, and made a prey upon.

Oh that any such things should proceed from those called Christians, seeing
that the Christians in the primitive times, were not to swear at all, being
forbidden by Christ, Matthew. 5. and by the Apostle, as Jam. 5.

But the Lord is our God, who will plead our Cause, who has the hearts of all
Kings and men in his hand: But oh that we should find such things among you
that have been sufferers by the same as we have suffered before you! And oh
that such cruel imprisonments and havoc should be found amongst them that are
called Reformed Churches! But we do appeal in our Cause to God, and to the
Witness of God in all your consciences, that these things will not be to your
honor in the sight of God, in the end: Nevertheless, if thou will do that
favor, as to let half a dozen, or half a score, or what number thou please,
come before Thee, that Thou may be further satisfied concerning us, before
You act so against us. Oh the violence that is acted in the Countries and
Cities! for now have the wicked people their hearts desire; this is the day
they looked for; they would have had this of the changeable Powers that were
before Thee, though under cruel sufferings and whippings, and banishments, and
imprisonments until death, which we suffered by them; and many Petitions and
Addresses there were to them, against us, whom God did restrain from a general
falling upon us. Nevertheless, we cannot look that these things are altogether
in thine own heart to be inflicted upon us; For if thou did but know the
usage of men and women, which is not within the bounds of modesty to mention;
and if thou did but know what a prey we are made of, it could not but break
Thy heart, or the heart of any Christian Prince upon the Earth. Is not the Seed
of the Church known in Persecution? Consider, what would Thou have done to
Peter and John, when they spoke in the Name of Jesus after the Council had
forbidden them, and they met in several Houses, which is called the Infancy of
the Church? But that these things should be found amongst them that think they
are in fuller age! Oh that Christians should stop Christians for meeting
together to worship God! Oh that ever it should be said that such things should
be amongst Christians in Christendom! that they should be restrained from
meeting together, to build up one another in the most holy Faith, which is
according to God and Christ, and the Apostles Commands, as it is declared in
the Scriptures of Truth. Therefore let these things be considered; for Prisons
and Dungeons are so full, that Friends can scarce sit or lie. Therefore, oh
that honest men, and such as love Peace and Righteousness, and Thy good, and
all men's, should see this day! We are against violence and plots, and we that
be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Wars and
Fightings, Strife and Plots are not, but they are below, and in the Fall from
God. And this we say, which is more to us then an Oath.

Henry Fell.

THE END.

