To all Magistrates in Christendom, That do Profess Christianity.
Concerning Christian Gospel-Liberty against Persecution, and One Christian
Forcing, Persecuting, Imprisoning, and spoiling the Goods of another, because
they will not be of their Faith, Worship or Religion.

CHRIST says, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together till the Harvest,
which is the End of the World; and then Christ's Angels shall separate the
Tares from the Wheat: And are not Angels Spirits, and not Men? For Christ
commands Christian Men to Love one another, and Love their Enemies; so not to
Persecute them: And those Enemies may be Changed, by Repentance and Conversion,
from Tares to Wheat. But if Men Imprison them, and spoil and destroy them, they
do not give them Time to Repent: So it is clear, it is the Angel's Work to burn
the Tares, and not Men's: Christian Men must Love one another, and their
Enemies. And Christ Rebuked his Disciples, that would have had Fire to have
come down from Heaven, to have destroyed them that would not Receive Him; and
told them, He Came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them: And Christ is
the True Light, that does Enlighten every one that comes into the World; and
says, Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of the Light. And God
pours out his Spirit upon all Flesh; namely, his Sons and Daughters, Servants
and Handmaids, Young Men and Old Men: And so the Manifestation of the Spirit
of God is given to every one to profit withal; so that in the Spirit they may
serve and worship the Living God that made them. And none are to grieve, nor
vex, nor quench the Motions of the Spirit of God; but to Walk in it, and to be
Led by it, that they may be the Sons and Daughters of God. And the Grace and
Truth is come by Jesus: and this Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has
appeared to all Men; which will teach them to deny Ungodliness, and to live
righteously and soberly. So all Men that do know their Salvation, and come into
Favor with God, it is by his Grace: And this Grace and Truth is in Men and
Women's Hearts, to Establish them upon Christ, who is full of Grace and Truth.
And God would have all Men to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved:
And so He would not have Men to be destroyed, nor gave no such Command, that
Men should destroy one another about Religion. And Christ sent his Apostles and
Disciples to Preach the Gospel of Life and Salvation to all Nations, and every
Creature under Heaven; He did not say, They should imprison, and spoil the
Goods, and destroy such as would not receive their Gospel, nor believe it; but
they should shake off the Dust off their Feet; which should be a sufficient
Witness against them.

And Christ, by the Grace of God, tasted Death for all Men; and, Christ gave
himself a Ransom for all Men, to be testified of in due time: So, has not
Christ in this purchased all, and bought all Mankind with a Price, namely, with
his Blood, in tasting Death for them all, and giving Himself a Ransom for all?
And therefore, are not all Men to Love one another, and Forgive one another, in
this his Gospel-Day? For Christ says, Judge not, that ye be not Judged; and,
With what Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again, Matthew. 7.1, 2.

And the Christians were not to judge nor despise one another about eating of
Meats, nor observing of Days; but Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own
Mind, Romans 14. to the End, Colos. 2.16. And the Apostle Paul says to the
Church of Christ, Not that we have Dominion over your Faith; but we are Helpers
of your Joy: for by Faith ye stand, 2 Cor. 1.24.

So Faith being the Gift of God, which Christ is the Author and Finisher of;
the Apostles did not claim a Dominion over the Faith, which is the Gift of God
in Peoples Consciences. And the Apostle says, God has dealt to every Man a
Proportion of Faith, as in Romans 12.3. and this Faith, the Apostle says, works
by Love, Gal. 5.6, 22. And again, the Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is Sin, Romans 14 23. And the Righteousness of Faith says, The Word is in
the Heart, and in the Mouth, to obey it, and to do it.

And the Apostle said, They were not to speak Evil one of another, or Condemn
one another; for he that did, spoke Evil of the Law, and Condemned the Law, and
did not do it, Jam. 4.11. for the Law of God commands People to Love one
another, and not to Persecute one another; yea, to Love Enemies. And the
Apostle says, Love does no Ill to his Neighbor. And the Apostle Peter says,
Honor all Men, etc. and Love the Brotherhood: So if they have Honored all
Men, then they have them all in Esteem, as they are the Creatures of God, whom
Christ has died for, and gave Himself a Ransom. And the Apostle says to the
Church of Christ, Though we walk in the Flesh, yet we do not war after the
Flesh; for the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, etc. 2 Cor. 10.3, 4. For
We wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.12. And in
this Chapter you may see the Saints Spiritual Armor, and Spiritual Weapons.
And so it is clear, the Christians, in the Apostles Days, did not use Carnal
Weapons, and wrestle with Flesh and Blood; and their Warfare was not Carnal, in
Matters of Faith and Religion, in the Church of Christ, and serving and
worshipping of God.

And the Apostle Peter says; That the Elders were not to be Lords over God's
Heritage; but that they might be Examples in good Life and Conversation, and
good Doctrine; Not by Constraint, for filthy Lucre; but willingly, of a ready
Mind, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.

And the Apostle Peter says; Of a Truth I perceive, that God is no Respecter
of Persons; but in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with Him: And this the Apostle Peter said, when he
went among the Gentiles, he by Nature being a Jew. So if God does accept, in
every Nation, all them that fear Him, and work Righteousness; therefore, ought
not all that have the Mind of Christ, and Profess true Christianity, to be
Tender to such as fear God, and work Righteousness? and are not all Christians,
that Love Christ, to keep the Command of Christ, to Love one another, and to
Love Enemies? Then they cannot Persecute, and spoil the Goods, and Imprison any
concerning Church, Faith, Religion, and the Worship of God.

And God Reproves and Judges such as build up Sion with Blood; for the Lord
says, That Sion that is built up with Blood, shall be Plowed up as a Field,
that is turned up-side down, Micah 3.10, 12. Therefore you may see, such as
build with Blood and Persecution, their Work does not Prosper: For the Body, or
Church of Christ, is Edified, Knitt, and United, and Built up together with the
LOVE of GOD, Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19.

G. F.

POSTSCRIPT.
Do not all Christians that Profess Christianity, say these Words in the Lord's
Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive our Trespassers? And does not
Christ say, If ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also
forgive you your Trespasses; but if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses,
neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your Trespasses, Matthew. 6.12, 14, 15.
So ye may see, all Christians in Christendom prays to God conditionally, to be
forgiven of God their Trespasses against Him, as they do forgive Men their
Trespasses against them. And therefore, it behooves all Christian People to be
serious, and consider what they do, when they Pray to God, that they do forgive
others, as they would have God to forgive them: And if they do Forgive, they
will not Hate nor Persecute, but Love.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1686.


