To both Houses of Par^iament. Friends, here is a few things for you to take
into consi^^ration.
I IN Righteousness and Truth dwell, for that preserves both Governors and
Government, and People in Peace

II Let no man that is a Curser, a Swearer, a Drunkard, heady, high minded,
furious, rash, covetous, and loves gifts and rewards, and respects persons,
bear Office and Rule; for such will not be like meek Moses, but will bring the
wrath of God both upon people and Magistrates as in former Ages has been seen;
but set up such as loves mercy, and do justly, walks humbly with God, and hates
covetousness, Mica 6. such God requires, and such as does not respect men's
persons, and are not convinced of the Law as transgressors, Jam. 2.5. And these
will be to the praise of God, of Government, and Governors, and these differ
from Pharaoh, Herod, and Nebuchadnezzar, that knew not the Kingdom of the most
High to rule in sons of men; therefore to the witness of God in you come down
to, and consider of these things, that the Nations and Dominions may be ruled
as a Family.

III. And let no one be put to death for Cattle, or Money, or any such outward
things, for by the Law of God they was to restore fourfold, and if they had it
not, to be sold for their theft; and so let them restore; and the Apostle says
in the Gospel, Let him that stole steal no more, but labor in the thing that is
good, so let him live that he may repent: These things lay upon me to write to
you; and let no man be imprisoned or persecuted because that for conscience
sake they cannot swear, Mat. 5. but obeys Christ's Commands, and the Apostles
Doctrine that says, Swear not at all, lest they should fall into condemnation
of the Devil, and evil, Jam. 5. but speaks Truth, and does Truth and Justice at
Yea and Nay in any Places they are put in, or Court, according to Christ and
the Apostles Commands, who is our Lord and Master.

IV. And let none be persecuted because they cannot for conscience sake toward
God, put off their Hats, and respect men's persons, at which many has been
imprisoned and fined, which has been like the Pharisees, a mark of
unbelievers, that be from the witness in themselves, John 5. such as seeks the
Honor that is from above only, that will never stain, we would have all to be
clothed with that, and honor all men in the Lord, and have all men in esteem,
and say that they that Rule well in Truth, in Justice, and in Righteousness,
are worthy of double honor; for every one that has murder in his heart, may
give honor with the Hat deceitfully.

V. And let none be persecuted for not maintaining a Ministry that they know in
their Conscience is not of God, which destroys both Edification and Comfort,
quenches the Spirit, and limiteth the holy One, and despises Prophesying;
that is, if any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace; this was order in the true Church; for ye may all prophecy one by
one, and this is according to the Apostles Doctrine (which is disorder among
the contrary) Cor. 1.14 and Peter said, Acts the second and Joel 2.) that the
Lord would power out his Spirit upon all flesh, and his sons and his daughters
should prophecy, which many witness, Glory and honor be to the Lord God for
ever. And meek Moses said, he would that all the Lords people were Prophets,
and stopped and rebuked him that complained of them, Numbers 11.29. verse.

VI. And let none be persecuted and imprisoned for warning Drunkards, Cursers,
Cheaters, Fighters, and Quarrellers to repent, in Streets, Markets, Cities, and
Towns, and to tell them that they be out of the Life of Christ and the
Apostles, and shame their profession: which Magistrates that be faithful and
fearing God should have kept down these things, and not have turned their Sword
upon the Righteous, and men that has reproved sin in their Gates has been to
them a Prey.

Consider these things, for it is your time now, and consider them in your
time, that to the Lord God you be faithful and valiant for his Truth upon
Earth, keeping to the Light that shines in your Hearts that gives the knowledge
of it, 1 Cor 2.4. and the Truth in the inward parts which is the stay of the
mind, and word in the heart which is to be obeyed and done, in which is the
Wisdom that is pure, and from above, Romans 10. and this is the ingrafted word
which is able to save the soul which is immortal, and bring it up to God from
whence it came, Jam. 1.21. and this w^^^ be always with you taking heed to it,
in Counsel, Wisdom and Ju^gment, and it will soften, and it will harden if it
be not obeyed, ^^d they that do not obey it, hurt their own souls, and they
cannon say by the testimony of the ingrafted Word that their souls are save;
and let all your Laws be drawn up into a short volume that every^ne in the
Nation may know them, and the end of them, that they man not distract people
about Opinions of them, but that all may know ^^e full Law and its end; for
many men not knowing of them puts i^ to others to do for them, not knowing them
themselves, and so come to be overthrown and undone and great charges, which if
things were ^hort, it would prevent this, that every one might know it.

And let all Writs, Indictme^ts, Warrants and Mittimusses, have no more in them
than can justly ^e charged upon people, and that is the way to keep things sweet
and wholesome; and if those things were looked into you would see abund^nce more
in them than needs be put in; which grives the hearts of the ^imple and
righteous.

And let none be persecute^ about the word Thou to a particular person, as many
have been b^ them that takes more honor and worship to themselves than they
g^^e to God, who says Thou and Thee to God.

And let no Prisoners lie lon^ in Goal, but let them come speedily to trial,
for they learn badness ^ne of another, and let none keep Goals but sober men
that they may b^ patterns and examples of good to Prisoners.

And let none keep Ale-hous^ or Taverns but wholesome people, and such as fears
God, and are able to lodge Travelers, that there may be no bad houses to
nourish wick^dness, which grieves the Souls of the Righteous.

And let all things be done i^ Love, that keeps down the Spirit of Strife,
where the vain gloryi^g is; and mind the Law of God and the Gospel, and let
your actions be accordingly, that all your Dominions may be as a Family, and
rul^d in mercy, Truth and Righteousness, and that establishes Rulers an^ People
in Peace.

And let no one be persecut^d about Church-worship, and Religion; for Christ
rebuked Persecutor, and such as would revenge, and told them that he came to
save men's lives; and the Apostles weapons was not carnal but spiritual, that
^hey wrastled with about Religion; Now mind them that wrestle with f^esh and
blood, whether these be spiritual weaponed men as was the Apo^tle and have the
mind of Christ.

Now such as will invent Forms and Worships, and set them up, and compel others
to bow unto t^em, mind and consider, and take heed of such and that; for Christ
h^th showed how people may worship God, and in what, John 4.

And they that fears the Lord, and meets often together, and speaks often one
to another, which are his Jewels Malachy 3. be tender to such as you tender
your souls, for the Lord God has reproved many for harming his Prophets, Psalm
105.

And let no one be persecuted for worshipping God in Spirit and Truth; for
Christ said to the woman of Samaria, neither at Jerusalem, nor at this
Mountain, but they that worship the Father must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, for he seeks such to worship him; and the hour was come, and now is.

For Jerusalem and the Mountain was places to which they came for to worship
out of many Nations, and therefore the Jews persecuted the Christians that came
off their Worship, and Temple, and Priesthood, and witnessed Christ the
Everlasting Priesthood, and the one Offering that ended all the other
Offerings, and they that received him their bodies was the Temples of God and
Christ; and all Christendom about their Worship is on heaps, they not being in
the Spirit and the Truth in which is the Unity, in which Spirit and Truth the
God of all Truth who is a Spirit is worshipped.

From a lover of your Souls and eternal good, and that Righteousness and Truth
may be established among you.

G F. a Prisoner in Lancaster Castle.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1660.


