A GENERAL EPISTLE, And a tender Greeting, sent unto The Flock of Christ, Who
meet together, to Worship the Father and the Son in the Spirit of Truth; to be
read in the fear and wisdom of God, amongst them.
DEar and tenderly beloved Friends, and Children of the most high God, who have
felt and tasted of his eternal Word of Life, and have been acquainted with the
workings and opperations thereof, whereby you are begotten again unto a lively
hope, and are brought to know that life, which you were alienated from, and
that Covenant of Promise, which ye were strangers unto. Oh Friends! unto you is
my love in the Lord Jesus Christ exceeding great, and for you do (...) pray to
the Father of life, that ye may be kept steadfast in that life, which ye have
felt and tasted of, and that nothing may move you from that hope and
confidence, which God has begotten in you by the working of his mighty power:
Oh dear Babes! let the love of our God break and melt you into the meek tender
spirit of the Lamb, and let the consideration of his mercy and grace, which to
you he has shown, overcome you and make you sick of love* Oh how can I express
his goodness, for it is beyond utterance! yea his loving kindness to you-ward
has been exceeding large, who in an acceptable time has appeared and visited
you with his tender love, the light of the world; and by his unresistable power
has he caused you to feel the day spring from on high, even the breaking forth
of light in your hearts and inward parts; yea, this did he do for you, who were
as sheep without a Shepherd, scattered upon the Mountains in the cloudy and
dark day: Oh Friends! how did his love reach unto you, when ye were enemies
unto him? how plainly did he show unto you the evil of your ways, which had
separated you from his presence? and how tenderly did he hold forth his hand of
love, to lead you out of that which had made you miserable? and how did he give
you strength to walk when ye were lame, and inclined your hearts after that
which he showed unto you to be good? and how did he manifest his eternal power
and righteous judgment in you, against the body of sin? and how did he beget
and quicken a righteous seed in you, which cannot live but in his presence? and
how mightily has he opened the eye of your understandings, by his eternal
spirit, that ye are brought to see the false ways and worships of the world,
wherein ye were once entangled; and he has also given you to see the way to
himself, and the worship which he regards, in the spirit of truth; wherein you
are come to know that which only can give satisfaction, and make you eternally
free: Oh let the unexpressable love of the Father never be forgotten by you, my
dear friends! but all keep to, and dwell in, that eternal immortal power of an
endless life, which ye have felt and tasted of; and let your minds be kept to
the workings and opperations of the same, that so none of you may be daunted by
the enemy within or without, but all wait in the eternal light, the foundation
of God, which can never be shaken, that so your minds may be girded up, and you
kept upon your watch, and your ear kept open to the Lord, that so when he calls
ye may answer, and when he teaches, ye may observe and obey, that so your souls
may live; and that ye may see his eternal will in all conditions, and be
contented therewithal, then will you feel the peace which none can take away:
And friends, give all diligence to obey the word of wisdom, that ye may be
known to be its Children, and that ye may feel, and witness your growth into
the nature of the immortal seed, whose Kingdom is not of this world; that so
your redemption from the earth, and all earthly things you may know, through
the blood of the unspoted Lamb of God; which blood is the life which he gave a
ransom for many, which life is manifested in your mortal bodies, that through
faith in it ye may be saved.

And know this my Friends, henceforth you are not your own, for you are bought
with a price, and you are called with an holy calling, that you might glorify
the Lord in your bodies and spirits which are the Lords: Oh my Friends! let not
your delight be placed in the things of this world, for then will you be
entangled, but wait in the feeling of the pure power of the Lord God, that ye
may be kept and preserved thereby, that so ye that marry may be as if you
married not, and ye that have of this world, as if ye possessed not, and that
ye may be kept in the living wisdom of God, in the ordering of all things that
are given unto you, that so the glory of God, and the honor of his eternal
truth, may be minded in all things; and that your minds and hearts may be drawn
out of all created things, and ye kept single and chaste unto the Lord, that so,
if it were his will, that ye should be separated either from wife, or husband
(outwardly) or Children, or Houses, or Lands, or any outward thing for his name
sake, that ye may be kept in that temper and frame of mind and spirit, that ye
may resign up all freely without murmuring, that so ye may be known to be
followers of the Lamb, whithersoever he goes for my babes it is given unto
you, as well to suffer for his namessake as to believe, and hereby shall the
world know that ye are redeemed from the earth, if ye in patience and innocence
give up to the will of God in all things: Therefore dear hearts, wait in the
power and life of God, that ye may feel your strength and courage and boldness
for the Lord increased, that when you are tried, ye may stand in that spirit of
life and meekness, which will give you eternal peace, in all your sufferings
and trials, for the Lord will try you, that ye may see, and know him alone to
be your strength, and that the world may know, that ye are a people saved by
the almighty God; and this know, that ye that are faithful, shall not be
proved beyond your strength, for the Lord will be with you in all your trials,
and the more that you are persecuted for his name, the greater shall his power
be felt in you, and the more your enemies afflict you, the greater shall be your
joy, and this shall torment your enemies: So friends let patience have its
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire wanting nothing, for the Lord
will make up his Jewels, and he will take away all the dross, and nothing shall
remain, but that which will abide the trial in the fire, for the Lord has been
loathed with the sacrifices of many, who have professed his name, but have not
been subject to the leadings of his spirit, but have grived it from day to day;
Therefore will the Lord God try all professions, and the chafe shall be blown
away, and all false coverings shall be stripped off, and men shall appear as they
are; yea the chasse which some time seemed to join to the wheat, shall be
driven to and fro, until the fire consume it, or until, it mix it self with
the mire where the swine walloweth; but God will have regard unto his seed
which is weighty: And friends, a day of calamity will come upon them, who have
worshipped, and do worship an unknown God at a distance, and pretend the
worship of the true God, for they shall call but their God shall not answer,
and they shall fret themselves, and fear and terror shall sieze upon them, and
many shall join to, and fall under that, which they have called and esteemed
Babilonish: But there is a Remnant yet to be gathered, both from among the
professors, and profane: Therefore dear hearts, let your circumspect walking
in the life of righteousness, reach the witness of God in all consciences, and
let your soberness and patience smite your enemies. And you that are strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might, are able to endure much, bear ye with
the weak, and encourage and strengthen the feeble, and let your tender love and
care be over such, as ye feel have true breathings after the Lord, though they
have have little of a knowledge of the declaration of truth; and let your words
to, and before them and all men, be seasoned with grace, that ye may minister
unto the grace in the hearers.

And ye that are weak, and yet have a true Love, begotten in you toward the
Lord; all wait in the feeling of the truth in your inward parts, that your
minds may be wrought into subjection to the Lord, through the working of his
eternal power in you; and when you are tempted, heed not the temptation, but
heed the light that makes manifest the temptation, and believe in the light and
keep to it, and ye will feel the Lords presence and strength breaking forth to
deliver you, and to make a way for you to escape the temptation; and if at any
time ye be overcome by the subtilty of the Devil, and then the light arise in
you, to make manifest the transgression, and to Judge you for it, then join to
the light, and love the judgment, and will not, but be still, until it works
through, and breaks forth into victory; and if ye see iniquity abound, then
take heed that your love wax not cold; and if ye see some fall from the truth,
and turn back with the dog to the vomit, and with the swine that was washed,
to the wallowing again in the mire; and if ye see some for fear of persecution
start aside, or for the love of this world depart from the faith, or turn from
the holy Commandment, which was delivered unto them upon any account
whatsoever; let none of these things move or trouble you, for such things will
come to pass; but blessed are they that are not offended with the light, but
suffers and endures all things unto the end, for they shall be saved: But this
know friends, that the Lord God will try you, and ye must pass through perils
and trials, not only among the open profane ones, but also among such as have
known the truth, and turns from it; yet know my friends, that God will not try
you further than he will give you strength to endure the trial, if ye be
faithful unto him. Therefore watch and be sober, and wait in the life, that ye
may have salt in your selves to savor withal; and be not weary, neither faint
in your minds, nor let not in distrust, but hope to the end, and be confident
that God will appear and work deliverance for his people; but if it be his will
that ye must yet be further tried, and that he will yet suffer the wicked to
flourish, and spread forth themselves as a green bay tree, and that ye must yet
bear your testimony for the Lord by greater sufferings; Oh friends murmur not!
but hold fast your integrity, and know certainly, that whatsoever any suffer
for the Lord, they shall not loose their reward: Therefore all friends, be
valiant and strong, and bold for the truth upon earth; and walk humbly with the
Lord, and wisely before your enemies, that so, ye by doing the thing that is
right in the sight of God, may put to silence the foolish and ignorant, for
this is the will of God. And friends, walk patiently toward all men, knowing
that ye sometimes were ignorant and foolish, and disobedient; therefore let
your pity and patience toward them (that be disobedient) be known, and wait
that ye may be ready to show them the thing that is good, and to instruct them
concerning the way of righteousness, or if you have not words given you, then
let you conversation preach forth righteousness, that so happily God may give
some of them repentance, and that ye may be made instruments for the bringing
them unto the acknowledgment and knowledge of the truth, and live in the
wisdom and power of God, that so your enemies may have nothing against you
justly, but if they will persecute you for any thing appertaining to a good
conscience, be not dismayed; or if they falsely accuse you, and falsely swear
against you, and so ye reckoned among the transgressors by them, be not
troubled, but be patient and keep to the witness of God; for thus the wicked
served your Master, who gave his back to the smiter, and his cheeks unto them
that plucked of the hair, and the servant is not greater than his Lord: So let
nothing be too dear to be given up for the Lord, and bow not to any thing, but
to the name of Jesus, whose name is called the word of God, by which we must
overcome and break through all this ungodliness: Oh the Lord keep you faithful
and patient in your trials, for much have we to pass through and to overcome,
through the patience and long-suffering of the Lamb: So let none be exalted
above their measures, nor cast down by letting in of fears, but all dwell in
the living nobility of the immortal king of righteousness, and keep in
subjection to his government, and meet together often in his name, though the Sea
and the heathen Rage, and the people imagine vain things, and though the Kings
of the earth, and the Rulers rise up together, and take counsel against the
Lamb, and his followers; and though the rude multitude may persecute you, and
the whore may drink some of your blood, yet be not dismayed, neither fear ye at
all, for in vain do they strive, for the Lamb shall get the victory; glory to
him in the highest.

And so friends, keep your garments unspotted, ye, who have washed them in the
blood of the Lamb, and be exceeding tender toward such professors as have a
tenderness in them toward God, in what sect soever they be in, for poor
creatures they are to be pitied, and the way of truth is to be shown unto
them, and this day will bring some of them unto the principle of God in
themselves, and they must come unto that, before they can find a true stay to
their minds; and them that comes not to that and keeps not to that, will wither
as the grass upon the house top. On friends! I can even rejoice and sing for
joy, notwithstanding the rage and strength of the enemies, for I see the day
that approaches will be exceeding good for truth, and for friends that dwell
in it; for they that stand approved shall be made manifest, and the upright
shall not loose, but gain through all these things, and certainly, when our God
has tried us to the full, he will appear for us; and though our enemies were
as the sand of the Sea, and as strong as Giants, yet shall they fall as the
untimely fruit, and our God shall consume and weaken them by the majesty of his
power, and an exceeding dissolation shall come upon the earth, and a beesome of
destruction shall sweep away many.

Therefore dear hearts, be steadfast in the Lord, and keep the word of his
patience, and know, that not one hair of your heads shall perish, nor any thing
shall be done unto any of you, but what the Lord will be glorified by, and you
shall receive a full and a sufficient reward for it, if ye continue faithful;
So live in the power and seed of God, that ye may possess the kingdom, the
eternal peace, joy and tighteousness, which stands in the power; And love
fervently, Oh friends, let that abound more and more one toward another, and
by this shall men also know, that ye are taught of Christ, if ye love one
another; and wait that ye may feel the springs of life in your selves, and feed
upon that which proceeds from God, that ye may grow up in the power and life,
and wisdom of God, and therein be established: So the almighty power, life and
wisdom of God, keep and preserve you for ever Amen; the Lord God almighty keep
you fresh and lively, meek, tender, and innocent, and fill you with every good
word, and work, which accompanies peace, and godliness; If any decree
unrighteous decrees, heed them not, for the decree of God shall stand, which
is, to establish righteousness in the earth, and in the power of the Lord, we
shall break the bonds of the ungodly, and cast their cords from us; So the
spiritual weapon war withal, and stand in the faith, and hold fast the word of
truth, that through it you may feel and witness your sanctification, and the
birth immortal raised up over all, which is the heir of the Kingdom, without
end, and assuredly God will do mighty things for his people; therefore be ye
comforted and strengthened in the Lord, and dwell in and keep his covenant, and
answer his requirings in the light of life, and live in the retiredness, and in
the wisdom of God, that your enemies may have no just occasion against you,
and that ye may be preserved out of their snares, and if they imprison you, and
falsely accuse you, or spoil your goods, or persecute you any manner of ways,
keep in patience, and freely forgive them, and suffer as Lambs in the true
innocence, that so your peace with the Lord may be preserved in all conditions.

And Friends, let the dread and majesty of God fill you, and as concerning the
changing of Times and Governments; let not that trouble any of you, for God
has a mighty work, and hand therein, and he will yet change again until that
come up, which must reign; and in vain shall Powers and Armies withstand the
Lord, for his determined work shall come to pass; but what is now come up, i'ts
just with the Lord that it should be so, and he will be served by it: Therefore
let none murmr, nor distrust God, for God will provoke many to zeal against
unrighteousness, and for righteousness, through things which are suffered now
to work for a season; yea many whose zeal was even dead, shall revive again,
and they shall see their backslidings, and bewail them bitterly, and God shall
thander down from heaven, and break forth in a mighty noise, and his Enemies
shall be astonished, and the workers of Iniquity confounded, and all that have
not on the garment of righteousness, shall be amazed at the mighty and strange
work of the Lord, which shall be certainly brought to pass; but my babes look
ye not out, but be still in the light of the Lamb, and he shall fight for you:
So the Almighty hand which must break, and split, and divide your enemies, and
take away peace from them, preserve and keep you whole, and in unity, and in
peace with it self, and one with another.

Lambeth House the third day of the 4th. month 1660. I am your Dear Friend and
Brother in the Kingdom and patience of Christ, who am a Prisoner for his
testimony, and keep his word, and am made as willing to suffer bonds, or to die
for his name, as to declare and publish it amongst men; eternal living praises,
and hallelujahs over all, be unto him for evermore, Amen. George Fox, the
Younger.

The End.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black^ Eagle and
Windwill, in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660.


