TO THOSE That have been formerly in AUTHORITY, And have broken COVENANT WITH
God and Man.

By G. F.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign
of the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins le Grand.

To Those that have been in Authority, etc.
Friends,
NOw are the Prophesies fulfilled and fulfilling upon you, which was spoken to
you by the People of God, in your Courts, in your Steeple Houses, in your
Towns, Cities, Markets, Highways, and at your Feasts and Pleasures, when you
were at your height of Authority, and in your Highness, and puffed up that you
would neither hear God nor man, though raised up from a mean Estate; none to
come nigh you without bowing, or the respect of persons; and were in the worlds
way, Complements, and Fashions, and set down at ease in the spoil of your
enemies: Which for Conscience sake toward God they could not go into, which
they were Redeemed from: Therefore, they were by you hated for that cause, but
now you may consider the thing is come upon you, which we told you of; who
exalted your selves above your Brethren, and threw the just and harmless from
among you, until at last God has thrown you out; and when you cast the
innocent out from among you, then you fell abiting one at another, until you
were consumed one of another; and so the day is come upon you, which before to
you was told, though before you would not believe it. And is not your hearts so
hardened that you will hardly yet believe, though in captivity? and was it not
told you (when you spilt the blood of the Innocent, in your Steeple Houses, in
your Markets, in your Highways, and in your Cities, yea and Courts) by such
as spoke the word then, and could not put off their hats, that if something did
not arise among your selves, to avenge the blood of the Innocent, there would
something come from beyond Sea, which lay reserved there, which the Arm of
Flesh, and strongest of Mountains cannot withstand the Arm of God; and yet you
would not consider, nor regard, nor hear, but cried peace, peace, and feasted
your selves, and sat down in the spoil of your enemies, and were both
treacherous to God and man; and who will trust you now? and have you not taken
COVENANTS and OATHS, and made the Nation take COVENANTS, and OATHS? and broken
both Covenants and Oaths, bewixt God and man, and made the Nation both, break
both Covenants and Oaths? So that nothing but hypocricy, and rottenness, and
fals-hood, and fair pretenses, were seen amongst you. And after when you
pretended to set up the Old-Cause, it was but your filliness; so that you long
stunk to sober people, which saw that no good you would do, but it was a joy to
any of you to get up in Authority, that you might have praise; and them that
were in the self-denial were a derision to you, amongst whom That was banished,
and so become the honored and respected, Nations Masters, and not Servants, for
the greatest of all must be the Servant to all; and so there you lost your
Authority, not considering your states from whence you were, and to what God
had raised you up, but forgot the Lord, and have quenched that which is good in
your selves, and have persecuted them that lived in it, so that an honest man
could not live amongst you, but put out till you were overthrown your selves,
and so were grown so gross and perverse, that at last you are neither fit for
God nor man: Have you not used to call the Quakers, the Phanatick people, and
the giddy heads, but whether are you now giddied into Cains City of Nod, which
signifies wandering? And have you not persecuted, and imprisoned till death,
such as God has respect to? and now has he reproved you for their sakes, by
them whom ye have hated. Was not many of you cut off (and yet would not take
warning) for your persecuting? was not there a book of Exaples set out unto
you, showing what sudden and strange deaths happened upon the persecutors of the
Innocent without a cause? and yet ye would not take warning, until the
overflowing Scourge come upon you. Are not you them that have killed, (like
Cain that killed) about your Sacrifice? has not God Vagabonded you, that you
should become a Curse upon the earth? does not the blood of the Righteous cry
out of the ground for Vengeance? will not the blood of the Righteous be
required? did you think that the Lord would let you fit always with bloody
hands, and fists of wickedness? what is become of all your feasts, and fasts,
or the prayers and blessings of your Priests? has the Lord heard you, or your
Sacrifices has he had respect unto? do you not see that its all hypocrisy,
and from a false heart? will not the Priests pray for the KING now, as fast as
they prayed against him, for the PARLIAMENT, to keep their benefices, who once
prayed against him, and said, Cursed was he that did not fight against him: Now
what is become of your Sacrifices, you Persecutors, has God had respect to
them, or are they gone where Cain went? O the falsnesse of heart! and
treacherousnesse, and security that you were grown to, that you could not trust
one another! have not you caused the Nations, and caused the Soldiery both in
arrears, and in wages, to suffer? was the Nation behind in their Taxes? and
have not the Soldiers bin like to starve for want of their pay? have not you
been false to God and man every way, and oppressed the Nation every way? and
almost all people had a cry of oppression in their mouths, and when they
petitioned you; and addressed to you, it was a great thing if they had thanks
from you; and some when they laid their grievances before you, you would not
take it except they put of their hats: Now your place had been to have sought
to have done Justice, if you had known your places, for that is it that
preserves a Nation. So have not you been the greatest Prayers, and Preachers,
and Professors in the Nation, and the greatest Persecutors? for how many
thousands have been brought up to you, and laid before you, that have been
Stockt and Whipped, Banished, and put to Death, and their houses Rifled, and
their goods spoiled, by your great Professing, and Preaching Priests? as ever
did the Tories, and Moss Troops, which made your Religion loathsome, and made
the honest people descent from you; but now have you your reward, and the day
of the Lord is come upon you, nevertheless God has reserved a rod in store,
for them that do wickedly, that none should rejoice in wickedness, and in the
downfall one of another, but in the Power of the Lord that does overturn, which
is seen with the pure eye, that lives in Justice, Truth and Righteousness; and
the Ravenous Lions must not be Satisfied, but must suffer hunger; the reward of
the hypocrite is to be paid, and persecutors were ever blind. And now you may
see what is come upon you; now see if your Teachers can save you, who have
Preached and Prayed for you, and that they would stand by you with their Lives
and Liberties, and that they would stand in the gap: Now see how they have
deceived you, whose hedge now is laid down to the ground; And have you not
imprisoned and persecuted many for coming to you, and warning you of those
things which now are come to pass upon you? Therefore, now you may see, that
when you had power you did not do good in your age, and so had not a praise,
neither a good Savior in the hearts of the honest upright and innocent; for
had you stopped, the shedding the blood of the innocent, persecution and
oppression, the Lord would have stood by you (for that will be the greatest
thing upon you) and stopped the violence of the wicked, from imprisoning them;
and these things will follow you to your beds, and on you lie heavy; yea the
heaviest thing as ever you did, besides all your unjust dealing, and bad
actions, and dealings in the Nation to people, that had regard to you, and that
were against you.

And now all ye PRIESTS and PROFESSORS, you may see what good you have done
among people, and you who have been the cause of casting so many of the
servants of the Lord in prison, and cast out of the Vineyard, and now are you
turned out your selves, and mind your vineyard, how you found it, and how you
left it, and see if you be at peace with the unrighteous mammon, and now you
have not power, but are become as weak as water, and have not strength, neither
are you to rise, except you repent.

And Friends, you have brought the Nation to be like a great Sea, and in it
has been like Whales to swallow up; you have been the bad examples and
patterns, who have pretended the greatest profession and preaching that ever
was in England before, but that you have dishonored, and that which God has
given to you is quenched, and you would have broken both order, edification and
comforting amongst Gods people, but now has God broken you, and reproved you
for touching his Anointed, and harming his Prophets; and you have been the
example of persecution to all the Dominion of England, yea to all Nations; who
have been the greatest professors of Christ with your lips, but now your
hearts, and inward parts, and skirts, has God brought to light, and made you
as bare, and as naked, as the servants of the Lord that went among you as a
sign of your nakedness and siripping; (which some of them you abused, and cast
into prison) I say, went naked before the people was carried into captivity, as
a sign to them, as many have done to you, and some in sackcloth and ashes upon
their heads, and still you rebelled and persecuted the Lords Prophets, though
some with hypocritical hearts would promise fair, but perform little. Now is a
skillful people come upon you, and now is the woes and plagues which we have
often declared come upon you, which the servants of the Lord have cried, WOE to
England, WOE to the corrupt Magistrates, WOE to the Priests and to the
Hypocrites, and fair Pretenders, and not Doers: Now you may see the end of your
false Prophets and Priests that daubed with untempered mortar; Now where is
your wall they made? what have you now to cover your heads? lie they not bare
now? are you not all become weak as water and faint-hearted, that dare not
stand to your own principles? so as you have been examples and paterns of
persecution to all Nations of the innocent, in the height of your pride and
vanity, are now become a hissing to all Nations in your fall, which the pride
went before, which you were often told of. Oh woe is me for you! That mercy from
the Lord you may find, in this great deep dark day of confusion among you, who
are like Babylon confounded, who has long drunk the Saints blood; the Kings of
the earth must hate the Whore, as the Re^elations the Scriptures must be
fulfilled, and that's but beginning, your Dalilah has cut your locks, who has
lulled asleep in her lap, who rose and shook your selves, and thought to have
been as at other times: This was said to you before your eyes was put out, and
^ou set a grinding; but now you must see if you can work in the Mill, but your
state will hardly be found Sampsons, therefore consider your selves, and see if
they were not your friends that warned you of the things that is come upon you;
who in the day of your prosperity would have stopped the cry of Wisdom in your
gates, and they that reproved sin in your gates (which you Magistrates did not
keep down) was become a prey amongst you; your goals you filled almost in every
corner of the Nation with the innocent and peaceable people; and of such as
obeyed the command of Christ, and could not swear, you thrust out of you
Courts and Places, and thrust them into Goals, that would have done truth at
yea and nay. The houses of thousands of Families have you suffered to be rifled
and spoiled by the Prie^s with a company of club-men, like a troop of Robbers:
In all your Courts, Assizes, and Sessions have you caused the innocent to be
haled up and down, by an unrighteous ministry that they did no work for; and so
brought iniquity upon your Throne Likewise men of 60. or 80. l. a year, who
reproved sin in the gates, and likewise sober women, you have whipped as
vagabonds, and so have been examples to Nations to Whip, Banish, Prison, Kill,
Burn, and drink the blood of the innocent; and so Christ has not been your
example, who saves men's lives.

And besides, thousands you have suffered your Prie^^s and People to drag out
of your Steeple Houses by the hair of the head, knocked down, lay for dead, shed
their blood, and cast into prison, and besides thousands of meetings of the
people of God have been by your people tumulted, many there windows broken,
houses pulled down, and men pulled out of the meeting by the hair of the head
when they have been at prayer, which has been a dishonor, and a shame to
Government: And how many formed lies have been invented amongst you, and by
your Priests, that the Quakers was rising to cut your throats; and now what
good does your refuge do you? and what is become of your refuge makers? are not
the Quakers now tried and proved? and must not now your refuge of lies go to
the pit with you? and was not the people of God called Quakers your friends, in
warning you of all this that is come to pass? though you persecuted them, and
trod upon them, and cast them out, for the Lords names sake, and because they
trembled at his word; but now he shall appear for their sakes, and you shall be
ashamed, and the thousands; and multitudes that have been persecuted by you for
not doffing hats to you, and respecting persons, in which you went beyond all
Christianity (yea, the very Turk) in pride and ambition, and now you may see
what you have been covered withal, now you have the substance of it, and you
may see how the life of Religion, you have lived out of, and out of the life of
Christ and the Apostles; and now you may see that God has stained, and laid in
dust that glory and honor of yours, which you would have had friends to bow
down to, and persecuted them because they would not give it you, and because
they would not bow down to your will-worships, but worshipped God in Spirit and
Truth.

And was not persecution ever blind, and Persecutors? and now you may see into
what Ditch you are fallen: And have you not a reward according to your works?
you cannot say, but you were warned both by God and his people, and were in a
wilful rebelling against both; and so the Lord will make you to know his Arm
and Power, and his hand stretched out, which lays down the Mountains with the
Valleys, and lays down the sturdiest Oak, and slayes the fattest Bull: View
the hand that does this, and Power of the Lord: Whether would not now many of
you be glad of a Rock and a Hole in the earth to hide your selves in, when the
Lord is risen to shake terribly the earth? now must you not own Quakers whether
you will or no? and for all your persecution toward us we freely say, the Lord
forgive you, and that from him you may find mercy in this day of your misery,
and whether now night is not come upon you that has been told you, that your
walking is there? and now have not you treachery enough, who in it has been
found both to God and Man? plain dealing men were become, an abominable thing
among you, for how many fair promises had you promised to the Nation, over and
over, and how long did the Lord spare you? and did you not betray the innocent
people of the Nation? Now mind and consider, whither that has brought you
selves, and learn to do so no more, but repent.

All men shall be at their wits end about their Religion and Profession which
be out of the Life and Power the Prophets and Apostles were in, and in heaps,
and confusions, and distractions, one setting up, and another plucking down;
And this is the work out of the Life and Power.

And before the Lord destroyed Jerusalem, he long warned them, as he has long
you, and nevertheless the Lords Arm and Power, will and shall be seen in this
Nation.

And did not the Lord warn and fend Prophets among the people before he
destroyed them? and did not they persecute them as you have done? and so cast
the Lords Servants out of the vineyard, like the Jews, until at the last they
were cast out themselves, and so you who have betrayed the Nation and power, at
last what you sowed, that you do reap.

From one that loves all souls (and the good of all people) which is eternal.
George Fox.


