To Friends in Barbados, Virginia, Maryland, New England, and elsewhere.
OH Friends, You all that have tasted of the Power of the LORD GOD, and of his
Truth, that is pure, and does not admit of any impurity nor change. O therefore
the holy Truth mind, which will let nothing that is unholy live: for nothing
that is unholy can enter into the Kingdom of God; and no disobedience to Truth
must enter into the Paradise of God: for the cause of disobedience was Man and
Woman put out of Paradise. And therefore all everywhere mind the pure Power of
the Lord God, and the Truth which first convinced you; and whatsoever is gotten
up through the Reason, and your Eyes going from the Power of God, and that
which does convince you, let that be purged out of your hearts; if not, it will
lift up your hearts to consultations and subtilty, questionings, reasonings and
disputes. Oh I feel too much that has gotten up into the wrong understanding
part, through which wrong liberty gets up, which will bring a plague in the
heart, which is worse than an outward Plague. O therefore consider the Life and
the Power of God has not the supreme in all; for I feel some minds, and some
bodies, have let in that which has defiled them, and does defile them: O
cleanse, cleanse, clean, and join to the pure immortal Power; for the Power of
the LORD GOD will make room for it self either in cleansing, or in vomiting, or
casting out them; and that that does not join to the Power of God, Sodom that
whorish and adultrous spirit, it must to the Fire, and gainsaying Core into the
Earth; and it will throw down that which has been ^ifted up; the Beesom of the
Lord is going forth to sweep, the Candle of the Lord is lighted to search every
corner of your houses; for the Just walks in the path which is a shining-light,
which admits of no rubbish in his path. O come out of all these things which
you have entertained in your minds, which you received not from them that came
to minister unto you in the beginning. Oh dwell in the Power of the Lord God,
for to keep you low; and O take heed of getting up into Conceitedness and the
Air; and to set up that which pertains not to the Kingdom of God, but to
strife, which never the Apostles, nor the Saints since, in the Power of God set
up; for if you do, the Power of God will cleanse it and you all away. And O you
that come to be Vessels of Honor, and Vessels of the Mercies of God, O have
esteem of your Bodies: for such as defile their Bodies, are neither Vessels of
Honor, nor Vessels of the Mercies, but of Wrath and for the Wrath: therefore
keep out Strife, keep out Fornication and the Adulterous Spirit; keep out Lust
of the Eye, Lusts of the Flesh, and Pride of Life, which is not of the Father,
that that which is of the Father may be received and have an entrance into
every vessel. O be not lifted up with a vain mind; and let Balaam be slain that
erreth from the Spirit, and raises stumbling blocks; and such as keep nor
their first habitation in the Power of God and his Truth, become Enemies to
such as be Heirs of the Kingdom and the Power of an endless life. Therefore all
Friends and People, mind that which first convinced you, that Power of God
which first awakened you, and arise and live in it, that all your eyes, minds
and hearts may be kept single and naked ^o God and one another, and uncloathed
of all that which is contrary, and is got up since: for the Seed and the Life
of Christ Jesus reigns and rules, Glory to him for ever.

I have been incapable to write or receive Writing a long time, or to speak or
be spoken to, but have been as a Man buried alive, and the Sepulcher watched as
with a Sword and a Gun, for else I should have writ to you before now; and
therefore, O dear Friends, give no occasion of stumb^ keep tender; for hardness
of heart is worse than an outwa^ plague, for that brings destruction many
ways: and so grie^ not the Spirit in others, nor in your selves. And
whatsoeve^ is decent and comely, follow; honest and of a good repor^ that makes
for Peace, and not for Strife, under pretense(...) Love; for that is not of God:
for God who is Love, is(...) the Author of Strife and Confusion, but of Peace.
So I^sire you to let Copies of this be sent into Virginia, Marylan^ and
New England, to be read amongst Friends in all the Meetings. Things are pretty
well here, Friends being in Love and Unity, and the dread of the Lord God is
amongst us, who raigns and will reign.

G. F.
London 29th of the 9th Month, 1666.

