AN EPISTLE TO Be Read in the Men and Women's Meetings.
London, the 13th of the 9th Month, 1677. G. F.
Dear Friends,
MY Love in the Lord to you all, in whom I have labored, and my desires are,
the God of all Peace, and the Son of Peace, may fill all your Hearts with his
Love and Peace, and Wisdom and Knowledge in all things, to do his heavenly
glorious Will, in that you will know his Sons Doctrine, and as you know it,
obey it. And my desires are in the Lord, that you may all walk worthy of your
Vocation, and of him that has called you to Holiness and Righteousness, and to
Peace; so that his Peace may flow as a River, and Righteousness run down as a
Stream to the glading of the City of God, the Walls of which is his Power and
Salvation, and Light, and Life.

And now, my Friends, first, all your Meetings keep in the Name of Jesus, in
whom you have all Salvation, which is above every Name under the whole Heaven
in whom there is no Salvation.

And also, all your Men and Women's Meetings every where, keep in the power of
the Lord Jesus Christ his Gospel, by which he has brought Life and Immortality
to Light in you that you may see over him that has darkened you, and before he
was, which Power will preserve you in Life and Immortality; so that you may now
all labor in the Gospel, the power of God, in his glorious and comfortable
Gospel, and joyful serving the Lord in his Gospel of Peace, through which
Gospel you have Peace with God: So that in this Gospel, the power of God, there
can come nothing between you and God; here is your everlasting Order, not of
man nor by man. So that all the faithful Men and Women, may in the Lords power
be stirred up in their Inheritances of the same Gospel, and to labor in it,
helps meet in the Restoration, as Man and Woman was before the Fall, in the
Garden of God; all are to work in his Righteousess, and in his Image, in his
Power, in his Garden to subdue the Earth, and keep the Dominion in his Power,
in the Restoration, as Man and Woman did in the Image of God before the Fall;
whosoever would hinder you in this work, it is the same Serpents Spirit that
led Adam and Eve into the Fall from the work of God, which now would keep you
in the Fall to do his work and command, and not the Lords; and therefore over
that, keep your Dominion, Authority and Inheritance in the Restoration, in the
power of God, in which every one of you must give an account to God; and
therefore be diligent in the Lords Power, Light, Life and Spirit, in which you
all see your Services to God, so that he may be glorified among you all, and in
you all, and over you all his Glory may shine. And you all men and women, in
your Men and Women's Meetings be diligent, laboring in the Light, Life, and the
Power of God, the Gospel in the Garden and Church of God; so that Righteousness
and Peace may flow down amongst you, Truth and Godliness, Purity, Virtue, and
Holiness, over all that is contrary; and that the weight and care of Gods
Glory, and his Honor, and his pure holy Name, and his Truth, Religion and
Worship you may all stand up for, against that which would in any wise cause it
to be evil spoken of by ill Walkers and Talkers, and let all things you do be
done in Love, and condescend one to another in the Power of the Lord, and in
his Truth, in it have esteem one of another, and let all things be done among
you without any Strife; for its love that edifies the Body, and knits it
together, and unites it to Christ the heavenly and holy Head.

And now you Women, though you have been under the Reproach, because Eve was
first in Transgression; but the Promise was, The Seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpents Head, that led her first in Transgression, and the Man
also; and this Promise of God is fulfilled, a Virgin should have a Child, and
they should call his Name Emanuel, God with us again: For Man and Woman was
drove from God out of Paradise, and the Serpent became their Head, and God of
the World; but Christ is come according to the Promise of God and his Prophets,
who was born of a Virgin, and therefore says Mary, My Spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior: my Soul does magnify the Lord, for he has regard to the low
estate of his Handmaid; for behild, from henceforth all Generations shall call
me Blessed: Now here comes the Reproach to be taken off from women, who were
first in Transgression, and which are not suffered to speak in the Church; but
here Mary did speak and believe that which was spoken to her; and also the
Reproach and Transgression taken off of men, that believes in the Seed Christ
Jesus, who bruises the Head of the Serpent that has brought man and women into
his Image, and his Works, which Christ destroys him and his Works, and renews
man and woman up into the Image of God, as they were in before they fell, and
into the Power to have Dominion, to work in his Garden, to subdue the Earth,
etc. So that all are now to labor in the Garden of God, that are in the Power
and Image of God brought by Christ Jesus that bruises the Serpents Head, that
has been head in them all. So that Christ Jesus may be Head in all men and
women, and every man and woman may act from him their holy Head, Life and
Salvation, and keep his heavenly Peace in his Church, and every living Member
believing in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, and so grafted into him
the Fountain of Life, and the Water of Life; and that they may feel the living
Springs, and the Rivers springing up in them to Eternal Life, which are the
living Stones, the spiritual Household, of which Christ is both Head, Rock, and
Foundation. And Christ is called the green Tree, which green Tree never
withers, in whom they are grafted by belief in the Light, which is the Life in
him, from whom they all receive their heavenly living nourishment, through
which every Graft is nourished, then it comes to bud and bring forth Fruit to
the praise of the Eternal God: Now every one of these living Believers are
Members of the living Church in God, which Christ is the Head of, and every
Member in the Church has an Office, and so every Member is serviceable in the
Body in his Office, within the Light which is over Darkness, and was before it
was, and within the Life over Death, and before it was, and in the power of
God, which was before the power of the Serpent was; and so they are in this
Light, Life, and Power to execute their Office, I say, within this divine
Light, Life, Power and Spirit of God for Gods glory, in Truth, Purity, Virtue,
Holiness and Righteousness they are to stand up for Gods glory, and the honor
of his Son, and receive him who has all power in Heaven and Earth given to
him; and all that receives him, he gives them Power to become the Sons and
Daughters of God; then in his Power all are to act and walk, and serve God in
their Generation, and in it to serve their Generation, yea, and in the new
Creation, in Righteousness and Holiness, and stand up in his Power for his
Glory, and in his Power, Righteousness and Holiness that Christ brings into
them, and renews them in, and so into the Restoration that they may labor in
the Church and Garden of God in his Power, to his Everlasting Praise and Glory,
Amen.

And all Friends, stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made you
free, and in the liberty in the Faith, which Christ is the Author and Finisher
of, which Faith purifies your Hearts, and is the Victory, in which you have
access to God, the Mystery of which is held in a pure Conscience, in which
Faith it has its true liberty. And keep in the liberty of the Everlasting
glorious Gospel of Peace, which is not of man, nor by man, but from Heaven,
which Gospel brings, and has brought Life and Immortality to Light, and will
preserve you in Life and in Immortality, over him that has darkened you; and in
this Gospel you have everlasting Liberty and Peace, and in the Truth, which
makes you free from him that is out of the Truth; this free state all are to
keep in, and also in the holy pure Spirit of God and Christ, that does mortify
all that is to be Mortifyed and Circumcised, and does Baptize you into one
Body; in this holy Spirit you are to walk, which leads you into all Truth, in
which is your Unity and Fellowship, and gives Liberty from that which has
grieved it, and quenched and vexed it; and so in the Liberty and Fellowship,
and Unity of the holy pure peaceable Spirit, and in the Unity and Liberty of it
you are all to dwell and walk, which is the bond of the Prince of Princes
Peace, which the World cannot take away.

G. F.

THE END.

