For the holy Women that trust in God and do profess Godliness with good Works,
according to the Apostle's Doctrine in this Age to read over and put in
Practice.
THE Apostle says, I will therefore that Women adorn themselves in modest
Apparel, with Shamefacedness and Sobriety, and not with broided Hair, or Gold,
or Pearls, or Costly Array, but as becomes Women professing Godliness with good
Works, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. And likewise Peter, says, in his general Epistle to the
Church of Christ, to the Women, whose Adorning, let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the Hair, and wearing of Gold, and of putting on of
Apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is not
Corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the
sight of God of a great price, for after this manner in old time the holy Women
also who trusted in God adorned themselves, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.

Now all Women may here consider what is to be the practice of such Women that
profess Godliness, and trust in God, their adorning is the hidden man of the
Heart, which is Incorruptible, and their ornament is of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great Price; but those Women whose
outward adorning is with broided and plaited Hair, and Gold, and Pearls, and
costly Array, these are not the modest Apparels which become Modest, Sober,
Shamefaced Women that profess Godliness with good Works; but such as are
Unsober, Unshamefaced and Unmodest, such look upon such things to become them,
are clothed with corruptible and unquiet Spirits, that do not possess
Godliness with good Works; and these outward Ornaments, as plating and broiding
the Hair, and wearing of Gold, and Pearls, and costly Array; the Apostle says,
Do not become Women professing Godliness with good Works; but them that do not
profess Godliness, that are Shameless and Unsober, they may become such Women
that do not trust in God, their corruptible Spirit may lead them to adorn
themselves with such things, as is said before, which the Apostle forbids; but
the holy Women of God which professed Godliness with good Works, and trusted in
God, adorned themselves not with plating the Hair, or wearing of Gold, or
Pearls, or costly array; but with the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is
not Corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the
sight of God of a great price.

And now consider also, you Women that profess Godliness, and go under the name
of holy Women, and trust in God, see that your selves, and your Children, and
all your young Women are Adorned and Arrayed, and have on this Ornament, as the
Apostle wills the Church of Christ to put on, as the holy Women did of Old, and
be not of an unmeek and unquiet Spirit, and unsober and unshamefaced, when you
are admonished and exhorted not to act contrary to the holy Women of old that
trusted in God, and such as professed Godliness according to the Apostles
Doctrine.

And here you may see what care the Apostles had to keep the Saints, the Church
of Christ, their Eyes, Minds and their Spirits above the wearing of Gold,
plating their Hair, and Pearls, and costly Aparrel, which was the Glory of the
World, which the holy Women that trusted in God and professed Godliness and
good Works, these things were not to be their Adorning nor Ornaments, but as is
said before, the hidden man of the Heart, which was not Corrupt, even the meek
and quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord of a great price, and this ought to
be, and is the Adornment and Ornament of all the holy Women that profess
Godliness and good Works, and trust in God.

And all you that have been convinced of the Lords Truth by his Spirit, take
heed of Satan taking you up into that Mountain, and then of his showing you
the Glory of the World, and then of your Minds and Eyes going after it, and
receiving of it, and so in that you fall from the Spirit and Truth of God that
did convince you, and then so to worship the Devil, the King of Pride, the God
of the World, that abode not in the Truth, in whom there is no Truth, and then
he to lead your Minds and Eyes after every new vain Fashion of the World that
passes away, and that lies in wickedness, and so draws you into the Love of
the World, which is Enmity to God, and into the Wisdom of the World, by which
ye do not know God, and then to such the Gospel of Life and Salvation is hid,
in whom the God of this World has blinded their minds, and in such disobedient
ones the Prince of the Air rules, and gets into them by disobeying the Truth,
and in such Christ does not rule in their hearts by Faith, and it is not like,
when they make Shiprack of it, and a good Conscience; and therefore walk in the
Light of Christ, and grow in his Grace, and the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ that bruises the Serpents Head and destroys the Devil and his Works,
that you may all be established upon Christ the Rock and Foundation.

And if ye do believe in the Covenant of Light, Life and Grace, then, why do
not you all train up your Children in the same? did not the Lord command the
Jews to train up their Children in the old Covenant and teach them to walk in
it? and were not all the Males to be Circumcised? and they that were not
Circumcised were to be cut off from the Congregation of the Lord; so are not
all you that profess the new Covenant of Grace, Light and Life, and the Gospel
of Salvation Preached to Every Creature, and the Grace of God which brings
Salvation that has appeared to all men, to teach them to live Godly, and to
deny Ungodliness, etc. (I say) are not you all to train up your Children and
Families in this Light of the Gospel and Grace of Christ which brings
Salvation, and brings them into favor with God, that you may have the comfort
of your Children in this World, and in that which is Everlasting? and that they
may be Circumcised with the Spirit of God, which he pours out upon all Flesh,
that with his Spiritual Circumcision the Body of Death and Sins of the Flesh
may be cut off, which are come into Man and Woman by Transgression, that
neither you nor they might dye in the Body of Death, and in the Sins of the
Flesh, and such do not die in the Lord, for they that are not Circumcised with
the Spiritual Circumcision are cut off from the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the
Kingdom of God and Christ, and from the Church of the Living God written in
Heaven: And therefore, if you will have the comfort of your Children in this
World, and that which is to come, train them up in the fear of God, and in his
Covenant of Light and Grace, which Grace brings their Salvation, and brings
them into favor with God, and into the Spiritual Baptism and Circumcision, so
that they may Serve and Worship the Living God in his Spirit and Truth, Amen.

And now, do not say but you are all warned in your Life time; and therefore
prise your time, while you have it, that you way spend it to the Honor and
Glory of God.

Concerning Children and Young People.
AND if Children and young People must be left and let alone to themselves, and
not be Admonished, Exhorted and Restrained from the Evil and Vanities of the
World, then why did Moses and the Prophets, and the Apostles, which were sent
of God, exhort the People to train up their Children in the fear of the Lord,
and to teach them his Law while they were Young, that they might not depart
from it when they were Old? and if that they did, the Lord did Judge them, as
ye may read in the Scriptures of Truth; and if that they must be left to
themselves, and not restrained from Evil, then how came it to pass that old Ely
lost his Life, and his Priesthood, and the Ark of God, for not restraining his
Children from evil?

And again, if that they must be left to themselves, why did the Prophets and
the Apostles say, that they must not Quench, nor Vex, nor Grieve, nor Rebel
against the Spirit of God, nor turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, nor walk
despitefully against the Spirit of Grace? but walk in the Spirit, and in the
Truth, and in the Light, and to Love it, and not to Hate it; for they that do
not Love it, the Light, but Hate it, are Condemed by it, and so grow in the
Condemnation, and are not in the Justification of Life.

The Lord God commanded Abraham to Circumcise himself and his Children, and
servants that were Bought with Money, and were Born in his House. He was to
bring all his Males into this Covenant of outward Circumcision. And the Lord
said, That Soul shall be cut off that is not Circumcised, he has broken my
Covenant of outward Circumcision, as you may see, Genesis 17. Here you may see,
Abraham was to teach and instruct his Family and Servants, and he was not to
keep any Man or Servant that was Uncircumcised in his Family.

Now you that profess the new Covenant, are not you, and all your Children and
Servants to be Circumcised with the Spirit of Circumcision? and do not they
that have not the Body of Death and the Sins of the Flesh, cut off by
Circumcision, go down into the Pit, and not into the Paradise, and the Kingdom
of God; and therefore may not such Uncircumcised by the Spirit hurt the
Families of true Christians in the Light.

Therefore consider Abraham was not to suffer any of his Children and Servants
that were Bought with his Money, or Born in his House to be Uncircumcised, in
the old Covenant, this care the Lord laid upon him, in his Family, in the old
Covenant. Therefore consider you that profess the new Covenant of the Spirit of
Circumcision, what care lies upon you in your Families, of Teaching and
Instructing your Servants and Children, and to bring them to the Spirit of
Circumsicion.

The 9th of the 5th Month 1686. G. F.

THE END.

