A FEVV Plain Words To be considered by those of the ARMY, Or others that would
have a PARLIAMENT That is chosen by the voices of the people, to govern the
three Nations.

Wherein is showed unto them according to the Scriptures of Truth, that a
Parliament so chosen, are not like to govern for God, and the good of his
PEOPLE.

Also something to the other part of the Army, and the New Committee, who
turned out, or ownes the turning out of the late Parliament.

From a lover of the Truth of God, and all his Creatures, GEORGE FOX the
younger.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

GReat are the cryings out of some of you of the Army, and the people of these
Nations, concerning the dissolving of the late Parliament, and it appears with
a pretense of a very great zeal, that you have for Liberty, Equity, and
Justice, and the general good of the three Nations, and you appear in a great
fear, that if the people lose the enjoying of Parliaments, that then they shall
lose their birthright and their liberty, both as men, and as Christians; and
that equity shall be laid aside, and that the people must be ruled over by a
tyrannical power of rebellious men, whose wills must be the Laws that the
people must obey. But you say if the Parliaments be chosen by the people, then
in effect the people makes their own Laws to be governed by, because they
chose their Lawmakers themselves; and this is Englands Birthright you say,
and it is just and equal that the people should enjoy it; and if they do not,
then the preservation of the people of God you say is lost, and all good
government will cease, and the people will be made a prey upon, and so the
three Nations will be ruined at once; and therefore seeing such things are like
to come to pass, if a Parliament chosen by the people be not upheld, some of
you have said, you will assert their Cause to the last drop of your blood.

Answ. Friends, It Is good to be zealously affected in a good cause, and its
good that the zeal be according to knowledge, and its precious to have the zeal
moderated with the wisdom of God; therefore I exhort you in that life and
wisdom which is of Christ, my Master, (who came not to destroymens lives, but
to save them) that you would mind the dread and fear of the Lord God, which is
the beginning of wisdom, and be moderate, and in coolness consider these
things which I shall declare unto you, which in waiting upon the Lord, he by
his spirit of wisdom and understanding opened in me, concerning the choosing of
Parliaments by the voices of the people, and I know that you who truly desires
the good of Gods people, and that mercy and justice might be establishd by
righteous Laws, (whereby equity and justice might be done unto all without
respect of persons) may clearly see with Gods witness in you (which will
answer to my words) that you are not like to see your desires fulfilled by a
Parliament that is chosen by the voices of the people; mark the reasons; because
the greater parts of the people that are admitted to choose Parliament men, are
such as do not truly desire the good of Gods people, whatever they may profess
in words; and therefore it being in their power to choose whom they will among
themselves (as it is) because most voices carries it; they will choose such men,
as are like minded with themselves, that is plain and according to the
Scriptures, for the world loves their own, as says John; and now for proof,
that the greater part are not such as desire the good of the Lords people, I
would have you consider, how that the Scripture says, that the flock of Christ
is a little flock; and Christ says, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it; but broad is the way
that leads unto destruction, and many there be that walk therein, and though
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved; now if ye
believe these Scriptures, then may you see that a Parliament that is chosen by
most voices, are not like to act for God, and the good of his people; and it
has been the complaint of the soberest and honestest men in several Counties,
when they should have chosen Parliament men, that they could not choose such a
man as they judged would act singly for the good of the people of God and the
Country, because they were over-voted by the wild disaffected people, who
sometimes have been stirred up by their Priests to vote for such a man as the
Priests knew would act for their covetous, oppressing self-interest; and in
some places some great proud men who desired to be in Authority, has feasted
the people, and sent gifts to them with flatteries, thereby striving to get the
people to vote for them, promising them to stand for their Liberties, when it
has been but to serve their own self ends, and thus the people have been
deceived; and if at any time in some Counties and places, the honest sober
people have chosen some honest men to serve in Parliament, yet there being so
many in the Parliament that have sought their own honor and gain, that such
men as were honest, and would have made just Laws, and have acted for Equity
and Liberty, they have been hindered; because what is done in Parliament, is
done by most voices also, and the honest party in the Parliament having been
the lesser party, have been over voted also: the light in your consciences will
witness that these things are true.

And whereas it is said, That it is Englands Birth right that the people should
choose their own Lawmakers.

I answer, then many thousands of men in England have been wronged of, and kept
long from their Birthright; for such as are not Freemen of some Corporations,
or have not free land of their own, are not permitted to choose Parliament men,
(mark that) though they be far more honest and understanding men then many
that are free of such Corporations, and have such land; so that its but a part
of the people that must choose Lawmakers; and further, he that has free land
worth forty shillings the year in several Counties, he may give his voice in
several Counties where his land lies, for several Parliament men, when as he
that has land but in one County, cannot have the same privilege, though he be
a far more honest man; and he that is a freeman of that Corporation, that
finds a Parliament man, or men; and has free lands in the country also, he
may choose both in the one, and other; but he that is not free of such a place,
he may not have the like privilege, though he be more honester then the other;
and this arose from the same ground, that negative voices arose from; And it
has been the manner and custom of England, to call and choose many wise men,
after the flesh, and many mighty, and noble men (so called) to be Parliament
men, that so we see the calling and choosing of Parliaments in England, has bin
exactly contrary to Gods calling, and choosing; Read 1 Cor. 1.26. (and therefore
such Parliaments are not like to act for God and the good of his people, but
against them) But that which God has called and chosen, shall confound and
bring to naught the wise and the mighty, and the noble things (so called of the
world) (and this the Lord will bring to pass) that so no flesh may glory in his
presence; Read 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. And likewise the choosing of Parliament men,
according to the custom of England (which is called its Birthright) stands in
respect of persons, and not in equality; for the rich covetous oppressing men,
who oppresses the poor, they have the only power to choose Lawmakers, and they
will choose to be sure such as will uphold them in their oppression; and the
poor man that is oppressed, though he have no power allowed him to choose, yet
he must be subject to the Laws which they make who are his oppressors, or else
he is accounted a Rebel; so what right think ye is the oppressed like to have,
when his oppressors choose the men that are to be Judges of his cause; and thus
the rich men oppress the poor, and draw them before their Judgment feats, as
they did in james his days; James 2.6. These things being considered, ye may
see the unequalnesse and partiality that has been in choosing of Parliaments,
according to Englands custom, and how unlike it is that a Parliament so chosen
should make England a free Nation, seeing the great oppressors of the land
(viz.) Priests, and Lawyers, and the great wicked, covetous, persecuting men
are so much concerned in the choosing them; so that if Parliaments so chosen
should continue, the people of the Lord are not like to be set free from their
oppression, (though Parliaments and Rulers have been made to do many good
things by a power which many of them scarce knew) but the Lord has a further
thing yet to do in the Nations, then either Protectors or Parliaments would
submit unto; therefore the Lord has thrown them by, but they had first a day
of trial given them, and now is the Lord trying others, and if they will not do
his work, in breaking every yoke, and letting the oppressed go free, God will
assuredly break them with a greater destruction then came upon those before
them; Therefore let your moderation be known unto all men, for the Lord is at
hand; and thirst not after blood, lest the Lord give ye blood to drink; and we
know that Kings, and Protectors, and Parliaments have made fair pretenses, and
have given themselves fine titles, and have pleaded that they had a just right
to, and a necessity for their authority, and sought to get into the affections
of the people by smooth words and large promises, to carry on their own design,
but their hearts were not right before the Lord; and therefore he broke them,
and their titles; and know that the people that fear God, they matter not
titles, and high names, but they look for righteous actions to be brought
forth; and many sees that a Parliament that was chose by the most voices of the
outwardly rich people, were not like to act righteously; and therefore they are
willing to wait to see what the Lord will do by others, and we see that people
have been in great blindness, in contending for Parliaments so chosen; so let
this wisdom be learned and lived in, which is better then the strength of
fools, who often perish in their passion and folly.

And now friends in the Army and Committee that have turned out the Parliament,
dread ye the Lord God, and mind the equal, just, noble principle of God in
you, which has stirred against tyranny and oppression, and make it not your
business to declare only for freedom, as some before you did, and did not the
thing they declared for; but in the fear and wisdom of the Lord, go ye on to
act for the good of all his creatures, and seek not your own honors, but
singly do the same both for your friends and enemies, that you would have them
do for you if they were in authority as ye are; and until ye come to this, ye
are not like to prosper; the Lord abhors the lying, flattering, double,
deceitful tongue and heart; and the people also have been wearied with fair
words, because the actions have been wanting that should have accompanied the
said words.

Remember how you have cried out against the oppression of a forced maintenance
for teachers, and now ye are tried, and have power given you to break that
oppression down, which some of you I say have desired others to do; therefore
abuse not your power, but leave the people free to maintain their own Teachers;
(mark) The Ministers that Christ sends forth, they have no need of you in this
particular, as to provide food and raiment for them, for their heavenly Father
knows that they have need of those things, and provides it for them without an
outward Law to compel it, that so they lack not any thing; and that Teacher
that will not consent to this, he serves not the Lord Jesus, but his own
belly; and that is his God; and such a one can never profit the people, and
(mark) if ye should take away tithes, and command by a Law any other
maintenance from us for Teachers, that would be the same Tyranny and oppression
in the nature and ground of it, that tithes were, and we must bear our
testimony against it also, and our lives, or estates, or both must yet suffer;
therefore if ye do thus, you leave us in the same bondage as before; And let
Laws be provided, that are righteous, just, and equal, according to that of
God in the conscience, and let such be empowered to execute them that will hear
and determine causes freely, according to righteousness; and let causes of
difference between man and man be heard in every County, and when by plain
proof of 2 or 3 witnesses (without transgressing Christ's doctrine) it come to
be manifested who have done the wrong, then let the executioners of the Law be
empowered to cause the party or parties, to restore for the wrong that is done
according to equity, that so this abominable oppression about the Law and
Lawyers may be broken down; and thunder down all ungodly gamings, and shows,
whereby the foolish wild people are cheated of their moneys, and spends away
their precious time to the dishonor of the pure God.

And let the people of the Lord have their liberty, to speak his word freely,
where and when his spirit leads them and gives them utterance; and let the Law
take hold on such as would wrong any man's person or estate.

And let the dread of the Lord be upon your spirits, and wait in his light, to
receive his wisdom, that therein you may be ordered in the particular, and in
it order all things to his glory, and that ye may remove all that which is
standing, which is contrary to the will of God.

And meddle not to establish Religion and Teachers by an outward Law, for
verily if ye do, ye will be broken; Let that alone to Christ, whose work it is:
Consider all that went before you of late years, that would be meddling with
such things, the Lord broke them to pieces, and they were warned in their day,
as ye are now. And let not your many victories which ye have obtained, nor your
being preserved in so many overturnings (wherein ye have been made
Instrumental) nor your strength, courage, nor wisdom puff ye up; for thus says
the Lord God, even as earthen vessels are in the hands of a Potter, (who have
power to dash them one against another, until they be broken, or to break them
in pieces with another thing, that appears more weak then they) even so are
you in my hand says the Lord; and I can confound your wisdom, and take away
your courage, and smite you with faintness, and dauntedness of spirit in the
twinkling of an eye; therefore seek not your selves, for if you do, your day
shall be but short.

Remember you of the Army had power once before to have acted for the good of
your Nation, but the subtilty in some who sought themselves (whom God has
since blasted) beguiled you, and (mark) some of you sold your power for
Commissions, and others for nothing but flattering words, and so betrayed your
own integrity, and the cause of your Country; and now you have power again, do
not abuse it; serve not the lusts nor the self-interest of any man or men
whatsoever, but serve the Lord and your Generation faithfully; mark, if you
consent to deceit, and make an agreement with death, through fear or any
self-end whatsoever, God will break that agreement, and bring shame upon you
for it. And Friends, there is a lofty, proud, self-seeking spirit yet amongst
many of you, which if you cease not from, it will be the cause of your
destruction; and truly, if you provoke the Lord to break you, it will be more
heavy and terrible then the breaking of those that were before you; therefore
let the Lord be minded, and linger not about things, but be valiant, and act
faithfully for the just liberty of all, without respect of persons, and let
revenge be forgotten, and this will overcome your enemies, and make you truly
honorable in the hearts of all people. This is your day, prise it, And let
your deeds make it manifest to the people, that you have not sought your
selves, (in this which you have done) but the general good of all, and then you
will need the fewer words to prove your enemies liars, who have accused you to
be self-seekers. And now woe is coming both upon Teachers, Rulers and people
that are in the good words, but out of the good deeds and life; and the Eternal
God who is the light, will break, shatter, confound and over-turn, until the
good life come up and be set on the top of all; and now the name of truth only
will be too narrow a covering, for it is the nature of truth it self that will
be able to cover, and to be a sure hiding place in this the day of the wrath of
the Lamb.

THE END.

