From Aboard The Van-Herring, Being a full Relation of the present State and
sad Condition of that Ship.
In a New Letter from Legorn, to a Merchant in London.
SIR,
SInce what I have formerly imparted to you was so well accepted, I have
thought good to continue my correspondence with you, by relating several things
that have fallen out on Board us since my last: I told you then, that the great
Council of Officers was called, whereby the Sailors hoped to have had the Ship
put into ^uch a condition, as not to have feared the attempts either of the
Mahometans or the Algerines, but might have rendered the hopes of the one, and
the expectations of the other frustrated; our hopes hereof were very much
heightened, when at the opening of the Council, the noble Captain gave them
large assurance of his ready compliance with all the means they should think
convenient, to this end the Council upon serious debate, and mature
deliberation, came to this Resolve, That the only way to secure the Ship, and
the Christian Religion, against the attempts of the Mahometans, was by an order
of the Captain and his Council of Officers, to disable the Lieutenant from
succeeding to the Captains place after the Captains death, all other ways being
insufficient and dangerous, like the false healing of a Wound, or Building on a
rotten Foundation: The Captain not liking their proceeding, sent them word by
an Officer, that a small Pinnace belonging to the Ship, was in danger to be
taken by some set on and encouraged as it is thought by the Mahometans and
Algerines, especially the latter, from whom it is thought they have been
furnished with Powder, Shot, and Guns, wherewith to batter this Pinnace, and
therefore he would have them let the Lieutenant alone, and bend all their
thoughts to the defense of this Pinnace, since it was of so great consequence
to the Van-Herring, that if once lost, we can never Trade into the Straits with
safety: the Council after a serious debate on this Message, resolved to draw up
an Address to the Captain, wherein they assured him they would withal readiness
comply with the motion of relieving the Pinnace, if there might be a satisfying
assurance given them, that it would be in order to the securing the Old Ship,
which they were humbly bold to tell him, they had found by woeful experience
hitherto, to be altogether manned with, and managed by the Mahometans; and
they appealed to the Captain himself, that he knew it was not long since one of
the Arch-Traytors, now in the Hold, for endeavoring to Murder the Captain,
and seize the Ship for the Lieutenant, sailed in, and commanded this Pinnace;
therefore since the whole Ship was in danger to be lost, they could not hazard
the whole Ship by endeavoring to relieve this Pinnace, which had been a Nest
of our implacable Enemies the Mahometans: they also with all humility showed
him, that all, or most of the supplies they had formerly given to maintain the
Captains Honor, and the Ships safety, were abused by ill Officers, the design
wholly inverted to serve the Mahometans interest. They told him also, that
since the best defense this Ship had, was to endeavor the advancing the
Christian Religion abroad, they admired to find his Officers endeavoring to
procure Mohammedan Chapels in other Christian Ships: they desired also, that
those which endeavored to render the endeavors of this Council, as dangerous
to the Captains Interest, might be looked on by him as Enemies to him and his
Government: The Council have also punished some persons, that by obstructing
Petitions for the meeting of this Council, have betrayed the Liberty of the
Sailors, which we hope will have this good effect, that in the Vacansy of
Council, there will be no more Abhorrors found amongst us. They have also made
several Addresses to the Captain, to remove from his Presence several
pernicious Officers, who by their fawning words, and flattering Councels, would
draw his affection from the Loyal Sa^lers, one of them was chief Clark to the
great Cabbine, him they have got removed, but the rest remain as they were,
only one advanced by the influence of the Lieutenant to the dignity of chief
Boat-Swain, was by the Council of the lower Bench charged with Treason against
the Captain, and betraying the Liberty of the Sa^lers, requiring to have him
secured, but could not prevail; the Council of the lower Bench after many
debates and consultations, drew up an order to disable the Lieutenant to
succeed to the Captains place after the Captains death. Now Sir; I cannot tell
you the different humors that filled the Sailors; all men were big with
expectation what would become of this order, when presented to the Council of
the upper Bench, all persuading themselves it would be according to their own
desires; the Council of the lower Bench handed it to the Officers of the upper
Bench, where the Captain sat, where after some debate, it was rejected, to the
great grief of the Christian Sailors, and the Joy of the Mohammedan Faction; the
Officers of the Red Robe were indifferently divided, but those of the White
Robe, although they pretend to be the Pillars of the Christian Religion, and
have long been thought by some of the Sailors to be so; Yet now to convince the
World, their own pretenses were untrue, and the Sailors good opinion of them
false; they most of them came in as a dead weight, and speedily carried the
Scale on the Lieutenants side, which is a thing so strange, that it makes some
of the Sailors think, that as they were the Relics of the Mohammedan
suppression, which remains unpurged, when the rest of their Innovations were
expelled this Ship; so they have secret inclinations to return again to the
Obedience of the Mufty. Yet something has been done to the discouraging the
Mahomitans, and encouraging the Christian Sailors; for one of the Arch Traitors
was at last brought to his Trial before the Council, and condemned to loose his
Head upon the Capstorm, which was done accordingly; the Counsel notwithstanding
the rejecting the Order, consulted of some other way to disable the Lieutenant,
which to prevent, the Captain minded them again of the danger of the Pinnis,
whereupon they resolved to draw up another Address to the Captain, wherein they
gave him great thanks for the care he had taken to prevent the Mohammedan
design, and his gracious promise of complying with all means they should think
convenient for securing the Ship; yet they much grieved to find his promise so
limited, as to render it wholly useless, by refusing to grant that wherein
alone our safety does consist, there being no safety to him or the Ship, until
the Lieutenant be Excluded; all the Answer the Captain returned, was, that the
Council of the upper Bench, by rejecting the Order, had confirmed him in an
Opinion, that it is not his Interest to desert the Lieutenant; the Counsel
hereat amazed, after some Debate, entered into the Journal of their Proceedings,
That it is their Opinion, that there can be no security to the Captain, the
Ship, or the Christian Religion, without preventing the Lieutenant from being
Captain; and that notwithstanding the Captains promises of complying with all
other ways of securing us, that unless this Order be passed, they can give him
no supplies, without Betraying the Captains person, the Christian Religion, and
the trust reposed in them by the Sailors; and whosoever should advise the
Captain to put off this Council to any other purpose then to the making this
Order, are betrayers of the Captain, the Christian Religion, and Promoters of
and Pentioners to Argere, and that the thanks of this Bench be given to the
Sailors in the great Cabbine, for their Loyalty to, and endeavors for the
preservation of the Captain, and the Christian Religion; immediately they were
put off for a few days, which the Mahometans have the impudence to say, it was
done in favor to them, but the Loyal Sailors hope the contrary, and that it is
only to give the Council an occasion to bring in the Order again; yet the
Sailors of the great Cabbine, fearing the Mahometans, might take this
opportunity to attempt something against the Cabbine, requested the Master of
this Cabbine to take all imaginable care for its preservation. I had almost
forgotten one thing that has occasioned much discourse amongst us; a Loyal
Officer made an ingenious Speech, containing a short and true Account of our
Affairs: It was condemned by some, although others think it will prove somewhat
like a late Treatise, called, The Growth of Mahometanism, which when first
Published, was generally condemned as a design falsely to asperse the Captains
Favorites, but in short time we found the thing too true. I should have told
you also, that while the Council of Officers were inquiring into this Plot,
some came on Board us from on Board the Harp, and acquainted our Council, that
Ship also was in danger to be Betrayed to the Algerines: We are informed, that
the Algerines, by the help of the Mufty and his Agents, have got a Stout Ship
that Rides near us, called, The Eagle, to be so Betrayed by the Captains
Officers, that it must shortly fall into their hands. As for our Lieutenant, he
at present Sails in the Lion, but is expected on Board us; I suppose his
absence will be more welcome to them, then his presence to us: just as I was
finishing this Letter, I saw the Sails flocking about the Mainmast, whereupon
I went to enquire the reason, and found them with great amazement and
admiration reading an Order of the Captains for discharging this Council of
Officers, and calling a New one, which are not to meet in the Old Cabin, which
they have done time out of mind, but in the Academy, a small Cabin in a more
remote part of the Ship; this unexpected and prodigious News filled the Loyal
Sailors with sad hearts and dejected countenances, yea, the Heavens have put on
Mourning, appearing Dark and Gloomy, and the Sun not seen for three or four
days together. Thus I have given you a short but impartial account of all or
most of the material things that have fallen out since my last.


LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1680.


