A LATE Libellers Folly MANIFESTED: AND THE Christian QVAKERS VINDICATED, From
the Base Insinuations, in a late PAMPHLET, Subscribed G. W.

By H. G.

Proverbs 11. 21. Though Hand join in Hand, the Wicked shall not be Unpunished,
but the Seed of the Righteous shall be delivered.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting, House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracecious-Street- and at the Croocked-Billet in
Holywell-Lane near Shoreditch, 1694.

A LATE Libellers Folly MANIFESTED, etc.
MANY have been the Adversaries, both of us and our Holy Profession; some of
whom not being Contented to Oppose us, only in Point of Doctrine, wherein we
differ from them; but rather than not Reproach us enough, have taken Liberty to
Misrepresent us, with holding Errors which we deny, and have not yet been
proved upon us.

But in all this Opposition, God that has called us into his Living Way, and
Worship, has at all times Effectually Qualified some in our days, as he did in
Primitive times; for the defense of the Gospel; by which means our Adversaries
of that kind, are better Informed or Defeated.

But our Grand Enemy, Envying our Peace, not being Contented to see Sion
Prosper, has by his Subtle devices, begotten in Some (from among our selves),
First, a Coldness to Truth it self, and from thence, a letting go Charity to
their Brethren, which have Led them into Envy, and Bitterness; Fruits that of
late more especially have been brought forth; and so much Resembles Cain's
Nature, that as much as in them lies, would slay the Reputation (at least) of
their Brethren; even as he did the Natural Life of his Brother; and which is
worse, I fear for the same Reason too.

Now, that which Leads me to the foregoing, was upon Perusal of a late
Pamphlet, Subscribed G. W. Called, Something by way of Reply, unto a Paper
lately Published in the City Mercury, Signed by Twenty Four Men, being also a
sort of a Vindication of a former of the same kind, Subscribed D. S. The tenor
of which Paper, Signed by those Twenty-Four was to detect D. S's. abusive Work,
who in the Name of the Christian Quakers, would Insinuate Guilt (upon many
Honorable Brethren, most of whom long since are deceased) as Charged by F. B.
and other malicious Apostates, most, if not all, of which Calumnies, have been
heretofore answered, and our Friends Vindicated.

But such is the Humor of our Present Adversaries, that rather than not be
doing, they will not only Dig up the Graves of such, but Rake in their Ashes,
whose Memory, even to some of themselves, since Buried, have, I make no
Question, been Precious to them.

I shall now leave Generals, and proceed to a Particular Observation on this
Pamphlet, Signed G. W. who in his first page says, Viz. I know not who was the
Author, i. e. D. S. Neither do I Pretend to Justify all that he has said
therein. At this rate another of the same kind may come out Subscribed T C.
disowning that he knows Either, nor will he Justify them in all they say; so
that we are, and like to be traduced by a sort of Lurking Adversaries, who by
smiting in the dark, are accountable to no Visibles; but however, he that is
Invisible beholds them, who will not let them escape the reward of that Evil
work, without they Repent.

In his Third page says, Viz. -- But that You should be so Impertinent first
to put on your selves the Name of Christian Quakers, etc. In answer whereto I
appeal to the Impartial; whether it is not more pertinent for Twenty-Four Men,
that are known to have been of that Persuasion for many Years, to Sign on
behalf of that People, rather than a Nameless Author to do it, and yet he
Complains, would any thing but Gross Folly and Ignorance, be guilty of such
Weakness.

Again, in his 4th. page says, And Indeed if you Could make the World believe,
that the Christian Quakers could give forth no Christian Testimonies, without
your leave as you would Insinuate, etc. Here again, I do appeal as before,
desiring the Candid Reader to peruse that small Paper Signed by the
Twenty-Four, who doubtless would find the Genuine Sense thereof, to intend no
other, than whereas D. S. had Imposed upon the World a false Libel, in the Name
of the Christian Quakers; they holding themselves to be of that Society, were
willing to undeceive such as might be misled by it; assuring them, that that
Book was not Printed by Direction, or Approbation, of that People; therefore
'twas Requisite that some, known among them, should Clear themselves, and
Brethren, from that Imposture.

Then again in the same page he revilingly Suggests, that the Twenty-Four are
no Christians, where he says; It is Possible some might have thought you to
have been of that Christian Society, but now your works have absolutely denied
it; with much more of the same kind in that page; and all for disowning that
Book Signed by D. S. and no other reason known to us: Does this Malicious
Author endeavor to Un-Christian us? And for our Satisfaction, in the 5th. page
gives a Challenge on behalf of himself, etc. Viz. But if any Christian People
should Question the truth of these Charges hinted at, and elsewhere more at
large; we do offer publicly to prove the greatest part of them, in any public
place convenient, to the faces of these Twenty-Four Men, etc.

In this he is somewhat Modest, by saying, the greatest part, which Naturally
Implies the lesser he cannot prove, yet not so modest neither, but that he is
more Liberal to Charge us in the dark, than he so much as pretends to prove to
our faces. Then again, who is this we that makes this offer, surely it must be
D. S. and himself; in the most Natural Sense of that place Cited, although
unknown, as he before said; and how these unknown Brethren should know how to
meet with each other, and we that known Neither to meet with them both, I
cannot tell; and which is worse, when they do meet, it is more then Probable they
will not agree; for G. W. says he does not Pretend to Justify all D. S. has
said, for, but however, as of Old, with Herod and Pilate, they agreed in
Condemning the Innocent.

My task in this (sober Reader) has been to discover the Insincerity, and
Disingenuity of this G. W. but that of D. S, as well as in General, he is
disowned in the Name of that Christian People by the Twenty-Four; he is also
more particularly answered by our Friend Robert Bridgman, to which I refer for
Satisfaction, in Reference to D. S. and to the particular Calumnies, in both
our Occult Adversaries; I do recommend thee to the Books following, Viz. The
Quakers Vindication, in on Sheeet, given to the Parliament against F. Bugg's
Calumnies. And Innocence Triumphant over Intolency also; The Counterfeit
Convert, a Scandal to Christianity, and the Certificate therein annexed to the
Preface; likewise the Just Inquiry into the Libellers Abuse, all by George
Whitehead. And for answer to his Six page about Jeptha's Daughter and Micah's
Mother, I refer unto Tho. Ellwood, Antidote, Chap. 8. Sect. 1. from p. 205. to
210, and Sect. 5. p. 214, 215. For it would be unreasonable to suppose, we
should as often make repeated Replies, as our Adversaries pleasure is to repeat
Charges upon us, long since answered, and refuted; so that we shall rest
Satisfied, in that Care already has been taken, to Vindicate our Innocent
Brethren, knowing that no Candid Reader will Judge them Guilty, without
examining whether true or false, especially since they are now reminded and
recommended to the abovesaid Books.

Henry Gouldney.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
WE cannot accept D. S. his Pamphlet, either as a true Testimony against F.
Bugg's Callumnies cast upon the Christian Quakers in General, or as any Sincere
Vindication of the Christian Quakers from his Calumnies and Reproaches

I. Because though he seems to Except against F. Bugg's Charges, as too general
or Indefinite upon the People called Quakers, yet he joins Issue with him in
his Charges against diverse particular Persons, both Dead and Living, known to
be Christian Quakers; as George Fox, John Audland, Josiah Coal, James Parnel,
George Whitehead and others.

II. Because the said D. S. whilst he pretends to Vindicate the Christian
Quakers from F. Bugg Asspertions and Callumnious Charges; yet takes his Charges
of Blasphemy, etc. for Granted against the said G. Fox, James Parnel, etc.
Consequently thereby condemning them as no Christians.

III. The said G. W. in his Vindicating D. S. his Pamphlet, has therefore
joined Issue with him, and F. Bugg in his Unjust Charges and Condemnation
against those our faithful Deceased Friends, G. F. J. P. etc. as no Christians;
which is directly Contrary to the living Sense and Testimony, of all Christian
Quakers that knew them.

Thus it is Manifest that F. Bugg, D. S. and G. W. have joined Issue in their
Charges, Condemnations, or a kind of Excomunications against Innocent faithful
Men, after their Death; which, as he says p. 6. he has no Scripture, nor
president for that we know of, unless he goes to the Pope for it; but these
Apostates have now shown their Envy and Rancour of Spirit; As many Instances
might he given of such like Popish, Antichristian Practices.

THE END.

