CHINA AND FRANCE, OR Two Treatises.

The one, Of the present State of China, As to the Government, Customs, and
Manners, of the Inhabitants thereof; never yet known to us before in Europe.
From the observation of two Jesuits lately returned from that Country.

Written and Published by the French Kings Cosmographer, and now Englished.

The other, Containing the most remarkable Passages of the Reign and Life of
the present French King, Lewis the Fourteenth; and of the valor of our English
in his Armies.

London, Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter-house in the
Strand. 1676.

The present State of CHINA.
ON the Thirtieth day of January, 1665. I went in the company of Mr. Carlos
Daty, to visit Father John Grueber at his arrival from Constantinople. About
two years since, he came out of China, where he had resided full three years.
He began his pilgrimage at Venice, where he took shipping for Smyrna; from
thence, by Land, he marched to Ormus in five months; from thence to Macao in
seven; so from the South Coast he traveled to the North, through the large
Empire o^ China, sometimes upon Rivers an^ commodious Channels, and sometimes
by Land, and at last he go^ safe to the City of Pekin. In his return from
thence, he adventured t^ pass, and survey a Country which was never yet seen
before, by any i^ Europe; namely, The unfruitful Sands of the Deserts of
Tartaria, which he passed over in three days, and came to the Coast of an
Inland Sea called Kokonor, Kokonor in Ta^tarty. signifies Great Sea.
not much unlike to the Caspian. The River Jannus that runs through China with
a strange rapidity, and discharges it self into the Oriental Sea, near the
Island of Carea, has here its source. This River is the deep^st and largest of
all that Countr^y Afterward this adventurous Traveller, lost the sight of the
Sea to ^nter further into the Land, into the Province of Toktokai, which is
(...) barren and wild, that one of the Neighboring people can have any
temptation to dispossess the ancient Inhabitants. Nothing is there remarkable,
but only some few dispersed Tents of the Tartars, who lead a most miserable
life.

The beautiful River Toktokai, which is as large as Danubinus, but so shallow,
that any Man, on Horseback, may ford it over in the deepest place, waters
this blessed Country, and gives unto it a name. From hence our Traveller
passed through the Province of Tangut, which is very populous and belongs to
the Kingdom of Barantola; he visited, in his way, the City of Retink, and the
Kingdom of Barantola, the Metropolis is called Lassa, and the present King
Teva. He is of a very ancient and noble Family of the Tartars of Tangut. His
ordinary residence is at Butala, a lofty Castle built according to the European
mode upon a high Hill, having Buildings of four stories, of very good and
regular workmanship. The Court of this Prince is numerous, and his attendants
are extreme lavish in their apparel, which is, for the most part, of Cloth of
Gold, and of embroidered Stuffs. Nevertheless this Nation is generally very
sluttish, and unhandsome in their attire: Neither Men nor Women wear lining
next to their skin. Their common Bed is the ground, their ordinary food is raw
Flesh, and they are not so scrupulous to wash their hands or faces; but they
appear very kind and courteous to strangers. Their Women have the liberty to
walk about the Streets, as amongst the other Tartars; but their other Customs
are like to those of China.

Their Archpriest or Mufty is called Lamacongiu, whom they reverence as God,
and believe to be related to their first King, but they name him the Brother of
all the the Kings of the World. They are persuaded that he rises from the dead
as often as he dies, and that this Man has already risen seven times. The
Kings and Politicians of that Country labor, by subtle means, to entertain the
common people, in this strange belief, and the Lamacongiu himself contributes
to it; for he keeps his face always covered, and suffers none to look upon it,
but such as are acquainted with the mystery. The Nobility do mightily respect
him; some of them come to that point of adoration, as to covet that which is
incredible, and to carry it about as a sacred relick: From Barantola, Father
Grueber traveled to the Kingdom of Nekpal, and in a months time passed
through it. The two principal Towns are Catmandir and Patan, situate on the
Banks of a River opposite to one another. This latter is a young Prince very
well accomplished; he commands all the Militia of the Kingdom as General. When
Father Grueber was there, he was at the head of a great Army marching against a
Neighboring King called Varcam, who made frequent inroads to spoil the
Country. The Jesuits gave this young Prince a Prospective Glass, through
which he caused him to look at a place where Varcam's Army lay encamped; he
found it so nigh, that he gave order presently to make ready and prepare for
the fight, for he perceived not that this propinquity was but an effect of the
Glass. This present was acceptable to him.

From Nekpal our Traveller went, in five days, to the Kingdom of Moranga, where
he could see no City, but only small Houses covered with Straw, and little
Huts, one appointed for a Custom-Housse. The King of Moranga pays a yearly
tribute of 250000 Rixdollers, and seven Elephants to the Mogol. From Moranga he
traveled into that part of India which is beyond the River Ganges, and came to
Minapor, the Metropolis of that Country; where he passed over that River,
which is twice as big as the Danubius. From thence he went to Patan; and from
that City, in five and twenty days, to Agra, the Royal City of that part of
India, which is on this side Ganges. From thence to Laor in fourteen days. This
City is built upon the Banks of the River Ravi, which is as large as Danubius,
it runs into India, near M^ltaia. There he took Boat and was carried down the
River, in forty days to Tata, the utmost City of Indostan, the ordinary
residence of the Viceroy of that Country; his name is Laskarkan, there he met
with many English and Dutch Merchants.

From this place he sailed to Ormuz by Sea, from Ormuz he went to Persia,
afterward he returned back to Smyrna, where he took shipping and arrived safe
at Messina; from thence he went to Rome, where he received an express command
to go back again to China. For that purpose he traveled into Germany and
Polonia, hoping to find another way through Muscovia. By the Emperors
procurement, he had got Pasports from the Dukes of Curland and Muscovia. But
when he was so far on his way as the Borders of Muscovia, he understood that
the King of Poland and the Tartars had made a conjuction of their Forces, with
an intent to attempt upon the Duke of Muscovia. By this means he was diverted
in his passage to Musco; for the fear of the dangers and difficulties in time
of War, brought him back to Vienna, where he arrived at a convenient time when
the Emperor was dispatching an Ambassador, Count Leshley by name, to
Constantinople. The Jesuit took this opportunity to travel thither with a
resolution, from thence to go forward in his intended journey: But when he came
to Constantinople, he was mightily incommoded with a great rheum, with
shortness of breath, and with violent pains in his stomach; so that being not
able to proceed on in his journey, he went aboard a Ship bound for Legorne;
from whence he was carried to Florence, where he remained about eight days. In
this time he was pretty well recovered of his distemper, so that he could go
afterward to Venice; from whence he passed through Friuli to Vienna, with an
intent, by that way, to return to Constantinople, that he might travel
afterward to China, according to the orders of his General.

This Father is about forty five years of age, of a jovial temper,
extraordinary civil, as sincere as a German, his conversation is very pleasant;
in a word, he has so many good qualities, and is so gallant a Man, that though
he were not a Jesuit, all the World would esteem and love him.

Monsieur Carlos Dati had seen him, the day before we had any discourse with
him, in the Withdrawing Room of Prince Leopold, where he was entered into a
conversation with him, which lasted not long; for the Father was called away
and introduced into his Highnesses presence. After this first acquaintance, he
entreated him to give him satisfaction to some questions that he had a desire
to make him concerning China, which request the Father granted in an obliging
manner.

First, Mr. Dati desired to know, whether the present King of China is the Son
of the last Conqueror of that Kingdom? Where he kept his Court? Whether in
China? or in Tartaria? The Father answered, that he was but his Grandchild; for
the Grandfather being invited and brought in by the Rebellious Eunuchs in the
year 1646. He conquered all China, as Father Martinius has written at large in
his History of China. He told us, that the present King of that Country is
about twelve or thirteen years of age; that he resides at Pekin, the chief City
of the Kingdom, that his Father and Grandfather also did dwell there, according
to Machiavels Rule; for he advises a Prince when he intends to keep in his
hands a Country newly subdued to his Scepter, where the Inhabitants differ
from him in Language, Customs, and Laws, to go and make there his abode. This
is a Policy not so subtle, but that the Tartarians have very well understood
and practiced it.

We inquired next, what kind of Militia they had? And how the Chinese were
treated by their Tartarian Kings?

He told us, that the most part of the Soldiers of the Kingdom were Tartars,
unless it be the Kings Guard which is a Body of about 40000 Men armed with
Muskets and Bows of Corea or Japonia, for the most part. That the Inhabitants
were not oppressed with Taxes, nor treated worse then by their former Kings;
for they have all kind of Liberty and Freedom of Religion. The ancient Laws are
yet maintained in force all over the Country, and Justice is administered by
Judges that are natural Chinese, only there is this alteration, a Tartarian
must ass^st in every Court with a limited Authority, which suffers him to alter
nothing of the ancient Customs and Laws of the Country.

We desired him to tell us, what manner of Government they had under the King?

At Pekin, replied the Father, there are nine Judges or Courts of Judicature;
and so it is in all other Cities of the Kingdom, where they are called by the
same names, and hear the same causes.

The first and highest Court is called Li-pu, where half are Chinese, and half
are Tartars. It judges all Causes proceeding out of other Courts of the
Kingdom, by way of Appeal, of what nature or business soever. The second is
named also Li-pu, but here the syllable Li is pronounced in a different manner
from the first, for in the former it signifies Reason; but in this latter word
it imports Ceremony. This Court is the Forum Ecclesiasticum that judges of all
differences between the Learned; and decides all matters of controversy in
Religion. The third is styled Pim-pu, which examines the affairs of the
Militia. The fourth is for offenders, or the Criminal Court called Nim-pu. The
fifth is named Cho-pu, appointed for the Kings Treasury, as the Exchequer is
amongst us. The sixth is Cum-pu, which has a care of all the Kings Buildings
and public Structures, and Edifices. The seventh is to see to the payment of
all the Kings Officers and Attendants in his Family. The eighth has an
inspection over the Kings Kitchen and Table. The Father had forgot the names of
the two latter Courts, and of the businesses examined in the other.

In every City, these nine Courts are erected subordinate to one another; for
example, that of one City, appointed for the Militia, is under the jurisdiction
of the Provincial Court, which is in the chief City of the Province; and from
that, and all others, Men appeal to the Metropolis of the Kingdom for the
Militia, from whence they may appeal to the highest Court, which is the Li-pu,
when it is a business of great importance.

From this Tribunal, there can be no appeal further, but to the Kings person,
which is never granted without the punishment of one hundred bastinadoes, which
every one must patiently endure before he can be admitted to the Kings
presence. The manner of giving them is very cruel; the poor wretch is forced to
lie down upon the ground, upon his Belly, with his middle and backside naked,
two men sit one against another upon his Neck and Legs, with two great Indian
Canes in their hands attempered before in water, that they might be more
pliable, then they strike one after another; he that sits at the Head, strikes
upon the Hips, and the other upon the Back, one after another so fast, that
they are forced to stop sometimes, and suffer the patient to breathe; for
otherwise they would beat the breath out of his Body. The Mandarins, that is to
say, the Noblemen of the Country, and the Tartars, do commonly inflict this
kind of punishment upon their servants, for the least offense. He that is
forced to undergo this misery before he can come into the Kings presence,
proceeds in this manner. He is to cast in a stone at the Kings Chamber Window,
then he is commanded to come in; and if the King perceives that he suffers
bravely the first bastinadoes in such a manner, that declares his cause to be
just, and the greatness of his oppression, he commands the Executioners to
forbear, and the party to relate his business. If it appears then, that any
injustice has been done him, all that have had any hand in the judging of the
matter before, are happy if they are discharged, only for the loss of their
Offices; for commonly they are condemned to die.

I asked the Father, whether there were none left of the Race of the last Kings
that reigned in China. For Monsieur Dati said, that some affirm that a Son of
the former King of China had escaped into an adjacent Island where he does now
live.

The Father assured us, that if we did but consider where that Island was
situate, that it was enough to convince us of the fal^hood of that report: For
it is in the Oriental part of China, therefore in such a case the Prince was to
pass and travel many months through the whole Body of the Tartarian Army, and
conquered Territories, for they were come that way into China; which is a thing
not possible to be performed. The King his Father that reigned then, was become
effeminate by his lascivious behavior. He seldom showed himself out of his
Pa^l^ce, more then once a year, leaving the Government of the Kingdom and Army,
to 10000 treacherous Eunuchs that had called in the Tartars, who had subdued
three whole Provinces, and besieged the City of Pekin ^ound about, before the
King knew any thing of their attempts upon his Government.

This sudden approach and surprise, cast him into such a despair, that he
resolved to die. In order to it, he writ with his own blood upon a Busquin of
white Damask these words. God preserve the new King, let him not trust my
Counselors, but let him take compassion of my people. After this he hanged one
of his Daughters, and then hanged himself under the door that leads into the
Garden of his Palace. The Queen also died in the same manner, but her Son and
another of her Daughters were taken by the Tartars, and shut up in a prison
where they died also.

We inquired of what Family were the ancient Kings of China? and the Kings that
now reign, of what House they are?

He informed us, that the ancient Kings of China, were of the Family called
Min, which signifies Light. Monsieur Dati replied, wherefore then does Father
Martinius in his History call their Family Taimin? Tai answered Father Grueber,
signifies Stock or Race; so that the meaning of Taimin is the Race of Min, as
we say the Race, or the House of Austria, or the House of Arragon. But he told
us, that the Tartars have no name to their Families, they are not
distinguishable, but by their proper names. The Father of this present King was
called Xun-chi, that is to say, The Son of Heaven; and this Kings name is
Tun-min, A great Light.

We desired him to tell us, how the King lives with his Wives, and what
distinction he did put between their Children, and the Children of his
Concubins.

At this question, he answered almost in the words of the Canticles, Chap. 6.
Sexaginta sunt Reginae and octogint (...) Conc^binae and adolescentulorum
non^est num^rus. The truth is, the King has fifteen Wives honored with the
title of Queen, they are not all equal, three of them are more esteemed then
the rest? The first, and the chief is named Cnis^, that is to say, A perfect
Queen. One of the others is styled Tum-si, Queen of the East, and the other
Si-fi, Queen of the West. These two Queens are named collateral, they attend
upon the Sovereign Queen, but never speak to her but upon their knees; but the
other twelve are never admitted to speak to her: But if they desire to signify
any thing to her, they do it by the mediation of these Collateral Queens. The
other Wives are more or less, according to the Kings pleasure and humor; but it
is certain, that there is never less then one hundred, they are all in the
Guardianship of Eunuchs: But the Children of these Wives are all equal; he is
looked upon to be the chief, whom the King chooses as his Successor. The King
that reigns now, is the Son of a Concubine, he attained not to that honor for
want of other Brethren, for he was preferred to five of his Brethren, Queens
Sons, a little before his Father died; because, when the dying King had called
them before him, he did not look upon them as able to command in chief, and
manage so great an Empire. Therefore he ordered this Man to be seated in the
Throne, and to be proclaimed King in his stead, and his Mother to be declared
Queen Regent, during his minority, appointing him four Tutors or Governors, of
whom the chief is named Samni.

I inquired afterward, how they did bury their Kings?

He answered, that they did never bury their Corpse, but burn them according to
the Tartarian fashion. The pile is not of Wood, but of Paper, it is almost
incredible, what a vast quantity is employed, or rather wasted, in such an
occasion: For they do not only burn his Body, but also all his Wardrobe, his
Movables, his Treasury, his Jewels; in a word, all that was useful to the
deceased, or that was designed for his service, the living Animals only
excepted. Twelve Elephants bridled, and richly harnassed, laden with Turkish
Stones, meral ds, Saphirs, and all manner of jewels of an inestimable price;
three hundred Ho^ses, and one hundred Camels carried the Kings Treasure at the
last Funeral. All this was unloaden, and put upon this Mount of Paper, erected
to burn the Kings dead Body; when the fire had been put to it, the Gold and
Silver did run from it in streams, and force a way through the gazing
multitude, who are not all idle lookers on; for some seek to advantage
themselves with the spoils of the deceased: But there is a great care taken to
prevent such kind of violences and stealth, by the watchfulness of the Guards,
and by the grievous punishments inflicted upon such offenders. The Tartars are
very superstitious in this respect, and careful to consume to ashes the very
Bones, and not suffer so much as the bigness of a Pins-head to remain; the Gold
and the Silver that is left, after the burning, is spent, to provide more Paper
in such a case, and to burn again the relics of the dead Body, for the Souls
sake. At the last Funeral, when the expense of Paper was reckoned up, it
amounted to no less then Seventy thousand Crowns, and the whole Treasure that
was there consumed, to Forty thousand Millions. Three of the Kings domestics,
a Privy Counselor, a Chaplain, and a Concubine, devoted themselves to attend
upon the deceased Princes Soul, and follow him into another life, by
sacrificing themselves, as soon as the breath was out of his Body. They have
always the liberty to choose what manner of death they like best, but commonly
their Heads are cut off, which is the most usual kind of death amongst these
people to punish offenders, only Soldiers are strangled. Besides these three
Officers, many offer themselves freely to death, some out of affection for
their King, others out of a superstitious persuasion, unto which their Religion
inclines them. But in case every one should refuse to die, and none would be
willing to wait upon the Princes Soul, they force such as he took most delight
in, and his dearest servants to depart and follow after him.

I inquired next, in what did the Kings Revenue chiefly consist?

He informed us, that the Fields and Country did properly belong to the
Peasants, who out of the increase of their Fruits, pay about the tenth part to
the King, and another part to the Mandarins, that is to say, to the Gentlemen
that dwell in the Castles; for they are the Lords of their adjacent Fields.
This Revenue that belongs to the Crown, is very great; there is another that
proceeds from all the Cattle of the Kingdom, out of which, a tribute is
gathered: Besides, there are great Customs upon Cattons and Rice transported,
and several Mines in the Province of Tunan, which signifies a Southerly Cloud.
These Mines yield plenty of Gold, Saphirs, Emeralds, and all manner of precious
Stones, that enrich the Neighboring Kingdom of Pegu. There is also an unknown
quantity of Silver brought out of these Cities, Quangh-ceu, Canton, and
Nanquin, which are the chief Mart Towns of all the Kingdom.

We asked him, if the King did often show himself publicly in the City? And
how many Inhabitants may be in Pekin?

He told us, that he was wont to cause the Soldiers of his Guard to be drawn up
in Battalia, and exercise once every month, where he did commonly appear, to
cause them to shoot at a mark in the Meadows belonging to the City, between the
Walls that incompass it; for it is surrounded three times about, the uttermost
Wall is the lowest, the two others are higher; the nearer they are to the
middle of the Town. The Ditches are deep and full of Water; about the City
there are many pleasant Meadows. In one of them a great Statue of Wood is
erected, against which, the King appoints his Soldiers to shoot either with Bow
and Arrows, or with Powder and Shot; one is to hit the Hand, another the Head,
a third the Breast. If the Soldier misseth the first time, he has liberty to
try the second, and the third; if he fails all three, without touching his
mark, he receives a great many bastinadoes for his reward, and is disbanded as
unworthy of his Kings service. In the whole City of Pekin, there cannot be less
then a Million of Inhabitants, some say that there have been heretofore Nine
millions: But that is not credible, for the City is not so extraordinary large,
and their Buildings are but of one story high.

We desired to know, how they did cover their dwellings?

He informed us, that they did cover them with Tiles, the Country Houses have
no other covering The Tiles of the Kings Palace are of various colors, of
yellow and marble, very pleasant and beautiful when they are looked upon at a
distance: When the Sun shines upon them, they appear as if they were all of
Gold.

We inquired, what Religion the Chinese did profess?

He answered, that they did profess Idolatry, that they were all Idolaters in
their hearts, worshipping several Idols in private. But i^ we consider only
their outward profession, there are three differing Sects. The first is of the
Learned, that profess to worship a superior Being, named in their Language
Sciax-ti. These two words are engraven upon Tables of Gold, hung up in their
Temples; unto them they offer Sacrifice, by burning before them Paper gilded
with Gold or Silver; together with some small round Balls made with Storax and
Frankincense. But although they make profession of this Religion, which appears
more plausible then the rest; it is only outwardly, that they might be
distinguished from the Bonzi, a sort of men come out of China into India,
extremely superstitious, exceeding all others in Idolatry, and fond Conceits;
at first they were in some good repute amongst the Chinese; as it commonly
happens when any new Sect appears that is not known. The Doctrine which they
published of the Transmigration of Souls, which is not altogether like that of
Pythagoras, got them the peoples esteem, and procured them the envy of the
Learned: So that they, in time, opposed the progress of this new Sect, more out
of displeasure against it, then out of love for their ancient Religion.
Therefore they have so well published and established the worship of their
Sciax-ti, that the Religion of the Bonzi is out of fashion and date, and has
lost all its credit; and they themselves are looked upon no better then cheats.
Now all over China, there is no kind of people more exclaimed against and
decided; nor is there any Profession more ridiculous then that. A man of credit
scorns to exchange a word with them in public, or to be in their company,
unless it be in such occasions as are not to be avoided; as in Funerals,
public Sacrifices, Processions, where these Idolatrous Priests are mercenary,
and hired to attend. The Nobility cause them to go in Procession in nuptial
Solemnities, at the birth of their Children, and such like times. Their
Processions are preceded by several Instruments of Music, and attended with
Banners, and displayed Ensigns, which they carry about their Idols; whose
praises they sing in Songs and Hymns, and to whom they burn Paper and
Frankincense.

The second Sect is the most numerous, for it consists of the Citizens, of the
Nobility, of the People and Peasants; in a word, of all manner of People. These
pay their Devotions to the Souls of their Ancestors, unto whom they Sacrifice
continually in their Temples; and in their private Houses, by burning Paper and
Frankincense. All over the Country, this is the ordinary Sacrifice which is
offered to the good and evil spirits every morning, before they go out of their
doors. The third Sect is that of the Bonzi, who are most abominably
superstitious.

We inquired, what the Chinese did believe of Man's estate after Death?

They believe, answered he, that we shall be all happy, that we shall be
enriched with more wisdom, and delighted with more pleasure then in this life;
but they proceed no further to particularise how these advantages shall happen
to Men. The Soul they believe to be immortal: But replied Monsieur Dati, if
they believe that all shall be happy in another World, how comes it to pass,
that they are not thereby encouraged to indulge themselves in all manner of
Vices? Nothing hinders, answered the Father, but the fear of present
punishment. Yet they have some light persuasions of Hell, where the Souls of
the wicked shall be tormented; but they have found a way to get them out of
those Tortures. You must know, that at Pekin, and in every considerable Town,
there is a great Temple erected, unto which, above three hundred little
Chapels belong; every Trade has one appertaining to it, and not only the
Trades, but also every order and rank of Men, from the Magistrate to the
Beggar. Now their persuasion is, that the Spirit that is to vex the Soul of the
wicked man, deceased, haunts the Chapel appropriated to that Profession, unto
which he did belong: For example, a Theif or a Robber shall bring a small gift
to the Theifs Chapel, to ingratiate himself with, and appease the displeasure
of that Spirit that punishes Theft and Robbery, that he might spare him when
his Soul shall fall into his hands. The Spirit makes no use of the gift, as you
may imagine, but the Bonzi that keep the Chapel: So is it with the rest. This
is a politic Invention, very well contrived for two good purposes, by that
means they free themselves from the troublesome apprehensions of the future;
and they cause a pack of Knaves to subsist, who otherwise would trouble all the
World with their begging.

We asked the Father, whether amongst the Chinese there were any Religious
Orders of Men?

To this question he answered: There are no other Orders of Religious Votaries,
besides the Bonzi, who are most wicked Varlets, and infamous for their
unnatural love of Boys; they want not opportunities to commit this abomination,
for they are entrusted with the tuition of the youth; they are as the
Schoolmasters of that Country. This sin is too common amongst the Tartars, as
well as amongst the Chinese. Instead of abhorring it, they make public
Profession of it, by erecting Academies for that infamous purpose. This Vice
has spread it self farther into Persia; they are so base as to receive Boys in
Marriage, and their Fathers themselves, are not ashamed to give their consent,
and appoint them a kind of Portion, as to their Daughters. Amongst the Tartars,
there are also Religious Votaries not much unlike the Bonzi; they have the care
of the Sacrifices, and are attired with Yellow or Red Garments, that fall down
as low as their heels, with large sleeves open. Some of them carry on their
heads Paper Miters; but commonly their heads are uncovered; they march with
naked feet, and all their habit is much like that which our Painters give to
the holy Apostles. This Religious Order has many Convents of the Tartarian
Women, situated, for the most part, upon High Mountains, of an uneasy access.
Out of these Monasteries, they never go out, without the leave of their
Superiors, and seldom, unless it be to beg, and then the oldest of them are
appointed. All these Nuns make Vows of perpetual Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience; their heads are uncovered, and their hair is cut round, close to
their ears; their garments are like to that of the Bonzi in shape; but they are
of a red color, that of the Bonzi is gray.

We inquired of the Sciences professed amongst the Chinese.

They have, said the Father, the Works of Consucius, who is as much esteemed
amongst them, as Aristotle is amongst us. Confucius lived about Three thousand
years ago, he has left them a Moral Philosophy mingled with Divinity and
Natural Philosophy. I have seen one of his Posterity reckoned to be the
Threescore and third Man of his Race: He is very rich, and honored with the
title of a Prince; for the Kings of China have always had so great a respect
for this Learned Man, that they have allowed that title of honor to his
Grandchildren. Besides the Works of Confucius, they are naturally inclined to
the knowledges of Numbers; but their Geometry is very imperfect, for it teaches
only the more ordinary and practical part: They are not in the least acquainted
with the Theory, nor with the most excellent part of Geometry, as the Optic.
From hence we may judge how little they excel in Painting and Architecture.
They are mightily addicted to Chyromancy, Metoscopia, Magic, and such like
Arts. And in Judiciary Astrology they esteem themselves super-excellent.

We entreated him to tell us next, something of their Language, and of their
Writings.

For their Language, said the Father, it is very poor, for it has not above
Four hundred words. All the Nouns are undeclinable, and the Verbs are employed
only in the Infinitive Mood. I answered him, Sir if you would but continue but
eight days in this City, I am persuaded that I could learn so well the
Language, that I might be taken for a Natural Chinese. The Father laughed at my
confident conceit, and returned me this reply. After such a study of eight
days, you might possibly call a Man a Hog, instead of honoring him with the
title of Sir; for all the significations of the China Language consist in the
variation of the accent, in the difference of the tone, in the aspirations, and
other alterations of the Voice, which are almost innumerable.

For example, Cin pronounced simply, has no signification. Ciunun pronounced
by lengthning the pronounciation of the u, and sharpning of the Voice,
signifies Sir or Monsieur; Ciu pronounced in lengthning the u, and keeping the
same tone, is a Hog; Ciu spoken swiftly, or rather shot in haste out of the
Mouth, signifies a Kitchen; and Ciu made use of in the beginning of a strong
Voice, which diminishes at last, signifies the Foot of a Stool. By this
example you may see how one word may have five differing significations. In
like manner Tien, pronounced plainly, has no meaning. If it be spoken sharply,
so that it makes Ti-en, it will signify Sweet. If the (i) is accented thus
Ti-en, it means Bread. Ti-en uttered speedily, signifies the Foot of a Table,
or of a Bed. Most part of the words in this Language are Monosillables, and may
be joined together in a various manner. But this Art of Joining the words, is
very difficult, and not to be learned in an instant; but that which renders it
more uneasy to strangers, is, That they have neither Characters for their
Letters, nor Alphabet; for they write all their Conceptions in Figures and
Ciphers, that signify every one of them two or three words, and many times
whole Periods and Sentences; therefore they are forced to write the five
significations of the word Ciu, by five differing Ciphers, for want of
Characters and Accents; whereas we might easily distinguish them by the several
Accents, which we might place variously upon the same words. This is the
Perfection of other Tongues, although the same word may have diverse
significations, we can easily distinguish that which is proper to it in that
place of the discourse, where we find it by the words that go before, and
follow immediately after.

But to return to this wo^d Ciu, besides the different Characters to express
the five former significations. Suppose I intend to write Good morrow Sir, I
must not make use of the Character that signifies good, nor that of Sir, but I
must write another Character different from all the former, which alone shall
signify all these three words Good morrow Sir. Or suppose that I am to write
Yes Sir, I must not use the Character of yes, nor that of Sir, but must employ
another which will signify alone Yes Sir. By this you may easily judge what
number of Characters are needful to write our Conceptions in this Language.
Therefore it is more uneasy to read it, then it is to write it; for when we
intend to express our mind in writing, it is only requisite that we should
understand the single Characters of words; for when they are joined together,
we may easily understand their meaning. But this manner of writing is not
esteemed, and only in use amongst the vulgar sort of Men. But the Learned must
be acquainted, not only with those single Characters and Ciphers, but many
others of a larger signification: Some reckon them to be about Seventy four
thousand; whosoever knows any more then the rest, is esteemed the most Learned,
because he is most able to understand and read more Books.

From hence it is, that this Tongue is so difficult to be learned; for as they
have no Letters, they have no Dictionary to teach the meaning of the words; so
that there is no other way to learn them, but to hear them spoken, to observe
the sound and accent, and to imitate the Inhabitants by repeating them often,
as the Parrots when they learn to speak. The Jesuits have caused a Catechism
to be Printed, and certain Dialogues; the one to teach the proper terms, that
they might discourse of the mysteries of our Faith, and make the Chinese
understand them; the other is for the words most commonly used in a familiar
conversation: Nine thousand Characters which are in that Book, are sufficient
for this purpose.

This account of the China Language discouraged me, and took me off from my
inconsiderate design of learning it in six days. When I feriously think upon
it, I cannot conceive how man's life can be long enough, for any to attain to a
perfect knowledge of so many Ciphers, to understand them, when they are placed
together, and to remember their different shapes and significations. I have
sought out a familiar example, to make me conceive the possibility of mastering
the difficulties of such a study. I remember the Figures that are employed in
the Demonstrations of Geometry, may serve very well for this purpose; for
although these Figures be entangled in Lines, Triangles, Squares, Circles, and
many such Figures which are made by the crossing and meeting of the several
Lines; nevertheless, at the first view, I understand not only that which is
demonstrated, at last, by these differing Lines; but also many other Truths,
which must of necessity appear, before all the Lines can be drawn by a great
many former Figures that enter into my mind, though they appear no more in that
Figure and Demonstration which they finally complete: For all those Figures and
Truths are supposed to have been sufficiently demonstrated. There is yet
another difficulty in this example; the Figures of Geometrical Demonstrations,
are to be looked upon variously, as a strait Line is sometimes the basis of the
Triangle, sometimes the Diameter of a Circle, or part of an Oval, or as the
right side of a Parabole, or as the Latus transversum of another. This
consideration caused me to admire, the more, Man's ingenuity, and to conceive a
possibility of writing and understanding the Characters of the Chinese; for
our skilful Geometers who are well acquainted with all the Figures of Euclides
and Archimedes, etc. And that are able, of that Truth that is thereby proved,
and to gather from thence a great many other consequences that are deduceable,
seem to perform something more difficult then the Chinese, who are only to
discover the meaning of certain Figures imprinted in their minds, by a long
continuance and usage; for it is possible in the whole course of our life to
attain to a familiarity with them all.

The Father Grueber told us of their Marriages, that the Chinese when they
came to nineteen years of age, or thereabouts, commonly espouse a Woman that is
reckoned as their only and lawful Wife; they receive with her a Portion in
Marriage, according to their Estates; but it is always in their power, to put
her away by returning her Portion to her again. When a Father delivers his
Daughter in Matrimony, he never expects to see her again, he shuts her up in a
close kind of Sedan. When he has locked her in, he delivers the Key to the
good Woman, by whose Mediation the Marriage is consummated; for there are some
who make it their Profession and Trade, to deal in such kind of Wares. The
Woman she delivers the Key to none but to the married Man, who is not to open
it, and free his Bride from her prison, but when she is brought into the
Nuptial Chamber. When the Virgins of the Nobility go abroad, they are carried
in Litters by Horses or Asses covered over with a Vail, the rest march on foot
with their faces also hid; all kind of Women appear in this manner in public.
He told us afterward, that when any Man has taken a Wife, he is at his
liberty to entertain as many Concubines as he pleases, of whom there are two
sorts, some free, others slaves: The free are descended of Gentlemen, or other
Persons well qualified, who to free themselves from the burden of so many
Children, which they have by their many Concubines, are ready to part with
their Daughters upon that account for small sums of Money, which they never
restore again to the Men, when they divorce or send them away. All the Children
remain still with the Father, unless he please to allow a yearly Pension to
them and their Mothers. The Concubines that are slaves, are commonly the
Daughters of the meaner sort of people, they part with them for the same reason
as the Gentlemen do with theirs: They bring their Children to the Marketplace
of the City to sell them; Daughters to serve as Concubines, and the Boys as
Servants; but they commonly drowned all such Children, Males and Females as are
crooked or misshapen at their Birth, or when they are otherwise deformed. For
fifteen crowns any man may choose the most beautiful Girls of the meaner sort to
be his Concubine; but their condition is most miserable, for they are forced to
carry water, and to drudge about the lowest offices of the family: When their
Master desires to enjoy them, they cannot refuse him; for they were bought for
that purpose; and although they may be of as good Family as himself; if they
are taken in Adultery, they commonly loose their heads. The Catholic Priests
make use of these meaner Concubines, to insinuate the Mysteries of
Christianity, into the minds of the other Women, and to teach the Children of
the Noblest Families. They have been by this means so successful, that many of
these Women are become Converts, but they do not think it convenient to baptize
them, in regard of that obligation that lies upon them, to grant to their
Masters all the liberty that they desire.

The Catholic Religion is there freely professed all over the Empire, without
let or hinderance. In every one of their Churches, a Copy of the Kings Mandate,
by which he grants a free exercise of our Religion, is graven in a Stone, and
hung up in an eminent place, in the view of the Congregation. Christians are
very well esteemed of in all the Provinces of China; and the Tartars as well as
the Chinese, have liberty to turn Christians, and embrace the Catholic Faith.
The Learned Men of the Country, are familiarly acquainted with our Missionary
Priests; the greatest opposition that they meet with, is from the Idolatrous
Bonzi. The Father told us, that he had left in China six and twenty Jesuits,
four at Pekin, six Jacobins, and two barefooted Carmelites. These Missionaries
wear the same habit as the Learned of the Country, a long garment of white
Damask that reaches to the ground. Father Adam Schall is one of the four
Missionary Jesuits in this City, he has lived forty five years in China, and
is very well esteemed of the Prince and People.

We inquired what kind of Coin or Money, and what Weights the Chinese use?

He answered, That they had but one sort of Coin Printed, named Cuxa, of very
base mettle, each of them is worth about a farthing; upon one side is the Kings
name, upon the other, the name of the Coin. Three hundred pieces of this money
make a Lexu, which is worth about a Crown; they divide the Lexu in ten Ziens,
in eight Fueus, and every Fueu in...... Cuxas. They use instead of Money, both
Gold and Silver pieces, which they cut off as they spend; for that purpose,
they carry in their Boots, and about them, Seals and Cizers.

The Pound weight of China is sixteen of our ounces. They measure by a cubit:
All kind of Victuals is very cheap, as well as their clothing; for five Fucas,
which are five of our pence, one may buy a very large Hen; by that any may
judge of every thing else that is sold, at a proportionable rate.

We asked him concerning their Meat and Drink.

He told us, that they had no Wine, although their Country affords excellent
Grapes. The Europeans sometimes make Wine with them, which the Inhabitants like
very well, but they dare not drink of it, but in private, for this proud Nation
have a Law in force to punish severely all such as shall bring in new modes of
living. Their ordinary drink is The, and Wine made of Rice; they extract it
doubtless by the Limbick and the Still. It is not certainly known how they do
it, for they will not discover the secret of any of their Arts to strangers,
unless they swear first to profess it, and it may cost them their lives, if
they fail afterward. They delight to drink hot liquors for that purpose; they
are always upon the fire in vessels near their Tables. In Summer they cast a
little quantity of Ice in their drink, which they suffer to remain there only
for a moment, that the liquor may receive from it, in so short a time,
something of its cold nature to cool the stomach; but they quickly take it out
again, that they might not loose the pleasure of drinking it hot. They keep
their Ice, as we do in Europe; it is sold about the Towns very cheap, they use
it more to cool their Fruits, then their Drinks, for they delight to eat them
very cold.

But to return to their liquors, Wine made of Rice, appears of a whiteness,
inclining a little to the Amber color, and mixed with a Golden Yellow, very
beautiful to the eye. It has a very pleasant taste, and so delicious, that it
seems as good as the best Sack. The common people drink out of Earthen Vessels,
but the rich and noble are provided with Golden and Silver, adorned with
ordinary Workmanship. The greatest Lords use drinking Vessels made with the
Horns of a Rhinocerot, imbellished in a course manner, enriched with Gold, and
sometimes with Diamonds. For their Meats they have all kind of varieties, as we
have in Europe, of Venison, and of Fowl, of all manner of Fruits and Pulse.
Their Spices are better then ours, for they are nearer to the Molucas. Their
Wheat is very good, they can make Meal of it, but they have no skill to knead
it into Bread; therefore in lieu of that, they use Rice which has soaked in
the Water, and been parched and dried afterward at the fire. This they take
and carry to their Mouths, with long sticks that serve them instead of Forks.
In their left hands they are commonly provided with a Porringer full of this
Rice, which they use instead of Bread, taking it out with their sticks at every
bit of Meat. They have no skill, nor taste to season their Meats well: In the
same Pot they boil Pork, Hare, Fish, Veal, and Pheasant together; and their
best Cooks are continually pouring in abundance of Water, while they are
boiling. When they are sodden, they fill their Porringers and Dishes with this
mad Oleo Podrido, which serves them instead of Pottage. The most ordinary Flesh
that they feed upon is Pork; their Mutton is in good esteem amongst them. The
poorer sort eat Asses, Dogs, Cats, and such like things, which they buy in
Shambles, appointed for all kind of Flesh. The dried Legs of Dogs, well and
curiously smoaked as we do our Neats Tongues, is a bit very savory to them;
they commonly reserve it for their dessert and last morsel at dinner; they
esteem it a great fortifier of the stomach. They bring every kind of Meat
severally in distinct Dishes, but they have but two sorts of Sawces to
encourage and provoke appetite. The first is a kind of Paste made with small
Beans in this manner; they beat the Beans soaked in Water, and then stir them
well together in the Water; when upon the top there appears a thin covering, or
green skin, they strain all through a Linen cloth into clean Water; the
finest substance runs through, but the skins remain behind. This they use
instead of Sauce to all their Meats, and instead of Salt also; for they never
salt them otherwise, although they want not Wells and Fountains of Salt and
Brackish Water in all the Western Provinces. The other Sauce is named Mi-sso,
which is made of a rotten Grain that yields a most noisome smell; they do not
boil it with the rest of their Meats, but they put it by it self in Sawcers;
and when they are at dinner, they dip their morsels of Meat in this strong and
filthy Mustard. At their Feasts, and at the Tables of their Nobles and Lords,
they garnish their Dishes variously, but ordinarily with Rice, Herbs, or with
hard Eggs, minced small and fried. When their Cooks have shown all their art
and skill in such occasions, it is no light punishment to condemn a Man of
Europe, to carry thither an empty stomach: Therefore when strangers are
invited, they provide themselves with a good dinner before hand, for they are
certain to meet with nothing there fit for their appetites.

Their Tables stand round about the room where the Feast is to be held, never
above two or three are together at the same Table, the Master is wont to sit
alone at the lower most. They use no Table-cloaths, but cover them with as many
necessary utensils, as there should be persons at the Table: These utensils are
a dish to drinkin, a Plate of Rice, another of their dainty Mi-sso, and two of
these Sticks, that serve them instead of Forks. All their Dishes are of
Porcelane, the Kings as well as the meanest Subjects, with this difference,
That the one is of a finer substance then the other. When the invited guests
are seated, an Officer ushers in the first service; and when all the Tables are
furnished, he makes a sign to all to begin to eat. If any should offer to touch
the Meat before he has given the signal, he would be severely checked, and
looked upon as a Clown or an impatient Glutton. The signal or liberty of
eating, is given by saying to them all Zin, that is to say, I invite you; then
the guests all answer, Zin, zin, zin, repeating this word three times, as the
Italian Priests do the word Peace, when they salute and embrace one another.
After this, they all carry their hands to their several Dishes together, and
the Meat to their Mouths; and if any do not eat at the same time, as the rest,
the Officer calls upon them; for they think that the perfection of their Feasts
consists in eating altogether, otherwise they judge it to be out of order, and
unhandsome. When the Officer esteems that they have sufficiently eaten of the
first service, he causes the second to be brought in, and after that the
third, observing the same ceremonies and decency, as at the first. Likewise,
when he thinks it is time to drink, he invites them to it, in the same manner
as he does to eat; but they must all empty their Cups. When they begin to drink
the first time, the Stage Players enter into the Room, some of them are common,
who play for Money at every House, when they are hired, others are entertained
by Noblemen; the richest have several companies of them, as the great Lords in
Europe have Musicians. These kind of people are very richly clothed; when they
come in, they address themselves to him that sits at the highest Seat to show
him their Book of Comedies, and to desire him to tell them upon what subject to
play. He sends them, out of civility, down to another, with their Book, which
comes at last to the Master of the House, who commonly tells them to act what
Comedy they please. This Comedy lasts about a quarter of an hour: The Subjects
of the most part of their Comedies, are taken from the Lives and Heroic
Actions of their former Kings and Queens; when the Comedy is ended, the Officer
enters in with other Dishes of Meat; and when they are all taken away, and have
ended their drinking, the Comedians return again, observing the same ceremony
as before, to entreat the assistants one after another, to appoint the subject,
upon which they are to discourse and act. When this second Comedy is finished,
the Officer comes again to give his attendance: Now this unpleasant diversion
lasts sometimes six or seven hours. I had almost forgot, said the Father, to
tell you, that they have no Olives growing in China, therefore they make use of
three other sorts of Oil: The richest have an Oil taken out of the Berries of
Flowers of that Country, that grow upon Briars: This is very sweet and
pleasant. I know not how they make it, but they have a great quantity of it;
for their Land is as fruitful of such Briars, as ours is of Nettles. The meaner
sort of people make use of another Oil, extracted from a Grain which they call
Telselin; it has almost the same taste as the Oil of Sesamum, a little bitter.
The Country People, as in Poland, employ the Oil of Line or Flax, or another
kind of Oil extracted from a Plant named Ma-sen, which has a most odious and
strong smell. They never eat any Sallads, nor other raw Herbs; many of their
Fruits they preserve in Salt and Vinegar. In short they are not curious in
their taste and eating, but are filthy and unhandsome. When we had a Pheasant,
or a Hair, we could not abide to see our China Cook handle and dress it; we
were forced to spit and dress it our selves, and eat it in the most retired
Room, having first forbidden the door to be opened to any that should come,
unless it be to the Kings Officers. And that none might surprise us unawares,
while our Meat was preparing, always one of us stood Sentinel at the Window, to
give warning of any Man's coming up to us.

It is a very strange thing said Monsieur Dati, that this Nation that has so
many Sheep and Cows, have no skill to make Cheese with their Milk, in any other
manner, but with small Beans.

This proceeds, replied the Father, from their unsufferable Pride; for they
scorn to learn any thing, from strangers, especially from the Tartars; because
the Tartars make Cheese that is enough to cause them to abominate such a
composition; for that Nation. I could never make use of any of their Cheese,
nor of the Milk of the Chinese; for both yield a most odious smell. The
Tartars make their Cheese of the shape of our Cracknels, and hang them up with
strings, a great many together, at their Shops, to invite the hungry stomach to
buy them; they are so grievous hard, that the Flint Stones are not more. They
are not to be eaten, but after they have been softened by the Fire, and molified
as our Wax.

But the Chinese, are far more nice and curious in their sleeping, then in
their eating and drinking. In Winter they spread Cotton Mats upon little
Furnaces, and square Stoves, named Cau, where they keep a very moderate Fire.
Upon these Mats they lay very fine Sheets of Cotton, all their Linen is of
that substance; for they use their Line to make Oil, and their Flax to twist
into Ropes. At the four corners of their Cau, there are Pillars as at our Beds;
at the top round, the Curtains are fastened, which they call Cai-ia. In Winter
they are of Cloth, or of some other thick substance; but in Summer they are of
a very fine and thin Cotton, to keep off the Musketas. When the cold is over,
they carry their Mats, and lay them upon Boards or Tables; and in the heat of
Summer, instead of Wool and Cotton, they fill them with a Sea weed, which when
it is dried, is as soft as Silk, and as light as Feathers: It is naturally very
cool. Their Bolsters and Pillows are very neatly made of the thinnest and
softest skins of Reed, which we call Indian Cane, in the manner of Hurdles.
When the inside is emptied out, and shut up close, they are filled with wind,
which yields in the hottest Season much pleasure. The head feels them to be
very soft, and never sinks deep; it is not buried as in our Down-pillows, they
are very smooth. Their head are as though they were upon Springs, when they
turn; and at the least motion, they cause their Pillows and Bolsters, to send
up a cold and fresh Air to cool their faces, which is a notable advantage in
the hottest nights of the Summer.

Their Chairs are of the same substance, the Back and the Elbows are made of
the Skins of Indian Cane, very commodious to sit down. The Tartars are not so
effeminate to make use of all these things, they sleep upon the bare ground as
the Turks.

We desired him to tell us something of the Kings pomp, and of the magnificence
of his Throne, when he appears in public in all his grandeur.

He assured us, that the former Kings of China did delight in a great deal of
glory and state; but that the present King of the Tartars, who reigns now in
China, is not so ceremonious: He is content in his greatest splendour, to sit
upon a Carpet spread on the ground.

Monsieur Dati desired to know from the Father, in what the Chinese were most
expensive.

He answered, that they spent much in their Funerals, in the great quantity of
Perfumes and Wax, which they did there burn, in the making of Wooden Statues,
in their Frankincense, which they did offer to the deceased, and specially in
the rare Coffins, in which they put the dead Bodies. They are of precious Wood,
as of Aloes, of Yellow Saunders, or of some other Aromatic Wood of a great
value: This serves instead of imbalming.

We inquired of the goodness of the Air, of the Country, and how long the
Inhabitants do commonly live.

The Air, said he, is very good everywhere; therefore the Country people that
are temperate in their diet, commonly live to be very old; some are one hundred
years of age. The Nobility at forty seem to be old, and when they see fifty,
they begin to be crasie; this difference proceeds from their debaucheries with
the Female Sex, and their immoderate eating, in which they prescribe no bounds
to themselves. Their Daughters seldom come to be thirty years of age, because
their Mothers are wont to tie and bind their Legs as soon as they are born; for
they think all their beauty consists in crooked Legs, which is that part alone
of their Bodies seen when they go abroad.

This strange and unnatural bending and tying of their Legs so young, disorders
the Channels, through which; the nourishment of their Members passes, and
stops the Conduits, in such a manner, that neither their Legs nor their Bodies
ever come to a perfect stature and bigness; for by that means, the Blood is
hindered in its ordinary circulation; and the complexion and constitution of
their Bodies being vitiated, it hastens them the sooner to their Graves.

We desired him to tell us, which were their most noted Festivals?

He answered us, That they chiefly observe three; the one at the first New Moon
in February, the second in November, and the third at the Kings Birthday. In
every one of these Festivals, the King goes out of the City, attended upon by
all the Nobility and Lords of the Court; by the Magistrates, Officers of the
Law, and by the Learned Men, etc. Every one wears an habit suitable to his
dignity and place. All their Garments are differing from one another, none but
the King dares wear a Pearl alone at the top of his Gap. Many of the most
eminent Lords have precious Stones, and some Pearls; but always a Ruby, an
Emerald, or a Jasper, is put with it; for none but the King is to wear it
alone. He wears also as marks of his Royalty, two Storks embroidered with
Silver upon his Breast. The Mandarins have other Animals: There are nine chief
differences, by which the Nobility is distinguished in their habits. The first
has a Crane for his Badge, the second a Lion, the third an Eagle, the fourth a
Peacock; I do not remember the rest, nor what differences are to be noted in
the Garments of their Magistrates and Learned Men. I only remember the Badge of
the Mathematicians, they wear four little Squares of Jasper, tied with silken
strings at their Girdles. In the middle of the Squares there is a Ruby, and
upon the top of their Bonnet, they bear a Ruby and a Pearl together. The most
ordinary colors of their Garments, are Red, Blew, Orange mixed with Blew. We
have already said, that their Bonzi are clothed in Gray, and the Learned in
White.

I remember that at every Festival observed at the New Moon in February, every
one is wont to melt or cast some piece of Mettle; upon which they represent the
Figure of a Crescent or New Moon; and they call this Festival, The Sacrifice of
the Hare.

We inquired, Whether the Chinese had any Memorials so ancient, that give an
account of the passages of so many thousand years ago, as some do affirm.

He told us, that they had no Histories more ancient then King Tao, who lived
about four thousand seven hundred years ago; and that they had no Histories of
antienter date, that speak of the beginning and continuance of the World.

We put the Father next upon the Art of Navigation, to know whether they
believe in China, that there is any passage out of Asia into America; he
assured us, that they had but little skill in Navigation; that they know not
well how to make use of the Compass, or rather this knowledge is defective.
Their greatest Vessels are not able to carry above fifty Men, their Sails are
made of Mat, but so artificially, that they can go almost with any wind. Their
rowing differs from ours, for they move their Oars before and behind. Therefore
as they have no great insight into the Art of Navigation, it is not possible
that they should be able to adventure far at Sea, they dare not loose the sight
of the Land.

Concerning their passing from Asia into America, the Father told us, That he
knew nothing certain, because the English and the Hollanders have been
disappointed in their attempting to pass through the Frozen Sea, where they
have no manner of Trade: For the Tartars they are no great Traders, and it is
not probable, that any of them will venture upon a mere curiosity, to open that
passage. It is not likely, that the Chinese will leave their Country, to
undertake any such hazardous voyage: Nevertheless, it is generally believed,
that there is some-where a passage, or that Asia is divided from America, but
by a Narrow Sea. The continual appearance of many wild Fowl of America, in the
Southern Parts of Tartaria, do very much strengthen this opinion: For it is not
probable, that they would there be seen, if America and Tartaria were not
joined together, or not far from one another.

We asked him concerning the Dancings, Plays, and Gardens of China.

The Chinese, replied the Father, never dance, but the Tartars use that sport
amongst themselves; the Men with the Men, and the Women with the Women; but
never both Sexes together. Their Music consists in striking their hands one
against another, or in beating upon some V^sel of Metal that yields a ^l^^
sound. The Chinese have all manner of Sports and Plays; they pla^ with Balls
and Draughts, with Di^ and Cards; they are very dext^rous in striking the Ball
with their feet: Their manner is not to play in parties, only five or six meet
together, and send with their feet the Ball from one to the other; I have seen
a Ball continue a quarter of an hour without touching the Ground. Their Gardens
are, for the most part enclosed Meadows, on purpose to e^ercise themselves with
a Ball. They have no other sweet scented flowers, but Jasmin; their Roses are
very beautiful, but without any scer^* They have also some Tulips, Violets, and
Gilliflowers; but they know not so much as the name of an Anemone: Nevertheless
their Gardens are very green and delightful, because of the convenience of
watering them with fresh Rivers; but they have but small skill to dress and
order them. All that I could take notice of, in such places, was in the Kings
Garden, where is to be seen a great Cascade of Water, that falls from a Rock of
Brass, covered all over with artificial Trees of the same substance. The
Chinese are extraordinary skilful in the Art of casting Metals; therefore
their Artillery is very beautiful.

We desired him to inform us of something concerning their other Arts, and
chiefly concerning their Physic and Physicians.

Their Physicians, answered the Father, are notable in discerning by the Pulse,
the nature and qualities of a disease; but their knowledge is not so
extraordinary in prescribing remedies, for they govern themselves by guess, at
all adventures, as our Physicians.

I can speak of both by experience; for when I fell sick, about forty days
distance from the City of Pekin, one of the Kings Physicians visited me, at the
request of Father Adam Schall. As soon as he was come into my Chamber, he
caused me to sit down and suffered me to rest quietly a while. Afterward he
uncovered both my Arms as far as the Elbows, placing them upon a Table, and
felt the Pulses of both Arms, one after another; pressing the Arteries
sometimes hard, sometimes softly, sometimes equally; and at other times he
pressed hard upon one Arm, leaving the other free: Sometimes he pressed hard upon
one Pulse, and softly upon the other; he continued to feel it along while, anon
he felt it but by turns; sometimes he caused me to hold my fist closed, anon he
made me open it. In short, he felt and examined my Pulse, as it did beat in
every posture of my Arm and Hand, which lasted a long while, about three
quarters of an hour. After all this, I had almost a mind to discover to him my
discase, but Father Adam interrupted me, and told me, that he knew it better
then I did. When the Physician was sat down, he described with a wonderful
majesty my disease, and all its properties and circumstances, assigning to them
the time of their first beginning, in such an exact manner, that I was
strangely surprised. He appointed me some Potions, but by the small advantage
that I received from them, I found that he had been more skilful to guess at my
disease, then to prescribe Remedies. They never let any man blood, as we do,
but instead of that, they make use of Cupping-Glasses in the Shoulders: They
cure the Pox very well, with certain mixture of Herbs; so that this disease is
not so mortal, in these parts, as in Turkey, Persia, and other Countries of the
East Indies: They have amongst their Physics a very famous Root that grows,
chiefly, in the Province of Sur-iven, they name it Tigers-Milk; for they say,
That it never comes, but where the Milk of the she Tigers has moistened the
ground, when they are furious and enraged by the pursuit of Huntsmen. It is
certain, that the smell of this Root is very like the smell of Milk, and its
color is white as Milk: They say, that when this Root is well prepared
according to their skill, it is able to give an infallible sweat; it is true, I
have seen the Root, but never the experiments of its virtues.

We questioned him afterward, concerning the other Arts of the Chinese; and
the Father in the same order, as we had proposed to him, returned us an answer
to every question.

That in China they have no Crystal, but many Glasses, one sort especially,
which they name Rice-Glass, it is more brittle then our Glasses, but easier to
work: For as soon as the substance of it feels the heat of the Furnace, it
melts; and they are not unskilful in handling it, for they make with it most
beautiful shapes and fabrics. Instead of Iron, they make use of great and
hollow staves of Glass, as our Enammellers in Europe. All their Looking-Glasses
are very good; and as they have a particular Art in Melting and Casting
Metals, they make many curious Looking-Glasses in a Concavity, for a very
small price; for a little above a piece, one may buy a Looking-Glass containing
thirty two Thumbs in Diameter. The Jesuits have carried to them the Art of
making Spectacles and Telescopes. It is a wonderful thing that the Chinese
have humbled themselves so much, as to learn this skill from us. At present
they do them very well, according to our patterns which the Merchants of Europe
transport thither. Our Spectacles of the larger size, is a gift well accepted
of them; therefore the Merchants do not forget to furnish them with this
commodity.

They make excellent Stuffs with Thread of Gold, and with Golden Wire they make
many beautiful Works: But they boast much of their Art in Gilding with Gold and
Silver-Straw at the fire, in several manners; for with this gilded Straw they
compose many rare and excellent Works. But I judge them to be most ingenious,
in their making of artificial fires with Gunpowder; for they cause them to
represent all kind of Shapes, Characters, Figures of Trees, and to appear in
all manner of natural colors. I could never have believed from others
relations, what my eyes have convinced me to be true. I have seen at a Feast, a
big Vine come down from the Roof of a large Room; and another fire after
incompass it about, representing its Leaves and Grapes so perfectly well, and
so naturally colored, that a Painter could not have shown one more lively.

This appearance lasted as long as we are repeating over our Misereri; when the
combustible matter was spent, the artificial Vine vanished away, leaving behind
a dark mist in every place, where any part of the Vine had appeared with its
Leaves and Branches of Grapes. They have something of this Art in Persia, but
they cannot do such wonderful feats as in China, for here they care not to
communicate their skill: The expense is not extraordinary, for forty shillings
any man may have a fire representing three or four shapes. At these words I
instantly replied to Father Grueber. You make me now believe, what I could
never credit before. About eleven years ago, I met at Rome with Monsieur
Sestel, a Dane, who told me, that some of his Friends had written to him from
Coppenhagen, that a Dane being returned out of China, had shown the King an
artificial Fire that rose up into the Air, and burst out into many flames,
which represented the Kings name. The Father replied, You may safely believe
it; but I wonder how this man could come to understand the mystery, which he
could never have been able to put in practice, unless he had tried it before,
and taken an Oath required in all such occasions, I wonder also, how he could
escape out of the Country after such an Oath.

Monsieur Dati asked, Whether they use any Coaches or Chariots?

He answered, That the Chinese are carried in Litters by Mules, or by Men;
they are like ours, but somewhat longer; for they put in them, their Clothes, a
Bed, a Table, and other conveniences for a Traveller. The Tartars have
Coaches, with two Wheels, drawn by one or two Mules or Horses. The Ladies of
Viceroys, or of other eminent Lords, are drawn by two of these Beasts, and
encompassed about with a great many Tartarian Women on Horsback, Armed with Bow
and Arrows. They carry their Bag and Baggage upon Camels backs, and upon a kind
of carriage that has but one great Wheel that turns in the midst of two Trunks
full of Stuff. One man draws this with a Girdle tied to his middle, and tied
also to two Staves that are fastened to the Trunks, with which he governs this
Carriage at his pleasure. They carry about their Wares and Commodities through
the Land, in this manner.

We asked him, Whether they delight in Hunting? Whether they run Races? Whether
they be good Horsemen? And, whether they have any skill to manage Horses?

He answered, That the Tartars are good Huntsmen, but the Chinese seldom
practice hunting: They know not what it is to run a Race; they are very careful
and curious in harnassing well their Horses, but they do not know how to manage
them.

We desired to know, Whether they took any Tobacco?

To this he replied, That they take no Tobacco in Powder, but in Smoke; the
Tartars and the Chinese, the Men and the Women are great takers of Tobacco.
For that purpose, the Women are commonly provided with a Bag that hangs over
their shoulders, where their Pipe and their Tobacco is kept; but the Men carry
their Pipes at their Girdles.

Monsieur Dati desired to know, Whether the word Mandarin be of China?

He answered, That it was a Portugues, and that at China they are termed Quoan,
which signifies a Prince, or a Governor.

We asked him concerning their Courage and Inclinations, to Martial exploits
and War.

He assured us, That they were Cowards, and that in three years time that he
lived in China, he never could see above two people fight together at cuffs;
for they have no other way to satisfy their revenge, and end their quarrels.

We inquired of him, whether in his return he had not met with one Monsieur
Tavernier, a French Merchant, that was gone from Legorne, about two years
since, into the Indies, to carry thither a great deal of riches in Jewels;
amongst the rest, he had a set of great Saphires, and of Pearls, as big as
Pears, to make a Rose, which he intended for the Great Mogol, to imbellish the
Plume of his Elephant. I told him also, that Monsieur Tavernier had said, That
the Great Mogol did spend every day Fifteen thousand Crowns, only to keep the
Elephants of the late King his Father. Therefore I desired him to tell us,
whether we were to believe any such thing.

He assured us, That he had met with Monsieur Tavernier in Persia, and that I
might credit what he had told me, and much more concerning the expense of this
Prince to keep his Elephants.

That you may better understand the truth, you must know said Father Grueber,
That India beyond, and on this side of the River Ganges, is divided into
several distinct Regions or Governments, which are given by the Great Mogol, to
the Lords of his Court, during life, upon condition of paying every year a
certain sum of money, as a Present or a Tribute. Besides that, they are also
obliged to keep always, some a thousand, others two thousand men on foot,
others five thousand, which may be ready to march at the Emperors command. By
this means it happens, that the number of their Militia never diminishes; and
when the Prince comes to take a view of them, if the Soldiers be not well
chosen, and of a good appearance, well clothed and armed, their Cheiftains are
in danger of Banishment from Court. Therefore the Mogol, may upon a sudden,
raise five or six hundred thousand men, ready for the encounter, without
putting himself to any extraordinary expense; for every Governor is obliged to
have all his Militia ready, in all times of the greatest Peace. Now you must
understand, that six or seven Elephants are kept purposely to attend upon the
person of the Mogol, they are named Panciasari, which signifies Lords of Five
thousands; because the Great Mogol expends as much to keep them, as the Lords
or Governors do, to entertain Five thousand Horse in the Army.

By this you may judge, that what Monsieur Tavernier has told you, is very
true. But you may take notice, that the Mogol spends a great deal of this money
in keeping fair Horses, as well as Elephants. They are richly harnassed and
adorned with many precious Stones; the Mogol delights much to make them run
Races.

He told us, that the present Emperor in his young days, did seem to affect a
retired life, spending his time in contemplation. But since this crafty
Hypocrite has cast away his Mask, and pulled down his Father from his Throne,
shutting him up in a prison at Agra; the old man is about Eighty six years of
Age: Only the fear of the Rebellion of his people, that did entirely love the
Father, has hindered him from taking away his life. His prison is a very large
Palace, with many Buildings about it, and pleasant Gardens. He is there guarded
by a numerous Company of Musketeers, and attended upon by his Women that are
kept in an adjoining Seraglio, in which he spends, for the most part his time,
and passes the melancholy thoughts of his retirement. The Emperor, his Son,
caused a high Tower to be built near to this place, in such a manner, that it
did overlook all the Gardens of his Father: Upon it he appointed a Watchman to
overlook and spy out all that passed in the Prison; but the old man caused him
to be shot and killed by a Company of his Women: Then he desired the chief
Commander of the Prison, to tell his Son, from him, that he should do well to
send such manner of Birds, and place them upon the same Tower, for they would
give a great sport to his Women.

The present Mogol, or Emperor, is renowned for many examples of Justice and
Wisdom, that are reported of him. It happened when I was at Lahor, a Prince
caused the Groom of his Stables to be killed in a very barbarous manner, his
head to be struck through with a large Nail, for a small fault, for not having
tended and dressed his beloved Horse, as he should have done. When the Emperor
was sitting in the Seat of Judicature, which he constantly does every month,
in a day appointed for that purpose, in a great Meadow, out of the Royal City,
the Grooms or Farrier Wife made her complaints of the cruel massacre of her
Husband; the Great Mogol sent immediately for the Prince, and asked him, If it
were so as the Woman said; He confessed his crime: Therefore the Mogol caused
him to be stretched upon the Ground, and commanded the Woman, or the Farriers
Widow, to deal with him in the same manner as he had dealt with her deceased
husband. There are many other reports concerning the Justice and Wisdom of this
Prince. He governs his Kingdom very well, and causes Justice to be
administered, only to ingratiate himself with his Subjects, and prevent the
tumults which they might otherwise be tempted to raise, because of the cruel
detention of his aged Father; for which unnatural deed, he knows that he is
hated.

He is about forty years old, it may be when his Father shall be dead, he will
loose his present Moderation, and his forced Inclinations now imprisoned, by
the considerations of Safety and Interest, may burst out and discover
themselves.

In this manner Father Grueber answered to our Questions; we had a great desire
to inquire of other Matters, concerning that remote Country; but in regard our
conversation had lasted many hours, and that much of the night had been spent
in this pleasing discourse, we thanked him for his great civility, and withdrew
to our Lodgings.

Observations of the Travels of Father J. Grueber, taken out of the Letters
which he has written in Latin to Kircherus.
IN the Year One thousand six hundred sixty one, in the Month of June, these
Fathers traveled out of Pekin, and in thirty days they arrived at Siganfu and
from thence they went to Sining or Siningfu, in as many more, having twice
passed the River Hoang. This City of Sining or Siningfu, is a great City full
of Inhabitants, situate near the prodigious Wall of China; through its Gates
all Merchants and Passengers, out of India, must pass to enter into Cathaia or
China, and where they must rest, until they have got, from the King, a Passport
to proceed further.

This City is in Thirty six Degrees and ten Minutes from the Pole. From Sining
they went in three Months time through Kalmuck, a Wilderness of Tartaria, to
the Borders of the Kingdom of Lassa, which the Tartars call Barantola. This
Wilderness is in some places Mountainous, in others plain, full of Sand and
Gravel; and therefore is barre^ and unfruitful: Nevertheless, Nature has
allowed some few Rivers to water it; upon their Banks there is very good Grass
for Cattle. Th^^ Desert stretches it self from t^^ Southern part of India, to
t^^ Northern, and is so large, that never any body yet, that I could find did
ever survey its bounds; some think that it reaches as far as the Frozen Seas.
It has many name^ P. Marcus Venetus names it the Desert of Lop, famous for the
ordinar^ apparitions of Devils and Spirits (...) but the Fathers of our Society
mak^ no mention of it, although these Spirits have oftentimes discovered
themselves: He does not approve of their continuance and constant appearing to
all. The Tartars did anciently call it Belgian, afterward Somo, the Chinese
Kalmuck, others Caracathai, that is to say, Black Cathaia, where no Animal is
to be seen but wild Beeves of an extraordinary bigness.

The Tartars that are used to the Deserts, venture through at any time; and
when they come to the Rivers that afford any feeding for their Cattle, there
they commonly pitch their Tents, capacious enough to shelter Man and Beast.

From Lassa, otherwise named Barantola, situate in twenty nine degrees and six
minutes from the Pole, they came in four days to the Foot of the Mountain
Langur. This Mountain is one of the highest of the World; so that when
Travelers pass over its top, they can scarce draw their breath, because of the
subtilty of the Air. The breath of several venomous Herbs render a passage this
way in Summer, to be very dangerous to our health. This Mountain is so full of
grievous Precipices, and steep Rocks, that neither Cart nor Horse can pass over
it therefore all Passengers are force^ to march a foot, for a months time^
till they come to Cuth, the first Town of the Kingdom of Nekbal* upon the
Borders.

Although this Region is so mountainous and difficult to pass ove^ Nature has
furnished it with several Springs of hot and of cold Water, that burst out of
the Concavities. Here is in some places plenty of Fish for Men, and Grass for
Cattle. I think this is the Hilly Region which Ptolomy says, that it lies
under the Mount Caucasus, and stretches it self a great way into the East
Country, and then divides into ranks of Hills; the one tends to the North, the
other to the South. He calls it Parapanismus, and P. Marcus Venetus, Belor.
Other Nations do give other names to these Hills that border upon their several
Countries.

From Cuth, in five days journey, they came to the City Nesti, belonging to the
Kingdom of Nekbal, where the Inhabitants live in a most grievous Idolatry,
without the least knowledge of Christianity. This place abounds in all manner
of things necessary for the life of Man; so that you may have thirty or forty
Hens for a crown.

From Nesti they traveled in six days, to the Metropolis of the Kingdom of
Nekbal, called Cadmendu, lying in twenty seven degrees and five minutes from
the Pole. The King is a great Prince, and a Heathen, but no Enemy to
Christianity.

From Cadmendu, in half a day, they went to Nekbal, the chief City of the
Kingdom, which is called also Baddan; and from thence, in five days, they
arrived at the City Hedonda, belonging to the Kingdom of Maranga, situate in
twenty six degrees and thiry six minutes from the Pole. From thence, in eight
days, Travelers go to Mutgari, the first City upon the confines of the Kingdom
of Mogol. From Mutgari, they went to Battana, a Town of the Kingdom of Bengala,
situate upon the River Ganges, in twenty five degrees and forty four minutes.
From Battana, in eight days, they came to Benares, a populous Town near the
River Ganges, lying in twenty four degrees and fifty minutes. It is a noted
place, for there are the Schools of the Brachmans, where all the Sciences,
professed in those Countries, are taught, and with them, the most abominable
Superstitions.

From Benares, there are eight days journey, to Catampor; and from thence to
Agra, seven more.

From Pekin to Agra, Men go in 214 days. But when they go no faster then the
Carravans, they are fourteen months in their journey.

This Relation I had from the Fathers of our Society, who gave me this account
of their Journeys.

These Kingdoms were never known by any in Europe before, nor to the
Geographers. In their passage they took notice of many particulars concerning
the Customs and Manners of the several Inhabitants.

From Pekin, the Imperial City of China, they traveled in two months to the
famous Walls of that Country, where the great City Siningfu is situate, as a
strong Bulwark against the Tartars invasions. They took great notice of the
Walls, that are as strongly built, as the conveniences of that place will
afford. This Wall is so large, that six Horsemen may ride upon it, in a breast,
without hindering one another. They are often visited by the Inhabitants of
Siningfu, to receive the benefit of the fresh Air, which comes off from the
Sandy Mountains of the Neighboring Desert; and to exercise themselves in
walking and delighting their eyes, with the pleasant Prospects; for they are so
high, that they discover the Country round about, and invite the Citizens to
take a view of the delightful objects that appear before them: There is a very
easy ascent up to this high Wall.

Its length from this City, to the other Gate, by which Men come out of the
Deserts into the Town of Sucien, is about eighteen days journey; many, out of
curiosity, as well as out of necessity of business, undertake this journey. For
that purpose they get a Passport from the Governor of Siningfu, and provide
themselves with sufficient victuals. They say, that in this delightful
pilgrimage, they may see an infinite number of dwellings in their way, in the
China side, which they discover as from a high Mountain; but on the other side,
toward the great and spacious Wilderness, as the Inhabitants have told them,
there are all manner of wild Beasts to be seen, Tigers, Lions, Elephants,
Rhinocerots, Leopards, Wild Bulls, Monocerots; this last sort are a kind of
Asses with Horns in their Fronts. The beholders may from hence, without fear of
danger, please themselves with many strange and unusual sights of furious
Beasts, especially from that part of the Wall that is toward the South, in the
most inhabited places near to Quamsi, Junnam, and Tibet. From hence to the
Yellow River, in the Country adjoining to the Wall, the wild Beasts hunt
together in Companies to seek for food in these places that are full of
Brambles and Bushes.

When the Fathers of our Society were gone out of this prodigious Wall, into
the Neighboring Wilderness, they found a small Stream of Water full of Fish,
whereof they dressed a great quantity in their Tent, and kep some for another
time. When they were passed over the Yellow River which runs out of the Wall,
they entered into that vast Desert of Kalmak, full of unfruitful Mountains, and
Fields most dreadful to behold; and in three months they arrived at the
Kingdom of Barantola.

Although this Wilderness be so solitary, and uninhabitable, it is frequented
by the Tartars of Kalmuk, at certain times of the year, when the Grass appears
upon the sides of the Rivers; then they transport their Portable Houses or
Tents, and pitch them in such numbers together, that any man would judge every
company to be a City.

These Tartars take the liberty to march up and down, and plunder all that they
can meet with; therefore it is necessary to be well armed against the violences
of these Rogues, and to travel with a good Caravan. Our Fathers did often light
upon several scattered companies of them, as they traveled through this
Wilderness.

The Lamae, who are the Priests of these Tartars of Kalmak, are distinguishable
by a Red Hat, a White Gown twisted behind, a Red Girdle, and a Yellow Tunick:
At their Girdle there is a Purse that is fastened to it. They say, that the
Tartars of Kalmak are clothed with Skins, and a Yellow Cap; their Women with
Skins, or with Green or Red Stuffs; every one of them has a Charm and
Characters hung about their Necks, to protect them from evil spirits and
witchcraft. They lodge in the innermost Room of the Tent, made up with portable
Staves, but the outside is covered with a thick Woollen Cloth and tied with
Ropes. When their Lamae are at their Devotions, their Bigots, there present,
roll about a Wheel, and handle it as a Scepter.

They have given the description of Han, a deceased King of Tanguth, whom they
say had fourteen Sons, and for his Goodness and Justice in governing his
Kingdom, the Inhabitants have honored him as a god, in their Country fashion.
He is said to have been of a Tawny countenance, he had a Beard of a Chestnut
color, and Eyes like unto Dogs-eyes, swelling out of his Head.

Tanguth is a large Kingdom of Tartaria, these Father-Jesuites have traveled
through a great part of it.

At that time, in the Court of Dena, King of Tanguth, there was a Woman came
from the Northern part of Tartary, that wore twisted Hair, in the manner of
Ropes; her Head was adorned with Sea-shells, and her middle bound about with a
Girdle. In the same place, some of the Courtiers were habited as Women, only
their Clothes were of a Red color as their Priests.

Into these Kingdoms of Tanguth and Barantola, the Devils subtilty has brought
in a most abominable and horrid custom. They choose a strong youth, stout, and
lusty, and give him liberty at certain times of the year, to kill, with the
weapons, that he has for that purpose, Men, Women, and Children, that he meets
in his way; and when they are killed in this manner, they imagine that they are
consecrated to their goddess Menipe, that they are in a most happy estate; and
therefore the living render to their memories, particular honors.

The youth is clothed with a Garment of several colors, he is furnished with
a Sword, with Bow, Arrows, and a Quiver; he carries sometimes a Banner. At a
certain season, he is transported with Fury, and possessed by the Spirit, unto
whom he is consecrated; he flies into the Streets, and rambles up and down; all
that he meets, he kills, for none dare make him any resistance.

This youth they call, in their Tongue, Buth, which word signifies a Slayer.
Whiles the Fathers were there, they had a sight of him habited in that manner
as he is already described.

In this large Kingdom of Tanguth, there are many Kingdoms included, first,
Barantola, which is also called Lassa, the name of the Metropolis of that
Kingdom. It has a King of its own, miserably addicted to Paganism. He worships
many Heathen Idols, amongst whom Menipe is one of the chief. Its head rises up
as a Sugar Loaf, in a monstrous manner. Kircherus has promised to publish a
discourse, more at large, of this and other Idols of China.

Before this Idol, these people perform their Sacrifices with strange gestures,
often repeating this exclamation, O Manipe mi hum, o Manipe mi hum, that is,
Manipe save us. Besides, these foolish Idolaters bring to their Idol, to
ingratiate themselves with him, all kind of Meats; and observe many other
abominable practices of the ancient Heathens.

There is another Image of a false God to be seen in Barantola, which is so
strange, that scarce any body will believe it; therefore I shall here give a
more punctual account of it.

The said Fathers, Grueber and d'Orville affirm, that whiles they waited at
Barantola, about two Months, until a Caravan was ready to march, they took
great notice of the Peoples Manners and Customs, whereof some were ridiculous,
and some most abominable.

In this Kingdom there are two Kings, the one is employed about the Government
of the Kingdom, and is named Dena; the other is retired from all worldly
affairs; he lives idle in the secret Chambers of his Palace, and is adored and
worshipped as a god; not only by the Natives, but also by all the Kings of
Tartaria, subject to this Kingdom; for they come to him in pilgrimage. They
name him their eternal and heavenly Father, and reverence him as the true and
living God, by offering to him great presents. He sits in an obscure and dark
place of his Palace, adorned with Gold and Silver, upon a Bed raised on high;
under his feet rich Carpets are spread, and round about him many Lamps stand
lighted. When strangers come to him, they fall upon their faces, they creep to
him upon their knees, and kiss his feet, as the Papists do the toes of their
Pope, with a wonderful respect.

From hence we may discover the Devils subtilty, in appropriating this ceremony
and testimony of respect due to none on Earth, but to the Pope of Rome, Here
Mr. Jesuit speaks as a Papist.
to the barbarous Superstitions of this Idolatrous Nation. He has had the
malice to transfer and usurp all the other mysteries of our Faith to his own
Worship. As the Papists call the Pope, the Father of all Spiritual Fathers; so
these Idolaters call this Demy-God, The great Lama, or The High Priest, or The
Lama of Lamas; that is, The Priest of Priests: For all their Religion and
Idolatry depends upon him; therefore they honor him with the title of Eternal
Father. And that by his decease, his weakness and mortality might not appear,
the Inferior Lamae, and other Priests only are admitted to attend upon him, to
procure him whatsoever he stands in need of, to receive his commands, and
deliver them as Oracles of the Divinity to the simple Pilgrims.

These men after his death, are wont to seek another, as like him in feature
and stature as they can; him they lift upon the Throne. By this means the whole
Kingdom, unacquainted with the manner of the deceit, firmly believes that he is
risen again to them, from the dead, seven times; and that he shall continue for
ever. This persuasion is so fixed in their minds, blinded with the Devils
illusions and deceits, that there is none questions it. Therefore he is
worshipped by all in a signal manner. Every one esteems him happy indeed, who
can prevail so much upon the goodness of the inferior Lamae, his attendants, as
to get something that has but touched his body, or been taken from him, which
they bear about their necks. For that purpose they load them with many rich
gifts to obtain this their desire. O abominable and filthy blindness! By these
Relics, they imagine themselves protected against all manner of evils.

This the said Fathers understood, to their great grief, from the Inhabitants
of Barantola. It is true, the Fathers did not see this great Lama, because none
is admitted that makes profession of the Christian Religion; and there are many
previous Ceremonies full of Idolatry to be practiced, before any man can be
permitted to go near him, but they saw his Picture at the Entry in of the Kings
Palace; unto which, as much reverence is paid, when but represented in Pictures
and Images, as if he were there in person, by these Idolaters. His authority is
so great all over Tartaria, that there is no King that offers to take upon him
his royal Scepter, but he sends first his Ambassadors with rich presents to the
great Lama, to obtain his blessing for his happy and prosperous reign.

They saw also at Barantola some strange Women, of a Neighbor Kingdom called
Coin, one old and the other young: Women of an ancient Nobility fold up their
Hair in a bundle, and cast them behind their backs. Upon their foreheads they
wear a red Ribbon, adorned with Pearl, but on their heads a Silver Crown, in
the shape of a Box, embellished with Turkoises and Corral.

They arrived next from Barantola to the Kingdom of Nekbal, through a difficult
way that leads over one of the highest Mountains of the World, named Langur,
which we have already described. They found all things there needful to the
life of Man, but only the knowledge of Christianity; for the Natives are all
involved in the thick mists of the Heathens ignorance.

The chief Towns are Cuthi and Nesti; the Custom of the Inhabitants is, when
any drink to Women, other persons pour into the Cup their liquor called Cha, or
Wine, three times, and observe other ridiculous ceremonies.

There is another custom practiced here most horrid and barbarous, they bring
out into the open field, and leave upon the ground, in the cold and wet,
without any pity, such as are desperately sick and near death; and when they
are dead they suffer them to be devoured by the wild Fowl, by the Wolves and
Dogs; for they look upon this namely the stomachs of living Animals, to be the
most glorious Monuments that their dead Corpse ca^ pretend to. The Women of th^^
Kingdom are so ugly and deforme^ that they seem to be Devils, rathe^ then
humane Creatures: For the^ never wash themselves for Religion sake, but anoint
themselves wi^^ an oil, noisome to our smells, whi^^ causes them to stink most
intol^^rably to all strangers, and cov^^ them over with such frightful
^^pearances, that one would t^^^ them to be Witches, and Devils in ^umane
shapes.

The King was very kind to these ^athers, chiefly because they gave ^im some
Prospective Glasses, which ^e had never seen before, and some other curious
trifles which surprised ^^m in such a manner, that he re^^lved to detain these
Fathers with ^^m, and would not suffer them to ^epart, until they had solemnly
^^omised to return; which if they ^^d, he engaged to assign them an ^ouse,
which he would build for ^^eir use, to allow them a sufficient ^^^elihood, and
full liberty to pro^^gate their faith in any part of his ^^ngdom.

When they departed out of Nek^l, they entered into the Confines ^f the Kingdom
of Maranga, which orders upon that of Tebet, the ^eif Town is Rodok, the
uttermost ^ounds of the Travels of Father ^^andrada.

They found here some signs o^ Christianity, by the names of Francis, Anthony,
and Dominicus, etc^ which made them conjecture, tha^ our Religion had been
heretofore professed in this place. From hence they traveled to the first City
(...) the Mogols Kingdom, named H^donda; and from thence to Battani a City upon
the River Gange^ and then to Benares, the Academy of the Brachmans; afterward
the^ went to Agra, the Royal Palla^ of the Mogol. Father Albertus d'O^ville,
sick and weary of his trave^ling died within a few days after (...) arrival, in
this middle way betwee^ China and Europe.

FINIS.
THE Most Remarkable PASSAGES OF The Life and Reign OF LEWIS XIV.

The Present KING IN FRANCE.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lownds, over against Exeter-House in the Strand.
1675.

The most noted Passages of the Reign of the French King.
THe French and Spanish Monarchies seldom live long in Peace. Either the
Interest of the Kingdoms, or the jealousies of State, or the humors of the
People, or the natural aversions and animosities which they have received by
inheritance from their Forefathers, do frequently kindle the flames of War.
Their Neighborhood and continual Conversation furnishes them with many
occasions of distastes and disputes; for both the Spaniard and the French, have
no compliance nor respect for one another. They are naturally proud and
high-minded, they pretend both to the Universal Monarchy, and think all the
World must bow and creep to their greatness. I intend not to examine in this
short Tract, the causes of their frequent Ruptures and Wars, I shall confine my
discourse within the Borders of the French Dominions, where we must visit the
King and Court, and see what has happened worthy of our observation upon that
famous Theater of Europe. I design not so much to satisfy the Readers
curiosity, as to furnish him with that knowledge which he may improve to his
advantage; for in every capacity true and impartial History tends to our right
information and direction, God by his providence teaches men as well as by his
Word. It concerns us not to neglect the means that he affords for our
instruction. And there is nothing more required in men that pretend to learning
and perfection, then to be acquainted with the late and present Affairs, as
well as with those that we have received from our Forefathers Relations.

It is very observable, that the French and Spaniards seldom conclude Peace
without a Marriage. The old Fable of Mars's Adultery or Conjunction with Venus,
is a practice so ordinary amongst them, that it needs no proof. In the year One
thousand six hundred and fifteen, the Politicians of both Kingdoms were
resolved to conclude their disputes, and reunite their interests in a Marriage
between Lewis the Thirteenth, surnamed The Just, and Anne of Austria, Infanta
of Spain. Both Kingdoms expected from these two hopeful Princes, a numerous
posterity; but to the great disappointment of their Subjects, and of all
Europe, they lived together three and twenty years without Children. Success
follows not always our best endeavors. At last in the Month of September, One
thousand six hundred thirty and eight, the Queen was brought to Bed of a brave
lusty Boy, who was saluted and welcomed into the World by the Parliament of
Paris, with the name of Dieu-donne, Given of God: For they were verily
persuaded, that his Birth and Conception had been miraculous, in regard of the
indisposition of his Father. To strengthen this persuasion, the more by
Cardinal Mazarines contrivance, then the Factotum of France, the King, the
Queen, and the whole Court had been in Procession, with much devotion,
barefooted, to the Chapel of the Virgin Mary, near Paris, to desire from her,
a Son and Heir to the Crown o^ France. Therefore the French look upon this
Prince, as the effect and return of their Prayers, then solemnly offered up to
the Blessed Virgin; for within a year after, the King and Queen were blessed
with this hopeful Child, to the greater joy of France, then of some of the
Blood Royal, who had promised to themselves the Kingdom, in case Lewis the
Thirteenth did die without issue. Their discontents remained long concealed in
private, and were not suffered to break out into a Public War, by the good
order that the Cardinal gave to the Affairs of the Kingdom, and by their
respect for the King, then alive. But afterward, when they saw Lewis in his
Grave, the People dissatisfied, and the Grandees discontented, with the Italian
Government, they proclaimed their displeasures at the Head of an Army, with the
loud noise of Drums, Trumpets, and Cannon; as we shall see by and by.

As soon as the Dolphin was inaugurated into his Principality, and initiated
into Christian Religion, they gave him his Attendants and Officers, according
to his quality and Birth; the two chief were his Governess -- a Lady of a noble
spirit, and Hardouin de Perefixe, afterward Bishop of Rhodes, and since
removed to the Archbishopric of Paris, was his Governor and Tutor. He is a
great Politician, Wise, and Learned, very affable and courteous. Whiles he lay
in his Cradle, we can find nothing worthy of our notice, but as soon as he
stepped out of it to walk alone, Providence waited upon him, to put into his
hands a Scepter, before he could manage it: For at four years of age, and a few
Months, his Father Lewis, surnamed The Just, departed this life, having
published before his Declaration, dated April 21. 1643. By which the Queen was
appointed Regent, and Governess of the whole Kingdom, the Duke of Orleans was
her Lieutenant, and chief of the Council. The Prince of Conde deceased, the
Cardinal Mazarine, Monsieur Seguier, Chancellor of France, Monsieur
Bouthillier, and Monsieur Chavigny; were to be of this Privy Council; but the
conduct of the Army, then on foot, was left to the Duke of Enguien, who is now
Prince of Conde.

This Declaration settled the Affairs of the Kingdom, and prevented the
mischief which might have happened, in case the election of these great Officers
of State had been left to the choice of such as might have designed to imbroil
the Kingdom, for their own private ends. About a Month after, on the
fourteenth day of May, 1643. the King died. At that time the Spaniard was
attempting to enlarge his Dominions in the Low Countries, by a War with France.
Don Francisco de Melo was Viceroy there, at the Head of an Army before Rocroy,
a French Garrison, which he besieged in vain: For the Duke of Enguien, a young
General, of twenty two years of age, came seasonably to its relief, forced the
Spaniards to a retreat, and obtained of them a notable victory on the
nineteenth of May. All their Artillery was taken, with about threescore
Colors; all their Bag and Baggage, and six thousand prisoners: The Colors
were sent to Paris, to be presented to the new King, six days after his
promotion to the Throne. The Viceroy behaved himself like a great Commander, he
encouraged his men by his words, promises, and example; where he perceived the
greatest danger, there did he hazard his person, and his life; but when he saw
the day lost, and the grievous slaughter of his Soldiers, he found a way out of
his Trenches, to retreat with the sad remains of his broken Army, and left his
Enemy to glory in their Success, and to enrich themselves with his spoils. The
Count de Fontaines was then grievously incommoded with a disease; nevertheless,
for the honor of his Master, he caused himself to be carried in a Chair, during
the fight, that he might assist his men with his Counsels, and encouragement;
seeing he could not help them by his example. He purchased to himself much
renown with the loss of his life; for he resolved to overcome or die. Therefore
in the hurry and rout of the Spaniards, whom he labored to keep to their
Colors, he was killed by a mean hand.

This victory gave a check to the designs of the Court of Spain, of enlarging
their Borders upon France. They had persuaded themselves, that the French had
been discouraged, during the sickness of the old King; and that they were not
so able to make resistance in the minority of the new; for commonly, Factions
and private Interests, reign in all Courts and Armies, when the Prince has not
attained to the age and ability of managing his own affairs. But it has been
observed, that when men intend to advantage themselves by their Neighbors
weakness, they find themselves disappointed at last, for providence makes use
of the feeblest and most contemptible Agents to defeat the proudest purposes.

The French General pursued the Enemy into his own Country, and took, from
him, several small Forts and Towns, as Maubeuge, Borlemont, Aimmerikt, Binch,
and Thionville, etc. So that they that had flattered themselves of enjoying new
Conquests, lost a small portion of their own Land. The Castle and Town of Cirke
stopped the course of the victorious General; it was so well furnished with Men
and Provisions, and commanded by such a resolute Governor, that the threats of
the French Army, the inconveniency of an approaching Siege, and the noise of
the thundering Cannon, could not prevail upon him to yield to the first
Summons, therefore it held out against the French several days; but when they
had brought their Trenches to the Town Walls, the Spaniard hearkened to
Conditions of Surrendering it up.

After this, the Duke of Enguien left the Army, about the latter end of August,
to receive the Compliments of the Court at Paris, for his great success in
Flanders; but at his first arrival, the news of the death of the Marshall de
Guebriant, General of the French Forces in Germany, hastened him thither. He had
been engaged in a Battle against the Imperialists, on the seventeenth of
November, where he was mortally wounded; for he died a few days after. The
fight had been desperate between the Germans, and the French, both lost a great
many of their best men; so that the French Army was not able to hold the Field
any longer, without the coming in of fresh and victorious Troops out of
Flanders, with their young General Enguien. His coming restored heart and
courage to the shattered Companies of the dead Mareschals Army. The French, who
are always wont to boast much in their Successes and Victories, and seldom or
never to grant the loss of the day to their triumphing Enemies, declare, That
the Marshall beat the Germans out of the Field. It is certain they seized, a
little after, upon Rotueil, a Frontier-Town, where the wounded Marshall
breathed forth his last gasp.

This War between France and Spain, had engaged most Princes of Europe, in the
quarrel, the Trumpets sounded round about the Borders, in Savoy, in Italy, in
Navarre, Catalonia, Flanders, Germany, Alsatia, etc. Armies and Armed Men did
carry about, Death and Destruction.

In Italy, the French had three watchful Commanders, Prince Thomas took from
the Spaniard, Trin; the Marquess of Ville seized upon Ast; and the Count of
Plessis-Praslin invaded Estura, small places that would deserve no mention, if
these Generals had but taken any more considerable Towns; but for want of
stronger and more noted Garrisons, and braver exploits, the French must needs
stuff their Relations with the taking of these poor Hamlets. And the Spaniard,
on their side, were not idle, they gained several places upon the French, but
none of any importance.

In Catalonia, the Marshall de la Mouth Houdancour commanded as Viceroy, for
the French, at the head of a small Army, with which, he drove the Spaniards
from the Siege of Miravel and Flix; he made some inroads into the Kingdom of
Arragon, and seized upon Almeras.

In the same year, at Sea, as well as at Land, the affairs of War were carried
on with much heat: The Duke of Breze was Admiral for the French, in the
Streights. He engaged, with his Light Squadrons, against the Spanish Fleet,
twice, once before Carthagena, in the Month of August; and another time, on
the nineth day of September. In both Rencounters, the Armadoes exchanged a few
Bullets, looked one another in the face; but they were so scared with their
Enemies frightful countenances, and with the apprehension of what might happen,
if they continued too obstinately in the fight, that they were both willing to
part upon equal terms; although the French and Spaniard both claim the Victory
as their own.

When the War is once kindled between these two Nations, it is not one or two
Campagnes can put a period to their disputes; no less then a River of the
Subjects Blood must be spilled, to extinguish the flames. And it is observable,
that all their Neighbors must dance at the sound of their Fiddles, and be
interested in their quarrels. All the Nations of Europe must attend upon them,
and second their bloody designs. War like a Tempest, commonly rises out of
Spain or France, then it spreds it self, and involves all the Neighborhood into
the same misery. Both Kingdoms are so populous and considerable, that when the
Princes of either stir, all the bordering people move; they are forced in their
own defense to have their Armies ready; which when they are so, Interest
obliges them to employ them.

During this Winter, great preparations were making for the ensuing Spring of
the year 1644. As soon as it appeared, the Duke of Orleans was appointed to
command in Flanders, where he besieged Graveling, which was surrendered to him,
after a stout resistance of two months: He made his entry the Twenty nineth of
July.

This place was strong and well fortified, and the Key of Flanders, on that
side; therefore the taking of it, did as much rejoice the French, as it did
grieve the Spaniard. After this success, the Marshall of Gassion, Lieutenant
General, had orders to march with his Army further into the Enemies Country,
where he took and pillaged some small Castles, the Abbey of Vate, the Forts of
Rebus, d'Henuin, and Arq. Some few Spanish Troops that were so unhappy as to
come within his reach, were put to flight.

In the mean while, the Duke of Enguien was General in Germany; for that
Country has always been the Seat of War, when any is stirring in Europe. At
this time, the whole House of Austria that have so great a sway in that Climat,
thought themselves engaged to assist the King of Spain, their Brother, against
the common Enemy the French. General Merci commanded the Army of the Duke of
Bavaria, he was so successful to take Frieburgh from the French. As he was
marching farther, to besiege some other place, the Duke of Enguien met him with
his Army, and engaged three times on three several days; at last, the French
forced them, after a notable slaughter, to a disorderly retreat. After this,
many considerable Towns submitted to the conquering valor of the Duke of
Enguien, and received, from him, Garrisons only to preserve their Territories
from the spoil, which otherwise he would have made. Philipsbourgh, a strong
Frontier Town, Vormes, Spire, Mayence, Burghen, Landau, and the Castle of
Magdebourgh, were yielded up this Summer.

But before the year was over, the Princes of Europe agreed to send all their
Plenipotentiaries to Munster, there to compose their differences, and agree in
a General Peace; for Germany, and the Frontier Towns of the Empire had been so
much impoverished; by the long and continual Wars, that as many died by Famine,
as formerly by the Sword. The only remedy was an Universal Peace, which was
endeavored between all the Princes of Christendom. The Queen Regent of France,
sent thither the Count d' Avaux, and Monsieur Servien, to manage the French
interest; afterward the Duke of Longueville followed. The Treaty began in the
Month of April, 1644. but could not be concluded till the Twenty fourth of
October, 1648. All the Monarchs of Europe agreed to lay down Arms, and to
suffer their People to enjoy the Blessings of Peace, only France and Spain had
such differences as could not be composed, their pretensions were so high, and
so entangled, That the greatest Politicians that assisted at this composure of
Affairs, could not find any expedient to bring them to an agreement: Therefore
the Ministers of other Princes did their business without them. When they saw
them so stiff, in not yielding to one another, they left them to themselves,
and their Masters alone, to end their own quarrels, and fight till they were
weary. That which administered new difficulties every day to this Peace,
between the two Monarchies, was the prosecution of the War, which was so
vigorously managed by the French, in the time of the Treaty, that in the
beginning of the Spring, 1645. they had five Armies on foot, in Flanders, in
Germany, in Lorraine, in Catalonia, and in Italy.

The Army of Flanders was commanded by the Duke of Orleans, as Generalissimo;
his Lieutenants were the Mareschals de Gassion, and Rantzau: At their passage
over the River of Colme, there was a very hot dispute between the French and
Spaniards; but, in fine, the two Mareschals behaved themselves so bravely, that
the Spaniard was put to flight, and the passage opened. Mardike, Bourbourgh,
Lillers, Bethune, Mount-Cassel, S. Venant, Menenes, and Armentiers, were forced
to yield. The Town of Lens was suddenly taken.

Upon the Borders of Germany, the Duke of Enguien, the French General, marched
with his Troops as far as the Nekar, he took Rotembourgh, and went next to find
out his Enemies, the United Forces of the Empire, that were encamped about
Nortlinguen, and Dunkespiel. The French had here a notable victory, Four
thousand men were killed, with Merci, the Duke of Bavariaes General; Gleen, the
Emperors General was taken, with all the Provisions, Artillery, Wagons, and
above forty Colors. The Duke entertained Gleen very kindly, and set him at
liberty; the Neighboring Towns, Nortlinguen and Dunkespiel, were surrendered to
the French, after the Battle. The Army had orders to march toward Hailbron,
but the Duke fell dangerously sick; so that he was forced to withdraw, and be
carried to Philipsbourgh. At this time, the House of Austria united all its
Forces under two Generals, the Archduke Leopold, and General Galaz. There were
in this Army above Thirty thousand Men. Monsieur de Turenne, and the Marshall
of Grammont, commanded in the French Army, instead of the Duke d'Enguien; they
had not above Twelve or thirteen thousand Men, yet they behaved themselves so
gallantly, that the Imperialists could never come to fight them. They retreated
with their Soldiers through their Enemies Country, and returned safe home into
the Borders of France. The French Generals were highly commended for their
Wisdom, in foreseeing the danger of a General Battle; and for their care and
prudence, in managing the Retreat to save their Men.

In Lorraine, the Marshall de Villeroy was sent with an Army to drive the Duke
out of his Dominions, because he had Confederated himself with the Enemies of
France. The Inhabitants are naturally inclined to favor the French, therefore
they made no great resistance, but submitted themselves to the King of Frances
General, only La Mothe held out. Monsieur Magaloty undertook to defend it; but
his death caused it to be surrendered also: So that the poor Duke was driven out
of all his Patrimony, by the overruling power of his Neighbor.

In Catalonia, the French were no less successful for the General, the Count du
Plessis-Praslin took Roses the nineteenth of May, and the Count de Harcourt,
Viceroy of Catalonia, defeated the Spaniards in the Fields of Liorerys, and
forced the Town of Balaguier to open its Gates. Du Plessis-Praslin was honored
with the Staff of a Marshall of France, for his good service to that Crown;
and was commanded into Italy to assist Prince Thomas against the Spaniards. In
the Dukedom of Milan, Viguerano was taken from them; but when the Prince was in
his Retreat, the Spanish Generals overpowered him; and had it not been for the
seasonable coming in of the new Marshall, his Soldiers had been cut in pieces,
and totally routed.

The next year 1646. the War was managed with the same fury as before,
especially in Flanders, under the Dukes of Orleans and d'Enguien, who laid
siege, with a numerous Army, well appointed, to the City of Courtray, which
they took in the presence of all the Forces of the House of Austria, that came
with a design to raise the Siege. Mardike was again retaken from the Spaniard,
and Dunkirk was besieged by the Duke of Enguien. Caracena and Lambay were the
Spanish Generals, but they did not dare to adventure a pitched Battle. The
Marquess of Leda, a famous and experienced Commander, was then Governor of this
Town, that was well fortified by Nature as well as by Art. Nevertheless, the
French won it in thirteen days, and forced the besieged to a Capitulation.
After this, Prince Thomas, and the Duke of Breze besieged, and took Orbiselle;
but the Spaniards were so strong in Italy, that the Court ordered the Marshall
de la Meilleray, and du Plessis-Praslin, with United Forces to march thither;
they took two small places, Paombino and Portolongone.

About this time, Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Conde died, the Six and twentieth
of December, and his eldest Son, the Duke of Enguien succeeded him in his
Principality, and to the honor of being the first Prince of the Blood Royal of
France.

In the year 1647. the Marshall de Gassion forced many places to submit; he
was wounded at the siege of Lens, and carried to Arras, where he died. Monsieur
Villequier commanded in his absence, and took the Town.

About this time the Duke of Breze was killed over against Naples, with a
Cannon Bullet, and his Fleet was put to flight by the Spanish Armado.

But the misfortunes and ill successes of the Duke of Guise, brought all his
family to ruin. He had been solicited by the Rebellious Neapolitans, to
command their Army against their lawful Prince. He too credulously trusted an
unconstant Rabble, and went to Naples to manage a War against Spain, in that
part of the World, and dispossess the House of Austria, of one of its best
Kingdoms.

His first arrival was attended by some Successes, and the favor of the
Inhabitants; but when the Court of France, out of a jealousy of his greatness,
began to frown upon him, and deny the assistance which they had promised, and
might have sent him; the Neapolitans betrayed him to their old Masters for
their own safety and pardon. He was carried into the Prisons of Spain, from
whence he could scarce obtain his freedom in three years. This great
disappointment brought the House of Guise to a low estate, together with some
other miscarriages, that they have been guilty of.

In this Campaign, Lerida, the strongest Bulwark upon the Borders of Spain, was
straightly besieged by the Army of the Prince of Conde. The Count de Harcourt,
had attempted it the year before; but this place stood it out, till the last,
so that the siege was raised to succor some other more considerable Town, which
the Spaniard was ready to carry.

In the beginning of the Spring 1648. that dismal year for England, the Prince
of Conde appeared again at the head of an Army in Flanders. where he took Ypres
in twelve days; but before this siege was over, where the French Army suffered
many wants, the Spaniard had recovered Funes, Courtray, and Lens. These
advantages had made them contemn their Enemies, commanded by the Prince: So
that General Beck, assistant to the Arch duke Leopold in his Army, assured him
of a full victory over the French. With this persuasion, they ventured to
engage, but the Troops of Lorraine were disordered in the Battle, and the
Archdukes Cavalry were so miserably treated, that if the Prince de Ligny had
not come in, with his reserve, the Archduke had been made prisoner. General
Beck died with the displeasure of his ill success, as well as by his wounds.
This Battle was fought the twentieth of August; it caused several petty Towns
to open their Gates, as Lens and Furnes, etc. At this time, Marshall de
Schomberg, the Kings General in Catalonia, took the Town of Tortoise, in the
Kingdom of Valencia, and defeated the Army of Don Francisco de Melo, the
Spanish General, that came to relieve it.

All these Sieges, Battles, and Rencounters, happened during the Treaty at
Munster, which excluded the French and the Spaniard. Their quarrels alone could
not be ended, for the Spaniard had intelligence of a secret Conspiracy in
France, where the greatest Princes were concerned. He did therefore expect to
recover what he had lost by the favor of the Domestic Wars, and troubles of
his Neighbors. The Prince of Conde, and many more of the Blood Royal were
united together, they published their Manifesto to justify their taking up
Arms to reform the Government, as was pretended, and to remove the Cardinal
from that great trust reposed in him by the Queen. Paris held for the Rebels,
and many other Towns were in danger of following the same example. The
Inhabitants were more then usually scurrilous and scandalous against the King,
the Queen, and the Cardinal. These troubles had almost deprived the young King
of his Crown and Scepter, had it not been for the seasonable assistance and
kind Mediation of our great Monarch, and the vigorous endeavors of the
Marshall de Turenne, more faithful to his King then to his Religion.

At last after much Bloodshed in an intestine War, the Prince retreated into
Flanders, with those of his party, whom neither Love, Loyalty, nor Interest,
could persuade to guard their young King. The Spaniard put him at the Head of
their Troops, with which he recovered almost all the Towns that he had formerly
lost. If the Marshall de Turenne had not stopped the progress of the Princes
victories, he had invaded the Crown it self as well as the Frontier Towns. But
after an absence of several years, the King invited him home, received him into
his favor, bestowed upon him his Government, and Employs, and treated the Dukes
of Conti, and Longueville, in the same generous manner, publishing a General
Pardon to all other offenders in the Civil Wars.

On the Seventh of September, 1651. the King being thirteen years old, was
declared of Age, sufficient to take upon him the Government, and to begin to
act in person, in that sphere where providence had put him. The Declaration was
approved of in the Parliament of Paris, and proclaimed all over the Land.

The War continued still between France and Spain. In the years 49, 50, 51, and
52, the Spaniard had the greatest Successes against the French; for they were
assisted by the Sedition and Treachery of the Inhabitants, as much as by their
own valor and numbers of Men, to recover more then they had formerly lost. But
after the Kings majority, he appeared himself at the head of his Troops, and,
with his presence, gave them so much courage and resolution, that they turned
the fortune of War. The City of Bar, and the Castle of Ligny, was surrendered to
the Marshall de la Ferte, in 1653. The Duke of Espernon besieged Bellegard,
but could not take it, till the news was come, that the King was in the Camp;
then the Governor was loath to stand it out against his own Prince. Rethel and
Mouzon were retaken by Monsieur Turenne, St. Menehou by la Ferte, the twenty
seventh of November. Du Plessis Praslin behaved himself so gallantly in taking
this place, that the King gave it him to command. Grancey surprised Castillon,
and withstood the valorous efforts of General Caracena.

The year 1654. was honored with the greatest solemnity, and most sacred
Ceremony of France, the Coronation of their King at Rheims, with that holy Oil
which they affirm to be fallen from Heaven, and sent from God for that purpose,
to anoint their Kings therewith. When they have been thus inaugurated, the
people have a particular respect for their persons.

After this, Stenay was besieged by the French, commanded by Marshall d'
Hocquincourt; when the Spaniard saw they could not hinder the taking of this
place, they labored to make a Diversion, and to recompense themselves for their
loss, by the invasion of Arras. Turenne, la Ferte, and Hocquincourt, had orders
to hazard all, rather then to suffer this great City to fall into their hands.
When they had called a Council of War, they resolved to attack the Lines and
Trenches, which they did with much resolution, in the night, the 24 and 25 days
of August. Hocquincourt entered first into the Enemies Camp, through the Troops
of the Duke of Lorraine, but he was beaten back with a great slaughter of his
Men; the other Commanders relieved, and seconded him: So that at last the
Spaniard was forced to leave his Trenches with some loss of Men, of Ammunition,
and Baggage: For the Governor of the Town sallied out at the same time, and
received so much assistance, that the Enemy despaired of being able to gain the
Walls. The Spanish General preserved his Army by a seasonable retreat, which
was managed with that prudence and courage, that he has worthily deserved the
admiration of his Enemies. The King went to visit his Camp and Army immediately
after this Siege was raised, to encourage and reward his brave Soldiers.

In Catalonia also, the Prince of Conti had some success in taking Conflans and
Cerdagne from the Spaniard. About the beginning of the Spring 1655. Landrecy,
Maubeuge, Conde, and St. Guilham, submitted themselves again to the French
Monarchy. Thus these small places were often taken and retaken by the Armies of
Spain and France. At every advantage, in the Field, these weaker Towns, of no
resistance, were forced, for their preservation, to prefer their Safety to
their Loyalty, and to side with the strongest party.

In this year there was a League Offensive and Defensive, made between Cromwell
and Mazarin, against Spain, upon conditions disgraceful to the King and Court
of France. Monsieur Bourdeaux solicited his Masters Affairs so notably, that
he got that Arch-Rebel to send over, in the beginning of the Spring 1656. an
Army of stout Soldiers, commanded by Reynolds. For although France abounds in
Men, it is wont to make use of the valor of its Neighbors, in all Wars, against
strangers: For it has been found, by experience, that the French are good for
the first Onset, but cannot abide nor weather so many discouragements, as the
English, Scotch, and Switzers can in War; besides their Foot are not to be
compared to ours. Therefore they may ascribe their most difficult Conquests to
their Money, and to the English, Scotch, Irish, and Switzers valor; as we shall
see in several late Encounters with the Hollanders and Imperialists.

The year 1656. was noted for the remarkable Siege of Valanciennes, where the
French received an overthrow, and were forced to quit the place; but afterward
they took Cappelle and Valencia in Italy.

In the beginning of the Campaign 1657. Montmedy was besieged by la Ferte, the
King himself went thither, after that the Succors which were intended for a
relief, were happily routed. Afterward the City yielded to his Majesty, and
opened its Gates to receive him on the seventh of August. St. Venant,
Bourbourg, and the Fort of Mardike, also were taken by Turenne. Our English
served him in good stead in the recovering of these places, especially in
storming of Mardike. The attempt was not esteemed feasible by the French
General, who had a design rather to besiege it, then to win it by an Assault.
But our English Commanders undertook this perilous attempt, Sir Tho. Morgan,
now Governor of Jersey, lead his Party with so much courage and resolution,
that they recovered the top of the Walls in an instant, passing through showers
of shot and fire, to the great astonishment of the rest of the Army. This
Gentleman has purchased to himself the name and honor of one of the bravest
Soldiers of Europe. And when the Spaniard ventured in the night to surprise
this Fort again, the English saved it, beat back the Spaniard, and obliged them
to a speedy retreat to Dunkirk. After this Turenne was employed with a Flying
Party to raise the Siege of Ardres, which he did with so much bravery, that the
Spaniard received there a considerable loss.

But all these Conquests were inconsiderable to those of the next year 1658.
Turenne and La Ferte were the two Generals of the French, and after the death
of Reynolds, drowned near Goodwin Sands, in a small Boat in which he ventured
to pass from Mardike into England, my Lord Lockart, then Ambassador at Paris,
took the charge of the English Forces. The Army was commanded to besiege
Dunkirk, for it had been agreed between England and France, that this place
should be put into the English hands. It was surrounded the Twenty fifth of
May; which when the Marquess of Leda had notice of, he shut himself in, with a
strong Garrison, resolving to defend it, or die there. The Siege was carried on
very resolutely, the English and French Armies made their approaches on a
sudden; so that the fear of loosing this strong place, caused the Archduke to
endeavor to raise the Siege by assaulting them in their Trenches. Turenne
confided in his own strength, therefore when he heard of the Enemies approach,
he marched bravely out of his Camp to meet the Archduke, the victory declared
for the French. In this encounter, it was the unhappiness of the English to
fight with their own Contrymen. In the Spanish Army, the Noble and
Courageous Duke of York, a Prince of an invincible resolution, was entertained
by the Spaniard as one of the best Commanders of that Army. That wise Nation,
as well knowing in Men as in Affairs, would not suffer so great a Courage idle,
in time of War. If I might have the liberty in this succinct Narration, I could
give an account of the most heroic actions of his Royal Highness; insomuch,
that Turenne, and the other Generals, have often confessed him to be the ablest
and most skilful Commander of the World. His Courage and Wisdom had not that
success that could have been expected at this time; for the English Regiments
under my Lord Lockart, especially that of Colonel Alsop, beat back the
Spaniards, and pursued them over the Sandy Hills, with a great slaughter. This
victory was due chiefly to the courage of the English, the fifteenth of June,
1658. After the Retreat of the Spaniards, the French Army returned to the
Siege, where the Marquess of Leda was killed with a Bullet. After his death the
Town began to listen to terms of Surrendering, which were agreed on the Two and
twentieth of June.

The King entered into the City, to take possession of it, afterward he
delivered it up to my Lord Lockart, for the use of the English, whose Blood and
Valor had got it from the Enemy. Bergues, Furnes, and Dixmuyde, yielded also to
the Kings Summons, so did Oudenard. Ypres staid for a Siege, and when the
Prince of Ligny had gathered the Relics of the Dispersed Army, beaten before
Dunkirk, he labored to raise it; but was beaten off with loss by Turenne, who
took afterward Menein, and many other small Castles.

At that time La Ferte assaulted Gravelin, but could not recover it in a
Month, for the Garrison was strong and resolute. Many brave Actions happened in
this attempt, the besiegers and besieged, behaved themselves very gallantly; at
last they capitulated upon honorable terms, the Eight and twentieth of August.

In the interim, the Dukes of Modena and Navailes, took Mortera for the French.
This first has always been devoted to the Crown of France.

The Spaniard endeavored to take from the French, some little places which they
recovered; but it is certain, that the Spaniard was the greater looser.
Therefore the Princes of the Empire assembled, together to consult about the
choosing of another Emperor at Franckfort, sent to desire his Majesty of France,
to hearken to an Accommodation. The King of Spain, Philip the Fourth, had
caused some Overtures of Peace to be made by the Popes Mediation. The French
Court entertained them willingly upon condition of a match, between the young
King, and the Infanta of Spain. When the King was at Lions, an Envoy came to
him from Madrid, about this Negotiation. The Cardinal had orders to have a
private Conference with him, to make way for the Ambassadors de Lionne and
Pimentel. The first was dispatched away to Madrid, the second went to Paris.
They dealt so effectually, that all Differences were composed, Articles were
concluded, and the great breach was made up, to the satisfaction of both
Princes and Kingdoms. The Queen Mother was not a little useful in this
business; for when the Cardinal did seem to put in some Demurs, she declared,
That the Peace should be made without him, for that she was resolved, that her
Son should match with one of her own Kindred.

The Kings indisposition had almost ruined this Affair, for he fell dangerously
sick; but he recovered after a few days distemper. Afterward he made a
progress into the farthest confines of his Kingdom; for there had been some
discontents and disorders about Lions, Burgundy, and Provence, which could not
be terminated without his coming. When he was at Lions, the Duke of Savoy came
to wait upon him. This Prince is so near a Neighbor to France, that he is
forced to keep his friendship, for fear of loosing his Principality; which has
been several times in great danger to be swallowed up, by this great Monarch,
at the least distaste.

In the mean time, the Spanish gravity was very slow in concluding the Peace;
that Court trifled away the time in Consultations and Meetings, whilst the
Spring of the next year 1659. was coming on apace. Which caused the King to
give order for new levies of Soldiers, to appoint Generals and Commanders, as
if he had intended to prosecute the War as vigorously as before. This made the
Spaniard desire a Truce of four Months; from the eighth of March, to the third
of July, which was granted the King, That it should continue till his
Declaration to the contrary ordered.

In order to a Peace, Mazarin went to Bayonne, and Don Louis d' Aro de Gusman
came to S. Sebastians, to treat more commodiously. These two Plenipotentiaries
at last concluded and signed the Articles the seventh of November next ensuing.
The Inhabitants of S. Sebastian, of S. John de Luz, and of the Neighboring
Cities declared their satisfaction and joy, by Bonefires, and other public
signs.

Whilst the business was in debate, the French Court was at Bourdeaux and
Toulouse, that it might be sooner consulted in all difficult Matters. After the
conclusion of the Treaty, the French King sent a Procuration to Don Louis d'
Aro, to espouse the Infanta of Spain in his name. The Marriage was performed in
Fontarabia in the presence of the Court of Spain, the third day of June. The
two Kings met in the Isle of Conference, situate between both Kingdoms, where
the young Queen was delivered to her Husband, and both Kings swore to keep, and
confirmed to one another the Treaty of Peace.

After this interview, they separated; the French King and Queen was received
at S. John de Luz, with much pomp and Joy; and in their journey to Paris, every
good City in their way expressed their extraordinary satisfaction, for the
Marriage and Peace between the two Kingdoms. But their Reception at Paris, was
one of the most glorious Ceremonies, the most splendid Triumph of our Age. The
young Queen was carried in an open Chariot, shining with all the riches of the
East and West Indies; she was attended upon by the whole Court, in their
greatest splendour and glory. The People, the Clergy, and the Nobility, did
welcome her with such expressions of joy, that they are not credible.

In the beginning of the next year 1661. on the nineth of March, the great
Minister of State, Cardinal Mazarin, paid his last debt to Nature, having, by
his policy, raised himself and family from a low beginning, to the greatest
honors in France.

The Court was pleased to Mourn for him, but they quickly cast off their sad
attire, when Monsieur of France resolved to marry with the Princess of England:
A Lady, very well accomplished in Beauty and Virtue. The public ceremony was
performed on the One and thirtieth of March.

There happened nothing remarkable this year, till the latter end. The first day
of November, the Dauphin of France was born, to the great joy of all that
Kingdom, Monsieur de Montausier was appointed to be his Governor.

One thousand six hundred sixty and two, the King made Seventy two Knights of
the Order of the S. Esprit; all Persons of the greatest Nobility, and approved
valor. In the same year there happened a difference between the Ambassadors of
Spain and France, about precedence, in the City of London. The Spaniards were
prepared to receive the French; so that the tumult was great, and some
Bloodshed on both sides.

The French sent their Complaints to Madrid, the King gave them satisfaction,
and forbad all his Ambassadors for the future, to appear in any public
solemnity with the Ambassadors of France; for they claim a precedence in all
Courts of Europe, unless it be in Vienna, where the House of Austria are Lords.
The King of Spain preferred in this occasion, the Peace and Quiet of his
Kingdoms to this odd Punctilio of Honor.

This year was spent in Sports and public Divertisements of the Gentry and
Nobility at court, till the Month of November. Then the French Ambassador in
England, had Orders to demand the restitution of Dunkirk to the French, for a
sum of Money, according to their pretended Agreement with Cromwell. It was
generally supposed by the wisest in France, that the English would never part
with a place so well fortified, by their late industry, purchased with the
Blood of many of their bravest Men that took it, and so handy and commodious to
them, both in Peace and War; and that therefore there would be a dispute
between the two Nations, for the recovery of it. But it happened otherwise, to
the Universal Sorrow of all our people, Dunkirke was surrendered, and the
French King made his entry into it the second day of December.

There had been a Treaty between the old Duke of Lorraine, and this young King,
by which the Duke made over to him, all his Right, Title, and Interest, in the
Duchy of Lorraine, for some Lands in lieu of it; and for the privilege of
being declared Heir to the Crown of France, in case the Family of Bourbon did
fail. This Agreement had been made the sixth of February, 1662. and confirmed
in the Parliament of Paris, in the Month of March. So that the French seized
upon all the Cities and Country of Lorraine, only the strong Town of Marsal
remained in the Dukes hands, who seemed unwilling to deliver it. Besides the
young Prince Charles of Lorraine, was supposed to have won the Soldiers there
in Garrison, therefore they would not surrender it upon Summons.

This affair caused the King to travel into that Country, with a sufficient
Army, to reduce it to his obedience, commanding that Marsal should be besieged
without delay. His sudden motion surprised the Duke, and found him unprovided;
therefore he went to meet his Majesty at Metz in Lorraine, to submit himself
unto him. The King received him very generously, and made him welcome; Marsal,
according to Agreement, was put into the French hands, on the third of
September, 1663.

A little before, the French Ambassador Monsieur de Crequi, had been affronted,
and in danger of his person, in the City of Rome. Some of the Popes Guards shot
into his Coach, and wounded his servants. When the Court of France heard of it,
the King commanded the Popes Nuncio, then at Paris, to depart out of the
Kingdom, and sent for his Generals, ordering them to prepare for a War.
Alexander the Seventh did then sit in S. Peter's supposed Chair. He sent
immediately, upon the news of the coming of the French Army, an Express, to
assure his Majesty, that he was much dissatisfied with the deed, and that he
would give him all the satisfaction that he should desire. The City of Pisa was
pitched upon to examine and discourse of this affair, where the Popes, and the
French Deputies, concluded it the Twelfth of March, 1664. to the great joy of
the Roman Catholics. The Pope yielded to his own dishonor, that his Nephew
Flavio Chigi should wait upon the King, and beg his pardon, that a Monument
should be erected in the very place, for posterity to gaze upon, with an
Inscription, declaring the cause of its standing there. This was performed
accordingly; but the zeal of the French, for their King, and their concernment
for his honor, is very remarkable in this occasion. The Parliament of Aix
hearing of the affront given to the French Ambassador, and the Kings resolution
to revenge it, made some levies of Men of their own accord, and marched to
Avignon, where they drive out the Garrison, they surprised Carpentras, and all
the Popes Territories near them. This action gave the King and Court great
satisfaction, and facilitated an Agreement between him and the Pope; for the
French are not so wedded to their Superstitions, as to be so much afraid of the
Popes thunderbolts as in former ages. It would become the wisdom of the
Politicians of this Nation, to shake off the Popes burdensome Fetters, and
establish a Patriarch of their own. There wants nothing else to make their King
an absolute Monarch. Some of the Jansenists have attempted to persuade their
Clergy to it, I hope God will one day open their eyes, to perceive their
slavery to S. Peter's counterfeit Keys, and to oblige them to use that liberty
unto which Providence invites them.

At the same time, that the Cardinal was in France, the Emperor desired the
Kings Succors, to help him against the Turks, who had invaded his Dominions.
This motion pleased the French humor, for they would be thought to be the
Champions of Christianity against the Infidels. The King ordered, as some say,
about Ten thousand Men to march under the command of Monsieur de Coligny, and
Monsieur de la Fueillade, who is now Duke of Roannez. This Army joined with the
Imperialists about the Month of June, 1665. they found out the Turks Army, and
encountered with them twice. It is certain, the French behaved themselves very
gallantly in this expedition; so that the Enemies were worsted, and in their
retreat, over the River of Raab, they lost about Five thousand Men that were
slain, Sixteen pieces of Cannon, and about One hundred and fifty Colors were
taken, with much of their Baggage. The rest of their Army fled, not being able
to withstand the Christians valor.

The Queen Mother of France fell dangerously sick, and died the Twentieth of
January, in that omnious year One thousand six hundred sixty six. She was much
lamented in France and Spain, for she was an excellent Princess.

At this time there was War between the Crown of England, and the States of
Holland. Their Fleets had had a brush at Sea, where the brave Duke of York
adventured, in person, against their Squadrons, more in number then ours. Opdam
their Admiral was blown up, and after a sharp fight they fled to their own
Coast, to carry thither the sad news of their defeat, and of the loss of many
Ships taken by the English: When the French saw that the Hollander was likely
to be worsted, he pretended an obligation to defend them; therefore he declared
War against us, not so much with an intention to assist the Hollander by Sea,
as to stand by with his Fleet, and judge of the blows. However, the countenance
of such a Prince, dreadful to all the World, because it was not known yet what
mischief he could do, helped them very much.

The French made no attempts upon us at home, unless it be upon our industrious
Merchants, who lost some Goods and Ships at Sea. But in the West Indies their
treachery and cruelty were remarkable in the Island of S. Christophers, where
the English and French Plantations had lived in Peace and Amity several years,
they supposed our English would endeavor to drive them away, after this breach
between the two Nations. To prevent therefore that which the others had no
design to execute, they fell upon them unawares, and massacred their Neighbors,
to their eternal shame, plundering all their Goods, and rifling their
habitations. They seized next, the Islands of Antego, Tabago, and S. Eustache.
Our Men resolved to revenge these outrages upon those of Guadeloupe; but the
Fleet that set forth for that intent, was dispersed by a terrible Hurricane,
and some of our Ships were broken and shipwracked, amongst the American
Islands, to the great disappointment of the English. This War between England
and France, continued till the year 1668. the Peace was concluded at Breda; for
the French had no quarrel with the English, but only as was pretended in
defense of Holland.

The truth is, the King did not care to have two Enemies upon his back, at
once; he was resolved to take into his possession some Towns in Flanders,
belonging to the Crown of Spain; he was glad that His Majesty of England, would
let him alone, and not intermeddle in this Affair. The pretense to color the
invasion was, that some Articles of the Treaty of Marriage were not performed
by the Court of Spain. The King, by his Ambassador at Madrid, acquainted them
with his demands, but they neglected to give him satisfaction; this caused him
to publish his Manifesto, to justify the seizure of those Lands and Towns
which, he said, belonged to the Queen, by agreement at her Marriage.

At the end of May, 1667. he entered into Flanders with about Thirty thousand
Men, well furnished. The first Garrisons were forsaken, as Armantiers, La
Bassee, Conde, and S. Guilhain. Bergnes and Furnes, were yielded up to the
Marshall d' Aumont. The King commanded Charleroy to be rebuilt and fortified,
that it might serve as a Bulwark against Flanders. Tournay was besieged and
assaulted, but could not stop the impetuous torrent of the French, that
carried, at this time, all before them. Douay waited for their coming, its
Governor had the mien to stop the French progress: But upon his Majesty's
Summons, he obeyed, and sent him the Keys. Courtray was taken in four days;
Oudenard and Alost were quickly frighted into a compliance with the French.
Lille was the next Garrison that had the unhappiness to be in the French Kings
way. The Governor of this place had the reputation of a brave Commander, he had
under him 800 Horse and 4000 Foot in Garrison, and was resolved to defend it.
Therefore the King came before it with his whole Army, laid siege to it, and,
after a very stout resistance, obliged the renowned* Governor to save the rest
of his men by yielding up the Town, upon honorable terms. The King made his
entry on the Eight and twentieth day of August, One thousand six hundred sixty
and seven.

During the siege, the Spanish Commanders had raised a small Army, with an
intent to Assault the French before Lille. Marcin was at the Head of these
Troops in his march, when Crequy, Rouvray, Lillebonne, and Bellefonds, met with
his Cavalry, in two several Rencounters, and broke his design. For these
Captains had so disordered his Men, and scared them, that they could not be
persuaded to attempt upon the French again without more assistance.

After this Campaign, the King went to Paris, and in the first appearance of
the Spring, One thousand six hundred sixty and eight, he gave order to his
Armies to march toward the Franche Comte. The Prince had the command of this
expedition; but when the Inhabitants understood it, they sent to his Majesty's
Deputies, to treat of yielding to him, to prevent the spoils of an Army.
Whilst the Deputies delayed, the Prince, with his Army, being ready, went
straight to Besanzon, where he encamped. On the sixth of February, it was
surrendered into his hands; some other Towns were taken without resistance, and
Salines was seized upon suddenly. At that time his Majesty was come to his
Army, which he caused to draw near to Dole, a place well fortified and
furnished with Men and Cannon, which caused the Inhabitants to stand upon their
Guards, and think of a resistance; but when they saw that the French had
possessed all the Outworks in one night, and lodged themselves under their
Counterscarpe, they accepted of his Majesty's offers, and sent him the Keys of
their City.

All these places were taken in twelve days, to the great astonishment of all
Neighboring People.

There had been some overtures of Peace made the year before: To prevent the
conclusion of them, the King appeared with his Army this year so early in the
Field; for the Dutch had threatened him, by their Ambassador, to join with the
Spaniard, if he would not hearken to an accommodation. This Speech, together
with the Resolution of his Neighbors, of rising up in Arms against him, brought
forth the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle: Unto which place, Colbert was sent as an
Extraordinary Ambassador, to meet with the Ministers of the Mediating Princes.
It was signed the sixth of May, and sent to be published at Paris and Brussels;
but the French King was mightily offended at the Dutch, who had forced him,
against his will, to this conclusion of Peace; therefore in due time he was
resolved to find an occasion to punish them for their sauciness.

In the mean while, the Nobility and Gallants of France that had prepared their
equipages, for the next Campaign, when they saw themselves disappointed by a
hasty Peace, resolved to venture abroad in Foreign service. Fame had told them
of the long Siege of Candy, by the Turks, and that these Infidels did daily win
upon the besieged by their numbers; therefore the greatest Zealots of them
resolved to hazard their persons for the releif of that noble City belonging to
the Venetians. The Duke de Roannez, the Count of St. Paul, the Duke de
Chateau-Thierry, the Chevalier de Harcour, with many other brave Adventurers,
voluntarily engaged themselves in this expedition. It is certain, that they
behaved themselves with all the gallantry that could be expected. At their
return, they acquainted the King with the condition of the place, and the
strength of the Turks.

This persuaded his Majesty, together with the Solicitations of the Venetians,
to send over thither the Dukes of Beaufort and Navailles, with about 10000 Men,
to see whether they could raise the siege. All the World expected a Success
answerable to the French courage: At their first sallying out upon the Turks,
they beat all down before them; but when the Turks saw their vigor abate, they
charged furiously upon them, and routed them, forcing them back into the City
Walls. Beaufort himself was lost, and killed, as it is supposed, in the rout,
but his body could not be found afterward.

He was much to be blamed for venturing his person, and the honor of his
Prince, amongst the meanest Soldiers; for Commanders of his rank and quality,
are to be mindful, that the safety of the whole Army depends upon the
preservation of their lives: They are never to hazard themselves in the Front
of a Battle, but when their presence is necessary, to give courage to their
fainting Soldiers, or to add more vigor to them, when the victory is almost in
their hands. After the defeat of the French, the besieged City was yielded up
to the Turks General, upon very favorable condition.

The King had intelligence about the end of the year 1669. that the Duke of
Lorraine did endeavor to stir up the Emperor and King of Spain, against him.
This caused him to send the Marshall de Crequy with an Army of 18000 Men into
Lorraine, to take in that Country. The Duke seized upon Pont a Mousson, and
pulled down the Walls. Epinal and Chate held out a littee, but they were, at
last, Surrendered up into his hands, and the old Duke was driven out of all his
Principality.

This year 1670. the King visited his new conquered Towns in the Low Countries,
repaired their breaches, restored their Fortifications, and put them all into a
good posture of defense. But that which was remarkable in this progress, the
King had no extraordinary Militia; he trusted so much these new Subjects, that
he entered into all their populous Towns, attended only by his household
Servants, and usual Guards.

This got him the love and respect of the Walloons, and secured him the hearts
of his people, as well as the Walls of their Towns.

About this time, a King of Guinny, who lives at a City called Arda, sent an
Ambassador to Paris to treat about an establishment of a Trade, between that
place, and the Islands of America, under the French Scepter. The King
entertained him, and his motion, very kindly, and sent him back with Tokens of
his liberality.

There had been an Order of the Kings Council published, by which certain Wares
of the Hollanders were prohibited in France. They labored, by their Ambassador,
to persuade the King to revoke this Order; but in vain, for the King was now
resolved to revenge himself upon them, for their insolent carriage toward him,
and his people, in the West and East Indies, and in many Foreign Countries;
where they had engrossed all the Trade to themselves.

It is certain, that both the English and the French had great cause to
complain of the Hollanders, who had, on several occasions, discovered an
unsufferable Pride, and a haughty carriage, not to be endured by Crowned Heads.
They had exercised their cruelty upon the Subjects of both Kingdoms beyond the
Seas, and had seized upon their Goods, affronting thereby their Princes who are
engaged to protect them.

These, and other unjust practices, as was pretended, obliged the French to
prepare for War: Therefore in his Progress in Flanders, he visited, himself,
the Fortifications of all his Frontier Towns, and caused the weakest places to
be fortified with new Works; from Dunkirke, he went to Amantiers, from thence
to Lille, to Courtray, to Aeth. He found that Monsieur de Montal had strongly
repaired the Walls of Charle le Roy; for which, he highly commended him.

Before the War was proclaimed, Madam de Orleans, the only Sister a live, of
our Gracious Monarch, came over here unto England, to visit the King, and the
Duke of York. She was received with all the expressions of kindness, that
Nature did require, and her Virtues deserve. But as all our satisfactions are
momentary, she had no sooner seen these dear Relations, but was forced to leave
them again, and return over to France, where she died so suddenly, that most
men entertained the bad reports that were raised about her death. However, the
Court of France honored her Birth and Virtues, with an outward Mourning, and
the Duke of Orleans's countenance seemed to be very sad and pensive, until the
King had cheared him up with the thoughts of another Wife. The Daughter of the
Prince Palatine of the Rhine was pitched upon; the Marshall du Plessis was
sent to espouse her in the Dukes name, in the City of Mets, the sixteenth day
of November. The Duke himself wen^ as far as Chalons, to receive and welcome
her: The King, the Queen, and all the Court expressed their joy and
satisfaction for her safe arrival; and about a year after, she was brought to
Bed of a Son.

All this while, the War was preparing against Holland. England and France were
to unite their Forces, by Sea and Land. On the seventh day of April, 1672. the
King published his Declaration, to forbid all Commerce and Trade with the
States of the United Provinces; and immediately after, appeared at the Head of
an Army of One hundred and fifty thousand Men, with whom he carried all before
him in the Low Countries, as a violent torrent: Nothing was of a sufficient
resistance for so great a power; every one did judge, that he would win all the
other Towns, the following Spring, if there were not a stop put to his
undertakings. But the motion of the French is always violent at the first, and
then at the least discouragement, it begins to abate. The Duchy of Cleves, the
Electorate of Cullen, the Duchy of Limburgh, the County of Zutphen, Vtrecht,
and its Territories. Holland, Brabant, Overissell, the Oriental Frieze,
Groningen, and the Duchy of Geldres, were full of French Troops, on a sudden.
Orsoy, Vesel, Burick, and Rhineburgh, that had been so strongly Garrisoned,
that the Dutch thought them to be the Bulwarks of their Land, were surrendered
at the first appearance of the Kings Standard. Reez, Emmerick, and Groll, were
delivered to the Bishop of Munster, who had taken up Arms to vindicate the
French quarrel.

The next attempt was, the Passage over the Rhine, which was first undertaken
by the Count de Guiche, at the Head of Two thousand Horse, he swom over it,
although three Squadrons of Horse, and some few Foot, were ready to receive him
on the other side. When the French had recovered the Bank, they charged so
desperately, that the Enemy was disordered, and fled to their Foot for succor.
They had Barricadoed themselves in, but when the Prince, and the Dukes of
Orleans and Longueville, were got on the other side with their Infantry, they
resolved to assault them in their Trenches. The Prince desired to march in
order against them, but some of his Men were so furious, that nothing could
keep them in. The Duke of Longueville, in a rage, went so near them, with the
Prince, that the Duke was killed, and the Prince wounded in the left arm, with
many more laid upon the ground.

When they saw the whole Army surround them, they desired quarter, which was
granted by the Prince, by that means they yielded, and were all taken
prisoners. It is not good to render an Enemy desperate, a small company in a
danger have won the victory; therefore the Prince freely offered them their
lives.

This Action amazed the Hollander, and astonished the Prince of Orange, who
expected the Kings Army another way. Harnen was taken by Monsieur de Turenne,
Nimeguen and Schenk also. Doesbourgh and Zutphen, were surrende^ed into his
Majesty's hands, and the City of Vtrecht sent Deputies to yield it up. Monsieur
de Luxemburgh was sent thither to take in all the places about Vtrecht. After
this, Turenne recovered Crevecoeur, Coerden, Grave, and Bomel; so that almost
all the Inland Country thereabouts, submitted to the French. The Hollanders
were then so much troubled, that they offered Conditions of Peace to the King;
but he hoped to gain all the rest of their Country: Therefore they were
rejected as unreasonable.

The King after all these Successes, left the Army the Six and twentieth of
July, and arrived at Paris the first of August, where he was congratulated and
welcomed by all the Societies of his Kingdom. The Queen was so much overjoyed,
that she commanded a Chapel to be built at Roan, and dedicated it to Our Lady
of Victories; for as amongst the Heathens they did give to Pallas, the Goddess
of War, several attributes, and names betokening the many good Office that they
fancied, proceeded fron^ her favoring of them: So the Papists assign diverse,
and differing titles to the Virgin Mary, who is now become the Goddess of War
amongst them, and the Giver of Victory to her devout Proselites.

The Princes wound had cast him into an indisposition, which made him follow
his Majesty, and accompany the Duke of Orleans, the Kings Brother, to Paris,
leaving the Conduct of Affairs to Monsieur de Luxembourgh and Turenne. The
Prince of Orange was then before Voerden with Twelve thousand Men; Luxembourgh
prepares a strong brigade of Two thousand five hundred Men, and by a secret way
over the Marshes, he gets into the Town undiscovered, with his Party, with
which he made such stout Sallies, that the Prince was forced to rise from
thence with his Army, to leave some of his Baggage and Cannon behind him.

All this while the Dutch had scarce time to look about, the French had been so
nimble and furious, that they had gained all this Country, without any
considerable loss. But before the next Campaign, the face of affairs was
changed, the Dutch had many Armies come to their assistance, the Spaniard, the
German, and the Imperialists, sent their powerful Succors to aid them: So that
they have since recovered a great part of what they first lost, and will,
according to all probability, recover the rest.

The Prince of Orange was now restored by Order of the States, after the
inhumane massacre of de Wit, to his Patrimonial Offices of Statholder, Admiral,
and General of the United Provinces. This generous Prince began to appear at
the Head of an Army of 24000 Men; with these he resolved not to be idle; some
places he took, but did not yet dare to adventure against his insolent Enemy,
triumphing for so many great Successes. Monterey, Viceroy of the Netherlands,
for the King of Spain, desired him to attempt something in his Country,
because the French had drained their Garrisons; for the Spaniard had not
declared yet against them. According to this advice, he laid siege to
Charleroy, a Fortress that was likely to annoy the Spaniard, their next
Neighbors. Montal, the Governor, had notice of the design, he Posts: thither in
haste; and taking his: time in the night, he passed through the Dutch and
Spanish Troops, and got safe into the Garrison, to the great joy of the
besieged. The next day he adventured to sally out with a strong party, which
was received and welcomed by the Prince of Orange, with loss on both sides.
When the King heard of this siege, he drew near to the Borders of Picardy, and
gave order to several thousands of his Soldiers to meet him, with a design to
beat the Dutch off. Therefore this intelligence caused the Prince to rise with
his Army, the Two and twentieth day of December, and depart: Which was
signified to the King by a Post, sent from the Governor.

At this time, Luxembourgh attempted to lead his Men over the Ice, to Assault
Bodengrave, Swammerdam, and Niverburgh; which three places he took without much
resistance. After this, the French went no further till the next Spring, 1673.
They were all sent into several Garrisons, where we shall leave them to take
notice of their behavior at Sea.

On the Water, as well as on the Land, the War was carried on. The Dutch had a
gallant Fleet, with which they did defy the Fleets of England and France: But
though De Ruyter, their Admiral, labored by Policy to fight us, and to surprise
us at an advantage; he was much mistaken to find our English courage, in the
greatest discouragement, not to resist and brave Death it self.

His Majesty of England had been engaged to join his strong Fleet with the
French Squadron, which was commanded by the Count de Estrees. Therefore the
Twenty eighth of May, 1672. in prosecution of the War that had been declared
against the States of Holland, our Fleet, under the command of the brave Duke
of York, had a very sharp Engagement with the Dutch, upon the English Coast; in
which, the Victory declared for the English, with the loss of the Royal James,
which was unfortunately burned; and of the Earl of Sandwich, who was drowned,
and his body found about the tenth of the next Month floating on the English
shore. He was an excellent Captain, more fortunate in the Mediterranean, and in
the Sound, then in our Channel. England lamented the loss of so excellent a
person. It seems his courage destroyed him; for when his Ship was Boarded and
Fired by a Dutchman, when it was surrounded by many of the Enemies best Ships;
His resolution to brave Death, and the Enemy, in the midst of the greatest
disadvantages and dangers, made him abide and continue the sight in his Flaming
Ship.

Of our English, Twenty four Persons of Note were killed, with three of the
French. Amongst the rest, a Gentleman, so Courageous, Learned, Civil, and so
well accomplished, that I cannot but mention him in this place: It was Mr.
Clement Cotterel, Sir Charles Cotterels Son. About fifteen Gentlemen were
desperately wounded, seven hundred Common Soldiers and Seamen killed, and as
many maimed. Monsieur de Rabiniere tres le Bois, Rear Admiral of the French,
was killed, and buried at Rochel.

The Duke of York, in this Engagement, behaved himself as a discreet and wise
Commander, with an undaunted Courage.

It is supposed, that if our whole Fleet could have had the convenience of
fighting, the Dutch had been for ever undone; but the Wind hindered most part
of our Ships from coming up to them; so that the Blew Squadron was forced to
engage with the Enemy alone. The Dutch had great loss of Men and Ships; it is
thought about five or six of theirs, besides the Fireships were sunk: It is
certain, that our Fleet pursued them to their own Coast.

About this time, the Twentieth of August, 1672. happened a most barbarous
execution of the two De Wits torn in pieces by the rude rabble of the Hague,
their Privities cut off, their Bodies dragged through the Streets, and hanged
at the Gallows, in such a barbarous manner, that the Cannibals would have been
ashamed to have done the like.

Groningen had been besieged by the Mercenary Weathercock of Munster; but in
the Month of August he left the Town, after a considerable loss of his Men.
The good Bishop was moved with compassion to see his Soldiers slaughtered by
the stout-hearted Dutch; so that he preferred their safety, or it may be his
own, to the filling of his Purse with Gilders; which was the thing this noble
Captain aimed at in this attempt upon the Dutch.

The States of Holland had prevailed with many of their Neighbors, especially
with the Emperor, King of Spain, and Duke of Brandenburgh, to send their
Succors to assist them by Land. The Prince Palatine was persuaded,
notwithstanding his Alliance with France, to enter into the party. They were
all resolved to send into the Field their Armies, in the next Spring; for they
were afraid that the French would not be content with the Conquest of Holland,
but would incroach upon them also afterward.

During this Winter, nothing happened worthy of notice, but the loss of private
persons, robberies, and small Encounters of Parties, that sought for Plunder
and Booties.

In the beginning of the Spring, 1673. three Armies appeared for the
Hollanders; the King of Spains commanded by the Count de Monterey, the Emperors
by Montecuculi, the Duke of Brandenburghs by himself; besides the Army of the
Prince of Orange, who was declared General at Land, Admiral at Sea, and
Statholder by the States. The French Army commanded by Turenne, marched against
the Duke of Brandenburgh, who was forced to quit to him all the County of
Marck, and to leave his Bag and Baggage behind him, for fear of a total defeat
of his Forces. The French took Vrnia, Ham, Camen, Altenau, Soest, and Hoexter,
Bilefeld, and Ravensperg, small places of no strength.

At this time, the Swede and the Dane, with other Neuter Princes, had desired
an accommodation of the differences between the Kings of England and France.
Cologne was the place of meeting; all the Ple^ipotentiaries were sent with
Instructions: But although the Dutch had so many losses by Land, and by Sea,
they would not yield to any reasonable Propositions at first. Their stout
hearts were resolved to try the Fortune of War, before they would listen to any
peaceable conclusion. At last after several Debates, and Consultations, the
Peace was concluded between the King of England and the States, but the French
pretentions were extraordinary high, and their Successes great; so that there
was no possibility that did appear, to end their differences at this time. But
before the Peace was published between England and Holland, all this Summer of
the year 1673. the War was vigorously carried on by Sea and Land.

By Sea, Prince Rupert commanded a Fleet of English and French, One hundred and
twenty Sail. With these Ships he attacked the Dutch Frigates, under the command
of De Ruyter and Van Trump. The fight was managed with much resolution on both
sides: The French in the former Engagements had been taught to face their Enemy
upon the Water; for they behaved themselves now very bravely, because they
could not well excuse themselves. It is certain, the Princes conduct and
courage in this, and all other Engagements, have justly deserved the praise of
all Men, and the thanks of our Nation. This noble Spirit has since his
infancy, spent his Wit and Blood in the defense, and for the honor of our
Country.

The Dutch proclaimed Victory at Land, whilst their Ships and Shipwracks
complained of their ill usage at Sea by the English. They lost eight
considerable Vessels, that of Van Haen was the chief, it was blown up by an
unfortunate shot. Many were so disabled, that they could not reach into their
Harbors. His Majesty's Fleet had received some damage in the Rigging, and loss
of Men; but not so as to hinder them the next morning, the nineth of May, from
pursuing their Enemies to their own Coast. The Dutch lost many Men, some of
note, and a Ship taken by the English.

At Land there were frequent encounters between the Dutch and French. The City
of Mastreicht was the chief place of action this Summer: The Count de Lorge,
and Monsieur Montall, were ordered to invest it, the sixth of June: The rest of
the Army marched thither to post themselves about this strong place. Fario was
then Governor, with a very stout Garrison of six thousand Men; the Count de
Monterey had sent thither two thousand Italian Horse and Foot, to reinforce the
place. The King himself was in the Army with the bravest and choicest
Regiments; and the Noble Duke of Monmouth, with several thousand English under
his command.

It is certain, the French King visited the Trenches, and encouraged his
Troops, with a great contempt of the danger. Fario had sent him this civil
message, That if he knew whereabouts his Majesty's Quarters were, he would
command his Men to forbear shooting to that place: The King sent him word
again, That his Quarters were every where in his Camp. The besieged made a
stout resistance, many Men were killed on both sides. It is thought that this
Town might have put a stop to the French Conquests, if the Burgers had been
more faithful to their old Masters, and less careless of their lives and
riches. It is certain, that it had never been taken by the French alone, had
not our English spent their blood, and in contempt of all danger, passed with
their Regiments through showers of small and great shot, to the Assault.

We cannot sufficiently admire the courage of the Duke of Monmouth, a young
General of an admirable conduct and skill in Martial Affairs. He commanded in
the Trenches, with an intention to assault the Counterscarpe, and the
Half Moon, before Brussels-Gate. He led on his Men with such resolution, that
though two or three Mines were sprung up, and the shot fell thick amongst them,
they carried the Half Moon, to the great wonder of all men, in half an hour.

As soon as it was taken, the Duke, with his Party, was immediately relieved by
the French, upon whom, the besieged played so briskly, with their great and
small shot, that they beat them out with the assistance of a Mine, and a stout
Sally. When the Duke saw that the French had lost what his Men had got, he
prepared himself to regain it; which he did with the greatest resolution and
happiness imaginable. This invincible spirit at the Head of his Party, leaped
over the Trenches first, with his Weapon in his hand, only twelve stout
Volunteers accompanied him, the rest followed so furiously, that the Dutch were
beaten off again, and his Grace became Master of the Half Moon the second time,
delivering it into the hands of Monsieur de la Feuillade. So that without
flattery, the French ow the taking of Mastreicht to the courage, conduct, and
brave resolution of the Duke of Monmouth, to the Blood and undauntedness of our
English. Sir Henry Jones was killed in one of these assaults, which happened the
twenty fourth of June. After some other attempts, where our Men were again
employed, the Town desired a Parley the twenty nineth, and in two hours the
Articles were granted, That the Governor and Garrison should march out as stout
Soldiers, their Colors flying, Drums beating, Match lighted, Bullet in Mouth,
with Bag and Baggage, and two Pieces of Cannon, and a Mortar Piece. That they
should be safely convoyed to Boisledue and Breda. The French lost 4000 Men, and
about 1000 of the besieged were killed. The King took possession of it the
thirtieth of June, and commanded the Cardinal de Bouillon to resanctifie the
Churches profaned by the Duchess Devotions.

About this time there happened another Sea-sight, between the English and the
Dutch Fleets, with loss on both sides; but our English beat the boasting Dutch
again into their Harbors, where they left them to complain of their wounds and
dead, and to glory in their pretended Successes and Victories.

The many Armies that were now on foot, to attend upon and stop the further
proceedings of the French, caused them to call away their Garrisons from many
Conquered Towns: Besides the Sickness and the War, had consumed a great number;
so that they were forced, for their own safety, to gather a little more close
together. Several strong places were abandoned, and several were dismantled;
the Sodiers were sent to reinforce the Armies.

During this Winter, many Encounters happened between the Enemies, and some few
unconsiderable places taken. But now to the great joy of England, it pleased
His Majesty to grant a Peace to the Hollander, on most honorable Conditions to
the English.

The French King nevertheless continues his designs by Land; but by Sea he
commands his Ships to be drawn up, or to sail out of the Dutchmens sight. In
the beginning of the Spring he besieged Besanzon, in the Franche Comte; Pesme,
Marnay, were taken before by the Duke of Navailles, the fourteenth of February.
The strong Town of Gray was yielded up after two or three days siege: On the
twenty eighth, Vesoal was also taken. The King himself, with a strong Party,
arrived at his Camp before Besanzon, in the beginning of May, 1674. It was
surrendered into his Majesty's hands before the end of the Month, after many
brave exploits and much blood shed.

Whiles the Treaty was on foot at Cologne, the Emperor caused the Prince of
Furstemberg, Plenipotentiary for the Archbishop of Cologne, to be arrested by
the Officers of his Regiment of Grana, in his Coach, and carried to Bon,
because he had not maintained the interest of the Empire, as he should have
done, he being a Subject.

This violent proceeding did mightily scandalize all the Ambassadors,
especially the Archbishop, and the French King, were offended at this violence:
For they pretend, that the person of an Ambassador is sacred, and not to be
violated by any means. Nature has taught the most barbarous people to suffer
them to go and come in safety, who are employed in quenching the Flames of War.

Navaigne was afterward besieged and yielded to the Prince of Conde; but the
Prince of Orange, had an intent to succor it, had not the besieged made so much
haste to secure their lives by a Surrender. Dole was also besieged by the King,
and taken after a stout resistance.

The fifteenth of June, there happened a fight between Monsieur de Turenne, and
the Imperialists commanded by the Duke of Lorraine, and the Count of Caprara.
The Duke of Bournonville was marching up to them, Turenne resolved to hinder a
conjunction; for that purpose, he passed the Rhine at Philipsburgh. The Duke
and Count had but Seven thousand Horse, and a Regiment of Foot, but Turenne was
Twelve thousand strong. The Confederates behaved themselves so bravely, that
had they not been inferior in number, they had forced the French to a retreat.
After a hot engagement, which lasted all the Afternoon, the Germans sought
their fafety in a retreat over the Neckar; many brave Men were killed on both
sides, some say the loss was equal. It is certain, four thousand Men lay dead
on the Ground; the old Duke of Lorraine headed his Troops with so much
resolution, as if he had intended to win a Dukedom in another World, by his
notable courage.

The Dutch Fleet, about one hundred Sail, passed out of the Channel to scour
the Seas, of all French Frigates, and to attempt something upon the Coast; they
Landed on Belle Isle, but were repulsed after the loss of a few Men.

The Duke of Schomberg commanded the French Forces in Catalonia; in the County
of Rousillon, he engaged with them, and forced them to a retreat, with the loss
of his Son, and another Gentleman of quality taken prisoners.

The next action was between the Prince of Conde, and the Prince of Orange,
assisted by the Count de Souches, the eleventh of August, near Haynault. The
two Armies were resolved to have a brush, which was performed with much
gallantry: The Prince of Oranges Army lost many Men, and Commanders; and the
French disputed the case very stoutly; at last they retreated into their Camp,
carrying with them many noble prisoners, and most part of the Princes Baggage;
leaving the Dutch to boast of their empty and sorrowful Victory, in the open
Field.

At this time Grave was besieged by the Dutch: The French could not be
persuaded to surrender it, till after a long and bloody siege.

The Messinenses had revolted from the Spaniard, and put themselves under the
French protection. The Duke de Vivonne arrived there, with some Succors, and
relief of Men, and Provision. The Inhabitants put them in possession of the
strongest places about the City; the Spaniards, by Sea and Land, endeavored to
plague them. A short conflict happened upon the Coast, between the French and
Spanish Fleets, where the noise of their great Guns, and their mutual
Rodomontadoes, soon terrified them, and made them both willing to part upon
equal terms. By this means the Messinenses had some Provision brought to them
in their urgent necessity.

In October, the Confederates, encamped upon the skirts of Turennes Army, were
forced to fight near Strasburgh; they lost three thousand Men, ten Pieces of
Cannon, thirty Standards, and many Prisoners; the French also had many of their
best Menkilled. The Confederates retreated to Spire, and Turenne to the sides
of the Rhine.

The taking of the Citadel of Liege this Winter, by the French, was an
accident, that surprised and startled all the World. It was betrayed by a
treacherous Governor, and delivered into the Kings hands, who sent thither
three thousand Men to remain in Garrison.

This year 1675 the War continues still call Europe is engaged in this Bloody
dispute, between the French and Dutch. The Swedes have been persuaded, for the
French sake to enter into the Borders of the Duke of Brandenburgh, and in
defense of the Protestant Interest, as they pretend, to help the French, who
carries on the Popes. Therefore they have quartered their Army all this Winter,
upon the Subjects of Brandenburgh, who has been forced to draw his Army from
the Confederates to stop the Swedes violences.

In May the French King caused Limburgh to be besieged, after the taking of Huy
and Dinant. The Confederates were resolved to raise the siege, but the
surrender prevented them. Nevertheless the Dutch and Spaniards have behaved
themselves very stoutly in the defense of this Town.

At present the Prince of Orange, with his Army, attends upon the French King
near Ruremond; Turenne is encamped near the Rhine, about Strasburgh, in sight
of the German, commanded by Montecuculi. All the World expects to hear of a
bloody dispute between them. What end this great quarrel will have, God alone
knows; however we ought to lament at the miseries of our Neighbors, at the
Christian Blood that is shed to satisfy the Ambition of a Prince that wants
nothing on Earth, but Content. We ought to pray God to preserve our England, in
Peace and Unity; and our gracious King, the best of all Monarchs, in health and
prosperity.

Amen.

