A METHOD OF GOVERNMENT FOR SUCH Public Working ALMSHOUSES As may be Erected
in every County for bringing all idle hands to Industry.

AS The best known Expedient for restoring and advancing the Woollen
Manufacture.

HUMBLY Offered to the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY and both Houses of
PARLIAMENT.

BY R. Haines

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis on Ludgate Hill, 1679.

A Method of Government for Public Working Almshouses, etc.
THE Scope or End aimed at, and promised by my former Proposals, is, That all
the Wool of England, and what Scotland and Ireland have to spare, may be
Manufactured in England, as fast as it grows and arises, on such Terms as that
all the Cloth we have to spare, being exported, may find quick Markets as fast
as it is made.

The Expedients or means to Effect All this; are, First in General, To bring
all poor People and idle hands to Industry. Secondly, in particular, as the
only effectual Way or Method, to do this to the best advantage it is proposed,
That two or three, or more, Public Workhouses be Erected in every County,
where all such poor people and idle hands may under good Government he
constantly employed in that Manufacture,



Which having been perused and considered by several Public Spirited Persons,
known Promoters of the Nations wealth and safety, they have generally very much
approved and encouraged the said Expedient, as most certain, feasible, and
effectual to accomplish the great and good ends aforesaid; If I could but
propose such a Method of Government in these Workhouses as the Nation may be
secured of these four things, viz. The Country from being cheated of their
Money raised for erecting and furnishing such Houses; the Poor from being
abused; unfit Persons kept from being Officers and bearing Rule in them; and
Justice from being wrested so as not to redress Grievances and punish Offenders.

Wherefore (with all submission to better Judgments) I humbly offer such a
Method of Government, as far as concerns the preservation of the Stock raised,
and prevention of Frauds and Corruptions in Officers, as will, I conceive,
remove all Apprehensions of any the before mentioned mischiefs, that so all
judicious persons may be entirely satisfied: As thus,

Since all Parishes are to contribute to this Work, and every Parishoner is
concerned in the Charge, and may reap Benefit by it, if honestly managed,
Therefore, because it cannot be imagined that any people will cheat or injure
themselves, let each person in every Parish be concerned in or about the
Government or Inspection thereof; as follows.

1. That it be Enacted, that all contributing Parishioners, or the greatest
part of them, meet Quarterly in their own Parish, and elect one, or more, as
their Overseer or Delegates for this Inspection; And so every Parish to choose
and send their Overseers every Quarter of the Year to inspect the State of that
house to which they belong. Each Parish neglecting to choose, to forfeit 5 l. to
the Treasury of the said Hospital. Each Overseer to be allowed 2 s. 6 d. a day
by his Parish for the time he is out on this Affair on Horseback; and 1 s. 6 d.
being out on Foot, provided that none continue out above 6 or 7 days at one
time. Or if this seem too burdensome, two, or three, or more, small Parishes
may join to this purpose as one. 2. That these Overseers, being Assembled, may
have full Power to elect Governors, prescribe Rules and Orders, choose
Trustees, appoint Officers, enquire into the Welfare of their respective Poor
there, hear and redress their Grievances, see that they be not abused or
discouraged, reform all disorders, call each Officer or Trustee to an account,
turn them out, and elect new ones as often as they think necessary, etc. To
which purpose they may subdivide themselves into several Companies, and
dispatch much business in little time. 3. That all men in this Assembly may be
of equal Authority, and no one person overruled the rest, who shall likewise
before they are admitted, oblige themselves by Oath, or solemn Promise made
before a Magistrate, to do those things that are just and honest, to suffer no
wrongs or injuries to pass uncorrected, to do nothing for favor or prejudice,
but to perform all that lies in his power for the safety and public good of
the Stock and House, and to give a just and true account at his return when
called thereunto. 4. That no known rude or disorderly Person shall be permitted
to have any Office there, but that for the encouragement of such as are sent to
the House to earn their Living, all inferior Offices or Places of Preferment
may be conferred on such of the House as most deserve it, if capable. 5. That
if it be known any Person or Persons, directly or indirectly, has given or
taken any Bribe or Fee, or offered so to do, in order to obtain or confer any
Office or Trust, or do improve his Interest to promote or continue any
dishonest scandalous person in Office, then every such Person shall thenceforth
for ever be incapable of having or holding any Office in the said Workhouses,
or giving his Voice concerning the same in any meeting of the Parish or
Overseers. 6. That the Assembly of Overseers, with the Assistance of a
Magistrate, have power to enjoin all Officers and Trustees of the house, either
by Oath or solemn Promise, that they shall act according to such Rules and
Orders as shall be agreed on in the said Assembly; that they shall not conceal
any ill Practices in any but discover them to the next Quarterly Assembly: That
they shall every Quarter give a fair and just Account to that Assembly of all
Moneys by them received or disbursed; what Goods they buy or sell, and the
quantity and prizes, and what Goods or Money they have in their Custody; And
that any one breaking such their Oath or solemn Promise shall be punished as in
the Case of Perjury; and besides, the Offender to make satisfaction, for what
he has detained, imbeziled, or defrauded, to the house, or those that
entrusted him. 7. That the Overseers neglecting at the time appointed to use
their utmost endeavor to take a true and just account of all persons
entrusted, or failing to deliver a true account thereof to their respective
Parishes, shall forfeit five pound a-piece, to be paid to the Treasury of the
Hospital. 8. That for the building and first stocking such Workhouses, every
Parish, or Parishes united, shall (till the same are finished and Government
settled) send their Overseers every Fortnight, or Month, who shall carry the
proportion of money payable thereunto by such Parishes respectively. And that
all Expenditors and Trustees employed for carrying on the work, shall be chosen
by such Overseers, and be accountable to them till the house be finished and
settled. 9. That if any difference arise between the Overseers of the Parishes,
and the Trustees of the House, it shall be refered to a meeting of the
respective Parishes, concerned in such Workhouse; And in case the like
difference arise between the Parishioners and their Overseers, the same be
referred to the next quarter Sessions, or if it require speed, then to two
Justices, one to be chosen by the Parish, the other by the Overseers; Provided
none shall have power to hinder the Parish or Parishes from choosing such
Overseers as they shall think most fit to be trusted; or turning out such as
they find dishonest. 10. That every Parish, and Parishes united, do bring a
fair account of what Moneys are Collected for the present year, and how
disposed of, what remains in hand, and what poor they relieve at home, and in
the Hospital, to the Justices at their Easter sitting, after the manner now
practiced. 11. That the Parishes united shall be equally Taxt at a poundrate
for the relief of their poor, and that their Taxes and accounts be confirmed by
the Justices, and that the Justices may in join the Parishes to contribute what
is fit, when otherwise they refuse, and that any poor Inhabitant when abused,
and cannot be Redressed, may make his case known to the Justice, when the
Governors or Overseers shall refuse to do their Office.
This Method of Government or Inspection I humbly offer as most safe, because
from head to foot the Interest of one Member has its dependence on the other.

1. It Is the Interest of each Parish to Elect honest Overseers, 2. It Is the
Interest of these Overseers to Act righteous things, and Elect honest Trustees,
not only because, if they betray their Trust, they are in danger of punishment
and dishonor, but also, because their own private Interest lies at stake in
the Common interest of their Parishes. 3. It Is the Interest of the Officers and
Trustees, whether Honest men or Knaves, to do honestly, because then they may
continue in their places of reasonable profit, But if they do otherwise under
so many Eyes, and such frequent inspections, they cannot hope to conceal their
misdemeanors, and then must be severely corrected, and pay dearly for it.
Thus much for the Form of Government, as to the Governors; I shall now add a
few words concerning the Persons to be Governed; The rather for that our design
is abusively Represented, as if we intended these houses to be places of
Slavery, and to keep people per force there all their Lives, whereas we propose
only this.

1. That the Children of all poor people, who are Chargeable to the Parish, be
without abuse employed in these Houses at six years old and upwards, and all
Impotent people who are capable of employment, and do not Earn their livings at
home, having no Children under the Age of six years to be maintained. 2. That
the Men-children brought up in these Houses have their Liberty to go to Trades,
or Husbandry, when they come to the age of 18. years. And the Maiden-Children
liberty at the same age to learn Housewifry. 3. That all Beggars, Vagrants etc.
who have no habitation, nor will earn their Livings in any lawful Employment,
be placed there. 4. That all dangerous persons, Criminals, etc. Whom the law
condemns to be hanged, etc. (Except in the Case of Murder and Treason)
especially such as are guilty of Perjury and Forgery, may be confined to these
Houses during Life, or for a certain Term of years, to serve the public, being
able by their Labor to maintain as many more as themselves. 5. That all
Debtors in prison, not able to pay their Debts, or maintain themselves (whereof
many hundreds there are ready to starve) may remove themselves to this
Hospital, where they may live Comfortably and be Instruments for public good.
These are the persons that may compose and fill up these Houses. As for the
Officers way of providing their Diet, Clothes, and other circumstances, we need
not here particularize, Christ's Hospital, or the like Foundation, may afford a
good President for us to imitate.

As for that Common Objection and Discouragement from the unhappy miscarriage
of Clarkenwell Workhouse, and the like, which to prevent the most happy
Reformation and Weal of our Nation, remains a Gazing-stock to discourage all
public Spirits, as the Devil and self-interested people would have it, The
same ought to be no plea or obstruction to what we propose. For, 1. That which
rendered that and other Houses unsuccessful, was the ill-government thereof, but
such regular method of Government as we have offered, at least with some
amendments, will prevent all such inconveniences. 2. As for that House, it is
nothing strange that it did miscarry, rather it would have been strange if it
had not; since the persons governing such Houses ought to be inferior to those
by whom they are entrusted, that the latter may speedily bring them to account,
and if they find any one dishonest, correct and turn him out of doors; whereas
the Governors of Clerkenwell-house were great men, and authorized to raise
money at pleasure, not to be corrected, but by Act of Parliament, etc. So that
their quality, and business, or want of honesty, hindered them from using that
inspection over inferior Officers as was necessary, and when money came into
their hands, and was diverted who could force them to an account? 3. If this be
a precedent of ill-success, and only for the reason aforesaid, we can show you
many precedents in Holland, etc. of such Workhouses erected and managed with
good-success; nay there is scarce any thing contributes more to the wealth and
strength of that Nation, than their ^dence and industry in this respect; but
there they are ^ged not by Grandees, as Clerkenwell was to be, but by honest
laborious men, who if they fail in their duty are forthwith severely corrected.
A person entrusted in a Spin-house in Amsterdam, was publicly whipped and turned
out of doors for being partial, viz. because by his connivance a young woman,
who was sent thither to work for her living, made her escape. Another Officer
was whipped and committed to the Rasp-house, for diminishing what was allowed for
the comfortable maintenance of the Poor. At Leiden I saw a fellow most severely
whipped upon a Scaffold, erected for that very purpose before the Spin-house, in
view of many thousands, and after committed to the Rasp-house, for that he
under pretense of being zealous to serve the States, inricht himself by abusing
and oppressing the Poor. 'Twas for want of such strict Government Clarkenwell,
etc. came to naught. 4. If because that House, merely for want of right method,
and persons of fit qualifications to govern it, miscarried, therefore no such
Houses must be made use of; may not our Merchants as well conclude, that
because some Ships, for want of an honest fit Master or skilful Pilot, have
been cast away; therefore tho there be men enough whose qualifications and
integrity are sufficient, yet they will never venture to send forth any more
Ships; If you say the case is different, for tho the Houses have failed, yet we
know most of our Ships return safe, then I may return you the same answer; In
Holland none of these Houses (...) ^^^refore if we take right method of
government, our Houses (...) often as our ^hips a^^ will become as profitable
to the Kingdom, for if the Houses prosper, to be sure our Shipping will
increase, therefore whoever is an enemy to these Houses, is as great an enemy
to the increase of our Ships and Seamen, and consequently an enemy to the true,
Wealth, Safety and Interest of the English Nation.


At least since this expedient is no new Project, but daily ^ractised with
^^traordinary success and advantage by our Neighbors It Is humbl^ hoped that the
same shall not be contemned (...), before they have first sough^ out, and
demonstrated some more certain, effectual and fea^ble expedients to accomplish
the wo^k in hand, and by the Proposer humbly offered, viz. To convert all the
Wool of England, and what Scotland and Ireland have to spare, into Cloth, on
such terms as to vend the Cloth as fast as it is made, whereby 30 or 40 hundred
thousand pounds, per annum may be gained to the Nation; and all poor people
bred up to such an habit of industry, that for the future a Beggar may not be
seen in the Kingdom; but neither they nor their childrens children shall ever
want a lawful Employment, Food, Raiment, nor Habitation.

FINIS.

