THE Antelope's Evidence; a third time published with additions. OR, An
Experimental and Ocular Demonstration Of the Goodness and Excellency of
MILL'D-LEAD-SHEATHING, Above that of WOOD.
Wherein is also proved, that It is much Cheaper at 14 d. a foot, the Rate
published, THAN Wood-sheathing, if it were reckoned but at 7 d. a foot.
The Lead being considered only to last no longer than an Ordinary
Wood-sheathing, though it is evident it would Outlast many of the Best that were
ever put on.
THIS Ship was Sheathed with Milled Lead in March, 1694/5; the first Summer she
was employed in the King's Service, and then upon her return sent by her Owners
a Voyage to the East Indies, from whence also being returned, and put into Mr.
Snelgrove's Dock, in March 1697/8, where she was viewed by the Navy-Board, 9th
of April, and has been seen by many others before and since, and still
remaining there, and likely so to continue for some time yet, any body else
that pleases may view the Success of her Lead-sheathing, which they will find
(though she had dangerously struck on ground) to lie on all about her Bildge and
Keel, and quite throughout, for any defect in the Sheathing it self, as firm
and well as at first doing, and the Ruddar-Irons under it being parcell'd,
preserved sound and not so much as touched with Rust, but altogether as good as
at first putting on above three years ago; as appeared upon stripping the Lead
off a Brace, and a Stirrup of the Sterne-post, by the Commissioners directions,
which this innocent Sheathing has been so obstinately charged by its Enemies to
eat and corrode in so extraordinary a manner, and such Conclusions drawn from
thence, that it has suffered under the Tyranny of this false and groundless
Suggestion (and this alone) to the great Loss of the Public, and Injury of the
Inventor, almost these Twenty Years, all other Objections, as rubbing off by
Cables, Hawsers, Boats and Lyters, lying on ground, Shortness and Smallness of
the Nails, and whatever its Enemies could invent, being removed long ago by
sufficient Proof and Five Years Experience upon Ten Ships sheathed in that
time, to the former Navy-board's full satisfaction; as they declared in the
Preamble of their Contract, tho the same Surmises have upon all occasions been
renewed again, which, it is to be hoped, this present Evidence will silence for
the future. They stripped some Boltheads also that were not parcell'd under the
Lead, which were very sound. As for the Pintels and Braces of the Ruddar that
lay naked to the Water, they are, as usual, somewhat eaten with Rust, but
nothing extraordinary, and with only new nailing the Braces all may be made
good again for further Service: and had these Braces, as well as those on the
Sterne-post, been parcell'd and covered with the Lead, doubtless they would
have been preserved sound as those others were. They will find some small
Cracks in the Sheathing, occasioned by the Ship's opening her Seams in working,
which closing when she comes to rights again, are little damage, no Worm having
entered there; as appeared upon the Commissioners searching and dubbing about
several of them. There was one place off on her Larboard side (by some unknown
Accident) about the bigness of a Crown-piece, where the Worm having eaten, the
Commissioners caused the Plank to be dubbed, but it went so little a way in,
and not further than the bare place, that the Worm-holes, which were but small,
were quickly dubbed out: and it is observable, whenever any Lead happens to be
off, the Worm eats but little in, and never goes under the Sheathing beyond the
naked place. There is also one place rubbed off at the end of the Keel, where
the Worm had eaten, which happened at her first going out of the Dock; and
another about a hands breadth, on the Larboard side, at her return in, no Worm
having touched there; and several small places torn by the Anchor; all which
(if not by Care prevented, where such Accidents happen) would damage a
Wood-sheathing as bad, and probably much worse, by rending and shattering the
Boards. They will find several places indeed off above, where the
Wood-sheathing was nailed over it, upon pretense to defend it from Boats and
Lyters, which being much Worm-eaten, shattered, and torn off, some of the
Lead-sheathing that lay under it came off with it. Moreover, they will find
this Lead-sheathing fouls but very little; and when foul, easily cleaned; which
with its smooth and thin lying on, must be an advantage to a Ship's sailing.

As to the Cheapness; Suppose such a Ship as the Antelope to measure 5400 foot,
which at 14 d. a foot amounts to 315 l. of which, if a fourth part 78 l. 15 s.
be allowed for the Old Sheathing when stripped, the Charge of this
Lead-sheathing would be but 236 l. 5 s. Suppose also that this 5400 foot, to be
sheathed with Wood, would cost but 7 d. a foot, which amounts to 157 l. 10 s.
and that this Sheathing be allowed to last Two Voyages to the Streights, or
elsewhere, (some last but One, and Two of those Sheathings being of equal price
to a Lead-sheathing, certainly the Graving saved in two Voyages, and the Value
of the Old Lead, when stripped, will abundantly pay the Interest of 157 l. 10
s. the Price of the second Sheathing, for a Year, or a little more, till it
shall be called for;) and the Lead-sheathing should be also stripped at the
same time, this would exceed the Wood-sheathing but 78 l. 15 s. which Sum
doubled, perhaps, would not defray the Charge of Graving for these two Voyages;
so that the Lead-sheathing must be considerably cheaper, with sufficient
allowance for the Interest of 78 l. 15 s. remainder of the excess of the first
Charge, after the 78 l. 15 s. be deducted for the Old Sheathing; and if Rebate
be allowed for that till stripping, it cannot come to so much as the Interest
of the Money disburs'd from time to time for the Graving till both shall be
stripped. But this Nicety of Computation seems very impertinent, where so many
and so great Advantages may be charged to the Account of Lead-sheathing, from
its long duration, no Trouble nor Charge in graving, its little fouling, and
very little trouble or charge in cleaning, no damage to the Plank, as by the
great Iron Nails of the other; but, in truth, preserving it better, more cool,
smooth, and sound, and the Oakam longer in the Seams than a Wood-sheathing can,
besides its certain Security against the Worm: All which, as well as the
Particulars abovementioned, is proved by full Certificates of the Commander
and Officers of the Antelope, and such experienced Masters and Commanders of
Ships as were present when the Commissioners viewed her Sheathing, and many
others that have seen it since. This Nicety, I say, to prove its Cheapness, one
would think, were needless; but that it has so long labored under Prejudice,
by the false Suggestions of its Adversaries, against which it could be relieved
only by Patience to wait for new Trials, and visible Demonstrations of its
Goodness, from new Experiments to be made, the former being long since put out
of the reach of Evidence, and its Enemies thereby encouraged to raise Stories
to fortify their Clamor against it, till this Trial upon the Antelope, which
proves to the World the Excellency of this Sheathing, and clearly answers all
Objections against its Goodness; its Dearness now, which was never thought of
before, is started to hinder its progress; though 'twould be very ridiculous for
any one to pretend by any Invention to introduce a New Thing into use, and not
to make it considerably cheaper, in one respect or other, as well as better,
than that instead of which he proposes it to be used, for dear and cheap are
relative Words, there being nothing dear or cheap in it self; and sure nobody
expects a Plain to be covered with Lead as cheap as with Boards at the first
penny: yet if he consults nothing of the Advantages abovementioned, but its
Duration only, he will quickly find this Sheathing is Cheap enough, if he can be
contented to have it for Nothing; for the Graving upon his Wood-sheathing being
saved, in less than Seven Years time, will more than pay for the Lead-sheathing
it self; and he may use it Seven Years more for Nothing, as it may prove, (this
Lead preserving the Plank, Seams, and Iron-work better than the other, as
above) besides the total loss of his 157 l. 10 s. which the Wood-sheathing cost
him out of his Pocket at first.

As the Shipwrights and their Friends, by their Artifice, Interest, and False
Suggestions (taking advantage of Differences that happened between the
Mill'd-Lead-Partners themselves, neglecting due Care in their Common Concern)
have been able to procure the discontinuance of the Lead-sheathing with this
Navy-board's Predecessors, no Ship remaining Sheathed for themselves to view,
that they might judge of the Truth and Validity of the Objections raised
against it, so it is not to be doubted, now that they have seen this Evidence
upon the Antelope's Sheathing, and considered the great Benefit that may accrue
to the King's Service, as well as to the Public in general, but they will in
due time restore the use thereof to the Navy.

The like also has been the Endeavor of the Plumbers and their Friends, to
decry the Use of this Milled Lead for Buildings, and have in great measure
obstructed it (where they have had an Interest, or been believed) with Private
Persons, as well as in the King's and Public Works, but could not prevail with
the Impartial and Honorable Commissioners for Greenwich Hospital, when they
plainly saw the Advantage that would accrue to the Charity they were entrusted
with, by preferring the Use of this Milled Lead in their Works, though great
Applications were made even by the Corporation of Plumbers, and the Best
Friends they could make.

All such as have occasion for this Mill'd-Lead-Sheathing, which perhaps may be
better done upon the Careen, with less Charge to the Owner than in a Dock; or
for any Other Sort of Milled Lead, of any thickness, and the usual breadth of
three foot and an half, twice as long as any Plumber pretends to cast, if need
require, for covering Churches, Houses, and all Works wherein Sheet-Lead is
used, and some that cast Lead is not capable of, Better, and above 20 per Cent.
Cheaper, than Cast-Lead can be; as is proved in a small Book, wherein also is
an Account of the former Proceedings about the Mill'd-Lead-Sheathing and other
matters, to be had at the Booksellers following, viz. Mr. Nelme 's, at the Leg
and Star in Cornhill; Mr. Simpson 's, at the Harp in St. Paul 's Churchyard;
Mr. Basset 's, at Temple Bar; and Mr. Henchman 's, in Westminster Hall:

Mr. Hale, at the Mill'd-Lead Sign in Orange-street, by Red-Lyon-Square,
undertakes Any of the said Works, having able Plumbers, and Workmen sufficient
to perform the same; and sells his Solder for 6 d. a pound, which the Plumbers
by Combination sell for 9 d.

London, Printed 16 May, School.


