HAINES HIS APPEAL TO THE General Assembly OF Dependent Baptists Convened in
LONDON, from most Parts of the Nation, the Third day of June; 1680.
WHereas I have made my Appeal to your Court, for Justice against Matthew
Caffyn, who is one of your Members, immediately after the Fact I complain of,
was committed, for these Reasons following, viz. 1. I did so Appeal to you
rather than to others, because yours is the Highest Court, and from which there
is no Appeal, as you suppose. 2. Because the Crime was of an High Nature, and
does not only call in question, but strikes at the Authority, Prerogative, and
Laws of the King, etc. 3. Because it was a Leading Case never practiced by any
Church in the World, and in it self more cruel and unjust than what is approved
of by the Church of Rome; wherefore I expected Justice speedily to be obtained,
and also you had Power so to do.


First, I expected Justice, because I was informed by diverse Members of your
Court, that you had Power to redress Grievances, reverse unjust Judgments, and
correct Offenders, etc. 2. By reason I had Liberty given me by the mouth of
Caffyn's Court, and that too without show of dislike of any Member, to make my
Appeal to whom I would. 3. By reason I gave your unjust Judge and his
Fellow-Criminals timely notice, that I would make my Appeal to this High Court.
4. Because the Fact was notoriously scandalous to the Dishonor of the
Profession, and those that are honest Professors; and therefore deserved speedy
Correction.
Thus I came to your Court, to let you know, that my Witnesses were present to
prove the Premises; but I soon perceived several of the Apostles hereafter
mentioned, to look asquint when I pressed for Justice, and that instead of
accepting of my Appeal, they cunningly would, if possible, have persuaded me,
both then, and every Court since, to refer it, notwithstanding you well knew, I
came not to refer, but to make my Appeal for Justice.

Wherefore, when I resolutely avoided that Bait, you then told me, that
according to the Laws or Canons of your Court, I must first make my Appeal to a
Quarterly Meeting in the same Country where the Fact was committed. To which I
answered, That by consent of each Party you had power to accept of an Appeal,
as well as a Reference; I also pleaded, that it was unreasonable for you to
compel me to make my Appeal to such a Court as had given their Consent to the
Criminals Proceedings before they were acted, they being inferior Persons, and
over whom the said Criminal himself was Supreme Bishop and Universal Apostle.

Howbeit, forced I was to this unjust and crooked Method; but the more willing
I was to submit, because you promised me, that if Justice were not done in the
Country, then you would accept of my Appeal and do me Justice; but alas! That
Design of the Confederates I perceive, was to wear out Time, corrupt Witnesses,
tire me out with expensive Attendance, to wrest Justice, justify the Villain,
and scandalize the Oppressed, as plainly thus appears, viz. For that when I had
followed your own Method, as aforesaid, and nothing being done in the Country
to determine the matter according to Justice, I then did again appeal to your
Court with hopes to obtain Justice: but contrariwise, I found a great part of
your Apostles to be traitors to Justice, and damnable Enemies to my Appeal,
which they opposed with Might and Main, notwithstanding their Promise to accept
thereof; howbeit to the Vote it was put, and the honest Party out-voted the --
Opposers, and much against their Stomachs, to a Hearing it came; but then to
prevent Justice, a Plot must be laid against my Witnesses, and though their
Reputation be unspotted; yet they must be censured, and looked upon as perjured
Persons, or such Rogues and Villains as would falsely accuse the Innocent; and
under that pretense were not then suffered to make use of their Papers, in
which, for their Memory, they had written the Truth of what they heard, to
prevent mistakes; but they must speak what they knew, and as they could
remember without them though several years had past between; and when they had
spoken, it was not to be regarded; but one of Caffyn's Faction being Chairman,
the Court was dissolved in Confusion, and then said, That God had withdrawn
himself from them: So that I well perceive its in vain to attend this Court
with my Witnesses any longer, until it purge it self of its corrupt, partial
and unjust Members.

Howbeit, about a year or two before this last Court, the matter in
Controversy was debated by the consent of the major part of your Court, and by
such the major part of your Court, That very thing with all its Circumstances
for which I was condemned, was judged and declared to be both lawful, just and
honest, notwithstanding my Witnesses were not heard, but only as they took it
from the Criminals own Mouth: Moreover you know, that several Persons, Members
of your Court, have expressly, (either honestly or deceitfully) Admonished the
said unjust judge, etc. to put away the Evil of his Doings by Repentance, etc.
as a Copy thereof subscribed will demonstrate; notwithstanding all which you
also know, That he as an Heretic, remains obstinate, persevering in his Acts
of Wickedness, and repents not. Wherefore know ye, That by these presents,
and in the name of him, and for the honor of the Gospel, under whom, and for
which you pretend to hold this Court, I do now demand Judgment against the said
Matthew Caffyn, and also that you forthwith reverse his unrighteous Judgment,
as being sinful, papistical, cruel and unjust, and that you admonish his
Congregation, who through Flattery, Threats, or any other way were deluded to
join with him in his sinful Practice, to put away the Evil of their Doings by
Repentance, and giving Satisfaction answerable to the Injuries, which by means
thereof have been occasioned: For it may be judged, that they, to wit, his
simple Congregation, are ignorant of the sense of your Court, and of the
Admonitions you sent them.

But if now at last, after all your Pretence^ and Promises that Justice should
be done; your Declarations, That that very thing with all its Circumstances for
which I was condemned, is just, honest and lawful, your admonishing him to put
away the Evil of his Doings by Repentance, etc. I say, if after this long
waiting, all this be but Seven years Hypocrisy and Deceit, and that you at
this time also refuse to give Judgment against the said unjust and papistical
Apostle, Then know ye by these presents, that I demand satisfaction of this
Court; and as it is my Duty, so I will according to the Advice of the true
Apostle of Christ, submit my self to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him for the punishment of Evil Doers, and for the praise of them that
do well; wherefore this being the Will of God, that by well doing I may put to
silence the Ignorance and Villainy of foolish and dishonest men; therefore to
that end I do resolve to Indict your Apostle, and all the Members of this Court
(that do not enter their Protestations against him and his Defenders, etc.) in
the Crown Office (if His Majesty's Ministers think themselves concerned to take
Cognizance thereof) of and upon the ensuing Articles (which in matter of Fact
you know, is no more than what I have charged, and several times offered to
prove against him in your Court, as my Printed Paper to you presented will
demonstrate) as follows. First, That the said Matthew Caffyn of Broadbridge
near Horsman in Sussex, has in a Papistical manner contemned the Laws, and
Royal Prerogative of the Supreme Magistrate of this Realm, and threatens to
excommunicate such as shall stand to plead for, and maintain the said Laws and
Royal Prerogative, after, or at the same time, that he himself does declare the
said Laws, etc. to be unjust and odious. 2. That the said Caffyn by Popish
usurpt Authority, has passed Sentence of Excommunication against a Protestant
and Liege Subject of this Realm, before it was proved that any known Law was
transgressed; and because he endeavored to justify the Laws and Prerogative
of the King, and Privilege of his Liege Subjects, against the Authority of this
little Pope. 3. That the Principles, Tenets, and Government of this little
Pope, are as dangerous as the Principles and Tenets of those who are now in
Newgate, or of late have been hanged at Tyburn, for Conspiring the Death of the
King, and Subverting the Government of the Realm. 4. That the Government of
this English Pope is more Hypocritical and unjust in its Cruelties, than the
Butcheries which are approved of by the Pope and Church of Rome. 5. That his
little Holiness has debauched a good Conscience, if ever he had any, and has
gone a whoring these seven years, notwithstanding he has been several times
admonished to put away the Evil of his Doings by Repentance, etc.


Furthermore, by these presents, I do impeach and accuse several Apostles,
formerly Members of this High Court, viz. George Hammon, Captain Morcock, and
Vridge of Kent, the Apostle Marner of St. Martins Le grand; as also Tho.
Croucher, Miller, Francis Stanley, Amory, and others, as being Enemies to
Justice, and Comforters, Supporters and Defenders of the said Matthew Caffyn;
and therefore I do desire this Court, that they may be removed from being
concerned as Judges therein, until they be brought to Trial, they being the
Persons by whom the Peace of your Government was destroyed to that Degree, that
it was declared and agreed, That God has withdrawn himself from your Assembly.

I need not tell you that it is pleaded by diverse Members of your Court, that
your Court has not Power to redress Grievances, reverse unjust Judgments, or
do Justice; which if true, who shall believe you the Members of this Court any
more? For have you not pretended to such Power, and wheadled me with fair
Promises to attend you with my Witnesses, to my great Charge, and now indeed
have you no Power? Why did you mock God and me, and all the
Baptist-Congregation almost throughout England? But in Truth, I perceive this
is only your last Shift: Fain you would defend your DARLING from the ROD of
JUSTICE; and therefore out of pure Pity to him, you are content, for the
present, to deny that Power you have always heretofore pretended to; and now
possibly with a pitiful Juggling Hypocrisy, you may exclaim against the thing,
viz. Superintendency and Dependency, which you owned when I entered my Appeal;
but now you really pretend the Churches of God are Independent: Well then, what
are you a General Assembly for? Are you nothing but Ropes of Sand? And are you
not gross Hypocrites and Juglers not to tell me so before? But to take you now
at your words, the Design of your General Assembly it seems, is not to do
Justice, and you have no Power (I am pretty well assured you want the Will) to
correct; and hence it will follow, that though you well know Caffyns Principles
to be most Diabolical and dangerous to Church and State; yet you will, and must
still own and communicate with him, as your dearly beloved Brother in the Lord
Jesus.

Sirs, Independent Reformation? If you will be Independent, and yet will allow
the Apostles to be Judges of Secular Jurisdictions, you then do but dissolve
your General Council, to set us up, as it were, a King-Pope in every Parish;
but if you now pretend you will have nothing to do as Judges in Secular Causes,
because you are commanded to submit to every Ordinance of the Supreme
Magistrate, etc. and are really so honest as to mean what you say: Then pray
Sirs, give the World a Demonstration of it, you having opportunity enough so to
do. The Villain, your Brother, now stands before you, who has usurped such
Authority, as to judge of Law and Royal Prerogative, as I have said before;
either make him an Example, or at least, since you promised to do Justice,
provided I would sue for it according to your own Methods, to which I have
submitted; yet Justice cannot be obtained, though so promised. Now pray Sirs,
will you be reformed, and not be honest? If you promised to my prejudice that
which you cannot perform, I demand Satisfaction for all that Charge, etc. which
I have sustained, in hopes to obtain the thing you promised; or otherwise, you
must confess that your pretense of Reformation is grounded upon a dishonest
Bottom, and has no better resemblance than to be such.

I would not be mis-understood; it is possible the Reader may conclude from what
has been said, that all the Anabaptists in England are alike. To this I only
say, that most of the Anabaptists in England are Independent, they meddle not
with State Affairs, they assume not to excommunicate Persons, but upon the same
terms as they baptize them, viz. plain Text of Scripture for their warrant
therein; and therefore this High Court, especially Caffyn and his Abettors,
would not permit of them into their Assembly; wherefore such as Mr. Plant, Mr.
Hicks, Mr. Kiffyn, and many more in City and Country, are wholly innocent in
this matter.

POSTSCRIPT.
June the 7th. 1680.
I Having presented the foregoing Discourse to the Assembly, before whom it was
read, they blamed me only for making use of hard words, viz. Criminal, Villain,
Pope, etc. but as to matter of Fact, which proves him and others to be as I
have showed, I was not at all blamed. But if behind my Back any should, then
know that I am ready to prove every particular I have charged.

The Assembly has now declared the Excommunication with all its Circumstances,
to be unjust and void, and has also required Caffyn and his Church to reverse
it: Also Caffyn has promised to submit thereunto; and now I also do declare, I
am ready to be reconciled to Caffyn and his Church, upon condition they be just
and honest. Liberty and Property are things pleaded for by Caffyn, etc. and
doubtless if he will plead those very Laws are unjust that are made to preserve
Liberty, he will not stick to say, all other Laws are unjust also. Now the
great Wisdom of this Nation to secure this excellent thing Liberty, etc. does
judge and agree, That he, or they that shall Imprison any Person unjustly,
shall pay 5 l. per hour, during such Imprisonment. And it is judged and
declared by Persons of known Integrity, that are Baptists, and others, That
Excommunication is ten times a greater Crime in those that shall do all that
lies in their power, to commit persons to the Eternal Flames of Hell, for doing
that which is no Transgression of any known Law of God, the King or the Church.

Now Reader, if you yet do question whether M. C. etc. have and do contemn such
the good Laws and Authority of the King, pray then, ask him, or them, whether
they do not judge this Law made for the Preservation of Liberty to be unjust?
If they say it is, why should you imagine he, etc. should not contemn all other
Laws of the King also, when they think it is for their own Ends so to do? But if
they say, the Law aforesaid be just, then judge you, whether it be not just,
that they should pay accordingly for this their Crime, which is judged ten
times worse than Corporal Imprisonment, and tends to the Destruction of all
good Government now established. It Is possible Caffyn and his Faction will
merrily laugh, and say, We are well enough yet: For if the Law for Preservation
of Liberty were 50 l. per Hour, yet there is no Law to compel us to pay him 12
d. an Hour for doing what he could to lay him in Hell. -- It Is true, the Devil
said, Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has will he give for his Life. And for
ought I know, Caffyn and his Faction may now be of this opinion, viz. to part
with, and give away Conscience, Honesty, and consequently Heaven too, rather
than to part with his Money. But it is possible, though there be no Law to
compel him to give Satisfaction, yet he may be honest, and do it willingly for
ought you know; It is but for Seven years, Sirs, that I make demand, and
although he has been most unmerciful, yet rather than to cast him, etc. into
an ordinary Prison, I will show Mercy, and accept of 12 d. in the Pound, yea, 6
d. in the Pound rather than be contentious.

But if he shall still refuse, I then humbly offer to Appeal to the King and
Council, to judge and determine the matter as they think fit, if the King and
Honorable Board be graciously pleased to permit thereof. Therefore, pray
Reader, persuade Caffyn, etc. to accept of this Expedient, and you shall find I
will use my utmost Endeavors to obtain this thing so determined, and humbly
submit thereunto.

Thus much I now Propose as an Endeavovr for Reconciliation, and leave the
same to the Consideration of all concerned therein.


