A Second ADVERTISEMENT Relating to the MILL'D-LEAD-SHEATHING UPON The Rising
Eagle.
THis Ship having lain in Newman's Dock, in Lymhouse-Hole, about a month, and
her Lead-sheathing much commended by all the unprejudiced that have seen it; at
which, its Enemies being as much offended, they have lately raised another new
Objection against it, after all their old Stories of rubbing off by Boats and
Lyters, ranging of Cables, lying on Ground, eating of Ruddar-Irons; and lastly,
of rotting the Okam in the Seams, have been fully proved from common Sense and
Experience, upon 30 Ships, within these 30 years, to be false or frivolous, in
many Papers, Printed and Published by Mr. Hale, from time to time, as they gave
him occasion, which they ought as publicly to have answered, if he had not
fairly proved the same, and doubtless they had, if they could have said any
thing that would bear a public Test: But they still run on with new Stories,
as false or frivolous as the old ones; not considering how ridiculous it is,
after so much Time and Experience upon so many Ships, so diligently watched for
faults by them, to pretend now to new discoveries of defects, never heard of
before, as he has heard of late; they say, the Barnicles or Shells (as some
there must be, though in no proportion for size or quantity, as upon a
Wood-sheathing) have eaten quite into the Lead, and cannot be got off, and that
therefore this Sheathing will not do: But what ground for this report and
conclusion, he cannot imagine; for if they had seen it before it was cleaned,
as was intended, and thought the Shells never so hard to come off, they should
not have been so positive (that discovers too much ill will to it) that it
could not be done, since Scrapers in a very little time, for 15 s. pay, have
cleaned the whole Ship, to content as well as at first; which, if any please to
view by Tuesday next (when she goes out of the Dock) he doubts not but they
will receive full satisfaction in this point, as in all others, of the
excellency of this Lead-sheathing, in preference to the best Wood-sheathing
hitherto used.

Mr. Hale, the Undertaker for covering Churches, Houses, etc. as well as
Sheathing Ships, lives at the Mill'd-Lead Sign in Orange-street, by
Red-Lyon-Square; and may be heard of at John's Coffee-house in Burchen-lane: or
Batson's over against the Exchange; where a Box of Patterns may be seen of the
several sizes, prices and uses of Mill'd-Lead.

LONDON, Printed April 5. 1700.


