AN ACCOUNT OF THE DISSECTION OF HIS HIGHNESS WILLIAM Duke of GLOUCESTER.

Drawn up by Doctor H. and Signed by Him, and by the Surgeons.

From the Original Letter, that was sent over to his Majesty in Holland.

London, Printed for J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1700.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE DISSECTION OF HIS HIGHNESS WILLIAM Duke of GLOUCESTER.
UPon the Death of his Highness William Duke of Gloucester, which happened on
Monday, July the Twenty Ninth, about Midnight, The Right Honorable the Earl of
Marleborough, One of their Excellencies the Lords Justices of England, and
Governor to His late Highness was pleased to give order, That the Body should
be Opened.

Accordingly the Surgeons appointed by His Lordship, whose names are
subscribed, in the presence of Doctor Hannes, who was commanded to assist at
the Operation, and of several other Spectators, made the Dissection; and,
afterward, jointly with the Doctor, gave in the following Report of it on
Wednesday, July the Thirty First, 1700.

1. Surface of the Body.
On inspection of the outward Surface of the Dukes Body; His Head, Chest,
Abdomen and Arms appeared tainted and livid, beyond what is usual: His Thighs
and Legs not much altered from their proper color.

2. The Abdomen was first opened; and these Observations made upon the Parts
Contained.

The Omentum was found as is natural. Belly.


The Gutts, from the Rectum, inclusively, upwards to the Duodenum, had the
common appearances; excepting only, that a few inflammatory Spots were seen
dispersed upon the Small Gutts; and, that the Plexus Glandulares of the same
Gutts were become Florid, and therefore more conspicuous, than is usual.

The Duodenum and Stomach were highly inflamed; especially, the Stomach; which
had in its Cavity, Wind, and a small quantity of Liquor.

In the Pancreas, Spleen, Liver, and Bladder of Gall was nothing remarkable:
Only the Spleen and Liver were more than ordinary Livid.

The Kidneys carried a color deeper than is common, besides which, they were
not noted to have any thing Preternatural: As neither had the Glandulae
Renales, nor the Ureteres, nor the Urinary Bladder, nor the Urine expressed
from the Bladder.

3. Next after the Abdomen, the Thorax, Chest.
or Chest was examined.

Here, the Pleura was inflamed to the most intense degree.

The Diaphragm, and Mediastinum, and Pericardium were thought not to differ
from the constitution given 'em by Nature; excepting only, that the Diaphragm
was something inflamed.

The Humor of the Pericardium was reddish; not without a mixture of Blood. And
even the Thorax and Abdomen were judged to have more Blood in their Cavity,
than could well proceed from the mouths of the Vessels cut asunder by the Knife
at the time the respective Venters were laid open.

The Heart was extremely Flaccid and weak in its Texture: The Right Ventricle
had very little Blood, and the Left was altogether Empty.

The Lungs on both sides were filled with Blood to the height of an
Inflammation.

4. Neck.
The Neck was Swollen: And upon Dissection the enclosed Parts appeared such, as
they are observed in Bodies strangled.

At the place where the Jugulars arise above the Claviculae, the Inflammation
approached very near to a Mortification.

The Glandulae Thyreoideae were almost black with the contained Blood: and
being put into Scales were found above Five Drachms in weight.

The Gulet was much Inflamed; the Windpipe also was affected in the same kind,
especially the upper part of it called the Larynx.

In the Larynx the Membranes that join the Cartilages Cricoides and Thyreoides
were very dark with the Inflammation.

The Membrane that lines the Epiglottis (at the root of the Tongue) was also
Inflamed: insomuch that the Glandulae Miliares of it, which are scarce visible
at other times, were here much distended and very conspicuous.

5. Throat.
In the Mouth, we found the Palate inflamed; as also the Uvula, the Membrane of
which was swelled.

The Almonds of the Ear (in the Throat) were swelled; and had in them Purulent
matter: There being pressed out of one of 'em as much Corruption, as filled a
Tea-spoon.

6. Last of all, The Head was opened; Head.
and out of the First and Second Ventricle of the Cerebrum were taken about
four Ounces and an Half of a Lympid Humor.

In this Region nothing, besides, was found particular, or different from the
natural state of it.

Signed Windsor Castle, July 31. 1700. Edward Hannes M.D. Charles Bernard.
Edward Green. William Cowper.



