A Letter to Dr. Tancred Robinson, in Answer to some Passages in His to Mr.
Wotton, relating to Mr. Harris's Remarks on some Late Papers, etc.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to say you have had very ill Treatment from me, tho you
believe, I never saw you, nor ever received any Affront or Injury by your
means. It Is true indeed that (to my knowledge) I never did see you; as also
that I know of no Affront or Injury you ever did or occasioned me. And I do
here assure you, that it was no Private disgust at Dr. T.R. that induced me to
write the Discourse that so much offends you, but a Resolution to bestow some
Remarks on those who from such poor Piques will set themselves by secret and
unfair ways to oppose Truth, Undermine Religion and True Philosophy, and Blast
the Reputation of those that endeavor to propagate them. But wherein I have
ill Treated you, I shall particularly enquire. And first, you charge me with
Insinuating that you are the Beast L. P. and that therefore I have fallen
heavily on the Introduction to Sir John Narborough, etc. To which I answer,
that I no where call L. P. Beast, nor directly charge the Essays on you. It Is
true, I hint now and then that there are some passages in them very like your
way of writing; and by what you used to talk about Town before the publication
of them, as well as what you are now pleased to Acknowledge, it is plain without
going any further, there is ground enough for an Insinuation of that nature.
The Reason why I cited some things out of your Writings, was both because (as I
said just now) I found a strange agreement in Sense and Style between them and
those of L. P. and also that I found several passages there liable to just
Exception: and why I may not make Remarks on such, wherever I find them, you
have not yet convinced me.

You solemnly declare you are not the Author of the two Essays; And yet you own
that you assisted toward the Composition of that Elaborate Pamphlet, being
induced to it, not by any motives of Reason, but (such is your soft, gentle and
Christian meekness) by a Private disgust at D. W. But since you say you are
sorry that you were tempted to cast your Eyes on some vicious Fragments of
those Patched Essays, and also that the Author has made such an ill use of
your kind furnishing him with Books and Letters: I declare I am sorry too, that
you did not prohibit the Publication of those Patched Essays, and which had not
you, as you say, touched here and there, I had never touched you. You must
therefore Sir, thank your self for the unkind Animadversions you complain of;
which how unkind soever they may appear to you, I am sure are not unjust.

You say indeed, that I have a peculiar faculty of bringing forth Monsters,
catching here and there a line, and sometimes single words, piecing them
together into one ridiculous Paragraph. Had you proved this, Sir, it would lie
as hard on me, as now it does on you; but the Instance you give is very short
of it. You say, I introduce on my Stage the Monkeys and Apes (as before I had
done False Dice and Trick Tack) which if any one thinks it worth his labor to
compare with your Letter to Mr. Ray, he will soon discover the Venom and Ulcer
of this Mercurial Remarker. But, Sir, your Invention it seems is much better
than your Eyesight, for I make no mention of False Dice any where, and not of
Tick Tack till 76 pages after this: And for the Monkeys and Apes, 'twas your
self introduced them on the English Stage; as will plainly appear if the Reader
please to peruse that Letter of yours. In the Place you referr to, viz. p. 51.
of my Remarks, I urge against L. P. that though it could be proved that the
Fossil Shells were not deposited, where they are found, by the Deluge, yet
would it not thence follow, that they were not Shells at all: And for this I
bring the Testimony of the most Learned Doctor T. R. who tho he thought some of
these Bodies might be scattered up and down the Earth by Encampments of Armies,
etc. or by Apes and Monkeys: yet calls them Shells notwithstanding. Now in
this, Sir, I do you no wrong, for the Passage in your Letter to Mr. Ray is only
a little longer, but to the very same sense. Say you there Mr. Loubere, the
late French Envoy to Siam, affirms that the Monkeys and Apes are almost
continually carrying Shells, and other Marine Bodies from the Seaside up to
the Mountains. All I can be culpable for here, is only that I did not cite the
Authority from whence you had this Observation, and that I call that your
Opinion, which you had from Mr. Loubere. And is it not so? don't you bring this
as one way, by which Shells may come to the Tops of Hills? Mr. Loubere perhaps
was so happy as to see the Monkeys and Apes about this important work; his
therefore was knowledge, and yours that relate it from him in that Letter, is
Opinion of the Truth of that Fact: which is all I say of it. And therefore,
wherein the Barbarity, Ulcer and Venom of this matter lies, you would have done
better to have demonstrated, than to have charged it unjustly and unfairly upon
me, without doing so.

Next, Sir, you charge me with Jirking at the Boiling and Burning Fountains,
which you are pleased to say, are not so much as warm, and even actually cold
(vid. My Remarks p. 59.) And really, Sir, I cannot but think still, that you
deserve a little Animadversion for that manner of expressing your self. For if
by Boiling and Burning, you mean as other People do, and according to the true
signification of those words, you will find very few Persons that will believe
the Fact you Relate, viz. that Boiling and Burning Fountains are actually cold.
But if by Boiling you mean nothing but a Fountain's bubbling up, I cannot see
what need there is of a Pompous Account of such a Fountain: For wherever there
is a great Pressure or weight of Water, and the Orifice of the Spring but
Narrow: Or wherever any Air or Vapor comes out along with the Water, there
this mighty Phenomenon of the Bubbling or Boiling of the Water will follow:
And yet it will be no great news to tell the World that you have seen a Spring
bubble up, whose Water is cold. And then as to Burning; if by it you mean no
burning of the Water at all, but only, an irruption of some Sulphurous or
Bituminous Vapors at, or near the Fountain Head (which was the Case of the
Spring near Wigan in Lancashire, Phil. Trans. N. 26.) I think still you had as
good not have called it a Burning Fountain: And it is your pretty wording of it
only, that I find fault withal; being satisfied there is in nature in many
Places, something like what you mean, without desiring any old Woman to pour
those Fountains into my Skull, which (by a way peculiar to you) you say she can
so easily do.

After this you tell Mr. Wotton that I have some where or other, tho where you
know not, a very nauseous piece of Scurrility on himself for his Laborious and
Accurate Account of Agostino Scilla: Now Sir, since you discourage Mr. Wotton
from Reading my Book, by a witty Argument drawn from its price, you ought to
have been so just and kind as to have quoted that Nauseous and Scurrilous
Passage: But the mischief is, there is no such thing there. I never mention Mr.
Wotton once in all my Book, nor do I charge the Extract of Scilla on him:
Indeed I say, that Extract is liable to Exceptions, and that I can prove it,
and I say now that the Extracter shall have that Proof whenever he desires it.
But where is the Nauseousness and Scurrility of this: Alas, it is only a poor
dis-ingenuous Artifice of yours to prejudice Mr. Wotton and draw him into your
Quarrel; and you practice the very same with reference to Dr. Hook, Mr. Ray,
and Dr. Lister: which I doubt not, but those Gentlemen are well aware of: And
now Sir, having finished my Answer to the great Charge against me; pray give me
leave to ask you a few Questions, and so I will leave you.

And first Sir, I would fain know whether your calling such pretty Gentile
Names as you do, such as, Buffoon, Mountebank, Scaramouch, and Harlequin,
Draw-Can-Sir, Leviathan, Fitz-Harris, Pueril Declamator, etc. be suitable to
that Christian Meekness, and to those soft and gentle Instructions you have so
often been (as you say) inspired withal? and whether it be agreeable to the
kind promise you made of not treating me after my own Petulant and Inhumane
Manner? and whether this be not a little suspicious and most disagreeable to
the refined part of Mankind? to give it in your own way. 2dly. May not a man
that so soon forgets his promised way of handling Mr. Harris, forget also
whether he ever knew the Author of the two Letters or not? for indeed Sir,
there are in them (as I observe in my Remarks) so many things agreeable to the
Style and manner of writing used by L. P. that they would tempt any one to
think they had the same Original. And truly Sir, there are even in this very
Letter of yours a great many Touches which are very like the Masterly hand of
L. P. such as the Ulcer and Venom of this mercurial Remarker: ducking in a
mighty Volum of vanity: Every old Woman's being able to pour the Boiling and
Burning Fountains into my skull: And that concluding piece of Elegance, that
you are not affected with the Grimaces of Buffoons, and Mountebanks, unless by
way of Laughter as in this J. H. his Remarkable Theater of Scaramouch, and
Harlequin: Judge you now of this Hue-in-cry from your Brother of Winchelsey:
All which I think are enough to justify a Remark I have made at the top of my
51 Page: Which I will not here repeat, but leave you to consider of it at your
Leisure.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant. J. H.


