THE HISTORY OF THE TREATY AT Nimueguen.

WITH REMARKS ON THE Interest of EVROPE In relation to that Affair.

Translated out of French.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1681.

The Translator to the Reader.
Reader,
WHEN I have told you that the Author of this History is a Frenchman, and that
he has dedicated the Original to Monsieur Colbert, one of the active French
Plenipotentiaries at Nimueguen; I suppose, without other notice, you will expect
to find in it some affectations, I will not say partialities, such as are usual
to Authors who write of Affairs wherein their Country have the greatest share;
though, to speak evenly, my Author does not seem very culpable in this kind.
The General peace that was concluded at Nimueguen, attests the truth of the
most substantial matters contained in this Treatise. And the respect that is
due to so many great men as were present at the Negotiation, makes it almost
incredible that an ingenuous person, such as the Author seems to be (who in his
Epistle to the Reader wishes that he had not been a French man, that so he
might have avoided the suspicion of partiality) would publish any falsehood
concerning the compliments and ceremonies which could not be spared amongst so
many public Ministers, when be might so easily, and with shame, be by the many
parties concerned convicted of the Imposture.

You need not then doubt, but that this Book presents you with the true
lineaments and features of the substantial affairs that were treated in that
famous Assembly, though probably the lights and air may be French, and the
frame which sets them off a-la-mode de Louis. You know as well as I, that it is
usual for subjects and lovers of a victorious Prince, to attribute even the
most extorted and unvoluntary actions of their Master, to his free choice, and
mere good will and pleasure; and in this strain you will find our Author speak
throughout this whole Book; yet I make no doubt but that many know how much
other influences, besides the French Kings good inclinations to give peace to
Europe (and particularly the English Forces sent over into Flanders) have had
their effects in producing that Serenity which is at every turn attributed to
his pleasure. But seeing it is usual in all great achievements wherein many
are concerned, that the several parties assume to themselves the glory of being
the chief instruments in bringing them about; I think if the dish be good, you
need not be much concerned at the manner of garnishing it, but please your self
according to your humor or skill.

Now, Reader, what advantage this Book may afford yo^, you will find by the
perusal of it. And if your Stars have not destined you for such a public
person as that it may prove practically useful to you, if they have (at least)
endowed you with a love of speculation and knowledge, you will therein certainly
meet with somewhat that may gratify your curiosity. Farewell.

A Table of the Mediators, Plenipotentiaries, Ambassadors and Envoys, mentioned
in this History.
MEDIATORS.
On the Popes part.
SEignior Bevilaqua.
On the King of Great Britain's part.
My Lord John Berkley. Laurence Hyde. Sir William Temple. Sir Lionel Jenkins.
AMBASSADORS.
For the Emperor.
The Bishop of Gurck. The Count of Kinski. Mr. Stratman.
For France.
The Mareshal D'Estrades. Monsieur Colbert. The Count D'Avaux.
For Spain.
The Marquess de los Balbases. The Marquess de la Fuente. Don Pedro Ronquillo.
Mr. Christin.
For Sueden.
The Count of Oxenstiern. Mr. D'Oliver Krantz.
For Denmark.
Count Anthony of Oldembourg. Mr. Heugh.
For the States General.
The Here Beverning. The Here Odyke. The Here Haren.
For the Elector of Brandenburgh.
Mr. De Somnitz. Mr. De Blaspiel.
Plenipotentiary Envoys.
For the King of Denmark. Mr. de Meyerkron. Mr. Petkum.
For the States General. The Here Boreel.
For the Elector of Brandenburgh. Mr. Meinders.
For the Duke of Savoy. The Count of Provana.
For the Duke of Lorrain. The President Canon.
For the Bishop of Osnabrug. The Baron of Platen.
For the Duke of Zell and the Princes of Brunswick. Mr. Muller. Mr. Schutz.
For the Bishop of Munster. Mr. Termeulen.
For the Bishop of Strasbourg. Mr. Duker.
For the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. Mr. Vlkers. Mr. Wetterkorp.
For the Elector of Mayence and Treves. The Baron of Leyen.
For the Prince and Chapter of Liege. Mr. Charneux. Mr. Vanderveck.
For the Elector Palatine. Mr. Spanheim.
For the Duke de la Tremouille. Mr. Sanguimere.
For the Mareshal of Luxembourg. Mr. De Villewrat.

THE HISTORY OF THE TREATY AT Nimueguen.
THE Treaty begun at Cologn in the year 1673 under the Mediation of Suedeland,
gave hopes that a general Pe^ce would speedily put an end to the War that raged
then in Europe, when the seizure of Prince William of Furstemburg, and Forty
thousand Crowns taken out of the Wagons of the French Ambassadors in a Neutral
City, discomposed affairs in such a manner that the Negotiation so happily
begun was quite broken off.

The violence committed on this Prince by the Emperors Ministers, and the
injury done to the French King, gave ground to many to fear, that Peace would
not suddenly be restored again to Europe; and that his Majesty would never
consent to the renewing of the Treaty, unless reparations were made for those
two injuries. Nevertheless at the instance of the King of England, (whose
Mediation was generally embraced by all the Princes concerned in that War) and
at the solicitation of the Bishop of Strasbourg, who publicly declared, That
he preferred the advantages of Peace before the liberty of his own Brother; The
King made the reasons of glory and interest stoop to the inclination which he
had of contributing to the Peace of Europe. And Nimueguen being pitched upon as
the place of Treaty, his Majesty resolved instantly to send thither his
Ambassadors Plenipotentiaries; and therefore on the 17 of Febr. 1675, named for
that effect, the Duke of Vitry, Monsieur Colbert, and the Count D' Avaux.

Seeing all the allied Princes appeared not at first to be of the same
disposition as to Peace, there was no advance made toward the forming of the
Assembly at Nimueguen until the month of November, that the King of Great
Britain disposed all the Interest-powers to send with all expedition their
Ambassadors to Nimueguen.

The French King was the first, and gave order to his Plenipotentiaries before
the end of December, to set out for the place of Conference; his Majesty having
allowed them but eight days to provide their Equipage. Accordingly on the 28 of
December, Monsieur Colbert, and the Count D' Avaux parted from Paris, not
staying for the Duke of Vitry, whose sickness would not permit him to undertake
a journey in the severity of the Winter-season.

On the third of January they came to Charleville, hoping there to find
Passports from all those Princes that were concerned to give them, and
especially from Spain and Holland, that they might come down to Nimueguen on
the Meuse; but the Passports were not in such readiness as they were made
believe; so that one in Charleville foretold the Count D' Avaux, That his stay
in that Town should be as long as that of the late Count D' Avaux his Uncle,
who had waited there four months for his Passports, when he went to Munster in
the character of Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary for the French
King, for the Treaty of the General Peace that was afterward concluded there.

The Ambassadors after two months stay, perceiving that the difficulties which
were started, sometimes about the reciprocal liberty of sending messengers from
Nimueguen upon their own single Passports, and sometimes about the quality of
Prince Charles, who demanded of the French King the Titles of Brother and Duke
of Lorrain, might still detain them long at Charleville, they resolved to cause
their Goods which were already Embarked, to be brought ashore again, and to
wait for their Passports in that Town, which came at length on the fourth of
June, bearing date the last of December in the foregoing year, with an order of
Court immediately to set forward; accordingly they Embarked on the seventh of
June.

The sickness of the Duke of Vitry still continued, and was thought desperate,
which obliged the King to nominate in his place the Marshall d' Estrade, who
was visited by his Colleagues in their passage at Maestricht; and having staid
there only a day, on Sunday the 13 of June about one of the Clock aft^^^ ^n
they came to Moock two Leagues from Nimueguen; where having instantly put
ashore their Coaches, and most part of their Equipage, they set forward, and
came to Nimueguen about five of the Clock at night.

Though the French Ambassadors were incognito, and without Train, having left
almost all their servants in the Boats with the rest of their Goods, which did
not arrive till next day; yet it may be said that they made a public entry, by
reason of the great concourse of people who out of curiosity and impatience to
see the so much wisht-for Ambassadors, flocked out of the Town, upon the
Ramparts, into the streets and windows. The vast number of Wagons laden with
packs of Goods that came after, and filled the whole street from the gate of
the Town to the Ambassadors houses, gave ground of admiration to that people,
who had never seen the like before.

The people seeing this, and being persuaded of the grandeur of France,
believed that the Ambassadors had brought with them things of vast value and
richness; so that their houses were presently filled with those of the Town
that crowded thither to see them; and they were not only looked upon as sure
pledges of Peace, but also as a probable cause of the wealth of the Town. All
the people being falsely persuaded that the French were only to be blamed for
the delay of the Treaty; but now seeing they were come, they concluded that in
a short time Nimueguen was to be the Theater on which the greatness and
magnificence of Europe was to appear. Nevertheless matters advanced not so fast
as people had imagined; for as yet there were none at Nimueguen but Sir Lionel
Jenkins, one of the three Plenipotentiary Mediators from England, and the Heers
Beverning and Haren, Ambassadors Plenipotentiary from the States General of the
United Provinces.

The French Ambassadors sent immedialy to acquaint my Lord Ambassador Jenkins
with their arrival, who rendered them the Complement, and gave them next day a
visit in a Coach with six Horses. The Dutch Ambassadors did the like; and the
French rendered the Visits, so soon as their Train and Equipage were in a
condition to appear abroad.

The Mareshal d' Estrades had orders with all expedition to part from
Maestricht; and though his Train and Equipage were not as yet in readiness, yet
he arrived at Nimueguen the 28 of June, whither Sir William Temple, another of
the Mediators from England came shortly after with my Lady Gifford his Sister;
my Lady Temple not coming till two months after.

My Lord Ambassador Temple is a person of much learning, singular in his ways
and opinions. Some judged him partial in the Mediation, and somewhat unequal in
his humor; he is nevertheless a person of great abilities, and well acquainted
with the Republican principles, as appears by the remarks he has written upon
the State of the United Provinces. His Colleague Sir Lionel Jenkins is a civil
well-bred Gentleman, of great integrity, and firm to his Religion; a person
endued with much knowledge, who always showed himself to be good Mediator. These
Ambassadors had a^ 100 l. sterling a week, besides an hundred and fifty pounds
given them for providing their Equipage, with Furniture for the Chamber of
Audience, and a service of the Royal Plate, according to the custom of England.

The report that came abroad at that time, that the Prince of Orange intended
to besiege Maestricht, seemed as unprobable, as the enterprise was dangerous;
notwithstanding the Hollanders flattered themselves with the hopes of carrying
that place in a fortnights time; and it seemed they only waited for the
departure of the Mareshal d' Estrades, that they might accomplish their
designs; but the conclusion of that siege was much to the advantage of the
French, who that year succeeded in every thing almost that they undertook
either by Sea or Land.

The King in four days took Cond^, and on the 25 of April obliged it to render
on discretion. After five days siege the Duke of Orleans carried Bouchain on
the 12 of May, in sight of the strongest Army that the Confederates ever had in
the Low Countries, under the command of the Prince of Orange, who thought it
not fit to hazard a Battle with the Kings Army that lay within Canon-shot of
him.

Air on the last of July suffered the same fate. The King laid the design, and
the Marquess of Louvois in the command of the Mareshal d' Humieres put it in
execution. The Fort of Linck was taken the 9th. of August. The Mareshal Duke of
Vivonne was very successful in his Fights on the Sicilian Seas, and in the Port
of Palermo b^rnt part of the Spanish and Dutch Fleet. The death of de Ruyter
that happened a little before by a great shot that he received on board his own
Ship, in an engagement against the French, was an irreparable loss to the
Dutch, who never had an Admiral of so much merit and reputation.

In the mean while it was easy to be judged by what began to appear, that if
the Prince of Orange had taken Maestricht, there was no hopes of finding the
Dutch any ways inclinable to accommodation; but an event so contrary to their
expectation, and the ruin of a great part of their Army, of which most of the
residue was seen to march by Nimueguen, dejected them extremely, and made them
think of other measures.

The first thing that began to be talked of, was the Neutrality of the Country
about Nimueguen. The Mediators at the solicitation of the Dutch, desired that
the French Ambassadors would extend the limits a little further. And as that
concession of Neutrality carried with it also an exemption from contributions,
under which the Garrison of Maestricht put all the Count, (...) to the Gates of
Nimueguen; and that (...) sieur Calvo some Months before in (...) Contributions
in the Maaswal, had* (...) and pu^ the ^^^ple in fear, even to (...) heart
(...) the Ambassado (...) State^ (...) desi^ed a^^ ^^^ment (...) ler^^ (...)

The French Court was very averse from granting such an extent of Neutrality,
which would have freed their enemies from keeping of strong Garrisons in the
Neighboring places, to cover all that Country; and therefore that affair lay
long undecided.

The pleasantness of the season invited the Ambassadors in the mean time to
take the air in their Coaches without the City; but the Dutch Ministers gave
notice to the French, that seeing there was no security for the Country against
the attempts of the Garrison of Maestricht, they would not answer neither for
what the Garrison of Grave might do, being but two leagues distant from
Nimueguen, and on that side where the Country is only pleasant for (...) and
taking the air. The French ^^^^^^adors therefore prohibited their ser^^ (...)
strag^le out of the Town; though (...) ^emse^^^ did not forbear to go (...)
^^ll together in company being at^^^ (...) a great numb^^ (...) ^^vants (...)
^^^ck. (...) (...) ^^^e it* (...) the (...) Mediators to view those places that
might serve for limits; but finding that there belonged only three Villages to
the Jurisdiction of Nimueguen, of which the most remote was but a little league
from the place, they caused a draught to be made of all that was contained
within the circuit of that extent, which being sent to the King, he consented
to it as the Ambassadors had proposed.

A Counselor of the Town, and a French Gentleman named by the French
Ambassadors, were pitched upon, to mark out the places, on which were planted
the limits of Neutrality, the whole extent whereof made a kind of a demi-oval
along the Waal, comprehending nine Parishes with their dependencies.
Nevertheless there remained betwixt the Meuse and the Waal above a league of
ground, which afforded a free passage (...) the parties that came from
Maestricht, (...) and raise ^^eir contributions in the C^^^^ ^^^try of Maaswal,
which lies betweenn (...) Waal and the Meuse.

The French Ambassador^ (...) the (...) of September had (...) to the Table of
Sir Lionel Jenkins; and had since that made use of the Table of Sir William
Temple ^ut seeing about the end of October, Sir William declared that he would
go to no man's Table but his own, whether that as Mediator he would thereby
affect to appear impartial, though that custom which was observed at the Treaty
of Cologn, had in it nothing that seemed contrary to the Mediation; or rather
that he would avoid the hurry and expense thereof; that manner of living which
was begun with much satisfaction, was thereby interrupted, and the Ambassadors
met only afterward at the Lodgings of the Ambassadors Ladies, where company
usually came.

The Count of Oxenstierne, and Monsieur Oliver Krantz the Plenipotentiary
Ambassadors of Sweden, arrived at that time at Nimueguen, and gave the French
Ambassadors notice of their arrival, who went the same day to visit them
separately at their House, in a Coach with six Horses; but those Ambassadors
were not as yet in a condition to render their Visits with the same ^eremony.

The Count of Oxenstierne i^ a person ho^^ aspect ans^vers his birth; he is
mag^^^t, (...) the too great expense he put himself t^ ^as the cause that his
house was not always well regulated. His indifferent way of carriage, joined to
a natural gravity, made many to judge him vainglorious. His Colleague is a man
of learning, who writes well in Latin and French; he has the reputation to be
a man fit for business; he speaks neatly, and loves a retired life. His Train
was very neat, and he had fifty Crowns a day from the King his Master; but the
Count of Oxenstierne had a hundred.

The Imperialists and Spaniards were not observed as yet to make any have in
coming to Nimueguen, notwithstanding the King of England urged them to it by
his Ministers. Philipsbourg, which for want of Ammunition was surrendered in
September, after it had held out a siege from the beginning of June, made them
hope that the forces of Germany would gain considerable advantages upon the
French; but the Ambassadors of that Crown about the end of September received
orders from the King to make known to the Mediators, that his Majesty having by
so many advances showed his forwardness to procure a Peace, he intended to
recall them, unless the Ambassadors of the chief Confederate Princes did within
a month repair to Nimueguen the place of Treaty.

This declaration having been communicated to the Ambassadors of the
States General, they gave notice of it to their Masters. Their answer was, That
if at or before the first of November ensuing the Ministers of the Confederates
did not repair to Nimueguen, they would begin to treat separately for
themselves. But that time being elapsed, they desired two days longer,
according to the old style which is observed in Guelderland, and several
Provinces of Germany, well knowing that the expiration of that term did not
draw them into any engagement; for if the Confederates made longer delay, they
could on all hazards in the reciprocal communication of their Commissions,
start difficulties, and find out means to spin out the time as they did,
without falling upon business, until the assembly was complete.

Monsieur Hoegh the second Plenipotentiary from Denmark, arrived at that time,
with his Lady, at Nimueguen. He is a handsome Gentleman of a good Family, who
rose to that dignity by his good discharge of the several employments he has
enjoyed. He had his Lodgings in a house that was provided for him near the
houses of the French Ambassadors, because that being the highest place of the
Town was the pleasantest also for the accommodation of strangers. So soon as he
had given notice of his arrival, he was visited by the Mediators, the
Ambassadors of France, and so by all the rest in Coaches of six Horses,
according to the Ceremony. He had of his Master about five hundred pounds a
month, which he spent nobly like one that understood the world.

About the middle of November my Lord Barclay the chief of the Mediators, who
came from being Ambassador Extraordinary for England in France, arrived with
his Lady at Nimueguen, and after some days being there incognito gave notice of
his arrival; he was visited by the other Mediators, and immediately after by
the three French Ambassadors successively, with two Coaches of six Horses
apiece.

The Count of Oxenstierne, who with urgency demanded audience of my Lord
Barclay, that he might not as it was believed, be prevented by the Ambassador
of Denmark, obtained it at three quarters after three; this was to be just
after the audience of the Count d' Avaux, who that he might lose no time, had
servants abroad in the streets to acquaint him immediately when Monsieur
Colbert should come out from his Audience; so that he went to it punctually at
half an hour after three. But hardly was he entered, when my Lord Barclay had
notice, that the Count of Oxenstierne was below in the Court. He bid answer him
that he was with the Count d' Avaux, and that the Count of Oxenstierne was not
to have his audience till half an hour after that.

The Ambassador of Suedeland who saw no body come to receive him at the foot of
the stair, caused his Coachman to drive out gain, without staying for the
answer. That action suffered various constructions; for it was alleged that he
could not be ignorant but that the Count d' Avaux was at his audience. The way
to the Lodgings of my Lord Barclay was by his back-gate, where some of his
servants were observed to be in the streets, and it was not then, but exactly
half an hour after three; that if he had been ignorant of it, and had had no
other design, in that case he might have come back, having first made a short
turn in expectation of the Count d' Avaux coming out; or if he pretended that
his visit was actually performed, as he did afterward, he ought to have sent
his Colleague to Audience immediately after the Count d' Avaux.

Whatever the matter was, whether ignorance, or a laid design, as many did
persuade themselves it was, though they could not conceive the policy of that
enterprise, the business was taken up by the Mediation of the French
Ambassadors. The Visit was held to be performed, and yet my Lord Barclay never
rendered it, nor saw the Count of Oxenstern, but accidentally, as it were, at
Madam Colberts Lodgings.

The unexpected Peace concluded between Poland and the Turk, the advantages
that the King of Sueden began to gain upon the Danes in Schonen, by the taking
of Elsinbourg, and the Succors put into Malmoe, the vigorous resistance of the
Town of Stetin, from before which the Elector of Brandenbourg was at that time
forced to raise the siege; all that, I say, and besides the progress of the
French Arms in Sicily, made it believed that the Confederates would at length
appear more tractable than hitherto they had been.

In the mean time the Count of Kinsdi, the second of the Emperors Ambassadors,
continued still at Cologne, detained, as it was said, by the Gout; and Don
Pedro de Ronquillo, the second Ambassador from Spain, coming from England,
where he had been but Envoy Extraordinary, stayed still at the Hague, expecting
the rest of his Equipage from England: but being at length arrived at
Nimueguen, he continued long incognito, because having no other character but
that of Plenipotentiary, the French Ambassadors refused to give him the hand.

Monsieur Somnitz and Blaspiel, the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenbourg,
who had been sometime at Nimueguen, on the 29. of December gave notice of their
arrival. The French Ambassadors consulted together, and afterward with the
Mediators, because contrary to what was practiced at Munster, both the
Plenipotentiaries of Brandenbourg demanded the hand and title of Excellence.
But the French Ambassadors would not give it, but to him that was first named
in the Commission; and upon occasion of that difficulty, visited them not.

The English Mediators made their visit, but with a resolution not to give the
title of Excellence save only to Mr. Somnitz, nor to demand audience of Mr.
Blaspiel. However being both lodged in the same house, the second failed not to
be at the audience; and the first perceiving that the Mediators addressed their
discourse only to him, showed them his Colleague, giving him the title of
Excellence. But they answered, that their visit was only to him. The Ambassador
of Denmark stuck not at these formalities, having to do with the Ministers of
one of the chief of his Masters Allies. But the Suedish Ambassadors followed
the example of the French: So that the Elector of Brandenbourgs Ministers found
themselves far enough from being able to establish their pretension at
Nimueguen.

The States General, who paid great Subsidies to the Princes that were
confederate with them, began at that time to think of retrenching that great
expense; and they thought they had the greater reason, that they needlessly
drained their Treasury by the charge of a War, which was now become wholly that
of their Confederates, unto which they ought to have no greater concern, than
in a public and common assault.

What glory soever redounded to the States General, in that they could reckon
among their Pensioners, the Emperor, King of Spain, King of Denmark, all the
Electors almost, the Princes of Brunswick, the Duke of Newbourg, and the Bishop
of Munster; yet that hindered them not from acquainting them with the inability
they lay under to continue those great Subsidies, excepting only the Duke of
Newbourg, in consideration of the new Alliance that he had made with them, and
the Bishop of Munster, of whose humor and Neighborhood the States General
have been always apprehensive. They did not as yet cut off those subsidies; but
the Dutch Ambassadors declared to the Ministers of their Allies, that they
would pay none for the ensuing Campagn, unless they put the French in the
wrong; that is, if they made it not appear by their refusal of reasonable
propositions, that if the peace were not concluded, the French were only to be
blamed for it.

By this means the Dutch stopped their Confederates mouths, they obliged them to
hasten the opening of the Conferences, to which no step had hitherto been made;
and put themselves in right of complaining of those who for their own private
interests desired not to see the War so soon put to an end; and therefore they
thought it not enough to speak of cutting off the Subsidies, but began also to
hint at a separate and particular Treaty, in such a manner that the
Confederates took the allarm the more easily, in that the excessive charges the
States General had been at during this War, had been exceeding burdensome to
all the Provinces.

The Count of Kinski arrived at length at Nimueguen the third of January 1677.
He is a Bohemean Gentleman, never before employed in any Embassy; and
therefore all his actings were in the beginning full of difficulties and
diffidence; but it appeared afterward that he had more sincere intentions for
peace than his Colleagues had, with whom he clashed so as not to be reconciled
again. He is a valetudnary man, and melancholic, but of great merit and
sagacity. He had two thousand German Florins a month, which make about three
hundred and thirty pounds English.

Don Pedro de Ronquillo remained incognito above a month; and neither he nor
the other Ministers of the Confederates seemed to act with the same frankness
and sincerity the French did, even in the opinion of my Lord Ambassador Temple,
who confessed that it was not to be doubted but that the French inclined to
peace, and that they were like those Gamesters who having won considerably,
were willing to leave play if the losers obliged them not to continue.

In the mean time those who examined without passion the present state of
affairs, and the interests of most part of the Princes engaged in the War,
wondered that they would continue it with so great disadvantage, upon hopes
that were not too firmly grounded. Holland had nothing to gain, and lost much
by the excessive charges of the War. The Emperor saw himself raised to the real
height of his greatness by the settling his Authority throughout the whole
Empire; but had hardly any means left of procuring Winter Quarters for the
Impetial Troops; and most of the Princes of Germany were so tired out and
incommoded by the War, that it was to be feared his Imperial Majesty might find
himself abandoned in time of need. The King of Spain had almost all the Powers
of Europe joined in his Interests, and could never promise himself such
assistance in any other juncture; but what advantage had he from that, seeing
notwithstanding the French took the best places of the Low Countries? Cambray
and Valenciennes were at that time so straightly blocked up, that it was not
doubted but one of those places would be lost before the beginning of the
Campagn. None but the Northern Confederates were inclined to the continuation
of the War, through the desire of preserving, and even enlarging the Conquests
they had made upon Sueden. But a Victory obtained by the King of Sueden in
Schonen, made it hopeful that the Suedes renewing their courage under so great
a Prince, might set their affairs to rights again. Though the Spaniards lost
most in this War, yet the Ambassadors of that Crown acted with greatest
slowness as to the advancement of the peace. The reason of their procedure in
the manner, could be attributed to nothing but the usual irresolution of the
Spaniards; and yet it was not very easy for them in the present juncture of
affairs to determine themselves. The removal of Valensuela, the first Minister
of State in that Court, and the return of Don John to Madrid, being supported
by all the Nobility of the Kingdom against the Interests of the Queen-Regent,
made people fear some dangerous revolution; insomuch that the Spaniards
abandoned the fate of the Low Countries to the protection of their
Confederates. However it might have been said at that time, that a real
Lethargy had seized men's minds, and hindered them from applying themselves with
care to the means of restoring a solid peace.

In the mean time the French were not asleep: That King caused a considerable
body of men to march into Flanders in the depth of Winter. This struck a terror
into the heart of the Low Countries, and gave ground to fear, that his Majesty
would next Campagn carry his Conquests far, if the Negotiations at Nimueguen
did not put a greater stop to them, than the strength of the Confederates was
likely to do. But the Assembly was not as yet formed, neither were the
preliminaries to the Peace as yet condescended on.

At that time the French Ambassadors had notice given them, that the Count of
Kinski received the visits of the Ministers of the Confederates, and were
surprised at that manner of conduct, though it was given out, that they were
but private visits among friends, upon occasion of the complements he made to
them upon his arrival at Nimueguen. However the Mediators understood that
complement to be a real notification of his arrival, because that the King of
England desiring that the Ambassadors should make no public entry into
Nimueguen, for avoiding several accidents which such Ceremonies usually produce
they ought not neither to give notice or their arrival twice; and therefore
they sent presently to desire audience of him next day at two of the clock, for
it was then ten of the clock at night. But when it was answered, That the
Ambassadors of Denmark had pitched upon the same hour, the Ambassadors were so
surprised, that they would have absolutely refused to visit him had they not
been assured that the visit o^ that Ambassador was only to be private and
without ceremony, the Count of Kinski protesting that he had not given notice
of his arrival to any whosoever. The Mediators pretended that they had received
notice, and fixed upon eleven in the morning, instead of two in the afternoon,
to render their public visit, which was received as such, and rendered
accordingly.

The French Ambassadors desired to have a clear understanding as to the
Emperors Ambassador his carriage in that particular; but after that the
Mediators had taken much pains to adjust the matter, the French found in the
conduct of the Count of Kinski neither sincerity enough, nor sufficient
security, but that some Ambassadors might therefrom draw advantages to the
prejudice of that precedence which they pretended to be due to France. That
Am^^^^^^or was indeed willing to have given (...) in writing disowning the
first (...) was made of his arriv^l, (...) he should so carry him^^^^ (...)
^^bassadors of Fran^e (...) ^^^ertheless, they fi^^^^^ (...) somewhat an (...)
^im, no more (...) ^f the Ele^^^^ (...)

(...) Kinski (...) begun, (...) gave gave notice of his arrival in the
ordinary forms to all the Ambassadors, excepting those of France, who would not
admit of it, and the Mediators who had already performed that ceremony; and he
rendered his visits the last days of January, though he was not as yet provided
but of two traveling Coaches, nor his servants of Liveries.

About the same time Master Hide, Son to the Earl of Clarendon, sometime
Chancellor of England, came to Nimueguen, to assist as the second of the four
Mediators of his Majesty of Great Britain: A fortnight before, he passed
through that Town upon his return from his extraordinary Embassy in Poland;
but instead of a Yacht which he expected at Rotterdam, to transport him to
London, he there received Orders from the King ^is Master to return to Ni^ wh^^
having given notice of (...) (...) was first visited by the th^^ (...)
^^ff^dors with a splend^^^ (...) (...) all three in the (...) (...) d'
Estrades, (...) (...) other (...) (...) Train (...)

Th^se (...) ^^^ture^^ (...) man^^^ (...) against the accidents which might
happen on the like occasions. The Marshal D' Estrades gave his Colleagues the
place in his Coach and at home, except when other Ambassadors were present, and
that the dignity of the Ambassy obliged every one to keep his rank. And as for
Letters and Dispatches to Court, they so ordered the matter, that each of them
should successively undertake it for one week, and all three together sign them.

The King of England sent Mr. Hide to the Assembly at Nimueguen, for no other
reason but that he might honor him with the Character of Plenipotentiary
Ambassador, and have his name inserted in the Treaty of Peace which was to
follow upon those new-begun overtures; for his Majesty of Great Britain had
occasion to employ him elsewhere.

About the end of the same month ( Jan. 1676/7.) the Ambassadors of the
Confederates began to meet; and for that purpose they chose (...) Apartment in
the little Town Hall, which is contiguous to, and has passages into the great
Hall. It is in that place where the Deputies of the Province of Gelderland for
the Precincts of Nimueguen, do ordinarily meet.

Feb. 1676/7. The French Ambassadors had no sooner notice of these proceedings
of the Confederates, but they complained of them to the Ambassadors of the
States General, alleging that in a Neutral Town equally common to all the
Ambassadors, some of them could not appropriate to themselves a public place
to the prejudice of the rest, without a breach of the Neutrality. The Dutch
Ambassadors had good reason to choose a public place for Conferences, well
knowing that they would be managed with greater liberty there, than at the
Houses of the Imperial Ambassadors, who would have affected to be the
Dictators. In the mean time to content the French Ambassadors, they gave them
the choice of what place they pleased in the great Town Hall; whither they went
to pitch upon the place which they found most convenient to meet in when they
thought fit; though they being by themselves, and having none to confer with
but the Ambassadors of Sueden, they needed no such Apartment; and it is
probable that if the Ministers of the Confederates had foreseen that the French
Ambassadors should have disposed of the Town Hall, they would not have pitched
upon the place which they had chosen.

The most remarkable passage that happened in the Assembly of the Confederates
was, that after the Count of Kinski, who as Ambassador from the Emperor had
taken his place at the upper end of the Table, the Ambassador of Denmark
contended with the Spanish Ambassador for the next place on the right hand;
insomuch that Don Pedro de Ronquillo was forced to consent to have it only by
turns; and for deciding which of the two should have it at their first sitting,
they behoved to cast lots for it, whereby it fell to the Danish Ambassador. The
same difficulty arose betwixt the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenbourg,
and those of the States General, who although they were at home, yet would not
yield it; insomuch that this difference was determined in the same manner as
the former.

The Forces of the French King began already to break into Flanders,
notwithstanding the coldness of the season; and the talk was, that some
considerable siege would be speedily made. On the other side the French King
put the frontiers of Germany out of a condition of being able to furnish
provisions to any great Army, with which he was threatened from thence. And the
Elector of Brandenbourg had lately before made a Declaration to the Diet at
Ratisbon, whereby he quashed the hopes that the Confederates had conceived
after the death of the Electoress, of his joining his forces with those of the
Empire, against the Power of France.

That Prince declared, that he never had consented to the War into which the
Empire was engaged upon occasion of the Dutch War: He protested he was so far
from contributing to it on his part, that he had Twenty thousand men in
readiness to act against those that should refuse a Peace; and that he would
punctually observe the Treaties of Westphalia, on which the safety and repose
of the Empire depended. Which was a sufficient Declaration in favor of France,
that seemed to demand no more in Germany.

The twentieth of February Mr. Stratman, the third of the Emperors Ambassadors,
arrived at Nimeguen, at which time all the difficulties that were started about
the communication of the Plenary Commissions, began to be determined; and no
better expedient could be found to effect this, than to reduce all the Plenary
Comssions into one and the same form as to the ^aterial and essential words,
according to ^he style and use of the Chan^elory of France. The five chief
Confederates, to wit, the Emperor, King of Spain, King of Denmark, States of
Holland, and the Elector of Brandenbourg, desired that in respect of them
severally, the French Ambassadors might have five particular Commissions. But
the French would only procure two, one for treating with the Catholic Princes,
in which the Mediation of the Pope was mentioned; and the other for the
Protestant Princes who owned not that Mediation; and they absolutely refused to
present one for the Elector of Brandenburgh, lest that all the other Princes of
the Empire should pretend to the like. But upon promise that no other
Commission should be demanded, the French Ambassadors judging it the interest
of the King their Master to treat separately with the Confederates, they were
not so stiff in that matter, and the rather especially that they might thwart
the Count of Kinski, who would have managed the interests of all the
Confederates, and deprived them of the liberty of acting by themselves.

The Danish Ambassador was the most scrupulous about these Plenary Commissions;
he stood upon the giving of his in the Danish language, if he must have that of
the Frenc^ in French; or that if he gave his in Latin, he pretended that the
French Ambassadors should give him theirs in the same language. He alleged
that the King his Master stood not on the same foot as heretofore, and that he
might very well challenge a right of establishing a new custom. But the Danes
got nothing by this, they were fain to condescend to the old way, which is that
the French Ministers speak to them in French, and that they answer them in
Latin.

On the 3d of March 1676/7. all the Ambassadors gave in their propositions of
peace to the Mediators, whereby the pretensions of all the powers concerned in
the war were made known; and on the 5th they were interchanged by the Meditors.

The Emperors propositions were, that the ^ing and Kingdom of France should
re^ore to the Emperor and the Empire, and to ^ll the Confederates, all that
had been ta^en from them; that they should have reparation for all damages that
they had suffered, and that peace should be re-established upon the best and
surest grounds that possibly could be devised.

France proposed to the Emperor and Empire, that the King having not desired
any thing more passionately than the religious observation of the Treaties of
Westphalia, his Majesty would gladly see Germany a second time owe the
restitution of its repose to the observation. of the same Treaties; and for
that effect his Majesty demanded that they might be fully and entirely
reestablished.

Spain demanded that France would wholly restore whatev^r had been taken in the
Kingdoms of Spain since the year 1665. That all Ammunition and Artillery taken
either by Sea or Land, should be rendered back again: That all places ruined,
demolished, or burnt, should be repaired: That the French King should give
complete satisfaction to all the Confederates: And by three different Articles
Spain demanded the same thing of Sueden.

France said, That the King being contrary to Justice, and the obligation of
the Treaty of Aix la Chapel, attacqued by the Catholic King, his Majesty had
reason to pretend that in respect of that Crown, all things should remain in
the condition that the fortune of War had put them into, without prejudice to
his Majesty's Rights, which were to continue still in full force and power.

The Danes pretended that France should give them complete satisfaction, and
reimburse all the charges of the War: and by four Articles they demanded of the
Suedes, that betwixt the two Kingdoms and two Kings, all things should be
restored into the same condition as they were before the War that was ended by
the Treaties of Westphalia; and that the Treaties of Rochilde and Copenhagen
should be abolished; and that all the Provinces which had been dismembered from
Denmark and Norway, should be restored to the Danes; that all that the Suedes
possessed in the Empire, should be taken from them; that Wismar and the Isle of
Rugen should remain in possession of the Danes; and that for the security of
his Danish Majesty and Kingdoms, they might put Garrisons in all the strong
places of Sueden that lie upon the frontiers of the two Kingdoms.

The propositions of France in reference to the Danes were, That seeing the
King had not declared War against the King of Denmark, but he runs contrary to
the Treaty of Copenhagen made in the year 1660. for performance whereof the
King was Guarantee; the King of Denmark had attacqued Sueden: His most
Christian Majesty was ready to desist from hostility on his part, provided that
the aforesaid Treaties and those of Westphalia were re-established.

In respect of France and Sueden, the States General demanded, That Maestricht,
Dalen, Fangumont, and all the dependencies of Maestricht, should be restored to
them: That they were willing for the public peace to sacrifice the inestimable
losses, whereof they might pretend reparation; and that for avoiding all
differences for the future, the Treaty might contain a general and particular
renuntiation of all sorts of pretensions.

There were afterward sixteen Articles concerning the full satisfaction to be
made to the Prince of Orange in regard of what depended on the Crown of France;
and particularly the restoration of the fortifications of Orange, that were
ruined in the year 1660. and of the Castle demolished in the year 1663. the
rights of Toll upon Salt and other Commodities, as well upon the Rone, as
through the Principality of Orange; the rights of Coining of money, of Laick
Patronage for nomination to the Bishopric; the exemptions, privileges, and
other Immunities granted to the inhabitants of that Principality by the Kings
his Majesty's Predecessors, and particularly by Lewis XIII.

The Estates General demanded nothing of Sueden, but that the future Treaty
might contain some regulations for obviating the frequent inconveniences that
happened concerning Commerce.

France proposed to the States General, That seeing the Union that has always
been betwixt the Crown of France and the States, was only interrupted upon
account of some causes of discontent, which were easy at present to be
removed, and to be prevented for the future; His Majesty was willing to restore
the States General to his former amity, and to hearken favorably to all
propositions that might be made to him on their part, even concerning a Treaty
of Commerce. And as to the propositions made for the re-establishment of the
Prince of Orange, the French Ambassadors made an answer to them; but upon
occasion opposed the pretensions of the Count D' Auvergne, demanding that his
Marquisate and Town of Bergen-op-zoom might be restored to all the rights of
Sovereignty which the other Towns of Holland enjoyed conform to the Treaties of
Pacification of Ghent.

The Elector of Brandenburgh demanded that France should make reparation for
the damages that his Territories had sustained by the French Forces during the
course of this War, that all security should be given him for the future for
the same Territories, and that all his Allies should be comprehended in a
general Treaty.

France made no propositions to the Elector of Brandenbourg besides those that
were made to the Emperor and Empire, which comprehended the full performance of
the Treaties of Westphalia.

In all the propositions that the Suedes made to the Emperor, the Kings of
Spain and Denmark, the States General, and to the Elector of Brandenbourg, they
demanded of the one but the renovation of their former amity and good
correspondence, and of the others the execution of the Treaties of Westphalia
and Copenhagen, which contained the restitution of all that had been taken from
that Crown.

Prince Charles of Lorrain, to whom the French King had granted the title of
Duke, with a general protestation made to the Mediators, that the titles taken
or given should be without prejudice, caused his propositions to be made, by
which he said, That as heir to his Predecessors, he hoped from the Justice of
the King that he would restore to him his Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, with
their dependencies, his titles, records, movables, and effects taken from him,
and make reparation for the Towns, Buroughs, Castles and Villages that were
ruined throughout all his Dominions.

But seeing the Ministers of the Confederates would not admit of the Sieur
Duker, the Envoy of the Bishop of Strasbourg, whom the French King reckoned
among the Confederate Princes, the French Ambassadors made no propositions
concerning Lorrain, nor showed any Plenary Commission for treating about the
Interests of that Prince (though much urged to it by the Confederates) that by
this means they might oblige the Imperialists to own the Minister of the Bishop
of Strasbourg.

On the other side, the propositions of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, which the
Sieurs Vlkens and Wetterkop, that Princes Envoys, had put into the hands of the
Mediators, lay there without answer or being interchanged, because the Danish
Ambassador hindered the Minister of that Prince from being admitted, as being an
Ally of Sueden, and protected by France, and upon that account dispossessed of
his Territories by the King of Denmark.

The Propositions of the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenbourg were not made
public, because the Ministers of those Princes kept incognito, pretending to
the character and rank of Ambassadors; yea, and these Princes wrote to the King
of England for obtaining the effect of their Pretensions: but what instance
soever they made during the whole course of the Negotiation, no Crowned head
yielded to their demand.

I have here but inserted the substance of the first propositions of Peace; yet
thereby may be seen how unreasonable the demands of Spain and Denmark were,
seeing that not only the Mediators, but even the Ambassadors of the States
General thought them exorbitant.

The sixth of this Month Monsieur Stratman gave the French Ambassadors notice
of his arrival; who at the same time sent each of them a Secretary, to make him
their complement, and demand audience, either the same morning, or immediately
after dinner. But he excused himself, saying that he had a business of great
importance to dispatch that day with an Envoy of the Elector of Cologn,
concerning urgent affairs of his Imperial Majesty, and appointed them six of
the clock at night. The French Ambassadors began then to doubt of the sincerity
of his conduct toward them, and they could not imagine what pretext he could
have. It is true, the Gentleman that made the complement to the French
Ambassadors in the name of Mr. Stratman, had waited sometime at the lodgings of
the Count D' Avaux, where at that time they were all three together; but the
time was but short, and the Ambassadors saw very well that Mr. Stratman failed
in what was due to their Character, though he assured them that he had sent his
Secretary to them, and that he had taken all the measures that he conceived
necessary to give them all manner of satisfaction. Whatever the matter was, the
great affair that Mr. Stratman pretended to be for the important concerns of
the Emperor, was no more indeed but that he might have leisure at two of the
clock to receive the visit of the Ambassador of Denmark, and at four of the
clock that of the first Ambassador of Sueden.

The French Ambassadors caused all the circumstances of Mr. Stratman's conduct
to be observed: nevertheless the made their visit all three together at six of
the clock at night, with seven Coaches and six Horses a piece, a great number
of servants in Livery, and Flambeaux; insomuch that there had not as yet so
splendid a Train been seen at Nimueguen. These Ambassadors intended to put
Monsieur Stratman in the wrong; they knew very well that the real distinction
of preference is not to be made according to the order that visits are given
in, but according to the order they are rendered by those who have received
them: as to that, they expected to see how Mr. Stratman would carry toward
them, that they might thereupon take their measures with him.

It was above a fortnight before Mr. Stratman put himself in a condition of
rendering any visit; during which time he pretended an indisposition. That
delay could not be attributed to any thing but the expectation of a Courier, by
whom it was said he was to be instructed how to behave himself in prospect of
the inconveniences which he expected to meet with on the part of the French
Ambassadors, if he gave not to that Crown the preference which it has always
pretended to. In the mean time he made an apology for that delay in a Letter
which he wrote to the Marshal D' Estrades, imputing it to an indisposition that
had seized him. The French Ambassadors sent a Gentleman to make him a
complement, and condole with him about his sickness: To whom he answered, That
he hoped suddenly to be in a condition to (...) and than^ them for their
civility.

No man doubted but that Monsieur Stratman found himself in some perplexity,
and that he was very sensible how hard a task it would be for him to go on as
he had begun, without exposing himself to troublesome consequences. He
perceived how the French Ambassadors had deported themselves toward the Count
of Kinski, who would have observed a particular way of conduct as to them. He
understood that the French Ambassadors would refuse his visit, if he failed in
giving them the preference; and he was ignorant, that if his procedure should
deprive him of the opportunity of seeing the Ambassadors during the whole time
of the Treaty, it might be a considerable prejudice and obstacle to the peace.

At length the 22. Mr. Stratman sent to demand audience of the Marshal D'
Estrades, but not till he had visited the first Ambassador of Sueden, and sent
in formality to demand audience of the Danish Ambassador, who was not then in
Town. The French Ambassadors had agreed among themselves about the answer that
was to be given to the Gentleman that should demand audience; so that so soon
as he had made his complement, the Marshal D' Estrades told him, that Mr.
Stratman knew not what was due to the King his Master, and his Ambassadors, and
that therefore he would not admit of his visit. Mr. Stratman was not willing to
expose himself to the receiving of the same answer from the other French
Ambassadors, and therefore did not send unto them. He expected, indeed, that
the French would show some discontent; but as being Ambassador from the
Emperor, he looked not for an answer of that nature. That Minister is a learned
man, and writes well both in Latin and French. He has always adhered to the
Bishop of Gurck, and opposed the Count of Kinski. He was preferred to the
Emperor from the service of the Duke of Newbourg, at that time when the Emperor
married the daughter of that Prince.

All the discourse at Nimueguen at this time, was of the great achievements
that the Confederates pretended they would do in this Campagn. The Elector of
Brandenbourg was come into the Country of Cleves to order affairs there; this
Country being daily threatened by the Caris^^ (...) Maestricht, to oblige the
inhabi^^nts to p^^ the Contributions that were laid upon them. The Elector was
detained by the Gout at Ham, four leagues beyond Wesel, whither the Ambassador
of Denmark was gone to visit him, and whither many other of the Confederate
Ministers were to go. The Prince of Orange was set out to come to that
Assembly, which was called the Great Council of War. But the news of the siege
of Valenciennes, and the urgent instances of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, for
succors from the States General, made the Prince of Orange alter his course,
broke up the Diet at Ham, and for some time disconcerted the measures of the
Confederates.

In the mean time the difficulties that hindered the French Ambassadors from
visiting those of the Emperor and Elector of Brandenbourgs, produced sad
effects, and might have put a stop to the cause of the Negotiation that was
begun, had not their pretensions been so well grounded as they were. The
Ambassadors of Brandenbourg published a printed Paper, to prove that their
Master had right, and was in possession of sending and having admitted several
Ambassadors into one and the same Assembly; t^^^ endeavored to give instances
of it taken from the Relations that Abbot Ciry printed of the Transactions
which passed at the Treaties of Munster and Osnabrug. However that made nothing
to their advantage. They denied those matters of fact that made against their
pretensions, which are related in the Memoirs of Mr. Chanut, as well as the
late instances of the Assembly at Frankfort, at the Coronation of the Emperor;
and they insisted particularly on the conduct that Monsieur Colbert held at
Cleves, toward three Ambassadors of the Elector, whom he treated equally and
without distinction.

The last instance signified nothing for confirmation of their pretension. Mr.
Colbert at that time had only the character of Envoy Extraordinary for
mediating the differences that were at that time betwixt the States General and
the Bishop of Munster; and Monsieur Colbert being in the Electors Country, it
was not his part to raise any dispute upon that head.

The Ambassadors of the Emperor complained also of the public refuse which the
French made of the visit of Mr. Stratman. The cause of those misunderstandings
was imputed to the Spaniards, who finding themselves always thwarted in the
equality which they so strongly pretend to with France, contend not for it with
other Crowns, to the end they may unite them all, and so oppose themselves with
greater force to the precedence which France claims, or at least to disturb it
as much as they can, in the possession of an advantage which they cannot obtain
for themselves.

There was an innovation made at Nimueguen of what was practiced at Cologn in
regard of the Mediators, to whom in that quality all the Powers had granted the
precedence in the affairs that concerned the Mediation. And the Mediators on
their parts being desirous to prevent all occasions of quarrels, which
frequently happen upon occasion of Livery-men, especially when many of
different Nations meet together in one place, persuaded all the Ambassadors in
the first place to command their Pages and Lacqueys to wear no swords; which
was punctually observed. And seeing most of the streets of Nimueguen are so
narrow, that two Coaches can hardly pass a breast, the Mediators drew up a
writing to be signed by all the Ambassadors, by means whereof they did
sufficiently obviate all the inconveniences which were to be feared during the
Treaty.

That writing bore, That in consideration of the narrowness of the streets,
when two Coaches going contrary ways should meet, that Coach which should be
least advanced into the street, should put back, without any consequence to be
drawn therefrom, or prejudice to any ones pretensions; that he that should most
punctually obey that order, should be held to be the most inclined toward the
peace; the matter being thus concerted for no other end, but for avoiding all
occasions of quarrelling, and to keep those who labored for the restoration
of the public repose, in goodintelligence together.

The French Ambassadors were the first who signed that writing, the Swedish did
the like, and the Danish Ambassadors followed their example: but the matter
went no farther, so that it was to be feared that some unhappy accident might
afterward happen amongst so many Ambassadors; but the order that was made for
preventing any disorder amongst servants, was punctually put in execution.

There happened at that time long debates concerning the manner of treating
about the affairs of the peace, and that matter was not easily adjusted: all
the Confederates were for having it managed only by writing.

The French Ambassadors maintained, that having given in their first
propositions in writing, the way of treating by word of mouth with the
Mediators was the shortest. The Confederates would not condescend to this, but
made very long answers in writing to the French propositions, which seemed
rather invectives than answers to the proposals of peace. But the French waving
all these disputes, which produce always strife, gave their answers verbally by
the Mediators. the Dutch were the first that approved this method, and all the
Confederates at length yielded to this way of treating, as the most expedient
for diispatching in a short time.

Don Pedro de Ronquillo continued still incognito at Nimueguen, whither Mr.
Christu arrived on the 18th of March. This Third Ambassador of Spain is a
Fleming, Doctor in the Laws, and Counceller in the Flemish Council in Spain,
who hoped to have the Office of Chancellor of Brabant, in recompense of his
services. In the mean time the News of the siege of Valenciences, before which
the King came the first of this Month, made all people very impatient to know
the success of that enterprise, it being known what care and circumspection had
been taken for the preserving of that place; but the news that came of the
Trenches being opened the Ninth in the night time, was quickly followed with
the taking of the place on the 17th about Nine in the morning.

The manner of taking Valenciennes, surprised all men, and daunted the
Spaniards. The King commanded the Counter-scarp to be attacqued with two
Half-moons that flanked a Crowned work, and that they should lodge on the front
of that work, which covers another that is before the Gate of the Town. But the
Kings forces marching cross those Half-moons, attacqued that great Crowned-work
on the front and sides, and entered it on all hands, killed or made Prisoners
all that opposed them, and pursuing those that saved themselves in the Town,
gained the Bridge and second Work, and by a Wicket where they could not pass but
one after another, they made themselves masters of the Town-gate; so that in
less than half an hour the King saw a place of that consequence taken by force.

April 1677, The Confederates hoped that the siege of Valenciennes begun in so
bad a season, would have ruined a great part of the Kings forces; but that
Conquest with others that were foreseen would follow, much disheartened them.
Nevertheless the Treaty of Peace went on but very slowly for all that. The
Confederates grounded their hopes on the great Exploits that the German Forces
were to perform in Alsatia, and on the Declaration of England, which they
expected in their savours, not doubting but that the Parliament would solicit
the King to join with them for opposing the progress of the French; but the
Confederates at that time found themselves much disappointed in their
Expectations.

The two Houses of Parliament represented to the King of England the necessity
of putting a stop to the progress that the French made in the Low Countries.
The King answered those that made him the Address from the Parliament, That it
was the thing he had in his thoughts, and that he should take care that the
French should not be in a condition of giving jealousy to his Subjects, and
that his Subjects should have no cause to have any. His Majesty of Great
Britain was afterward informed, that Don Bernardo de Salinas, Envoy from
Spain, gave it out, that his Majesty had called the Authors of that Address
Rogues. The procedure of that Minister so much the more offended the King of
England, as that in so nice a juncture, it might have produced dangerous
effects in his Kingdoms; and therefore he sent order to Don Pedro de Salinas to
keep within doors, and to make ready to depart out of the Kingdom within twenty
days.

The Ambassadors in the mean time remained at Nimueguen like Spectators; and
all that was done there, was to consider and observe what passed in the Low
countries, where after the taking of Valenciennes, the King made himself Master
of Cambray on the third of April, five days after the Trenches were opened, the
Governor with the whole Garrison having retreated into the Citadel; and the
Duke of Orleans who till then had only held St. Omers blocked up, caused at the
same time the Trenches to be opened. But upon notice that the Prince of Orange
marched with a great Army to the relief of St. Omer, the King detached from his
Army the Mareshal of Luxembourg with Eight Battalions, the two Troops of his
Musketeers, and some Dragoons, reserving only so many of his forces as were
necessary for forcing the Citadel of Cambray.

This Detachment came in the nick of time to strengthen the Duke of Orleans his
Army; for on the eleventh the two Armies engaged near to Mont-cassel, and had a
sharp dispute; but after a vigorous resistance made by the Dutch-Infantry, the
French got the day, and the Dutch in that defeat lost eight thousand men that
were killed or made Prisoners, many Colors, eight pieces of Cannon, two
mortar-pieces, all their gross Baggage, and many Wagons laden with Arms and
Ammunition for the relief of St. Omers, which was the chief fruit of the Battle.

The news of that victory, the taking of Cambray on the eighteenth, and of St.
Omers on the twentieth, stunned the Confederates, and so many Conquests in six
weeks time, and before the usual time of the Compagn, made the Spaniards
despair of being able to preserve any thing in Flanders, if peace did not put a
stop to those progresses; but that which troubled them most, was, that by these
Conquests they lost all the Contributions which they raised on the Frontiers of
France, and which was the surest way they had to pay the small Army that they
entertained in the Low Countries.

In the mean time the Elector of Brandenbourg being come to Wesel, there was a
great Conference held there concerning the Enterprises which the German forces
were to undertake in three several places. The Ambassador of Denmark went
thither from Nim^eguen, the Pensioner Fagel, and Admiral Van Trump were there
for the States General; the Envoys of the Electors of Cologn, Treves, Palatine,
of the Princes of Brunswick and Bishop of Munster, were also at that Council of
War, and the Duke of Newbourg was there in person. But the great advantages
that the French King had just then obtained, diverted the designs which the
Confederates had again formed upon Maestricht and Lorrain.

Many were persuaded that the loss which the Dutch had then sustained, would
incline them to treat about a separate Peace; if the States General were as
desirous of it as the people; and all that wished well to the public, seemed
impatient to see themselves delivered from so troublesome a War. They could not
have a better pretext for it, than the loss of the battle of Montcassel, and
the sudden return of the Here Beverning, who upon that news came presently back
to Nimueguen, confirmed the conjecture that some had of a particular
accommodation betwixt Holland and France. That Ambassador appeared always so
zealous for the real interest of his Country, that if there was any separate
Treaty to be expected, it could no ways be managed but by his means; and if
different interests had not always divided the States General, it would not
have been long before they had broken off from the Confederates, whose hopes
daily vanished, though they could not resolve to save themselves from the
misfortunes of War by a good Peace, which appeared to the Dutch to be the most
speedy and safe way to remedy the present Evils, and prevent those wherewith
they were threatened.

After this short, but no inglorious Campagn, the French King dispersed his
Forces into quarters of refreshment; and being at Dunkirk, sent the Duke of
Crequi to compliment the King of England, and to carry him a Letter, whereby
his Majesty declared, That though his willingness to come to peace did not at
all promote the conclusion thereof; yet he was ready, amidst the prosperities
wherewith Heaven was pleased to favor him, to consent to a general Truce for
some years, as the surest means of restoring tranquillity to Europe, provided
that the King of Sueden was of the same mind. And seeing his Majesty could have
no free correspondence with that Prince, he prayed the King of England to
inform himself of his intentions, not doubting but that he was sufficiently
persuaded of the sincere desire he had to second the good offices of his
Mediation, yea and to contribute all that in him lay, for the procuring of a
General Peace, though he might have ground to expect considerable advantages
from his Armies.

In the mean time it was the common discourse that the French King did but make
formal demonstrations of desiring a Peace, whilst he found himself so
successful, and so powerful, as to make himself Master of all the
Low Countries; that if he did really consent to a Truce, he must either think
himself too weak to bear up against the efforts that were preparing to be made
against him in Germany and Catalonia, or that he intended some enterprise into
which they could not dive. Some gave out, that the French King's Letter was but
a politic fetch, whereby he gave occasion to the King of England to wave the
Declaration which his Parliament so urgently solicited; and that the condition
of the King of Sueden's consent would be always a sure pretext to stave off the
proposition of the Truce, whenever France though it convenient.

The same day ( May 1677.) that that Letter was brought to Nimueguen, the Dutch
Ambassadors having demanded audience of the French, came all to the House of
the Marshal D' Estrades, whither they brought the project of a Treaty of
Commerce, the Articles of which were extracted out of the last Treaties which
they made with France. But the people said publicly, That that was but to
amuse them to no purpose; that it was much better to conclude a Treaty of Peace
than a Treaty of Commerce. The States General in the mean time sent three
hundred thousand Crowns to the Prince of Orange to raise recruits for their
Forces; publishing, that the loss they had sustained at Mont Cassel, should not
hinder them from rigging out a Fleet which they designed for the assistance of
Sicily and Denmark.

The Confederates nevertheless began to take umbrage at the Negotiation of the
Dutch; the disposition they found the Sieur Beverning in to treat separately,
gave them the greater cause of fear, in that that Minister ceased not to press
them, and to complain of their slow proceedings. And the Duke of Zell finding
himself solicited to send five thousand men to join the Confederate Army, as
he had done the year before, he made some difficulty, and demanded of the
States General an hundred thousand Crowns, and as much from the Spaniards; and
insisted upon this, That the Emperor would cause the title and rank of
Ambassadors to be given to the Ministers which the House of Brunswick should
send to Nimueguen. These conditions gave ground to suspect that that Prince,
and some others of Germany, had not the same disposition to promote the common
cause. In effect they sufficiently perceived that they were engaged farther
than they would have desired; which made the Spaniard fear, that if they
accepted a Truce, they might in a short time be abandoned by the greatest part
of their Confederates.

On the fifth of May the news came by Letters from England, that the Session of
Parliament was broken up the 26. of the foregoing Month, and that the King was
fully satisfied with them, though no Act had passed contrary to the Interests
of France; but that his Majesty of Great Britain had adjourned them till the 27
of May, to consider of such means as might give a new countenance to the
present affairs. There came news also which gave some content, that the first
Ambassadors of the Emperor and King of Spain* were shortly to come with the
Popes Nuncio to Nimueguen, where all affairs were at a st^^^, because the Count
of Kinsks had no (...) to agree but on preliminaries, until the ^^^ing of the
Bishop of Gurck, the ch^^^ (...) the Imperial Embassy.

The President, Canon, Envoy and Plenipotentiary from the Duke of Lorrain,
being come to Nimueguen on the 25th of May, paid a visit to the three French
Ambassadors in one of the Coaches of Don Pedro de Ronquillo, who remained still
incognito. Mr. Spanheim, who was at Nimueguen about the affairs of the Elector
Palatine, visited also the same Ambassadors, who returned the Visits without
any ceremony; seeing this last had had the quality of Envoy in other
Negotiations, it was not doubted but that he carried the same character in
this; but it appeared afterward that he had only Credential Letters from his
Master; and therefore the Confederates would not admit him into their
Conferences.

About this time the Elector of Brandenbourg wrote to the King of England
concerning the Injustice that he pretended was done to his Ambassadors by
France; and the matter, said he, touched him the more sensibly, that the
decision of that difficulty was left to his Enemies, without doing the lustice
which was due to him; and that he expected it from his Majesty of (...)
Britain, without which he would be ^^^ged to recall his Ambassadors from
Nimueguen. But that Letter, and all the instances that were made upon that
subject, had no effect as to France, which had not the same reasons as England
had to condescend to those new pretensions.

On the first day of June, 1677. Seignior Beliagua, who had been Nuncio
extraordinary at the Emperor's Court, to incline him to contribute to the peace
of Christendom, arrived at Nimueguen by water from Cologne, and came to the
house that was prepared for him near the French Ambassadors; the scarcity of
convenient Houses not permitting him who was sent before, to follow the express
Orders he had, to choose a house in some part of the Town which might be equally
distant from the French and Spaniards, that he might give no cause of jealousy
to either of those two Nations.

The arrival of a Mediator so disinterested as the Uncle of his Holiness ought
to be, gave hopes that his Mediation would much contribute to the promoting of
the Peace, because of the confidence that the chief parties concerned reposed
on him. Seignior Beliagua is of a very noble Family in Ferrara, and rich in
estate; he is Patriarch of Alexandria, and was Governor of Rome in the reign
of Clement IX. nor was that charge taken from him under ^^^ment X. his
Successor, but in exchange of the extraordinary Nunciature of Vienna, from
whence he was sent Mediator to Nimueguen by Innocent XI. who at present fills
the Holy See. Although the allowance of great Nuncio's exceed not 370. Roman
Crowns a month, and that he was not well paid, his Train was nevertheless
splendid, and his House well ordered. His civil and familiar carriage gained
him the affection of all people; and his good intentions toward the Peace,
made him to be equally respected by all the Ambassadors.

Next day after his arrival, the French Ambassadors sent three Gentlemen
together, to testify the joy they had for his happy arrival, and to offer him
all the civilities they were able to perform, impatiently expecting a fit time
to come and salute him in person. The three Gentlemen were received by the
Nuncio according to the custom of Italy, in the Chamber of Audience, upon three
elbow-chairs. They spoke covered, and were conducted by the Nuncio as far as
the door of the outer antichamber that looked into the Court. The same honor
was done to the Gentleman that rendered that compliment on his part; and the
day following after noon the three Ambassadors of France went severally to
visit the Nuncio incognito and on foot, his house being distant but a few steps
from thence; yet they were followed by all their servants. The Emperors
Ambassadors were there also in the morning incognito.

On the fifth of June, the Nuncio gave notice of his arrival to the two
Ambassadors of the Emperor, who had their public audience at five of the clock
afternoon; and to the French Ambassadors, who visited him at seven of the
clock, with a train of seven Coaches and six horses a piece. The Towns-people
were very curious to see such ceremonies, but much more for this, being
impatient to see how a Nuncio of the Pope looked. The Burgomasters of the Town,
and a great number of other persons placed themselves in the Windows of the
Neighboring houses to see him at his gate, whilst he received and re-conducted
the Ambassadors to their Coaches. He was in a plain long purple habit lined
with scarlet, and carried a Cross of Diamonds; but he was clothed commonly in
a short habit. No body wondered at the curiosity of that people, seeing it was
a very extraordinary thing to see a Pope's Nunior^^ a Protestant Town. The
Country people, both Protestant and Catholic, came flocking to Nimueguen for
that end; these found their spiritual consolation, and those satisfied the
great curiosity they had to see an Ambassador sent from the Pope, of whom their
Ministers give them an hideous description.

The Burgomasters of Nimueguen, in consideration of the neutrality of the Town,
and of the Negotiation of so great a work as that of a general Peace, visited
the Nuncio, and offered him all they could do for the free exercise of the
Catholic Religion; but he was satisfied to have a large Chapel only in his
house, whither Catholics might freely come, as they did to the French
Ambassadors Chapel, where service was performed on Festival-days with all the
solemnity that is usual in Parish-Churches, having even placed a Bell in the
top of a Tower, which was heard over a great part of the Town.

Some days before the arrival of the Nuncio, a Jesuit belonging to the Family
of Don Pedro de Ronquillo, went about the streets in the habit of his Order;
this seemed so strange a thing, that it stirred up the curiosity of all the
people; and therefore the Magistrates fearing lest such Novelties might
occasion some disorder, published next day an Order under the pain of corporal
punishment, That no body should say or do any thing to any person whatsoever,
whatever Ecclesiastical habit they should see them wear. But Don Pedro de
Ronquillo thought it not fit that that Jesuit should appear any more abroad in
that manner. The Nuncio himself left two Capucins of his household at Cleves,
and suffered them not to come until he was assured that they should enjoy a
full liberty.

Don Paolo Spinola Doria, Marquess de los Balbases, first Ambassador of Spain,
arrived at Nimueguen the 4th of June; and seeing he came from Germany, he took
passage down the Rhine, as the Nuncio had done. That Ambassador is a Genoese, a
Grandee of Spain, and Grandchild to the great Spinola; he has been General of
the Cavalry of Milain, and since Governor of that State for a time: He came
from the Extraordinary Embassy of Vienna, where he had continued seven years.
He is a tall lean man, most civil, and well bred, and married the Sister of the
Constable of Colonna. Their eldest daughter is married to one Spinola, Duke of
St. Peter, one of the richest Gentlemen in Italy, and who lived at Nimueguen
until the conclusion of the Treaty. This Ambassador had another Daughter with
him, married by Proxy to the Marquess Quintana, Son to the President of
Castile. He had likewise an only Son ten years old, who was called Duke of
Sesto. This great Family made a very numerous Train; yet among so many
servants, there were not above five or six native Spaniards.

When the French Ambassadors came to Nimueguen, finding that the Catholics,
though under the Diocese of the Bishop of Ruremond, followed the old style,
according to the practice of Guelderland, they resolved likewise to conform to
it. The Catholics of the Country have a dispensation so to do, to the end
they may celebrate Easter, and the chief Festivals of the year, at the same
time the Protestants do, and not appear singular in a Country where they are
with much pain and difficulty suffered. The French Ambassadors followed the
same style, that they might not seeem to make a kind of Schism betwixt
themselves and the Catholics of the Town, and that their Chapel where five or
six Masses were said a day, might serve for the devotion of the Catholic
people.

The Imperial and Spanish Ambassadors did not at first conform to that style;
but the Nuncio resolved at Cologn to follow it, and even kept the Rogations at
Nimueguen according to that custom. Nevertheless next day about ten of the
clock at night, he sent to acquaint the French Ambassadors, That he was to
observe the New Style, according to which the next day was the Vigil of
Pentecost. The Ambassadors sent the Nuncio back word, That having taken the Old
Style upon very pressing considerations, and particularly that they might
conform themselves to the Orders of the Bishop to whom the Catholics of the
place were subject, they could not leave it off. The Nuncio made answer, That
it was not his intention to oblige any body, and that what he did concerned
only his own Family. Nevertheless he altered his opinion eight days after. The
Imperial and Spanish Ambassadors, and all the Ministers of the Catholic
Princes, followed the example of the French Ambassadors, and all the Chapels
observed only one style.

At that time the Nuncio rendered his visits of ceremony to the Imperial and
French Ambassadors on one and the same day. The French met at the house of the
Marshal D' Estrades to receive him, resting satisfied with that single visit,
instead of having each of them one, as the Nuncio offered, though he afterward
saw them severally. His Train made a great show; he had three Coaches with six
horses, and many servants in Livery, clothed after the Roman fashion, with
hanging sleeves, some laced all over, and others of Velvet with long cloaks.
But all the other Ambassadors had their Equipage after the French Mode.

My Lord Barclay having at that time obtained leave to return to England by
reason of his age and indisposition, parted from Nimueguen the fifth of June.
The truth is, the Negotiation was at such a stand, that there was no discourse
of any affairs then, and both Mediators and Ambassadors had time to play. At
the same time news came from England, that the Parliament being assembled the
fourth of June, had made a pressing Address to his Majesty of Great Britain, to
incline him to make a League offensive and defensive with the States of the
United Provinces, for opposing the progress of the French Conquests.

The King was displeased at this Address, and made them answer, That it did
invade so essential a Prerogative of the Crown, that the like had never been
done but during the Civil Wars. That it did not belong to the Parliament to
prescribe to him what kind of Leagues, and far less with whom he should make
them. That it seemed rather that he should engage in it by their permission,
than at their solicitation. That foreign Princes might have cause to doubt
whether the Sovereignty was in his person, and refuse to treat for the future
with a King that had only the bare name. In a word, that he could not suffer
that prerogative to be invaded, which no consideration should ever make him to
renounce, seeing it was the foundation of the Crown and Government. And
hereupon he dismissed the Parliament without having obtained from them the
Supplies he demanded for procuring the satisfaction and safety of his subjects.

June the 23. the Marquess de los Balbases, who desired to begin to appear in
public, sent on his own and Colleagues parts to compliment all the Ambassadors
of the Princes; but the French received and rendered them the first of all. The
substance of the compliment that was made to every Ambassador in particular, by
a Gentleman accompanied with two others, was, That the Ambassadors of Spain
upon their arrival at Nimueguen, sent to salute their Excellencies, to testify
the joy they had to find themselves in so illustrious an Assembly, and to have
occasion of treating with persons of so known worth as their Excellencies were;
and that his Master impatiently expected that his Colleagues were in a
condition to be treated according to their character, that he might come in
person to testify his joy to their Excellencies.

The Marquess de los Balbases gave thereby to understand, that Don Pedro de
Ronquillo, and Mr. Christin, had not as yet the quality of Ambassadors; but it
was known that the Court of Spain had sent to the Duke de Villa Hermosa Plenary
Commissions in diverse forms, and left to the Marquess his disposal the
characters that he pleased to give them; but he being no Native Spaniard, and
being to treat about an affair of so great importance for Spain, which he well
foresaw would not prove advantageous for that Crown, it was his interest, as
well as the dignity of his Embassy, that the Court should authorize his
Colleagues, that the event might be the less laid at his door.

The French Ambassadors sent three Gentlemen to return his compliment in the
like terms of esteem and civility, whom that Ambassador answered in French. The
same Gentlemen had Orders also to go wait upon the two other Spanish
Ambassadors, and to compliment them apart. But it being just before insinuated,
that they had not as yet the character, those Gentlemen were advertised not to
give them the title of Excellence; and for that reason Din Pedro de Ronquillo
was not at home, tho they went twice to his house, and at dinnertime. But Mr.
Christin received the compliment without the least difficulty.

The Nuncio made no doubt but that if in the first steps that the French and
Spaniards made, there happened any thing that might give discontent to the
French, the Treaty might thereby receive great prejudice; and therefore for
preventing the same inconveniences to which the conduct of the Imperial
Ambassadors toward the French had given occasion; he so ordered m^^tes, that
the carriage of the Spaniards should give the French no cause to complain. So
that that Mediator, extremely zealous for the repose of Christendom, hoped that
by bringing the French and Spanish Ministers to a good and familiar
correspondence together, the affairs of the Peace would the more successfully
be promoted.

Though the Marquess de los Balbases remained still incognito, yet the French
Ambassadors sent to compliment my Lady Marchioness, and to desire audience of
her. They visited her separately, and without much ceremony; and so did all the
other Ambassadors and their Ladies, expecting till they could render her their
public Visits.

Of all the Ambassadors Ladies that were at Nimueguen, the Marchioness de los
Balbases was the only Lady that spoke not French; but seeing she understood a
little of it, and that the other Ladies had no great difficulty to understand
Italian from conversation and play, they had no need of any Interpreter.

The progress that the French Tongue had made in foreign Countries, appeared at
Nimueguen; for there was no Ambassadors house where it was not almost as common
as their Mother Tongue. Besides, it became so necessary, that the Ambassadors
of England, Germany, Denmark, and other Nations, held all their Conferences in
French. The two Danish Ambassadors agreed, that even their common Dispatches
should be made in that tongue, because Count Anthony of Oldembourg spoke good
High Dutch, but not a word of Danes, which his Colleague did. Insomuch that
during the whole course of the Treaty of Peace, nothing hardly but French
Writings appeared, strangers choosing rather to express themselves in French in
their public ceremonies, than to write in a language that was not so much in
use as it.

July 1677. The Assembly now beginning to be formed, and many strangers being
with the Ambassadors at Nimueguen, the Mediators on the second of July thought
fit to renew the Writing that was spoken of before, concerning the means of
avoiding the inconveniences which might happen upon the meeting of Coaches:
they likewise entreated the Ambassadors to command their Gentlemen upon severe
penalties not to fight any Duels, and all their servants not to make any
disorder in the Town neither by day nor by night. This was approved hy all the
Ambassadors, because of some Duels that had been already fought. The Nuncio,
who was no less zealons for preservation of peace amongst the families, which
were to procure a general peace to all Europe, made a like Writing in Italian,
which was signed by the Ambassadors in the same manner as that of the English
Mediators was.

In the mean time the Confederates raised all their Batteries in England, and
were not discouraged. Their Ministers made new instances to the King of Great
Britain, That it would please him to recall the Forces that he had in the
French Service; representing to him that they were the cause of the loss of
Mont-cassel. His Majesty made them answer, That in that Engagement there were
none of his subjects in the French Army, but the single troop of the English
Gen d'arms, wherein there were but seventeen English, all the rest being
French; and that on the contrary, the Dutch had two Regiments of Scots, who had
behaved themselves better in that action, than any others of the whole Army.
That besides, he could not recall his Forces from the French Service without
declaring War against France, seeing he had sent them thither before he was
received to be Mediator; and that desiring to retain that quality, and only
labor to procure peace, he could not recall the one, unless he likewise at the
same time recall the others that he had in their service.

The Confederates had nothing to say to so just and reasonable an answer as
that was; and they found themselves disappointed of their hopes, seeing that
that powerful German Army that was to enter into France, was put to a stand on
the frontier by the Forces which the Marshal de Crequi commanded; and so
distressed for want of provisions, and the parties of the neighboring
Garrisons, that it was obliged to retreat. They conceived also so great
jealousy of the King of England's equipping of a Fleet, that they were in
doubt whether on that side they had not as great cause to fear as to hope.

On the 13th of July there was an extraordinary Courier from England, having
Orders to Ambassador Temple to repair forthwith to London; and accordingly on
the fifteenth about five a clock in the morning, he embarked for that Voyage.
Every one had his several reasons concerning the hasty departure of that
Mediator, and could not agree whether it was a good or bad presage for the
desired peace.

On the 16. the Marquess de los Balbases returned from Holland, not well
satisfied with the people of Amsterdam, from whom he received not that
favorable reception which he expected, by reason of an opinion which that
people had, that the Spaniards for their own particular interests were the only
cause of the continuance of the War.

Mr. Vlkens, Envoy from the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, a Prince in League with
the King of Sweden, and who has been dispossessed of his Territories by the
King of Denmark, rendered his first Visits to the French Ambassadors on the
third of August, and the same day the Count of Kinski and Mr. Stratman the
Imperial Ambassadors, visited publicly the Ambassadors of Spain, who returned
the Visit the same day.

The Nuncio ought to have been dissatisfied at those public Visits made before
the performance of that which was due to him, as Mediator and Nuncio of the
Pope; Besides, the French Ambassadors declared, that at the very instant that
the civility which was due to the English Ambassadors as Mediators, was not
rendered to them, and that the Ambassadors of that Crown suffered those of the
Emperor to have the precedence, they would likewise reassume the rank which
they pretended to be their due, without any respect to the Mediation: Wherefore
the Ambassadors of Spain gave in writing to the Nuncio, and wrote a Letter to
Sir Lionel Jenkins, declaring in both, that they followed a custom established
betwixt the two branches of the house of Austria, which rendered these Visits
because of kindred; and that these Visits made before the notification of
arrival, were not of any consequence.

The Nuncio and Ambassador Jenkins gave Copies of those Declarations to the
Ambassadors of France, and inserted them in the Memoirs of the Mediation.

On the fourth, the Ambassadors of Spain having given notice of their arrival,
were visited by the Nuncio; Sir Lionel Jenkins who was then the sole English
Mediator rendered them his Visit immediately after and next were the French
Ambassadors all three together with their usual attendance The Ambassodor of
Denmark, who always strove not to be the last, had his audience the same
evening, and all the other Ambassadors visited them next day.

Seeing C. Anthony of Oldenbourg was not come to Nimueguen, though his house
had been kept long in readiness for him, Mr. Petkum stepped into Office, he took
the Character of Envoy of Denmark, and in that quality visited all the
Ambassadors, which he retained during the whole course of the Treaty, having
signed the Memoirs that were given in by the Ambassador of his Danish Majesty.

On the sixth the Ambassador of Spain visited the Mediators, and the same day
demanded Audience of the Ambassadors of France, who were all three at the house
of the Mareshal d' Estrades, and there received them at three of the Clock in
the afternoon; their Train was numerous, and had no less than nine Coaches with
six horses apiece. The five first Coaches were for their retinue; the three
Coaches for the thre^ Ambassadors came after, in the third (...) which that
belonged to the M^^ (...) Balbases, were they all together (...) there taking
the place; the ninth (...) Coach of the Duke of St. Peter, (...) he had the
young Duke of Sesto there, the Coach-horses of the Marquess de los Balbases
being young, the Coachman durst not entangle himself in the Court of the
Mareshal d' Estrades his house, because it was but small; and therefore the
French Ambassadors went out to receive the Spanish at the Street-gate; the
retinue of the Gentlemen were ranked into two files in the Chamber of Audience,
because the same had been done by the Spaniards; but the Pages according to the
usual custom set the Chairs, the Gentlemen having done so to none but the
Nuncio, because it was so practiced at his house. After that common Visit, the
French Ambassadors severally visited each of the Spanish Ambassadors apart, and
their Visits were returned in the same manner.

The Confederates did not as yet lose the hopes that they built on the German
Army commanded by the Duke of Lorrain, who that he might employ those great
forces in some remarkable action, was advanced as far as Mouson, the
fortifications whereof (...) ^^fore razed; there he took his (...) designed to
pass the Meuse, and (...) Champaign; but he durst not ha^^^ (...) ^er, because
the Mareshal de Crequi (...) ^^ly observed his motion. All the pro^^dings of
the Duke of Lorrain were only to favor the designs of the Prince of Orange,
and to join his Army if he had succeeded in the enterprise which he was going
to attempt on Charleroy.

Then it was that the Consultations which were held at Wesel began to break
out. The Prince of Orange, who during the whole course of this War seemed
always to have great designs, marched with the forces of Holland, Spain, Zell
and Munster, which he commanded, to invest Charleroy, where he made his Lines,
and assigned his Quarters. Several English Gentlemen came and offered their
service to the Prince, who seeing no Army in readiness, promised himself better
success in that Siege than he had had the first time that he attempted it. But
he was out in his measures; for Monsieur de Louvois who foresaw the design, in
a few days put a powerful Army into the field, and was himself in person in a
posture of coming to action. Many Gentlemen of the Court went thither by Post;
and many English Gentlemen were there also to signalize themselves upon that
occasion; in so much that the Prince of Orange seeing his hopes evanished,
thought fit to draw off on the fourteenth, and the Duke of Lorrain having
advice thereof, left Mouson the same day, and marched in haste beyond Treves
During the whole time that that Prince encamped on the Meuse, the Mareshal de
Crequi watched him so close, and so incommoded him, that without fighting he
ruined his Army. In effect since that time the Imperial Army appeared only on
the defensive.

About this time the Bishop of Gurck arrived at Nimueguen; the dignity of that
Prelate, whom his Servants without Ceremony called my Lord the Prince, and the
quality of chief of the Imperial Embassy, gave him without contradiction, the
first rank among the Ministers of the Confederates. The Spaniards instantly
visited him, and he returned the visit the same day; but he was obliged to give
the Mediators and French Ambassadors a Declaration in the same form, as those
of Spain gave when they visited the Imperial Ambassadors, to the end that that
particular custom might be still without prejudice to the honor that the other
Ambassadors rendered the Mediators, and to the preference which is pretended to
by France.

Sept. 1677, that Prelate gave notice of his arrival to the Mediators and
French Ambassadors on the third of September. The Nuncio and Ambassador
Jenkins visited him in the morning, and the French Ambassadors having sent
three Gentlemen to demand Audience, rendered him their visit at three of the
Clock afternoon, with a splendid train of Coaches which marched in this order.
The three first were filled with Gentlemen, the three Coaches of the body
followed, the Ambassadors being in the last, and a seventh Coach belonging to
the Mareshal d' Estrades came last of all. All the other Ambassadors almost,
rendered their Visits the same day to the Bishop of Gurck, who next day visited
the Nuncio, and Ambassador Jenkins in the morning, and after dinner was with
the French Ambassadors, who received him all three together at the house of the
Mareshal d' Estrades.

The Bishop and Prince of Gurck, formerly Baron of Goes, had the reputation of
a great Negotiator, seeing the dignity to which he was raised, was the reward
of the services which he had rendered the Emperor in several Negotiations; but
when it was perceived that his Talent lay only in making long and rambling
speeches, stuffed with an infinite number of Questions, and remote
Suppositions, which tended only to pump those with whom he discoursed, without
ever speaking his thoughts clearly, the able Ministers were soon weary of his
long Visits, which lasted always three hours at least. He seemed so irresolute
in the most pressing conjunctures, that that was no small obstacle to the
conclusion of the peace of the Empire. There was never any good understanding
betwixt him and his Colleague the Count of Kinski, nor the Marquess de los
Balbases. His allowance was 3400 German Florins a Month, and he had always
several persons of Quality in his Retinue.

Count Anthony of Oldembourg arrived at Nimueguen on the seventh of September;
but as he was preparing to give the Mediators and all the other Ambassadors
notice of his arrival, the Imperial Ministers acquainted him that they expected
to be preferred before the English Mediators. That Ambassador perceiving this
to be contrary to the custom that was established at Cologn, would not consent
to the Imperial pretensions. He well foresaw that not only the Mediators would
not have admitted his Visit, but likewise the French and all the other
Ambassadors who maintained the honor of the Mediation; and therefore he gave
no notice of his arrival, gave nor received no Visit, and continued still
incognito at Nimueguen; but that hindered not but that he met at conferences,
and especially at all places where they played.

That Count is the Natural Son of the last Count of that name; to whom the King
of Denmark was heir, as being of the same family; but the present Count has
obtained a vast Estate from his Majesty, with the Government of the County of
Oldembourg; he is of the Order of the Elephant, and very handsome; his
presence, courage, rich equipage, and vast expense showed him to be a great
person; but his civility and free humor made him beloved of every body;
insomuch that the Assembly of Nimueguen lost much by his departure, which was
eight months after his arrival.

The end of the Campagn drawing now near, the Confederates did not think that
the French forces would effect any considerable Enterprise. Nevertheless the
Mareshal de Crequi assured the King that he would make him Master of Fribourg,
if his Majesty pleased. The design appeared extremely difficult. But the
Mareshal having obtained permission, and all that was necessary for carrying on
so great an Enterprise, endeavored to make the Duke of Lorrain believe that he
intended some design upon Sarbruck, and at the same time made a considerable
body of men pass the Rhine at Brisac, which on the ninth of October invested
Fribourg, and marching thither in great haste, he forced the place to render,
before that the Duke of Lorrain could come in time to relieve it.

October. 1677, such was the consternation at Nimueguen among the Germans, and
all the Ministers of the Confederates, that even after the taking of that
place, they could hardly believe that the Mareshal de Crequi durst have
undertaken the siege. Fribourg has a Citadel strong by situation and
fortifications; the Town is great and well peopled, because of the University
that is there, and the Emperor received a very considerable revenue from it;
but the consequence of that conquest was better known afterward than at that
time.

The Voyage that the Prince of Orange was preparing to make into England, gave
ground of various conjectures. On the 17 of October. he Embarked at the Brill,
being accompanied with the chief of his Family, and the Here Odyke the
Extraordinary Ambassador of the States General, who had not, as it was given
out, given him a full power to conclude a Peace, or make a new League. On the
19th. the Prince arrived in England, where his Marriage with the Princess Mary,
Eldest Daughter to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, was carried on so
secretly, that the first news that they had of it at Court was the conclusion
thereof.

The news of this Marriage came to Nimueguen the 29th. and seeing all the
Confederates began to hope more than ever, that England would not be long
before it declared in their favors, they made no more doubt of it after this
Marriage. And therefore all the Ministers of the Confederates complimented
thereupon Ambassador Jenkins, and my Lady Temple also, who remained at
Nimueguen after the departure of her Husband, of which no man doubted but that
the Marriage of the Prince of Orange was the cause, whereof till then they were
ignorant.

The affairs of the North went daily worse and worse for the Suedes, especially
in Pomerania; Stetin was besieged from the beginning of Summer, and was
extremely straightened. The Danes had taken the Isle of Rugen. And though Count
Koningsmark routed them there, and beat them wholly out of it, yet the Town of
Stetin deprived of all kind of relief, and out of hopes of receiving any, was
at length forced to render to the Elector of Brandenbourg, having given
demonstrations of great Lovalty to Sueden, and left to posterity an
extraordinary instance of constancy and resolution.

Affairs were wholly at a stand at Nimueguen; there was no meeting but for
Play, Dancing and Collations, at the houses of the Ambassadors of France,
Spain, Sueden and Denmark; but the League which was signed at the Hague the
tenth of Jan. 1677/8;, betwixt England and the States General, to oblige the
French King to make Peace on the terms they had agreed upon, made all the
Confederates hope that the countenance of affairs would quickly change to their
advantage, and that France would be at length forced to stoop, or be overpowred
by the multitude of enemies.

England in effect seemed inclined to an open declaration, and the King thought
it not sit any longer to reject the solicitations of his Parliament; wherefore
he made a Speech to them in a quite different strain from that which was
mentioned before; he acquainted the two Houses with the League that he had made
with the States General for the preservation of Flanders, and obliging those to
a Peace who would not accept of the conditions that they had judged reasonable.
He laid before them the necessity of money for compassing those great designs.
He gave them some account of the moneys which he had received for the building
and equipping of Ships; and consented that the Supplies which the Parliament
did give upon this occasion should be laid out by such persons as they should
nominate. But of all things his Majesty put them in mind of the advantages
which England had reaped, and still did reap from the peace it enjoyed, whilst
all Europe besides were in actual War.

For preserving so much happy success, it was necessary that the French should
be still prosperous; and that by breaking the measures of the Confederates,
they might make their Ambassadors change their tone. The taking of the Isle of
Tobago, of all the Vessels that were in that Port, and the Ammunition which was
in the fort; the death of Binkes Admiral of Zealand, and the utter ruin of that
Colony, were sensible blows to the States General; as the taking of St.
Guillain during the rigor of Frost and Snow had terrified the Low Countries. By
these means the French King thought he might overthrow the projects of his
Enemies.

Febr. 167/8, Monsieur de Somnitz Ambassador and Plenipotentiary from the
Elector of Brandenbourg on February 25. died at Nimueguen, in the sixty and
sixth year of his age. He was a fat man, of great judgment, and had done his
Master very good service in several employments. Mr. de Blaspiel his Colleague
remained sole Ambassador at Nimueguen; he is as honest and civil a man as
lives, and loves company and good cheer; but his best quality is, that he
perfectly understands the interests of the Elector his Master, and is wholly
devoted thereunto.

The Elector of Brandenbourg having defrayed the charges of his Ambassadors, by
a Steward of the Embassy, which for the first year amounted to forty thousand
Crowns, their allowances were regulated for the future.

In the mean time the French King began the Campagn with his whole Household,
which never appeared in better order, nor richer Equipage; but the better to
cover the design which he intended, he carried with him the Queen and all the
Ladies of Court as far as Metz, whilst several bodies of his Armies kept at the
same time Luxembourg, Namur, Charlemont, M^ns and Ypres, the best provided
places of the Low Countries, as it were blocked up; in so much that the
Confederate-forces being divided for the preservation of these Towns, were in
no condition to bring relief to any of them.

March 1677/8, the French themselves were no less surprised than all the
Confederates were, when the King leaving the Queen, crossed so many Countries,
in so great haste, that on the fourth of March he came before Ghent, which by
orders from him was invested the first of that month. The besieged to no
purpose cut their Dikes, and drowned part of the Country; for the King lodged
his forces, and pressed so vigorously the siege, that in a few days the Town
and Citadel were both carried.

It is hard to be expressed what trouble the taking of Ghent put all Holland
into: They saw to their astonishment that the French who were remote on the one
side, approached on the other. At London all the Confederates exaggerated the
importance of that loss, that they might excite England to a speedy and open
declaration; whilst the French King pursuing his conquests, caused Ypres to be
besieged on the 15 of March, and in a few days took it, though the Garrison made
a brave resistance.

The Treaty was now more than ever damped at Nimueguen; so great prosperities
stopped the mouths of all the Confederates Ambassadors, though the French seemed
nothing elevated thereby. The same prosperities had great impressions on
Holland; the people tired out with the War, and alarmed by the conquests that
were made on their frontiers, minded nothing but peace. They reflected on the
flourishing condition that the United Provinces were in before the War; they
saw their Treasure exhausted, and the inhabitants unable any longer to support
the great Impositions and Taxes of the Two hundred penny, which had been raised
seven times in one year. And therefore the Here Beverning pressingly urged the
Ambassadors of the Confederates, being vexed to see them still flatter
themselves with vain hopes, when the only refuge they now had was the
declaration of England; and indeed that was the thing they wholly applied
themselves to, without advancing one step toward the peace.

Mr. Oliver Krantz, who the year before went into Suedeland to receive new
Instructions from the King his Master, with whom the Danes hindered the
commerce of Letters, was come back to Nimueguen, where he found affairs as
backward as when he parted from thence; and besides a great dryness betwixt his
Colleague and the French Ambassadors, by reason of a difference that had
happened between the Countess of Oxenstierne and Madam Colbert; the Countess
after her Lving-in having been pleased to render her first visit to the
Ambassador of Spain's Lady.

That procedure offended Madam Colbert, who twice afterward refused the visit
of my Lady Oxenstierne, upon pretext of feigned indispositions, which hindered
her not at the same time to receive the visits of several other Ladies. This
published the ground of the difference, which might easily have been adjusted,
had it happened between persons of other humors, of whom the gravity of the
one, and the frank humor of the other would hardly agree together. And that
was the reason that the difference of those two Ladies, and the dryness betwixt
the French Ambassadors, and the first Ambassador of Sueden, lasted even till
the end of the Treaty.

The Tragical death of the Ambassador of Denmark's Ladies brother, was also the
cause that that Lady visited my Lady Oxenstierne no more. Her brother had a
Settlement in Scho^en, where he was accused of keeping inte^^igence with the
Danes against the service o^ Sueden: he was brought before a Council of War,
and there sentenced to be shot to death by four Ensigns. The King of Sueden
offered him a pardon if he would have acknowledged himself guilty of Treason;
but the poor Gentleman chose rather to dye, and with extraordinary generosity
caused fifty Ducats a piece to be given to the four Ensigns that shot him to
death. The news of that did so afflict the Ambassadors Lady, that afterward
she could not so much as endure the sight of a Suede.

The Baron of Platen, Envoy from the Duke of Osnabrug, arrived on the 30th at
Nimueguen; but seeing the House of Lunenbourg had not obtained the title and
rank of Ambassador for their Ministers, Baron Platen thought, that taking the
title of Plenipotentiary Minister, he might obtain an equality with the
Ambassadors of the Powers that came after Crowned heads. But he succeeded not
in his pretensions, though by a liberal expense he did his Master credit.

April 1678. At the time when there was no t^lk at Nimueguen, but of the
disposition that was in England of openly favoring the Confederates, and
reducing France to receive the Law; it may be said that the French King at the
same time gave it to all Europe by the Propositions that he made the 9th of
April, wherein he declared the conditions on which he was willing to make peace
with all those with whom he was engaged in War; and whereupon his Majesty fixed
as the last point he would condescend to, and upon which his Enemies might
choose Peace or War, provided they did it before the tenth of May, beyond which
time he would not be engaged to stand to those conditions.

I will not here insert a particular relation of these conditions, neither of
the Memoirs of the Treaty, nor of the Treaties that were concluded, because
they have been already published: I shall only say, that the Propositions of
the 9th of April were the beginning of the Negotiation of peace, and the
scantling according to which all the Treaties have been concluded and signed,
though at first nothing appeared more remote from it, nor yet afterward, until
the day that the conditions were in general accepted.

The Imperialists of all others seemed the least inclined to yield to those
conditions.

The first which required full satisfaction to be made to Sueden, was
insupportable to the Northern Princes. The Spaniards and other Confederates
found them so hard, that (as they said) they would hazard all, rather than
accept of them: And when the French Ambassadors carried these conditions to my
Lord Ambassador Jenkins to be by him communicated to the Confederates, he made
answer, That he could not do it as Mediator; but that he would acquaint them
with them in discourse, as a matter to which he promised no answer.

That Mediator refused to treat on these Conditions, because in the League that
on the 10th of January was concluded betwixt England and Holland, the King his
Master had made other conditions with the States General, to which they
resolved to force France. But he did not foresee, that by refusing to present
the French Kings Conditions to the Confederates, which would prove the cause of
as many treaties as there were Princes and States engaged in the War; he
excluded himself in effect from the Mediation.

The news came about that time, that the French had abandoned Messina, and all
their Conquests in Sicily. People were strangely ^^rprised to see that the
Mareshal de la Fa^^^^ade, who was thought to have been sent into that Kingdom
with fresh Forces, upon design of some new enterprise, was only gone thither to
fetch off the Forces that the King had there. The abandoning of Sicily was
imputed to the suspicion that the French had of England's declaring, where
considerable Levies were already making. Some wondered that the French King
should so easily abandon a Country, the yiedling up of which might have stood
him in stead in the Treaty of Peace with Spain: Others on the contrary thought
it more glorious for him so to recall the succor which he was pleased to give
the Messineses, without having had any hand in their revolt, than to forsake by
a Treaty, people that had implored his protection.

It was not to be doubted, but that the present juncture of affairs would
oblige the King to provide against all accidents; and therefore the Marshal de
la Favillade, having declared to the Senate his Majesty's Orders, grounded on
the need that he stood in of all his Forces, caused his Troops to embark. But
many of the Messineses dreading the certain revenge of the Spaniards, came in
so great number on board of the French Fleet, that if there had been more ships
there, Messina had been wholly disserted.

The Confederates had their eyes fixed solely upon England, as the only place
from whence they might expect any considerable relief. Hence it was that many
Ambassadors left Nimueguen. Don Pedro de Ronquillo went to Brussels to return
no more; but it was thought the reason was, because he would not be inferior to
the Marquess de la Fuentes, who came as it were only accidentally to Nimueguen.

Don Pedro de Ronquillo, who passed for one of the sharpest sighted men that
was in all that famous Assembly, could not forbear to tell a French Gentleman,
upon occasion of the conditions of Peace which the French King had proposed,
That he admired the prudence of that great Prince, and that the success of his
conduct would well appear by the necessity they were like to be brought to,
either of making peace, or of maintaining the War alone. The Baron of Platen,
Envoy of the Prince of Osnabrug, went likewise to Brussels. Mr. Spanheim on the
27th of April, set out for England, with the quality of Envoy Extraordinary
from the Elector Palatine. The Count of Oxenstiern a few days after embarked on
the same design. Mr. Oliver Krantz soon after did the same: Which made some
think, that the Suedes intended to take other measures, fearing lest France in
the sequel might not be powerful enough to buoy up Sueden from the low
condition into which it was sunk.

Thus from all parts came bellows to blow the fire that was kindling in
England, and which already threatened France. In the mean time the Parliament
that was then sitting, was prorogued until the 9th of May; and in the Assembly
of the States of Holland, which were at that time met, the Towns were divided
as to the continuation of the War. The propositions which the French King made
to the States General, seemed so reasonable, that notwithstanding the powerful
faction of the ill affected, Amsterdam, Leyden, Harlem, and all North-Holland
were absolutely for peace.

May, 1678. The Province of Holland being the most considerable of all the
rest, always turns the balance of deliberations; so that Deputies were sent to
London and Brussels, to represent the impossibility that the States General
were in of continuing the War. And it appears by the three printed Memoirs of
the Heers Boreel and Weed, the Extraordinary Deputies of the States to the
Duke of Villa Hermosa, Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, of the 8.14. and
27. of May, that the reasons of that impossibility were no less founded on the
power and strength of France, than on the weakness of the Dutch and Spaniards,
and the unprofitableness of all their efforts. At that time there began to be
some hopes of Peace, what aversion soever all the Ambassadors of the
Confederates seemed to have to it. The time prefixed by the King was near at
hand; and on the fifth of May the French Ambassadors received orders to declare
that his Majesty required that the Messineses who were come for refuge into
France, should by the Treaty of Peace with Spain, be restored to, and
maintained in the possession of their Estates, and that they might dispose of
them at their pleasure. The Ambassadors were enjoined to insist upon that
point, as a matter that his Majesty concerned himself much in; but that demand
being made after that the conditions were proposed, it could not create an
obstacle sufficient to hinder the conclusion of the Peace: Nevertheless it
afterward produced a very considerable difficulty, seeing it lasted long after
the signing of the Treaty, and was one of the causes that were alleged of the
long delay that Spain made in exchanging the ratifications.

Though it was no new thing to hear of the success of the French forces,
nevertheless men were strangely surprised at the news which a Courier brought
from Maestricht, that on the sixth of May a Detachment of that Garrison
commanded by the Sieur de la Breteche, had surprised the fort of Leew, situated
in a Marsh, with a double Ditch well pallisado'd. The barrels of Waxcloth which
were prepared at Maestricht for the Execution of that Enterprise, had not the
success that was expected; but forty swimmers joining valor to stratagem, had
the greatest share in that fortunate exploit; in so much that in an hours time
the French were masters of a very strong place, and very easy to be maintained.

The States General in the mean time began seriously to reflect on the
advantage of making Peace upon the conditions which the French King had offered
them. The Town of Amsterdam, which has the same esteem amongst the Towns of
Holland, that Province has among the other six, was of that opinion, and backed
it vigorously; that Town has always been more inclined to peace than any
other, not only because it suffered more by the interruption of commerce, but
also because it has been more tender of its liberty, having Magistrates
disinterested and zealous for the Commonwealth.

Rotterdam had its advantage by the continuation of the War, because there
being but little or no Trade at that time in Holland but what came by means of
the English, all was brought to that Port, as to the center of the Province,
and the most convenient place for them. Nevertheless one of the most
considerable Magistrates of Rotterdam, so powerfully assisted those that were
well affected toward the Peace, that they gained almost all the voices of
Holland. The rest of the Provinces have found it always to be so much their
interest to follow the example of that Province in matters of greatest
importance; that they still acknowledge that they owe their last preservation to
its prudent conduct. The Provinces of Guelderland, Vtricht and Overyssel, in
which the Prince of Orange has acquired a great authority, since the French
King forsook his Conquests there, durst not openly declare for peace, because
it evidently appeared to be contrary to the interests of that Prince; but they
referred themselves to what Holland should think fit to be done concerning that
great affair.

The effect of all these Declarations was, That the Hier Beverning received
orders from the States General, secretly to acquaint the French Ambassadors,
that they accepted the conditions which that King was pleased to grant to them.
This Ambassador, that he might act according to the intention of his Superiors,
who would not allarm their Allies, gave the Count d' Avaux notice, that he
earnestly desired to discourse with him in private; and that for that end, he
would fetch a walk alone upon the Rampart of the Town about seven a Clock in
the morning, because at that time no body would be there. The Count d' Avaux
failed not to be there, and had an hours conference with him, after which he
gave his Colleagues an account of the result of that discourse, which gave
occasion to the Dispatches whereby the King was informed of the good
disposition of the States General; in consideration whereof his Majesty granted
them ten days longer than the tenth of May, as they had desired, that during
that time they might endeavor to persuade their Allies to accept of the
conditions proposed, as themselves had done.

The Marquess of Fuentes arrived at Nimueguen the sixth of May, he is Son to
the Ambassador of the same name, who was in France after the Kings Marriage; he
came from Venice, where he had resided Ambassador thirteen years; and the Court
of Spain called him thence, that they might employ him in England; but it was
believed that the nature of those important affairs which were then treating at
London, was the cause why the Duke of Villa Hermosa detained him at Brussels,
that he might send him to Nimueguen, there to fill the place of second
Ambassador.

The Peace began to be so certain in Holland, that the joy of the people
appeared in all places, who at the Hague expressed the same by shouting, God
save the States General, and the Prince of Orange, the Peace is concluded. It
was not so at Nimueguen, where the Confederates were troubled; because they saw
the effect which the conditions offered by the French King were like to
produce. They declared to the Mediators, That it was impossible an affair of so
great importance, as that of the Peace, could be resolved and concluded in so
short a time as the French King had prefixed.

On the 20 of May a Courier brought to Nimueguen a copy of the Letter which the
French King wrote to the States General from the Camp at St. Denis. The 18th
the King acquainted them, that with pleasure he was informed, that they had
sentiments conform to the sincere desire which he had of contributing all that
could conduce to the establishing of Peace, whilst he enjoyed the advantages
that his Arms had procured to him, and which he might still expect in the
sequel of the War. By the same Letter the King granted to the States General
the seventh Article of the Treaty of Commerce, about which the Ambassadors had
not agreed at Nimueguen; and that he might fully remove the apprehensions they
were in of the loss of Flanders, his Majesty promised, That so soon as by a
Treaty concluded upon the conditions proposed, they should return to his
ancient Alliance, and oblige themselves to be Neutral during the course of the
War; he would still in consideration of them, grant the same conditions to
Spain, and that in the mean time he should not attack any place in the
Low Countries, but that he should always be ready to grant them that Barriere
which they judged so necessary for their repose. That if they thought fit to
send Deputies unto him, they should find him in the Neighborhood of Ghent
until the twenty-seventh of that Month.

So soon as that Letter came to Nimueguen, the Count d' Avaux went with two
Coaches and all his Retinue, to give the Dutch Ambassadors notice of the same.
The noise of this Letter, and that public visit, which much rejoiced the
people, gave an alarm to the Ministers of the Confederates. Every one of them
dispatched Couriers the same day, clearly perceiving that the conduct of the
French would infallibly produce the effect which his Majesty expected from the
States General. This beginning of Negotiation gave so large a subject to the
conferences of the Confederates, that the meetings which for a long time they
had held, were at that time doubled.

That Letter of the French Kings was the same day brought to the States General
by a Trumpeter whom his Majesty sent to the Hague; and was there received with
all the demonstrations of joy. The States after four days consultation, on the
25th sent their Answer by one of their Trumpeters, whom the Kings Trumpeter
conducted to the Camp.

They expressed in few words the profound respect wherewith they had received
the Letter, which his Majesty had done them the honor to write to them, and
testified the exceeding joy which they conceived from the sincere desire that
his Majesty had of contributing to the peace of Europe; humbly beseeching him
to give credit to the Hier Beverning their Extraordinary Ambassador, whom they
would send to his Majesty, to inform him how desirous they were of giving him
fresh assurances of their sincere intentions for the Peace.

The Dutch Ambassadors having on the 26th received a copy of the answer of the
States General, gave it to the French Ambassadors, who sent it to the King by
the same Courier, who brought the copy of his Majesty's Letter to Nimueguen;
his Majesty was well satisfied to find therein, that the States General fully
corresponded with the inclination that he had for the Peace. At the same time
the Here Beverning received orders to go within a few days and wait upon the
King, that he might be more particularly informed of his Majesty's intentions.
That Ambassador would willingly have excused himself; but the States Order
being renewed, on the 29th he set out from Nimueguen in Laid-coaches. The
reluctance of the Here Beverning was attributed to the fear he had of
disobliging the Prince of Orange, whose Interests did not admit of the Peace;
till that time this Ambassador was reputed a very good Republican; but
afterward he was thought wedded to the concerns of the Prince of Orange, though
it could not be affirmed whether fear or inclination were the cause of that
engagement. He is a man of a penetrating wit, who knows what is good, and
always pursues it by just means. He is assiduous and painful, and has been
employed by the States in many Embassies, and in all the Treaties that have
been made since the year 1650; but he loves retirement, and it was not without
trouble that he left his Country House near Leyden, to come to Nimueguen. The
Here Haren his Colleague is a Gentleman of Friesland, of much credit in that
Province, and addicted to the interests of the Prince of Nassan, Governor and
Hereditary Stateholder of the Provinces of Friesland and Groninguen.

The Here Beverning arrived on the 30th at Antwerp, and there found a
Trumpeter, who stayed for him to conduct him to the French Camp, where having
seen Monsieur de Pompone, he had Audience of his Most Christian Majesty: He
found him so sincere in his intentions toward the Peace, and so favorably
inclined toward the States General, that on the first of June he left the
Camp; but in the account that he gave his Superiors of his Negotiation, he told
them that he found the French King as well informed of the condition of his
enemies, and of the places that he might attack, as he was of his own affairs.

About the same time the Marquess de la Fuente gave notice of his arrival to
the French Ambassadors; but seeing he had already visited those of the Emperor
in public, without giving the same declaration that his Colleagues had given
to the Mediators, to whom all the Ambassadors gave the precedence, the French
Ambassadors ordered a Gentleman to tell the person that came from him, that
they could not see him unless he first performed what was due to the English as
Mediators. By that the French Ambassadors obliged Ambassador Jenkins, to whom
they had given their promise constantly to maintain the honor of the Mediation.

It was alleged that it was to no purpose for the Marquess de la Fuente to
give that particular declaration, since that instead of one which might suffice
for the three Ambassadors of Spain, they had already given two. But the French
Ambassadors maintained that for the same reason they ought to have a third, and
that no consideration should hinder the Marquess de la Fuente from following
the example of his Colleagues in that matter; that on the contrary they had
great cause to wonder, that by such a refusal he would in some measure seem to
condemn their conduct; so that for want of that declaration the French
Ambassadors saw not the Marquess de la Fuente during the whole course of the
Treaty, unless at the meetings of the Ladies, where he used to come as the
other Ambassadors did.

The news from England were at that time very tumultuary; they advised, that
the King of Great Britain had Prorogued the Parliament to the third of June,
promising at that time to give them good news of the Peace. Seeing a
Prorogation of it self cuts off all that has been proposed and treated in
preceding Sessions without being concluded and confirmed, this Prorogation put
a stop to some pert Addresses which the House of Commons had made to his
Majesty of Great Britain, such as that whereby they desired the King would
declare who they were that had counseled his Majesty to give the answers which
he made in the mouth of May the year before, and in the Month of January of the
present.

June 1678, The Marquess de la Fuente, who had not as yet communicated his
plenary Commission, caused on the first of June a copy thereof to be given,
which was collationed by the Nuncio's Auditor. The French Ambassadors found it
not to be in the form that it ought to be, because all the four Ambassadors of
Spain being named therein, and being Posteriour in date to that of the three
Ambassadors who were approved, it seemed that by that means the Spaniards might
disown, when they should please, all that they had done till then, since that
that new plenary commission might annul the former. And therefore the French
Ambassadors refused to accept of it, and pretended that the Marquess de la
Fuente should have one apart, or that this last should be of the same date with
the former, without which they declared that they would not acknowledge him for
an Ambassador.

In the mean time they were in great impatience at Nimueguen to know what had
been the success of the deputation of the Here Beverning, who to the trouble of
the Confederates went from thence to the French Camp, not doubting but that all
these proceedings would at length terminate in a Peace with the Dutch. They
thought it a matter of so much importance to divert that blow, that for that
end they set all engines at work; but on the fourth of June a Courier from the
Camp brought the French Ambassadors a copy of the answer which that King had
made to the Letter of the States General, and another of the Memoir that his
Majesty had caused to be given to the Here Beverning.

The King by that Letter testified the pleasure which he had to see the
States General in a disposition toward Peace; that his Majesty was willing to
condescend to several things in favor of their Allies; and how joyful he would
be, by restoring to them his ancient amity, to enter with them into such
engagements as might for ever secure their repose and liberty.

It can hardly be believed what good effect the word Liberty produced in the
minds of the Dutch; that word was so agreeable to them, and so sensibly
affected them, that in all the impressions that have been made of that Letter
in Holland, the word Repose is left out, to make that of Liberty sound the
louder. They talked publicly, that whatever secret or public enemy they might
have, for the future they would not fear the loss of their Liberty, in which
the present War had made so great a breach.

By the Memoir given to the Here Beverning, the French King at the desire of
the States General granted a Truce for six weeks, to begin the first of the
ensuing Month, which extended that Truce until the fifteenth of August, to the
end that the States might have all the time they wished for to persuade their
Allies to consent to the Peace, in consideration whereof the States should
promise not to assist them in any manner, during the whole course of that War,
if they would not incline them to embrace the conditions offered by the King;
it being unjust that his Majesty in the condition that his forces were in,
should lose the occasions of action, and should engage himself of new, as he
had already done by the Letter of the 18th of the foregoing Month. But to
evidence the sincerity of his intentions, his Majesty at the same time gave
orders to the Mareshal of Luxembourg, General of his Army, not to attack any
place during all that time, and to stay for the answer of the States in the
Neighborhood of Brussels.

The good disposition that the King of England seemed to be in at that time,
contributed much to the advancement of the Peace. The Here Beverning, who came
to the Camp from London, brought word that the King of England approved all the
proceedings that the Dutch had made toward the Peace. And by the Harangue that
his Majesty of Great Britain made to the Parliament the third of June, he
declared that none were to be blamed but the House of Commons if he could not
engage in the War. And the Chancellor told the whole Parliament that their
manner of acting could not but provoke a powerful Prince, who might resent it;
and for that reason that they ought to strengthen themselves at home and
abroad, for their own security against all kind of attempts.

In the mean time the Confederates set all Engines at work to incline the King
of England to favor their interests. The Marquess of Borgomanero, Envoy
Extraordinary from Spain at that Court, on the fifth of June represented to his
Majesty of Great Britain, how necessary it was that he should send his Fleet
and Army toward the Low Countries for a curb to the common enemy, and a Guard
to all Christendom against the oppression and ruin wherewith it was threatened
by the most Christian King; and how advantageous it would be for his Majesty to
make a League offensive and defensive with the Catholic King his Master, and
the Emperor, who would prove his constant Allies in all the concerns of the
common cause.

The Ambassadors of the Confederates held long and frequent conferences at
Nimueguen; but they found it difficult to agree upon the answer that they were
to give upon the communication which the Ambassadors of the States General had
made to them of the Memoir that the French King had given to the Here
Beverning, and whereupon the Ambassadors urged their resolution, that they
might take their measures accordingly; at length all of them gave their Answers
in their Conference of the tenth.

The Imperial Ambassadors gave it in Latin, and very long; but the purport of
all was, that they expected from the candor and equity of the States General,
that they would do nothing to the prejudice of the Emperor, the Empire, and
all the Confederates, who were only engaged in the present War for the
preservation of the United Provinces, which the States themselves knew
sufficiently, without being put in mind of it. That they had to do with an
enemy whose design was only to divide the Confederates, that he might the more
easily surprise them all. That if there was an absolute necessity that they
must make Peace, the Emperor offered to concur with them in it upon fair and
honest conditions; but that they would not take such precipitate resolutions as
were demanded by the enemy. That they well perceived the design was only to
throw them upon a precipice, since they were not so much as allowed to treat of
those matters, without the decision of which no Peace could ever be had. That
they entreated them not to be overhasty. That the general Peace was ruined, if
France perceived that the States General had a design to treat separately;
assuring them, that when the Emperor should make Peace, he would not be less
careful of the needs of the United Provinces and Low Countries, than he had
been zealous in undertaking and maintaining the War for their defense.

The Ambassador of Denmark made answer on the same subject, That he believed
that the States General would never do any thing to the disadvantage of his
Danish Majesty, who had exposed his person, and spent his revenues to comply
with the engagements into which he had entered with them. That if they were
absolutely obliged to accept of Peace, they expected that they would not do any
thing that might force those whose affairs were in a better posture, to accept
of absolute conditions. That it was not fit that the constancy which the French
showed to their Allies, should triumph over the firmness of their Union; that
they ought to guard against the inconveniences that the least precipitancy
might plunge them into; and that provided the King his Master found his
security in a Treaty, he would sacrifice all his interests to the public weal.

The Ambassador of Brandenbourg assured himself that the States General would
promise nothing to the French King that might be contrary to the League that
the Elector his Master had with them; since he had neither spared his Blood nor
Countries, to preserve their Republic from utter ruin; and that far less they
would conclude a Peace with France, till they first procured his Master the
satisfaction they had promised him by their Treaty of Alliance. That as to the
rest his Electoral Highness desired nothing more than a reasonable Peace, for
procuring whereof he should always make appear his moderation, and the respect
he had to the urgent reasons which the States General pretended for concluding
of Peace.

Whilst the Confederates made all these Remonstrances to the Ambassadors of the
States General at Nimueguen, it was known that the Spaniards declared at the
Hague, that they accepted the conditions offered by France: and as the Deputies
of the States General in their Memoirs presented to the Duke de Villa Hermosa,
alleged the weakness of Spain, as one of the strongest reasons that disabled
them longer to continue the War; so upon this occasion the Spaniards failed not
to do the like, and to impute the necessity they were in of accepting the
Peace, on the inability of the States General of supporting any longer the
charge and burden of so great a War.

The Imperialists in the mean time, and all the Ministers of the Northern
Princes, exclaimed against the inclination that the Spaniards and Dutch had to
so disadvantageous a Peace; they made their own interpretations of the French
Kings condescensions, saying that France laid snares for them, which they could
not discover until they were out of condition of avoiding them; or that
otherwise there must needs be some internal weakness in the forces of France,
how formidable soever they appeared; that standing of it out would do the
business; and that it was too base to submit to an absolute Law, whilst they
were not yet out of hopes of gaining those advantages that would render their
condition better.

The Dutch, who saw evidently by the Declarations of the Ambassadors of their
Confederates, that their design was to give no positive answer to the Memoir of
the French King, which they had communicated to them, and that they refused to
accept of a Truce, which being for more than two months time, would have given
them sufficient time to receive Instructions from the Princes their Masters,
without any precipitation; they declared to them of new, that the necessity
they lay under, could admit of no longer delay; that they had lost all their
hopes in England; that all the Low Countries were in so bad a state, that there
was not so much as one place that could resist the attempts of the French; that
nothing but a speedy Peace could save their Republic from the ruin that the
lose of these Provinces would inevitably draw upon them; and therefore they
prayed them to give a positive answer.

In the Conference of the 20th, all the Ambassadors of the Confederates
answered, but after their usual way of biassing: The Bishop of Gurck made a
long speech, wherein he exaggerated all that the Emperor had done and suffered
both within and without the Empire for the defense of the States General. He
assured them, that it was with grief that the Emperor understood that they
were reduced to a necessity of making Peace; that he found the actings of
France to be contrary to the rights of all Sovereign powers, in that they
prescribed conditions without admitting of Treaties; that the Emperor desired
Peace; that the Ambassadors of the States had themselves acknowledged that the
conditions were hard, and that it was not their intention that every thing
therein contained should be swallowed down; that for their part, they had
declared to them that the Emperor could not admit of the alternative of
Fribourg and Philipsbourg in the manner it was proposed; that they expected
orders from his Imperial Majesty, and in the mean time besought them that by
their good offices they would dispose the French Ambassadors to admit of more
equitable conditions, and to enter into Treaty with them; and that they would
incline them to have regard to their Allies, and especially to the Duke of
Lorrain, who was the most injured of all.

The Marquess de los Balbases said, That he had nothing to add to the last
answer which the Duke de Villa Hermosa had given in writing to the Deputies of
the States General; and that the King his Master would not abandon the
interests of his Allies, neither in Peace nor War. By that kind of expression
this Ambassador declared for the Peace, without offending the Confederates,
seeing his Declaration was conform to the acceptance with which the Governor
of the Low Countries took it in the answer of 27th of May.

The Ambassador of Denmark alleged that in the short time that had passed
since he was required to give a peremptory declaration, it was not possible
that he could have had new orders from the King his Master for giving it; that
the matter was of such importance, that no less depended on it than the
acceptance of Peace, or continuation of War; that as to the States General, it
was to very little purpose to advise them about an affair that was so far
advanced, that nothing was wanting to it but the formalities of a conclusion.
That the King his Master had no other measures now to take, but to put the
States in mind, that the Peace which they were about to make, did not exempt
them from the obligation of their reciprocal Treaties; and that he prayed God
that he would inspire the States General with counsels suitable to the
reflection they ought to make on the state of those whom they themselves had
drawn into the hazards of the present War.

The Ambassador of Brandenbourg insisted on the same reason, to excuse himself
from giving the Declaration to which he was urged; saying that he had but two
things to represent to the States General; the first was, That though on the
part of the Elector his Master he had given in Propositions of Peace with
France and Sueden; yet his most Christian Majesty had not declared on what
conditions he would make it. The other, That the general condition of the
entire satisfaction of Sueden being downright contrary to that which the
States General were obliged to procure to the Elector his Master, it was to be
thought that France and Sueden desired not to have Peace.

The President Canon who was not at the Conference of the tenth, enlarged very
much upon the hardness of the Alternatives which the French King offered to his
Master; seeing, as he said, the first swallowed up almost all his Country, by
dismembring the half of his Territories; and that the other by depriving him of
his Capital City, and the Sovereignty of the four Ways which France demanded,
took from him at the same time the free commerce of his own Territories. That
if the faith of all the Treaties made with the Confederates, was of no effect
to his Master, he protested that that Prince would rather banish himself
willingly from his own Country, than to be restored to it upon such hard
conditions, seeing he had never done any thing against France that could
deserve so severe usage.

All these high discourses and declarations that tended to stave off the Peace,
stopped not the course of the Negotiation. On the 22 the States General sent
orders to their Ambassadors to sign the Peace with France before the end of the
Month; and they wrote the same day to the King by the Sieur de Launoy one of
their Officers, who past through the Camp and delivered a Letter from them to
the Mareshal de Luxembourg, whereby the States acquainted that General with the
Order they had given their Ambassadors at Nimueguen to sign the Peace, and
communicated to him the Contents of the Letter which they wrote to his Majesty
upon that Subject.

The Estates expressed to the King with what joy they understood by the answer
of the first of that Month, given at his Camp at Weteren, that his Majesty was
pleased to grant them a longer Truce, that they might induce their Allies to
accept of the Conditions he had proposed; and that to give him all possible
satisfaction they had omitted nothing that lay in their power. That though they
could not promise themselves that all their Allies could concur with them in
that particular, yet nevertheless they had given Orders to their Ambassadors to
sign the Treaty about the end of the Month; but that seeing they were assured
that his Catholic Majesty would accept of the Peace with them, they besought
his Majesty to put a stop to all acts of Hostility, and to cause his Army to
draw off unto his frontiers, and to give Passports to the Vessels of their
subjects that were abroad a fishing, to secure them from his Majesty's men of
War.

The affairs of Spain and Holland were in such a tendency toward Peace, that
a^^ people expected within a few days to see (...) conclusion of it, and the
news of it was no less hourly expected at the French Court than at the Hague.
But whilst no difficulty appeared on either side, of a sudden there was one
started at Nimueguen, which not only put a stop to the signing of the Treaty,
but had almost quite broke it off. In the project of the Treaty there was no
mention made of the time wherein the French King was to deliver up the places
to the Crown of Spain and States General, being a thing not at all mentioned in
the Conditions. The King pretended that it was not to be done till after the
General Peace, and the full satisfaction of Sueden, in prospect whereof his
Majesty condescended so much on his part. Spain and the States General
understood that the restitution of places ought to be immediately after the
ratification of the Treaties. Nevertheless the Negotiation was managed in that
manner until the very day before the Treaty was to be signed, without any
thoughts of a clear explanation of that point.

The Marquess de los Balbases was the first that demanded an Explication as to
the time of the restitution of the places. The French Ambassadors suspected
several persons for having given occasion to that Ambassador to start the
question. However it were, the Marquess de los Balbases had no sooner received
that Umbrage, but that he went to the Dutch Ambassadors to inquire their
opinions on that subject. These answered, that if the French pretended to delay
the restitution beyond the exchange of the ratifications, it was a thing not
meant by them; and immediately they went to desire the French Ambassadors to
give them their Explication, which they would send to the States General by an
Express.

The Ambassadors of France told them, that the satisfaction of Sueden being the
first of the Conditions proposed by the King their Master, without which his
Majesty would have declared that he could not condescend to peace, it behoved
that the Powers which accepted these conditions should contribute what in them
lay, to procure satisfaction to Sueden; and that the retention of Places was
the easiest means, which the King had in his hands, for obtaining it, without
demanding that the same Powers who only accepted the conditions of peace, that
they might so soon as they could free themselves from the misfortunes of War,
should engage any other ways for procuring that satisfaction.

Notwithstanding all the Reasons that were alleged to justify the conduct of
the French King, the Here Beverning having received an answer from the
States General, declared to the French Ambassadors on the 25th, that he could
not sign the Peace if the King did not remit his pretensions. But the French
Ambassadors having no power to desist, it behoved them to stay for new Orders
from the Court.

The Ministers of the Confederates, and all the ill affected, who with extreme
trouble saw that the Peace with the Dutch which was to be followed with that
with Spain, was upon the point of being signed, failed not to make their best
of that conjuncture which favored their designs, and to do all they could to
make the Dutch suspect the sincerity of France. It was the easier for them to
succeed in this, that those very men who in the States had been the chief
promoters of the Peace, exclaimed most against that new pretention. For seeing
they were not willing to be suspected to have yielded to snares, wherewith they
might have been surprised, they thought themselves obliged to appear the most
steadfast and most resolute wholly to break off the Treaty, rather than to
condescend to that point.

It is certain, that as the generosity of the French King toward the
States General, the amity which his Majesty expressed for them in his Letters,
and his condescensions to a Peace with them, when they had greatest cause of
fear, had on the one hand entirely gained the hearts of the United Provinces,
so on the other hand the enemies of France, and those that envied its growth
and greatness, made so good use of that juncture, to fill the peoples minds
with distrust, that they began in good earnest to believe, that the French
acted not sincerely with them, and that every Article of the Treaty contained
some meaning disadvantageous to their Country.

The Ambassadors of France in the mean time declared to those of the
States General on the 30th, that they were ready to sign the Peace upon the
Conditions that were stipulated betwixt them; and that seeing they had not
mentioned to them the time of the restitution of Maestricht until the 25th,
neither could they any sooner give their Master advice of the new clause that
they would have added to the article which themselves had framed concerning
that restitution; but that in the mean time they offered to sign the Treaties
of Peace and Commerce in the manner as was agreed upon, that they might make it
appear to the world, that they desired not to delay for one day the signing of
a Peace, which all the people so impatiently longed for.

As to Spain, the same Ambassadors said, That if that Crown which had not as
yet openly accepted neither the Peace nor Truce, did formally declare that
without delay they embraced Peace upon the Conditions proposed, and did choose
one of the Alternatives touching Dinant and Charlemont, it should appear that
the King their Master desired nothing more than that Christendom should enjoy
the repose which it might expect from his promises.

During these Debates, the Here Odyke second Ambassador from the
States General, who had not hitherto stayed above two or three days at a time
in Nimueguen, came thither with his whole family. He is of the House of Nassau
by Prince Maurice, Brother of Prince Henry Grandfather to the Prince of Orange,
to whose Interests he is wholly devoted; and not without reason, for he
receives many favors from him, and has a considerable Revenue by reason that
being the chief of the Nobles of Zealand in place of the Prince of Orange, he
represents the Nobility in the States and Council of that Province. He is well
bred and magnificent, loving company and pleasures; and has a particular
dexterity in inventing of them.

There were still some hopes that the difficulties which put a stop to the
signing of the Peace would be taken away; but by a Courier from the French
Court, who arrived July 10.1678, the French Ambas. having received Order to
signify to the Dutch, that the King would not remit any as thing to the
detention of the places, that he might obtain satisfaction to Sueden; one could
not tell what to think of the Peace.

Whilst affairs were in this doubtful condition, news was brought to Nimueguen,
that on the sixth of July there had happened at the Bridge of Reinfield, a
sharp conflict betwixt a great Detachment of the French Army, and a like number
of their enemies, who were so smartly attacked in their Trenches, and so
briskly drove upon the Bridge, that many of them were killed and drowned, with
some of their Generals; in so much that if the Bridge had not been quickly set
on fire, the same thing perhaps might have befallen that Town which happened to
Valenciennes, a considerable number of French Soldiers having entered into it
pell-mell with those that run.

At that time the Duke of Trimouille sent the Sieur de Sanguiniere, a
Counselor of the Chastelet of Paris, to Nimueguen, with Letters of
Procuration, and the Titles that justified the pretensions he had to the
Kingdom of Naples, to the end that the same protestation might be made to the
Mediators as was made to those of the Treaty of Munster, for preservation of
the rights that he has to that Kingdom, by Anne de Laval of the House of
Arragon, from whom that Duke descended in right line. The Mareshal d' Estrades
his Lady arrived at Nimueguen the 12th, and was met by the French Ambassadors
at Moock on the Meuse, two Leagues from thence; where she disembarked. As all
the French were very curious to be present at that first Interview, so the
people of Nimueguen showed no less desire of seeing that Lady. Immediately
after her arrival all the Ambassadors and their Ladies rendered her their
public visits.

The Nuncio about this time received a Courier from Rome; but the cause of his
coming was not fully known. Nevertheless seeing the noise of the Peace was
already spread all over Europe, it was not doubted but that that Court desired
to find some expedient that might remove the obstacles which hindered the
Ambassadors of France from admitting the facultative Brief of the Nuncio,
because the Pope had named none but the Emperor in it.

The Nuncio offered then three overtures to satisfy the French Ambassadors:
the first was, to present a Brief in which no Prince should be named. The
second, to give as many Briefs as there were Christian Princes in War, wherein
every one might have the rank that he desired. And the third to follow the
style of the plenary Commissions of the English Mediators, by giving a Brief
facultative to end the War which was betwixt the Emperor, Spain, Holland, and
their Confederates on the one side; and the most Christian King, the King of
Sueden and their Allies on the other. But the French Ambassadors continued firm
in their Pretensions, and would according to the ancient custom, have the King
their Master named immediately after the Emperor; and that was the reason why
in all the Treaties of Peace that have been since concluded, there is no
mention made of the Mediation of the Pope.

Notwithstanding of that conduct of the Nuncio, the pains he took in promoting
of the peace, were as grateful to the French Ambassadors, as they were
conducive to the repose of Christendom. That Mediator carried himself also in
so different a manner from the former practice of Nuncio's, in regard of
Protestant Princes, that it was not his fault if he did not visit all the
Ambassadors that were at Nimueguen. He rendered the visit to the Envoy of
Osnabrug, who had visited him; and received the Protestants with as much
civility as the Catholics; which produced so good effects for the Catholic
Interest in all these Provinces, and corresponded so well with the reputation
of the Pope, that on occasion of the Bull which was then believed the Pope
would emit, one of the most eminent subjects of the States General said, That
their Ministers might well preach that the Pope was Antichrist; but that for
his own part he was persuaded that this man was not.

News came on the 13. That the Mareshal de Schomberg was advanced with Twenty
thousand men toward Duren in the Country of Juliers; and that he had sent to
demand of the City of Cologn the forty thousand Crowns, and twelve thousand of
Interest, which that Town ought to restore to the French King, seeing that
contrary to the Neutrality agreed upon at the first Assembly held there for the
peace, the Magistrates suffered that money to be taken by the Garrison. The
Envoy of Cologn, who was at Nimueguen, demanded audience of the French
Ambassadors; but they refused it, because he came to the Assembly without a
Pasport from France.

The French Army, which encamped at the gates of Brussels, so netled the
Spaniards, and incommoded the whole Country, that there happened some tumult
in the Town, where Don Pedro de Ronquillo was accused for being the author of
those counsels that delayed the conclusion of the peace; insomuch that it was
affirmed for a certain, that the Duke de Villa Hermosa wrote to the Marquess de
los Balbases, that he would make him accountable for the loss of the
Low Countries, if with all diligence he did not conclude the peace.

The French Ambassadors still expected the last resolution of the
States General, that they might send back the Courier which the Mareshal de
Luxembourg had at Nimueguen, with the news according to which he was to take
his measures, for putting into action, or drawing of the Armies he was upon the
point to have marched toward the frontiers of France, upon the Letter of the
States General, wherein they informed him that they had given orders to their
Ambassadors to sign the Peace at Nimueguen: but the advice that the French
Ambassadors gave him of the new difficulty which hindered the signing of it,
made him to remain still in those parts.

My Lord Ambassador Temple parted for the Hague on the 14th. where finding no
final resolution for concluding the peace, if the impediment which hindered the
signing of it were not removed; he bestirred himself with all industry to
incline the States General to enter into new engagements with the King his
Master, that might procure them and their Allies more advantageous conditions
than those which France proposed to them. The French Ambassadors thought fit,
in the mean time, to make public the reasons that his most Christian Majesty
had to retain the places until Sueden had satisfaction; and for that end they
caused to be printed the Memoir which on the 17th. they gave to the Dutch
Ambassadors.

By this Paper it was given out, That the French King having equally espoused
the Interests of Sueden with his own, and on that account only abandoned so
many places, which was no less advantageous to the Dutch than Spaniards; his
Majesty had grounds to hope that these Powers would contribute with him for the
re-establishment of that Crown, or at least that they would not oppose his
design in making use of those places, as of a very proper expedient to procure
the performance of a condition to which they agreed by accepting the peace. But
since that the Kings Enemies endeavored to render his Majesty's word
suspected, he was willing to engage with the States General in all the measures
they should judge most convenient for precuring satisfaction to Sueden.

This Memoir being enlarged and published in way of a Manifesto, the
States General caused an Answer containing thirty pages to be made to it by
their Ambassadors, which was printed in French and Dutch, and on the 25th given
to the French Ambassadors.

It contained a long recital of all the Negotiation, whereby they alleged,
that after all the favorable expressions that the King was pleased to use
toward them, they could not believe that the sentiments of his Majesty agreed
with the expressions of the Ambassadors Memoir. That they could not impute that
emergent to any thing but the artifice of those who for private interests were
against the public peace. That in all the Negotiation no mention being made of
Sueden to them, it would be unjust to pretend, that the King having demanded a
neutrality from the States General as an essential condition in their separate
peace, they ought to give their places to be made use of against their Allies.
That the States promised, as they had already done, to contribute what in them
lay for the accommodation of the Northern powers, by all the good offices they
were capable to perform; and they protested that it was not their fault if the
peace were not presently brought to a happy conclusion.

That Answer made it evidently appear, that the States General had no design to
condescend; and indeed they began to think of other measures: for their
Deputies about Foreign affairs signed a second Treaty with Ambassador Temple,
grounded on this, That the States General having accepted the offers of his
most Christian Majesty, and engaged that his Catholic Majesty should do the
same as to what concerned him, they perceived to their grief that the Ministers
of France opposed the peace by the refusal of delivering up the places. That
therefore they were obliged to have recourse to his Majesty of Great Britain,
to the end that if his Mediation with the most Christian King should prove
ineffectual, he would protect so just a cause, and assist them with his forces.

This Treaty was still conditional as to the circumstance of time, and was not
to take effect but in case they could not obtain from the French King a
Declaration favorable to their pretensions, before the eleventh of August; and
that his Majesty absolutely refused to render up the places upon the exchange
of the Ratifications. In case of such a refusal, they agreed with his Majesty
of Great Britain to declare War against France, that by united force they might
oblige that King to embrace the conditions stipulated by that Treaty. These
conditions were far different from those which the French King proposed the 9th
of April; but they were only specified for the Empire, Spain, and Lorrain.

Whilst that Treaty was concluding at the Hague, and that the Ministers at
Nimueguen impatiently expected to know what resolution would at length be taken
on either side concerning the restitution of places, the Marquess de los
Balbases made some instances to the French Ambassadors to incline them to admit
of the Marquess de la Fuente, that he might not have the displeasure of being
come to that Assembly, and not have the power to sign the Treaty of peace; but
they would not consent until that Ambassador produced a plenary Commission in
the same form with the rest, and they were satisfied with a collationed copy
which the Nuncio's Auditor gave them, without receiving the visit of that
Ambassador, for the reason that I mentioned before.

The Marquess de la Fuente, that loves to be very gallant, resolved to treat
the Ambassadors Ladies after the Spanish fashion; but seeing they visited no
Ambassadors that wanted Ladies, they were invited in the name of the
Marchioness of Quintana, who did the Honors of the Feast. The two French
Ambassadors Ladies went thither, but the Ambassadors excused themselves,
because they visited not the Marquess de la Fuente. Whether it was there, or
that there had been before some difference betwixt the Servants of Monsieur
Colbert, and the Marquess de la Fuente, which might have occasioned some
resentment; it happened that this time a Lackey belonging to Monsieur Colbert
was somewhat ill used at the Gate; this Footman did the like to one of the
Servants of the Marquess de la Fuente, the first time that they came to the
house of Monsieur Colbert; in so much that the difference made such noise, that
the Nuncio thought fit to take cognizance of it, and to make both sides promise
that the matter should go no further.

The same day being the 29th, the French Ambassadors by a Courier-Express,
received Orders from Court, according to which they framed a Memoir, which they
gave to the Dutch Ambassadors, whereby they signified to them that the
satisfaction of a King in Alliance with the King their Master, being the sole
end that his Majesty proposed to himself in the present affair of the retention
of Places, he would willingly admit of all Propositions that might tend to that
end, and that for that effect he would come as far as St. Quentin, to hear what
the States had to propose to him by Deputies, assuring them that they would
find him so equitably inclined, that they should have no more cause to doubt of
the sincerity wherewith his Majesty had begun and continued to treat with them
concerning Peace.

The Dutch Ambassadors had nothing to answer to these Propositions; they said,
That they saw no expedient to remove that difficulty which was made about the
restitution of the places; that if the French Ambassadors had any, they might
propose them; and that their Masters did not think that a deputation upon that
subject would be to any purpose.

It seemed that the mistrust which the Ambassadors entertained mutually of one
another, upon occasion of the impediment that stopped the conclusion of the
Peace, and even infected their Servants; for the accommodation that I just now
spoke, which was made two days before, did not so appease either party, but
that on the last of July at night there happened amongst them a scuffle of far
more dangerous consequence.

That evening there was a great Rendezvous at the House of the Here Odyke, and
as it was on a Saturday they intended to stay by it, and drank to their wives.
The French Ambassadors had notice given them about ten of the Clock, that the
Servants of the Duke of St. Peter had been there with Arms. They immediately
acquainted the Nuncio with it, who had concerned himself in adjusting that
Quarrel, who was not indeed wanting in giving necessary Orders about it: But
about Eleven of the Clock at night, the Marquess de la Fuente his Pages, who
had been the Authors of the first difference, went and fired some Pistols about
the House of Monsieur Colbert, which made the Servants of the French
Ambassadors to provide against what might happen.

The Company being set down to Table at the House of the Here Odyke, the French
Ambassadors observed that all the Servants of the Spanish were about the Table,
and filled the Hall, whilst they were without attendance according to their
custom, that they might not pester the house they went to. This made them send
to call all their Gentlemen to come and wait on them, to stand behind them, and
to order their Pages to serve them. These Orders presently obeyed, so surprised
the Spaniards, and especially the Ladies, that for some time there was not a
word spoken at Table. The Here Odyke thought himself obliged to rise from
Table, and reassume the Ladies by inviting them to eat; but he was no sooner
up, but that the Spaniards and Company rose likewise.

The Marq. de los Balbases with his whole Family, and the Marquess de la
Fuente, took leave of the Company at the very instant, and went home in four
Coaches, without telling why, or informing themselves of the reason of that
proceeding.

The Spanish Ambassadors passed by the House of the Mareshal d' Estrades, which
was not twelve-score paces distant from thence, where all the Livery-men
belonging to the French Ambassadors were shut up, for fear of some disorder, to
which they were observed to be much inclined. Three Coaches had already past,
when some of those who were in the fourth with Arms, fired a Carabin at the
Gate of the Mareshal d' Estrades his House. Perhaps they did it only in
bravado, thinking they might safely do it, since they saw the Gate shut; but at
this shot, whereof the Bullets left impression on the Gate, all the Servants
that were in the House finding themselves insulted over, snatched up what Arms
they could find, opened the Gate, and ran after the Coaches, who again firing
upon them, were answered in the same kind.

The French Ambassadors were in the mean time in Discourse with the Here Odyke,
and complained of the extraordinary carriage of the Spaniards, and of their
numerous attendants; but the Gentlemen who were with them, having heard the
first shots, ran thither in all haste, and coming up with those Servants that
were about to attack the Coaches, with much ado stopped them. They came certainly
in the nick of time, for finding none on their side wounded, and none to engage
with but Coaches, wherein were so many Ladies of quality, amongst whom was the
Duchess of St. Peter ready to be brought to bed; they so ordered the matter by
threatening their people, that the tumult went no farther.

The Spaniards had cause of fear at that time; their Lacqueys threw away their
Flamboys, and their Coachmen put to a gallop through the Marketplace, and
along a descending Street at the end whereof they lodged. The whole Town was
alarmed at the noise of shot about two of the Clock in the morning. The
Town-guard sent the Court of Guard, and did not appear, and all people ran to
the windows. But a stop was put to this tumult in a trice, and amongst so many
people there were none but a Spanish Coachman wounded in the foot, and a French
Lacquey in the hand.

The Mediators, and especially the Nuncio, employed themselves next day to
compose that difference. The Spaniards would never confess publicly that they
were the aggressors. Nevertheless seeing it was but a scuffle amongst Servants,
it was consented to on either hand, that the French Ambassadors and the
Marquess de los Balbases, should each of them send to the Nuncio, and the Lord
Ambassador Jenkins, a Gentleman, with some Servants in Livery, to be delivered
into their hands, and to entreat them to cause what punishment they thought fit
to be inflicted on them, for transgressing the Orders that were made against
their carrying of Arms. But seeing the French Ambassadors had not owned the
Marquess de la Fuente for an Ambassador, they would not suffer him to make any
kind of satisfaction, though his Servants were known to have been the first
Authors of that disorder.

August 1678, this was put in execution the third of August; but the Spanish
Ladies having been extremely discomposed by an accident, which they unawares
expected, the French Ambassadors sent to compliment them severally. The
Gentleman whom they sent on that errand, spoke to the Marchioness de los
Balbases, her Husband being present, to this effect in Italian: That the
Ambassadors his Masters were vexed that an unexpected accident should have
given her Ladyship any trouble; but that they doubted not, but as she was
persuaded that they had always endeavored to entertain good correspondence, so
she did not believe but that they likewise condemned the least thing that might
displease her, and whatever was inconsistent with the respect that they
professed to have for persons of her quality. That Gentleman made such another
compliment to the Duchess of St. Peter, and the Marchioness de Quintana; and
some days after, the Assemblies for diversion, which were thought wholly laid
aside, began to be kept again as before.

At that time the Here Boreel Envoy Extraordinary from the States General
arrived at Nimueguen; his arrival was taken as a good presage for the Peace of
Holland; for the States, as I have said, had employed him to incline the Duke
de Villa Hermosa to accept the Conditions proposed by the French King. And the
interest of the Town of Amsterdam, the place of his birth, being very dear unto
him, it was not doubted but that he was very zealous for the Peace.

The Mareshal of Luxembourg sent at the same time to Nimueguen, the Sieur de
Villevart Captain of his Guards, to make a Protestation to the Mediators
against the detention of the Duchy of Luxembourg, which falling to the
heir-female, ought to belong to him in right of his Wife, as he proved by her
Genealogy, and by the Laws and Customs of that Duchy.

The Ambassador of Brandenbourg perceiving by the copy of the Memoir which the
French Ambassadors had given to the Dutch, for justifying the detention of the
Places, that the French King had openly declared that it was his design to make
use of them for carrying the War into the Dominions of the Elector his Master,
in favors of Sueden, made a long remonstrance, which he gave to the
Ambassadors of the States General. He represented to them that his Master,
their neighbor and good friend, had ventured all, and suffered much for the
preservation and settlement of their Republic; that he had grounds to hope
that the States General would not comply with so pernicious designs contrary to
the faith of their Treaties; but on the contrary, that they would be no less
careful to procure a Barrier on the side of the Rhine, than they had been for
obtaining one in Flanders; and that the preservation of the Country of Cleves
was no less necessary for their security than the frontiers of their own
Country.

On the second of August the French Ambassadors received Orders from Court by
an Express, to make new Instances to the States General to incline them to send
Deputies to Ghent, assuring them that they should there find his Majesty as
well disposed as they could desire, to surmount all obstacles that hindered the
conclusion of the Peace. It was generally believed that the French King did
really design to remove all those difficulties; but all the Confederates did
equally bestir themselves to hinder the States from complying with his
Majesty's intentions; and amongst the other reasons that they alleged to take
them off from sending Deputies, the disgrace which they said it was, that their
Peace was not treated by their Ambassadors in the general Assembly at
Nimueguen, made not the smallest impression on their minds.

In so much that by the answer which the Ambassadors and Envoy Extraordinary
made on the 4th, no hopes appeared of finding any expedient of removing the
impediment that retarded the Peace. They said that they were overjoyed to see
that the King still testified a sincere inclination for the Peace; but it
extremely troubled them that they found him so wedded to the satisfaction of
Sueden, of which neither Spain nor the States possessed any thing of that which
was to be the greatest part of it; that they would always profess the profound
respect they had for his Majesty, and that they would comply with him in any
thing he could desire of them; but that they perceived not to what purpose it
could be to send Deputies either to St. Quentin or Ghent; since they had no
expedient to offer, but the evacuation of the Places; that if it pleased his
Majesty to propose any one for facilitating the conclusion of the Peace, they
were ready to sign it; that they had not made any contrary engagements; but
with this respect to his Majesty, that they should take no effect, unless that
he refused to evacuate the places upon the exchange of the Ratifications.

The Confederates were not a little troubled to see that a word of the French
King could conclude a Peace, which overthrew all their projects, and banished
those hopes wherewith they still flattered themselves But that King had so
openly declared, that he made but one and the same affair of the interests of
Sueden and his own; that unless that Crown would desist, he could not abandon
the engagement he had taken to procure its satisfaction.

Seeing the Confederates were persuaded that an obstacle clogged with such
conditions could not easily be removed, and the rather that there remained but
five days of the time that the States had prefixed for entering into a League
with England, from which they could not flinch back, they despaired not of
seeing the Dutch Peace evanish. In the mean time the news that was brought to
Nimueguen of the birth of the Archduke, filled them all with joy, but
especially the Imperialists, who expressed it by public rejoicing and
largesses.

The French Ambassadors in the mean while received a Courier from Court; and
according to the Instructions that he brought them, they framed the Memoir of
the 6th, whereby they declared to the Ambassadors of the States General, that
seeing the King had no design in the retention of the places, but to comply
with the Ambassadors of Sueden, who judged it necessary for the
re-establishment of their affairs, his Majesty was willing to desist from that
pretension now that the same Ambassadors consented to it; but in that Memoir
the French Ambassadors added, that the States General should send Deputies to
their King, as well for adjusting the means of warranting the obligation of
Neutrality, into which they promised that Spain should enter, as to concert
expedients for procuring the satisfaction of Sueden.

Distrust had so seized the minds of some, and was so well fomented by those
who had cause to be afraid of that Peace, that it was not very strange that
that Proposition how simple soever it was, occasioned new jealousies in the
Dutch. They were afraid to be drawn in farther than they desired, and said that
since the King was pleased to remove the great impediment which hindered the
Peace; the French Ambassadors could no longer persist in demanding that they
should send Deputies to his Majesty, unless they had some reasons which
concealed designs quite different from the pretext they took; so that they
seemed further off than they were before.

The same Courier brought back the Declaration which the Suedish Ambassadors
had made to the French the 17. of July, concerning their desisting from the
pretension of retaining the places; but they were unwilling to communicate the
same, until they knew whether the King approved of it in the form that it was
drawn up in.

That Declaration bore, That notwithstanding the just and general design of the
French King to procure satisfaction to the King their Master; yet they left it
to his Majesty's consideration, whether after all the oppositions that he met
with in it, it was better to delay the restitution of the places in prospect of
a general peace, than to grant it for obtaining a separate peace with Spain and
Holland. That for their own parts who had no free correspondence with the King
their Master, and had instructions in general to conform to the pleasure of
France, they were assured that the King of Sueden would be satisfied with what
his most Christian Majesty thought fit to resolve upon; not doubting but that
his Royal prudence could find out means enough as suitable to his Glory, and
the re-establishment of his Ally, as the retention of places was.

To this the Ambassadors added 7. reasons to evince, that it was the common
Interest of both Crowns instantly to conclude a separate peace with Spain and
Holland, to take off those two Powers which supported their Enemies: and by
seven other reasons they made appear, That his most Christian Majesty might
have no less renown in accomplishing his designs by other means, that might
make evident to the world the sincerity of his intentions, and which at the
same time might give him opportunity to make the ill affected, who endeavored
to render them suspected, sensible of his resentment.

By this it seemed that the Suedish Ambassadors foresaw the future as well as
they could at the present time; however it be, they clearly saw that the
obstacles which hindered the peace were otherways insuperable; and since they
were obliged to consent to the evacuation of the places, they might hope that
the French King would not want other means of procuring full satisfaction to
the King of Sueden. Nevertheless that Prince found the retention of places of
such importance to the re-establishment of his affairs, that not being informed
in time of the urgent reasons which obliged his Ambassadors to consent to the
waving of that pretension, he professed himself much offended at their conduct.

The Count of Provana, Envoy from the Duchess of Savoy, arrived at Nimueguen
on the eigth; he came to demand of the Spaniards the portion of the Infanta,
Catharina, Great Grandmother to the young Duke of Savoy; or at least he came to
have that debt owned by an Article of the Treaty which was to be made betwixt
France and Spain, as it was at the Treaty of Munster, and the Pyrenean. What
repugnancy soever he met with on the Spanish part, the French obtained him his
demand.

Ambassador Temple finding the term which the States General had taken before
they would enter into the Engagements of the Treaty that he had signed with
them, now to draw near, came on the eighth to Nimueguen. All men were persuaded
that his errand was not to facilitate the signing of the Peace, nor to bring
the distant parties to a nearer accommodation as to the conclusion of it. His
proceedings appeared all along too contrary to the character of a Mediator to
make that to be believed. In the mean time on the 9th in the evening, the
Ambassadors of the States General had a long conference with the French: they
represented to them the short time that remained for ending that great work,
the accomplishment whereof was only retarded by a difficulty which ought not to
seem of great importance to them, in comparison of the great advantages which
the peace would produce; and seeing they had not time to translate into French
the Memoir which they had to give in concerning that, they contented themselves
to tell them the substance of it.

The French Ambassadors made no answer to the instances of the Dutch, but that
their hands were tied, and that without new Orders they could proceed no
further. At length the tenth came, which was the great day that was to give a
happy beginning to the repose of Europe, or quite quash all hopes of it for a
long time. Nevertheless there appeared no hopes that the peace could be signed
that day; and it could not be conceived why the refusal of a deputation, which
was not absolutely necessary, should put a stop to the accomplishment of so
great a good. The Hier Odyke returned to the Hague the 7th. because he had lost
all hopes of peace; but both by reason that he believed that the tenth day
might produce some change in affairs, and that he had Orders from the Prince of
Orange to make on the eleventh a protestation in name of the States against all
that could be concluded, if that day past without signing the peace; he came
back the same day in haste to Nimueguen.

The Hier Boreel, Envoy Extraordinary from the States General, went at nine in
the morning to wait on the Marshal D' Estrades, and gave him the Memoir made
the day before, wherein the States General thanked his Majesty for the care
which he still took to remove all obstacles that occurred in the conclusion of
the peace, not only with them, but Spain also; and prayed his Majesty to
consider, that the enemies of their State having represented to them the
evacuation of the places, and the peace at the same time as desperate, they had
been obliged to enter into engagements with the King of Great Britain, not to
stave off the peace; but to take from them the pretext they made use of, and to
clear his Majesty from being the cause of the same. That for that end they had
reserved to themselves a certain time, which being ready to expire, suffered
them not to make the deputation that his Majesty desired; but not doubting but
that since all the conditions were at present agreed upon, the peace would be
signed before the eleventh, they would not fail to make a deputation, not to
St. Quentin, but to Paris, to give his Majesty the testimonies of their
respect, and of the satisfaction they had from the conclusion of the peace.

M. Colbert, and the Count D' Avaux, went at the same time to the Marshal D'
Estrades house; but being unwilling to meet the Here Boreel there, because they
designed all three to go that morning to the House of the Dutch Ambassadors,
and to tell them their last resolution, they let the Here Boreel come out
without seeing him; and immediately after they all three took coach, and went
to the Dutch Ambassadors.

It was believed so certainly that the French Ambassadors had no power to sign
the peace, that Ambassador Temple himself advised those of Holland to press
them to it, because he really believed they could not do it. Nevertheless the
French Ambassadors declared to them in that conference, that they had power to
sign their Treaties of Peace and Commerce; and that it must be done the same
morning, if it were possible. The Dutch being no less persuaded than the rest
of the Confederates, that without new Orders the French could conclude nothing,
were no less surprised than overjoyed at that proposition. All the Articles
about which there had been any debate, were read over; and they agreed to sign
the Peace that day. But seeing that conference had lasted from ten of the clock
in the morning, until half an hour after two in the afternoon, and that some
time was still required to write over the Treaties fair, the signing was
delayed until the evening.

The French Ambassadors had found by experience, the importance of secrecy for
carrying on such a Negotiation to a happy end, in so great an Assembly, where
there were almost as many persons to be feared, as there were Ambassadors; and
where there was no less disposition to conceive jealousies of the conduct of
France, than it was easy for the Confederates to create new grounds of
distrust; and that was the cause why the French Ambassadors pretended to the
last, that they could not sign the peace, upon pretext of a very slight
obstacle, to the end that the conclusion having almost nothing to hinder it,
they might in an instant surprise those who expected nothing less than such a
change.

The length of the French and Dutch conference had already so alarmed the
Confederates, that they were all in commotion before it was ended; but they
were very sensibly touched when they came to know that the peace was concluded,
and that it was to be signed that day without any possibility of hindering it.
It troubled them the more, that they found England acting in their favors in
the same manner as they had long desired.

Ambassador Temple could not forbear to evidence his discontent to the French
Ambassadors, who went all three together to visit him in the afternoon, and to
acquaint him, that if he thought fit they would sign the Treaty at his house;
for upon pretext of some indisposition, he received them in his nightcap and
gown, and absolutely refused their offers: whether it was that he had
instructions so to do, or that he despaired not (for all the matter was gone so
far) but that before night some impediment might arise that might break off the
conclusion thereof.

That Mediator so little expected that the peace should be concluded that day,
that he had a Messenger ready in his house to part at midnight, and to carry
news to the States General of the expiration of the term, which engaged them to
the execution of the Treaty that they had signed: and that he might let the
French Ambassadors see more clearly that the Mediation approved not that
Treaty, he prayed them to put his own and Colleagues names out of the Preface;
saying, that the King their Master had not sent them as Mediators to a General
Treaty, there to sign a Separate Peace.

The Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg, with the Bishop of Munster, did
all they could to hinder the signing of the peace: They framed a protestation
in the terms that were most proper to express their resentment: They declared
to the Ambassadors of the States General, That the resolution they had taken of
abandoning their Confederates, was contrary to the faith of the leagues they
had so religiously contracted; that they conjured them by all that was sacred,
that they would not proceed with so much precipitation to the signing of a
separate peace, in a time when they had all taken vigorous resolutions, and
agreeable to the desires of the States General, in sending vast numbers of
Forces into the Spanish Netherlands for the relief of Mons, which was reduced
to extremity.

They further added, That such a hasty and precipitate conduct was unworthy of
a State, that had always governed it self with reason and justice; and that so
extraordinary a step would be an everlasting blot to the honor and reputation
of the States General: That if notwithstanding of all that, they were resolved
to proceed, and to enter into a Neutrality so contrary to their Engagements,
they protested against that separate Treaty, and against all the calamities
that Christendom in general, and the Princes their Masters in particular might
suffer by that separation.

Those who considered without passion the conduct of the Dutch, found that they
were unjustly accused of having acted without acquainting their Confederates;
since that by the public Declarations which they themselves had given to the
Dutch Ambassadors on the 10th and 20th of the preceding Month, they took notice
of the necessity to which the United Provinces were reduced. And the
States General were very far from acting with precipitation, seeing they signed
not the Peace until the last day of the time that they had agreed to with
England, in case that France removed (as was then done) all the impediments
that for more than six weeks obstructed the signing thereof. In a word, it was
an easy matter for the Northern Confederates, to exhort the Dutch to wait
patiently, when according to their own confession their affairs were in a
better state, and who daily found new advantages in continuing the War with
Sueden; whilst notwithstanding of all the forces that were in the Lowcountries,
the French King took as many places as he pleased, and Holland ran on into
utter ruin.

The desire of the States General being conform to the intentions of France as
to the Peace; nothing could stop the signing of it; all diligence was used to
have the Treaties ready, and at eleven of the Clock at night the Dutch
Ambassadors came to the house of the Mareshal d' Estrades in two Coaches with
many Flamboys to light them. The two Treaties of Peace and Commerce were there
signed betwixt eleven and twelve of the Clock at night, with a separate article
concerning the States which the Prince of Orange possesses in the Provinces
that are under the dominion of the French King.

The Ambassadors wished one another mutual joy for the re-establishment of the
good correspondence which had been interrupted by the War, and the joy was
great and reciprocal amongst all their servants and attendants; but it appeared
especially among the servants of the Dutch Ambassadors, who upon their return
knocked at all the Towns-peoples doors, calling to them in Dutch that the Peace
was made. Next day the Marquess d' Estrates who was at Nimueguen, parted to
carry those two Treaties to the French King; and the Ambassadors had the
satisfaction to find by the first dispatches they received, even before the
news was brought to Court, that all they had done should be conform to his
Majesty's intentions, who upon information of the signing of the Peace,
acquainted them that he was very well satisfied with the wise conduct they had
observed in so great an Affair.

Seeing the Spaniards were engaged to the States General jointly to accept of
the peace on the conditions proposed by France; and that the States by the
thirteenth Article of the Treaty which they had signed, were Guarantees to the
French King of all the obligations to which Spain was to be bound, and
especially to that of an exact Neutrality; the Dutch Ambassadors would lose no
time in promoting the peace of Spain, but on that occasion performed the office
of Mediators, as it was necessary they should, since the English had in a
manner excused themselves from mediating, by refusing to propose the conditions
of the ninth of April, and to sign the peace with the Dutch.

The news that were brought of the advantages which the French Army obtained
daily over the Forces of the Empire, made it probable that after the peace with
Spain, which began seriously to be treated, it would not be long before the
Emperor and Empire came to an accommodation. The Marshal de Crequi had ruined
the Fort of Kiel, at the end of the bridge of Strasbourg, on the side of
Germany; and having burnt the Bridge, and raised the Fort on the other side, he
very much incommoded that great City, and made them apprehensive of the same
fate that had befallen all those places which the French had attacqued.

In the mean while the States General, who looked upon the peace of Spain to be
as necessary for their repose, and the renewing of their Commerce, as their own
peace, made the success of that Negotiation their own particular affair. It
was, indeed, expected in Holland, that those two Treaties should be signed at
the same time; and therefore the joy which the people conceived upon the
conclusion of the former, was much lessened by the fear they had that the
second would not be so soon concluded as was desired; but seeing both parties
were equally desirous of the same, the French Ambassadors went first to the
Ambassadors of the States General, and there exchanged the projects of peace
betwixt France and Spain.

That they might the better facilitate the Treaty, and conclude it with as
little loss of time as possibly could be, they agreed to meet at the House of
the Dutch Ambassadors; and for that effect they gave one of their Chambers,
which was at the end of their Hall of Audience, to the French Ambassadors;
another that had an Entry from the Porch, was for the Ambassadors of Spain; and
all the Gentlemen belonging to the several Ambassadors, stayed in the Hall of
Audience, which served for a passage to the Here Beverning, who accompanied
with the Here Haaren, applied himself industriously to remove the difficulties
that happened in that Negotiation, carrying back and for, from one Chamber to
another, all the controverted Articles.

Mr. Beverning is no less a man of dispatch, than knowledge and ability; and
therefore in the Conferences of the thirteenth, which lasted four hours in the
morning, and as long after dinner, a great part of the Articles of the Treaty
with Spain, were condescended to, and agreed upon: but the fourteenth, being
Sunday, the Conferences were interrupted, and all people were surprised to hear
that Ambassador Temple parted that day from Nimueguen, about four of the clock
in the morning, for the Hague, where perhaps he had still hopes of bringing
some obstacle to the ratification of the Treaty, though he could not hinder the
signing of it.

In the mean while seeing it is almost impossible that so important an affair
as the Negotiation of a peace betwixt two potent States can be so happily
ended, and no unexpcted accident fall out that may hinder the conclusion of it;
several obstacles arose in the course of this Treaty which retarded it much
longer than was expected. It was hoped that the Conferences would be renewed on
the fifteenth; but that day the Dutch Ambassadors made report to the French,
that the design the French King had of retaining Bouvignes and Beaumont, put a
stop to the Treaty, and might quite break it off, If his Majesty persisted in
his pretensions to those two places, whereof the one is a little Town almost
ruined, situated upon a hill below Dinant; and the other a Bourg without
fortifications, lying toward France, in the Country betwixt the Meuse and the
Sambre.

It is true, that in the project of the peace no mention was made neither of
Bouvignes nor Beaumont; and that they were not named in the printed Conditions.
But to that the French Ambassadors made answer, That they were in the
Conditions which the French King had proposed to his Majesty of Great Britain,
who by his Ambassadors had communicated the same to all the Ministers of the
Princes that were at Nimueguen; and seeing his Majesty had in his Conditions of
the ninth of April named precisely all the places which he intended to restore
to Spain, and not all those which his Majesty resolved to retain, these were
necessarily comprehended amongst the last, seeing they were in actual
possession of the French, and of too small importance to be expressly named in
the Conditions.

Whilst these difficulties put a stop to the Treaty at Nimueguen, there was a
report spread abroad of the defeating of the French Army before Mons; into
which it was affirmed that great relief was put during the Fight. The truth
was, that the Prince of Orange having drawn together the Forces of Holland,
Spain, and the Confederates, resolved to attempt the relieving of it on the
fourteenth, afternoon; the hopes he had of succeeding in that enterprise with
so great forces, and of ending so many Campagns by a famous action, which till
then had been so unfortunate to him, concurring with the urgent instances of
the Marquess de Grana, Envoy extraordinary from the Emperor, were motives
powerful enough to incline him to give battle, and to make the best of so fair
an opportunity. Many have thought that that Prince had advice by an Express
from Nimueguen, that the peace was concluded there on the tenth; but however it
be, having had no information thereof from the States General, he was not
obliged to know it.

The Marshal of Luxemburgh, who had received advice of the Peace by an Express
from the French Ambassadors, could not persuade himself that the Enemies who
appeared on the Eminencies of the Abbey of St. Denis, had a design to attacque
him. But when it was past all doubt, and that he perceived they had possessed
themselves of the Village of Casteau, he passed over the rivolet that divided
his Camp from that post, with some Regiments of Horse, Dragoons and foot; these
Troops, led by the best Officers of the Army, marched through narrow passes,
gullies, and unfrequented ways, beset by the Enemies on the right and left, and
had a smart and bloody engagement; but the French retook Casteau and set it on
fire, with less loss on their side than on that of the Enemy's, though the
fight continued till night put an end to the action.

Next morning the Prince of Orange sent a Messenger to the Camp, to acquaint
the Marshal of Luxemburgh that the peace betwixt France and the States General
was signed the tenth; and that he had not received the news of it until that
night. He therefore desired, that since the countenance of affairs was changed,
he might be permitted to send a Convoy unto Mons. But the General refused it,
seeing he could not consent thereunto till he had received Orders from Court.

This action of the Prince of Orange received various constructions, and was
not altogether approved by the States General, who saw to their regret, so many
brave soldiers uselesly sacrificed to private interests. Nor was it well
relished in England, because two thousand of the ancient Regiments of his
Majesty of Great Britains forces, who were in the States service, were totally
routed in that Engagement. The particulars of that Fight being brought to
Nimueguen, undeceived the Confederates, who were at first informed that the
success of it was much more advantageous to them than indeed it was.

The Nuncio, who was very solicitous for promoting the General Peace, by means
of the Imperialists inclined all the Confederates to a Months truce. He was
hopeful that in that time the Negotiation might have some success; and that
Truce had been concluded, if the Bishop of Gurck, who then returned from
Cologn, had not broken all the measures that were taken in his absence. The
impediment which the Confederates observed to be put to the Peace of Spain,
made them less concerned to make their own. But the Here Beverning being gone
to the Hague, made many hope that that Minister would bring from thence some
expedient to remove the difficulties that put a stop to that Negotiation; and
that at the same time he would have assurance of the Ratifications of the Dutch
Peace.

In the mean time, since by the Letters which the States General wrote to the
French King the 22. of June, they entreated his Majesty to grant them Passports
for the security of their Merchant Ships; a Courier brought a great many from
Court to the French Ambassadors; but they would not exchange them at Nimueguen
for a like number with the Dutch Ambassadors. It behoved the Dutch to deliver
theirs first at Maestricht, into the hands of the Postmaster of France, who
was to acquaint the Court that he had received them. But seeing it was not just
that the subjects of the States General should have freedom to trade alone with
the Passports of France, whilst the subjects of that King might suffer
prejudice by the Spanish men of War, notwithstanding the Passport of the
States; the Dutch Ambassadors engaged themselves to procure from the Duke de
Villa Hermosa, as many Passports for the French, as France should give to the
States.

The French King continued to testify the sincerity of his intentions by
ratifying the Treaty of Peace without delay. On the 22. a Courier brought the
Ratification to Nimueguen; and at the same time his Majesty appointed the Count
d' Avaux to be his Ambassador Extraordinary to the States General. The terms
wherein his Majesty wrote to them on that subject, testified the affection that
he had for that Republic, by the choice he made of a subject whom he judged
the fittest to renew the ancient ties of amity which the late times had
interrupted.

The Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg, who could not but with great
trouble see the great disposition that appeared for the Peace of Spain, made
the same day a vigorous Remonstrance to the Ambassadors of that Crown. They
doubted not, but that the glory that was to be acquired in signifying the same
constancy after the unexpected signing of the Dutch Peace, would render them
steadfast and unshaken in the observation of their Treaties of Alliance. They
said that their Masters desired nothing more than the repose of Christendom;
but that their Enemy proposed the Law to them, instead of admitting a Treaty
upon the conditions which might conduce to a General Peace.

These Ambassadors employed afterward all their Eloquence to divert Spain from
the course they saw it taking; they represented to them, That the constancy of
that Crown was alone capable to reclaim those who had deviated from their duty
through the influence of the Cabal, and the levity of some who understood not
how dear faith and sincerity ought to be to a Free State. That what France left
to Spain by that Peace, in the Netherlands, was rather to exhaust its
Treasures, than that they intended to leave that crown in the peaceable
possession thereof. That they hoped Spain would not yield to the common Enemy
the glory of being more constant in favors of their Allies, than themselves.
In fine, that if their Masters found themselves forsaken and abused, they would
have care another time how they helped to quench the fire, since they saw
themselves so ill rewarded for their pains.

On the 24. the Articles that were made betwixt the two Armies, were brought to
Nimueguen. They were both at the same time to draw off to an equal distance
from before Mons; but the Troops that blocked up the place, were not to retire
till two days after. In the mean time there were various reports of the
Ratification of the States General. All the Provinces at that time held their
several Assemblies to give their resolutions as to that point to the States,
who seemed less inclined than the Provinces to keep their word, and correspond
with the exactitude with which France seemed to act in execution of the signed
Treaty.

The Here Beverning returned to Nimueguen on the 27. where having conferred
with Ambassador Jenkins, who had received new instructions from England, he had
audience of the French Ambassadors, and would have them to understand that his
Masters were so far engaged to procure the peace of Spain, that they would be
very glad to see the difficulties that hindered the conclusion of it, removed,
before they ratified the Peace which they themselves had made; and that his
Majesty of Great Britain had by Mr. Hyde his Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, whom he had sent purposely to the Hague, made very pressing
instances to them on that subject in favor of Spain.

The truth is, the expressions of the Memoir which that Ambassador gave to the
States General on the 25th agreed not with the procedure that England had
hitherto held for promoting of the peace. That King made known to the States
that he was surprised to understand that they had signed a separate peace
without including Spain, and without any Guarantee for the evacuation of the
places within the time limited. That since the new pretensions which France
formed to the County of Beaumont and the Town of Bouvignes, retarded the
accomplishment of the peace, his Majesty thought that the condition put into
the last Treaty was fallen; and that he and the States General were equally
obliged to enter into a joint War against France. That if the States would
refuse to ratify what they had signed at Nimueguen, his Majesty of Great
Britain offers to declare actual War against France.

The States General having already made great instances to the King of England,
that he would use his power with the French King for obtaining for them the
Neutrality of the Country of Cleves and Juliers, the Ambassador of his Majesty
of Great Britain by the same Memoir assured them, That the King his Master
knowing it to be no less necessary to the States, that their Provinces should
be covered on that side, than on the side of Flanders, he was ready upon that
account to enter with them into what measures they should judge convenient; and
that the obtaining of that security depended only on themselves.

In the mean time the Forces that were newly raised in England for the
assistance of the Low Countries, passed daily over into Flanders by Ostend.
Some of them at Bruges upon a mistake had suffered a Riot from the Rabble upon
the account of Religion; and the Flemings, who are Catholics, were not well
pleased with Heretical succors. But the Spaniards, who found in their
Confederates, and the King of Great Britain, so great a disposition of
maintaining their Interests, rested satisfied, and showed no more desire for
the conclusion of the peace.

They found some advantage by that delay; for the French Forces being now by
the Treaty of Mons retired out of the Spanish Territories, attempted no
enterprise; and France being uncertain of the issue of the Spanish peace, and
of the ratification of the Dutch Treaties, their Forces could not march into
Germany, where they had already ruined the affairs of the Emperor and Empire.
Besides, the Spaniards by the debates which they started concerning the
difficulties in which they were so well supported, in some manner saved the
honor of their Nation; and they had at least the advantage of not receiving
the Law without disputes and oppositions; which was so far from rendering their
conditions worse, that it could not, on the contrary, but procure for them more
advantageous terms.

On the first of September 1678. the French Ambassadors by an Express from
Court received new instructions, and in the conference which they had the same
day with the Dutch Ambassadors, they told them, That for the good of the
general peace, they had power to remit in their pretensions. So that next day
the conferences were again renewed at the house of the Dutch Ambassadors, who
carried the propositions and answers back and for, betwixt the French and
Spaniards, who were in several rooms. The Articles in controversy were
adjusted on the mornings and forenoons meetings. Next day they continued; but
the difficulties that were raised concerning the condition of the places which
the French King was to deliver up, as well in respect of Ammunition and
Artillery, as of the Fortifications, hindered the Treaty from any great
progress.

Those whom it most concerned to prevent the peace with Spain, omitted nothing
that could put a stop to it; and upon a pretext that France kept not to the
sole Articles of the ninth of April, they made great noise in England, and
engaged his Majesty of Great Britain so far, by many proceedings conform to
their intentions, that in the sequel it would not be easy for him to abandon
any of their concerns. One of the chief means they made use of at Nimueguen, to
break off the peace with Spain, was to get the Mediators to propose a Truce for
six months, during which they hoped that the differences of all the Princes who
were engaged in the War, might be happily ended. But hitherto their opinions as
to that were quite different, seeing they had refused all the Truces that had
been proposed to them. In the mean time the Northern Confederates made great
preparatives for putting in execution a new enterprise, which they designed
upon the Isle of Rugen.

Matters were in such a state, that the decision of one difficulty seemed to be
the necessary cause of another; and that so great an affair as Peace could not
be brought forth without great stratagems. The seventh and eighth were spent in
the Here Bevernings frequent coming and going to demand of the French
Ambassadors the clearing of several doubts which the Spaniards raised to all
the Articles of the Treaty, saying that they had secret notices, which being
but confused, rendered them scrupulous and distrustful upon the smallest
appearances. In fine, they demanded an explication concerning the Chattelleny
of Aith, which was the ground of a difficulty of little less consequence than
that of Bonvignes and Beaumont.

Since that Chattelleny was yielded to the French King by the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle, his Majesty dismembered several Villages from it, and adjected them to
the government of Tournay, and in that state the King pretended to deliver back
this Chattelleny; but whether the Spaniards thought fit of themselves to demand
that explication, or that they were put upon it by others, they desired a
particular clause concerning that to be put into the Treaty; and upon the
refusal of the French Ambabassadors, they framed a Memoir, which they gave to
the States General.

They said that the dismembring of the Chattelleny of Aith made by the French
King, absorped the chief part thereof; that no less lay at stake than seventy
Villages, and the City of Leuze, which is but a league and a half distant from
Aith. That since his most Christian Majesty had in the conditions made no
reservation of the dependencies of that Chattelleny, as he had of Verge and
Memin, depending on Courtray, the French Ambassadors by refusing the clause
demanded, showed but a captious fetch, that they might restore to Spain but a
part of so considerable a Chattelleny.

The French were in great pain to know what could have given the Spaniards
ground at that time to make that reflection upon the dismembring of the
Chattelleny of Aith, and to think that the design of the French was to make
their advantage of the omission that might have been made thereof in the
Treaty. The truth is, the Spaniards would have had no ground of complaining if
Aith and its Chattelleny should have been restored to them in the condition
that it has been so long in.

They could not imagine what was the reason of this new emergent; but it was
obvious, that the Prince de Lignes, who has a great Estate in the dismembered
part of that Chattelleny, having sent a Secretary to Nimueguen upon the account
that it concerned him to have his Lands return again to the Spanish Dominion,
had without doubt given the Spaniards information of that affair, and of the
necessity of inserting a clause concerning it in the Treaty.

The Here Beverning acted not in that affair with the same zeal as he had
formerly made appear. The distasts he had received the last time that he had
been at the Hague, made him proceed much more slowly than his usual application
did allow: for after all the pains he had taken to end a War which the United
Provinces could no longer support, he little expected to have his conduct
blamed. Nevertheless they endeavored to let him see that there were several
faults and considerable omissions in the Treaty which he had signed.

The five principal were these: First, that in the Preface the French King
seemed to be the Protector of the States General, though it contain no term but
what is conform to his Majesty's Letters, and the answers of the States.
Secondly, That the Neutrality to which the States General were engaged by that
Treaty, was indefinite, and by consequent might be extended beyond the present
War. Thirdly, That the Here Beverning had exceeded his commission, in having
obliged the States to warrant the Neutrality of Spain. Fourthly, That he had
omitted an Article of Amnistie and Oblivion, which ought mutually to be
stipulated in all treatties of Peace. And Lastly, That he had forgot to mention
the Barriere, which the French King granted to Spain, in consideration, and for
the security of the States General.

Though most of those faults were more grounded on the discontent of those who
regretted the conclusion of the Peace, than on any important or dangerous
consequence; yet the French King was willing to satisfy the States General in
any thing that might farther concern them. And seeing the indefinite term of
their Neutralitie, and the warranting of that into which Spain was to enter,
were the points that appeared to be of greatest importance. the explication
thereof which the French Ambassadors gave to the Dutch, according to the desire
of the States, was approved and ratified by his Majesty at Fontainblean, the
5th of September, in the same manner as if it had been inserted in the Treaty.

The French Ambassadors understood by the Letters which Courier brought them on
the 9th, that the Court was persuaded that there would be greater difficulty in
concluding the Treaty with Spain, than had been at first imagined; and that was
partly the cause why the French King gave Orders to the Count d' Avaux to go
with all diligence to the Hague, where his Majesty judged his presence
necessary. But seeing affairs appeared then to be in a better state at
Nimueguen than was believed at Court, that Ambassador departed not. However
another Courier having on the 10th brought a compromise from the King, whereby
his Majesty referred to the States General the decision of all the differences
that retarded the conclusion of the Peace with Spain. The Count d' Avaux
arrived on the 11th at the Hague, where it was not difficult for him to observe
that there were many there fully inclined to introduce (if they could) some
change in the State, whereinto the signing of the Peace had put the affairs of
the United Provinces.

Nevertheless it was already known, that all the Provinces had consented to the
ratification of the Peace, some absolutely, and others upon conditions which
they submitted to the determination of the States; insomuch that before the end
of six weeks the Ratifications might be exchanged if no difficulties stopped the
conclusion of the Peace with Spain.

In the mean time the English forces that in so great number came over into the
Low Countries, bred great umbrages in Holland; the people could not tell what
need there was of an Assistance that came not till the peace was concluded. And
seeing they were not as yet totally cured of the doubts they had conceived of
the sincerity of France, no more than of the jealousy that some entertained of
the too great authority of the Prince of Orange; most part knew not but the
peace which was made, might be an occasion to make them fall the more easily
under a dominion, the increase of which was possibly one of the reasons that
made them embrace the peace.

In fine, a Courier on the 13th having brought Letters from the French King,
whereby his Majesty removed all obstacles that hindered the conclusion of the
peace with Spain; the Count d' Avaux returned on the 17th to Nimueguen, and in
the Conference which he had that day at the Dutch Ambassador's house, that
lasted till two of the clock afternoon, all the Articles were agreed upon, and
that the peace should be signed that evening. The Spanish Ambassadors caused
the Treaty to be translated into Spanish, and the Translation was examined by
Mr. Colbert, who found two or three words to be amended, which did not exactly
quadrate with the sense of the French.

Seeing the Dutch Ambassadors had been the Mediators of the Peace betwixt
France and Spain, their house was thought the most convenient place to sign the
Peace at. They caused their Hall of Audience to be prepared for that Ceremony.
They entered it by a great door about the middle; the Chair of State stood at
one end, on the left hand of the door, and the Chimney just opposite on the
right. The French Ambassadors room had an Entry into the Hall on the side of
the Chimney; and that which was appointed for the Ambassadors of Spain, had its
Entry on that of the Chair of State. There was a long Table set cross the Hall,
one end of it toward the door, and the other toward the windows; but seeing
the French would not have the Chair of State to be on the Spanish side, it
behoved to be removed; and the Chimney which was on the right hand as one
entered, making too great a distinction on that side, the Dutch Ambassadors
caused it to be covered with a piece of Tapistry, that none in their house
might have any cause of discontent.

The French Ambassadors came to the Dutch Ambassadors House about nine of the
clock at night with several Coaches filled with Gentlemen. They were no sooner
in their Chamber, but the Here Beverning gave them notice that all things were
ready; and having the Treaties in his hand, he went and sat down at the upper
end of the Table, and the Here Haaren his Colleague at the other end. At the
same time were opened the doors of the two Chambers, and the Ambassadors
advanced in equal pace from their several Apartments, walking all three a
breast. As matters were disposed, the Ambassadors of Spain had two
disadvantages; first, that they were on the left hand as they entered the Hall:
and next, that advancing to the Table in the rank which they were to keep, the
Marquess de los Balbases was forced to give his Colleagues the right hand,
because otherways he could not sit opposite to the Marshal d' Estrades, nor at
the upper end of the Table.

All the Ambassadors sat down at the same time, the Gentlemen on either side
standing at the backs of their Chairs. The Marshal d' Estrades, and the
Marquess de los Balbases, took each of them a Pen, and at the same time signed
the Treaty which the Here Beverning presented to them. Then the other
Ambassadors took the Treaty and the Pen, and signed it in the same colume,
every one on the right hand of his Treaty, and exchanged them after the first
signing. The French signed that of Spain, and the Spaniards that of France in
one colume, to the left of the former, leaving room for the seals, which the
Secretaries took care to place at the end of every subscription. This being
done, all the Ambassadors arose, and complimented one another standing, during
the space of half a quarter of an hour; after which they returned to their
Chambers as before, from whence they severally retired to their Lodgings.

Next day after the signing of the Treaty of Peace, the Count d' Avaux with his
whole Train parted for Nimueguen by water in quality of Ambassador
Extraordinary to the States General, who told him upon his arrival, that the
Ratification of the Treaty was sent to Nimueguen, where they were exchanged on
the 20th with all the testimonies of mutual satisfaction among the Ambassadors,
who gave marks of their good intelligence by feasting and mutual rejoycings.

The Northern Confederates were at that time more than ever inclined to consent
to a truce; but the Suedes would not absolutely agree to it: they would have
willingly accepted of it in Pomerania, because they had ground to fear that the
great losses they had there sustained, might be followed by others more
considerable; but they were not for it in Schonen, where their affairs were in
a better condition, by the taking of Christianstadt, which they had at length
made themselves Masters of. However the losses they felt in Pomerania, were of
greater importance to them than all they could gain elsewhere. The Confederates
at Nimueguen were at that time much surprised at the news of the death of the
Bishop of Munster; they had reason to fear that it might bring some alteration
to the projects that they were forming. However the great preparations that the
King of Denmark and Elector of Brandenbourg were making against the Isle of
Rugen, were not at all retarded. The Elector embarked his forces in several
ships, and was himself present at their landing; which was so happily
conducted, that in less than a day he rendered himself Master of the whole
Isle, and without losing of time he went and besieged Stralsond, which he took
two days after he had begun to batter it.

October. 1678. The peace with the United Provinces was proclaimed at the Hague
on the 28th of September; and on the fifth of October public rejoycings were
solemnized throughout all the Towns of the United Provinces, except Nimueguen,
because that Town being Neutral, and appointed for the Treaty of the General
Peace, it did not seem expedient that they who by a separate Treaty were freed
from the calamities of War, should therefore rejoice in presence of those who
still lay under the burden thereof. And it was upon that account that the
Ambassadors of the Emperor and of the other Confederates, desired the
Ambassadors of the States General that they would not suffer any public
rejoicing to be made in that place before the conclusion of the General Peace.

The French King, who seemed to be no less desirous of the peace of the Empire,
than of that of Spain, put himself in a posture of making the Princes who were
engaged in that War, to consent to it; and for that end he caused a
considerable body of his forces to march into the Country of Juliers under the
command of Monsieur Calvo, who possessed himself of Aix la Chapelle, whither
part of the Ammunition of Maestricht, which then was evacuating, in order to
its being rendered up to the States General, was transported, the rest being
carried by water to Huy, which was put in a condition necessary for the
security of the Magazines.

What inclination, in the mean time, the French King made appear to the peace
of Germany, the Ministers of the Emperor still labored to persuade the Diet at
Ratisbon that his Majesty desired no peace, seeing he proposed an Alternative
of which both parts were equally impractible. They said that the Emperor could
not render Philipsbourg, because by the Leagues which he had made with most of
the Princes of the Empire, he had obliged himself to demolish it, as a place
prejudicial to their liberty; and that if he delivered up Fribourg, he would
thereby leave all Brisgow and the Forest-Towns under the jurisdiction of
France, and give the French a footing in the Empire with more advantage than
they had before by the possession of Philipsbourg.

For overthrowing these reasons, which were thought pretexts to stave off the
Peace, and to render the intentions of the French King suspected; the French
Ambassadors declared in his Majesty's name, That he consented to the
demolishing of Philipsbourg; and that to remove from the Emperor and Empire all
causes of jealousy and fear concerning Brisgow and the Forest-Towns, he was
satisfied with the City of Fribourg and three Villages under its jurisdiction.
This proposition blasted all the reasons of impossibility which were alleged
against the practability of the Alternative on which the peace of Germany
depended.

In the mean time all diligence was used to put Maestricht in a condition of
being rendered up to the States General according to the intent of the Treaty
of peace. And in effect, the Count d' Avaux having given his word to the
States General that it should be evacuated by the sixth of October; the same
day they took possession of it, with the greater satisfaction to the Dutch,
that there were some still amongst them who continued to possess them with
distrust, and to persuade the people that France intended only to cheat them,
and that the King would not surrender Maestricht.

The French Forces that possessed almost all the passes on the Rhine, were very
uneasy to all the Neighboring Princes who were engaged in the War. The Duke
of Newbourg, who had most reason to fear, was the first that desired of the
States General that he might be comprehended in their Treaty, and enjoy the
benefit of the Peace according to the 19th Article, which gave them power to
name their Allies within the space of six weeks, that they might be included in
the Treaty. That Prince had the greater reason to hope that by this means he
might put himself out of danger, in that he was really an Ally of the States,
and that he had declared that he would accept the Peace before the expiration
of the six weeks.

The Elector of Mayence and Treves made the same Declaration, and the same
demand to the States General, by a Memoir which the Baron of Leyen presented in
their names at the Hague. But what instances soever the States made in favor
of those Princes, and what assurances soever they gave that the Emperor himself
would ere long accept the Peace, they could not obtain any thing in a matter
which they thought just, and conform to the Article of their Treaty, before
they heard the reasons which the French alleged against that pretension.

On the 30th the Marquess de los Balbases returned from Brussels, whither he
went after the signing of the Peace with Spain. It was thought that he brought
the Ratification of the Treaty, because the six weeks wherein the exchange was
to be made, were expired the day before. Nevertheless he brought it not: but
the French King having sent an Express to the Count d' Avaux, that Ambassador
declared to the States on the fifth of November 1678. that notwithstanding the
negligence of Spain, his Majesty was willing in consideration of them, to
prolong the time of the exchange of the Ratifications until the 20th of that
month. And by the next Courier that came, news was brought that in compliance
with the instances of the Ambassadors of the States General, his Majesty had
granted the whole Month.

At that time the Plenipotentiary of Lorrain declared, That his Master accepted
the Peace upon the terms proposed by the French King the 9th of April; and at
the same time chose the second part of the Alternative, by which Nancy was to
remain to his Majesty, who in exchange thereof gave him the City of Toul upon
the conditions specified in the Article of the Kings project which concerns
that Prince. The Nuncio who promised himself that all these particular
acceptations of Peace would terminate in the conclusion of the General Peace,
employed all his care and pains with much zeal to incline the Emperors
Ambassadors, and the Ministers of other Catholic Princes, not to defer any
longer the complishment of so great a blessing.

The French King in the mean time well perceived that these Princes of the
Empire consented only to a separate Peace, in prospect of putting themselves
out of danger of his Arms, and not with design to conclude it upon conditions
that respected the Empire in general, seeing they desired no more but to be
comprehended in the Dutch Treaty, and consented not to the reinforcement of the
Treaties of Westphalia, which granted free passage to his Majesty's forces
through the Empire, so often as it was necessary they should march that way for
the execution of the same Treaties. And therefore the King yielded not to the
desire of those Princes, though the States General, who made it a point of
honor to procure them the benefit of their peace in the midst of War,
pretended they had right to have them included in their Treaty.

The Count de Bouvean d' Epense, whom the King permitted the Spring before to
take a journey to Berlin, to see the Elector of Brandenbourg his old Master,
about that time came back to Nimueguen: though he was wholly addicted to the
Interests of his Electoral Highness before the War, yet his Majesty did not for
all that repose less confidence in him; for upon his return from Berlin,
finding the King in Flanders after the taking of Ghent, his Majesty ordered him
still to wait upon him, designing to make use of all opportunities that might
offer to renew a good correspondence with the Elector. And therefore he came to
Nimueguen with particular instructions from the Court to contribute what he
could to that peace; and the French Ambassadors acted nothing without his
consent, in the transactions that passed at Nimueguen concerning that
Negotiation.

The Imperial Ambassadors could not as yet resolve to give their consent to the
entire confirmation of the Treaties of Westphalia; it was the thing that
created them most trouble, and which was most prejudicial to the Authority that
the Emperor had acquired during this War. They declared, as the rest did, that
his Imperial Majesty accepted the peace; but they consented not to the passage
of the French forces through the Empire, and they despaired not but that they
might even derogate from these Treaties, by those which they were to make with
France and Sueden. And as to the alternative of Fribourg and Philipsbourg, they
declared that the Emperor would yield it to the King in the manner as the
French Ambassadors proposed.

Seeing the States General still pretended that those Princes ought to be
included, who being their Allies, declared within six weeks after the exchange
of the Ratifications, that they accepted the Peace. The French King made appear
by the Memoir, that the Count D' Avaux gave them on the 18th of November, 1678.
that in that juncture the private Princes of the Empire could not be considered
separately from the Emperor and Empire; and that they could not neither accept
a separate peace upon the conditions proposed by the King, seeing his Majesty
had made no conditions for them in particular, but only for the Emperor and
Empire in general; and that they ought all to be comprehended in one and the
same Treaty.

That reason had not been so good in respect of the Emperor, who was expressly
mentioned in the French Kings project; and the States General would have
willingly been astricted to the inclusion of him alone; but it was represented
to them, that his Imperial Majesty could less pretend to the benefit of the
Dutch Peace, than any other Prince, since the term of six weeks after the
exchange of the Ratifications was expired without any formal acceptance of the
conditions of the Peace by the Ambassadors, in the manner that they were
proposed, for the Emperor had not as yet consented to the passage which the
Treaties of Westphalia give the King through the Empire; so that the not
consenting to the corroboration of the same Treaties, the fulfilling wher^^f
was to give repose to Germany, m^^^ ^^^l the Emperor's acceptance of the p^^^^

The States General desisted from that pretension; and seeing that the
Spaniards did not ratify the peace, and that it was uncertain what might be
the effect of this long delay, they began to fear that if the time granted by
the French King should expire, and Spain not ratify the Treaty, the War might
begin afresh in the Neighboring Provinces to them, and that they might be
thereby deprived of the most considerable advantage which they expected from
their peace. Upon this consideration the States besought his Majesty further to
prolong the time of the exchange of the Ratifications; but the King on the 30th
not only acquainted them, that in consideration of them he was willing still to
grant fifteen days as the longest delay; but his Majesty also assured them,
that he was ready to remove all the apprehensions they might have for the
Spanish Towns on their frontiers; and that he would even deliver up into their
hands those places which he was willing to render to Spain, to be kept by them
until the consummation of the peace with that Crown.

At the same time the French King required of the States General, that in
pursuance of the Treaty of peace, they would cause to be paid to him the
Arrears of Contributions of the Country of Kuyck, the Mayordom of Bois-le-duc,
the Barony of Breda, and of the Marquisate of Bergen-op-zoom; and that they
would draw their forces out of the Country of Liege: that otherways his
Majesty would have cause to take the longer abode of their forces in that
Country, as a violation of the Treaty, and a tacit assistance given to the
Prince of Liege his Enemy.

The Negotiation of the peace of the Empire, proceeded still very slowly, and
the Spaniards made no haste to exchange their Ratifications; and therefore his
Majesty caused to be declared to the Ambassadors of the Emperor, That if in the
Month of December they did not conclude the peace, his Majesty would not
afterward consent to it upon the same conditions. And to oblige Spain to hasten
the Ratification, the King ordered that Ghent and the Country of Waas shoule
pay contributions proportionable to the great number of Forces that he was
obliged to maintain in the Low Countries until the ratification of the peace.
So that all the Country which was to be rendered to Spain, suffered more in
that short time, than it had done during the whole course of the War; and all
that, that it might not be said that the Spaniards had abandoned the Emperor by
ratifying their peace before that his Imperial Majesty had concluded his own.

So great was the terror at that time throughout the whole Duchy of Cleves,
that upon the noise of the approach of the French Forces, most part of the
Inhabitants left the Country, not doubting but that notwithstanding the
contributions that they should pay, the French King would possess himself of
the Duchy of Cleves, to oblige the Elector of Brandenbourg to give
satisfaction to Sueden, the affairs whereof could not be worse than they were
in Pomerania, seeing that Gripswald, which was the only place that the Suedes
retained in that Province, had surrendered to the Elector of Brandenbourg, and
that by that means the Suedes were wholly beat out of Germany.

The King of Denmark nevertheless was sensible, that notwithstanding the
advantages that he and his Allies might have over Sueden, France had so
declared for the entire satisfaction of that King, and so publicly espoused
his Interests, that it was in vain to imagine they could obtain other
advantages from that War, than what the French King thought fit to allow them.
In prospect of this, his Danish Majesty caused his Envoy at the Hague to
negotiate secretly with the Count D' Avaux: That Prince protested that he
resigned all his Interests into the French Kings hands; that he desired no
other Mediation than that of his Majesty; and that he would conform to any
thing that it should please him to appoint. But no positive answer was made to
all these general propositions; there was a necessity of coming to the precise
point, if any thing was to be expected to be done.

The Spanish Ambassadors received the Ratification of the Peace in the
beginning of December 1678. but seeing the French King had granted them until
the 15th for making the exchange, they endeavored to draw some advantage from
the short time that still remained; saying that they could not deliver the
Ratification until they had the interpretation which they demanded of some
Articles of the Treaty, and especially concerning the Messineses, whom they
would have excluded from the Treaty, which extended an Oblivion to all the
Rebel-subjects of his Catholic Majesty.

The reason that was given why the Spaniards did not what they could to hinder
the Messineses from enjoying the pardon that the French King procured them by
the Treaty, was that several Grandees of Spain had obtained the confiscation of
the chief Rebels of Messina; and that the interest they had to bring things so
about, that by virtue of the Treaty they should not have power to dispose of
their Estates, was one of the chief reasons that had so long deferred the
Ratification, and by consequent had ruined so many private Families in Flanders.

The Spaniards likewise demanded, That in case the Commissioners that should be
appointed by the two Kings to make exchange of the Villages which they should
find prejudicial to the settling of the limits, could not agree amongst
themselves as to the value of the exchanges, the difference should be referred
to the determination of the King of England. But the French Ambassadors
condescended to none of those unseasonable demands, being resolved rather to
break off, than to innovate the least thing in the Articles that were agreed
upon.

The States General made even a Declaration to the Count D' Avaux on the 13.
that they not only desisted from the inclusion which they pretended to give to
the Emperor, and Princes of the Empire; but that they would likewise abandon
the Spaniards, if they ratified not the Treaty within fifteen days, being
unwilling to importune the French King for a longer delay; and that they hoped
in a short time to incline the Emperor to accept the peace.

In effect, the Imperialists on the 12. gave their counter-project, wherein
nevertheless they changed their mind as to the option that they had already
made of Philipsbourg, and added several Articles which were not conform to what
was agreed unto with the Mediators. They demanded that the French King should
indempnifie all those of the Empire who had suffered any damage during the War.
That the Princes of Furstembourg should by their submissions crave pardon of,
and make public satisfaction to the Emperor for having espoused contrary
Interests. And that the King should not have the Sovereignty over all the Ways
that he demanded in Lorrain.

These propositions quite contrary to the project which the French Ambassadors
gave to the Mediators, who approved all the Articles therein contained, made
the sincerity of the desire and conduct of the Imperialists to be doubted of,
or at least they made their ordinary irresolution appear; particularly touching
the choice of the Alternative; about which having once declared themselves,
they ought not to be admitted to change again. But the truth was, they never
imagined that the French King liked Fribourg as well as Philipsbourg, but that
yielding to him the latter, they would put his Majesty to a plunge, insomuch
that the desire that he would have to make them change their choice, might
produce some advantage for them. But they were no less mistaken in that point,
than in their hopes of getting new Articles inserted into the Treaty; for the
French Ambassadors would not admit of any, nor derogate in the least from the
Treaties of Westphalia, except in the Alternative of Fribourg for Philipsbourg.

The Spaniards had now spun out the time until the end of the last delay which
the French King had granted to them, but found no way longer to defer the
exchange of the Ratifications, nor any hopes that the French Ambassadors would
grant them the least thing of what they remanded since the signing of the
Treaty. So that on the 15. they delivered their Ratification. The exchange was
made without any ceremony at the House of the Ambassadors of the States
General, whither the Secretaries went to fetch them. But the French Ambassadors
finding that the Ratification of Spain was not altogether in the form that it
ought to have been in, they declared that they accepted it no otherways than in
so far as it should please the King their Master.

The Imperialists finding the French Ambassadors as inflexible in respect of
them, as they had been in regard of the Spaniards, despaired of obtaining
liberty to change the choice which they had already made of the Alternative; so
that on the 24. they declared that they stood to the Election that they had
made of Philipsbourg; and that they might not spend the whole Month, after
which the French Ambassadors had declared to them that the King would not
adhere longer to the conditions of the 9th of April, they entered into public
conference, that they might in good earnest endeavor the conclusion of the
peace. These Conferences were held in the Townhouse, where the Ambassadors of
the Emperor, France, and Sueden, with the Mediator Jenkins, had all separate
rooms.

Though the Nuncio employed himself very usefully for promoting the peace, yet he
appeared not as public Mediator, because Rome and England could not join in
one Mediation; and that England was admitted by all the other Princes who were
concerned in that Negotiation. The Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg
endeavored presently to stop the course of those conferences; and represented
vigorously to the Imperialists, that every step they made, were so many
breaches in the Treaties of Alliance which his Imperial Majesty had made with
the Princes their Masters.

The Ambassadors of the States General perceiving that in the few days which
remained of the Month, it was not possible to conclude a Treaty wherein so many
difficulties appeared in the very beginning, prayed the French Ambassadors to
prolong the delay which that King had granted. Their answer was, that they had
no power to do it; but that nevertheless they believed that if the Treaty were
in readiness to be signed, his Majesty might give a new delay.

In the first Session of Conferences, the four first Articles of the Project of
the Imperialists, were reduced to one; the French refusing to fill the Treaties
with needless Articles, and such especially as only concerned those matters
which France pretended to be sufficiently adjusted by the Treaties of
Westphalia, whereof they demanded the corroboration and accomplishment. And
seeing by the treaty the Emperor and all the Princes of the Empire were not
only to remain neutral, but were also to take from the Enemies of France and
Sueden all means whereby they might make any advantage or profit by the
Countries of the Empire, whilst the King might make use of them for restoring
Sueden; his Majesty by his Ambassadors demanded such places as he should stand
in need of after the peace of the Empire, for a free passage from his frontiers
to the Rhine.

On the fifth of January 1678, the French Ambassadors declared that the places
which their King intended to reserve, were Casselet, Huys, Verviers,
Aix-la-Chapelle, Duren, Linninch, Nuys, and Ordingen, that was the straightest
and shortest march that the French Forces could have to the Rhine; and his
Majesty was already possessed of all those places, which being open, and without
fortification, showed that the design of the King was only to make use of them,
that he might oblige to the observation of the Treaties of Westphalia, those
Princes who contrary to the faith of the same Treaties desired to continue the
War after the peace of the Empire, that they might retain the possession of the
Countries which they had taken from Sueden, whilst his Majesty to procure
satisfaction to that King his Ally, had surrendered a great many good places,
and made peace in a time when he might have expected great advantages from the
success and prosperity of his Arms.

At that time news was brought that the Suedish Army was come out of Livonia.
For the space of two years there was a talk of its marching, though it advanced
not one step. But at length it entered into Prussia, and having possessed some
places on the River of Wemel, it was advanced to the middle of that Province.
There was the greater probability, that the Suedish Enterprise would contribute
to their peace with the Elector of Brandenbourg, that in the mean time whilst
that Prince was marching all the Forces he had in Pomerania and Germany to
oppose that irruption, he ordered M. Meinders, his Minister and Councellor of
State, to go in diligence to the French Court, the King having granted him a
Pasport for that effect. M. Meinders was at that time at Nimuegueu, being come
back from the Elector his Master, to whom he went upon occasion of the
propositions which the Count D' Espenses had brought; but seeing the chief
thing contained in these propositions, was the entire restitution of all the
Conquests which the Elector had obtained from Sueden, the obstacles that
hindered the conclusion of the Treaty, were so hard to be digested, that his
Electoral Highness judged it far more convenient to negotiate the peace with
his Majesty, than to treat at Nimueguen. This Prince was the rather inclined to
take this resolution, because those who continued still in War, were severally
thinking of making their Treaties apart.

In the mean while the Conferences betwixt the Imperial and French ambassadors
continued in the Townhouse, and it began to be hoped that the Negotiation
would come to a happy conclusion. The Plenipotentiary of the Duke of Lorrain at
that time endeavored to obtain what the Imperial Ambassadors had in vain
essayed; he supposed that his Master dreamt not that the ways which the French
King demanded from Nancy to Mets, into Alsatia, the French County and France
should belong to the King in sovereignty; and upon that pretext he pretended to
change the choice he had made of the Alternative, and to accept Nancy for Toul;
but the reason he alleged having no appearance of the least foundation, he
could not obtain the liberty of a new choice, no more than the Imperialists
could, after they had once accepted Philipsbourg: so that the Duke of Lorrain
might easily have perceived, in the course of that Negotiation, that he was
mistaken in expecting greater advantages, if he were admitted into the
possession of Lorrain under the protection of the Emperor, than if he received
it from the bounty and generosity of the French King.

Seeing new difficulties were daily started in the Negotiation of the Peace of
the Empire, the King was willing to prolong the delay he had given until the
end of the Month; but that retarded rather the Negotiation, than it promoted
the Treaty: for besides that the Imperialists, who always seemed irresolute in
bringing things to a conclusion, desired no better, than not to push on
business when they had time before them; they were so sensibly touched at those
burthensom conditions wherewith the King clogged that prolongation, that if they
could have found any other remedy for the calamities of the Empire, besides a
speedy Peace, they would not have dissembled their resentment. The King
consented not to that delay, but on condition, that if the Peace were not
signed before the Month was expired, Philipsbourg should be demolished, for the
reimbursment of the charges that his Majesty was obliged to be at, for
maintainsng his Forces: and that if February likewise passed without concluding
the Peace, his Majesty would moreover have all Brisgow in recompense of his
charges.

The truth is, the French King could be no less than absolute Master of Peace
and War, to impose such a necessity upon the Imperialists: Nevertheless,
whether it were the fears of seeing themselves exposed to undergo these
conditions, or a sincere desire of freeing the Empire as soon as possibly could
be from so troublesome a War, set the Imperial Ambassadors to work; the
Negotiations of Peace grew brisker than before; they met morning and evening,
and had very long conferences; so that Sir Lionell Jenkins had trouble enough
in going back and fore betwixt them, laboring to renew the impediments which
retarded the Negotiation; and yet for all that, the Peace advanced but slowly.

The Imperialists started great difficulties about the 26. and 27. Articles of
the Treaty; and seeing they all tended to annul the rights which France had
obtained in the Empire by the peace of Westphalia, and especially those which
have been yielded to that King over the ten Towns of Alsatia; the debates that
arose upon that subject, were many and hard to be adjusted.

The Ambassadors of the Emperor perceiving that they gained no ground by these
debates, and that the French Ambassadors would not consent that those things
which were concluded by the peace of Munster, should any ways be infringed by
this Treaty. They endeavored at least to obtain, that the points to which the
French would not condescend, might be referred to arbitration. But this was to
as little purpose as the extraordinary repugnancy they showed against the
Emperor being obliged to observe a neutrality in the Empire, whilst the French
King might march his forces for the relief of his Allies. Nevertheless all
these points were at length agreed unto in the manner as the French Ambassadors
demanded.

The jollities of the Carnaval were at that time very great in Nimueguen, where
the people, who since the change of Religion and Government, has not been
accustomed to see Masquarades, took great pleasure in these Novelties, and
especially in a frolic of Spaniards, magnificently disguised, who went through
all the Town drawn on sledges upon the snow at a Ball in the House of the
Ambassador of Denmark on the 24. Two men appeared disguised into Capucins, of
whom one having danced with the Niece of the Danish Ambassador, presented the
hand to Mademoiselle Colbert; but Monsieur Colbert being present, stopped the
Masquer, telling him that it was not the custom of France to dance in such
habits; and that if he had him at his house, he would serve him as he deserved.

The forwardness of the peace of the Empire, gave the Northern Confederates
enough to think of; for, for all they were so well united among themselves, yet
when the matter was of opposing those who seemed inclined to make a separate
peace, they were not wanting to mind their own particular concerns. The journey
of M. Meinders, Envoy from the Elector of Brandenbourg into France, gave them
great umbrage, and made them fear that a separate peace with that Prince would
quite ruin their affairs; and therefore they resolved severally to prevent the
disadvantage that might happen to them by continuing last in the War; but their
peace depended on the Suedes, who being so highly supported by the French,
seemed no less haughty as to the propositions that were made to them, than if
they themselves had been in condition of giving the Law to their enemies.

The morning and evening conferences of the 29. and 30. were very long, and the
Ambassadors met and discoursed together; so that there was no question made of
the happy success of the Negotiation. Ambassador Temple, who upon the advice he
received that the Treaty was upon the point of being concluded, parted from the
Hague on the 29. arrived on the 30. at Nimueguen, that he might sign that
peace, though many things still remained to be adjusted. The Ambassadors were
at the Townhouse from eight of the clock in the morning, until two afternoon.
And as it was not doubted but that that last day would put an end to that great
work, the end of the evening-conference, which began at four of the clock, was
impatiently expected; but it lasted till five of the clock next morning, and
yet the peace in no condition to be signed.

The affairs of the Duke of Lorrain took up much time; and in that conference
M. Stratman made a long and elegant discourse in Latin concerning the
pretensions and interests of that Prince; though M. Colbert expected no such
thing, and that he had no time to prepare himself for an answer, yet he
answered ex tempore with so much force and perspicuity, that the whole Assembly
were surprised at it.

It seemed that the Imperialists perceiving that the delay granted by the King,
expired with the preceding day, purposely suffered affairs to be spun out
beyond that term, to the end that it might not be said that they had suffered
it to expire without a conclusion, and that they had incurred the penalties
upon which the French King granted a second prorogation. No other business
remained to be determined but the affairs of the House of Furstemberg, and the
possession of the Duchy of Bouillon, with the granting the demand of the
French Ambassadors, who would have the result of the Diet of Ratisbon mentioned
in the Treaty, by which it might appear that the Ambassadors of the Emperor
were sufficiently authorized to stipulate in the name of the Empire.

January 167^/2;: The greatest difficulties being at length discussed, the
French Ambassadors declared that they had power to prolong for two days the
last delay that their King had granted. But the Ambassadors of Denmark and
Brandenbourg finding that no obstacle could hinder the conclusion of the peace
of the Empire (though the Ministers of their Masters at the Emperor's Court
assured them of the contrary in all their Letters; and though the Imperial
Ambassadors themselves protested to them at Nimueguen, that they would not act
in reference to them, but as faithful Allies): the first of February about
eleven of the clock at night, they made a long and smart Remonstrance to the
Imperial Embassy, that they might endeavor as much as in them lay, to divert
the blow which they then saw nearer than they had ever before.

They told the Imperial Ambassadors, that their proceedings with the common
Enemy so much the more alarmed them, as that in the place where they were shut
up, they could not come to speech with them, that they might represent to them
how sensibly it affected them to see that they made mysteries of that which the
Enemy scrupled not to make public; that they entreated them to consider the
faith of their leagues, the Decrees of the Empire, and the wrong they would do
the Princes their Masters, if they restored Sueden to the benefit of the
Treaties of Westpbalia, contrary to the solemn conclusions that declare they
have forfeited the same; that above all, they prayed them to give away nothing
of what belonged to them; and not to suffer that under the name of peace the
war might be carried into those parts of the Empire into which the Enemies
Forces were never as yet able to advance.

These Ambassadors added to their Remonstrance a kind of threatening; saying,
that if the Imperialists abandoned them to the discretion of their Enemies,
they ought not to take it ill if they made use of their ^wn misfortunes for
obtaining some reparation from those who would sacrifice them in that manner.
In fine, they adjured them by the Majesty of the Sacred Empire, that they would
conclude nothing contrary to the Rights of their Masters, seeing they were
ready to make peace jointly with them upon equitable conditions, or otherways
to take all necessary measures for a vigorous resistance.

The Confederate Ambassadors nicked the time in making that Remonstrance; for
the Conference from which the Imperial and French Ambassadors were just come,
ended in a total rupture, and with so much animosity on both sides, that those
who formerly desired the peace, had cause to fear that the Treaty could hardly
be set on foot again. But notwithstanding of that, Ambassador Jenkins, who
showed no less prudence than zeal in his conduct, so ordered affairs, that next
day (being the second of the Month) the Conferences were renewed.

Seeing the difference that remained concerning the Duchy of Bouillon, was
that which at that time created the greatest obstacle to the conclusion of the
peace, insomuch that it was thought it would have broken off the Treaty; the
Nuncio fearing lest that single difficulty might obstruct the fruits of so long
and difficult a Negotiation, so ordered matters, that the Sieurs Charun and
Vanderveck, Envoys from the Prince and Chapter of Liege, declared, That since
nothing but the pretension which their Master had to the Duchy of Bouillon,
hindered the peace, they consented that upon the account of that particular
Interest, the welfare and repose of the whole Empire should be no longer
retarded. By that means all things were adjusted, and in the same Conference
(which lasted till midnight) the Ambassadors agreed to sign the Treaty.

Though the peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and France, sufficiently provided
for the security and satisfaction of Sueden, seeing it restored that Crown to
all that the Treaties of Westphalia gave it in the Empire; yet there was a
necessity of a separate Treaty for Sueden, because that King had been declared
an Enemy to the Empire, and fallen from the advantages which he had by the
peace of Munster. That Treaty was therefore set on foot with great diligence,
and had all the success that the particular care of the French King could
procure for the concerns of his Confederate. The Treaty of Westphalia was made
the rule and pattern of this; all Acts, Decrees, and Mandates made to the
contrary, were rescinded and declared null by it, as innovations introduced
during the troubles of the War: the neutrality of the Emperor, and restoration
of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, were therein stipulated, and all protestations
that could be made to the contrary, declared null and of none effect.

The Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg seeing the peace fully concluded
on the third of the Month, made their protestations against it; they complained
that the Emperors Ambassadors had consented to matters which so nearly
concerned the Princes their Masters, that they had not only neglected all their
interests, but also that they had given their Enemies liberty to pursue the War
even into the heart of their own country: That they had treated about the
rights of all the States of the Empire, so far as to abolish some Decrees
concerning them, without the knowledge of the Princes who were most interested
therein. In a word, they solemnly protested against that separate peace, which
ought to be reckoned null, and no way prejudicial to their Leagues, nor to the
Decrees of the Empire.

These Ambassadors omitted no formalities which they judged necessary for
maintaining the pretensions of their Masters. And therefore on the 4th they
made a conditional protestation against the peace made by the Emperor with
Sueden, because they saw it ready to be concluded and signed the same day with
that of the Emperor with France. They said that they could the less be
persuaded that the Imperial Ambassadors would do such a wrong to the Princes
their Masters; that Sueden had been treated during the War, as a State and
member of the Empire, guilty of breaking the public peace, and in that notion
cited and condemned by the Empire in the usual forms. So that in what manner
soever the Emperor might reconcile himself to that Crown, they had reason to
protest against the validity of that peace, and at the same time for all the
damages that their Masters might suffer thereby.

The Ministers and Plenipotentiaries of the Princes of Brunswick-Lunenbourg,
who hitherto had exerted no public act of their function, the same day
protested against those two Treaties in the same terms, and upon the same
pretexts that the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg had done. Perhaps
they were ignorant that the Princes their Masters were concluding their
particular Peace at home with France and Sueden, whilst they complained so
loudly at Nimueguen against that of the Emperor. Nevertheless these proceedings
hindered not but that the peace was next day signed, though the Imperial
Ambassadors endeavored under various pretexts to have the signing of it
delayed.

The 5th at noon these Ambassadors sent the Nuncio's Auditor to entreat the
French that they would defer the matter until the day following, in respect
there was so much Writing required before the Treaty could be drawn up fair,
that it was impossible it could be ready to be signed that evening. But all the
answer they had was, That there was time more than enough for putting things in
a condition; and that if the peace was not signed by ten of the clock, they had
orders from the King their Master not to sign it next day.

It seemed to be the fate of the Mediators not to sign any Treaty of peace;
they refused to sign that of the Dutch, because it was separate, and had been
managed without their privity; and they meddled not in that of Spain, which was
a consequent on the former: But seeing they had been the Mediators of the
Treaty of the Empire, they thought nothing should have hindered them from
signing that peace. Nevertheless the Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty having
failed in yiedling the honor to the English as Mediators, according to the
practice of Cologn and Nimueguen, which occasioned, though no obstacle nor
difficulty in the course of the Negotiation; they were likewise ambiguous in
their answers, when the Mediators sent to enquire of them how they pretended to
carry themselves in the signing of the Treaty.

But when they were upon the point of going to sign the Treaty, the Imperial
Ambassadors positively declared, That they would not consent that the English
should sign first. So that seeing they could not sign it either as Mediators,
in which case they ought to have the first place, as due to them in that
quality; or as English, for then the French would not write after them; it was
impossible to find out any expedient to adjust that difficulty. And therefore
Ambassador Temple said true, when he protested a long time before, That he
would not sign the Peace whilst the affairs of France were in such a condition
as to have it concluded to the advantage of that Crown. And all the fruit of
his hasty journey to Nimueguen to sign a Peace so advantageous to France, was
his displeasure for undertaking it in the coldest season that for these twenty
years has been known in Holland.

Upon the French Ambassadors refusal to delay the signing of the Peace until
next day, the Imperialists lost no time, and all things were ready that
evening. About ten of the clock all the Ambassadors went to the Townhouse with
several Coaches, and many Flambeaus: So soon as the French Ambassadors were in
their Chamber, they sent to compliment the Imperialists, and to tell them, That
when they pleased they would come into the Hall which was prepared for the
signing of the Peace. The Imperialists returned them the same compliment; and
so the French entered first into the Hall, which was above stairs, and opposite
to their room; and they placed themselves at the Table on the left hand of the
entry.

Immediately after the Imperial Ambassadors came up, and took place
over against the French. The doors were open, and a great many Gentlemen of
both Nations, and several others whom curiosity to see so solemn a ceremony,
had invited to Nimueguen, stood behind the Ambassadors. M. Stratman brought the
Treaty of the Empire, and M. Colbert that of France. The Count d' Avaux had
affairs at the Hague that hindered him from being at that Ceremony. The two
Treaties were written in Latin, and for comparing of them M. Stratman began to
read; but having read some pages of it, M. Colbert offered to ease him; and the
whole Treaty being so read over by turns, the Imperialists according to their
several qualities signed it in one colume on the right hand; then they took
that of France, which they signed in the same manner; whilst the French signed
that of the Imperialists in one colume on the left hand, as the Imperialists
did that of France; but the Count d' Avaux being absent, a space was left for
his name, and a Chair set in the place which he ought to have taken.

Afterward the Bishop of Gurck made a congratulatory compliment upon the happy
conclusion of so great an affair as the Peace of the Empire, which would
restore repose and tranquillity to the rest of Christendom that were still in
War. The Ministers of the Northern Princes who were not comprehended in that
Peace, being dissatisfied with the conduct of the Imperialists, spoke in
another strain of language. M. Heng, the Danish Ambassador next day after,
publicly expressed his discontent at the house of the Marshal D' Estrades. He
scrupled not to say openly in company, yea and several times to repeat it, That
if it pleased the French King, he had sufficient authority to conclude a League
with his most Christian Majesty, and to get it ratified by his Danish Majesty,
who would oblige himself to make war against the Emperor, in what manner, and
for as long time as his most Christian Majesty should desire him.

Seeing the Emperors Ambassadors could not obtain of the French, that an
Article should be put into the Treaty, whereby the French King should consent
to refer to arbitration the difficulties which they raised concerning the
Rights of the ten Towns of Alsatia, of the Nobility of that Province, and of
the three Bishoprics of Lorrain; before they signed the Peace, they entered a
protestation into the Records of the Mediation, that it might appear, that
though they had right to pretend that these affairs ought to have been referred
to arbitration, yet they had rather consent that no mention should be made of
them in the Treaty, than longer to delay the conclusion of the Peace for
matters of which the French Ambassadors absolutely refused to take cognizance;
contenting themselves to protest that that omission could no ways be
prejudicial to the rights of the Empire.

The Ambassadors of Sueden refused also to insert into their Treaty with the
Emperor, the verbal declaration which they gave of the sense of the third
Article, acknowledging that they pretended not that that Article ought to
oblige the Princes of the Empire that were still in war, to the confirmation of
the Treaties of Westphalia, as to what concerned Sueden, knowing that these
were affairs that ought to be adjusted by particular Treaties.

Nevertheless upon the refusal that the Ambassadors of Sueden made of inserting
that interpretation into the Treaty, the Imperial Ambassadors prayed the
Mediators that they would make mention of that explication in their Memoirs,
and to set down in them by way of protestation, that if in the Treaty of the
Emperor with Sueden there is no mention made of the customs that are raised at
Termeude, of the rights of the Dukes of Mecklenbourg, nor of those of the Town
of Bremen; the reason was only, because the Ambassadors of Sueden alleged that
for want of a free correspondence with his Suedish Majesty, they could not have
instructions as to the points for which the Imperialists thought it not fit to
delay the signing of the peace, since that without such a clause, these Rights
were as well established under the authority and protection of the Empire.

Though the Treaty of the Peace made betwixt the Emperor and Sueden, was not
figned until the 7th. yet it bore date the same day with that of the Emperor
and France, because it was mentioned therein to be of the same date. And some
time after, the news was brought that the peace of France and Sueden, with the
Princes of the House of Brunswick-Lunenbourg, was signed at Zell on the sixth,
by M. de Pabenack, who after that the Suedes were wholly out of Pomerania,
stopping at Hambourg, went by order from the King to the Court of those
Princes, who by this Treaty restore to the Crown of Sueden the Duchy of
Bremen, and all that they had got of the Suedes, except the Bailiage of
Tedinghansen, which has always been controverted, because it is enclosed
within the Territories of the House of Brunswick, and the Provosty of Dowen,
that lies between the Weser and the Elbe.

The Suedes likewise yield to those Princes some Revenues of the Church,
consisting in tithes which belonged to them upon account of the Bishopric of
Bremen, and some other Benefices. But the French King being willing fully to
indempnifie the House of Brunswick, and to secure the peace of the Empire, his
Majesty by that Treaty engages to pay to these Princes three hundred thousand
Crowns, at the same time that the restitution is made to Sueden in the manner
as was agreed upon.

M. de Meyerkron continued to make propositions at the Hague, where he seemed
willing to have managed a Negotiation with the Count d' Avaux; but the offers
he made, were still so general, that they gave no ground for a positive answer.
And therefore that Ambassador made him the same declaration that the other
French Ambassadors made at Nimueguen; telling him that in order to a more
favorable hearing, the King of Denmark must begin, by releasing the Suedish
Soldiers, who since the time that they were shipwrackt upon the Isle of
Barnholm, were not only detained prisoners contrary to the privilege of the
Pasports which they had; but likewise exposed to violence, which they daily
suffered on design either to make them engage in the Danish service, or forsake
that of Sueden. That the King of Denmark would by so doing purge himself from
the suspicions of that shipwreck which the King nevertheless was rather
inclined to attribute to Chance, and the mistake of Pilots, than any
premeditated design; but that in the mean time, the inhuman manner of using and
detaining of those forces could not but be thought very strange.

Though from the beginning of the Assembly, many instances had been made, and
several expedients proposed by the English and French, for procuring to the
Ambassadors of Sueden the liberty of Couriers, or at least of bare Letters to
and from his Suedish Majesty; yet it could not be obtained from the King of
Denmark. This gave occasion of fear, that the strictness which was observed in
that Kingdom upon that subject, might hinder the conveyance of the Treaty newly
signed with the Emperor, into Sueden; and that the ratification thereof might
not be brought within the limited time. And therefore the Ambassadors of Sueden
hired privately a Galliot at Amsterdam, which ^arried the Messenger to
Gottemberg, from whence he might go by Land to any place where the Suedish
Court was.

The Ambassadors of the Emperor having stipulated for the whole Empire in the
Treaties of France and Sueden, by virtue only of the conclusion of the Diet of
Ratisbon of the 31. of May 1677. The Ambassador of Brandenbourg produced a copy
of it at Nimueguen, on the 18th of the Month, with a new protestation,
alleging, that that conclusion of the Empire was not conform to the sense that
was put upon it in the 36 Article of the Emperor's Treaty with France, and in
the 12. of that of the Emperor with Sueden; and that the Imperial Ambassadors
were so far from having by that means sufficient authority to treat in name of
the whole Empire, that on the contrary the Emperor was thereby required to
conclude nothing at Nimueguen without first submitting it to the deliberation
of the Diet; and that the Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty, by adding in
these Articles, That all protestations that might be made in the Empire against
that Peace, were to be of no effect; had committed the greatest violation, and
manifestly contravened the Golden Bull, the Imperial Capitulations, the
Constitutions of the Empire, and the very Treaties of Westphalia, on which they
pretended to settle the peace of the Empire.

Although the King of Denmark and Elector of Brandenbourg saw themselves
abandoned by all their Allies, and left alone in the War, exposed to all that
France could undertake against them both by sea and land; yet they could not be
brought to a resolution of restoring what they had conquered from Sueden; they
dealt with the French King, and with his Ambassadors; but his Majesty gave them
answer, and caused his Ambassadors to do the like, That he could not listen to
the propositions that they made to him; that he had no quarrel with the King of
Denmark nor the Elector of Brandenbourg; that they should give satisfaction to
Sueden; and when that Crown was contented, his Majesty would be so likewise.

But the French King stopped not there: for after that the Peace was signed, his
Majesty desiring that the rest of Germany might likewise be at quiet as soon as
possibly could be, on the 24th of February did by his Ambassadors declare to
Sir Lionel Jenkins, the English Mediator, That if within the Month of March the
King of Denmark and Elector of Brandenbourg did not give full satisfaction to
Sueden, his Majesty should then be at freedom to demand new conditions, which
would be, that Lipstadt should be restored to the Elector of Cologn; and that
the King of Denmark and Elector of Brandenbourg should pay to his Majesty all
the Charges of the War.

That Declaration of the French King, and the answers which his Majesty gave to
all the propositions, which came short of a full satisfaction to Sueden, were
the more uneasy to the Elector of Brandenbourg, that he had just then forced
the Suedish Army to leave Prussia, and to return with much haste into Livonia,
but more harassed with sickness and long marches, than the losses they
sustained in several skirmishes, which happened in their tetreat betwixt the
areerguard of the Suedes and some parties of the Electors Forces.

The Ambassadors of Sueden finding their affairs in a better condition since
the peace, thought themselves obliged to remit nothing of their pretensions;
and therefore they patiently expected the effect of the French King's
Declaration, and of what his Majesty was preparing to do for them. They made no
doubt but that all would terminate in the satisfaction of Sueden, without any
great effects on their part. They found that the Forces of Denmark were weakened
in Schonen, because the Bishop of Munster began already to recall the Forces
which his Predecessor had sent to his Danish Majesty, who without that
assistance could hardly make head against the Suedes in Schonen. The Suedes
reckoned the Treaty of that Bishop as good as already concluded. He is indeed
of a peaceful disposition, but nevertheless vigorous and firm, as a great
Prince ought to be, in maintaining his lawful pretensions by the Sword. The
conclusion of his Treaty stood in effect upon an hundred thousand Crowns; and
that Prelate was satisfied that Sueden should leave no more in his possession
but only the Bailliage of Wilshonsen, as a Mortgage for the payment of that sum.

The Elector of Bavaria on his part represented to the Diet at Ratisbon the
necessity of settling the Empire by procuring the Peace of the North; and that
that could not be done, but by re-establishing the Treaties of Westphalia, and
the satisfaction of Sueden, for which the whole Empire ought to be concerned.
The Emperors Ministers who were at that Diet, found that the Protestation which
the Elector of Brandenbourg caused to be made there, wounded the Authority of
his Imperial Majesty; most of the Princes of Germany saw evidently, that none
had advantage by the War, but those that desired not Peace; so that it was to
be hoped th^^ private Interests would at length give place to the public
concern of the whole Empire; and that the passion which those Princes had to
spoil Sueden, could not long stave off a Peace which was so earnestly desired
by so many people.

The Emperor had already testified how much he concerned himself in the
satisfaction of Sueden, by his desire to procure the repose of the Empire. The
Letter which the Elector of Brandenbourg wrote to his Imperial Majesty the 24th
of November, gave occasion to an Answer; which made him fully understand, That
he had no cause to hope that the Empire would support his Interests. He
complained that the Emperor seemed disposed to peace, separately from the other
Princes who continued in War; and that the project of the peace of the Empire,
which his Majesty's Ambassadors had made at Nimueguen, offered and contained
such conditions as neither France nor Sueden would have demanded, especially in
a time when having driven the Suedes wholly out of the Empire, he had for ever
settled and secured the peace and tranquillity thereof.

But all the reasons that his Electoral Highness alleged to incline the
Emperor to continue the War, and to procure better conditions for him, were
overthrown by that Answer, which bore, That the Elector of Brandenbourg would
have done better not to believe that the Emperor had ever any design to act
against equity, or to engage in any proceeding contrary to the conclusions of
the Diet of the Empire. That his Imperial Majesty saw plainly, that all his
Confederates had made War only for their particular Interests, since they
abandoned him by making separately their peace: But that his actings were of
another nature, seeing he would not divide his Interests from those of the
whole Empire, upon which he would have certainly drawn the utmost calamities,
if he had followed those examples. Moreover, that in the league made betwixt
his Imperial Majesty and his Electoral Highness, there was nothing to be found
that obliged the Emperor to procure to his Highness the possession of the
Conquests that he had obtained from Sueden: That on the contrary the
Constitutions of the Empire required that that Crown should always be one of
the chief members thereof. In fine, that the Emperor himself was so far from
listening to the reasons that were alleged for continuing the War, that he had
willingly yielded part of his own Revenue for the securing of a firm Peace.

In the same answer, the Emperor put the Elector of Brandenbourg in mind, That
having engaged with the States General of the United Provinces in the beginning
of this War with consent of the Emperor and Empire, he had afterward against
all reason changed his Conduct, and without acquainting them, joined with
France; that his Imperial Majesty had much ado to take him off from that
engagement, drawing upon himself great enemies thereby, and giving him
considerable advantages: That by threatening, as he did, to conclude a separate
Peace as often as his Imperial Majesty had by his Ministers made propositions
of peace to him, he himself had given him cause to mind his own, and to leave
him on his part to do as he should think good* In a word, that it was not for
the interest of the Empire, that Sueden losing the Territories that it had
therein, should lie always upon the catch to regain them, and be continually
stirring upon that account, to disturb the public Peace; and that therefore he
would by consequent do well to think of making his accommodation with that
Crown.

Though the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg had no great ground to rely
upon their Negotiations, and that they plainly saw that the Conditions of Peace
depended absolutely on the pleasure of the French King, yet they left nothing
undone at Nimueguen, which they judged necessary to maintain their Pretensions.
The Ambassador of Brandenbourg perceiving that the Declaration made by the
French the 24th, threatened his Electoral Highness with the loss of Leipstadt,
and the reimbursement of the charges of the War, if within the Month of March
he concluded not the Peace, made on the 26. a kind of citation to the
Ambassadors of the Princes, who had made their Peace with France, that he might
let them see the obligation they stood in of warranting the Leagues which his
Electoral Highness had made with them upon occasion of the present War.

All these Declarations were conceived almost in the same terms; but in that
which that Ambassador gave to the Spaniards, he said that the rigor which the
French King showed toward his Electoral Highness, was an effect of the
separate Treaties that some of the Confederates had made with France, to the
prejudice of his Master; and he declared, that before he could answer the
French Ambassadors, it was necessary he should know how his Catholic Majesty
pretended to discharge himself of the engagement he had made with his Master by
the 14 and 24 Articles of their League, whereby the King of Spain was not only
to procure Peace to his Electoral Highness, but also to indemnifie him as to
the losses that he might suffer in the Country of Cleves. And seeing the term
prescribed to his Master by France was very short, he prayed the Spanish
Ambassadors, with all expedition to inform him of his Catholic Majesty's
intention as to the performance of those two Articles, that he might
accordingly make his answer to the Declaration of his most Christian Majesty.

These formalities were no real advances toward the Peace. The Ambassadors of
the North still flattered themselves with the hopes, that the ratification of
the Emperors Peace might meet with such obstacles in the Diet at Ratisbonne, as
might change the face of affairs. Nevertheless that Diet was of a quite
contrary disposition, and nothing but the interests of the Duke of Lorrain
retarded that ratification on the Emperors part.

I must here call to mind what I mentioned before, that the French King having
granted five different Plenary Commissions, for treating with the five
principal Confederates that were engaged in War against his Majesty, he would
give no particular one for treating with the Duke of Lorrain, (though all the
Confederates had solicited it by means of the Mediators); and therefore that
Prince having been obliged to list himself under some one or other of the
Confederates, committed his concerns to the care of the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, who in the Treaty that was concluded betwixt the Emperor and France,
having stipulated for his pretensions, it was the Emperors part to procure the
ratification of the Articles that concerned the Duke of Lorrain.

March 1679. Nevertheless the Imperial Ambassadors declared on the 12th of
March, That the Conditions which concerned that Prince, were so hard, that if
France would not mitigate them, and make them more acceptable, they must be
cancelled out of the Treaty, or declared to be held as not comprehended
therein, seeing the Emperor could not procure them to be ratified, nor by
consequent promise to do it. The French Ambassadors made answer, That their
Kings ratification which they had in custody, being simple and unconditionated,
that of the Emperor behoved to be so too; so that the Duke of Lorrain found by
experience, that into whose hands soever he committed his InInterests, he was
not to hope for so advantageous Conditions, as he might have obtained from the
French King, if he had wholly referred himself to his Majesty.

The Ambassador of Brandenbourg made the answer of the other Ambassadors a
pretext for his delaying to give a return to the Declaration of the French,
until such time as he might have orders from the Elector his Master: So that
although he made answer on the 11, yet he declared that it was only in
expectation of instructions, that no advantage might be drawn from his silence.
But as he would not directly complain of France, he imputed to Sueden all the
cause of the severity which he found in the Declaration of the 24th of February.

This Ambassador said, that such a kind of Declaration could not have been
made, but at the instance of Sueden; that his Electoral Highness would be much
surprised, to find that that Crown charged him with unwillingness to accept of
reasonable Propositions of Peace, seeing the Suedish Ambassadors could not
deny, but that it was themselves who refused to answer to the Projects of
Peace, which he gave in to Sir Lionel Jenkins, the English Mediator, by express
Orders from his Master; that, moreover, he did not believe that it was the
intention of the French Ambassadors, to make it be thought that the
satisfaction which his Electoral Highness pretended, did offer violence to the
Treaties of Westphalia, nor that what Sueden possessed in the Empire was become
unalienable, as if the States and Territories of the Empire could not pass from
one to another of its Members, without violating of those Treaties: that upon
that ground only his most Christian Majesty had concluded Peace with the
Princes of the house of Brunswick, who retained some part of that which Sueden
heretofore possessed in the Empire, and that the Elector his Master might with
much more justice pretend to a satisfaction of the same nature. He furthermore
added, That his Electoral Highness would be amazed to understand that the
French should pretend to make him pay the charges of the War, and much more to
dipossess him of Leipstadt without any formality, contrary to the Constitutions
of the Empire, and the very Treaties of Westphalia; and that with so much the
less reason, that the Count of Lip, to whom the half of Leipstadt belonged,
had not the least quarrel with Sueden.

All who, were less concerned than France in the restoration of Sueden; and
the Mediators themselves said openly, That the too great obstinacy with which
that Crown pretended to the entire restitution of all that it had lost during
this War, would be an insuperable obstacle to the peace. That it was not to be
expected that Sueden would make too much haste to end the War, since the Eight
hundred thousand Crowns of Subsidy which that King had from France, were better
to him than the Revenues of Pomerania, and all that he possessed in Germany.
That if the French King did not by his Power make the peace of Sueden, that
Crown would never make the least advance toward it, especially so long as it
was so well supported by the men and money of France.

In the mean while the French Ambassadors having seen the Answer that the
Danish Ambassador made, thought fit to reply to it on the 14th. saying, That
the French King's design being to make the peace of the Empire universal, his
Majesty had stipulated in the Treaty, that he should employ all his Offices
with the King of Sueden, and the Emperor the like with his Confederates, to
incline them to consent to a truce for better carrying on of the peace. That
the Suedish Ambassadors were the first that consented to it, even by the
Treaty, whilst that those of Denmark and Brandenbourg were so far from
condescending to what had been stipulated for them, that on the contrary they
had protested against the Treaty, and used still all their endeavors to
incline the Empire to prefer the continuation of the War before the
ratification of the peace.

The French Ambassadors subjoined, That it was this procedure of the
Confederates which had given occasion to his Majesty of taking more efficacious
measures for obtaining of a general peace with as much expedition as the good
of the people required, and therefore for making the Declaration of the 24th of
February, which was so much the more reasonable in the pretensions it
contained, in that all equity allowed that those who share most in the
inconveniences of War, should make likewise the greatest advantages of it.

The Elector of Cologn, with whom peace was made, was at present most exposed
to the passage of Forces; and his most Christian Majesty not desiring to make
advantage of his Armies to the prejudice of the Empire, was willing thereby to
gratify that Prince of all the rest, to whom the continuation of a War, which
the obstinacy alone of the Elector of Brandenbourg entertained still in the
Empire, was most prejudicial. At length the French Ambassadors declared that
they would never consent to any proposition, unless the re-establishment of the
Treaties of Westphalia was fully admitted.

All men were of opinion, that the cessation of Arms mentioned in the Treaty of
Peace betwixt the Empire and France, was the most proper means of compassing
the Peace of the North. And therefore the Ambassador of Brandenbourg finding
that the French charged him in their Reply, with refusing to accept of that
Cessation, and that at the same time they declared that they could not admit of
any proposition which was not grounded on the Treaties of Westphalia, thought
himself obliged without further delay to make an Answer, which he did the 16th.

He said, That if by a repugnancy which is common on such occasions, he had
disapproved what the Imperial Ambassadors had concluded with France to the
prejudice of his Master, it could not be inferred from thence, that he was
unwilling to accept the cessation of Arms, seeing he had made known to the
French Ambassadors, by the English Mediators, that he was ready to conclude it
upon reasonable conditions. That as the King of Denmark and Elector of
Brandenbourg had cause to be very well satisfied with the Mediators; so their
Ambassadors ought not, without express Orders, to have the same respect for the
offers of the Imperial Ambassadors, that those of Sueden ought to have for the
care that the French Ambassadors took of the concerns of that Crown; and so
much the rather, because that if in this juncture France particularly performed
the Articles of the League betwixt it and Sueden, it was manifest that the
Emperor did violate that which was contracted betwixt him and the Princes whom
he abandoned.

The Ambassador added, That the Elector his Master had only engaged in the War,
to maintain the Peace of Westphalia, against the Invasion of Sueden: That his
Electoral Highness was willing to have contributed what he could to the
preservation of that Peace in its full force; but that since it was the intent
of the same Peace, that those who should break it, to the prejudice of those
that are comprehended therein, should make reparation, according to the
sentence of the Emperor and Empire; there was nothing more just, than to put in
execution the Decree which the Emperor and Empire had given against Sueden in
the present case; and that it was far greater obstinacy to refuse that which
was reasonable, than to pretend to what was lawfully ones due.

The Mediators in the mean time, and the Ambassadors of all the Princes, who
had made their Peace, perceiving that the Month of March, which the French King
allowed as the longest delay to the Elector of Brandenbourg, was drilled on in
debates and disputes in Writing, without any serious application to the
promoting of the Peace, solicited the French Ambassadors to consent to a
cessation of Arms, during all the following Month, not doubting but in that
time all the difficulties that hindered the conclusion of the general Peace
might at length be removed.

These solicitations made the French Ambassadors declare to the Mediators, on
the 26. that in compliance with the Instances that had been made to them, both
by them, and the Bishop of Gurck, in name of the Ambassadors of Denmark and
Brandenbourg, for a suspension of Arms until the first of May, they consented
in name of the King their Master, and his Allies, to a cessation during the
whole Month of April, provided the same Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg
accepted of it without delay, saying, it was neither the fault of them, nor of
their Allies, that that Truce was not granted at the time that they signed the
Peace with the Emperor, according to the offers that were made then; but that
it was the protestations of the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg only
which was the cause it did not then take effect.

The French Ambassadors declared to the Mediators at the same time, that they
had not only received the ratification of the Peace, which they had signed with
the Imperial Ambassadors the 5th of February; but that also his most Christian
Majesty desiring to see that Peace with all expedition accomplished for the
repose of the Empire, he had sent them a commission for the fulfilling of the
Treaty; so that since it was not his fault that the Empire did not instantly
reap the fruits of so desired a Peace, if it happened that the ratification of
the Emperor should not be exchanged within the time prescribed by the Treaty,
they demanded from that instant in name of the King, that the demolition of
Philipsbourg, and the surrender of all Bri^gow might be granted to his Majesty,
and added to the Treaty* for satisfaction of the charges that he was obliged to
be at. And as to the Duke of Lorrain, that if that Prince did not in the same
time fully and plainly ratify all that the Imperial Ambassadors had stipulated
for him; his Majesty in that case held himself acquitted from all the
conditions that he had granted to him.

The circumstance which the French Ambassadors added to their declaration, of
the Instances which they said were made to them by the Bishop of Gurck in the
name of the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg, so sensibly touched those
two Ambassadors, that, thinking their Honor thereby much offended, they took a
great deal of pains to make the contrary appear, by long answers which they
made on that subject on the eighteenth; affirming that they had never neither
desired nor rejected the cessation of Arms: but nevertheless, that they might
omit nothing that might in any probability tend to the promoting of the Peace,
they accepted the Truce upon such conditions as should on both sides be agreed
upon.

Never were any Ambassadors more fond of Writing than those of Denmark and
Brandenbourg; their debates had already occasioned as many public Writings
during the Month of March alone, as had been made during the negotiation of all
the other Treaties put together. In the mean time the French Ambassadors, that
they might give these Ambassadors all the satisfaction that they could desire
upon so nice a point, declared on the Nineteenth,

That since the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenbourg thought themselves
wronged, in that they could be suspected to have demanded or desired a
cessation of Arms, they consented that the Mediators might give them a public
Act thereupon, to be joined to the protestations which they had made against
the peace of the Empire; whilst that they on the contrary, being persuaded that
all the proceedings of the King their Master for the advancement of the general
Peace, in a time when he was in a condition to continue the War with advantage,
argued great glory to his Majesty: They still offered the cessation on the same
conditions which they proposed to the English Mediators, without derogating, in
the mean time, from their Declaration of the 24th of February, in case that the
Peace was not signed in the Month of March, and that they accepted not the
Truce: But that if they consented to it for the whole Month of April, it was
his Majesty's will, that during all that Month, the King of Denmark and Elector
of Brandenbourg might have liberty to conclude the Peace, without requiring the
new Conditions that had been demanded of them.

At length, after so many debates and proceedings to no great purpose, the
Treaty of cessation was signed at Nimueguen the last of March, to continue till
the first of May, and was exchanged both in name of his most Christian Majesty
and King of Sweden, betwixt the French Ambassadors on the one part, and those
of Denmark and Brandenbourg on the other. But seeing, that before the signing
of that Treaty, the French Intendant had caused Contributions to be demanded
from the Country of Cleves on the other side of the Rain, and that the French
Ambassadors could not promise that they should not be pretended,
notwithstanding the conclusion of the cessation, the same Ambassadors consented
by a public Act, that the Dutch Ambassadors should pass their word for them;
that they should Write about it to the King, that they might know his
intentions, and that in the mean time no hostile execution should be made
during the space of Fifteen days; after which, if his Majesty thought good that
these Contributions should be exacted, they engaged to give the Inhabitants of
the Country Three days more, to take such measures in as they should think fit.

The Truce that was now signed, instead of advancing the negotiation, on the
contrary stopped the course thereof during all the time that it lasted; because
the French Ambassadors sticking to their Declarations, there was no more to be
said: So that the Two Princes that remained still in War, Judged it more
convenient to negotiate their Peace with the King himself, than at Nimueguen,
not doubting but that they might promise themselves some advantage to their
interests from Treating rather with a great Prince, than being too headstrong
in defending the same at Nimueguen, by a long train of proceedings, from which
they had no great cause to expect a happy conclusion.

The Elector of Brandenbourg had for that effect, already sent M. Meinders to
the French Court; and his Danish Majesty ordered M. de Mayerkron his Envoy to
the States General, to go immediately and wait upon the King. In the mean time,
a great part of Europe was allarmed at the Fleet which the most Christian King
was setting out to Sea: Italy, and particularly the Republic of Genoa were
much startled thereat. Denmark feared a descent in the Country of Holstein;
and the Parliament of England, (where there happened such commotions, that the
Duke of York was obliged to depart out of the Kingdom) conceived some
Jealousies at the French Naval preparations.

In the mean while the Ambassadors of Sweden having by two several Couriers,
and contrary ways, sent to the King their Master the Treaty of Peace which they
had signed with the Emperor, that by that means, notwithstanding the severity
of the Danes concerning free passage, they might receive the ratification in
time; these two Couriers arrived at Nimueguen from several places the 17th and
18th, with the ratification in good form; But his Swedish Majesty refused to
confirm the Treaty, which was concluded with the Princes of Brunswick; because
they thought in Sweden that they had yielded to them a great deal too much, and
the rather, that the most Christian King indemnified all these Princes at his
proper charges.

About the same time the President Canon, Plenipotentiary from the Duke of
Lorrain, renewed his instances with the French Ambassadors, that he might
obtain some moderation of the conditions that had been stipulated for his
Master. The Imperial Ambassadors did also the like, but without any success: So
that they thought it enough to declare that his Imperial Majesty pretended to
be no longer obliged by the Articles that concerned that Prince, by which his
most Christian Majesty had declared himself obliged, and they demanded that
that Peace might be deferred until another time; in so much that the
Imperialists being unwilling that the time mentioned in the Treaty should
expire, without exchanging the ratifications, because of the pretensions made
by the French in their last declaration of the 26th past, they resolved to make
the exchange the 19th of April.

April 1679, There arose an unexpected difficulty concerning the exchange of
the ratifications; for the Mediators who had not signed the Peace, would not
take it upon them: The Nuncio likewise excused himself from doing it, because
he had protested against the same Peace, in respect it was concluded in
conformity to the Treaties of Westphalia, against which Rome had then
protested, because of the revenues of the Church, which they were then obliged
to secularise and yield up to Protestants, without which it had been impossible
to have procured Peace to Germany. So that the expedient that was found out,
was to make the exchange of the ratifications by the hands of Secretaries, who
were reciprocally sent on both sides. And seeing the ratifications of Sweden
were happily arrived the day before, they were exchanged in the same manner; so
that that was a day of Ratifications: The Ratifications of the Treaty of Peace
concluded betwixt France and the Bishop of Munster being the same day exchanged.

On the 20th the Envoy of Lorrain protested to the Mediators, that the Duke his
Master pretended not to be obliged by the Articles stipulated for him in the
Treaty of the Empire; and Eight days after declared to the same Mediators, that
though his Highness of Lorrain thought it not convenient to accept nor ratify
the Articles that concerned him, yet it was not his intention to continue, nor
to be reckoned an enemy of France, nor of his most Christian Majesty, whose
humble Servant he protested he was; the same Declaration was by the same Envoy
made to the French Ambassadors; telling them moreover, that he did it by
express order from his Master, and not in compliment.

In the mean time the French Forces that were in the Country of Cleves and
Juliers seeing the time of the Truce expired, and having no advice given them,
that there was appearance that the Elector of Brandenbourg would conclude his
Peace upon the conditions demanded by the French King, put themselves in a
condition the first of May, 1679, to pass the Rhine, over which they had made a
Bridge at Ording^en. General Spaen who commanded the Brandenbourg Forces,
seemed as if he would oppose their passage with what Soldiers and Trained-bands
he had on the other side of that River; but he soon retreated, when he
understood that the French Army had passed it on flying Bridges above and below
Augerorts at the meeting of the Auger and Rhine: So that the shortest expedient
that that General and the Ambassador of his Electoral Highness could find, to
secure, as much as was possible, the Countries into which the French Forces
were about to enter, was to procure a conference at Santhen with M. Colbert,
that they might endeavor to get the Truce prolonged.

Santhen is a little Town three Leagues from Wesel, whether Monsieur Blaspiel
and General Spaen went: Monsieur Colbert came there the Third of the Month, and
Monsieur Calvo who commanded the French Forces, was ordered to be present, to
the end that according to the success of that negotiation, he might desist, or
pursue the enterprises that he was in condition to make: And therefore since
they were straitened by time, and that the Generals could not leave their
Quarters, this place was chosen as not being far distant, for holding of that
conference, wherein the very same day the Treaty of Truce which was signed at
Nimueguen, until the first of May, was prolonged for Fifteen days, to begin
next day the Fourth of the Month; which lengthened the cessation of Arms until
the 19th, the King being unwilling to grant a longer time, that he might sooner
hasten the Peace, and not leave so many people in an uncertainty of a thing
they so much desired.

The chief cenditions that M. Colbert obtained for the prolongation of the
Truce, were, that as a proof of the sincerity wherewith the Elector intended to
act with his most Christian Majesty, General Spaen put Wesel and Lipstadt into
his hands, to be kept by him until the Peace betwixt his Majesty and his Allies
on the one part, and his Electoral Highness on the other, should be signed and
ratified. These Conditions seemed the stranger, in that the Elector of
Brandenbourg made no great difficulty in granting of them, offering even to put
Schinkenscance into his Majesty's hands, who refused it, that he might not any
ways allarm the States General, to whom, by the Count D'Avaux his extraordinary
Ambassador, he gave that testimony of his good will.

It was not easy to be conceived what could be the policy of the Elector of
Brandenbourg, in willingly delivering up those places; if he desired the Peace
in good earnest, as it was probable, since he thereby put himself in greater
need of concluding it, what advantage did he find in exposing his Country to
ruin, for some few weeks delay in the conclusion of the Treaty? Or if he had a
design to defend himself, and that he hoped he was able to resist a powerful
Army, he might have begun by Wesel, which was a strong place, and wherein he
had a good Carison that might have afforded his Enemies business upon their
entry into his Country.

It was thought that the Elector of Brandenbourg perceived very well that he
could not hold out long; and that he knew that if the French entered by force,
not only that whole Country would be utterly ruined, but that likewise there
would be so great a consternation throughout all his other Territories, that it
would be hard for him to secure any of them; that upon these considerations he
had yielded up those places, that he might the better preserve them; and the
rather that with the Forces he drew out of Wesel and Lipstadt, he would be in a
condition of making a vigorous resistance at Minden, and to obtain from France
more advantageous conditions than those which he could not as yet resolve to
embrace: but before experience made appear how little security there was in
that choice, it was not very hard to foresee that the Elector of Brandenbourg
was not like to find great advantage thereby.

About this time, the Mareshal D' Estrades having got leave from the King his
Master to leave Nimueguen, parted from thence with his whole Family on the
Fifth, and M. Colbert, to whom alone the King referred what remained of the
negotiation at Nimueguen, signed the same day the prolongation of the Truce
with the Ambassador of Denmark, upon the same conditions that were agreed upon
at Santhen with the Ambassador of Brandenbourg, except the Article concerning
the places which were to be delivered up to his Majesty.

M. Meinders finding no success in his Negotiation with his most Christian
Majesty, having parted from the French Court upon his return to the Elector his
Master, that he might receive from him more ample instructions, and a larger
commission, returned at that time to Nimueguen, where on the morrow the 11th of
the Month, he had a long conference with M. Colbert, which made it hoped that
the Peace of Brandenbourg would be speedily concluded; but a few days after, M.
Meinders took his Journey back to Paris.

The Emperor in the mean time gave no orders to his Ambassadors concerning the
fulfilling of the Treaty of the Empire; which occasioned great complaining
amongst all the people of the Countries that were possessed by the French;
seeing that far from enjoying the fruit of Peace, they found themselves on the
contrary almost undone by the vast contributions which they paid for
maintanance of the French Forces; they carried their grievances even to the
Mediators at Nimueguen, and the Nuncio having reported them to M. Colbert by a
Memoir that he gave him the 14th, that Ambassador offered to cause the French
Forces to draw out of the posts which they possessed, provided that the Emperor
would evacuate the places which his Army held in the Empire, according to the
intent of the 27. Article of the Treaty of Peace.

At that time the Princes of Brunswick solicited the Mediators, the
Ambassadors of the Empire, and of France, that the Treaty which they had made
with France and Sueden, might be declared to make a part of the Treaty
concluded at Nimueguen betwixt the Emperor and those two Crowns. The Imperial
Ambassadors were for committing the affair to Vienna; but M. Colbert gave those
Princes on the Kings part an Act of inclusion into the Treaty of the Empire.

The Elector of Brandenbourg found now that he gained nothing by delaying to
accept the Conditions which the French had long ago proposed to him; for the
Forces that fell into his Country of the Marck, put him to a stand; and those
whom he had led into Prussia against the Suedes, suffered much, and were ruined
by the long Marches which he caused them to make that they might come and
defend Minden. And therefore his Electoral Highness, that he might omit nothing
that would tend to his advantage, resolved to Write to the French King, and to
try if he could obtain from his Majesty's generosity, what he could not hope
for by any other means.

I thought fit here to insert that Letter at length, because I found it would
be difficult to express the force of so fine a Letter by way of abstract;
besides, unless I gave the exact Copy of it, it might probably be hard to be
believed that agreat Prince, such as the Elector of Brandenbourg, would write
with so much respect and submission to his Majesty.

The Letter from the Elector of Brandenbourg to the French King.
Postdam the 16. May, 1679. My Lord,
IT is impossible but that your Majesty, according to the great wisdom
wherewith with God has endowed you, does easily perceive the moderation and
justice of my pretensions: and it being so, that you must offer violence to
that Generosity and Greatness of Soul which is natural to your Majesty, in
forcing me to conditions of peace that are not only injurious to me, but
ignominious also. God, who is just, seeing the righteousness of my Cause, has
prospered my Arms with the conquest of all Pomerania; and your Majesty makes me
give back the greatest part of it, which I put into your hands that I may
preserve the rest, which is but a small matter in respect of what I have gained
with the loss of my blood and the ruin of my subjects. Is it not then just, my
Lord, that since your Majesty obliges me to part from so great and fair Cities,
and so much of my Enemies Country, you should likewise oblige the Suedes to
leave me the rest; and that your Majesty having so far concerned your self for
the party that had no right to demand any thing, should concern your self also
for him who had right to keep all, but yet yields the greatest part merely in
condsieration of your Majesty? I am informed that your Ministers object to me
the Interest of your Glory and Honor; and know that that is a powerful motive
to animate a great soul to undertakings: But suffer me to put you in mind, That
Justice is the source and rule of Glory; and that I having that on my side, it
is far greater and more solid glory to support a just and moderate pretension,
than to favor one that is nothing less. And certainly could your Majesty but
hear the discourse of all Europe, and weigh it with the reasons that Interest
suggests to you from my Enemies, I am confident you would instantly decide in
my favors, and so prevent the judgment of disinterested posterity. Withal, my
Lord, I am very sensible that the Match is too unequal betwixt your Majesty's
Forces and mine, and that I am unable to resist a King who alone has carried
the burden of a War against the greatest Powers of Europe, and has with so
much glory and success gone through with it: But can your Majesty find any
advantage in the ruin of a Prince who is so desirous to serve you; and who
being preserved, may contribute more to your service than a bare willingness?
Your Majesty will, certainly, be the first that will regret my ruin, since you
cannot easily find in all the world besides, one who is more really and with
greater respect and zeal than my self, Your Majesty's, etc.


The Duke of Lorrain also, who was not willing to neglect any thing that might
give the French King fresh evidences of his desire to merit the favor of his
Majesty, was not satisfied with the assurances which he had already caused to
be given to him, but likewise got the Mediators to declare to M. Colbert, That
the Emperor had taken into his service all the Lorrain forces; and in the
public Declaration which he made at Nimueguen, he said that he had delivered
his Forces to a Prince at peace with France, that he might make appear to the
King, that though he was expelled his own Dominions, yet he would do nothing
that might give his Majesty ground to deprive him of the honor of his favor.

There was no appearance in the mean time that Germany would so soon taste of
the fruit of the Peace, because there was no forwardness showed for the
fulfilling of the Treaty: for though the accomplishment of it was very
necessary for the ease of a great many Provinces of the Empire; yet the
Imperial Ambassadors testified no great solicitude for attaining to so desired
an end. But M. Colbert having by the Mediators acquainted them with the
commission that he had received from the King his Master to act alone as to the
executing of the Treaties, they agreed to meet on the 22. at the Town Hall of
Nimueguen, in presence of Sir Lionel Jenkins Mediator. That Conference lasted
four hours, but without any agreement. As to the explication of the 27. Article
of the Treaty of Peace, the Imperialists said that they were ready to remove
their Forces from the places they possessed, so soon as they were required to
do it by the States of the Empire. But the French Ambassador maintained that
the Emperor ought to remove them without any requisition, seeing that Article
was absolute, and without condition, equally obliging both parties fairly to
evacuate all the places which they possessed, within a Month after the exchange
of the Ratifications, without further delay.

The King of Denmark's Resolution of treating his Peace with the King himself,
put an end to the Negotiation of the Ambassador of that Court at Nimueguen.
Nevertheless Monsieur de Meyerkron was not at first favorably accepted of his
Majesty, who refused to receive the King of Denmark's Letter, because in that
Letter he gave him not the title of Majesty, though that retarded not long the
Negotiation. The King approved of the measures that were taken of treating the
Peace of the North in Schonen. And M. Heugh, Ambassador from his Danish Majesty
at Nimueguen, acquainted M. Colbert on the 26. with the Conference that was to
be held at Louden, where M. de Feuquieres, Ambassador from his Most Christian
Majesty in Sueden, was to meet the Minister of the King of Denmark. The Suedish
Ratification of the Treaty of Peace betwixt that Crown and the Bishop of
Munster, was at that time brought to Nimueguen; but it was not as yet
exchanged, because of some difficulties that were found in the Treaty which was
signed the 22. of March.

The French Forces began already to spread in the Marck of Brandenbourg, and
there came daily new Troops to Wesel, to increase the Army which the Mareshal
de Crequi was to command; Equipage, Artillery, and all necessary Ammunition,
were continually brought; and the French used the greater diligence to put
themselves in a condition of making some enterprise, because M. Meinders was
not at all urgent in his Negotiation with the King. He spoke but indifferently
as to that concern, and said that the Elector his Master could not make peace,
if Stetin, and the country beyond the Oder, were not given up to him.

Most of the Princes of Germany offered their offices for the promoting of that
Peace. The Elector of Saxony offered his Mediation; but the Letter which he
wrote to the French King upon that subject, having been given by M. de Blasper
to M Colbert to be sent to his Majesty, that Ambassador refused to do it,
seeing the Elector of Brandenbourg had a Minister at Court, who might discharge
that office. The Princes of Brunswick made also some instances in favor also
of his Electoral Highness, that they might procure a delay in the Military
executions, seeming to be persuaded that that peace would not fail to give the
King all kind of satisfaction.

It was nevertheless a rare thing to see that it behoved the French Ambassadors
to press the Imperialists to consent to the easing of the Empire by
consummating of the peace. For this end M. Colbert thought a second Conference
necessary; in which the Imperialists would not maintain the reasons which they
had alleged in the former, without palpable prevarication. He therefore on the
second of June 1679. proposed to the Mediators, that they would bring about
that Conferenee, in which it would be convenient that all the Ministers of the
Prinees of the Empire at Nimueguen, might be present, to the end it might
appear whether the Emperor or French King were the cause of the delay of that
performance on which the repose of so many people depended. But the Emperors
Ambassadors thinking that a Conference in presence of the Ministers of the
Princes of the Empire would injure the Authority of his Imperial Majesty,
absolutely refused it, saying that the Decree which they had from the Diet at
Ratisbon, sufficiently authorized the Emperor to act as his Imperial Majesty
should think fitting touching the concerns of the Peace and present War.

At that time the Minister of the Elector of Cologn presented a Memoir to the
Mediators, demanding that Bonne might be evacuated by the Imperial Garrison; and
at the same time published the Resolution which the Diet at Ratisbon had taken
the 22. of the foregoing Month, whereby the Emperor was entreated to command
that the places in the Empire possessed by the Imperial Troops might be
evacuated, so that the Imperialins could not refuse a second Conference upon
that occasion at the Town Hall. But for all that, it was not possible to bring
them to condescend to the evacuation of the places; pretending that they had
not as yet had any advice of that result of the Diet of the Empire.
Nevertheless in regard of the instance that had been made by the Minister of
the Elector of Cologn, they offered to draw all the Forces out of his Country,
provided that the French drew theirs out of the Countries of Liege and Juliers.

M. Colbert could not condescend to that Proposition; but he offered to
maintain with all exactness at the Kings charges, the Garrisons of the places
which his Majesty had reserved in the Empire, to be employed for procuring of
the Peace of the North, and the satisfaction of Sueden. The Imperial
Ambassadors answered, That his most Christian Majesty was obliged to do that
from the very day that the Ratifications of the Peace were exchanged: And so
that second Conference had no better success than the former.

That which most vexed the Imperialists, was, that they could not obtain by the
Peace, that the French King should restore the Ten Towns of Alsatia into the
condition they were in before the War; that his Majesty should draw out his
Garrisons, and not possess them as belonging to him in propriety: And therefore,
seeing that stuck extremely in their heart, they intended when they made the
Treaty for consummating the Peace, to have comprehended those Ten Towns amongst
the places which France ought to evacuate; and in prospect of that, they put
them into the List which at that time they gave of the places of the Empire,
from whence the King was to remove his Forces. M. Colbert answered in general,
that his Majesty was ready to draw out his Garrisons from all the places which
they held in the Empire, excepting those that were made over to France by the
Treaties of Munster and Nimueguen.

That Answer gave no ground to the Imperialists to hope that they might obtain
by that Negotiation, what they could not gain by the Treaty of Peace, though
they alleged that the Treaty of Munster was not so express concerning the
Cession of the Ten Towns of Alsatia, but that an Article of the same Treaty
seemed to contradict what was clearly explained in another place concerning
that Cession. But the Imperialists at length waving that pretension, declared
on the 15th, that they consented that France should evacuate all those places
which their Forces held in the Empire, excepting those that had been yielded to
them by the Treaties of Munster and Nimueguen; and that on their part they were
ready to evacuate, not only Bonne, but also Treves and Keyserflatern, in
compliance with the instances that were made to that effect by the Electors of
Cologne, Treves, and the Palatin; but that for the other places of the Empire,
they still expected the resolution of the Diet of Ratisbone, affirming that
they doubted not but that the Emperor would comply with the desire of the
States of the Empire.

That Answer being by the Mediators communicated to M. Colbert on the 16th,
that Ambassador saw so little disposition on the part of the Imperialists to a
sincere performance of the 27th Article of the Treaty of Peace, that he held to
the last declaration which he had made, in respect that the Emperor, who was
much more concerned than France to make that evacuation, ought likewise to be
more inclined to it, to the end that some difficulties which apparently had no
other scope but the Emperors particular advantage, might no longer retard the
general ease of the States of the Empire.

The French Army was in the neighborhood of Minden, and began to straiten that
place, where General Spaen pretended to make a vigorous resistance: But the
Mareshal de Crequi made Monsieur Calvo pass the Weser on the 30th with a party
of Horse and Foot, on a Bridge of Boats which he had caused to be made, whilst
he himself, with a Body of Horse, went to cross it at a Ford, which he passed,
partly swimming under the Guns of a Castle, and in sight of the Enemies
Trenches. The Castle was afterward taken by the Foot commanded by the Marquess
of Vxelles. At the same time the Mareshal de Crequi, who passed the River only
with an intent to oblige the Country to pay the Contributions which he had
demanded, perceiving that General Spaen was come out of the Town with above
Three thousand men, and some Fieldpieces, to dispute the passage of the River,
briskly attacqued and defeated that Party. General Spaen was beat back to
Minden with considerable loss of men killed, and above four hundred taken
prisoners; so that the Elector of Brandenbourg had cause to be fully convinced,
that nothing but a Peace could secure him from the miseries which the
continuation of the War threatened.

This was the last action that put an end to so great a War; and if the Elector
of Brandenbourg had hastened but a few days the Negotiation of the Peace which
was signed at St. Germans the day before, the news had come in time to have
saved a great many brave men, by preventing that Engagement.

The re-establishment of the Treaties of Westphalia, was the groundwork and
chief Article of the peace of Brandenbourg, without any derogation from them,
except that for avoiding the differences that arise commonly amongst Princes
about the confusion of limits. Sueden yielded to the Elector of Brandenbourg
the Territories which that King possessed beyond the Oder before the War,
excepting the Towns of Dam and Golnau, with their dependencies; his Electoral
Highness being in the mean time to retain possession of Golnau, until the Crown
of Sueden should pay him the sum of fifty thousand Crowns.

The King of Sueden likewise gave up the half of the Tole and Customs which are
raised at the Port of the Town of Colberg, and the other Ports of the Electoral
Pomerania, and which were granted by the Treaty of Stettin in the year 1653.
But Sueden had still the Sovereignty of the River of Oder, the Elector of
Brandenbourg having no power to settle any Tole there.

That Prince was not exempted from the clause which was common to all the other
Princes who had made their peace with France; to wit, that he could not
directly nor indirectly assist the King of Denmark his Ally, if he continued to
make war against Sueden. But the French King as an effect of his good will, and
for the good of the peace, promised by a separate Article to pay, or cause to
be paid to the Elector the sum of Three hundred thousand crowns, in some manner
to reimburse the charges he had been at during the course of the War.

There remained now no Negotiation of importance to be managed at Nimueguen,
but that of the Treaty for fulfilling of the peace concluded betwixt the
Emperor and France; for the Conferences that were on foot at Louden in Schonen,
or rather the Negotiation that M. de Meyerkron had begun at the French Court,
gave hopes that ere long the peace would be concluded betwixt Sueden and
Denmark. Upon design of hastening the conclusion of that peace, a considerable
detachment of Cavalry commanded by the Marquess of Joyense, marched through the
Territories of the Elector of Brandenbourg, into the Counties of Oldenbourg and
Delmenhurst, and put all that Country under contribution.

The Count D' Espense passed at that time through Nimueguen, going with the
Treaty to the Elector of Brandenbourg; and though that peace was signed at St.
Germans, yet the Ratifications of it were exchanged at Nimueguen the 22. of
July 1679. so that nothing now detained M. Colbert at Nimueguen, but the
concluding with the Imperialists the Treaty for fulfilling the peace. Yet he
found them not as yet disposed to end that business quickly, though the
conclusion of it was so necessary for the welfare and repose of the Empire,
that without the same, the peace was of no use at all to it.

Matters standing thus, M. Colbert thought that it behoved him to put a little
more heat into the Imperialists than he perceived there was, and to bring them
to his hand by all ways imaginable. He found none more proper nor more natural,
than to feign a sudden departure, for which he said he had received Orders; and
in that design he sent away a good part of his Equipage and Servants. The
Imperial Ambassadors made no doubt but that he had such Orders as he said; and
the Nuncio bestirred himself with the zeal of a true Mediator, in soliciting
the Imperialists, to the end that so many people ruined by the miseries of War,
might not be longer without tasting the fruit of peace.

These considerations at length prevailed with the Emperor's Ambassadors: for
though they had been as stiff as to the conclusion of the Treaty of performance,
as they had been in respect of that of the peace it self; yet they well
perceived that the endeavors which they had heretofore used for explaining in
their favor in the Treaty of Nimueguen, what they found advantageous for
France in the Treaty of Munster, having only tended to confirm the French
pretensions as to the Sovereignty of the ten Towns of Alsatia, they might
likewise be assured that they lost time in pretending to gain by the Treaty of
Performance, more than they could by the Treaty of Peace; so that seeing M.
Colbert had prefixed a day for his departure, they consented to sign the
Treaty, rather than to leave so great a work imperfect.

By that Treaty which was signed the 17. the evacuation was on both sides to be
made the 20th of August, from all places in general, which by the Treaties of
Westphalia and Nimueguen belonged neither to his Imperial Majesty nor to the
French King, excepting eight places mentioned in the 8th Article of the Treaty
of Peace signed at Nimueguen the 5th of February, which the King was to possess
in the Empire until the conclusion of the peace of the North.

Seeing this Treaty was to take effect without any need of giving or exchanging
of Ratifications; it was no sooner signed, but that M. Colbert left Nimueguen
that he might return to France by the way of Holland: So that now it may be
said that the Assembly at Nimueguen ended, since the chief party left it, and
that there was no more to be treated there. Nevertheless the Mediators, part of
the Imperialists and Spaniards, the Ambassadors of Sueden and of the States
General, made a little longer stay at Nimueguen, there to sign the Treaties
betwixt Spain and Sueden, Sueden, and the States General. And the Nuncio
intending to stay until the end, that he might give proofs of the sincerity of
the intentions which he brought to that Assembly, was also one of the last that
departed.

Since all the Princes, who had still some concerns to be adjusted, were
comprehended in the Treaties which France had concluded with the principal
parties, and by consequent all hostilities amongst them ceased; the greatest
difficulties that remained to be determined, were about the Commerce of Sueden
and the States General.

The Peace betwixt Spain and Sueden was easy to be concluded, seeing that in
that Negotiation there was no new interest to be managed betwixt those Two
Crowns: Neither was there any need of a Treaty for that Peace, only some
Conditions were agreed upon, under which it was to be published in the
Countries of the Spanish Dominion, and those that depend on Sueden.

The greatest perplexity that happened in that affair proceeded from this, that
Sir Lionel Jenkins the Mediator, and the Ambassadors of Sueden had not, no more
than the French, for the Reasons I mentioned before, seen the Marquess de la
Fuente the Spanish ambassador; so that since the Mediator could not directly
mediate betwixt that Ambassador of Spain and those of Sueden, the Negotiation
on the part of Spain; behoved to be managed betwixt Sir Lionel Jenkins and the
Marquess de la Fuente by the mediation of the Imperial Ambassadors; by this
means, and by the great care that the Lord Ambassador Jenkins took in that
Affair, the parties agreed upon a form for the re-establishment and publication
of the Peace betwixt the Two Crowns of Spain and Sueden; and the mutual Acts of
acceptance being reciprocally interchanged, the form was sent to Spain and
Sueden, to be signed by the Two Kings, and afterward published at Madrid and
Brussels, and at Stockholme and Riga in Livonia.

The substance of that formulary was, that the Declaration of War, which had
been made some years ago, especially since the 17th of September of the
foregoing year, betwixt the Kings of Sueden and Spain, should be reputed as
never made; that his Catholic Majesty consented that the King of Sueden should
be comprehended in the Treaty of Peace, which had been signed, and since
ratified betwixt France and Spain; and then, that his Suedish Majesty approved
that the King of Spain should in like manner be comprehended in the Treaty of
Peace that had been signed and ratified betwixt his Imperial Majesty, and the
most Christian King; these Two Kings commanding and declaring that a true,
sincere and Christian Peace be renewed and settled betwixt them, their Kingdoms
and Subjects, as fully as there had never been War nor any Hostility betwixt
them.

The interest of Sueden and Holland, were attended with so many difficulties,
that those Two Treaties of Peace and Commerce betwixt those Two Powers, were
the last that were concluded at Nimueguen. So many obstacles and so hard to be
surmounted were started concerning Navigation, that it would be tedious, and
contrary to the design I proposed to my self in writing, if I should enlarge
upon the particulars: I shall only hint at the principal points on which were
founded the difficulties that lasted so long.

So soon as the Peace was signed betwixt France and the States General, the
Negotiation of another betwixt Sueden and the same States was begun. The most
difficult point to be adjusted in the Negotiation of that peace, was the
renewing of the Treaties of Alliance and Commerce which have been betwixt the
two Nations. The Suedes insisted much upon the renewing of the Treaty of 1673;
but it being made when the affairs of Holland were in a bad condition, and in
hopes that the Suedes having undertaken to be the Mediators of the peace, would
have no occasion to declare, as they did, for France: in prospect of that, the
States General scrupled not by that Treaty to grant great advantages to Sueden;
but they would not at all consent that it should be mentioned in the fourth
Article of the Treaty of peace, wherein they only renewed those of 1640. 1645.
1646. and 1667.

Of seven and thirty Articles which compose the Treaty of Commerce and
Navigation, there was hardly one which did not produce some difficulty. They
had already, for almost the space of a whole year, labored in vain to surmount
those obstacles; and therefore it was expected that at the Hague rather than
Nimueguen, the principal points in debate would be more easily adjusted. With
these hopes M. Oliverkrans went in the Month of May to the Hague; and the
States General having named Commissioners to treat with that Ambassador, they
met at the House of the Count D' Avaux, who in that juncture performed the
Office of Mediator. Besides, the particular interest that the Town of Amsterdam
and some other Towns of Holland, have in the commerce with Sueden, requiring
more exact informations as to every particular difficulty; it was reasonably
hoped, that that affair would be more easily determined at the Hague than at
Nimueguen.

They had many conferences upon that subject. The States demanded a diminution
of the impositions that Sueden had laid upon bulky commodities, especially
since the Treaty that Sueden made with the States in 1640. These commodities
are such as are of a great bulk and small price, as Stone and Marble, Hemp,
Wax, Pitch, Tar, Potashes, Corn and Timber. But the States waved the three
first sort of bulky Commodities; and the Ambassador of Sueden after much
repugnancy in two conferences successively, consented at length that the four
other sorts of bulky commodities should be regulated according to the Rates of
1659. which neverthelss are but little lower than those whereof the States
complained.

It was also agreed upon, That all duties and customs unequally imposed, which
tended to the lessening of the mutual freedom of Trade, and which have been
introduced in Sueden since the year 1656. should be discharged for the future;
and that the subjects on both sides should pay no other duties but those that
the native subjects do pay. Nevertheless that equality was not to be observed
in the Kingdom of Sueden and Finland; that is to say, that that clause of the
Treaty should only reach Riga in Livonia, Ingria, Pomerania, and the other
Dominions of Sueden upon the Baltick-sea; the Provinces of Ischonen, Bleking,
and Holland, being reckoned as parts of the ancient Kingdom of Sueden, though
they be not specified in the Treaty.

The free and half-free Ships of Sueden, gave occasion to another difficulty:
The free Ships are vessels built for War, carrying from 24. to 30. piece of
Cannon, and are obliged to serve in the Kings Fleet in time of War; and
therefore the King has privileged them in trading in respect of duties and
customs, that the benefit which they thereby enjoy, may recompense their
service, and supply the charges of rigging and fitting of them out, from which
Merchants ships are exempted. By means whereof the King of Sueden has always
men trained to the Sea, and a Squadron of about thirty Ships.

The half-free Ships are Vessels of about One hundred Tuns burden; their
privileges and number are so small, that they cannot be very prejudicial to
the Dutch Trade. Nevertheless the Dutch found, that all these privileged
Vessels might carry away the greatest part of the Trade of the Baltic; and
therefore the States insisted vigorously upon the abrogation of all those
privileges, as contrary to the equality of advantage which the subjects of
both Nations were to enjoy: But in that debate the same mean was taken which
served to remove the former difficulty; and it was agreed upon, that these
Vessels should only enjoy their exemptions in the Territories of the Kingdom of
Sueden and Finland; and that in the other Provinces on the Baltick-sea,
depending on the Crown of Sueden, there should be no distinction between
Suedish Ships and Dutch.

It could not be believed after this, that any new difficulty could retard the
conclusion of the Treaty of Commerce, whereof the Negotiation had lasted above
a year: Nevertheless there happened one which put a full stop to the affair.
The Ambassadors of the States General had put in the 7th Article of their
project, That the subjects on either side should be used as the Nation in
greatest friendship, ut quaeque gens amicissima.

The Suedes took occasion from this, to demand a freedom from the duties which
the Dutch had imposed upon the Suedish commodities that pass the Sound; and the
rather, because that imposition was never laid on till the Suedes had obtained
from the Danes, by Treaties concluded to their advantage, and exemption from
part of the duties that are exacted in the Sound. The truth is, that the States
to hinder that exemption from being prejudicial to the trade of their subjects
who enjoy not the same privilege, settled then in their Country upon those that
had the privilege of the Sound, and Imposition almost equivalent to that
Exemption.

The Dutch said, That the equality which ought to be observed in the Trade of
the two Nations, was not hurt by that kind of compensation; and alleged that
it was so little contrary to it, that in all the Treaties which had been
concluded in the long time since these duties were imposed, the abrogation of
them was never thought upon when other Treaties was made.

The Suedes however, who would not lose to the profit of the Dutch, what they
obtained to the prejudice of Denmark, stood firmly to that point; so that the
conferences at the Hague were broken up, and the Count D' Avaux could not
promise himself to renew them again on that subject with the same success that
they had had in the other difficulties; insomuch that M. Oliver Krants came
back to Nimueguen ( Aug. 1679.) where the Assembly being shortly after wholly
dissolved, the conclusion of these Treaties could no longer be prolonged, which
yet were not signed until the second of October; the annulling of the Imposts
laid on in Holland, and the reduction of those of Sueden to the standard of the
Treaty of 1640. remaining undecided and referred to other conferences which
were to be held at the Hague for adjusting these affairs within eighteen Months
after the signing of the Treaty.

In the mean time M. de Mayerkroon, who had been for some time at the French
Court, perceiving that the conferences in Schonen did not advance the
Negotiation of the peace betwixt Sueden and Denmark, began to seem more
inclined to conclude the Treaty of the King his Master, though he had no cause to
expect more advantageous conditions than those he had at first. On the
contrary, experience and example made appear, that it could not but be
prejudicial to the King of Denmark, to be the last in making his peace.

The French King on his part, desiring nothing more than to correspond with
that good disposition, and to render the peace general by the conclusion of
that of Denmark, gave for that end, on the 24th of August, a full power to M.
de Pompone, and by that means within a few days the Treaty was concluded
betwixt his Majesty and the Kings of Sueden and Denmark, and was signed at St.
Germans the second of September, on the same conditions that the King had
always proposed for the full satisfaction of his Ally.

It is known that his Majesty declared from the beginning, That he could not
make peace with the King of Denmark, but upon condition of a full restitu ion
to Sueden. The delays and difficulties that were made thereupon, moved not his
Majesty to abate any thing of the Treaties of Roschild, Copenhaghen, and
Westphalia; and these Treaties were the groundwork of the peace of Denmark; in
the fourth Article whereof his Danish Majesty declared, That in consideration
of his most Christian Majesty, he consented that the Crown of Sueden be
restored to all that it possessed before the War; and to all the Territories,
States, Provinces, Towns, and places that have been yielded up and acquired by
those three Treaties, and by consequent to all that the Danish Arms had
possessed during that War.

As to the differences that heretofore happened betwixt the subjects of the two
Nations by reason of the privileges and exemptions which the Suedes, as I
said, enjoy from a part of the duties that the King of Denmark raises in the
Sound and in the Belt, the most Christian King being uncertain whether or not
the intention of the King of Sueden was that his subjects should any ways make
use of their privileges to the prejudice of the revenue of the K. of Denmark,
thought fit so to order affairs by that Treaty, that Commissioners named by
each party, should meet three months after the exchange of the Ratifications,
and by the mediation of a Minister appointed by his Majesty, adjust all these
differences in an amicable way.

The Restoration of the Duke of Sleswick Holstein-Gottorp having been one of
the conditions on which the French King consented to this Peace; it was
likewise one of the greatest difficulties that happened in the carrying on of
the Treaty. That Prince was stripped of all by the King of Denmark, only for
being an Ally to the King of Sueden; and therefore ought to be restored to all
again: To which, the King of Denmark, as an evidence of the desire he had to
put an end to the War with all expedition, consented at the desire and
requisition of the French King; granting that the Duke of Sleswick
Holstein-Gottorp, should enjoy his Territories, Provinces, Towns and Places, in
the same state as they were in at the signing of the Treaty, with all the
Sovereignty that belonged to him by virtue of the Treaties of Roschild,
Copenhagen and Westphalia. That Prince could hardly pretend to more, unless it
were the damage that his Territories had suffered during the War, by the vast
sums of Money that the King of Denmark had raised therein, as being one of the
best Countries of all the North.

The Elector of Brandenbourg, the Princes of the House of Brunswick, and the
Bishop of Munster, who made their separate Treaties, after that the Peace was
concluded betwixt France and Holland, received profitable testimonies of the
desire that the French King had of giving repose to Europe; for his Majesty was
willing to ease them of part of the charges of the War, by giving them large
sums of Money, in consideration of their good inclinations toward the Peace,
and particularly in favor to the King of Sueden, who has not been wanting on
his part, to give considerable advantages to all these Princes: But the King of
Denmark is the only Prince who has not only reserved none of his Conquests; but
likewise the sole enemy of Sueden, to whom France has allowed no consideration
for his charges. Seeing the King of Denmark was at that time in a condition to
demand Reason of the State of Hambourg, in relation to several pretensions that
he has upon that City, and particularly concerning the Homage that he claims
from it; he drew all his Forces about that Town immediately after the
conclusion of the Peace with Sueden. The truth is, his Danish Majesty had not
not an Army strong enough to force such a City as Hambourg, and the more,
because the Neighboring Princes concerned themselves in its preservation: But
the King of Denmark coming at first as near to it as he pleased, by reason of
the neighborhood of Altena, raised Batteries for his Artillery and Bombes, with
which he might easily have incommoded the Town.

October 1679, In this Instant the most Christian King wrote to the King of
Denmark, entreating him not to disturb the repose that the general Peace had
given to all Europe almost: and the Princes of the House of Brunswick, who had
already sent Forces into Hambourg to provide for its defense, interposed
vigorously for that accommodation, which was provisionally concluded the first
of November; the Rights of the King of Denmark and of the City of Hambourg
remaining as they were, until that the point of Homage and the other
differences which depended betwixt his Danish Majesty and that Town, should in
an amicable way be decided by course of Law.

November 1679, The chief condition of that agreement, was an obligation by the
Town of Hambourg, to pay, at Five Terms, to his Danish Majesty, the sum of Two
hundred and twenty thousand Crowns; in consideration whereof, that King
remitted the indignation he had conceived against that Town, renounced the
pretensions that he had to the Lands jointly possessed by Hambourg and Lubeck;
and promised to restore the Ships, Goods, Commodities and Inhabitants of
Hambourg, which had been seized by reason of these pretensions.

Thus ended that great War, wherein almost all the Princes of Europe were
engaged from the year 1672. But it was not enough for the good and repose of
Europe, that the general peace put an end to all the calamities of the War;
these mournful Scenes of so bloody a Tragedy required at length some pleasing
Catastrophy, which might sweeten the memory of past miseries, and fill the
people with more agreeable hopes. Nothing was more proper to produce such an
effect than the Marriage of the chief Princes who had had a share in the War,
seeing these new Alliances were sacred ties to render the Peace indissolvable.

No sooner had the King of Spain ratified the Peace with France, but that he
thought upon confirming it by a new Alliance with the French King; so that
though the Court of Spain were far engaged with the Emperor for the Marriage of
the Imperial Princess with his Catholic Majesty, yet it hindered not that
Prince from converting all his thoughts toward France. The Picture of
Mademoiselle de Valois, and the Royal qualities of that Princess, made him
resolve the last Spring to cause the Marquess de los Balbases to go from
Nimueguen to the French Court, in quallity of Ambassador extraordinary, to
demand her in Marriage.

That Minister went suddenly into France, and in a private Audience which he
had of the King about the beginning of May, he demanded of his Majesty
Mademoiselle in Marriage for the King his Master; but his Majesty gave no
answer to the Ambassador concerning an affair of that importance until the
beginning of July, at which time he declared that he granted Mademoiselle to
the King of Spain. That Kingdom being mindful that France had always given them
good Queens, the people were extremely overjoyed at the news; but the young
Monarch especially, who was deeply smitten with the merit of that Princess.

The Ceremony of the Marriage was performed at Fontain-bleau the last day of
August, with all the magnificence that could be expected from the French Court.
The Procuration which the King of Spain sent blank, to be filled up with the
name of him whom the King should think fit to nominate for espousing the Queen,
was given to the Prince of Conty, who gave his Hand to that Princess in the
name of his Catholic Majesty; and the Queen sometime after took her Journey
for Spain, not without shedding of Tears, which testified that the regret of
leaving France was more sensible to her, than the joy of possessing a Crown.

The Heroic qualities both of body and mind which met in the person of the
Prince of Conty, gained so much of the esteem and affection of his Majesty,
that he thought it not enough to give him a very special mark of it, by making
choice of him to espouse the Queen of Spain; but shortly after gave him more
sensible testimonies of the same, by bestowing upon him in Marriage
Mademoiselle de Blois, whom his Majesty tenderly loves. That Marriage was
celebrated with so much splendor, and with so universal approbation, that the
Court never appeared more magnificent, nor better satisfied than upon that
occasion.

The Marriage of the King of Sueden with the Princess Vlrica of Denmark, was
agreed upon, before the rupture betwixt Sueden and Denmark by this last War:
yea, even from that time, stately Coaches, and some things that were necessary
for the Pomp of that Marriage, were providing in France; so that after the
Peace was concluded betwixt those Two Kings, it was not hard to make up that
new Marriage: But seeing those Princes had still a great deal to do to regulate
affairs within and without their Kingdoms, and especially the King of Sueden,
who was to retake possession of several Provinces, and to give orders for
settling them again in the condition that they were in before the War; the
consummation of that Marriage was delayed until the Spring: In the mean time
part of the Equipage for that Ceremony was preparing at Hambourg; and Clothes
and other things which were ordered to be made in France, were expected from
thence.

December 1679, The French Court also laid aside all thoughts of War, Feasting
and Divertisements were the daily employment there; and the Marriage of the
Queen of Spain was hardly over, when the King thought on that of the Dauphin.
Men cast their eyes on all the Princesses of Europe, being curious to know for
whom that great fortune was destined by Heaven; but his Majesty pitched upon
the Princess Anne Marie Christian of Bavaria, for whom also the Dauphin seemed
to have greatest inclination. M. Colbert, who was just returned from Nimueguen,
was sent into Bavaria to treat about the Marriage, where he concluded all the
Articles, and signed the contract thereof the 30th of December, Afterward the
King sent the Duke of Crequi into Bavaria with presents for the Princess, who
being accompanied by Forty Gentlemen, performed the journey by Post.

The Court at that time prepared for the Journey which the King designed in
February, to go meet the Dauphiness as far as Tholous, where the ceremonies and
confirmation of the Marriage were to be performed; the Duke of Bavaria having
espoused the Dauphiness in name of the Dauphin at Munichen. The King in the
mean time acquainted all neighboring Princes with that Marriage, by Letters
which he wrote to them, wherein it appears that the piety and great virtues
wherewith that Princess is endowed, have given his Majesty just cause to hope,
that that alliance will produce to France, Princes that shall worthily answer
the greatness of so August a Birth.

FINIS.

