English version of royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom HONI SOIT QVI MAL
Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the Lords Justices and Council.
Maurice Eustace Canc. Orrery. Mountrath.

WHEREAS the Duke of Albemarle General of all his Majesty's Armies, and the
Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of his Majesty's household, have by writing under
their hands and Seals bearing date the second of March 1660. Pursuant to the
Authority unto them given, by his Majesty's gracious Declaration of the
thirtieth of November in the aforesaid year appointed the Right honorable Henry
Lord Viscount Moo^ of Droghedagh, Arthur Lord Viscount Valentia, John Lord
Viscount Massereene, Francis Lord Angyer, John Lord Kingston, Richard Lord
Baron of Colloony, Sir James VVare Knight, Sir Theophilus Jones Knight, Col.
Arthur Hill, Col. Marcus Trevor, Cap. Robert Fits-Gerrald, Sir Robert Newcomen,
Baronet Sir Arthur Forbess, Bart. Sir Richard Lane Rnit. and Baronet, Sir
Patrick Weyms Knight, Sir George Lane Knight, Sir John Stevens Knight, Sir
Audley Mervin; Knight, Sir William Flower Knight, Col. Chid^ey Coote, Col.
Francis Fowke, Serjant-Major Thomas Harman, Serjant-Major George Rawden, Cap.
Hans Hamilton, Cap. Robert Ward, Cap; Richard Gething, Brian Jones Esquire; Doctor
William Perty, Richard Stevens, James Cuff, and Samuel B^thurst Esqs and
Alderm. Daniel Bellingam, or any five or more of them to be the Persons
entrusted by virtue of the said Declaration, who are to do every Act and thing
entrusted to their care by the said Declaration, and to let, and set, for the
best advantage, and to the ends in the said Declaration expressed the several
securities appointed by the said Declaration, for the satisfying the respective
personal Arrears of all Commissioned Officers, their Heirs, or Assigns, who
were in Regiments, Troops, and Companies, raised in Ireland, or transported out
of England, and served his Royal Majesty CHARLES the first of blessed memory,
or his Majesty that now is, in the Wars in Ireland, at any time before the
fifth day of June 1649 other then such who have received Lands for their ^ay
due unto them since the fifth day of June 1649, And whereas all former Leases
or Contracts for Leases, made by the late usurped Authority for any of the said
securities are now void. It is therefore hereby declared to the end all Persons
who are in possession of any of the Lands and Tenements, or of any of the
Houses and Lands, thereunto belonging, which are by the said Declaration set
apart for the satisfying of the Commissioned Officers as aforesaid, as also
such Persons who are desirous to become Tenants unto the said Trustees, to any
of the Premises aforesaid, may have timely notice given them when to attend
the said Trus^ees, for the making of agreements with them for the same, that
the forfeited Lands and Houses, in the Respective Counties, Towns, and
Corporations hereafter mentioned, are appointed to be set and let by the said
Trustees, on the several days hereafter set down at the Custom house in
Dublin (viz.)

The Town of Droghedagh Friday the 26. April 1661. The Town of Naas Friday the
26. April The County of VVicklow Monday the 29. of April. The Countyes of
Longford and Le^rim Wednesday the 1. of May The County of Donnegal, and the
forfeited Lands within the mile line, Thursday the 2. of May. The city of
Kilkenny, Friday the 3. of May. The Town of Trim, Navan, and Athboy, Monday the
6. of May. The Town of Kells, Thomas town, and Callen, Tuesday the 7. of May.
The Towns of Wexford, Ross and Inesteag, Wednesday the 8. of May The city of
Waterford, Thursday the 9. of May. The Town of Clonmel, Wednesday the 15 of
May. The Towns of Dungarvan, Feathard and city of Cashel, Friday the 17. of
May. The city of Limerick, and the Town of Kilmallock, Monday the 20. of May.
The Town of Galway, Wednesday the 22 of May. The town of Athlone, Thursday the
23. of May. The city of Dublin, Monday the 27 of May.
And whereas it is supposed that there are many persons who upon Leases or
contracts for Leases, from the late usurped Authority, have made considerable
Improvements upon Houses in the Towns aforesaid, As also others who had Leases
or Contracts for Leases granted unto them by the said usurped Authority of
several other of the Houses within the aforesaid Towns, who made a considerable
advantage thereby by setting and letting the same to under Tennants, who
likewise made Improvements thereon, It is therefore hereby Declared that it is
the intention of the said Trustees, that the Person or persons who have made
such considerable Improvements upon any of the Houses as aforesaid, shall be
preferred unto the Tennancy of the same whether he or they be head Tennants or
under Tennants. And to the end likewise that the Persons concerned as aforesaid
may not ^ut themselves to an unnecessary charge in attending the said Trustees,
and soliciting there business themselves when the same cannot betimely
dispatched, they are directed by the said Trustees; to Authorize: (if they think
fit) by Letters of Attorney ^uch Person or Persons in whom they can repose
trust to solicit the dispatch of the Premises, whereupon the said entrusted
Persons ^nform us that Leases shall be perfected for the same to all intents
and purposes, as if the same had been done by the Persons themselves. Provided
that the said Letters of Attorney be duly perfected before the chief
Magistrates of the Towns wherein such Letters of Attorney are to be made, or
before two of the next Justices of Peace, and certificates produced before the
said Tru^tees from such chief Magistrates or Justices of the Peace, that the
said Letters of Attorney were so perfected before them as afore^aid, and it is
further Declared by the said Trustees, that if any of the Persons concerned as
aforesaid shall neglect to give their attendance on the said Trustees either by
themselves or their lawful Attourneys at the respective times appointed as
aforesaid the said Trustees will proceed to the disposing of their several
houldings to such Persons as will give most for the same, And all Majors,
Sheriffs, and other the chief Magistrates, and Officers, in the several Towns
and Counties aforesaid respectively are hereby required to publish this
Proclamation immediately after sight thereof in the most public and remarkable
places in the several Towns and Counties aforesaid,

Dated at the Council Chamger the 17. day of April 1661. Io. Armachanus
Massereene. VV. Caulfeild. R. Coote. Hen. Tichborne. Tho. Pigot. Io. Bisse.
Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbess. Robert Forth. Arthur Hill.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Dublin Printed by William Bladen, by special Order. Anno Dom. 1661.


