English version of royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom HONI SOIT QVI MAL
Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the Lords Justices and Council.
Maurice Eustace Canc. Orrery. Mountrath.

WHereas We are given to understand by the Informations of many persons well
deserving credit, that of late times there have been sundry unlawful assemblies
in many parts of this Kingdom held by Papists, by Presbyterians, by
Independents, by Anabaptists, by Quakers, and other Fanatical persons meeting
in great numbers, diverse hundreds and sometimes thousands at an assembly
convened and congregated, some by a foreign pretended Jurisdiction, others by
a pretended Domestique Authority from a Presbytery, others under pretense of
Congregational Churches, and all of them contrary to and in contempt of his
Majesty's Royal Authority, and the established Laws of the Land, and if not
seasonably prevented threatening the disturbance of the good Government, Peace
and Tranquillity of the Kingdom; In which Assemblies some have taken upon them
on their own heads to appoint public Fasts, and days of Humiliation or
Thanksgiving for his Majesty's Subjects, and to give holy Orders, and induct
into Ecclesiastical benefices, and to deprive Ministers (who have good titles
by the Laws of this Realm) at their pleasures by their Arbitrary Orders by the
force of such of their parishioners as join with them and go along with them,
At which meetings they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and to cast
dirt in the face of the lawful Magistrates, yea to usurp the essential rights
of Sovereignty it self, and to inveigh against the known Laws of this Realm; We
therefore the Lords Justices and Council, considering and desiring timely to
prevent the many sad inconveniences and mischiefs which must of necessity flow
from these tumultuous courses if not prevented, and what apparent dangers they
threaten to the Kingdom in general, Have thought fit to declare to all his
Majesty's loving Subjects, that all such Assemblies, whether it be of Papists,
of Presbyterians, of Independents, of Anabaptists, of Quakers, or of any other
Fanatical persons, are in themselves altogether unlawful, and most dangerous to
the common good of the Kingdom; And therefore We do strictly inhibit and forbid
all his Majesty's Subjects either Ecclesiastical or Lay, to call or convocate
any such Assemblies under the name of days of Humiliation, or days of
Thanksgiving or consistorial days, or under any other pretense whatsoever, or
to be present at them, or to execute their sentences, or to be present or any
way to assist at the execution of them, as they will answer the contrary at
their perils.

And We do hereby further declare, that as We can readily pass by such
disorderly and tumultuous meetings for the time past upon hope of amendment for
the future, so if any person or persons whatsoever, shall for the future
presume to convocate or appoint any such Assemblies, or meet at them being
convocated by any others, or shall disperse or spread abroad any of their
Orders, Sentences, or Acts, or execute or assist at the execution of any of
their said Orders or Sentences, or Acts, or any part of them hereafter, We
shall call him to a strict account as well for the time past as for the future.

And as We assure Our Selves that the most Reverend Archbishops, and the right
Reverend Bishops, will use all due care and industry to gain such as have been
seduced into those Turbulent and Seditious courses to obedience and conformity
to the just Laws of this Realm, so We do hereby require and charge them, and
all Governors, Justices of Peace, Sherifs, and all other his Majesty's loving
Subjects and Officers whatsoever, that they suffer not any such unlawful
meetings under the pretense of Religion to be held within their several
Provinces, Diocesses, Sheires, or districts for the future, but seize upon all
such persons so assembled, and bind them over with sufficient sureties to
answer for such unlawful meetings, and all other abuses and disorders aforesaid
either before the Judges of Assize, or the Justices of the Peace at their
Sessions according to the quality or degree of their offenses, there to be
proceeded with according to Law, as they tender his Majesty's service, and the
prosperity and welfare of this Kingdom.

And We require all Commanders Officers, and Soldiers of his Majesty's Army,
and all other his Majesty's Subjects, as occasion may be offered, or their
assistance required, to be ayding and assisting in the due execution of these
our commands, whereof they may not fail; And We require all Mayors, Sherifs,
and all other Officers of Cities, Counties, and Corporate Towns to cause this
Proclamation to be forthwith Published and Proclaimed, and publicly fixed up
in all public places within their respective limits.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 22. day of January 1660. Io.
Armachanus. Cork, Cloyn, Ross. Ia. Margetson Elect. Dublin. Montgomerie.
Michael Boil, Elect. Hen. Tichborne. Rob. Forth. Rob. Meredith. Theo. Jones.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Imprinted at Dublin by William Bladen, by special Order, Anno Dom. 1660.


