AN ARREST On the East INDIA PRIVATIER, As per Advice and Copy sent to its
Commander Sr. J. C. from H. K. near HAMBURGH.
SIR;
SEnse as well of your Worth as of my Obligation to you being a constant Spring
of desire in me to subserve your Inclination and Interest, I could not let slip
this Occasion given me (as opportune as casual) to serve them in the
Information of an Arrest hereunto annexed; If the Original thereof be, as I
hear it is, designed for Royal View and Judgment, exclusive of all other, I
have thwarted them, and gratified you by motion equally unexpected and hidden
to both.

Tho the end and motive of this Mission be obvious in the Reason of the thing
sent, yet somewhat I may say to each of them. The Aim or End thereof is, to
propagate Philopatriasm, and to state and promote the real Interest of our King
and Nation in Trade, particularly in that of East India; next to serve your
Interest and Inclination too, if Philopatris be Name and Nature: for walking
Exactly, and being a Common good is Wisdom and Satisfaction in Philopatria and
Theoprepia; as being Rich and growing in Contraction is, in Argentoria: Only
with this difference, the former is real and everlasting, the later a Dream and
must soon awake Fools in forlorn despair. The Motive thereof, (beside what has
been said) was the late practice of printing the Allegations of the Turkey
Merchants presented to the view and judgment of His Majesty in Council,
(exclusive of all other) without their consent. A matter you are concerned in,
and in which you see your Example does dispose to Imitation; since by special
contrivance and sundry and caetera's you are in effect the whole East India
Company. If you now sail in Morals, One will be induced to assert manifested
un-truths before Councils, and tender his Oath thereto. Another will open
sealed Letters and read Contents neither directed nor appertaining to him. A
third will utter Contradiction or Falsehood in print: e.g. Answer to Allegations
page 12. which says, As to the Accusation of sending Throwsters, Weavers, and
Dyers, the East India Company say, the whole Accusation is a mistake, (i. e.
they never sent any) except only as to one or two Dyers, which they have
usually sent to the Bay of Bangala, i.e. tho they usually (so often as their
Ships go) send them by one's or by two's yet they send none; Riddle me what is
this? Tho other prettynesses be in the Ans. yet in that they are but small, a
single winding sheet may serve them. This you see is filled already with
Contents sufficient to testify that I am a True Philopatrite, and without
Trope or Complement,

16 Sept. 1681. Your Affect. and Faithf. Serve. H.K.

REASONS For Constituting a New EAST INDIA COMPANY IN LONDON.
COmmunities, i. e. humane Beings collected for common good, or Bodies politic
are best represented by the Body natural. And Trade, as means to the Life, the
strength, and beauty thereof, may be resembled to good blood in it; which in
circulation is the chief Succor and Health of the whole, and with most speed
runs to relieve the wounded or meanest part; When therefore upon any Stop, be
it by contraction or otherwise, we seek to remove the obstruction, or apply for
regular motion, we do not endanger the Trade, but subserve it, and the
prosperity of the Community: As, we hope, will appear when our Reasons (most
humbly offered) are considered.

Why a new Subscription unto a Joynt-Stock to be managed by a regulated Company
will improve the Trade of the East Indies unto National Advantage beyond what
it is at present?

REASON I. Because though this Trade, once but the Fortieth, be now increased
to be in value the Fourth part of the Trade of this Nation, yet it does now
support, or entertain fewer persons as Proprietors, than it did when the
Company was first settled. The Stock not being increased by new Subscriptions
in proportion to the Trade; for continuing 375000 l. (upon which all Sales and
Dividends are made) the Adventurers instead of being increased to 9000
proportionable thereto, are reduced from 900 as they were at first, to 550. Now
as Joint is requisite to make a Stock in this Trade profitable, so extension to
Persons is necessary to make it National.

II. Such are the CORRVPTIONS, grown up with time in the management of this
Trade, that the major part of the Gains is divided among Forty men, and the
whole Administration or Command in the hands of Ten, I had almost said One man;
Whence a Particular Interest is carried on under the name of a Public.

III. The Method now used in carrying on the Trade, by taking up 6 to 700000 l.
on a Common Seal, at Interest, (no Member of the Company being obliged for
payment) is not only indirect and dangerous (in that they seldom have in
England near the value they owe, and there is a possibility their Ships may
miscarry) but also very unequal to the Subject. The Company reaping from 50 to
60 per Cent. profit thereby; whereas the Lenders have but 3 or 4 per Cent for
Interest and Hazard.

IV. The Major part of Merchants and many other people of our Nation are
excluded Trade, if not admitted into This. Some being Minors or unborne when
this Company was settled, and others have their Trades swallowed up by This; As
Linens from Hambrough, Flanders, Holland and France; Taffeties from Italy and
France, and in part our Manufacture at home.

V. This Company, finding great Gains by appropriating this Trade to a few, do
hinder the Enlarging thereof to sundry Places in India, etc. to which nothing
can conduce more, than the enlarging of Stock and number of Persons therein. It
being certain that if it were so increased to two Millions (of which the Trade
is capable) and a Regulation answerable, it would employ, as more Men and Ships
in the Indies, so in all other places of this Trade; Augment Custom to his
Majesty, and be of great advantage to his People in general.

VI. It agrees, as with the Argument used to obtain a Grant of this Charter,
so with their Preamble or the Act of a General Court, viz. That they should at
the end of seven years balance their Books, and open them for new
Subscriptions: A thing they never yet did, except in such sallacious ways, that
no one person, upon reasonable Terms, could go in or out. By which, be it
neglect or deceit, they keep Supscription from us: although it be our
indubitable Right, if not in the intent of their Act, yet, in the Intendment of
his Majesty's Grant, as it was the Motive of it.

VII. The Primitive Practice of this Company and the Reason thereof requires
now a New Subscription. For when 750000 l. was at first subscribed, the half
only was paid, being as much as the Trade then required. The same reason, now
two Millions is requisite, does direct unto the way for Supply, not by
borrowing, but by opening for Subscriptions: This being the most natural,
because primitive, way for it. And whereas this Company take Money at Interest,
and decline calling in the other half subscribed by their own Members; it shows
that the Regency is in them, who have absolutely subjected every thing to their
own particular Interest.

VIII. Whereas it is unusual to allow, as Motive or Reward, unto Invention or
Discovery, other than some certain Term of 10 to 15 or 20 years: Yet this
Company, though not Discoverers of this Trade, have enjoyed it 24 years (in 10
of which they made 7 for 1 of their Money) which may be conceived sufficient
Reward for what Service they pretend to have done their Country.

IX. If by opening this Trade to JAPAN, to CHINA, or otherways, it should
become double or treble what it is, most likely, without a new Settlement, the
desire of Gain will then effect a Paucity of Adventurers (the natural Effect of
this Cause which usually increases as a Gainful Object is increased) It having
gradually so done since the time it began to advance in Anno 1666. For no man
had of this Trade 4000 l value in Anno 1665, but now some have 40000, others
50000, another 100000 l. in it. Of like produce the desire of Security will be,
in that an Ingross of the Stock giving them the Management, they will have for
their Security the Stock and the Nations Money, borrowed on a Common Seal;
which upon Misfortune affects not their Particular.

X. Many Persons, partly through decay of other Trades, but chiefly to bring
This to a Reasonable and National Settlement in a Joint Stock, have engaged in
Interloping; who having met with Profit, will scarce desist that way, unless
this be opened to them. And should they be denied Freedom to unlade and sell
here, their going to Foreign Ports may excite to that which in the Issue may
divert in part or otherwise prejudice the India Trade of this Kindom. To
obviate which Mischief (by the two Ships now so employed) it seems requisite to
give them admittance here. Whereby His Majesty will receive his Customs; and
the Interlopers by being Subscribers into the New Joint Stock or by other means
(when they are here best to be used) may be prevented for the Future. And we
conceive the Equity and Usefulness of such a New Charter as makes the Trade
National, will give it the Force of Law, an effectual Bar to Interloping, which
the present cannot be, because it incloseth Trade not for, but from the People;
and being pernicious to the Kingdom, whosoever shall practice as these do with it,
are indictable at Common Law.

XI. It will be very severe that the Turkey Merchants should have no Admittance
into this, so like to ruin theirs; when they have deserved well, by carrying on
a Trade which (though less Profitable to themselves) Exporteth yearly of Our
Manufacture 400000 l. and Imports Goods for a farther Manufaction, whereby
the Nation gains 600000 l. per annum.

XII. Admission into this Trade any other way will be either difficult, or as
none unto the purpose of general satisfaction and Interest; As Purchase is,
being when and at what Price the Seller will, like to that of Lands: Whereby
the approved and usual allowed freedom of Admission into Trade is destroyed.
Also Experience shows, that since the advance of this Trade the great Sharers
therein accumulate more and more; it is only some small Sums in Sale escape
their hands. And if more did, it would be but the exchange of AB for CD. A
thing not subserving the King's or Kingdom's Interest in addition of Stock, or
of number to Persons in this Trade. And in that it is by Purchase and not by
his Majesty's Grace, our Loyal Hearts resent it, as A grievous common Nuisance.
The rather, for that the most needy of his Royal Help (who be the Objects of
his Pity) are for ever excluded, because they have not Money to buy 100 l. at
the Rate it now goes; and a less Sum, original Stock, is seldom, if ever, to be
met with.

XIII. This Company as well by sending to East India, Dyers, Weavers, and
Throwsters, with Instruments for the setting up of Manufactures abroad, as by
the contraction of this Trade to few Persons, the inequality which arises by
carrying on the Trade with Money at Interest, Their private Trade, their owning
of Ships (which chiefly belong to a few of them) their refusing to enlarge the
Stock by new Subscriptions, and by other undue practices at home, are
degenerated form their Primitive Nature, and have perverted, to particular
advantage, his Majesty's Charter granted for general Good: therefore ought not
to be continued Sole Possessors of so profitable a Trade, in opposition to the
desire and Interest of the Nation in general; as it is to the Opinion and
Consent of the Majority of themselves in particular.

XIV. As by Contraction the Company do rob his Majesty of his Treasure in this
Stock, scilicet, the Persons and Good of his People in general, so by long
continuance have well nigh forgot his Majesty's Favor, the Nature of their
Tenure. This Trade they deem as their Money, and name it their Personal Estate,
in bar of the great Charter by which a People depend on their Prince as a
Common Father. Whereby, obscuring or obstructing his Majesty's Beneficence,
they cool the fervor of his Subjects Affection and Duty to him.

XV. The present Conjuncture is opportune for the termination of this Company,
As well in reference to Affairs abroad, as at home; Our Neighbors not being in
a Condition to take Advantage thereof: and at home want of Employment for the
numerous People that have of late applied themselves, their Stocks, and Ships
to Trade.

XVI. As all past terminating of Old and constituting of New Companies have
been advantageous to this Trade; so the present desired will be, if a good
Regulation be made (as is intended) to prevent in a New the Defections of the
Old Company. Until this be done (by new subscribing two Millions, etc.) the
present may go on with the Trade, in connection with setching off their Effects
in India; As is easily and soon done, because they seldom, if ever, have any
thing there beside Forts, etc. (called a Dead Stock) which must always remain
to succeeding Companies. And then the through change of the Company will
endanger the Trade no more than that annually made, of committees; Nor
discommode it otherwise than the Old wellgrown Tree is by lopping its exuberant
Branches, or opening its Root for fresh Supplies of Water.

XVII. At the Original Settlement of all India Companies, (because the Motive,
as the End thereof, is general good) no man is excluded but by his own Act,
which ought to be perpetuated to us, though cannot, unless we determine Old and
constitute New, so frequent as is consistent with the Being of this Trade, and
its profitable continuance with us. Wherefore the present Company if continued
cannot do other than violate, unto National Perdition (as too far already it
has done) the Rule and the End of Incorporating of Trades; for that the Men
who frame the trading part of the Nation are in 24 years so changed that they
be, as it were, a new Generation.

XVIII. In Charters granted by Kings, wherein Trades are Incorporated to a
number of Subjects named, the Intention is not particular, but to them in trust
for the general Good. The like just Wisdom and Grace of his Majesty is expressed
in the Grant to this East India Company, for his Charter says, When it either
in whole or in part becomes unprofitable to him or the Realm that then and
from thenceforth (after three years warning) it shall expire to all intents and
purposes.

XIX. If Examples be of force, we have many of Companies which had their
Determination for public good, though they reaped not what they sowed; which,
if particular Interest must be considered, will be found much severer than to
have this East India Company expire after so profitable an enjoyment, and so
long.

XX. If the Trade of this Nation were Incorporated and contracted as this to
India is, it would soon perish, for that the whole then, in proportion to this,
would enrich only 160 persons, and maintain, as Adventurers or Traders, not
above 2000. Now if such an Incorporating would have very ill Effect in the
whole, the Contraction in this great Trade of East India, must in some
proportion be of ill effect to it, and as consequent, on the Glory and
Prosperity of our Nation.

To show that our Design is not to destroy, we are ready, and shall, if thought
fit, publish a Form of Settlement agreeing with the abovesaid Ends.

FINIS.

