Taxila, OR LOVE Preferred before DUTY. A NOVEL.

By D. W. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Kings-Arms, near Cliffords-Inn-Lane,
by St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street, 1692.

TO THE Accomplished and Highly Esteemed Mrs. Elizabeth Whittingham.
TO find your deserving Name prefixed to so inconsiderable ^ Piece, the World
may justly won^er, and term it a presumptuous Undertaking: Consideration, says
^ne, would have made him more dis^reet, and had he balanced it, he must have
yielded to a less bold ^umour. Alas! how different is that thought from the
true occasion; from thence I had the highest En^ouragement to proceed: For
pau^ing one day seriously upon the mat^er, the most affecting Object so
^trongly seized upon my active Prin^iple, that I found my self disposed in sp
ite of all my force, to form without delay this Dedication. I hope your
goodness will prevent the Censure of the World; and of an unpardonable Crime,
only make a too considerate Action. But had there been no other reason for it,
methinks it had been an Egregious Fault to have neglected, if it could be
possible, a Person in whom Beauty and Virtue are so eminently conspicuous. One
whose incomparable Humor, and obliging goodness, are no the least of those
excellent Qualities, which have acquired her the Esteem and Admiration of all
tha^ have the Honor to know her The Considerations had been sufficient to have
raised me to the confidence of laying this Diverting though Unpolished Treatise
at you^ Feet. I have heen eased hereby, o^ some few leisure Hours, purely to
avoid the intruding Cares of what might happen. The Subject is Love; So much
the more curious, for who is not fond of knowing what they feel, besides the
natural Inclination of piercing into Secrets. The Scene, it is true, was acted
in a far distant Climate; still the more encouraging, for what is more pleasing
to the Sense than Novelty, that necessary Appurtenance of our Nature. And then
the Powerful Charms of our Tartarian Princess, Her Generous, unaffected
Disposition, and more her Noble Soul, fit, and adapted to entertain true Love,
bear such a near Resemblance to yours, that it were an irreparable Injury not
to repose them under your Protection. Do but observe to the least particulars
of what Relates to the adorable Taxila, and I Am confident you will find, that
through every Circumstance of her Character, you may discern as through a Mirror,
your individual Self. If the following Novel will but suffice to entertain
those Hours, that are disengaged from more important Business, it is all my
Hopes can reasonably wish for, and the full end of my Design obtained. Amongst
the Crowd of your Admirers, be pleased to Accept the particular Devotion of,

Madam, Your most Obedient SERVANT, etc.

Taxila, Or Love preferred before Duty. A Novel.
THe Eastern Tartary, after having enjoyed many Kings, worthy to govern that
fine part of the World, in process of time found it self under the subjection
of Vndkan, a feeble Prince, and at the disposal of an imperious Queen, that
suggested to him nothing but Violence. The City of Cambalu, the usual residence
of it is Sovereign's, magnificent in all things, and illustrious by the Majesty
of six Kings that were then at the Court of Vndkan, was upon the point of
serving as a Theater to the cruelty of Zamur; that was the Name of the Queen.

Vndkan had an only Daughter by his first Marriage, called Taxila, who was the
Object of the Admiration of the Tartars, whom he destined to the Son of the
Queen his Spouse; this Prince, by name Timur, was King of Tenduc, and enjoyed
as his utmost merit, the blind affection of an ambitious Mother, that was
capable of sacrificing all things to her Grandeur.

The Princess of Tartary, was born with admirable Qualities: Nothing was ever
seen comparable to her. The Charms of her mind bore an equality to those of her
Beauty: She possessed a a great Soul, a complete Virtue and one may say, that
Heaven had been in no wise wanting in its Favors to her. Her inclinations were
very repugnant to the designs of the King her Father, and in spite of the
pretentions of Timur, she along time avoided what absolute orders could prevail
upon her. But her heart, which the Son of Zamar could not effect, was by no
means insensible. Zingis prescribed at Cambalu, although he was guilty of no
other Crime, than that of being too deserving, caused some tender Disquiets in
the Princess. She saw all combined against him, Vndkan, Zamar, Timur, and many
other Kings, cowardly Adorers of a Tyrannical Power. Taxila alone was of his
party, with a perseverance due to the Services of that illustrious Lover; but
he was absent, and the jealous Timur was Almighty through the Authority of his
unjust Mother.

One night, as Taxila was devoted to the remembrance of Zingis, she heard a
great Noise, and saw the King her Father enter into her Chamber, who came with
his Eyes full of anger, to reproach her with a private correspondence with his
most mortal Enemy. After having vented an infinite number of outrageous
Expressions, he commanded her to be strictly guarded in her apartments, where
he left her alone. The Princess judged immediately, that this Enemy of whom he
spoke, could be no other than Zingis; but she did not comprehend upon what
motives Vndkan, who from above a year past had left him some repose, renewed a
persecution, which time feemed to have abated, and recalled in his Memory a
Person, that he had sought to exclude from thence. An Officer of the Guards
unfolded to her this Mystery, in acquainting her, that Zingis was lately
surprised at one of the Gates of the Palace upon the Banks of the River
Polizangi, where Zamar had heard him speak from a Terrass, where she was
walking. That discovering by his discourse, that he returned to Cambalu for the
Princess, she ordered him to be assaulted; that Valor yielding to force, they
had overwhelmed him without being conquered; and brought him laden with Irons
to a dismal Tower, where the vilest Offenders were usually enclosed.

This discourse occasioned a mortal grief in the Soul of Taxila. She made the
Tartar depart, and suffering her self to fall into the Arms of Axione, a
Damsel; she tenderly loved, because she was all charming. Ah! my dear Axione,
said she to her, behold this fatal accident which I have so much feared and the
generous Zingis is in the chains of the implacable Zamar. Alas! I supported
patiently his absence, because it secured him from this barbarous Enemy; but he
has precipitated himself into her hands, and it is still the passion he
entertains for me, that has conducted him thereto: All was sweet and pleasing,
whilst I considered that he loved me, and that I was under no occ^sion of fear
for him. I used to reckon up his Services, to pay them with my most tender
affections, and I suffered the importunities of Timur, in hopes that Heaven
would never abandon me to a person, so little worthy of me.

The afflicted Taxila accompanied these words with a Torrent of Tears; and the
beautiful Axione, who by the liberty the Princess of Tartary had given her, and
the noble motions that encouraged her, did not strive with her, but said to her
in receiving her Embraces, all that she judged capable of moderating her
displeasure. No Axione, replied the sorrowful Princess, There Is nothing more to
hope for. My Father is infirm, Zamar holds her Victim, Timur has no Virtue, and
Heaven would make me know to what degree it is angry with me. But Madam, pursued
Axione, do you think that the King has utterly renounced all equity, and that
he will give so many Princes, whose Eyes are fixed upon him during their
residence at Cambalu, such just Subjects to detest his Cruelty? Axione, replied
Taxila, those Princes of whom you speak, are naturally Cowards, and besides
incensed against the Valor of Zingis, who has made them Slaves, in imposing on
them those Tributes that maintain the Pride of Zamar. Madam, answered Axione,
amongst the Kings we see here, there may be some free and generous. It is true,
added the Princess, that of Thibet has a merit that extremely distinguishes him
from the rest; besides, pursued Axione, he is powerful, and I am persuaded,
that he will attempt all things for Zingis, because he loves Virtue, and c^nnot
dispense with Injustice.

Whilst these two amiable persons entertained themselves in this manner, Zamar
was infinitely pleased to think that she was Mistress of the Destiny of a Man
that had made her ambition suffer so much. Vndkan had a great share in this
Joy, and Timur basely triumphed in the misfortune of a generous Rival, to whom
he was indebted for his Life and Liberty.

The day dispersed this surprising News amongst the Tartars. Those that had
seen Zingis in War, and at Cambalu, wished his loss, or his safety, according
to their inclinations; yet there was but few, but were desirous to secure him
from the danger he was in.

As soon as Vndkan was to be seen, the Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, Ergimul, and
Vng, rendered themselves near his person, and a little after Philing, King of
Thibet: The first expressed to him a great deal of Joy for the captivity of his
Enemy; and the last, who with an Independent Kingdom, being much more
considerable than the rest, had also Sentiments infinitely more noble and
generous, spoke freely in favor of Zingis, and did not stick to declare, that
he was full of respect and esteem for his Virtue, and for that noble
Reputation, which made his name so illustrious in Asia. Vndkan frowned at the
discourse of Philing; and Zamar, who was a witness to it, looked upon him from
thence as a suspicious person All his Qualities were truly Royal. His person
was admirable, his Dominions vastly extensive, and depended upon no Power. The
Neighborhood of China, which bounded the Lands of his Obeisance, might afford
him great advantages, in calling to his Assistance, a People, who, being often
attacked by the Tartars, were yet only upon the defensive part, and aspired to
reduce them to Complaisance. All these reasons rendered the King of Thibet
formidable to that of T^rtary, who answered him softly, that Zingis was a
Traitor, and that his Captivity was owing to the safety of his Crown. Philing
did not think it proper to be very urgent the first time with an irritated King
and Queen, in favor of a Man whom he knew but imperfectly, and withdrew in
casting contemptible Regards upon four Princes, that dishonored their
Character, in breaking so unworthily before ^ndkan and Zamar.

Philing passed from thence to the Apartments of the Princess, where the
interest of his heart often called him: but by the Orders which had been given,
he could neither see her, nor the lovely Axione. From thence he directed his
steps to Almundzar, a noble Tartar, in whom he had found a great deal of
Virtue, who had the chief Government of Tartary, through his profound skill in
the most-secret Affairs, and whom Zamar disaffected for that reason: He was a
sincere friend of Zingis, and Philing found in his company a Man that was
faithful to this Prince, who had saved himself by the favor of the night, and
came to solicit Almundzar to endeavor for the liberty of his Master. The
generous Tartar had received him with all the courtesy in the world; but he
feared with reason, that he could do nothing for Zingis, against the fierce and
artificial Zamar. They were upon this Subject, when the King of Thibet entered.
Generous Almundzar, said he immediately to the favorite of Vndkan, What shall
we do for the illustrious Zingis against so many implacable Enemies? Hatred,
Artifice, and Baseness, are armed against him, and it is to us Heaven has
bestowed the Favors of more reasonable Sentiments, that we may unite Virtue,
Friendship, and sincerity for his Relief. The Servant of Zingis, who was
unacquainted with Philing, and who admired his incomparable mien, was ravished
to hear him speak after that manner. Almundzar assured the King of Thibet, that
he was ready to expose his Fortune and his Life for the Service of Zingis; but
that he was ignorant of any means, that might barely balance the Authority of
Zamar. I am not acquainted, answered Philing, with all the particulars of the
life of Zingis, and I am only prevented of that glittering Merit, of which
Renown gives so advantageous a Character: but, Almundzar can you give me no
further information? Behold, my Lord, replied Almundzar, in showing the
faithful Squire of Zingis, a Man that is better ena^led to give you that
satisfaction, than I am. Yes, my Lord, added Zerbin, with a respectful
behavior, and my Master will be done a sensible pleasure, in being perfectly
known by such a Prince as you. Philing obliged Zerbin to pass into another
room, to leave Almundzar at liberty to pursue the Affairs that ordinarily
employed him; and being seated commodiously, Zerbin began his Discourse as
follows.

The History of Zingis, and the Princess Taxila.
YOu know, my Lord, that my Master is the Son of Sakuh, or Bahadur, surnamed
the Valiant, King of the Monguls; and you are not ignorant, that amongst diverse
people of Asia, those have particularly distinguished themselves by their
incomparable Valor, and the uninterrupted union that is amongst them. Bah^dur
is descended from our most ancient Kings; and as a worthy Successor of an
infinite number of Heroes, he was always dreaded by his Adversaries, and
extremely cherished and respected hy his own Subjects. His Territories are of
an ample extent; the River Tartar, and the Lake of Coras, render the Country
extraordinary fertile in many places, and that solitary part which comprehends
Bargu, and extends as far as the Tartarian Ocean, is hardly known to those that
inhabit near the Lands of Vndkan.

Bahadur had by his Queen a double Offspring; this illustrious Zingis whom
Fortune exposes to day after so cruel a manner; and the Princess Zenelia, who
was surprised and carried away by the violence and force of a company of
Robbers, in a Journey the Queen took, to receive the benefit of an Air that was
more conformable to her constitution, which was in a languishing State. The
loss of the innocent Zenelia made such a deep impression upon her Vitals, that
she soon bad adieu to the World, leaving the youthful Zingis for a consolation
to her Husband. He then went under the Name of Temuzin; but there was observed
from his Infancy, such enlivening marks of Grandeur and Courage, that the
People gave him that of Zingis which is a proper Title for a peculiar,
distinguished person.

Bahadur with this Son so worthy of his affection, cancelled the thoughts of a
more ample Posterity, and devoted his utmost cares to the Education of Prince
Zingis, whom a few years rendered perfectly accomplished. The King observed the
increase of his Person and noble Qualities, with a profound satisfaction. He
could perceive by the progress of his first actions, that he would not derogate
from so many excellent persons, from whose blood he descended, aspiring to the
real Character of Glory, giving Virtue the deserved preference of all things,
and showing none but generous Inclinations. As soon as he had attained the
seventeenth year of his Age, he appeared with so much courteousness in his
actions, and with so agreeable a behavior, that nothing was ever seen
comparable thereto. Bahadur encouraged his presence; but the young Prince who
had yet tasted nothing but the sweetness of repose, and whose Courage demanded
more tumultuous occupations, agitated in his thoughts how to absent himself for
some time from the King his Father.

My Lord, said he one day to him, don't you suppose that I owe something to the
honor of being your Son? Hitherto I have given you no other marks than my
Respects; but my Lord, that does not suffice to satisfy the blood from whence
our Vitals proceed. The profound Peace that the Monguls are under an obligation
to your Courage for, does not require that I should remain at Molg in a
perpetual ease and obscurity: We may have reason perhaps one day to blush for
shame, and in all proba^ility, to find unfortunate effects thereof. It is time
for me to learn that Accomplished Art, which alone serves for a worthy
Employment to Princes. If so be there is no occasion for War in Asia, it is
necessary to enquire after it in Europe, and return with a Reputation more
Illustrious to the rest of the World.

This discoruse flattered the invincible Courage of Bahadur; but at the same
time he was exceeding fearful of his tender youth. Zingis, replied he to the
young Prince, neither your noble Progenitors, nor the most envious Nations have
any just Subject to reproach you with; and you have all along from your
Infancy, addicted your self to those Employments which might procure you a
glorious Futurity. I am sensibly satisfied with your presence, and should be
extremely afflicted at the news of your loss: But yet, my Son, don't imagine
that I am desirous to confine you to a place, which in the opinion of the
World, is more proper for the residence of furious Beasts, than for Princes, on
whom Heaven has be stowed some Merits. I don't oppose this generous Emulation
you seem to be inspired with; but my dear Zingis, defer your intentions for a
little time: You cannot be ignorant of the King of Tartary's threatenings to us
all; perhaps he is ready to make a Declaration of War. The Tributes which he
has exacted from several Kings, will most certainly extend to us, and then we
shall have just cause for War. Ah! my Lord, interrupted Zingis, how uneasily
does a person of my age and humor dispense with such Projects. I don't know
whether the King of Tartary confounds us with other Princes, over whom he
designs to erect a Sovereign Authority, but I Am of Opinion, that through the
consideration of your exploits, he will consult more than once upon the matter.
In short, my Lord, these are but uncertain Conjectures, and if so be you are
not disposed that I should exceed the limits of Tartary, suffer me at least to
view the whole extent of it, that I may inform my self of a great many
Curiosities, which I have had but a confused Relation of.

The King of the Monguls found so much reason in the Prince's Design, that he
at length assented to his departure, but not without some violence to himself,
but under a proviso, that he should not pass beyond the limits of Tartary. He
gave him a permission to visit the Court of Vndkan, with whom as yet he
entertained no dispute; and Zingis satisfied with the fruition of his Request,
converted his thoughts to the preparation of his Retinue. He would not take
with him a numerous Equipage by reason of the profound Peace that reigned in
all the places we were to pass. My self, because of my Education near his
Person, and the favor of his particular friendship, was of this Journey, and
we departed from Molg with as much satisfaction as if we had escaped a Prison.

The first things we made our observations on, were the Tombs of the Tartarian
Princes: They are situated amongst Mountains which obstruct not (at a great
distance) the prospect of an infinite number of magnificent Pyramids, which are
erected higher than the tops of those exceeding lofty Hills. From thence
coasting the Deserts of Belgian, we saw the Kingdoms of Tanguth and Ergimul,
without stopping our progress, or discovering our persons, and took the direct
course for Cambalu, where we designed to take up a longer Residence.

Coming near the place, we were informed that Vndkan with his whole Court were
gone to pass the most diverting Season of the Year at Cingui, a very pleasant
City upon the River Pazanfu. As my Master directed himself to Cambalu for the
diversion of the Court, this News made him turn his course toward Cingui. The
Royal Palace is Situated without the City, and one of the most superb and
stately of all Tartary. The Gardens are extremely large, and curiously
cultivated. The Springs and Fountains add a thousand Beauties to the place. The
Trees and Arbors form a charming obscurity, which the Sun with his variety of
Beams can hardly penetrate ^n diverse places, besides the liberty of walking
there at all hours. We discovered at a distance this glorious Pa^ace, and
Zingis whom the heat of the Weather had wonderfully fatigued, ^spying one of
the Garden Gates open, and without a gua^d, had a mind to ^nter, in order to
refresh himself for some few moments, showing us with ^is hand a place where he
ordered ^s to attend him. Notwithstanding ^he vast Journey that he had already
made, there appeared in him nothing of carelessness or neglect, and the
magnificence of his habit joined to the Splendor of his incomparable Mien,
made him appear something more than a Humane person.

He was extremely taken with the Beauty of these Gardens, which is indeed
extraordinary, and walked therein with abundance of delight, and was thinking
to rejoyn us, when crossing another Walk he discerned at the end of it several
persons together, and distinguished amongst them some of the Female Sex. As he
is not subject to be surprised, he advanced with a great assurance, and the
more he approached, the more clearly he apprehended that these Women were of
the Noblest quality, by the respect that was paid them. His curiosity
increasing, encouraged him to proceed a little further; but a Man separating
himself from the rest of the Company came up to him, and regarding him with an
Insolent Air, Who are you said he fiercely, that violating the sacred Laws,
comes presumptuously hither without giving that respect that is due to the
Majesty of the Princess of Tartary? Are you ignorant that no stranger durst
appear before Her, without being introduced according to the usual Customs? And
is it for to brave those that attend upon her, that you come to expose your
self to our just displeasure?

Zingis was not accustomed to such a Language, and this Entertainment gave him
a little surprise. His action appeared to him very innocent, and being somewhat
moved at the Tarta^ians incivility. I am one, answered He, that is not obliged
to render an account of what he pretends to do: the Princess indeed may command
so much from me, as will prove to my Vindication; but I must not allow that
satisfaction to any of the Subjects of Vndkan.

He that heard Zingis was of too ^roud a nature, not to be moved at ^is answer.
It was Timur, whom the Titles of King of Tenduck, and Son to ^he Queen of the
Tartars, rendered ^roud, even to Insolence; and although that Character of
Grandeur, which ^ppeared through the whole person ^f the Prince of the Monguls,
ought to ^ave detained his hand, yet seeing his ^aseness slighted, he drew his
Sword, and lift up his hand to strike Zingis; ^ut how fatal had his rashness
like to ^ave proved to him! The invincible ^ingis prevented him by so weighty
blow upon his Head, that he tumbled ^stonish'd at his feet, and had it not been
^^r the goodness of his Hat, he had ^ever been capable of disturbing my
^aster's Repose.

The misfortune of Timur occasioned the presence of a great number o^ Guards
who would by all means seiz^ upon the person of Zingis. He mad^ a courageous
Defense, and had demonstrated to them the real Character o^ Virtue, had not
Vndkan made his appearance in the same Walk. He immediately informed himself of
the Subject of this Disorder, and apprehending it inconsiderable, was much
displeased at the Accident of Tymur and entertaining but too good an Opinion of
him that was so fearless o^ danger, he made his approach wit^ the Princess.

Vndkan has a venerable presence and would inspire respect in those tha^ are
unacquainted with his person; bu^ yet 'twas the Beauty of Taxila, an^ not the
presence of her Father tha^ prevailed with the Prince of the Monguls to depose
his Arms. This charming Object had such an imprinting influence upon him, that
he found himself capable of nothing, but fixed regards upon the Princess, and
to yield his youthful heart to the glorious Fet^ers, which Fortune had destined
for his Confinement. Vndkan, who had ^ot yet renounced Generosity, was ^ull of
admirable thoughts relating to any Master; and Zingis. approaching with a grace
that was natural to him. I see, My Lord, said he, that you are the Sovereign of
the Tartars, and it is to you alone, I ought to Justify my self. I am Zingis
Prince of the Monguls, who came into your Territories to reside here for some
time as a Friend and as an Ally. In passing near these Walls, Chance directed
me to a Gate that was open; I am ignorant of the Customs of this place; I
entered without precaution here, which I supposed to be free for all persons;
and am insulted by a Man that is as little instructed in that civility that is
due to Strangers, as I am in the Orders of your Kingdom.

The discourse of my Master was surprising to the Tartarian King. He ^ad no
Ally more considerable than the King of the Monguls, and it wa^ a sufficient
honor to behold the Prince his Son at his Court, and more a Prince of the most
amiable Aspect and most admirable Mien, that ever appeared to his Eyes. I was
fu^ly persuaded, answered Vndkan, tha^ you were no Tartarian, and it is n^ small
rarity to see such persons as you^ But, my Lord, that which according to our
Laws would be a great offenc^ in an ordinary stranger, is not so i^ the Prince
of the Monguls, whom ^ shall always see at Cingui, at Cambal^ and the whole
extent of my Dominions, with a great satisfaction. A^ these words he embraced
him, an^ presenting him to the Princess Taxila said he, Taxila, you must
entreat the Prince Zingis to be unmindful of the unhappy reception that you
were the principal occasion of. My Master who was sensible of the discipation
o^ his Anger, and the cooling of his natural fierceness at the Charms of
Tax^ila, saluted her upon his knee, an^ implored her pardon for what his
ignorance had caused. The Princess replied, that she had nothing to add to her
Fathers instructions; and my Master, who could not turn his Eyes from so
Charming a Prospect, felt ^lready those powerful emotions which her
extraordinary Beauty had ^xcited in his Breast.

Timur by this time was returned from his astonishment, and Zingis being
informed that he was the Son of ^he Queen, approached to him with ^n Air that
discovered nothing of Enmity; 'I am under a concern, my Lord, said he to him,
that I have been forced to a behavior that I entreat you, to forget, and to
reconcile your self to a Prince who came not to Cingui, to procure such Enemies
as you. At these words he gave him his hand, and although Timur received it with
a ^old indifference, yet the presence of ^he King obliged him to accept the
^dvances of my Master.

At length Zamar comes: She learnt ^n a few words the Adventure which had come
to pass. Vndkan presented Zingis to her, and she could not bu^ have a secret
resentment of the Affront which her Son had received Notwithstanding she
appeared civil to my Master, who having his Eyes no more at liberty, but to fix
them upon Taxila, was not curious to examine the actions of the Tartarian Queen.
Vndkan who had secret prospects, would not suffer Zingis to go out of his
Palace, and was not displeased to have so dear a Hostage of the King of the
Monguls. We had orders to go and find our Prince, to whom was give^ one of the
finest Apartments, and who was immediately apprehensive that this Adventure
would be the occasion of many others.

He soon became the admiration o^ the Tartars; and the Princess Taxil^ had a
judgment too exact to be unacquainted with his Merit: They lived at Cingui with
more tranquillity than at Cambalu, because the Court i^ not so numerous there.
Vndkan, wh^ had a mind to win the affection of ^ considerable Prince, to obtain
of him by sweetness and civility, what he pretended to impose upon others by
force, neglected nothing that might oblige the young Zingis. He gave way to
pleasures that touched his Inclination, and observing that Timur still
preserved his coldness, he entreated him to constrain himself, although he had a
repugnance thereto, being inspired by a politic Mother, that was in hopes to
obtain from Undkan one of the most considerable Crowns in Asia for this Son, he
did as the King would have him.

As for my Master, he gave himself up entirely to love: The more he saw Taxila,
the more influence she had upon him. His Heart filled with an ardent passion,
began to feel disorders, which till then had been unknown to him, and fearing
worse to come, he was unquiet and amorous together. It Is true, he was the Son
of a Prince that was incapable of making him any refusal: But Taxila owed her
life to a Man that destined her for Timur, and although this Rivals Dominions
were much inferior to that of the Mongul^ yet he was a King, and the Son o^
Zamar, who had Vndkan at her di^posal.

At length we quitted Cingui to return to Cambalu; 'twas then our
divertisements suffered an Alteration and instead of Walks, there was a^
application to Sports and public entertainments. Taxila had many Ladies of
Quality near her person: Bu^ a few days before our arrival at Cingui, she was
presented with a young Stranger admirably Fair, perfectly Beautiful, whom the
Princess soon distinguished from all the rest, by a^ Friendship full of esteem
and confidence. The Men that made the mos^ advantageous appearance at the Cour^
of Vndkan were Timur, Almundzar, an^ Omir Prince of Brema, who had been brought
young to Cambalu; the King of Tartary having rendered himself Master of the
Dominions of his Father, who had lost his life in their defense. There were
also Bazian, Mirante, Ozrun, Ziphane, and many others of a remarkable
Character. My Master ^as presently acquainted with the ^reat Merit of
Almundzar, and con^racted a strict friendship with the ^rince of Brema.

During some Months that slipped away, those amongst the Tartars that any Master
conversed with, were ac^uainted with his worth, and had the ^ighest esteem for
his Person. As for ^im, his principal aim was to please Taxila, who observed
his eager cares, ^ltho' she was besieged by Timur. He ^njoyed privileges,
which the Credit ^f his Mother afforded him, and often ^imes put the patience
of the Princess ^o the utmost proofs. Imagining himself secure of a happiness
he de^erved not; he spoke before her with ^n insupportable boldness, and Taxila
^omparing the submissive proceedings of the Prince of the Monguls to the
a^^acious advances of the Son of Zamar; ^he found their actions as different as
their Persons. Zingis had too much respect not to impose upon himself a perfect
discretion: For all he was a Prince, and in a condition to pretend to all
things, he did not precipitate a Declaration of his Love, that might incense
Taxila, but would wait till his Services should prepare her to a favorable
Audience. At length the heart of the Princess was inclined to Zingis, and her
aversion for Timur had increased considerably since the arrival of my Master.

Upon a day which Timur regarded as his own, because 'twas the Birthday of
Taxila, he prepared divertisements for all the Court, and amongst other things,
some extraordinary Sports upon the Polisangi. A thousand Golden Barks covered
the River. Every one had the liberty to choose his Colors; there was nothing
to be seen but Ciphers, and Devices in Streamers: The Cordage was made of Gold
and Silk; the Oars covered with Glittering Pictures, and those little Boats
filled by a magnificent Court, formed the most agreeable sight in the World.

The Princess would most gladly have dispensed Timur from his gal^antry; but
the fear of incensing the King, obliged her to the acceptance of it; it was
even necessary for her to appear at this Feast with all the Gaiety and
exactness of an accomplished Art. Timur in all his Equipage showed a
magnificence that went to profusion, and my Master with less affectation had
much greater advantages. Zamar did not disdain this pastime, although she had
contemned many others, and Vndkan to oblige his Queen, gave them the honor of
his presence. The amorous Zingis was a little touched to see the name of his
Rival mixed every where with that of Taxila, and to think that so much Beauty
and Virtue were destined for a Man, in whom there was observed nothing that
might render him worthy of them; and these considerations cost him some
profound sighs, which the Princess heard sometimes.

In a word, my Lord, this day which Timur designed to solemnize after an
extraordinary manner, was remarked by an observable Adventure, which had like
to have proved very fatal. Whilst they were taken up with the diversions
prepared upon the River; Whilst a charming Consort filled the Air; the Bark
which carried the Princess where she was with Axione alone, (that unknown Lady
that was become so dear to her) because those little Boats could not
conveniently contain more than four persons, with those that conducted them, by
an unexpected misfortune, turned upside down, thrust by some other Boats, and
exposed Taxila and Axione to so great a danger, that all the World esteemed it
irrecoverable. Doleful Cries succeeded the sound of Instruments. Ti^ur, the
Cowardly Timur, did nothing but encourage his Attendants to seek Taxila in the
Waves; but the courageous Zingis excited by other Sentiments, hurled himself
into the River, and dexterously cutting the Course of the Water, he received
the Princess in his Arms at the very moment she came up, and as she went to
fall again, perhaps forever to the bottom of the River. His action was so
sudden that no one else could prevent him. The Prince of Brema, who was with
him, rendered the same Service to Axione, and equally happy in this occasion,
they felt the sat^sfaction of preserving from death the two most amiable
persons in the World. The danger was great, since the Men that fell in the
Water with Taxila, perished through the little care that was taken to relieve
them, their negligence deserving in some measure this unhappy Fate. This
Accident disturbed the whole Festival. Vndkan being alarmed, made to the Shore;
the Princess and Axione were conveyed thither almost senseless, and Timur
incapable of Shame, had the, confidence to approach her. Zamar, who had
observed with Envy the action of my Master, and who began to apprehend the
secret Interest of his heart, appeared in a confusion for her Son, and gently
murmured against his timerousness.

The Princess opened her Eyes, and regained her knowledge. When she was laid
upon the Bed, she enquired after Axione, of whom they had taken the same care,
and then fixed her self to that repose which was convenient for her. The Night
past away sweetly, and finding her self perfectly recovered in the Morning, she
asked her Maids to which of the Tartars she was indebted for her Life. Although
she had no good Opinion of Timur, yet she was afraid lest she had received so
important a service from him, but being informed that it was Zingis, who had
prevented the whole World with a precipitation full of zeal, she had a secret
satisfaction, and gave thanks to Heaven for it. They did not cease to tell her,
that the King of Tenduc did not so much as think to expose himself for her,
with which she was pleased, as being disengaged from any acknowledgment to him.
As soon as it was day, Axione presented her self to the Princess, who most
tenderly embraced her. Vndcan had testified to my Master, how sensible he was
of what he had undertaken for Taxila. Zamar also who was perfectly acquainted
with the Art of concealing her Sentiments, returned him some thanks, and Timur
acknowledged something in spite of his Confusion, but he was little observant,
whether they were affected at it or no.

Taxila arose, and being unwilling to wait for the particular importunities of
Timur, she went out of her Apartment, just as the Queen was coming to make her
a Visit, and meeting in a common Gallery, Madam said Zamar to the Princess, I
praise Heaven for the care it has taken of your Life, and I assure you, that at
the moment I saw it exposed, I could most willingly have endangered mine for
your safety. 'You would have done much more, Madam, replied Taxila, smiling
modestly, than many Men could do, and you see that in the very bosom of the
King my Father's Dominions, there was but two Princes and those strangers too,
generou^ enough to contemn the Danger. Bu^ Madam, added she, with a profound
reverence, full of Grace and Majesty, your Life more valuable than mine,
interess too many Illustrious Persons to expose it to the least danger, and I
am as much obliged to your good Intentions, as if they had produced other
effects.

Zamar plainly saw by this discourse the acknowledgment of Taxila for Zingis,
and her disdain for Timur: but not designing to enlarge upon this matter, she
prayed the Princess to return to her Apartment; when the King passed by,
accompanied by Timur, Omir, My Master, Almundzar and many others. Taxila
blushed extremely, her Charming Eyes which languished again, made an obliging
Declaration to Zingis, that she was sensible of what he had done for her; and
Timur had the mortification to observe, that she did not so much as turn them
toward him. My Child, said Vndkan to her, you have made me pass a Night full
of disorder and trouble, which the good condition I behold you in, most
agreeably disperses. In the mean time methinks you ought to be less desirous of
quitting your Apartment. My Lord, returned the Princess, a little exercise can
be no prejudice to me, since I do not find my self in the least indisposed. The
King made an obliging Complement to the beautiful Axione, which she accepted
with much respect, and all this glorious company passed to the Apartment of
Zamar, because dinner time approached.

My Master, who saw well that the Princess was so beset by Timur, that she
could not oblige any more company, retired; and in effect, after the repast the
King of Tenduc coming to her without any interruption, had the liberty to say
what he pleased. He looked along while upon the Princess with a confused
Behavior, and then casting down his Eyes: The same day that Heaven presented
you to the World, as the most valuable gift it could make, had like to have
proved the utmost of your Life, Madam, said he, and I tremble to think of the
danger that threatened it. Every one has not suppose^ it so considerable as you,
my Lord, replies Taxila, disdainfully; and the Prince^ of the Monguls, and
Brema, have demonstrated that they despised it, in exposing themselves thereto.
It Is true, Madam, replied Timur, red with anger and shame, that they showed
something of courage, but then they possessed their reason entire, and mine was
disturbed by the most dreadful of all Ideas: And this disturbance, my Lord,
returned Taxila with a malicious Smile, would have suffered me to have been
lost, if so be there had not been found persons of a more easy temper, and less
interessed for my life. I see, pursued Timur, that you seek to extol a Service
great in effect, but which a thousand others could have performed. All the
World would have performed it, but the K. of Tenduc, interrupted Taxila. But,
my Lord, don't be disturbed, if I have some acknowledgment of this service,
which deserves a great deal; since I give you my promise to keep an account of
your Troubles, and also of the fearfulness they have produced in you.

Timur would have answered to these words, and perhaps without respect; ^ut a
crowd of People, who came to ^ee the Princess, prevented him, and he departed
full of confusion. Taxila, observing the fine Weather, descended to the Gardens
of the Palace, and walked there for some time: Those that attended her, having
remarked that she had a desire to be a little private, kept at a distance. She
seated her self at the end of a Terrass, that looks upon the Polisangi, and
observing the place where she had liked to have perished: Axione, said she to
that charming Lady, as we have been since informed, don't you tremble at the
prospect of this River, as courageous as you are? My Princess, answered Axione,
I protest to you, that I am not moved at it, but for you, and as far as my
Reason would permit me, although I looked for a certain Death, the thoughts of
yours made me suffer what is most afflicting. You are too kind a Friend, my Dear
Axione, added Taxila, pressing her hand, and I cannot sufficiently requite this
tender and generous motion of forgetting your self for me. I am very sensible,
replied Axione, smiling, that you are one of the most powerful Supports of my
Life; and that person, added she, with moist Eyes, who ought at present to have
a greater right to it than any other. You make my own very dear to me, replied
the Princess: but Axione, I know not whether I ought to rejoice in seeing it
prolonged. Ah, Madam, cried Axione, why should not you be satisfied with a
Happiness that is valuable to all reasonable persons? Alas! answered Taxila,
this happiness that must be sacrificed to Timur, promises nothing agreeable to
me. What a person amongst all Men in the World, the King my Father chooses for
me? Should I be the Victim of that power, which his weakness has submitted to
Zamar? besides the small Inclination I have naturally for Timur, he does
nothing as he ought to do, to gain my Affections; he supposes that I am his
due, and you see after what manner he behaved himself in our last adventure.
More amorous of his own Life, than of the Unfortunate Taxila, he abandoned her
to the unhappy Fate that threatened her, and lest the care of her Fate to the
generosity of others? How should he pretend hereafter to a Princess, whose
preservation he has so weakly neglected? Oh Heaven! O just Heaven, pursued she
very sadly, I that have so much horror for Cowardice, will you suffer me to be
thrown away upon the most Cowardly person living? As the Princess ^xpressed her
self in this manner, my Ma^ter who had learnt that she was in the Garden,
appeared with the Prince of Brema. Taxila who knew him rose up to go before
them. Zingis offered her his hand, after he had saluted her. Omir rendered the
same Office to Axione, and they continued their walk. Well, Madam, said my
Master to the Princess, how are you disposed after your cruel Accident? And you
my Lord, replied she with a Charming sweetnes^, you who had so generous a part
therein, and so much (...) my advantage, how do you find your self? If I had
been ass^^lted with an inconveniency, answered Zingis, the satisfaction of
being serviceable to a great Princess, for whose safety the whole World ought
to have been concerned, would have entirely dispersed it. Our Bodies are made
for greater Fatigues; you endured much, and it is with Reason that I am
disturbed for it. I assure you, my Lord, replied Taxila, that I have no
remainder of this Adventure, but the remembrance of the sensible Obligation I
am under to you. Ah, my Lord, added she, with an Emotion that marked her
acknowledgment, What can I do to acquit my self! It Is too much, that you
remember it, Madam, persued the Prince of the Monguls, and this price is
sufficiently great to retalliate the most considerable Services. I don't know
who can be more deserving of it, returned Taxila, -- Madam, interrupted my
Master with a sigh, although according to all appearances, I have only labored
for the Service of Timur, yet I did not cease to regard yester day, as the
happiest of my Life. The Princess cast down her Eyes, to hide some Tears, which
she could not retain at these words, and which notwithstanding appeared to
Zingis. He was concerned that he had touched that place, and continuing thus, I
beg your pardon, Madam, if I have named the King of Tenduck; it is perhaps ^
want of respect. No, interrupted Taxila as her turn, but it is reviving an
afflicting Idea, which I often endeavor to remove; you know the Intentions of
the King my Father in relation to Timur: But my Lord, mine are unknown to you,
and you are ignorant without doubt, that I cannot think of submitting my self
to the Son of Zamar without a mortal grief. I am not enough determined to
disobey Undkan; and be the effect what it will, if he Commands it, its
necessary that I ^acrifice my self, judge, my Lord, having a ^atural Antipathy,
or rather an invincible ^atred for Timur, what a state I am in, every ^ime I
think on the designs of my Father, and the Influence of the Queen. This free^om
of the Princess charmed my Master, and gave him more assurance. I confess
persued he, that there is nothing in Timur, that is worthy of you, nor even in
persons much more complete. Ah! Madam, what Man amongst all those whom nature
and Fortune have most distinguished by their Favors, might lawfully aspire to
the precious advantage of not displeasing you, and the glory of being possessed
of you one day? My Lord, answered Taxila, I can discern Merit wh^re it is, and
not infer a blameable conceit from that which I have not; several in the World
might be in a state to pretend to the Alliance of the King of Tartary, and
Timur himself would not be unworthy by his Rank, if his evil Inclinations were
not absolutely inconsistent with mine. When Fortune should authorize some
Prince to lay his Possessions at your feet, added my Master, if so be his
Person could not affect your heart, the other advantages would be of no
service, and there are Princes of a sufficient Power that would sigh before
your Eyes, without daring to let you know, that they adore you. We must be
exceeding Cruel, continued the Princess of Tartary, to arm our selves with an
unjust Anger against those who should have some affection for us, and
disengaged from all sorts of Passions, to dare to boast of being always
insensible: But, my Lord, with a freer behavior, this matter would lead us too
far, and I had rather speak of the obligation I am under to you. If that
inspires you with some goodness for me, replied my Master, it will be of
considerable use to me in the state I am in, since loving you with a most
ardent Passion, whose beginnings I have sedulously concealed, I am forced to
let slip the declaration of this Mystery in my own defense. My Lord, replied
Taxila, with some disorder, that presaged nothing of prejudice to my Master, I
see the King, which as all I can say to you. In effect Vndkan appeared, and
Zingis could proceed no further. He perceived by the looks of the Princess,
that she had a confusion without anger, and in some days that followed, if he
observed any disturbance in her Eyes, there was no resentment there.

Taxila was beloved among all the Tartars, and the important service which my
Master had rendered to her, made a deep impression upon the grateful Souls.
This Nation looked upon Timur with disdain, after the unworthiness he had
shown: Vndkan himself, was concerned to see that he made himself so little
deserving of all the advantages he destined for him; and could not hinder
himself, as we were informed by Almundzar, from expressing his sense thereof to
the Queen: But she had so much influence upon him, that he dispensed with the
timorousness of the King of Tenduck, and was never the less Religious observer
of his Promise.

At this time Zamar, who was ambitious of extending the limits of Tartary, in
hopes of seeing her Son upon the Throne, made Vndkan compreherd that it was
disgraceful for him with so much power, not to exact from his Neighbors those
Tributes which it was easy for him to impose upon them.

Most of th^se Kings have preserved something of the fierceness of the Ancient
Scythians; but their valor is wanting to them, and you see Instances thereof
in this Court, in the Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, Ergimul, and Vng. Vndkan made
known to their Ministers, that they owed something more than an Embassy to his
Grandeur, and that they must with hommages pay him an Annual Tribute. These
strangers demanded time to Communicate this affair to their Princes, and having
at length returned for answer, that their design was not to condescend to that
degree; they retired into the Dominions of their Masters, and all things were
prepared for War.

The Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth and Ergmul could easily join their Forces,
becau^^ their Provinces are bordering; but that ^ Vng being further distant,
and of a side quit^ opposite to the rest, made a diversion. A^tho' Zingis had
reason to believe, that the would attack the Monguls in their turn, y^^ loving
Taxila as he did, he would by n^ means remain idle in the Court of her Father,
and if so be he found injustice in the enterprise of Vndkan, Love would not
le^^ him examine this proceeding with rigor* He did not long consider, whether
he should offer his Arm to the King of Tartary* whatsoever the absence of
Taxila might cos^ his heart, he resolved to go to become more worthy of her.
The Kings of Tanguth, and Cerguth advanced upon the Territories o^ that of
Ergimul, who was likely to be first assaulted, as being the nearest neighbor
o^ Vndkan. There was a necessity for two Armies, since the King of Vng was by
himself, and Timur's Dominions not far distant from his, Vndkan left a part of
his forces to his Conduct, to perform this Conquest: but experience declared
that they were very ill disposed of. The King of Tenduck would most willingly
have remained at Cambalu, if his Mother more courageous than he, had not
encouraged him to his Duty. So with good Lieutenants, and experienced Troops,
he marched toward the Enemy he had to Conquer.

Zingis had no Army to Command as Timur had, although he was better capacitated.
Vndkan went in Person, and my Master took no Employment that he might be at
liberty to fight near him.

The Princesses saw these preparations of War, with motions extremely
different. Zamar, who could engage that her Husband and her Son were not of a
humor to expose themselves, easily submitted to their departure; but Taxila,
who was already perfectly acquainted with the Love and courage of my Master,
did not enjoy the same Tranquillity.

All things being ready, Zingis went to take his leave of her, and the
Employments of Timur delivering her for some time from his Importunities, he
found her accompanied with no one but Axione. As she was not at all suspected
to them, the Prince did not constrain his Love, and the Princess let her
sadness be discerned. You are going then, my Lord, said she to him, to look
after Victories, which we could easily dispense you from. Oh how greedy is the
Ambition of Zamar, and how dexterous is she in spilling of Blood! Since the
glory of the King your Father is concerned therein, Madam, answered Zingis,
those that lose their blood in this occasion ought not (...) be disturbed at
it. 'Whatsoever may (...) the Motives of the War, replied Taxil^ it always puts
me into a trembling; b^ my Lord, that which you go to be co^cerned in, appears
to me so much the mo^^ Cruel, in as much as the Spoils thereof a^ to belong to
Timur, and will transp^^^ his vanity to the most Insolent ptich. S^ long as the
King's alive, continued my M^ster, he will never enjoy those advantage^ and if
the Fates should determinate h^ Life, I see but a few Tartars that are di^posed
to submit themselves to the Law of Timur. I am in earnest, my Lord, a^swered
Taxila, more moved than before, h^ will re^gn, the fatal influence that rules
me^ has so ordained; grant Oh Heaven, tha^ my death may prevent his fortune! A^
Madam, interrupted my Master, in a passionate m^nner, is it thus, you would
comfort an unfortunate, whose Duty calls him near Vndkan, and who separates
himself from you, with a mortal affliction. Wha^ shall I do in this extremity?
Shall I stay behind as a Cowardly an^ useless Spectator, of a War that may
expose Tartar to some disorder, because the proud Timur has pretentions to it,
and shall I observe the Father of Taxila, a Princess whom I adore, and for whom
I would expose a thousand lives, were they in my power; go in Person to the
Battle, without making a fence of my Body and Arms for him, because he is
favorable to my Rival. In a word, Madam, shall I remain ^t Cambalu, or retire
amongst the Monguls, ^o avoid uncertain inconveniences, and to me^it the
having my name oblitterated from amongst Men? Ah! my Princess, how little
wor^hy should I be to sigh for you, and to wear those glorious Chains which I
have received with so much pleasure; let the future prove as it will, the
present time requires me to serve the King of Tartary; my fidelity and zeal
perhaps will make some Impression upon his Soul. But Madam, you are dumb, and I
see nothing but a trouble in your Eyes, which concerns me. What misfortune can
it presage to us, my Lord? pursued Taxila, you see that it is the effect of my
weakness; your Reasons have conquered mine; but they cannot assure my heart.
Alas! Zingis, was not I unfortunate enough, in hating Timur, if the Fates have
destined me for him without loving? Taxila blushed, and could not proceed, but
her Eyes were the Interpreters of her Heart, and those of the amorous Zingis,
read therein the happiness he had so much long^d after. Never was there a more
tender separation on his side, and more obliging on that of the Pr ncess, than
that of these two Illustrious Persons: Timur did not insist up so much respect
and delicacy; he did nothi^ but repeat without agreeableness, what (...) had
said so often, and departed as fierce (...) if he had been assured of the
Conquest (...) the World.

We found the three Kings united, a^ in a disposition to fight us. Their Troo^
were lusty, and in order, but those (...) Vndkan much fatigued by traversing t^
Mountains and Forests. The Enemies posessed advantageous Posts, and seemed
(...) be determined. Notwithstanding a Batt^ was fixed upon. All that has been
said Fabulous Heroes, did not come up to t^ performances of Zingis. Vndkan
looked upon him as a Prodigy; it was his valor ^lone that made Victory to be
always decl^red in our Favor; he preserved the li^ of Vndkan, who was
insensibly engaged amongst the Enemies, and after several ba^tels he made the
three Kings Prisoners (...) different occasions, which put an end (...) the War
on this side. The King of Ta^tary left my Prince Master of the Destin^ of his
Captives. He not only spared the lives, but restored their Liberties, and w^
contented to engage them to that Homag^ and Tribute which Undkan had required
(...) them. The generosity of such a Conquer^ was of no other Service, than to
excite the^ against him by a particular and secret Enmi^y. But Undkan after he
had highly pro^laimed, that to him alone was owing the ^lory of this
Expedition, seeing his Foes ^ubdued, disbanded his Troops, and re^urned to
Cambalu.

Fortune had not been so friendly to Ti^ur, and the King of Ung with Forces
in^erior to his drove him from his Territories, and prepared to march toward
those that ^ompose the Kingdom of Tenduck. This News ^fflicted Undkan; and my
Master to complete what he had begun, directed his course to Timur without
delay, brought him back to ^he Battle, and returned to Cambalu after ^e had
triumphed over the King of Ung, ^s he had done over all the rest.

Undkan received him with signal expres^ions of Joy, and Zamar, although envious
of his Glory, was obliged to show some acknowledgment: But it was not their
applauses that affected him, and those of Tax^la were of a much different
esteem to his Heart. A year of absence had yet increased her Beauty, and my
Master found in her. Person, what was agreeable to his most ardent wishes. I
know not whether my Prayers have been any ways assisting to your Victories, My
Lord, said she to him, when he was to visit her, but it is certain that mine
were very zealous and sincere. I question not my obligations to your goodness,
Madam, answe^ed Zingis, and certainly the hopes of not gai^ing your
displeasure, has rendered me more r^solute and performing, than those of
obtainin^ the Universe. But Madam, what will becom^ of all the Love that your
Beautiful Charm have inspired me with, if Undkan is favorable to none but the
Son of Zamar? Alas, o^ what use will my Respects and Acknowledg^ments be to
you, interrupted Taxila, if I a^^ to be disposed of against my Will, to the
Person I abhor? He is Insensible of his shame and pretends to partake of your
Reputation (...) and what is worse, my Father notwithstandin^ all you have done
for him, is capable of requiting you with Ingratitude. It Is this knowledge that
I have of his Injustice, which afflicts me. Pity me, my Lord in so dismal ^
condition; deplore my hard Fate; and whatsoever happens, assure your self that
I shall always be much more unfortunate than you. After she had said this,
Timur makes his entrance; he had not seen the Princess before but at his
Mothers Apartments; his behavior, was full of boldness, and he came to receive
as a reward of his Cowardice new assurances of his good fortune; or rather
Zamar, who had a mind to comfort him after his unlucky chance in War, and shake
off the Melancholy that disturbed him, came to obtain of Undkan stronger
promises of Taxila for her Son, than she had yet de^anded. He saw Zingis with
impatience in place, where he was resolved henceforth (...) reign alone; and if
he durst have fol^^wed his own Motions, he had explained ^^mself at that very
moment: But the re^embrance of the late event in War restrain^^ him, and
contenting himself with no ^ark of Civility to him. We come to enrich ^^e Crown
of Tartary with many important ^ributes, Madam, said he to her, and she (...)
at present the only one of Asia, that is ca^^ble of numbering considerable Kings
amongst ^r Subjects. You might speak less generally, ^^mur, answered the
Princess, with a des^sing coldness, worthy of the Insolence of ^e King of
Tenduck, and if so be Fame ^s done you justice, the King of Ung should ^^ve
obtained of you what the Prince of the ^onguls has forced from him and all the
rest.

These words nettled Timur so smartly at his transport stopped his mouth for some
^^nsiderable time; but at length returning (...) himself, If you were more
equitable and less ^^ejudiced, continued he, you would ot take ^^om the King
your Father that glory which is ^^ing to him, to bestow it upon others, and I
^as not so much lost when they came into the ^rovinces of Ung, but that I
should have sub^ued them in a little time. If I might have ^^en consulted,
replied the Charming Princess with the same indifference, you should have been
allowed all the time you required; and indeed my Lord, you ought to have taken
it your self. I know not, said my Master, whether I have a share in the
obliging words of the Princess, and the contempt of Timur? But I am satisfied
that I should esteem my self much more glorious by the one than dishonored by
the other. My Lord, added Taxila, I should be destitute of Reason, If I
remained the single Person of Tartary, that does not give justice to those
Services she has received from you, and the Conquest of four Kings, has spoke
loud enough to be known by all the World. There are Kings, replied the
inconsiderate Timur, that are not so easily to be subdued, and if we were
engaged Man to Man, it might perhaps be found uneasy to perform what you
pretend has already been. Your fierceness replied Zingis with a disdainful
smile, could not prove my rudest Adversary, and I should not take great
precautions to execute against certain persons, things which their weakness
would render always easy; But my Lord, would you rekindle a War in Tartary
after an establishment of Peace? No, pursued Timur, with sparkling Eyes,
because he well knew that so near the Princess the respect of my Master was an
obstakle to his Valor; but I Will carry it amongst the Monguls, at the head of a
hundred thousand Men, when by the Commands of Undkan, I shall have an abso^ute
power over this unjust Princess. Much fewer than a hundred thousand Men shall
oppose your irruptions, replied Zingis; but you will be never the more
formidable, and he that has posed Tributes on your Neighboring Kings, is still
in a capacity to put a heavier yoke upon that of Tenduc.

This smart Conversation had passed further, if the circumspection of Zingis
had not obliged him to depart in saluting the Princess with all imaginable
respect, who beheld Timur with more contempt than before. In short, Madam,
replied the Son of Zamar, to her, your discretion is at an end; your aversion
appears for me in all its extent; but the King your Father, who has just given
me a fresh assurance, that you are uncontroulably mine, shall take an occasion
to enquire after the Cause. Timur answered Taxila in a resolute Tone, when the
promise of my Father shall encourage you to force my Inclinations, you cannot
expect to be e're the more happy, you have not so much as sought to deserve
them, and it is not a fierceness of that Nature which raigns in your heart, that
can make an impression upon that of Taxila: It were submissive proceedings with
a generous and disinte^essed Conduct, and not the Credit of the Queen which
ought to have been put in use; but it is for your Fortune that you labor; and
since the Crown of Tartary has more powerful Charms than mine enjoy them if
you can, I shall not be jealous, provided you leave me at ease; it is evident
enough that my Person is not esteemed by you; the Adventure of the Polisangi,
is a demonstration of it, and you come now to quarrel with a Prince before my
Eyes, that exposed himself courageously to preserve my Life. These last Words
excited a cruel Jealousy in the Soul of Timur. He was already persuaded, that
my Master loved the Princess, and was then but too sensible, that he was
beloved by her. You pay very dear obligations, which you speak of, replied he,
since that happy stranger, who is a little favored by Fortune, is become
Master of your heart: But if War and Love protect him at the same time, I hope
the King will put a difference between us, that shall be of no advantage to
him. Upon which, Timur retired, and left the Princess at liberty to reflect
upon all she had to fear from a person without Honor and Gene^osity.

Whilst she considered her misfortune, and that Zingis was in the same
Employment, Timur went to find the Queen, and said to her all that might excite
her against the Princess and my Master. She favorably heard his Complaints,
and promised to calm all his Disquiets with all possible diligence. To that
end, she made use of to her Spouse those affected Charms, which had so often
surprised his Weakness; she told him that Zingis was beloved of Taxila, and
that against his Word, which she ought to respect; this disobedient Princess
aimed at nothing but to render the Prince of the Monguls happy, and easily
provoking the Father against the Daughter; he again made a protestation to her
with Oaths, that the Rebellious Taxila should be enjoyed by none but Timur.
Zamar pleased with this first advantage, had a mind to obtain a second, and
solicited Undkan, to humble Zingis, that he might be made a Tributary to the
Tartarian Crown amongst the other Princess. As this was no easy Undertaking,
Undkan rejected the Proposition, and by what he had seen the Prince of the
Monguls perform, he thought there was no Power sufficient to control him.

As soon as the subtle Queen had left him, he sent for the Princess. Taxila,
said he to her, looking steadfastly upon her, I am unwilling to believe what has
been reported to me. I am informed, that your heart is engaged in spite of the
choice I have made for you, and that you prefer the Prince of the Monguls
before Timur. Methinks you might have known my Sentiments long before in
relation to your Establishment, and you have had leisure to prepare your
Inclinations, if they were not disposed to it. I have destined you for Timur
from your most tender Infancy. He is a King, he is the Son of my Spouse, and if
you entertain any foolish Idea's engage with them, or rather force them to
oblige me; since no Law ought to be more powerful with you, than that which
requires you to obey me. I esteem zingis as a young Hero, that may aspire to
great things; but I can do nothing for him in your respect; and I had promised
you, before I had known that Prince.

The Princess hearkened to this Discourse, which touched her Repose through the
most sensible places with abundance of emotion. She distinguished every word,
and arming her self with a Resolution worthy of her Virtue. Allowing I had a
particular esteem for Zingis, my Lord, answered she, the most severe Judges
could not interpret it as a Crime; and what he did for me, whilst Timur
abandoned me to a fatal Adventure, well deserves my acknowledgement: I will not
allege to you here the important Services he has done you, and I will only
tell you, my Lord, that when my Heart shall enjoy it is full extent of Liberty,
it will never so much incline to Timur's side. You may sacrifice me to his
Ambition: My respect owes all things to you; at the same time, this Duty cannot
overcome my Aversion for the King of Tenduc. Alas, my Lord, there are so many
Princesses in Asia, or in some other part of the World, that might render his
condition much more happy. You are wise, interrupted Vndkan, with a moderation
that much degenerated in the consequence, and I am persuaded, that you will
love Timur, when he is your Husband. So Taxila; No reply, I have promised him,
I will and must perform.

It was thus the K. of Tartary sent back the Princess his Daughter: She
complains, she bewails her Misfortune; but all joined against my Master, who
had none for him, but the Princess and Almundzar; the Prince of Brema being
retired from Cambalu at his return from the War, where he had gloriously
signalized himself, without any ones knowing the reason, that obliged him to it.

Axione, a zealous Friend of my Masters, informed him of all that had passed,
and the affliction the Princess was in, He was but the more disturbed, his Love
reproaching him with all the Disquiets of Taxila.

Zamar, and her proud Son, assured of the Passion of Zingis for the Princess,
thought of nothing but the conclusion of her Marriage with Timur: To defer it,
was to permit the growth of those Fires, that were but too violent already; so
that it was their single Aim to get it performed with all Expedition.

The Queen s^tisfy'd with the positive assurance, that Vndkan had given her,
was to visit the Princess, to torment her with this News: Madam, said she to
her, after the Favor the King has according to my Son, I cannot too much
declare his Goodness, nor do enough to testify to you my sat^sfaction. I know
that you and we have not equally desired the double Alliance, with which he
honors us: But we will do so many things to convert your Heart, that it may at
length perhaps become favorable to us. I see a disturbance in your Eyes, that
promises to us the Consequence of your Disdain, we perceive it with Affliction:
But Madam, you disperse it upon constant ^ersons, that will never be weary o^
Suffering. How much Resolution the Princess had need of to retain her self! I
am persuaded, Madam, answered she, with her usual moderation, That wh^t you
call a happiness for Timur, is owing to none but your self, and which according
to the Inclinations Heaven has bestowed upon me, cannot postsibly be one for me.
Your perpetual Solicitations force the King my Father to a compulsion; in the
me^n ^ime, Madam, my Respect for him exemp^s you from that disdain which you
speak of, and of which I am little capable: You know, Madam, that his Alliance
exalts you above all the Princesses of Asia, and before that you could hold a
Rank but amongst the most inferior. Ought then this Advantage of yours serve
to my Destruction? Is it possible for me to love your Son against my Nature;
and if I love him not, will you render us both unhappy? I have told him, and I
repeat it once more, that I am willing to make a Resignation of my Title to the
Crown of Ta^tary, provided he demands not a Heart which I can never give him.

This smart Answer, which escaped through the great Courage of the Princess, gave
no disturbance to Zamar, who had leisure to prepare her self for all things. It
would be too much, pursued she, to abandon your just pretensions to Timur; he
entertains more reasonable ones: But as he is not without ambition, and that
the indifferent Rank we have held in the World, is not sufficient to content
him, since the King ordains it, he shall partake of them with you, and shall
expect from his perseverance, and your Justice, this heart, that you are not
yet disposed to give him. As for me, Madam, added she in saluting her, I shall
always regard you as an indulgent, and affectionate Mother; and it is not to
esteem you a little, to offer you what is of most value to me in the World.
Whereupon she retired, and left the Princess in a confusion, which all the
comfortable methods of Axione, could not easily qualify.

The next Morning Vndkan declared to his most considerable Subjects, his Design
of making Timur his Successor, by matching him with the Princess his Daughter.
The most sincere, who esteemed nothing in Timur, because in truth, he had
nothing to be esteemed, disapproved of this Choice: But some unworthy
Flatteries, whose Suffrages Zamar had purchased, applauded the motion, and the
greatest number was of that side: The next day the Marriage was proclaimed, and
all things began to be prepared, to adorn the Festival, Almundzar was one of
those who declared not for Timur, and Zamar, who loved not the Favorite of
Vndkan, placed this Subject of Animosity amongst several others.

I cannot express to you, my Lord, the confusion of my Master, when he was
informed of this sudden Resolution. He found himself so much the more u^happy,
in that he could allege nothing to the King of Tartary, but a Love that was
born after that of Timur. He knew that he was beloved, and tasted the sweetness
of this precious advantage: But he saw the lovely Taxila subjected to an
absolute Power, and upon the point of being Sacrificed to what she abhorred.
All his thoughts were violent; although he shouldd arm all Tartary against him,
in assaulting the life of Timur, yet he concluded that he had better die, than
leave him the quiet Enjoyment of Taxila. Things were so far advanced, that the
Princess was forbid the sight of him, and this prohibition enraging him to the
highest degree; he went out of the Palace, resolved to abandon himself to his
Passion. In crossing the great Square, he saw Timur but slenderly attended, and
forgetting that he was not only at Cambalu but under the very Eyes of Vndkan
and Zamar, beholding in Timur the Persecutor of Taxila, he advanced with an
angry Beharviour. King of Tenduc, said he to him, you that will carry a War to
the Monguls, think of doing it at Cambalu to a Man, without whose assistance
you would not be in a state of disposing your self to an unjust Violence
against the Princess of Tartary. It Is by your Orders that her sight is
forbidden me, and I will lose my life, or you shall give me satisfaction for
this Offense. Timur was not prepared for so importunate an Encounter, and had
no inclination to fight. He would have passed on by answering with disdain; but
zingis, who had drawn his Sword, obliged him to defend himself. Timur's
Attendants placed themselves before him: The Valor of my Master soon dispersed
them; and seeing his unworthy Rival without other defense than than his Arms:
Defend thy self, Coward, said he to him, and deserve Taxila to day, by showing
some marks of Courage. The Son of Zamar heard these words; but he was never the
less weak and fearful; so my Master made him fall, pierced with several Wounds,
with out having received a single Hurt from his Arms. Zingis would not retire
after this Action; but Almundzar, whom the Noise of the Fright ^rought to this
place, obliged him in the Name of the Princess to be careful of himself; and
the Night happily approaching, he conducted him to a secure Retreat, that was
known of no one, but my self.

Timur was carried to the Palace, without any appearance of Life. Zamar set up
dreadful Cries, and made horrible Imprecations against Taxila, and my Master;
Vndkan dispersed his Orders to search for him in every corner: But Almundzar
had too well provided for his Safety. He came to see him the same Night, and
told him all that was prepared against him, showing the indispensable necessity
he was under of leaving Tartary. My Master opposed it along time; but Almundzar
made him comprehend, that if he should remain at ^^amb^^a^ he could not
possibly see the Princess; that she would be in continual frights, and that he
ought for her repose to go and attend some where the abatement of Storm. Zingis
did not consent, but upon condition he might have a sight of Taxila before his
departure: And the night following the faithful Almundzar introduced him to her
by some private ways, that he was acquainted with. Axione alone was privy to
the Secret. Almundzar retired to observe, least any one should surprise them;
and Zingis falling at the feet of the Princess, was ^ixed there for some time
without being able to express himself: What have you done, my Lord, said she to
him, raising him up, and what will be the consequence of this last effect of
your Valor? What should I not do to preserve you from Timur Madam, replied my
Master, or at least to defer his good Fortune? I know not, pursued Taxila,
whether Heaven sometimes pardons violent Actions; but it is certain, that I
cannot be much afflicted for the State of Timur. In the mean time, my Lord,
it is necessary for you to retire, and to dispose your self to it; for I cannot
know of your being here without continual Fears. Madam, answered my Master, if
I had nothing but my Life to consider, I protest to you, I would not stir from
Cambalu: but if your Repose is concerned in it, I am ready to submit to all
things. In the mean time, my Princess, do but reflect on the punishment he that
loves you with so much fervency, goes to be exposed, is in the uncertainty of a
tedious absence. The proud Timur will recover; my Arms have not been fortunate
enough to put an end to his Life: Ah! who shall defend you against this
Adversary, when Zingis is away? Let me but stay till one may depend upon his
condition, to the end of preserving you from being unhappy. No, my Lord,
replied the Charming Princess, I shall not entertain so cruel a complaisance: O
Heavens! I tremble, in speaking to you, when I consider that the revengeful
Zamar is so near us. Suffer me, to make those Prayers for you which are not
disturbed by fear. It may be, Heaven may hearken to them. Be it as it will,
believe that I love you. I don't offend Virtue, in giving you an assurance of
an innocent Affection; and if that can satisfy you, taste the pleasure thereof
entire. In leaving us, be assured, for your comfort, that if you absent your
self from the eyes of Taxila, you shall be never the less fixed in her heart:
and that not only her Repose demands this constraint, but also her Reputation.
Yes, Madam, replied the amorous Zingis, I will go, since it is your pleasure,
and will content my self with the precious Assurance which I have obtained from
your Goodness: But how shall I behave my self in relation to the King your
Father? Shall I defend my Life against him, if he comes to assault it; and will
the respect I owe to you, permit me to arm our People against the Tartars. Yes,
my Lord, replied the ^enerous Taxila, and if my Father becomes our declared
Enemy, after the obligations ^e is under to you, make the best use of your
^orces, and your Valor; and consider nothing but his Life. It Is his Person
alone that I recommend to you. Go, my dear Zingis, remain no longer in a place
so full of Danger. At these words, she gave him her hand, which the Prince
respectfully kissed, and not concealing her Tears from him, she received his
Farewell, and finally obliged him to retire. He took his leave of Axione, who
was no less afflicted than the Princess, and after having embraced Almundzar a
thousand times, who had prepared all things for our departure, we left Cambalu,
and took the direct way to Molg. Our Journey was but melancholy; and finding
the King dead at our Arrival, my Master, who had most tenderly loved him,
received a terrible addition of Grief by this loss, and demonstrated the
goodness of his Nature in the profound Mourning he was in for a long time. His
Subjects ravished at his sight, swore to him an inviolable Fidelity: And some
Months after his Arrival, not doubting but that he should be assaulted; and
Taxila having given him leave to defend himself, he visited all his Provinces,
advanced as far as the Deserts of Bargue, and in short time disciplined a
People, that were wholly ignorant before, teaching them the Art of War, with
which he had as perfect an Acquaintance as any Prince in the World. His
Neighbors, being jealous of his Glory, had a mind to give him some
disturbance: but in a few Months he added several Provinces to his Dominions,
amongst which are those of Jek, Motrik, and Melair. In this Triumphant
Condition, more sensible of his Love, than of so much Glory, seeing that
Tartary made no advances against him, and supposing that things might have
suffered an alteration there, he dispatched a splendid Embassy to Vndkan, to
demand the Princess: But he was refused, and treated as a rash person. Timur,
as he had foreseen, being cured of his Wounds, he carried his despair amongst
new Enemies, and always victorious, being unable to live without the sight of
Taxila, knowing that she was still free by a secret Correspondence, which he
entertained with Almundzar, he returned to Cambalu, with a design to make the
Princess consent to a private Departure with him, or to die before her Eyes, if
she was contrary to it. Coming to the Gate of the Palace, which was to have
been opened to us, the impatience of Zingis betrayed him; he spoke, Zamar heard
him, and you know, my Lord, what she has ordained against my Master.

Zerbin ceased to speak, and the King of Thibet, after having admired a Life so
illustrious, assured the Mongul, That he bore no less affection to his Master,
than those who were his particular Friends; and then went to rejoyn Almundzar,
whom he praised for his faithful Attendance upon Zingis. My Dear Almundzar,
said he to him, by what means shall we look after the Security of Zingis; what
methods shall we make use of against the cruel Zamar? As her hatred is
inflexible, answered Almundzar, and her Power absolute upon Undkan, I see
nothing but force that can counterpoise it, and I know not where to find that
which is fufficient for an undertaking of this importancc, Whatsoever happens,
pursued Philing, I will die before I Will suffer the King of the Monguls to be
destroyed. I Will go first to Vndkan, and still pursue the Paths of sweetness.
But if he perseveres in his Cruelty, I Am resolved to declare my self his open
Enemy. Almundzar approved the generous Resolution of Philing, and assured him,
That whatsoever he attempted for the Service of Zingis, he would always be of
his Party. This day passed afflictingly: The following one the King of Thibet
returned to Vndkan, whom he found still besieged by Zamar, and was the more
expeditious, in as much as he feared son private Cruelty; for they talk at
Cambalu (...) the Death of Zingis, as a thing without disput^

Zamar and Vndkan feared the presence (...) this Prince, who was neither their
Subjec^ nor their Tributary, and whom they sa^ highly declared for Virtue. His
Arriva^ put them into a sort of confusion, and Zama^ was extremely disturbed at
it. My Lord said he to the King of Tartary, I kno^ not whether the design,
which brings me t^ you this Morning, will have a favourabl^ Success: But I
protest to you, that I never had so urgent an interest, as that of the lif^ of
the King of the Monguls. It will b^ always reputable and glorious to you, my
Lord, to treat a Prince with generosity, from whom you fancy to have received
some Prejudice: But it will be to your eternal Disgrace, to exercise an unjust
Cruelty upon him having s^ many reasons to esteem him, and to look upon him as
the greatest of Men. No body is ignorant of the Services he has rendered to you,
and his Love for the Princess is all that makes him Crimminal before you. But,
my Lord, in the Dignities Heaven has raised you to, consider what is owing to
that of other Kings. Must you be powerful only to appear unjust, and will you
exercise this Power upon an Enemy that has submitted to you, only because he
would; but an Enemy, whose Actions have been always glorious, and who keeps the
Eyes of a great many Nations fixed upon him: This would be to confirm the Ideas
that other People entertain of us. We are taken for Scythians still, my Lord,
that is to say, a People without Humanity, without Laws, without Gods, and
Religion. Will you pursue those barbarous Examples of Antiquity, which are
looked upon as hideous Prodigies? and will you sacrifice a considerable King,
for such slender Reasons? Those slender Reasons, interrupted Zamar, transported
with anger, will not pass for such, wthi Mothers as indulgent as I, and he that
would have killed my Son before my Eyes, and almost in my Arms, cannot be too
severely punished for a violence which has cost him so much Blood, and me so
many Tears.

I have been informed, replied the King of Thibet, That Timur was well
attended, when zingis assaulted him, and that Generosity had not so much as a
share in this occasion, since many Swords at the same time were directed
against a single Man; and I think I have been told, that the King of the
Monguls had saved the K. of Tenduc's Life more than once, when he made War in
the Kingdom of Vng. My Lord, answered Zamar, you are so well acquainted with
what relates to zingis, that in all appearance you have some particular
correspondence with him; it is undoubtedly in our Dominions, and upon these
Conjectures it might be lawful for us. What Madam, interrupted Philing coldly,
to load me with Irons too, and to heap Injustic^ upon Injustice? It matters not
from whose mouth I have learnt the Wonders of hi^ Life; but it suffices that I
am a zealous and sincere admirer of it. My Lord, said Vndkan, The Queen talks
like an Offended Mother, and you ought not to condemn her Resentment, I have
considered al^ your Reasons, but they have not convinced me, and it were to
make Virtue suffer, to let those Men live, that disturb Empires and
unreasonably stain the Palaces of King^ with Blood. I have received some
Services from zingis, and I have honored him as a Stranger, that I thought
worthy of my esteem; but abusing my easiness, he comes to my Court with a
design to seduce a Young Princess, and to withdraw her from the Obedience she
owes me; and pushing his Rashness still further, he attacks the Life of a
Prince, who is my Son, because he is that of my Wife, and to whom I have
destined my Daughter; and then returns unknown to Cambalu, to introduce himself
into my Palace, and make secret Combinations with the feeble Taxila How do I
know, but that he had an intention upon my Life; and who shall assure me of the
innocence of his Designs? In short, I owe my self this Victim, and to solicit
for his Liberty, is to lose time without effect. I see well, my Lord, answered
Philing, incensed with the barbarous resolution of Undkan, that the loss of the
King of the Monguls is sworn, and that there is no resisting it in places, where
all submits to your Commands. But a Person of my nature will never observe this
Cruelty without resentment. In all appearance, you fear neither the anger of
the Gods, nor the contempt of Men: But do you think that the juster sort of Men
in this part of the World, which we inhabit, will permit you to Sacrifice this
Illustrious Zingis without any attempt to revenge his loss? The Indies, Persia
and China, will easily be moved, and there wants nothing, added he, inspired by
his generosity, but such a Prince as I to encourage them to it, and to bring
into your Territories a storm, which would soon overwhelm you. And so departed,
but all his threatenings were so remote, Undkan and Zamar were less terrified,
than incensed. Their first motion was to apprehend Philing: but Almundzar and
some other Tartars, in whom Vndkan had some confidence, hindered him from coming
to that extremity, by representing to him that it were to arm against him all
the Powers of the Universe: Zamar was no of this opinion, but she was obliged
to yield

The King of Thibet would again attempt to see the Princess, but the entrance
of he^ Apartments was refused him, as it had been before; and whilst, being
provoked with this denial, he was considering of methods to pull down an unjust
Authority the Afflicted Taxila, and the lovely Axion^ were in a melancholy
Solitude, where they entertained none but dismal thoughts. Bu^ what must those
of Zingis be, that was so near Taxila, and so incapable of conversing with her?
By the knowledge which he had of his Enemies, he did not question his
unhappiness; and the Idea of that Death which he had so often braved, was less
a^flicting to him, than the absence of the Princess

Almundzar interessed himself as a generous Friend, in the misfortune of Zingis
but notwithstanding all his Credit with Undkan, that of Zamar was always
preferred He spoke loud enough to be commande^ silent, and he had not so much
as the comfort to be able to qualify the inconveniences which the King of the
Monguls received in his Prison. Zerbin who was still concealed with this
generous Friend of Zingi^ informed him that his Master had six hundred of the
most resolute and courageous Me^ in the World, lying hid in several Corners
about Cambalu, that would most heartily expose themselves for their Prince.
Almundzar immediately made the King of Thibet a partaker of this News, in order
to engross a Party, of which this Prince might have the Conduct.

There were some Tartars too, bold enough to declare themselves in favor of
Zingis against Timur, whom they mortally abhorred, and whose Government they
justly feared. Almundzar hid his zeal, to be more useful to the Princess, and
the King of the Monguls; and with this Policy he had liberty to win a great
number of considerable Tartars, who respected the Virtue of Zingis, and
despised the baseness of Timur, which had appeared to them in so many
occasions. The King of Thibet vexed at the second refusal he had received,
carried his concern to Almundzar, to whom he made his complaints You plainly
see, my Lord, replied the Tartar, that all is here managed against Honor and
Justice, and I don't believe that any other place in the World would have been
so much wanting in the respect which is owing to such a King as you. My dear
Almundzar, answered Philing, I should be but little sensible of such
formalities, if I had nothing but the Interests of Glory to observe here, but I
have those of a Lover to satisfy; and you discern in me the most amorous of
all Men Ha! of whom, my Lord? replied Almundzar, being surprised; of Axione,
pursue^ Philing; of that Charming Damsel so dea^ to the Princess, whom I have
loved these many years, and shall do to Eternity. I don't know, Amundzar,
whether you have exper^enced her enough to be acquainted with all her Virtue,
that stands in competition with her Beauty; and the obscurity of her Birth is
effaced by the grandeur of her Sentiments. This effect of the merit of Axione
does not surprise me added Almundzar, but that which is amazing to me, is the
manner of her arriving at C^mbalu, and the residence she has made here without
you. Notwithstanding it is she alone that has brought me hither, answered
Philing, and for whom I have remained here so long. But Almundzar, it is
necessary that you know perfectly so extraordinary a person, and the Passion I
entertain for her, in opening my heart to you sincerely. Almundzar who was very
ambitious of knowing the Adventures of Philing, besought him not to retard this
satisfaction; and the King of Thibet, who could not be more agreeably employed,
than by speaking of Axione, thus expressed himself.

The History of Philing and Axione.
THE Kingdom of Thibet is not one of the least considerable of Asia, neither as
to its extent nor Traffic. Although it is ^ncompassed with Mountains, and
Deserts, ^et the Inhabitants of the Indies and those ^f China come frequently
to correspond ^ith us. Our Cit^es are Populous, our Coun^y Fertile, and
magnificence is not unu^ual with us. I was but six years old when ^ lost my
Father, and nine when we re^ained (the Princess Thamirize and I) without a
Mother. These first misfortunes ^ere great, but our Age diminished the ^oubles
and made us soon forgetful of them. ^ would be even difficult enough to express
that we thought, and I acknowledge that have but a bare remembrance of persons,
that ought to have been so much ^alued.

My Father had been extremely loved by ^is Subjects, and his memory was always
^ad in veneration by them. Perhaps there ^ever was observed a People more
affectio^^te and faithful to a young Successor, who ^new neither his Fortune
nor what might ^v^^-whelm it. Amongst all those, My Father had distinguished in
his Dominions, Hildezar was the most considerable. There was some Relation
between the Royal Family and his, and 'twas to him the Regence^ was committed,
during my years of Minority. He made a worthy acquittance of this Employment.
His knowledge was eminent, and his courage great. He was vigilant, and zealous,
and Affairs underwent no alteration by his management. As for me, I was
afforded Governors of sufficient merit, and Thamirize had select Ladies to
wait upon her. Our usual residence was at Kachen. Hildezar lodged in the
Palace. He had lost his Wife, of whom he enjoyed but one Daughter, who had the
same Education with my Sister; and I was attended with several young Gentlemen
of Noble Families, to render the Employments of my Infancy the more agreeable.

Hildezar at that time was about five and thirty. He did not want Ambition, and
ceased not to feed himself with hopes, considering his all-sufficient power in
Thibet, to oblige me one day to espouse his Daughter. The pleasure of Hunting
was that he practiced most of any. His Family was more numerous than mine, his
Expenses much greater, and his Equipage equally splendid. It i^ true, that at
ten years old so much magnificence is not absolutely necessary; and it is also
certain that my Interests were not neglected by the Regent. It was a year
per^aps, since he exercised the whole Autho^ity of Thibet under my Name, by the
death of the Queen my Mother, and the Mourning being over, divertisements took
up our time with those useful Employments that might complete the Body and the
Mind. All our Mountains are of a difficult access. Notwithstanding the Chase is
agreeable there, and Hildezar, who often took this delight, suffered me to
partake of it sometimes, without letting me be exposed to the violence of this
exercise. One day chosen amongst the pleasantest of the Spring, we were at a
place near Kachen to pursue our usual Game, and we rid long enough with more
vigor, than Children ordinarily enjoy. In passing under some scattered Trees,
whose Trunks were washed with a little Rivolet, we saw a spectacle that
surprised my youthful Heart, and made a lively impression upon it. The Blood of
several dead or dying Men, filled up this River, and some distance from these
Bodies, we saw a little Damsel of six or seven years old, clothed richly
enough, and of a Beauty so extraordinary, that our whole Company was astonished
at it. She cried and lift up her Eyes and Hands on high, being ignorant of whom
to ask assistance. In this dismal state her very Garments were all stained with
Blood, and never could an Object more Charming, and worthy of compassion appear
before us. Hildezar stopped; and our arrival made the innocent unknown redouble
her Cries, who thrust her self amongst our Horses feet, amazed at her
misfortune. I profes^ to you, Almundzar, that I was sensible of Love from that
very moment; but I was ignorant thereof at first, and my innocence made me take
it for a simple compassion. Hildezar alighted from his Horse, and went
forthwith to approach the lovely stranger. He is dead, said she, with an
innocence Divine, in the Tartarian Language, but somewhat different from ours,
my Father's dead. These cruel Men have killed him, but he has dispatched them
too. Ah! my Father, added she, turning her Head most pitifully to the place
where the Bodies lay, Ah! my Father, I shall never see you more, and now will
dye with you. Hildezar being softened, took her in his Arms, and made her show
him the Person she called Father, but neither he nor any of the rest gave any
signs of Life. After that Hildezar himself conducted the little Axione, for so
she was called, to Kachen, asking her some questions by the way, and learning
of her that Marzille her Fathe had been assaulted by th^se wicked Men, with
others that attended him; but she could inform him n ither of her Country, nor
her condition, which by all appearances was not indifferent. The sight of my
Sister, and Alzina the daughter of Hildezar, both much of the same Age with
her, a little moderated her grief, and some few days after she appeared so
beautiful, that the whole Court was charmed thereat. I never saw so much grace,
such sweetness, and such modesty as appear in her meanest actions, and although
she had spent her first years in a wandering life, she had an admirable nature;
which was not corrupted by the Want of Education. Her reason, which outstript
her years, soon ex^elled that of persons much more aged: She was complaisant
without debasing her self; and would have a deference in certain things to the
Quality of King, which my Tenderness could not dispense with. My Sister loved
her entirely. Alzina lived Familiarly with her, and we passed five or six years
in the sweetest condition of the World. In the mean time, Axione became so
handsome, and I so amorous, that I aimed at nothing but her sight, and how to
please her. I rendered her small Services which touched her Gratitude: but
always humble, and always modest she received them with respects, of which my
Passion could not bear the observing. Axione said I to her one day, when I had
made her a Present of some Flowers, for which she gave me, thanks, as for a
thing of much more value, you esteem at a high rate, gifts of little
importance, and amongst those that I could make, that are some more worthy of
observation. All those that proceed from your hand, my Lord, replied she, ought
to be very considerable to me, and such a King as you knows not how to bestow
small ones. Ah! lovely Axione, said I, if flowers attract so obliging an
answer, what ought not I to hope from a Heart less unworthy of you, which I
have long since disposed of to you? Hith^rto my Eyes alone h^ve told you so,
but now it is necessary to speak after another manner. Yes, Axione, I have given
you this tender heart, which shall be faithful to you; and if you are capable
of acknowledgement, methinks it should prove in my favor. The Modest Axione
blushed, sighed, and beholding me with an affecting Air, but full of grandeur
and Majesty. The Hearts of Sovereigns are not so easily to be disposed of, my
Lord, answered she, nor to be accepted with so little precaution. Consider what
you are born to, and the condition you have found me in. Make reflection upon a
goodness which might pass for weakness, and which I Will not abuse. Believe that
I will always respect in you the Royal Dignity, and a desert of which I am but
too sensible. But, my Lord, believe also that the obscurity of my Life does not
concern me enough to escape by an artificial way. You have too much Wit,
replied I, and would to Heaven you had as much tenderness! what can the
obscurity of your Birth prevail against such Beauty, and such noble Virtue? Do
you believe that I am one of those that Sacrifice to Fortune, and not Merit?
Content with what I possess, I should esteem my self more happy to please you,
than to oblige the gre^t^st Queen upon Earth. Don't give me instructions then
which I should look upon as Cruelties; suffer me to love you, and suffer it
with satisfaction. I might press on, it is true, but still she answered me as
she had done before: The only advantage which I had, was to speak, and be
understood, and when I protested to Axione, that it was not the quality of King
which made me take that liberty, she seemed to be more satisfied: But,
Almundzar, when her stature was quite formed, and her Beauty perfect, I also
felt my Passion to increase, and found my self full capable of giving up all
things for her.

I was not the only one that loved her in this manner, and you shall find I had
a formidable Rival. Hildezar, Regent of Thibet, in an advanced Age, Father of
Alzina and who had acquired much esteem in our Country, and amongst our
Neighbors, by his good management of things, seeing the lovely Axione grown
up, felt kindling in his heart for her, Fires of an extreme violence. He took
in vain some care to stifle them, and what he had done for Axione flattering
his hope, he let an Evil increase, which it was not in his power to defend
himself against.

He had observed through all my actions the love I had for Axione; but he did
not think it could be pure, and imagining that a young King must entertain
Ambition, he hoped that time would carry my inclinacious further than to the
Fortune of a Stranger; and so let his own act freely.

One day, when I was not at the Palace, Hildezar found Axione alone upon a
Terras walking, and taking the advantage of the time, when no one could observe
him: Stay Axione, said he to her, I have something of importance to discover to
you* Axione, who foresaw nothing, smiled at these words, Of what, my Lord?
replied she, is it in reference to the Obligations I am under to you, and is i^
to reproach me for having been wanting in m^ respects to you? If you had an
obligation to me replied Hildezar, it would be easy for you t^ acquit your
self of it, and it is of this power which is unknown to you, that I would infor^
you. As long as you remain a Child, not feeling what I do with the same
violence, I have forbore expressing to you what was beyond your reason; and
since I have been retained by a fear, which a more absolute Authority at
present quite effaces. One cannot always be discreet and circumspect when one's
desper^tely in Love: This Declaration will surprise you, Axione, the knowledge
you have of your own charms, should have prep^red you for it. You need not fear
my Intentions, they are full of respect, and I don't offer to you my heart with
an absolute Empire over my affections, but to offer you at the same time my
hand, and all that Fortune has enriched me with.

The Discourse of Hildezar made Axione loose her speech. He besought her a long
time to answer him, before she could, at length returning a little from the
confusion: Is it possible, my Lord, answered she, that what you say is not
designed to make a Trial of me, and that there should be any truth in a
discourse of this nature? Can you doubt of it, rep^yed Hildezar, and are these
sort of delusions becoming a person of my Age? You must needs think I love you
very ardently, since no consideration hinders me from declaring it? Ah! my
Lord, cried Axione, what have I done against Heaven, to be exposed to such a
misfo^tune? Alas! is this misfortune so great, replied Hildezar, that you are
so much disturbed at it? Yes, my Lord, pursued she, it is one of the most cruel
ones to me; and after the obligations I am under to you, it is an eternal
unhappiness for me to contribute to the pollution of your glory. What will be
said, if you let your self go to such evil Conduct, and suffer your self to be
guilty of Errors, which the tendrest youth cannot render excusable? What
commendation can my alliance procure you? unknown to my self and the whole
World, perhaps too of an inferior blood, unworthy of your Cares. Axione,
int^rrupted Hildezar, this modesty raises your Virtue to so high a pitch, that
my Love would increase, if it were not already at the utmost poi^t. I see in
you all that can satisfy my Ambition and my Love. but Speak possitively then*
Ha! well Hildezar, persued she, I will be sincere, si^ce you would have me, and
I declare to you, that this unknown Bl^od, from whence I proceed, inspires me
with thoughts so noble, that I will never do any thing without being informed
of my Extraction. I feel it much better than perhaps I shall ever know it --
It Is not that which stops you interrupted Hildezar again, and this resistance
which puts me into despair, is owing to another cause; I am neither young, nor
yet a King: but Axione I love you, and I can make you very happy. I have
A^thority, do not force me to make use of it. Philing it is true, is So^eraign,
but he must have a great Alliance suitable to his Dignity, and he offers
nothing but a volatile Love, much sooner extinct with Kings than other Persons.
I ^eave you, and expect all things from you, proposing nothing but what is
reasonable. Thus he departed, and Axione remained alone at liberty, to reflect
upon what she had heard. This entertainment made such an impression upon her
Face, that it was easy to discover it, in spite of all the care she took to
hide it. I found her much disquieted, full of distraction, and in a state I
never found her in before, What have you done this Morning, Axione, said I to
her, you are no more your self, and I cannot suppose the cause of this
alteration? My words recovered her a little; she told me there was nothing very
extraordi^ary; but I discerned too clearly in her Eyes, what love had long
since made me study for, to be contented with this Answer. You are not sincere,
persued I, but if you co^ceal any thing from the tender Interest I repo^e in
you, you will be the crueliest person in the World. My Lord, replied Axione, that
which you desire to know, ought to be concealed from you; yet I find my self
not to be in a capacity of hiding the secret from you, but it must be upon
condition that your goodness leaves no room for Resentment. Know then, my Lord,
that this Hildezar whom Heaven has made use of to sweeten the first Misfortune
of my Life, is now become the most sensible of my Torments. There was no need
of any more to make me comprehend, the Designs of Hildezar, and had it not been
for the Condition which Axione had placed in her confidence, I had instantly
gone to have searched him in order to his chastisement. Hildezar, is amorous of
you, replied I, what then can I p^opose to my self if you are favorable to
him? My Heart added this charming Damsel, is of no great value, but my
Inclinations are not destined for Hildezar. I am exposed to his discourses, and
perhaps to his Capricio's. Ha! do you make no account of my Authority,
interrupted I, do you imagine that my love will let his'n act undisturb^d? O my
dear Axione! I have much more interest therein than you, and you have too much
charmed me to let a Rival importune you with a love, which no one shall pretend
to whilst I am King, and enjoy the Possession of all, but Axione. You may
extend your Title even as far as my Will, my Lord, replied she, since your
generosity will never impose on it what is displeasing; and which is more, you
are all-powe^f^l here No Axione, added I, I shall never act any thing where you
are, but what is agreeable to your wishes, since you are to reign here with a
Sovereign Power. Oh Heaven! pursued this lovely Creatur^, is it possible that I
should prove ungrateful to so much goodness, and will you not put me in a
condition one day of returning an acknowledgment? I ^ope, my Lord, continued
she, that my indifference, or rather my concern, leaving Hildezar in despair,
he will change his Conduct; but if that happens not, I must change my self. Yes
Axione, answered I, and what is more, it is necessary that you change your
Condition. Don't believe that I consider, whether I shall make you Queen of
Thibet, it is a determined thought. The Throne which I enjoy, cannot please
without you, and if our Laws would suffer such things, I Would offer it entire to
your disposal. My Lord, replied Axione, with regards full of Acknowledgment,
you honor too much an unhappy Stranger, whom Fortune has hitherto sound
unworthy of the least of her Favors. It ^ould be too great a one to enjoy the
affections of a noble Prince, and to partake his Crown: But my Lord, I shall
not vilify so generous a goodness: Your Glory shall not be stained by an alliance
such as mine; and to prevent this Misfortune, I would abandon my self to the
most cru^l ^nes, so far as to bestow my self on Hildezar: What should Axione be
Queen of Thibet, one who brings for her whole Advantage, nothing more than an
Original unknown to all the World? I owe my self and you a perfect Information
of my Person; and if there is found, said she with an extraordinary Majesty,
something in my Life that is worthy of you, believe, my Lord, that no one can
dispute it with you, and that I shall esteem my self but too happy.

Oh Heaven! cried I, charmed with the virtue of Axione, could you have placed
so much grandeur in a common person? An. Madam, seek for no other Proofs of
what you are, than in the Beauty of your Sentiments. They make you worthy of
all the Thrones in the World. Accept of mine, and do not be cruel to me, by too
modest and too obstinate a Refusal. My Lord, replied she, it is a fixed
Resolution. I know not whether I shall offend decency, in professing to you
that you have touched my Heart, and that of all which can be presented to my
Eyes, nothing is more agre^able to them than you; But I commit this fault to
assure you, that the more dear and e^timable you are to me, the more I ought to
be careful of your glory. She blushed in conclu^ing these words, and would
absolutely change her ^iscourse.

To satisfy her, it was necessary to put up the Offense she had received from
Hildezar, and to give him no suspicion that I was informed thereof. Having then
my Eyes open, I saw but too clearly, what was agitating in the Heart of this
inconsiderate Rival: But I was not so apprehensive of the Intri^ues he caused
in Thibet, by the Authority which he had gained during my Minority. As soon as
he had declared his Sentiments to Arione, he took secret Measures to oblige me
^o espouse his Daughter, to whom I had not so much as inclined a thought, nor
had he spoke to me concerning it. He put the whole State in motion, and as
hitherto my Education and my Love had more employed me, than the grand Affairs,
it was easy for him to insinuate to those who had a Partnership in his Cares
and business, all that he had a mind they should do. He declared then to every
Man, that was distinguished amonst them, and who obtained some credit, that I,
possessed with a blind Infatuation, abandoned my self to the love of the
unknown Axione, and that I destined no other Princess to my Subjects. Each was
for charging him to tax me with it, condemning this Engagement; but he refused
to do it, and others were obliged to take the Commission thereof.

I was not care^ul to imagine what they were then concerned about, and I was
much surprised one day, that for an Affair of great importance, I was obliged
to be at Council, where I but seldom went, supposing that my presence ^as not
always necessary, when the most vene^able of those that made up the ^ssembly,
made ^is Addresses to me in these words.

I speak to you in the Name of all your Subjects, my Lord, who by my Mouth,
implore your goodness to give them a Queen. Your Age is not advanced, but your
Reason is much; and that will inform you, that nothing is more agreeable to
People, than to see their Sovereigns in a state of leaving them a glorious
Posterity. Kings become more vigilant thereby, and Nations better disciplined:
Princes without engagement are almost always without Interest, and that of a
Family makes them search after renown, and the enlargement of their Dominions.
Think then, my Lord, of satisfying us, and pursue the Steps of most of your
Predecessors. Don't go to take in Foreign Climates, a Princess that may
undeserve our Love. There are in Thibet Families Illustrious enough to Merit
the Alliance of their King. This favor ought even to regard the zeal and
fidelity of Hildezar. Alzina can reckon Princes amongst her Ancestors, and she
is not the first of her Blood, that has entered into the Royal Family of Thibet.
This discourse astonished me to such a degree, that I could not immediately
return an answer. Anger had seized upon my Soul, I looked upon these Men as so
many Adversaries, that had designs to trouble my repose, and particularly
Hildezar, not doubting but that he was the single occasion of all that passed.
At length composing my looks, which the subtle Hildezar examined, I spoke,
because 'twas necessary I should. Botzar, said I to him that had explained
himself, I know not from whom you hold the Commission of which you have just
acquitted your self, but I Will tell you, that it is not agreeable to me. Who
ought to be more concerned than my heart, in the choice which is so much
desired, or more careful of my Fortune than my self? You must certainly suppose
me very weak, when you take the liberty of recommending Objects, and giving me
Instructions. I am not so far Ignorant of the Laws of Thibet, and those of
other Kingdoms of the World, but that I can square my Conduct with some glory,
and make choice of a suitable Spouse when it shall be judged convenient. My
Lord, said Hildezar, seeing that I had left speaking, you must not take amiss,
that so many persons who regard you as their only good, aspire to see you fixed
to them by that Interest they intimated to you. I could have given my Vote, but
'twas not I that did propose Alzina, who notwithstanding, Sir, excells a
Stranger, and would agree much better with your Subjects. Hildezar, interrupted
I, with looks full of displeasur^, you abuse the consideration. I have had for
you. I am apprehensive enough, to know that you do not so much con^emn the
unknown Ladies, and you might have so far discovered my Inclinations, to have
been more retenti^e, and less confident. As for the rest, I am King, and
pretend to be the Master. When the People of Thibet are oppressed by my
injustice, then they may complain of me: When I abandon them to the fury of
their Foes, th^y'll have just reason to reproach my Cowardice; but hitherto
they cannot condemn my Actions, and I can upbraid you, for all your Power, as
one that is wanting in those respects, which I shall take care to make you
observe for the Future. And so withdrew full of anger, and had appeared such as
I was, when showing my Resentment to those ra^h Men; had I not feared to have
committed Axione to somewhat that would have disturbed her: she read my emotion
in my Eyes but I concealed the cause, and gave another pretense to it.

Hildezar incensed against me for the Interest of his Daughter, but much more
for that of his Love, made a ^angerous malice succeed to the affection he had
professed for me. My ruin appeared to him necessary to assure his repose, and
Fortune, and as the peace which reigned amongst us had left no Clouds at all,
he raised a War by pernicious Intrigues, not doubting but I would run with a
precipitant haste, to places where Glory was to be obtained. He expected by my
Death, a Throne which had no other Heirs, and although Benzid and Othris, two
considerable Princes in Thibet, had some pretensions to it, the suffrages, of
which he was assured, made him regard them as no great Obstacles. 'Twas he then
that seduced the People subjected to my Obedience, that Inhabit our Frontiers
toward India. upon the first noise of this Rebellion, I would by all means act
as General, and King. Hildezar cold and tardy, seemed little inclined for the
War. His Creatures followed his Example. But in spite of him, I found my self
in some small time at the Head of a considerable Army. As soon as he discerned
me ready to depart, he feigned an Indisposition to remain at Kachen. It was a
cruel necessity for me to leave Axione, exposed to his importunities. No, said
I to her, when I must depart, I Will never abandon you to the indiscretion of
Hildezar. He is all powerful here, Axione, and my misfortune has let his
Authority increase. My Lord, replied she, being so near the Princess, I ought
to be afraid of nothing in reference to him, and it is not his importunities,
that disturb me; it is your Life, my Lord, which will be exposed to Rebellious
Arms, 'ti^ your self, it is that great Heart, that burns to sygnalize it self.
Alas! my Lord, to sympathize with our Weakness, have less Passion or a Glory
that will always attend you close enough, and remember in the fight, what cares
are owing to your own security. This Testimony of the Love of Axione, whose
Charming Eyes began to appear moist, most sensibly affected me This Life that I
have Consecrated to you, fai^ Axione, said I, will not run so many hazards, which
your goodness does persuade you. But since you particularly ordain it, I will
be careful of it, as of a thing which appertains to you, and which you are
unwilling to be deprived of. For you, Axione, I trust you to your self. Fight
with the rashness of Hildezar; and think at my return to put an eternal
Obstacle between his bold pretensions, in giving your self to a Prince, that
only lives for you Go, my Lord, continued this charming Damsel, where the
rigor of Fortune demands your Courage, and if I am Mistress of any of your
Interests, believe they cannot be placed in more secure hands.

'Twas thus I parted from Axione, and after having tenderly commended her to my
Sister. I left the Palace attended by Benzid, Othriz, and several other
considerable Persons in Thibet. Hildezar, said I to that perfidious man, you
are inclined to remain at Kachen, but remember always, that I reign there, and
that I reign justly, don't ab^se the Power I have given you. render to my
Sister what is owing to her Dignity, and above all, respect Axione for whom I
Intress my self. Don't excite Troubles, which I go to calm: my return will be
expeditious; I dare ass^re you, farewell. His answer was a Salutation, and I
departed, but not without disturbance.

I could tell you. Almundzar, that I passed like a Torrent amongst the Rebels,
they had no courageous Leader to excite them, and their Revolt was the
workmanship of the perfidiousness of Hildezar. I had but little pains to subdue
men conquered at the single prospect of our Standards; my vexation suffered me
to punish some for ex^mples, and as much disposed as I was to Clemen^y, I could
not think without Resentment, that ^hey occasioned my absence from Axione. In a
lord, without much loss sustained, or the recep^^on of a single wou^d, although I
did not spare ^y self; In less than three Months, all things were composed. The
conquered disposed themselves to all I ordained; and I retook the Road of
Kachen, from whence I had often heard without the least intimation of any thing
that might make me suspect the misfortune that attended me. But at my Arival
there I found neither Hildezar, nor Axione. The Traitor had forced her away;
and as exact as Thamirize had been to observe him, she apprehended nothing of
it, and appeared to me astonished at the Accident. Alzina her self, the
innocent Daughter of so Criminal a Father, Protested to me, that she had no
share in the action of Hildezar, and offered me courageously her blood for the
reparation of the offense I had received. I assured her, as afflicted as I was,
that not confounding her with the Infidel that gave her life, I e^e^med her
innocent of all. In a word, Almundzar, without any stay at Kachen, I run
through Thibet, and even exposed my self in the hideous Deserts of Xamo to
frightful advetures; and after so much useless Enquiry which consumed much
time, I returned to Kachen, to dispose my self to a longer Journey, leaving the
Government to the Princess my Sister, and Benzid and Othriz to asist her in her
important Employment* after which I went out of Thibet, being unable to live
without Axione. I saw the grearest part of Asia. I had adventures, which I
don't acquaint you with, because they have no reference to my Love; and after
t^o years of vain enquiry, being in Tartary, and passing through a-Forest that
belongs* to the King of Ergimul, I found Hildezar at the foot of a Tree,
pierced with many mortal Wounds, and in a condition worthy of his Treacheries.
He breathed as yet, and knew me without much difficulty. His misfortune made
any anger vanish, and persuaded me to succor ^im; no, my Lord, said he to me,
you ought not to ^row away your goodness upon a Man, that is so little
deserving of it. I am culpable, it is not Death that forces me to acknowledge
it. and it is long since that a just remorse has revenged you of my
infidelities. I dye too quietly for a man, that has deserved the utmost
Punishment, since I can ask pardon of my Master* At these words he made an
attempt to kneel, but I excused him from it, and asked him Ne^^s of Axione. He
fadly sighed, and told me that he had lost her near two years since; that
having ma^e her travel a long time, they had been assaulted in Tartary, and she
taken from him. Since which, he had searched her strictly, but in vain, and
that the same R^vishers had newly pu^ him in the state I found him, because he
knew them and demanded news of A^ione; after which he expired, and having
ordered my Attendants to co^er his Body with a little Earth; I came hither
where I have at length found Axio^e, beyond my expectation. I made my self
known to Vndkan. I ^ave often seen Axione, and then she loves me; I am assured
of it, but her Severe virtue will not permit her to consent to make me happy,
till she has a perfect knowledge of her Self. she told me, that Hildezar had
taken her away with a most secret Art, and great dexterity; that he did not
show himself to her till a long time after his departure from Kachen; that he
had conjured her to pardon his Love, which made him Sacrifice his All for her;
that she had exclaimed against his Perfidiousness: But that nothing had
convinced him, and at length in Tartary, she had been taken from him and sold
to some Tartarians, who gave her to the Princess Taxila*

Philing ceased, and Almundzar admired his generosity, and the Virtue of
Axione. At length returning to the Intrests of Zingis, they talked o^ the Troops
he had about Cambalu and those Measures, which they ought to take to preven^
the misfortune, which threatened the Life of that Illustrious Prince.

In the mean time, Timur the Author of those Evils, which so many considerable
persons Suffered, was not without disquiet, and for all the Man of the World he
haed most, was upon the point of being sacrificed to him; yet loving Taxila as
he did, he could not live without her sight, and he was too sensible that he
could not present himself before her, without hearing things that would be
disagreable to him. Zamar, who loved him even to Idolatry, saw his Melancholy
with trouble. Why do you languish, Timur, said she to him, all things conspire
to your Felicity, and there is no Crown in Asia, that equals what you will
possess? What can you want more to satisfy you? After so much care that I have
taken, will you always appear before me with a disturbed Aspect? Madam, replied
Timu^, these motions are not voluntary, and it is against my will, you discern
them. You have done but too much for me. My acknowledgment can go no farther;
but if my Ambition is contented, I feel my Love alarmed. Being too constant a
lover of Taxila, I must either deprive my self of her sight, or else expose my
self to her reproaches Ah! Madam, how I deserve compassion, and how discomposed
I am in the midst of my prosperity! Say rather that you are weak, interrupted
the Queen of Tartary, and that you merit real misfortunes, since you make to
your self imaginary ones. First see our Enemy destroyed, and then render your
self Master of Taxila. Her consent is of no importance. The Authority of Vndkan
shall raise these difficulties. In short, my Son, I would have you reign over
the Tartars, and there is nothing but I would accomplish for that end. Go see
this ungrateful Taxila, whose fierceness I should not spare but for your single
consideration, whilst I dispose the King to the Execution of Zingis.

The Son of Zamar, inspired by such a Mother left her, to go visit the
Princess, where he alon^ had the privilege to enter. Taxila, who had no seen
him since her disgrace, was so confused at hi^ arrival, that she had almost
lost ^ll knowledge. T^ pursue the Counsel of his Mother, he had disperse^ his
sadness, and appeared most confident and bold Madam, said he, it should be
hardly credible tha^ such a person as you should be capable of attracting
banished Enemies to Tartary, and even to the Palace of the King your Father,
and without valuing my Interest, that you could have those o^ a sufficient
Power to obstruct my correspondenc^ with you.

As moderate as the Princess was, she lost al^ patience at these words. When I
shall have done things that deserve some reparation, replied she, i^ should not
be to the King of Tenduck, vile Slave t^ his Vanity and the Passion of his
Mother, tha^ I would justify my self: This is to use me indee^ like a Captive,
to carry his insolence in places where my liberty is taken away. Does not my
natural aversion to you suffice, without augmenting it b^ proceedings full of
injustice and temerity? Go, pretended King of Tartary, and solicit for the loss
o^ Zingis: but know at the same time that whatsoeve^ state your common furies
reduce him to; he shall b^ always dearer to me than my life* perhaps I ha^
never said so much* if he had not been unfortunate but in the state we are, I
have nothing more to car^ for, and to requite what he has done, and what h^
suffers for me, all my love is insufficient. At these words Taxila passed i^to
a Closet, where she enclosed her self,; and Timur full of Rage and confusion
said to Axione an infinite number of things without respect, and without
reason. She answered to the ^ with much Spirit and assurance, and did not
deviate from the Sentiments of the Princess; which e^creased the Son of Zamar's
fury to such a degre^ that he returned to his Mother, to exclaim against
Taxila, and urge the loss of a Rival, whom he could not suffer to enjoy the
preference.

Vndkan so ardently solicited by persons all-sufficient over him, soon took a
fatal Resolution. Almundzar, whom the interest of Zingis made careful to
observe him, perceived what was acting in his Soul, and went to seek the King
of Thibet, to inform him of it. Then Zerbin, without any further delay, was
ordered to assemble the Monguls near Cambalu, and Almundzar took the same care
for those Tartars that had declared themselves in favor of Zingis.

The King of Tartary, who had a mind to act with some form of Justice, to avoid
the censure of the world, thought he had a sufficient motive to condemn the
King of the Monguls, in that he was surprised in the night at the Gates of his
Palace, with a design to enter secretly. Zamar made choice of Judges that
condemned the illustrious Zingis, pur^uant to her inspirations, to lose his
head in three days. This Judgment was pronounced to him, without appearing in
the least disturbed. But the King of Tribet and Almundzar, upon whom Generosity
was so predominant, trembled with horror and confusion, resolved to ruin all,
or to preserve him. They acted with so much diligence and se^recy, that they
soon obtained a formidable party, which dispersed it self in the twelve Suburbs
of ^he City of Cambalu, to be at liberty to go when ^t was time, and force
Zingis from the Guards of Vndkan. The King of Thibet did not scruple to appear
Captain of these Defendants; he was under no obligation to the King of Tartary,
and so infring^d no Right against a person, that would commit so barbarous an
Injustice.

The noise of the death of Zingis passed even to ^he Princess, who repented,
but too late, for having ^ncensed the jealousy of Timur. She remained in the
fatal expectation of this misfortune, and shed abundance of Tears near her dear
Axione; and this fair Damsel, more affected than she had ever been before, felt
an affliction little different from that of Taxila.

The day designed for the Death of the King of the Monguls being come, the
streets were very early filled with people. It was before the Palace he was to
lose his life; and it was an easy matter for those that intended to rescue him,
to mix themselv s in the crowd, composed of all sorts of people. The Scaffold
was erected before the Apa tments of Zamar, that through the windows of her
Ch^mber, she might taste the pleasure of this Spectacle. Vndkan himself was
seated there with Zamar, Ti^ur, and the Kings of Vng, Tenguth, Cerguth, and
E^gimal, the worthy Slaves of the Tartarian Queen. People regarded with
amazement this Ass^mbly of Sovereigns, in an Employment so little becoming the
Royal Dignity; whilst the afflicted Taxila was groaning, or rather dying in the
Arms of Axione.

Zamar, who saw her Vengeance no longer deferred, tasted those Delights which
barbarous Souls for the most part find in Cruelty. The feeble Vndkan let
himself be drawn to the same motions, and the inglorious Timur, declared enemy
to Virtue, prepared to see the Sacrifice, as Heroes dispose themselves to the
most glorious Exploits, that is to say, with a contented mind, and an assured
aspect; and the four Kings, fixed to the Chariot of Zamar, served as an
Ornament to this unworthy Triumph. It was not only the K. of Thibet, Almundzar,
and some Tartars more emboldened than the rest, that murmured at this horrible
attempt. Amongst the People and the Soldiers, there were found those of a
disposition just enough, to be sensible of the desert, and innocence of Zingis,
and who demanded but a Captain, to declare openly in his favor.

He was taken out of Prison about the middle of the day, that the action might
be the better observed. His Guards made him ascend the Chariot, that attended
him, and the Executioner having secured his hands, familiarly sat by him, to
add disgrace to Cruelty.

The composed Zingis beheld all this without the least amazement: His
resolution made the boldest of those tremble that encompassed him; and many
reflecting upon those occasions, where they had seen him acquire so much glory,
cast down their eyes and sadly sighed to see so great a Man destined to so
deplorable a Fate. He never appeared with so much grace and Majesty, as in this
unhappy condition: His hands which had chained so many Kings, sustained his
Irons most courageously; he despised his ignominious usage, and lifting up his
Eyes to Heaven; Oh Taxila, said he in a Tone loud enough, I give you my Life as
heartily, as I would have done the Empire of the Universe, if it had been at my
disposal. Accept thereof, as an assured testimony of my constant Love, and
remember Zingis.

In the mean time the Chariot advanced, and there was seen throughout a deluge
of Tears. The Men encouraged themselves to preserve Zingis. The Women asked his
Life, and the very Children gave some Marks of tenderness. In coming near the
great Square of the Palace, the Crowd divided in a Spacious place to let the
Chariot pass: 'Twas there the King of Thibet stopped. He would not suffer
Almundzar to take Arms, that he might be the better enabled to Act in the
consequence. Zerbin alone, was near him, and at the first signal which they
gave, the Monguls and Tartars opposed the passage of the Guards.

This Obstacle, which was so unexpected, caused a general surprise; the first
thing which the King of Thibet did, was to strike off the head of him that was
to have been officious to Zingis in the same respect, which he effectually
performed at a Blow, and then untyed the hands of this courageous Prince. My
Lord, said he, in presenting him with Arms, if you die this day, you shall not
die alone, and it shall be after a glorious manner. Receive this Service from a
Man, who, though a stranger to you, is not a little fixed to your Inter^st.
Zingis accepted what was offered to him, and soon found himself in a condition
to carry terror every where. He dispersed it in the midst of the Tartars by his
Supernatural Actions. Philing valiantly followed his Example. Zerbin surpassed
himself. The Monguls appeared like so many Heroes; and the Tartars, who after
what they had done, could expect no safety but from Zingis, sacrificed their
Contrymen that favored the Design of Zamar. Instead of one single Head that
should have fallen that day, Rivers of Blood were seen to overwhelm the st^eets
of Cambalu. Vndkan, who feared nothing of this surprise, had been contented
with but one Party of his Guards, for the security of Zingis, and had not armed
the Old Bands of Soldiers, which usually were quartered in the Suburbs; and in
few moments Zingis's. Party cut all in pieces that opposed their fury. But how
did Zamar, Vndkan and Timur behold this Rebelion! Malicious Pride and Anger had
like to have stifled the Queen. Vndkan was moved with several Passions at a
time, and the timorous King of Tenduck became pal^ with fear, not doubting but
he should be obliged to expose himself to the valor of Zingis, which was so
well known to him. Zamar might long enough excite the Tartars with Cries and
Promises. The feeble Spirits fled, and those of a braver strain, wanted
assurance to advance. The Kings themselves, whose submissions made her so
haughty and fierce, remained immovable, without daring to attempt. What, said
she, in seeing them at the Palace Gate, and in the presence of five other
Kings, shall a rash Criminal triumph, over the Laws, and our Authority, and
bring perhaps to us those Irons which he has just shook off! O humorsome
Fortune! how blind and furious art thou to day? These Words put the Auditors
into a confusion, but she had not Virtue enough to inspire them with Courage.
Undkan, whose safety was concerned in this adventure, as well as his
Reputation, and who, notwithstanding his Years, was perhaps the least unworthy
of those Kings, went out, the rest attending him: The Soldiers had notice to
advance, and they brought to the Engagement all that was in a state to carry
Arms in the Palace. Upon the time Zingis and Philing rendered themselves
Masters of the Square, the presence of Vndkan recalled those that fled: But his
Blood was soon chilled at the prodigious Actions of the two Kings. Zingis knew
him again, and could with easiness have proved against him that admirable
Valor which formerly had served him so successfully, but respecting him who
gave life to Taxila, he turned his Sword elsewhere, when he saw a Horseman
that had joined his Party within some few Moments, extend his Arm to strike the
King of Tartary. The generous Zingis, not being satisfied with having spared
his Persecutor, would still defend him against his proper Friends, and opposing
himself to the valiant Man that fought for him; Hold, whosoever thou art, said
he, and do not stain thy Arms with the Blood of Taxila's Father. Vndkan was ^ot
more surprised at this Action, than the unknown, to whom Examples of Virtue
were familiar. All the World observed the proceedings of Zingis, and Philing
was so ravished at it, that his affection for so great a Man increased still
more. The King of Tartary retired pale, and trembling amongst his own, and by
this time the old Band of Soldiers, who quartered in the Suburbs, as we have
said, and who had leisure to prepare themselves, arrived on all sides. As soon
as the base Timur saw their appearance, he put forth a cry of joy, and advanced
himself before them, but how dear did this inconsiderate boldness cost him!
Zingis who was so moderate in relation to the Father of the Princess, behaved
himself in a different manner to an Insolent Rival, and forcing himself upon
him. Thou shall die without enjoying Taxila, or the Crown of Tartary, said he,
and thy Eyes shall never observe the Sacrifice of Zingis. A shower of blows
pursued these words, and the ^on of Zamar fell without life at the feet of the
King of the Monguls. His fall occasioned in his Mothers heart, who encouraged
him from the Windows, the most violent effects of Grief and Rage. She sent out
Blasphemy against Heaven and Men, ravingly cursed her very Husband, and fell
into Convulsions, which argued her cruel Passion and Resentments. Whilst
Zingis, Philing, Zerbin, the unknown, and the Monguls with a Party of Tartars
went on to complete the Conquest; Almundzar, who saw the Apartments of the
Princess without a Guard, was got thither, and found her terrifyed at the noise
she had heard, without knowing the Occasion. Well, Almundzar, said she to him,
is the King of the Monguls dead? No, Madam, replied the Tartar, and I hope
you will see him in a little time enabled to terminate all your Fears. Then he
informed her of all that had passed; and as she abhorred Bloodshed, the Death
of Timur was not very pleasing, notwithstanding all the advantage she might
receive from thence. But of all that affected her in favor of Zingis, nothing
was so powerful as that brave Action, which gave the Tartars so much
admiration. Oh Heaven! replied she, if Zingis persecuted and ready to fall
under the merciless Sword of his Foes, defends the Father of Taxila against
those, whom a genero^s Temper arms to preserve him from the severity of Undkan;
what does not she owe to such strong Testimonies of so pure an affection?
Axione interessed for her Lover, and for a Prince she tenderly affected,
revived her hopes with the Princess, and they redoubled their Prayers.

Fortune had made an entire Declaration against Zamar. The loss of her dear
Timur, was attended by the death of several thousands of Soldiers. The Kings
of Tauguth, Cerguth Ergimul and Vng, weakly engaging, without Valor or
Courage, perished by the Arms of Zingis and Philing; and the Tartars who came
from the Suburbs, were constrained to yield.

Zingis would not aspire to the Crown of Undkan, seeing this Prince, amazed by
such a disorder, reenter his Palace, he embraced the King of Thibet, whom the
faithful Zerbin had informed him of, and after he had expressed all that a just
acknowledgment could inspire a great Heart with, he turned him self to the
valiant Man, who had fought with so much advantage; and seeing his Head
discovered, he knew him for the Prince of Brema; their mutual Embraces was an
Argument of their Friendship. Zingis praised the Tartars, and the Monguls that
served him, according to their Merits. His Friends advised him to make his
entrance into the Palace; but for all his impatience to see Taxila, he thought
it inconvenient, out of respect to her, to insult over the King, and so retired
to the same House, wherein he lay concealed for some time.

The King of Thibet, and the Prince of Brema accompanied him, and Zerbins
business was to take care of those that remained of the Monguls. But scarce had
they been two Hours in this place, before Almundzar came to find them. Come
valiant Princes, said he to them, in transports of immoderate joy, come and
possess the Fruits of your brave courage, Ye have no more enemies to fear: Fury
has effected upon Zamar, what your Arms have accomplished over all the ^est.
She is dead, and Undkan delivered from the bondage her Artifices had confined
him to, calls Virtue again, which he had banished from his Soul, and now
breaths nothing but a happy Reconcilement with you. These words, which made so
agreeable a Revolution to be hoped for, did not immediately find a perfect
credit in those, to whom they were addressed, but at length 'twas proper to
believe them, and follow Almundzar to the Palace. Tranquillity was already
established; all the World made Prayers for Zingis; No body so much as pitied
Zamar, and less her base unworthy Son. Arriving at the Palace, Zingis found the
Princess there, and Philing, the charming Axione. The King of Tartary offered
his hand to the King of the Monguls, and the Prince respectfully condescended
to receive his advances. Will you no more remember Cruelties, which cover me
with an eternal shame, My Lord, said Vndkan to him, and can you pardon what an
unjust Empire, which a Woman took over my Weakness, has made me enterprise
against you, in spite of so many important services you have so generously
rendered me? It Is by your first actions that you deserve the Crown of Tartary,
and all that you have annexed to it, and by that Life which you have preserved
in favor of Taxila, you fully merit the Princess. I give her to you Zingis,
and with her all Tartary; and whatsoever is subdued to her obeissance, being no
more sensible of any satisfaction, than to behold both Reign. At these words he
took the hand of the Princess, who full of joy accepted that of Zingis. My
Lord, said he to Vndkan, your goodness infinitely exceeds my hopes, and the
small merit of my Services. I receive with all due respect the precious
advantage of being united with the Princess, but for the Crown of Tartary, I
will not affix mine to it, but to make you the Master. Reign, my Lord, and
peaceably, and only accept of my Hommage No, no, interrupted Vndkan, I have
been too much King, since I have acted in this quality things so little just:
Reigning by you, you shall reign for me, and I shall make my glory of it. Then
he asked pardon of the King of Thibet, praised his generosity, and was
perfectly reconciled to him. But in casting his Eyes upon the Prince of Brema,
who had not changed his Equipage, he knew him for that formidable Man, against
whom Zingis had defended him. He was a little moved at the sight; but
regenerated Virtue, which began to exclude from his Soul, all that approached
near Vice, would suffer no Resentment. He embraced him as he would have done
his own Son. The King of the Monguls would no^ permit you to revenge him, Omir,
said he to him, and and yet I will not complain of him that set upon me for so
just a cause. Omir answered to this discourse with much submission. Almundzar
also came to receive of Vndkan new Testimonies of his Friendship^ who spoke
with much good Nature and Sweetness to all those who had taken Arms for Zingis.

In the mean time, Love was triumphant. Zingis and Taxila mutually acknowledged
it in their contented Eyes, and afforded one another the tenderest assurances
thereof. Ph^ling said to Axione all that he had suffered in some days of
absence, and conjured this scrupulons person to be a little less fixed to her
Resolutions, and to consent to make him happy. She gave him thanks for what he
had performed for Zingis; and after this first interview, the Princes having
received some slender hurts, which were convenient to be looked upon retired all
together with Almundzar. There was nothing considerable nough to oblige them to
be confined; and they disposed themselves to see the Princess, when the Prince
of Brema directed his discourse to the King of Thibet thus.

I know not, my Lord, if what has happened to me in your Dominions, will not
procure me your displeasure; I have committed a fault there which I cannot
possibly repent of: The Princess Thamirize is at Cambalu: It Is I have brought
her hither; but when you shall know the reasons, Perhaps you will pardon me.

This discourse surprised Philing. He questioned not but Love was concerned in
it, and as he possessed a heart, that was indisposed to condemn this Passion
which had so much empire over him seeing the Quality of the Pr^^ce of Brema,
and sensible of the service he had rendered to Axione, whatsoever you have done
my Lord, said he, I am persuaded that my Sister is obliged to you, and being my
self extremely in your debt, believe that I am incapable of condemning you. But
since Thamirize is at Cambulu, let us see her instantly, that she may receive
the embraces of a Brother, who always tenderly affected her.

Philing and Zi^gis would accompany the Prince of Brema; but Almu^dzar begged
the favor of them not to stir, and went with Omir to seek the Princess of
Thibet whom they forthwith conducted to the Palace of Vnkan: The Brother and
Sister gave all the testimonies of a perfect Love. Zingis saluted her, and
admired her Beauty; The King of Tartary, informed of her arrival, came to
respect her to show the more consideration for Philing, and would himself wait
on her to an Apartment, where Taxila and Axione soon came to see her. As oon as
Th^mirize had saluted the Princess of Tartary she gave her Hand to Axione, who
received her Caresses with a respectful tenderness. The King retired, and there
being a general ambition to know by what adventure Omir and Thamirize were come
together, the Prince of Brema, with the permission of the Princess, thus
explained himself to those Illustrious persons.

The History of Omir and Princess ^hamirize.
No body is ignorant that I have been an unfortunate man from my most tender
in^ancy; being the Son of a Prince conquered and subdued by the Arms of the
Tartarian King, without Fortune, having lost all by this Revolution, and
without any hopes of raising my Family, but through my Courage, and the
asistance of my Friends.

Vndkan was not neglectful of my Childhood, and I am under an obligation to
him, for having allowed me the Education of a King's Son: but with a little
more age* the insolence of Timur made me discern-that I was but a Slave because
he used me as his Inferior. I suffered a long time, not hoping what to
determine. The arrival of Zingis in Tartary detained me there, by the affection
I selt for him; we carried our first Arms together; but at my return from the
War, being unable to live under a Power which the Authority of Zamar and the
credit of Timur made unjust. I departed silently from Tartary, and went
directly to visit those unhappy places, where I received my Birth. Such
melancholy Objects served to afflict me. I descended toward the South, and
came insensibly to the Kingdom of Thibet.

'Twas not long after the King's departure from Kachen when I arrived there:
all things were in a solitary posture: Those that governed the State; taking
the advantage of his absence and of the small experience which the Princess had
in Political Affairs, aimed at their own profit, and usurped too much Authority.

I first saw Thamirize in the Temple, where she made her Devotions. Her modest
and melancholy behavior rendered her Beauty to my heart all-powerful* I well
perceived I went to be in Love, and had not force enough to combat this
disposition. Having seen her but a moment, I burnt with a desire to review her:
but how could I be introduced to her presence? The absence of Philing made a
solitary Court, and would admit no strangers to the Palace. 'Twas necessary
th^n to expect from Fortune an occasion to satisfy my growing passion. The Idea
of T^amirize did not abandon me; I returned to the Temple, but as it was a
Public place, she went but seldom there.

I learnt, after I had made some residence at Kachen, that since the departure
of the King, the Princess lived retired: That men had no sort of Liberty near
her person, not so much as those of the first Quality; and that she gave her
own time for reading, walking, or any other employment of that nature. Those
that I conversed with in a little time, made me a description of her humor,
which ravished me. I learnt that she was generous, compassionate, of an easy
access, when there was some reason to make application to her; ingenious in
Conversation, and incapable of doing any Injustice. She had several Ladies of
illustrious Families to attend upon her, and this small Court, so little
favorable to our Sex, inspired me with the design of a young Man, fantastical,
and bold at the same time, but the only one I thought capable of succeeding:
Being of a tolerable aspect, I resolved to take the habit of a Woman. In Thibet
they are negligent enough, and I gave orders for some to be made, that were
proper for a person of Quality, by the mean^ of a Damsel I got acquainted with
and who was faithful to me. There is no body but this disguise might have
imposed on, even amongst those that were my Familiars, having nothing of
affectation in my actions, and my face being likely to pass for that of an
^greeable Damsel. Ravished to have found this opportunity, I aimed at nothing
more than to put it in use; and two days more having perfectly accustomed me to
the behavior of a Woman, I directed my self to the Gardens of the Palace,
where my Habit easily introduced me. I walked there for some time alone: but at
length Thamirize, who betook her self to the Garden every day, came at her
accustomed hour and passed near the place, where I was* I saluted her
respectfully: she returned my civillity with an extraordinary goodness; and
some few paces from thence, the Idea of my unknown Face strikeing her
imagination, she asked her Ladies, who attended her, if any of them had an
acquaintance with me? All having answered no, and Fortune, willing that the
Princess should observe in me something worthy of her curiosity, she sat down,
and ordered one of her Ladies to go and pray me to come to her. I obeyed with
some confusion; and Tha^irize took for an effect of modesty, what was nothing
but the effect of. Love Don't take it amiss, said she to me, with a sweetness
full of grace, if I have a desire ^o know you: you are made after such a
manner, that is ^eventing in your favor; and I wish I could be necssary to
you, to give you some assurance that I speak by incli^^tion.

These obliging words peirced to the very bottom ^f my Heart and conveyed
thither a sensible delight. don't admire, Madam, replied I, that I have had
such ^ advantageous character of your Generosity and Beauty, find they are both
of an equal starp; I was born in Tartary, Madam, bred up at Cambalu, near the
Princess Taxila, being of a Rank that procured me that Honor. De^lorable
misfortunes have obliged me to absent my self from that Court, and Heaven has
directed me to Thibet, where I ^emain, to avoid more dangerous evil; unknown to
all your people, without protection, and without friends, I have already passed
here some tedious, melancholy days: but Madam, they will be more agreeable
hereafter, and the advantage I receive too day, will make me soon forget my
past afflict^ons. Thamirize attentively looked on me as I spoke, and offering me
her hand with a behavior full of goodness. I am sorry, said she, that Fortune
ungrateful to your merits, has exposed you to any Sufferings: but I am glad at
the same time, that she affords us an occasion to relieve you: You may remain
with us, and all that depends on me shall not be wanting to you.

I cast my self at the feet of the Pincess, being transported with Love, and
Pleasure; and after I had re^urned her thanks for this particular favor, I
made her a feigned recital of adventures, which were but probable, and told her
that my name was Irmisa.

Behold how my amorous Intrigue succeeded; I remained in the Palace amongst the
Ladies of the Princess, and I forgot no cautions that migh assure my secret,
and leave me quiet possessor of the advantage I enjoyed. In a few days I
obtained no inconsiderable share in the affection of the Princess. She gave me
a thousand innocent marks thereof, and seemed pleased to hear me talk: but that
which I found most difficult was to conceal my Love, which I perceived each
moment to increase. I had this Advantage in my happiness, that it excited no
Envy against me, and that all the Ladies of the Princess showed an extreme
civility to me. Alzina daughter of Hildezar the Fugitive, and cause of the
King's absence, often bewailed the crime of her Father before the Princess, who
told me that it was Axione, who had obliged the King her Brother to go out of
his Territories; and I made her sensible of no small joy, by giving her some
News of the lovely Axione.

My greatest care was, not to abuse the goodness of the Princess, in affording
my eyes too great a Liberty. I always retired, when the sight of Women is
forbid us I never came into her Chamber before she was dres^ed, and always
withdrew before she went to Bed.

See how I passed my first Months at K^achen: but I could not be always there
without ^isturbance. The absence of the King and that of Hildez^r, who had been
the most considerable next to this Prince, puffed up the courage of some
persons, who durst not pretend to any thing till then. Supposing that neither
would return, and seeing the Princess de^ined to succeed her Brother; Othriz
and Benz^d, who bore up the quality of Princes, did not stick to appear in Love
with her, and made an open declaration of it. The King, who had judged them
capable of giving advice to Thamirize, the youngest exceedi^g thirty years, at
his departure recommended to them the State, and a Sister that was valuable to
him, and they made a Tyrannical use of this Commendation.

Although Thamirize was desirous of shunning all sorts of men, yet those had
privileges which she could by no means contradict. As soon as they knew the
^^^ves to be Rivals, a division immediately (...) ^^^ded: they were both very
proud, and (...) deserving; and a Soul as curious as that (...) Princess, could
not be affected in their fav^^^ As for me, I soon perceived that their Love
(...) ^eresied and little respectful. They had (...) ^nformed of my Adventures;
and seeing the liberty I had obtained near the Princess, both used their
Endeavors to win me to their party, and prayed me to be serviceable to their
Love. As their Discourse to me was of the same nature; my answers too were much
alike to both. My Lord, said I to Benzid, who was the Eldest of the two, and
whom I judged to be the most advised, The Princess is too wise to ask Advice
upon the Subject you treat of: But if she should do it, and should address her
self to me, I would re^er her to her own Heart and Reason* fit a one to measure
the Sentiments of such a Person as she: But, since you honor me with your
confidence, permit me to tell you, that the humor I know the Princess to be
of, will hardly dispense with the Declarations of Lovers, especially in the
absence of the King. Philing, replied Benzid, will never return to Kachen, and
the occasion which obliged him to depart, will unquestionably ruin him: But it
is not that which perplexes me, and all my disquiet, is to know the difference,
which the Prince s makes between Othriz and my self. I believe, said I, she
observes none at all. Very well, pursued Benzid, little satisfied with me, it is
necessary that I make a ^^stin^^ion then, and I hope I shall be so fortunate as
to do it. Thus he left me, and the Princess, who perceived that he did it with
disturbance, came up to me, to draw me from the meditation, this Entertainment
had put me in. What are you become my Rival, Irmiza, said she to me smiling;
does Benzid come to make an amorous Declaration? Ab^^ how extremely should I be
obliged to your Beauty, if it would deliver me from his importunities? I am but
the Confident of Benzid, Madam, answered I; He solicites me to serve him in
relation to his love with you, and wishes that I could render him agreeab^^ to
you. My d^^r Irmiza, replied she with a sigh, (...) afraid Benzid and Othriz
will be the occasion of g^^ misfortunes to me. It was not without reason, (...)
she entertained this fear; and never two amb^^ Men pusht on their rashness to a
greater extr^ (...)

As for me, I lived with desires less unju^^ which did not leave me undisturbed
The Beauty of Thamarize flattered the present time, and left me nothing to be
hoped for, for the future. I had put a Criminal abuse upon her; for all the
purit^ of my intentions, it was to be supposed that she would not excuse this
Conduct. After I had blindly satisfied the first motions of my Love, these
Reflections took me up entirely; the least regard of the Princess caused an
Emotion: I could not persuade my self but that she pierced into the truth, and
was acquainted with my ^ex. That made me fall into so deep a Melancholy, that
I often balanced between a Declaration of my Crime, and the exposing my self
to the just indignation of Thamirize, to be punished as I deserved; and a
Retirement, to assure the Secret for ever. These agitations made an impression
both upon my Body and Mind. Thamirize, who loved me, was sensible of this
Change with displeasure. Irmiza, said she to me one night, when I was alone
with her; you are always in my thoughts, and I don't believe that I have the
least concern in yours. Without doubt this misfortune, which has conducted you
to Thibet, inspires you with a disturbance, which I cannot discern without
trouble, and which I would disperse at any price whatsoever. Madam, replied I,
as you have sweetened, or rather fixed this cruel Fortune, which has disquieted
my first years, it is impossible that I should be an instant, without reflecting
upon my Obligations to you. Alas Madam, it is not the Crime of being forgetful
of you, that I can be guilty of; and if you could never have any other occasion
to reproach me, I should be perhaps less troubled than I am. I blushed as I
pronounced these words: Thamirize perceived it, and looked upon me with an
attentive Eye; but comprehending nothing in this Mystery, I don't believe,
replied she, that any thing can make you Criminal with me: but, Irmiza, speak
sincerely, and if you would have me satisfied, tell me the cause of your
Melancholy? If there appears a Fire in your Eyes, it seems that you endeavor
to conceal it. If you are suprised, you send forth little sighs: Sometimes you
look up to Heaven after a^ ^ntreating manner: You appeared much out of order
before me, in the beginnings of our Acquaintance, and at his time it seems as
if my presence was disturbing to you. You are here at liberty, and I have not
afforde^ you a place of safety, with a design to put a const^aint upon you. But
my dear Irmiza, added she with a Smile, and offering me her hand after an
obliging manner, I must discover my thoughts to you: I fancy you are in Love,
and that some illustrious Tartar enjoys this heart, wherein we are so ambitious
of a little share. During this Discourse, I was a hundred times ready to
declare my self: but considering that Thamirize would perhaps show me more
severity, than she had done sweetness, I still concealed my Love, and used my
endeavors to dispose my self to a less agitated State.

If any one had a greater share in my heart than the Princess of Thibet,
answered I, it is more than probable I had never seen her, and a person of my
humor could not easily depart from places, where such a one should have his
Residence. I don't say, pursued I, that my Soul is free from Love, and it is
that perhaps which makes me sigh and languish. I question not, said Thamirize,
more perplexed than before, but that you know well how to choose; and in this
Opinion, I promise to be favorable to you in that person, that shall be so
happy as to please you And what would you say, Madam, replied I, you that have
so much Reason and Prudence, if you should find a Damsel resolute enough to
Love, and dare disclose it? I should not condemn a Freedom of my own
encouraging, answered Thamirize and as there are legitimate Affections, if hers
were of that nature, I should esteem her never the less for the discovery. If
you should approve in me, said I, this passion* which so many others have
condemned, it is not u^likely, Madam, that a Prince deserving of you, by his
Birth, and Merit, may one day be so happy as to affect you. It is true, pursued
Thamirize, with a modest Blust that I don't feel my self incapable of loving
what most amiable; and you see, Irmiza, since I lov^ you, I am not altogether
insensible Ah! Madam, answered I, the Friendship which you honor me withal,
would not satisfy an amorou^ Prince; and I know some, who would no^ be
contented with it, as precious as it is. Sinc^ you have been in places, that
are unknown to me added the Princess, you may give me Instructions But, Irmiza,
as it is not in favor of Benzid, and Othriz, that I would make use thereof, it
is no^ inconvenient to expect some other opportunity.

I was not sorry for having found a pretense for my Melancholy; I let
Thamirize believe I was in love; and since this Conversation, she put no more
Questions to me in relation thereto. The two Rival Princes then redoubled their
importunities, and began to be Competitors in Thibet. It was in this occasion I
admired the inconstancy of the People. Although Philing was go^e from Kachen but
for a Journey; his ungrateful Subjects no sooner saw his Absence, but they
flattered the ambition of two Usurpers, declaring that they would not live
without a King, and that the Princess was incapable to Reign alone; the hopes
of Recompense emboldened these interessed Souls, and the Lovers of Thamirize,
got but too strong a Party. Their Conduct had been so secret, that it was as it
were, impossible to foresee what happened. These two Men, inspired by the same
interest, acted after the same manner; and one morning, when the Princess was
in the Garden, with her usual attendance, that is to say, some Guards and her
Ladies, we saw Benzid approach at the head of several Armed Men; his Behavior
as stately, as if he had been at a glorious Expedition: And Othriz at another
place, with a like number of persons, and an equal boldness. Ah! Irmiza, said
the Princess to me, what is the design of these two Princes, and what do they
pretend to with so many Arms and ^ouldiers? I had already formed my Judgment
upon (...): I did not doubt but that they intended to become Masters of the
Liberty of Thamirize; and being determi^ed to perish for her, don't be afraid,
Madam, replied (...), Heaven protects no Violences, and you are not so much
abandoned to their Fury, as to be fearful of their intentions. As I concluded
these words, they ^oth came near the Princess; but they did not direct their
Speech to her. What is it you come to seek for here, said Benzid to Othriz? And
what is it you pretend to here, pursued the last? I well perceive both our
intentions are upon the Princess. Come on then, let us fight for her, since
it is by Arms we must decide our Quarrels. They began in earnest to dispose
themselves to Blows, with more fury, than Address; and whilst they only
exercised themselves one against the other, I stood an unconcerned Spectator of
their Combat. But Othriz more fortunate than the other, having made him fall at
his feet dangerously Wounded, and forced his party in disorder, run to the
Princess, with a design to seize her Person. It was then I was sensible of what
I was, and that no consideration could retain me. Will you permit your Princess
to be taken Captive, said I to the Guards, and will you not rather perish than
appear so cowardly, and so perfidious? The party of Othriz was strong, because
he had sustained but little loss, and Thamirize had with her but a small number
of her Guards; but not contenting my self with an Encouragement, by words, I
added an Example to them, took up the Sword of a dead Man, and in spite of the
perplexity of a Woman's Habit, I fought with an eagerness that much amazed the
Princess. He that had often sought for indifferent Interests with some
advantage, was not long before he was successful over the Enemies of Thamirize;
who full of astonishment and fear, encompassed with her Women, regarded what
appeared prodigious to her. The Guards believed it was an assistance which
Heaven miraculously sent her, and became the Braver. I spilt abundance of
Blood, but not without losing my own; and fixing my felf upon Othriz, I wounded
him in several places: But at the time he fell, pierced with my Blows, in sight
of Thamirize, and that his Men gave place to the valor of her Guards, a Man
affectionate to Othriz, being mortally hurt, and furious to find himself at the
extremity, came behind me, and run me through the Body with his Sword. This
painful thrust made me fall also, and the ground which received me, forced out
the Sword from my Body, where it remained before. The Princess saw her self at
the same time without Enemies and without a Protector; being moved at my
misfortune, thinking my Death most certain, she past through the Dead, and
dying Bodies, and sound me in a State worthy of her Tears, which she poured out
abundantly. Irmiza, said she to me, my Dear Irmiza, why did you precipitate
your self into this danger? If my repose is procured at the price of your life,
it is impossible it should ever be happy. I am not worthy of Life. answered I,
with a feeble Voice; and the Blood which I give to the reparation of my Crime,
is not capable of excusing it. Retire, Madam, consult your Security, and
abandon the unfortunate Omir, Prince of Brema, who has abused your Goodness,
but who dies in adoring you, and who would never have committed an offense
against you, if he had not loved you with too great a p^ssion. I can say no
more. Thamirize concluded I was dead, and was more sensible, as she has told me
since, of Grief, than Anger.

Benzid and Othriz had received dangerous wounds, but they did not prove
mortal. Their Creatures took care of them, and by the Orders of the ^rincess, I
was conveyed to an Apartment of the ^alace. My Sex was learnt with amazement:
but amongst all the Persons that were in the Inte^ests of the Princess, not one
was incensed against me.

When I was absolutely out of danger, and in a ^ondition to speak, Thamarize
came into my Chamber one Evening with two of her Ladies. (...) did not expect
her, and was extremely dis^rdered. When I had saluted her as respectful^y as
the situation I was in would permit me, she ^at down; and after some moments
of silence, You ^ave deceived me, my Lord, said she to me, and a Person more
disposed to Passion than I, would un^oubtedly exclaim against this Offense: But
you have ^erved me, and I will forget an Injury that's great enough in it self,
in favor of a considerable Ser^i e: Behold my Sentiments, my Lord; But how ^ha
l I justify my self to the Public? Who will be^ieve that you have lived
disguised in this Palace, without judging me concerned in the Intrigues; and
what will the King my Brother think of such an Adventure, when he comes to hear
of it? Ah! my Lord, how ^uch trouble you had eased of, if you ^ad been a little
more retentive. All that the Princess said, was too full of Justice, not to
give me a true Remorse. She saw in my Confusion, that I was an imploring
Criminal. I have nothing ^o answer for my Vindication, Madam, said I, I ^m
g^ilty and will unde^go without complaint, all be pains your just Resentment
shall condemn me to. Those that know the Powers of Love, will have a little
indulgence perhaps for mine. But I ought to expect none from you, and must dye
for your Satisfaction. Whatsoever disturbance you have caused me, interrupted
Thamirize, I don't d mand such Reparations. Live, my Lord, and only thank of
departing from Thibet, where I cannot behold you without disorder. And you are
not revengeful, replied I, in choosin^ me such a cruel Punishment, as absence.
If you condemn me to it, its necessary to obey, but I will dye that is beyond
dispute. Since to the end of seeing you I have been so unhappy as to offend
you, my Life is undoubtedly fixed to this satisfaction. In the mea^ time,
Madam, I will not cease to depart, and at thi^ very moment, if my strength will
permit me. No, no My Lord, replied the Princess, with a les absolute behavior,
be cured first, and when you are perse ly recovered, we'll choose the time of
this departure, which disturbs you. At these words she left me, and I passed
the Night peaceably enough. The sight of the Princess had such an effect upon
me, that I forsook my Bed in a little time, and soon after, my Chamber, but
under another figure, than that of a Damsel, in spite of the rage and
jealousy of Benzid and Othriz. I went to the Apartments of the Princess with a
trembling Air, and she appeared to me so confused, that I conceived a new
disturbance from the Trouble I occasioned her. The Habit I procured was very
becoming, and served to make an advantageous figure. I was very Amorous, full
of Fear and Respect This moment was fa^ourable to me, and Thanirize granted a
Pardon to my servent Supplications, without which it was impossible for me to
live; and if she did not altogether treat me as she had done ^rmiza, I was
notwithstanding very well contented. Those that saw me dwell at Kache^, and
held the Party of my Rivals, believed that the Princess was really concerned in
my Disguise. But Othriz and Benzid openly declared themselves my Foes, and
swore with the utmost confidence, my ruin. They had seen me well enough defend
my Life, not to assault it with some advantage. In a word, my Lord, their
Factions were so powerful, and fury was so predominant in their Parties, that
they came to the resolution of obliging the Princess to make a ^^oice. She
might long enough have represented ^e Royal Power, offended in the absence of
the ^ng: Her words were of little use to stop their ^ld attempts, and the two
Princes came to an ^greement, that whosoever Thamirize would dear for, should
remain undisturbed, Master of ^r Person, and the State. She resisted for some
^me: But what could she do in a general Re^^lt? I offered my self to dye for
her service; and if you should perish, said she to me, shall I be ^^ss unhappy?
Well, Madam, replied I, believe (...) advice, which you may think perhaps
proposed for ^^terest, but which at the same time is re^l and sin^^re. Trust
your-self to my Respects: let us depart ^^om Thibet: and direct our selves to
Tartary, where ^^e King your Brother will without doubt have found ^e fair
Axione; and when we have se^ur^d your ^^rson, it will be very e^sie for us to
^om^ and pu^^sh your unworthy Subje^^s. Thamirize ^ade a ^^ousand Scruples,
which my reasons furmounted, and in spite of the number of our O^servers. I
^ook such just and happy measures, that we left ^achen without any hindranc^*
and soon after ^hi^^et; having but one Damsel of the Princess to ^onduct with
her, and twenty Men for our Con^oy. By our diligent cares, and different
Convey^nces, we entered Tartary; the Princess courageously supported the
Fa^igues of so long a Journey, and yesterday we came to Cambalu, where I learnt
what part, and immediately determined to expose ^y life for that of Zingis.
Behold, my Lord, said Omir, to the King of Thibet, what is my Crime, and ^he
state wherein we have left your Kingdom?

The Brother of Thamirize tenderly embraced her Lover, and gave him thanks in
terms full of acknowledgment, for what he had performed in her service. The
troubles of Thibet did not much disturb him, being persuaded that Benzid and
Othriz, whom he knew, would destroy each other

Omir, charmed at his felicity, tasted a perfec^ satisfaction at the feet of
Thamirize, who did no^ stick to let appear without constraint, an affection
autho^ized by the King her Brother. The thoughts of Zingis were singly employed
on Taxila, and Philing still presied in vain the obstinate Axione to make him
happy.

Vndkan being returned from his Fury, had considered the death of Zamar, and
that of Timur, as an effect of Heavens justice. Finding himself now free from
the Empire of the Ambitious Queen, he repented of his weakness, and renouncing
the grandeurs which had served for nothing, but to make him appear unjust, he
had no other inclination, than to abandon them to Zingis and Taxila, for whom
he at length felt a real tenderness.

Whilst the three satisfied Lovers entertained the three most charming persons
of the World, with their ardent Passions; the careful Almundzar endeavored to
efface the Queen, by his discourses full of Virtue, from the Memory of Vndkan.

She was enclosed without much Pomp, together with her Son in a Tomb, where lay
the Bodies of several Tartarian Princes; and as she was not generally beloved,
eight days eclipsed her from the worlds remembrance. The King of Tartary gave
orders for all things to be prepared with a Royal magnificence, to solemnize
the Marriage of Zingis and Taxila, and the Ceremony of their Coronation. Six
Diadems were in one day united to the Crown, and the valor of Zingis promised
many more. Almundzar applied himself most agreeably to the Observance of those
cares; and one day when he was in the Great Square of the Palace, where he
ordered to be erected a most stately Triumphal Arch, instead of the disgraceful
Scaffold, which had it is Situation there not long before, A Man whole figure
surprised him, came up to him: He was old, but Venerable enough. My Lord, said
he to him, as your power is all-commanding here, it is to you I address my self
to make me obtain a moments Audience from the King of the Monguls, whom I would
inform of some things, which are of very great importance. Almundzar, full of
zeal for any thing that had the least relation to Zingis, brought the old
Stranger without delay to the Apartments of Taxila, where the King of Monguls
was accompanied with the King of Thibet, the Prince of Brema, Thamirize, and
Axione.

As soon as the Old Man had cast his Eyes upon the last, he appeared astonished
at the sight: Great Gods, cried he transported with Joy, Is it true then that
you at length restore me this Princess, whom I lost in Thibet? O Axione! O
Zenelia; who could have assured me, that I should see you again?

His exclamation surprised this Illustrious Company: but the Stranger renewing
his discourse, and addressing himself to Zingis. My Lord, said he to him, this
fair Axione whom you behold, is the Princess Zenelia your Sister, who was
forced away from the Queen your Mother by a company of Robbers in the Tartarian
Mountains; but it is necessary to prove to you this truth with a little more
order.

I am Mongul, my Lord, born the Subject of the King your Father, and tied to
the Service of the Queen, by the first Charges of her Household I was her
Attendant in the Journey, which her indisposition obliged her to take. She took
the young Princess along with her, being unable to bear a Separation, and
passing through a Forest, these Cruel Men, whose number infinitely exceeded
ours, compelled us to submit, and carried away Zenelia without any Difficulty.
The Queen was overwhelmed with grief, and I with several large Wounds deplored
her misfortune, and reproached my own Incapacity. As soon as I was cured, I
made a Vow to enjoy no repose till I had found Zenelia; And leaving the
afflicted Queen, I was in all places where I thought to have any Information of
the Ravishers of the Princess. More than two years passed in a vain Enquiry;
and I learnt by Rumor the death of the Queen of the Monguls; I still rambled,
having no Family at Molg, and one day more happy than the rest, made me
encounter in Thibet the Captain of those Robbers, who had forced away Zeneiia,
and the Princess her self, who was near him. I easily remembered her, but she
entertained not the least Idea of me, I asked this Ravisher what he pretended
to do with a Child, who did not belong to him. He answered me immediately, and
called her several times Axione. Weary of speaking to him in vain, being then
as well accompanied as he, I fought him, and we had all put our selves in that
Condition, that Axione alone remained standing.

She was then seven years old. There came immediately several persons on
Horseback, who in all probability took away Axione or Zenelia. As for me I lost
all knowledge, and was a long time in this unhappy sta^e. But some Persons who
lived in the midst of the Forest, where they kept some Flocks, came to the
place where I was, and finding me not absolutely deprived of Hear, they
conveyed me into a Cave. It was more than six Months before my Legs could
sustain me, having no other assistance than some simples for my Cure. For want
of strength, I was obliged to live in this. Desert several Years. I by degrees
accustomed my self to it. But when time had sent me a better health, the
Remembrance of Zenelia revived my Zeal: I left the Forest then at length,
wherein my weakness had so long enclosed me. I have since searched and wandered
in a thousand places; but at last, hearing there was at Cambalu an unknown
Damsel, named Axione, I directed my course hither; I have seen her, and I find
that it is Zenelia, so near resembling the Queen her Mother, that the least
distinction is not to be discerned. Then Metaphanes produced a Picture of the
Queen of the Monguls which he had preserved; and if it had been made for
Axione, there could not have been a more exact Resemblance. All the
Circumstances of her fortune so justly relating to that of Zenelia, no body
questioned but that she was the Princess of the Monguls Zingis a thousand times
embraced this lovely Sister, who tenderly returned him her Caresses. Taxila and
Thamirize testified their Sensible Joy for Zenelia, by all that could express
it; and Philing transported, cast himself at her feet. Zingis assured him that
she was his own, and the young Princess did not contradict this Illustrious
Brother.

Vndkan learnt this discovery, whereof Old Metaphanes told him the Particulars.
In a word. Joy was dispersed through the whole Palace, and the wished for time,
when these six Persons were to be united, was fully come.

This great day was solemnized after a glorious manner. Never did so much Pomp
and Splendor appear at a time. The Temple where the Ceremony of Marriage was
to be performed, was filled by an infinite Number of Tartarians, and Strangers.
The King of Thibet and the Prince of Brema bore up the Imperial Robe of Zingis,
and Zenelia and Thamirize, that of Taxila. The Scepters and Crowns were laid
upon a stately Throne, and after these happy Lovers were for ever joined,
Vndkan Crowned Zingis and Taxila, with his own hands* After which the New
Emperor Crowned Philing and Omir, and the Empress Taxila did the same Honor to
Zenelia and Thamirize. All places Ecchoed with Exclamations of joy. The People
repeated the Names of Zingis and Taxila without intermission, and all sorts of
Pleasures in the Palace, concluded this remarkable day. Vndkan would be no more
concerned in Cares, nor preserve the least Mark of his dignity, resigning all
to Persons that so well deserved such Honors. A little after it was known, as
Philing had foreseen, that Benzid and Othriz had perished in their Factions,
and Ambassadors from Thibet came to assure their King, that his People had
submitted to him. He remained in Tartary, by the Importunities of Zingis, as
well as Omir with the Title of King of Brema. Zingis much increased the Limits
of Thibet, and testified by his Liberality to the Princess his Sister, how dear
and valuable she was to him. Vndkan lived but a little while, and was lamented
because the last of his Actions had effaced the remembrance of the rest. In a
word, Zingis founded the most powerful Empire of Asia, and rendered his Name so
Illustrious, that the whole World was filled with it. He Subdued the Indies,
Persia, and all that part which extends from the River Tigris to the Volga.
Philing and Omir were sharers in the glory, and followed him in his prosperous
Expeditions. Almundzar was considered by him, as he well deserved; Metaphanes
dyed with the satisfaction of seeing Zenelia Queen of Thibet: Zerbin received
rewards due to his fidelity; and these Princes, loaded with Honors and with
happy Years, left behind them a large and glorious Posterity.

FINIS.

