A VOYAGE INTO TARTARY. CONTAINING A Curious Description of that Country, with
part of Greece and Turkey; the Manners, Opinions, and Religion of the
Inhabitants therein; with some other Incidents. By M. Heliogenes De L' Epy
Doctor in Philosophy.

Primi Mortalium quique ex his geniti naturam incorrupti Sequebantur, eamdem
habeant and ducem and legem, commissi melioris arbitrio. Sen. Ep. XC. London,
Printed by T. Hodgkin, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers
Hall. 1689.

depiction of a female figure wearing a long floral dress and wreath or crown,
receiving a box or casket from a boy; behind and above groups of figures play
wind instruments or pipes The Priestess of the Son, presented with. a Casket of
Gold by a youth in the Temple.


TO THE Right Honorable THE EARL OF CLANRICARDE.
My Lord,
THE Good Fortune which has always attended me by Sea and Land, in my last
Travels into the Levant, incourages me to presume, that that same Providence,
which more especially assigns certain Genius's to watch over the safety of such
Persons, which it culls out for the Execution of the greatest Enterprises, cast
an Eye upon me, from the very Moment that I departed from London, with a
Resolution to find your Lordship out, in whatever part of the World you were.
That Providence doubtless it was, which having snatched me from the gaping Jaws
of Dragons in France, and delivered me from several dangers and hazards which I
ran both upon the one and the other Sea, diverted also from my Heart the Sharp
pointed Dagger of a Megera, which Hell it self had vomited up to overwhelm me
at Venice: This Providence it was that staid a small Vessel at Marseilles for
seven Months together, till the day that I arrived to embark my self for
Smyrna, and to be there before your Lordship was to depart, in pursuance of
other Voyages quite contrary to the Advantage of your Affairs, and which I
could never discover. At length being happily returned home under the Conduct
of your successful Patronage, after I had traveled Six thousand nine hundred
Miles by Sea or by Land in four Months time, I flattered my self, that in
Dedicating to your Lordship this little Piece, which departs from my Study upon
a Voyage to the Republic of the Curious, it might find the same Good Fortune
as the Author of it. Though indeed a stronger Reason obliged me to procure it
this Honor; that is to say, the Grandeur of a Name which has preserved it self
untarnish d in the Nobility of your Family for many Ages, even till this very
day in your own Illustrious Person. For you are descended from that Great Hero,
who assisted William the Conqueror to lay the Foundations of a Monarchy, which
the Sword of your Ancestors has ever since upheld with the hazard of their
Lives. Witness that Thunderbolt of War, the Deceased Earl your Father, who for
having taken up Arms in the defense of the King his Master, had lost his Head,
had not the Vengeance of Heaven crushed the Tyrant who had condemned him by the
means of a small number of Judges and Jury Men, that then acknowledged no other
Law than Absolute Power. And your Lordship, the true Offspring of so many
Hero's, tracing their Glorious Examples, declared your self against your best
Friend, so soon as he appeared to be an Enemy to the King his Father, whose
Arms your Prowess caused to be redoubted, both in Flanders and wherever else
the Honor of his Commands carried you. I could say much more, but that your
Modesty obliges me to silence. But to what purpose should I be multiplying
words, when your own Actions themselves sufficiently Proclaim the rest, as well
as your Person, which alone attracts the Affection and Esteem of all that have
the advantage to know those excellent Qualities with which God has endowed your
Lordship; and of which I wish your Lordship a happy and long Enjoyment. Accept
therefore I beseech your Lordship this small Present as a Testimony of my
Respect in the Quality of

Your Lordships, Most humble and most Obedient Servant. De L' Epy.

THE PREFACE.
I Had written in my time several Volumes upon several Subjects, which
afterward I threw into the Fire; as well for that they disliked me (for I am a
very severe Censurer of my own works,) as for that I did not think them proper
for the Genius of the Age, more inclined to trifles than to serious things.
Nevertheless I was merciful to the Memory of my Adventures, not so much for any
Esteem which I had of them, but that I might leave my Children settled in a
Foreign Country the Consolation of knowing whence they came, and by what
Accident they happened to be born. Afterward understanding by the Conversation
which I had had with the Booksellers, that Books of Travels were agreeable to
the Palates of most Readers, the Inclination which I have had all my life to be
serviceable to Mankind, made me resolve to publish this small Part of mine, at
least to give some few hours Divertisement to the Public by reading them; with
this Promise, that if this small Essay find acceptance, they shall have the
whole Journal entire. The Impression was begun in French the last year; at what
time finding my self obliged to return into the Levant, upon the occasion which
I have hinted in the preceding Epistle, I desired the Printer to stop his Press
till my return, because I desired to oversee it. In the mean time he had caused
my Copy to be Translated into English, which I viewed and found faithfully
done. After which having restored him his Translation to do what he pleased
with it, he desired me to answer some Objections which had been made in my
absence.

In the first Place they will hardly believe the Shipwreck which I suffered in
my Third year, nor the manner how I escaped. Nevertheless there is nothing more
certain than what I have said of it: besides other Circumstances, which I have
omitted which would seem yet more incredible. All the City of Lions, which is
the Place of my Nativity, was at that time fully possessed of it; I was there
looked upon as another Moses. Neither am I so old, but that there are still
Persons alive that can testify the same.

2. They will have Heliopolis to have been in Egypt; I confess it; but that is
not the Heliopolis I speak of. But as there are at this time several Cities of
the same name; as Frankfort upon the Maine, Frankfort upon the Oder; Lions upon
the Saone, and Lion le Saulnier; or Lions where the Saltpits are, besides
Leiden which the Latins call Lugdunum also: Chalon upon the Saone, and Chalons
upon the Marne; Valence in the Dauphinate, and Valence in Spain: Why must it be
denied, but that besides Heliopolis in Egypt, there may be that other of which
I have given the Relation in Tartary. They who never saw more than their own
Village, never imagine that Steeples are of any other fashion than their own.
Lactantius and St. Austin laughed at those who by the dictates of sound sense
affirmed there were Antipodes. And a German Bishop was accused for a Heretic
before Pope Zachary upon the same score. And if Columbus had not discovered the
way where others followed him, we should have had enough pitiful Scholars that
would have maintained there was never any such thing. Being once in a Coach
with an Impertinent Lady, understanding that I was a French Man, she would not
believe that they spoke in France any other Language than hers, which she
thought to be the Language of the whole World. Good God! how many People are
there, who believing themselves to be very witty, are altogether like this
Woman? If not in this very particular, yet in several other things. We have
taken for Fables what the Poets or the Ancients have told us of the first
Inhabitants of the World. That they lived after the manner of Beasts, without
Commonwealths, without Laws, naked, and feeding upon Acorns, and what the Earth
produced, without any other preparation than that of Nature. Yet they who
return from America, tell us that they meet with such People there at this day,
and that that part of the World is still in its Infancy. Nay though our own
Hemisphear be so Polite, yet there are some Cantons discovered, where the Men
have only the outward shape of Men: Witness the Savage, which, as Monsieur
Sloskoski a Canon of Cracovia, told me at Padua, he saw in his own Country, and
which had been brought from the Mountains that separate Poland from Hungary. He
was all over Hair, spoke not at all, but made a sign for his Victuals, by
barking like a Dog; he hid himself up in a Corner, ashamed to be seen of Men;
he refused all manner of Clothes which they brought him, and the Bread and Meat
which they offered him baked and boiled; only fed upon raw Flesh and Provender
like a Beast: For the ruggedness of those uninhabited Mountains hindering People
of our Conditions to have any Converse or Commerce in those Parts, preserves
those Savages in their purely natural Estate; in like manner as the vast extent
of the Ocean had kept the Indians in their Primitive simplicity. Now because
there was not any Author, who had informed the Polonians that there were
Savages so near them, had they any reason to give the Lie to those, who having
traveled thither, either out of Curiosity, or by accident, should have assured
them that it was so, unless they had brought one of those Savages along with
them? which however it was more easy for them to do than to bring a
Heliopolitan into Europe. For of things which we do not see, we know nothing
but by the Report of others. Now Men have not reported to us all things for
want of having been upon the Places; and the Reason why they do not travel
thither, is either want of Courage or Curiosity. Now that other People, besides
those of whom History speaks, have transported themselves from one Country to
another, there is no Question to be made: Witness those, who in the Times of
the first Israelites escaped out of that part of Syria, where they inhabited,
into Africa, where they Erected a Pillar, which was found several Ages after
with this Inscription, Procop. cited by Machiavel.
Nos Maurusii qui fugimus a facie Josue Latronis, filii Nave. It Is very well
known, that we have but a very small part of the Ancient Authors, and that
those which have been preserved to us are very much maimed. Had we all of them
entire, we should not be such admirers of what appears to us so strange or new
by reason of our Ignorance only. Perhaps we might there have found out the
Transmigration of this Solary Colony, whether the Incredulous might easily go,
since we do not here pretend to undertake the fantastic Travels of Begerac de
Cyrano. As to what remains, since I relate nothing which is impossible or
miraculous, or that may render my Relation incredulous, it signifies little to
call in question the Matter of Fact, while the possibility of the thing is
acknowledged; and that leaving to every one the liberty to believe as they
please, they do not deprive me of that freedom which Plato had to propose the
Idea of a Republic after his manner.

3. As for the Passage where I say that I heard People speaking Greek litteral
behind a Wall, they exclaimed it is impossible; but if they read with attention
all the Relation, which in two different Passages says well enough for
satisfying our Admirer, and I do not like Repetitions.

4. They say that I have not given an exact Relation of my return. To which I
answer, that being weari'd with long Traveling, I thought it sufficient to set
down the most Remarkable things till I recovered Turkey. And as for what
concerns Italy or France, I have not said any more concerning them going
thither than coming back; though I have made very exact Descriptions of them too,
as well as of Germany, Switzerland, Holland, Greece and other Countries,
described so many times by other Pens, and as well known to the English as
England it self. However Courteous Reader, if it be my good hap to understand
that this Essay finds a favorable acceptance, I may observe the Promise which
I have made you at the end of my Relation, by giving you the whole of my
Adventures, together with the knowledge of all the Corners of the World, where
I have been, as exactly as it is possible to be done.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Author teaches Philosophy and Physic, both Ancient and Modern:
Geography, History, Chronology, Latin, Greek, French, Italian; and keeps
Boarders. If any Gentleman or Gentlewoman be desirous to learn Philosophy, or
whatsoever they please in Latin, or in any Vulgar Tongue, he is ready to wait
on them: He lives in Beauford Building's in the Strand behind the Fountain
Tavern, over against the Crown.

Monsieur L' EPY's TRAVELS INTO TARTARY.
SO glorious is the Beauty of the Sun, and the Sphere of his Activity so large,
that of all those People who adore the Creature to the Prejudice and Dishonor
of the Creator, those are to be deemed less culpable, who pay their homage to
this, of all the Beings or Things of Heaven which we behold, the most noble and
beautiful. In short, his Characters have such a Correspondence with those of
the Deity, that were it not for that Revelation which informs us to the
contrary, we could not be blamed for adoring him as the God of this sublunary
World. The Earth, which seems to undergo a kind of Death at his departure,
seems to rise again at his return; while the Plants sending forth their Flowers
and Leaves, recloath her with their gayest Ornaments. The Birds renew their
Amors; the very Insects propagate; the more perfect Animals resume new vigor
to engender their like: And, in a word, this common Mother of all things grows
young again, when he has finished his Southern Retrogradation, and comes back
to us. Or, if it be he that stands still, when she, according to the Order of
her Revolution, opposes against him one or other of his Tropicks. For then it
is that she keeps open-house for all her Inhabitants, by the Production of her
Fruits, by the Favor of his lovely Aspect, from which nothing is concealed.
For the vast extent of his Beams renders him present over all the Universe, of
which he penetrates the deep Abysses, there to produce Gold, Diamonds and
Pearls. He is the inexhaustible Fountain of that heat which enlivens us, and
our real Fellow-parent in the Generation of our Children, if we may give credit
to Aristotle. He is lovely for his Beauty, to be adored for his Power,
unspeakable for his Effects, formidable for his Chastisements, which he shall
quickly feel, that stares upon his luster, with disrespectul Eyes, as being
dazzled with the sight; and if he continue obstinate in his curiosity, he fails
not to find himself overwhelmed with the spendor of his Glory. Now if all these
Attributes will not serve to excuse People that want the light of the Sun of
Justice, and that to be only a more specific Character of the Divinity, we may
add in their favor, That he is only single; for which reason it was that the
Greeks called him (...), by a name excluding Multitude. The Assyrians named him
Adad, signifying One, and acknowledged him for the chiefest of the Gods,
together with the Persians, who called him by another name, which signifies in
their Language, He in whom resides the Sovereignty of Command. If Pliny his
admirer did not adore him, he deemed him worthy the Adoration of the People,
which the Inhabitants of the Fortunate Islands never refused him. The
Massagetes acknowledge no other Deity but him. Also at this day we find in
China a Temple dedicated to the Atoms of the Sun, whose Palace is thought to be
the Paradise of that People. All the Heathen upon the Coast of Malabar pay him
homage, as also some part of the Jappons, and the Great Tartars, as we are told
by several Geographers. For my own part, in truth, I never observed any such
sort of Worship in all that vast extent of Territory, which I have traveled;
only I met with one small corner inhabited by Philosophers originally descended
from the Greeks, who moved by these, or some other more important Reflections,
were convinced not of his Divinity, but of his Superiority, and consecrated
Holy Days; and ordained Ceremonies, wherein they acknowledge the Benefits which
they receive by his Influences. Their Form of Government is Aristocratical,
under Laws that seem to have been borrowed from Plato's Commonwealth, or else
from the primitive Christians, as enjoying all things in common, though it be not
really so, as you shall see in reading these Travels, which I was induced to
undertake upon the following occasion.

In the third year of my Age, and the year of our Lord 1636. I was sent by my
Parents from a Country House upon the Saone two Leagues above Lions, with my
Governess in a Boat, which through the carelessness of the Master, was overset
by another larger Vessel that was towed along the same River. I remember I
heard the confused noise of Shrieks and crying-out, We are lost, we are lost; I
asked what was the matter? they made answer, That they believed me to be the
Cause of their disaster, while the Boat-men stood gazing to see me play in the
Water. At length I lost my senses, I know not how. But no sooner recovering my
self, I saw a Lady floating upon the Water, that with a lamentable voice called
me by name; whereupon I called to her and others whom I saw perishing before my
Eyes, to do as I did: For I fansied my self holding fast by the Piles of a
wooden-Bridge, believing certainly that I could not be drowned so long as I
kept my hold. Methought also that some body went about to hinder me from saving
my self, by thrusting away my Head with a Pole, which made me call him Cruel.
Being thus lost a second time, I remained senceless, till I found my self in a
Bed, where some People had laid me, who perceiving me from the shore about half
a League lower, and believing me to be a Bundle of Goods, came and fetched me
out of the middle of the River, where they found me carried by the Stream upon
a Bavin of Vine-Twigs. About two hours after the Boat was sunk, wherein were
fourteen Persons all unfortunately drowned. From that time forward, being at
the disposal of those to whom I was beholding for my life, I rolled from School
to School, learning Greek, Latin, and Poetry, with whatever besides the Circle
of the Sciences contains, till I was fourteen years of age; at what time being
fallen into the hands of a sort of Persons, who have the subtilty to insinuate
themselves into the simple Minds of Youth, and to make what impression they
please therein, I suffered my self to be led by their persuasions to follow
their Maxims. I remained in their Society traveling from City to City, from
Country to Country, till I was four and twenty years of Age; at what time
finding my self at Rome in full leisure to examine the Sciences, which I
thought I had acquired, I found by my self, that I knew nothing because I had
been ill taught: Therefore I translated my self from the Lycaeum to the
Portico, to the end I might give my self wholly up to the Study of Morality,
till the Reflections which I made upon the several Objects that presented
themselves to my Senses, furnished me with other Principles, that made me apply
my self to the study of Philosophy and Physic, with a greater satisfaction
than before.

During this leisure of mine, I opened my Eyes to observe the Cheats that had
been put upon me, and bethought my self that it was my duty to abandon those
People, whose ill lead Lives gave the Lie so manifestly to their Tenants. There
having communicated my Design to Monthreso, the honestest and the most Learned
among the whole Tribe, he not only approved it, but desired he might have the
honor to accompany me in so laudable an Enterprise. With these Resolutions we
departed from the Capital of the Roman Empire the Twentieth of January 1663. by
St. John Lateran's Gate, and arrive at Naples by the 25th. where after we had
seen the Curiosities of Puzzuolo, and Vesuvius, tired with our Travels through
the Principal Parts of Europe, we resolved to see the Varieties of other
Countries and Territories of the World. Thereupon resolving to go aboard the
first Vessel that set sail for the Levant, we went to the Seaside, where we
met with Signor Hippolito, Captain of the good Ship called the Hope; who
understanding our design, made us an obliging Proffer of his Service, which we
readily accepting, embarked the fourth of February, with a Wind so favorable,
that in a short time we lost sight of the Land, which by Sickness laying in my
Cabin I saw no more till we arrived at Porto Lione, where we again had a view
of it the Fifteenth. Overjoyed that I was so near a Place which was formerly
the Mansion of all Human Wisdom, I soon forgot the tiresome hardships of the
Sea. So soon as I cast my Eyes upon the ancient Pyraeum, so ill treated by
Time, that it does not preserve so much as its Name, changed into that which it
carries at present, by reason of the ill-shap'd figure of a Lion. In the same
Place we hired Posthorses to visit Athens, distant from the Port about five
Miles. So soon as I arrived there, I began to look for the rugged Ruins of that
Famous Piece of Antiquity. Wherein I found great Assistance from the knowledge
of the Learned Demetrius, to whom I was recommended by his Friends at Venice.
Neither was my own Skill in the Greek unprofitable to me. For though the Vulgar
Greek differs very little from that in the Schools, the Corruption of this is
not so great, but that it may be understood, when it is spoken according to the
Pronunciation of the Country. Besides that it is as common among Persons of
Quality, as Latin among the Polonians. Moreover, they told me, that there is no
other Greek to speak properly than that. In regard that what is called Vulgar
Greek is a kind of Pedlars French, which differs according to the several
Jurisdictions of the Country: that it was the same in the time of Demosthenes;
that then, besides the four Dialects most known, there were some other in use
among the Vulgar People; but that the Orators in their public Pleadings made
use of the common Speech, which was understood by the ordinary sort, although
they did not speak it; which they confirmed to me by the Letters of private
Persons written at that time, and which were afterward found in the Ruins of
old Walls. Their Books also were written in that sort of Greek, which we call
for that Reason Literal, and which is the very same that the Preachers at this
day make use of in their Sermons. In a word that Person is deemed to write and
speak best among them, who comes nearest the Language of the Ancient Authors;
which is at this day the only Standard of the Language, as the Paragon in
Italy, and the Parisian in France in respect of the other Provinces, where
though it be not spoken, yet it is understood by the meaner sort. The Citadel
or Acropolis seated upon a Rock commands the City, and is seen at Sea. Being
not permitted to go in I could see no more than the outward side of it; but my
Friend told me that there was a noble Piece of Antiquity, viz. the Temple of
Diana. However all that we could meet with of the Ancient Ornaments of that
City, built many Ages before Rome was, only certain small Towers erected in
honor of those who had been Victors in the Olympic Games, and some Portico's
of ruined Temples; among which there is one which resembles that of Virile
Fortune, which is now the Egyptian St. Mary's at Rome, upon the Banks of Tiber,
in the Flesh-market. They showed me also a certain piece of carved Work,
representing Diana in her hunting Habit, attended in a Wood by her Nymphs. It
was a wonderful Piece of Workmanship, and the Inscription gave us to
understand, that it was wrought by the hand of Phidias, having been dug, but
a little before we came thither, out of the Ruins of the Areopagus; which does
not now stand within the compass of the City, that is now reduced within a
lesser compass. They also showed me the place of the Temple or Altar Erected to
the unknown God. Several Statues are dug up out of the Earth every day, of
which not one that I have seen comes near to those of Italy. Thereupon being
amazed to see so few Signs of its ancient Splendour, they made me answer, that I
might see them in other Places, whither the War had transplanted them, or else
Barter in Traffic. Indeed there was one Piece which I saw the last time I was
at Venice, in the House of Signor Michele Peruli, an Athenian Merchant, which
had been sent him as a Present, representing in Bass Relief, a young man stark
naked, holding a Or else a Horn-Owlet, for the word signifies the same.
Jack-daw in his Right hand. The botom of the Sculpture was adorned with a
Palm Tree, upon the Trunk of which a certain kind of Beetle was engraved in a
creeping Posture. The Cornish comes forth as far as the Statue, and is raised
by two borders, between which at the Top these words are to be read in Greek
Letters, (...), which some will therefore have to be the Son of the Great
Demosthenes. The Piece is good from the Belly downward; but the Head is not
very extraordinary, and the left hand is broke off. Every Body knows that the
Statue of Venus which formerly stood upon Mount Pincius at Rome, and is now to
be seen in the Galleries of Florence, leave being given to the Grand Duke by
the present Pope to remove it thither, was the Work of an Athenian, whose name
is engraved at the bottom of the Statue, (...). Kleomenes the Son of
Apollodorus an Athenian made this. A favor which the Dukes Predecessors could
never obtain, though from Popes of the same Family. So cautious they were of
parting with any of the Ornaments of their City; whereas the present Pope
suffers them to be daily taken away, notwithstanding all the grumbling of the
Romans. So that all that remains at this day of the Athenian Antiquity is their
Olive Trees and their Wit. These Olive Trees encompass it round, and are the
chief Revenue of the Athenians. Their other Fruits are very Excellent, and it
may be the best in the World. But as for the Inhabitants they are no less
naturally Witty and Ingenious than ever; so that if they were but well manured
by Education, they would prove as Good Poets, Orators, Philosophers, Statuaries
or other Artists whatever, as ever were known at the time when it flourished in
its highest Splendor. The Turks have the same respect for them as the Romans
had; who suffer them to live according to their own Laws, and to be governed by
their own Magistrates, for the Grand Signior is contented only with sending
thither one of his Favorite Eunuchs, who receives the Duty imposed, without
farther concerning himself with their Affairs; besides that his Garrison is
very inconsiderable. The Bishop is Judge of the Differences between the
Diocesans, who generally submit to his Determination for fear of Ecclesiastical
Censures. They trade into Italy with their Commodities, for which they receive
in exchange Cloth, and all manner of Iron Tools. Their Women are handsome, and
richly clad in their Garments embroidered with Gold down to their very Shoes,
which their Husbands, though poor, willingly let them have, for fear of a
greater mischief. The Citizens of Quality wear a long black robe with short
Sleeves; but their Priests are habited much like the Ministers of the English
Church, only the Sleeve is not gathered into Pleats: In the City they always
wear upon their Heads a round Cap; but in the Country a flat Hat; which they
call an Ischiodon, because it covers them from the Sun; their Beds are Quilts
laid down on the Sopsa, but some of them are furnished after our own fashion.

They believe the presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament; though the most
Learned among them have acknowledged to me, that the Fathers never understood
what Transubstantiation meant. They say moreover that Christ is not there
present in that manner which the Latins hold, when the Priest pronounces these
Words, (...). This is my Body; which they affirm to be purely Historical, but
by virtue of the Prayer when he says, (...). Make this Bread the worthy Body of
Christ. I observed that they never kneeled before the Sacrament, but only bowed
with their Shoulders to the Bread, as well before as after Consecration. The
Liturgy being ended, the Priest invites the People to the Communion, if no body
come, he eats the remainder upon a Table which stands at the side of the North
Door.

As for the Sick, they communicate of the Bread and Wine Consecrated by the
Bishop upon Maundy Thursday for the whole year. To which purpose they keep the
Bread steeped in the Wine, by the side of the Altar in a Cup-board without
Light. I asked them, whither the Sacrament so preserved, did not putrify; but
they assured me, it did not.

The Bishops Miter is not cloven, but round, and all beset with precious
Stones. All the Bishops believe themselves to be equal as to the Function, but
not as to the Sea, the Dignity of which exalts the one above the other, by
virtue of an Institution purely Humane, and not Divine.

They never stay till they are sick to receive the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction; but they receive it all every year in the holy Week, after this
manner: Two Archbishops bless the Oil; afterward the Archbishop of the Church
being seated in his Chair, and five or six Priests in theirs, the People
present themselves to be anointed, first by the Prelate, who holding a Wax
Candle in his hand, dips the Cotton in the holy Oil, and then anoints the
Forhead, the Face, and Palm of the Hand; after which the same Person goes to
the other Priests who do the same. They pray for the dead, whose Souls they
believe remain in this World in expectation of the General day of Judgment; not
admitting any parcicular Judgment.

They frequently perfume with Frankincense in their Ceremonies, which are very
decent, and fill the Soul with a sensible Devotion. I asked them the reason why
they made such frequent use of their Perfumes; to which they answered, That it
was to admonish the People to send up their Prayers with the Perfume, which
ascends toward Heaven. As to what remains, the Eastern Church glories in its
Priority, which they assume to themselves, and which is no more than Truth;
neither do the Latins dispute the Point of Eldership. That which surpised me
was this, that they should preserve themselves under the Tyranny of the
Mahometans, who neither by their oppressive Impositions, nor fair Promises,
could ever oblige the Eastern Christians to change the Gospel for the Alcoran.
To which purpose I will impart to the Reader two Remarkable Passages, that
happened about six years since; the one at Constantinople, that befell a young
man between seventeen and eighteen years of Age, whose Name was Anthony,
Learned for his Age in the Turkish Language above any, beloved by every one for
his Excellent Qualities, even of the Turks themselves, who for that reason
would fain have brought him over to the Mohammedan Religion. To which purpose
they showed him a little Note to read, wherein were written, in Arabian, these
words, I believe in God, and in Mahomet his Apostle. So soon as he had read it,
they saluted him as one of their Brethren, saying he was a Turk, as having made
a Profession of their Religion by reading that Note. He denied it; upon which
they carried him before a Judge who condemned him. From thence they haled him
to the Grand Vizier, who upon the Testimony of those wicked People who had so
surpised him, condemned him also to make profession of the Law, as being
thereto obliged by his reading. Upon his refusal they carried him to Prison,
where for thirty days he endured most horrible torments; of which one among the
rest was the thrusting of sharp Reeds between the Flesh and the Nails of his
Fingers: After which he had his Head cut off, which the Ambassador of France
bought of the Executioner as a precious Relic.

The other, named Diamanti, aged about thirty years, and of a charming Beauty,
was rowing naked in a Boat upon a River of Asia, with certain Turks, who moved
with compassion that so lovely a Man should perish for want of embracing their
Religion, put a white Turbant upon his Head. Which done, he was used with the
same severity as Anthony was, after he had refused the chiefest Preferments in
the Empire. But a Jacobin Monk, who was there at the same time, renouncing his
Christianity, was the occasion of their recovering by his Apostasy, what they
had lost by the generous Constancy of Diamanti. I could give a more ample
Description of the Religion of the Greeks, but having done it in another place,
I shall not study to enlarge this Volume.

Neither was Demetrius content to show me what was within the City, but
extending his kindness, resolved to let me see what was without. To which
purpose he invited me to take a walk with him to the Country House of one
Constantine his particular Friend, distant about ten miles; which we resolved
to walk according to the custom of the Country. We set out by daybreak, and
with great delight crossed over several delicious Gardens and Fields planted
with Olive Trees, promising our selves a most pleasant Journey, perceiving the
Sun to rise upon the Lilies whiteness. But contrary to the Maxim of the
Weather-wise we were deceived. For a black Cloud behind us being driven forward
by a West wind, soon got under the Sun, and deprived us of the sight of that
noble Planet. Presently the Sky became so dark that we could hardly discern one
another, which were the forerunners of a most dreadful Thunder; which,
however, did not terrify me so much as the Rain that followed did me mischief.
For besides that continuing all that day, it soaked through my Shirt to my very
Skin; the Fat Soil of the Fields through which we were to pass to get the
nearest way, being dissolved, we sunk in the Mud up to our very Knees, so that
we were forced every step we took to pull out our Legs with our Hands. This
same Combat with the bad Weather and worse Way, tired me so much, that I was
forced to make a stop. Nevertheless I encouraged Monthresor to follow
Demetrius; I bid them also drink and be merry, and take no notice of my
indisposition, telling them withal, That after I had rested my self upon the
descent of a Turfy Bank, where I was laid down through mere faintness, I would
endeavor to overtake them the next day. After that, falling insensibly asleep,
I knew not what became of them, till waked with the noise, I perceived them
upon two Camels followed by a Countryman who led a third, which carried me to
the Friends House.

Constantine treated us with that magnificence, that it was easy to see he had
been advertised of our coming. But having lost all my Strength and Spirits, not
all the Delicacy of his Viands could force my languishing Appetite; so that the
good Wine was all the Refreshment I could take that Evening. However I took
some pleasure to see the Company fall on so heartily, sometimes casting my Eyes
upon a Lady that sat over against me, young, handsome, and plump, yet one that
eat no more than my self; which I wondered at the more, because I could not see
any reason she had to be so tender-stomach'd, I observed also, that she would
be still staring upon me, and could read in her Eyes that I was not a person
out of her Favor. However, Modesty would not permit me to inform my self any
farther, and my Indisposition was Excuse enough for me to take leave of the
Company, that I might repair the Losses of my Strength by the Refreshment of a
good Bed. After a short Nap, I observed Monthresor earnestly peeping through
the crevice of a Door that lead out of my Chamber into another, and finding by
my stirring, that I was awake, he came to me, and made me put my Head out of
Bed, and look through the same chink into the next Chamber, where I saw a young
man performing the Duty of a Chambermaid to the young Lady: But neither of us
knew what the meaning of it was; thereupon I fell asleep again, and Monthresor
went to bed. About midnight I was awaked again by the hard treading of some
body in the Chamber; at what time, putting by the Curtain of the Bed, which was
of Cloth of Gold, I was strangely surprised to see the same young man in his
Shirt, with a Scimiter drawn in his right Hand, and his Eyes sparkling like the
light that glittered out of the Lanthorn which he held in his left, with my own
Nightcap. Nor was I less terrified to see him in that posture making toward
Monthresor's Bed; which however, he presently left to come to mine; and so soon
as he perceived my bare Head, which I thrust out from between the Curtains to
see what was the matter; Oh! is it you, cried he? The noise which he made,
wakned my Companion, and I at the same time leaped out of my Bed stark naked as
I was, having lain after the Italian manner, the better to ease my self,
snatched up my Cloak and wound it about my Arm to send off the Blows which the
enraged young Fellow laid on without mercy. By this Monthresor coming to my
assistance, clasped the young man about both his Arms, and stopped his Fury,
which was as much as he could do, in regard we had both left our Swords in the
place where we supped. Presently after the Lady coming out of her Chamber, made
a hideous outcry which raised all the House, and brought them into the Room;
and Demetrius without any more to do, took my part. At which the Aggressor
began to vomit forth against me all the Reproaches and ill Language that his
Passion could invent, out of a false belief, that I had attempted the Honor of
his Sister, shows my Cap to Constantine, as being the most proper Judge of the
Trespass which was supposed to have been committed in his House; and adds, That
having heard a noise in her Chamber, he hastened thither and found what I
wanted, lying at her Beds feet. However, though the Presumption were very
rational, Demetrius had a better opinion of me, as well in respect of his
experience of my Conversation, and the Recommendations of his Friends in my
behalf, and stiffly maintained that I was a Person that scorned such a
dishonorable Action. On the other side, the Lady who had thrown her self
between her Brother and me, to stop his Fury, conjured him by her own Honor,
not to believe any thing that might tend to her Scandal; alleging, that the
Cap might have been carried into the Chamber by some unthought-of Accident.
This Constantine confirmed, assuring the Company, That the Rats, of which the
House was full for want of Cats, the sight of which he could not endure, did
often play him such Tricks, many times carrying away his Stockings and other
Clothes, sometimes into one Corner, sometimes into another, and that so my Cap
might have fallen accidentally from my Head, and have been carried where the
young man found it; therefore he desired Lascaris to pacify his Wrath, and me
to pardon his zealous Fury in his Sister's behalf. Thereupon, every one
acquiescing in his Judgment, they all returned to their Beds. By break of day
my Enemy gave me another visit, not like a Madman, but with a serene and
smiling Countenance, craved my Excuse for the Transports of his Rage; and so
saying, he brought me one of his own Shoes that a Rat had likewise carried
away, all gnawed and Vermin-eaten as it was: And this, added he, puts me out of
doubt of Constantine's Conjecture. After that he made me privy to his Sister's
Concerns, and his design to carry her privately out of the way, that he might
release her from the importunate Addresses of the Eunuch Governor of Athens,
who was passionately in love with her, but whose vain and impotent Caresses
were loathsome to her.

Demetrius would fain have had me traveled farther up into the Country; but in
regard I had seen enough to judge of the Nature of the rest by what I had seen
already, that is to say, That it was enriched with excellent Fruits, abounding
in Corn and Oil, without any deficiency of Bacchus's Liquor, I determined to
return to the City, where finding my Landlord Epiphanes tied Legs and Feet by
the Fetters of that Distemper which proceeds from Wine and good Cheer, where
men indulge their Appetites to excess, I relieved him with my Antipodagricon,
or Antidote against the Gout; and understanding that our Vessel was ready to
set sail for Constantinople, though there still remained many things for me to
have seen in this so highly renowned Province of Greece; I rather chose to
deferr the Satisfaction of my Curiosity till my Return, than to lose the
opportunity of our Vessel; so that we embarked the 25th. New-stile, and the
15th. Old-stile, which the Greeks retain as well as the English.

Scarce were we got clear of the Road, but my usual Distemper seized me, which
obliged me to keep my Cabin, where I lay ill till we came to Byzantium, where
we arrived the 4th. of March. Upon our landing, a French Slave that stood upon
the Key, offered to conduct us to the House of Signior Lorenzo, to whom I had
Letters to deliver; by the way we met with two Turks, one of which took off my
Hat, and with his Foot tossed it up into the Air, like a Football, diverting
himself and his Companion for some time with his rude Sport, laughing and
houting all the while. The reason was, as our Guide told us, because those sort
of People bear an inveterate hatred to our Habits, which they look upon to be
very paltry and ridiculous, nevertheless we think them to be very graceful, and
account our selves the wisest People in the World.

This Capital City of the Ottoman Empire having been several times described by
other Travelers who have been very exact in their relations, I shall say
nothing of it, only that after I had satisfied my self with the sight of the
Hippodrome, and several other the most remarkable parts of it, I departed
thence the 7th. of March, having the opportunity of a Vessel, which carried me
through the Euxine Sea to Lonati, where we arrived the 17th. my desire to see
Tartary, of which Country there has been so little said, causing me to make
choice of that Passage. However, not having any information that might assist
me to find out the most commodious and safest way to steer my Travels, I made
it my business to frequent the Coffee-Houses, where I had the good luck to meet
with Aristides, a young man, well-featur'd, and infinitely civil, the Son of a
rich Merchant of Jamina in Epirus, famous for the Birth of Pyrrhus, and well
stored with Learning. This Person was also a Traveller for his pleasure, and
with the same design that we had, which was to see the most remote Places,
rarely frequented, and of which the Relations are hitherto very imperfect. He
understood the Turkish perfectly well, but excelled in the Litteral Greek.
Seeing therefore that I had a smattering of both the Languages, and that our
humors corresponded, he was desirous to make a Third in our Society. Thereupon
we concluded to range the remainder of Turkey, being informed that we should
find Vessels at Santa Maria, which would transport us into Tartary through the
Caspian Sea, and that we might take that way without any danger, having a
Janizary to attend us, with whom we might agree for the whole expense of the
Journey. With these Instructions we pitched upon a Rough hewn Blade, who
undertook to conduct us for Twenty five Crowns a Head, for whose Fidelity,
besides that he looked like an honest stout fellow, a Merchant of Aristides's
Acquaintance engaged. A Crown is a Spanish Real, which Money, as well as that
of the German Empire and Holland, goes through all Turkey with Venetian Sequins,
to the great advantage of Travelers; upon every Sequin you get five Shillings,
upon every Real one Shilling.

Upon the Twentieth of March we got a Horseback, the Weather being very fair,
and so continuing till the Thirtieth, at what time we got to Santa Maria, by
easy Journeys, setting up our Tents in those places which seemed to us most
convenient; and yet for all that we traveled at least Twelve Leagues a day.
All that Country which comprehends Mingrelia and Georgia, is sufficiently
beautiful, but ill peopled and consequently worse manured. The Georgians are
acompted Heretics by the Greeks, though they observe their Ceremonies. The
difference between them consists chiefly in this, that they will not
acknowledge the Holy Virgin to be the Mother of God; alleging that God could
have no Mother: However though they blame the Greeks for being of a contrary
Opinion, yet they do not forbear to frequent their Churches in Italy, and
prefer them before the Latins. Aristides and my self were present at their
Ceremonies in the Passion Week, at what time Monthresor lay sick of a Dysentry;
but by virtue of an infallible Cure which I brought with me from Rome he
recovered, and was in a Condition to put to Sea, the Third of April, which we
did with a fair Wind that brought us to Mora the Seventh. However we did not
land there, by reason of the Pestilence that was very violent in that Place:
Which was to me a grievous Affliction by reason of the racking Pains which I
endured upon the Sea, and which only going ashore could relieve. Thereupon we
were constrained to put out again into the open Sea, which being offended at
our Return, began to murmur, and by and by all in a raging fury began to
threaten the destruction of our Vessel, and swallow us up in his Mounting
Waves. Nor did the Storm cease till some hours after Night was shut in; but
then it became so calm and smooth that I felt some ease.

The next day being the Eighth I got upon the Deck, and descrying Land with a
small Town about three Miles distant from the Shore, I proposed to our Friends,
that we might be rowed ashore in our Skiff, to which they agreed, and our
Captain was no less willing, and in respect to Aristides, ordered the Seamen to
carry our Luggage to the Town, which afterward we found to be Sabatan. There
we were courteously received by the Inhabitants, who caressed us after an
extraordinary manner, and without any hopes of Profit, in regard there are no
Inns in that place, as in France and other Countries of Europe; the Person that
entertains you being satisfied with having performed a laudable Act of
Hospitality. Happy was he that could have us; and therefore to please more then
one we divided our selves. However though we lodged in several Houses, we kept
together all day long. They also recommended to our Service a Tartarian, who
having lived among the Franks at Constantinople, had learnt the Italian
Language; and therefore finding him inclined to serve us we accepted of him.
And thus having recovered our former health by rest and good feeding, we set
forwards again the Eleventh, without any other design, than to travel at a
venture in a Country that let us come where we would, we had what we aimed at.

About a Mile from Sabatan we traveled over a rising Ground, from whence we
might take a view of the Country; and after we had for some time looked as far
as we could see, we chose the South East, as seeming the most pleasant, and so
marched on with Caraman our Tartar before us, carrying a Basket of Provisions,
with a Partisan in his hand, and his Bow and Arrows at his Back. We carried
every one a Carbine in our hands, as well for sport as defense, two Pistols in
our Pockets, and a Scimitar by our sides; and as for our Coats and Bags of
Linen for change, we threw them upon a Horse which we had provided to serve us
in time of necessity. Moreover Aristides had one more attendant than any of the
rest; a stout Mastiff, which he had bred up of a Whelp, fierce to all others
but his Masters Friends; and which his Master had armed with a strange
fantastical Cap of Steel to defend him from the Claws and Fangs of Wild Beasts,
which covering his head like the hollow half of a Pruen Stone, ended a little
below his Nose, like the Horn of a Rinoceros, with a Point so sharp to be able
to pierce a Bufolo's Skin. This Dogs Name was Pamphagos, in plain English
All-devour. And thus accouter'd and provided we traveled all that day till
night without meeting any Living thing; nor was the night less tedious to us
for want of a good lodging.

The Twelfth, setting forward again betimes in the Morning, and we found by
Caramans pace, that we had made a shift to find the way to our Mouths in the
Dark. But when we had made a farther Breach in his Basket at Noon, he began to
outstrip us so fast that we were forced to order him to keep behind. Toward
Evening we discovered a Cottage made of Stone without Mortar covered with
Grass. Thereupon we desired All-devour to open his Mouth and speak to the
Cottage, believing that upon his surly summons they that were within would make
their appearance; but no answer being returned, we conjectured it to be as we
found it, empty; and thereupon thought fit to take possession, not knowing
where to find a better Lodging. The rest of the Evening we spent in cutting
Fern for our Bedding. The Wolves however being come, Monthresor struck a light
with his steel and flint, to the end we might sup with more pleasure by the
light of a small Wax Candle; Caraman was extremely pleased to see us feed like
Hunters, in hopes that he should have nothing to carry next day; and truly
there was but a very small Modicum left, which we reserved with an equal
proportion of Wine for breakfast. Thus after we had supped we took our repose
very sweetly under the Guard of All-devour, who kept Sentinel at the Door of
the Cottage.

The Thirteenth All-devour started a Hare, which it was Monthresor's good
fortune to kill. Presently we got a good heap of Brush Wood together to roast
our Venison. And after we had dined we agreed together, that if any Misfortune
should threaten us, the last living should inherit all the Goods.

All this while the apprehension of wanting Victuals had put us quite out of
conceit with these Deserts, at what time we discovered about four Miles off a
rising Hillock, of which the White and Green put it into our heads that we
should make a discovery what it really was. Thereupon we made up to it, and the
nearer we approached the Objects rendering themselves more distinct, at length
we perceived them to be a knot of Shepherds Lodgings, who understanding by
Caraman the Cause of our coming, feasted us in their Tents to the best of their
Power: For their usual Diet is Milk, Cheese, Butter and Pulse, such as the
Earth naturally produces without labor. Some there are that eat Flesh; but
they are looked upon as Savages and Brutes. They have also a sort of Wheat which
grows like their Pulse without the assistance of Husbandry; but they make no
Bread of it, no more than they make Wine of their Grapes. In a word, they live
upon all the Productions of the Earth, which it affords them without any other
preparation than that of nature. Nevertheless, as having the forecast of Bees
and Emets, they make their Provision in its proper Seasons against Winter.

As to their Stature, they are generally about four foot and a half high, but
never exceed five. Their Faces are generally square, but well shaped, only that
their Noses are generally flat: They are strong and courageous; their Clothing
for the more careless sort is only a Sheeps Skin; but the more neat and curious
make use of the Skins of Hares, Martins, Foxes or Tigers, which they kill in
Hunting. Nor is the Habit of the Women much different from that of the Men; for
they say that the Beard is a sufficient distinction between the two Sexes. They
are faithful to their Husbands, equally sharing with them in their Cares and
Pains, according to the practice of Holland. When they have a mind to eat,
their Provision is brought in an old Heart, or Elan's Skin; which being spread
upon the Ground serves instead of a Table, Napkin and Platter much like the
Greeks and Turks; they sit down upon Cushions made of Sheep Skins with the
Wool on; every one takes what best pleases his Palate. For they have Fruits of
all sorts, fresh in their Season, and preserved in Winter; Apples, Pears,
Cherries, Figs, Grapes, Wheat, Milk, and Roots, which they preserve in Honey
instead of Salt, of which they make no use at all; they begin their Meals with
a large draught of Milk, and so conclude them. After that, if they chance to be
a dry, they quench their Thirsts with the next fair Water they meet. They lie
in their Clothes upon Skins spread upon the Ground, and cover themselves with
Skins of the same sort: Which I find to be more convenient than the Beds of
Germany and Switzerland, where Feathers serve for Bed and Coverlet.

They are never sick, and therefore Physic is not known among them. They only
dye of old Age, upon the utter extinction of their Natural heat, which happens
sooner or later, according to the Composition which they first received in
their Mothers Womb. I once asked a decrepid old Man, whether he were not afraid
of Death? Who being surpised at the Novelty of a Question never proposed among
them, made answer, That there was nothing to be feared where there was nothing
of Evil. That he conceived Death to be nothing else but a Cessation from the
Motions of Action and Thought: That all evil consisted in the Thought, and
therefore there could be no suffering where there is a Cessation of Thought. I
could not but admire at such Philosophy as this in a Person so Illiterate; for
they are so far from addicting themselves to study, that they have not any
knowledge of Books. In the next place I caused him to be asked of what Religion
he was? To which he made this Return, That he was a Shepherd by Profession; nor
could I draw any other answer from him. They abide in the Places of which they
make choice, so long as their Flocks find any thing to feed upon. Afterward
they remove into other Parts, under the Conduct of one who is their Chief. They
were so Civil, that perceiving we wanted a Tent, they presented us with one of
their own; together with a Cart and four Cows to draw it, which besides the
service that they did us, might also feed us with their Milk. Their Tents are
made of white Skins, dressed with the Hair on; which color they make choice of
above all others, to the end their Tents may be discerned at a distance, which
prevents others that have occasion to change their stations, to remove to a
place already possessed.

The Fifteenth we took leave of our Hosts, laden with Provisions for Eight
days, which they put into our Cart; for which we presented them with several
Italian Trifles, very acceptable to them by reason of their Novelty.

From thence we went on slowly, and by short Journeys, taking up our Lodging an
hour before Night, which we spent either in eating or sleeping, one of our
Company always keeping watch in his Turn; not for fear of Robbers, or Barbarous
spoilers of Passengers; for there are no such Usages among them, but for fear
of the wild Beasts, which otherwise might have assaulted our Persons, or
devoured our Cows, for whose Pasturage our Sentinel had in charge to provide,
with the assistance of All-devour, We also made a stop in the day time, as well
to rest our selves, as to refresh our selves with a short Meal, which was
generally by the side of a Fountain, which wanting of, we drank at the charge
of our Cows.

The Twentieth we understood by the heat of the Sun, that we were far distant
from the North; which heat was so violent, that the Reflection of it from a
Rock upon our right hand, put Aristides into a violent Fit of the Headache, who
having at length met with a convenient Shade, under the favor of the Elbow of
a Hillock, made bold to sit down upon certain Stones, which long time had
loosened and rolled down from the Rock; besides that our hour being come, the
convenience of the Place invited us to take our Repast, provided we could meet
with any Water. Thereupon Monthresor and my self, leaving our sick Friend to
his Repose under the Guard of Carraman, went to look out for some Water,
judging by the nature of the Place, that we could not be far off from a Spring:
Nor were we deceived, for not far off, we discovered a large Hind going to cool
himself in a wide receptacle of spring water, not unlike to that which proves
the Spring of a wide River near the Temple of Diana at the foot of Tourmagne at
Nimes in Languedoc.

The Beast was nothing scared either at the sight of us, or our Firearms; nor
did we think it Humanity to injure our Benefactress. But finding the Rock to
open in that place, our Curiosity led us to enter the Hole; wherein about ten
paces from the entrance, we found a spacious Hall very convenient for us to
take the benefit of the cool Air. The rocky part was so odly contrived, that
you would have taken it for the Workmanship of a Monk of Pic-Puz, had you been
near Paris. The bottom of the Grotto was cleft into an Ascent, the first steps
of which did not seem very uneasy. Thereupon our Curiosity leading us further,
Monthresor struck a light, by virtue of which we pursued the Ascent for about
half a quarter of an Hour with some difficulty, till at length we came to
another Hall larger and fairer than that below. Thence we passed into a Gallery
that led into several others, very much resembling those of Chinon; for that
here as well as there, the moisture of the Earth straining it self through her
Veins in so many distinct, as it were, Springs of Water, transforms it self
into so many Crystal Pendants, sticking and crusted to the Wall, like so many
little Mirrours, in a concave and unequal form, not inferior to the Ice flakes
of Murrhan, which are polished at Venice. And thus Nature having, as it were in
Sport, shown us what she can do alone without the Assistance of Art, seemed to
teach us the Original of Rivers: For she permits the remainder of this matter,
after she has formed these rare Pieces of Workmanship, to fall partly by way of
Distillation from the point of a confused multitude of Pyramids, hanging
athwart this so richly frettiz'd Ceiling, partly trickling from the glittering
Concave upon the Pavement that receives it; whence the whole conveys it self
into several Channels to be thence conducted into larger Receptacles, situated
at a distance one from another, till it come to the last and largest of all,
whence it unfolds it self like a Napkin, which the violence of the Air opens as
it hangs, till at length it descends in a kind of small Rain, colored by the
Reflection of the Sun that shoots in through the hole at the top, into a
profound Abyss, not to be beheld without Terror and Amazement. These
Observations put me out of doubt, that that same Water which I knew to be a
ramassment of distilled Drops, was the Water that originally enlarged the
Receptacle first mentioned, and to the River that springs from it. Whence I
concluded that all other Springs have the same original; whether it be, that
the Air condensed by Cold, dissolve into moisture; or whether the Earth imbibe
this Humor by filtration, or otherwise, as I set forth in my new System of
Philosophy. And thus satisfied with a sight so extraordinary, we returned to
Aristides, to whom we imparted our Discoveries; who thereupon would needs have
us carry our Dinner thither, to the end we might have the pleasure of eating in
such a delicious Banqueting house.

The 21st. we had nothing but Plains on every side very rich in Pasturage,
which was the reason that we met several Shepherds who had left their Tents,
where only Night requires their Attendance.

The 23d. we arrived at the foot of a Mountain covered with Box, out of which
the Lake called the Swan's Lake, discharges it self through a hole about ten
foot below the top, among the Boughs of a pleasant Wood; where Nature has so
ordered the sloping of the Rock, that sometimes the Water spouts forth like so
many Waves, sometimes spurts out like a Plume of Feathers, and sometimes like
an Agret; afterward falling all of a sudden, like a Veil, through the sides of
a Demi-oval, eight Foot in Diameter, it throws it self into a neighboring
River, which in Summer is the delight of the Shepherds that feed their Flocks
in the Meadows which it waters. In this River while they wash their Sheep, they
sport with their Sheperdesses; every one cockering and caressing his own
Mistress. Which done, they fall to their Music, playing several Tunes upon
Flutes made of the Rine of Willows that cover the Bank; upon which they also
sit while they assuage the hunger which their bathing has excited and
sharpened, putting their own Victuals altogether. One day they gave us a Visit
at our Imcampment, where we presented them with several Glass Jewels, such as
they make at Nevers, in lieu of which, they brought us their Provisions, more
than our Cart would carry.

The 24th. we came to a Forest, out of which there issued a Beast about the
bigness of an Elephant, which it resembled in every thing else but the
Proboscis. This Beast perceiving us, recovered the Wood, where I could see him
feed upon the tender Branches of the Trees, not being able to nibble the Grass
by reason of the tallness of his head. Thereupon judging it to be tame, I went
up to it, and offered it some Wheat in the Skirt of my Coat, which it swallowed
with some seeming acknowledgment for my kindness, and kept us Company all the
time we staid there under the shade of the Oaks.

The 25th. we made a full stop.

The 26th. being advertised by Caraman, that a Company of neighboring
Shepherds were packing up their Tents, with an intention to change their post,
and that we should be very welcome in their Company; we accepted the Proposal,
as well to continue our Journey with the more convenience, as to observe the
Form and Custom of their March, which is thus: The day before the Captain gives
notice by the found of a Horn, that they are to be ready the next day. At what
time the signal is no sooner given (so punctual they are) but they begin their
March in this Order. First moves the Standard, which is the Head of Bull
crowned with Flowers, which they stick upright in the Ground when there is any
occasion of encamping: After that follow the Pipers afoot; the Captain
immediately goes before the Children which are carried in Carts, with their
Tutors, whose business it is to have an inspection into their Manners; next the
Women and aged People carried likewise in Carts drawn by Bulls, for they have
no Oxen, neither is it their Custom to geld any other Creatures, detesting
above all things that sort of Mutilation, so familiar among men in Italy, as
injurious to Nature. After these follow the men in the full vigor of their
years, together with the Baggage, the Guard of which belongs to them, and all
the way they laugh and sing, and sometimes dance. Two hours before night they
make a stop, at what time every Master of a Family carries what Provision is
necessary to his own People in the Carts. We followed them in our Cart till the
28. at what time we took our leaves, because they resolved to tarry, and we
resolved to go farther.

The 29th. we met with several Huntsmen, who, as they told us, are another sort
of wild Tartars, who feed and cloth themselves with the Flesh and Skins of the
Beasts which they take; and to that purpose making continual War upon the poor
Creatures, with whom they combat, armed with a Bow and a Cutlace: Here we made
a stop, and after Dinner had the satisfaction to see a Tiger pursued by two of
these Champions. So soon as they perceived the Beast, they presently let fly
their Arrows against him, of which the first flight is not intended to do him
any great harm, but only to provoke him the more. But when they perceive the
Beast to make at them in revenge of the Injury, then they bestow their Arrows
upon him thick and threefold, till the poor Creature having received several
Wounds in his Body, is forced to yield. At what time one of the Hunters boldly
rushing in upon him, cuts off his Head with his Cutlace: Sometimes they will
struggle with the Beast, but without any danger, for that they are very nimble,
and never alone, otherwise the Beast would have the Advantage.

The 30th. we passed through a Hamlet, where we desired Provisions, which they
let us have for our Money. Nevertheless, Monthresor finding himself in a
Venison-Country, resolved to taste of it; to which purpose we made a stop about
Noon, and after a short Repast, he began to beat the Fields, with Carraman in
his Company, while Aristides and my self set up the Tent, and went to cut Wood
for our Kitchen. Toward Evening our Huntsmen returned laden with Hares,
Pheasants, and Partridges, which we roasted upon a woodden-Spit, and feasted
our selves that Night, if a Feast could be without Wine; but we were pretty
well accustomed by this time to want it. The first of May we set forward
betimes in the Morning, resolved for the future to make our best of the cool of
the day, finding the heats to be very incommodious. But Monthresor allured with
the Success he had the day before, was resolved to have the other Hunting-Bout
together with his Companion, whom he never brought back again. For the poor
Tartar was surprised by a Tiger, which leaping of a sudden upon him, gave him a
gripe by the Neck, and choked him before his Master could come to his relief,
who nevertheless revenged his Death with his Scimitar, which he ran full into
the Body of the Beast over greedy of his Prey; with which Wound the Tiger died,
only giving Monthresor a slight Nip in the Arm, which did not hinder the Victor
however from fleaing him, that he might have the Spoils of his Enemy, which he
preferred before those of an Aga.

By this accident were we deprived of our Speech, as if all our three Tongues
had been cut out, which caused us to bewail our Loss so much the more, because
we thought it irreparable. We were now to renounce the Society of Men, unless
we intended only to appear among them as mute Beasts. However, we did not
forbear to go forward, in hopes of some lucky Accident before we had spent all
our Victuals, with which we were furnished for eight days; all which time we
were continually upon the march, but when we either eat or slept, steering our
course all along directly against the South-East, All-devour serving us instead
of a Forerunner, attacquing with a Heroic Valor all that came in his way. But
the most famous of his Exploits was this: A very fierce Lion met him, and
thought to have terrified him with his roaring; but All devour on the contrary
growls, barks, advances, and having joined him at four leaps, nimbly fixes upon
his back, and presently made him sensible of the sharpness of his Fangs.
Thereupon the Lion endeavoring to shake off his Burden, frisk'd about in such
a manner, that he threw his Rider, and then flew open jaw'd upon his Antagonist
with a design to gripe him by the Neck; but All-devour prevented him; fixing
his Steelhorn so directly in the Palate of his Enemy, that he thrust it quite
through and through. But then Aristides coming in seasonably to All devour's
relief, put an end to the Combat with his Scimitar, unwilling to hazard another
engagement.

The lovely clear Water that glided along by the side of a Wood whither we came
the 6th. of May, invited us to make a stop. And here it was that Monthresor,
notwithstanding the fatal Misfortune of Carraman, and all our friendly
Persuasions to the contrary, would needs gratify that extraordinary Passion
which he had for Hunting. Thereupon Aristides being resolved to keep him
company, I was left alone to get ready the Lardings against their return: And I
had the more hopes of his Success, in regard that All devour followed his
Master. Nor had I been deceived, had they had none but Beasts to contend with;
but a Destiny far different attended Monthresor. For after they had ranged
about for some hours, they came to a Lake so clear and clean at the bottom,
that it invited both, being heated by their Exercise, and scalding heat of the
Sun, to go into the Lake and bathe themselves. As for Aristides because he
could not swim, he would not trust himself out of his depth, using only a
medicinal Bath by the Banks of the Lake, while Monthresor diverted and pleased
himself with cutting the smooth and liquid Plain through all its Dimensions. He
tried its depth by diving to the bottom, its breadth and length in imitation of
the Frog. Sometimes he laid himself upon his Back to ease himself; afterward
resuming the use of his Limbs with more vigor, with a design to cross the Lake,
he met with a Current so rapid, that it carried him to the entrance of a Cavern
hollowed under the Mountain that bordred upon one side of the Lake, where he
vanished of a sudden from Aristides's sight, who made me the Relation with
Tears in his Eyes for the Loss of a Person so dear to him. I spent the night in
extremity of Sorrow, expecting daylight, which no sooner appeared, but I went
and viewed exactly the several Places, of which when I had considered all the
Circumstances, I despaired of ever seeing my Friend again.

The Eighth there arose such a furious Tempest, accompanied with Rain and
Thunder, as if the World had been returning to its first Chaos, and to complete
my Miseries, I had the Misfortune to see Aristides ranvers'd to the Earth by a
Flash of Lightning, and thrown four Paces at least before the Cart which I
followed; I threw my self upon him for some time quite senceless; but then
recovering my self, I began to think that death had put an end to their
Miseries, and that the end of my Friends Misfortunes was but the beginning of
my own, in a strange Country, of which the Language and Roads were to me
unknown, without assistance, without support, without Provisions or means of
subsistence. It Is true I had Gold and Jewels both of my own and of my deceased
Companions; but I neither knew how to trade, nor how to agree with any Person
that could bring me to the Seaside, where I might get a convenience to carry
me back into my own Country; which I looked upon as my best way. At last
considering that I could get nothing by staying where I was, I resolved in the
first place to pay my last devoires of Burial to my deceased Friend: To which
purpose I made use of my Sword to dig a grave in the Earth four fingers deep,
where I laid him at his full length, and covered him with the same Turf which I
had pared off: For by our discourses together, I understood that such a
Sepulcher pleased him best; for he did not like that Custom of the Christians
to bury in Churches, who not content with a deep Grave, cover the dead Body
with a heavy Freestone. Whereas, said he, it is much better to carry our
Carkases into the Fields, where their substance dissolving, and serving to
nourish the Plants, receives a kind of new Life; by which means the wrong done
to Nature by Mortality is in some measure repaired. He also taxed of
sottishness and injustice the Custom of embalming; of sottishness, because that
Death receives no benefit by it: of injustice because it defrauds Nature of her
Rights; for it is her desire that the Corruption of one should be attended by
the Generation of another, to which Perfumes are an Enemy, because they delay
the Dissolution of the Body which they embalme.

After all leaving All-devoure upon his Masters Grave, from whence I could by
no means allure him, I resolved to abandon my self to Fortune, and to the
guidance of the Cows; which I determined should take their own fancy, without
troubling my self any farther than only to follow them: In which distress, my
Provisions failing me in three days, I was reduced to Milk; upon which I lived
for three Weeks together, wandering through Deserts where I could not discern
the least print of human Footstep. In the day time I took care to pick up all
the Brush Wood and dry Sticks I could find to make a Fire in the night, which I
understood by the Tartars the wild Beasts would never approach. One time among
the rest meditating like a Philosopher, I came to a Lake, the deceitful Banks
of which giving way to my Horses Feet, we fell both into the Water, which was
of an ill taste, and began to fill my Mouth. Presently I threw my self off my
Horse toward the Land, and laid hold of the first Roots I could light upon,
thinking to get up out of the Water, but they being too weak to bear my weight
I fell in again; nor had I any other way to get out, but by grasping the Mudd,
and so taking hold of other Roots stronger than the former, by which means I
drew my self to the Shore. So full was I of my Seneca at that time; and by
reading him become so familiar with Death, that instead of being affrighted to
see him so near me, I reasoned with my self in falling, with the same
Tranquillity of mind as I could have done at the greatest distance from danger.
My Horse had the Misfortune to remain there; but I the good fortune three days
after to light into a Country well manured. I saw that the Lands were tilled,
and fenced with Diches as in Europe, that the Medows were Palizado'd, the
Vinyards walled about, and a little farther I met with Gardens and Orchards
planted according to Art. This change of the Scene put me in hopes that I
should suddenly meet with Men of our own Fashions. And with these hopes I still
went on, when by and by I came to a place where I heard People talk on the
orher side of a Wall. Upon which I made a stop, and listening understood their
Language to be Greek. What! thought I to my self, am I miraculously transported
into Greece? Thereupon I went up into my Cart to see whither I could discover
any thing like to what I had heard; and then I saw People weeding a Field that
was sown with Corn, and planted with Vines after the manner of Naples. At first
I took time to consider, not without astonishment, that Persons who had nothing
of a Country Mien, should employ themselves in Husbandry. I roused my self, I
felt my self, and yet could hardly believe my self, or rather I could not
believe but that I dreamt, or that my Life had been only a Dream, till this
very Moment. However at length I opened my Lips and saluted the Gentlemen with
a (...), or God save ye. Thereupon they star'd upon me, and I asked them in
what Country I was? In the Territories of Heliopolis, cried they, and you are
welcome. Thereupon I made them a short Relation of my Misfortunes; upon which
one of the Company by consent of the rest came to me, and undertaking to drive
my Cart, brought me to a Country House, about Five hundred Paces distant;
where so soon as we came into the first Court, another took my Cows and led
them to the Stable, while my Guide carried me into the House, the neatness of
which, together with the Gaietry of the People charmed me at first sight; nor
did they delay to bring me in Refreshments immediately. Judge you whether I
were not overjoyed at a happiness so unexpected, and whether I did not with
Pleasure behold the Wine in the Glasses, not having tasted any in so long time
before. The Collation being ended, I was conducted into a Chamber, where they
told me I might take my Repose at leisure, and make use of the Conveniences of
the Lodging as long as I pleased. Thereupon seeing the Bed handsome and decently
adorned, as much weary as I was, I made haste into it, and lay till the next
morning very late.

In this delightful Mansion I spent three days, amidst the Innocent Sports of a
most Charming Youthfulness, with which they intermixed the Labors of Country
Husbandry, while the young Virgins and Lads met every Evening to sing, dance,
and play together at Colin-Maillard or Blind-man's Buff; while such as were
more seriously disposed more seriously entertained each other. For they had all
the Liberty to do what they pleased, in regard there were none that would abuse
their Liberty; so virtuous were their Inclinations by the means of good
Education, with which they were seasoned in their tender years. Callisthenes,
the Master of the Society kept me Company continually; so that whether the Duty
of his Office obliged him to go abroad, or whether he had a desire himself to
take a walk, he would still have me to make one. So that I had the leisure to
inform my self touching the Original and Government of this Petty State; of
which that Noble Gentleman gave me an Account, with that neatness which I am
not able to imitate.

Sir, said he, since it is your intention to sojourn here for some time, and
that you have laid your design to visit our Chief City. I will pass by several
things, which you will be able to observe of your self, contenting my self to
dispose your Mind to the understanding of what you shall see, by an exact
Relation of our Establishment and Policy.

After the Death of Alexander, his Courtiers shared his Empire among
themselves, and Governed it after a manner so far from the Intentions of that
Prince, who always had a most particular esteem for Philosophers, that they not
able to endure the Tyranny of his Ministers, after a Consultation becoming
their Wisdom, forsook Athens, carrying their Families along with them, to
settle themselves in some part of the World, which they could find more
Comodious for them, and there to live under Laws, of which themselves were the
first Founders, and which we observe to this day. The rest of the Wise Men of
Greece being informed of this design were desirous to be of the Company, and
all together carry along with them what they had of most precious Value, more
especially the Books which you will see in the great Library at Heliopolis.
Thus having without danger crossed the Seas that separate us from our Ancient
Country, so soon as they got a shore and saw the Land inhabited, they deemed it
a horrible attempt to expel the Inhabitants, only they desired free passage,
which was granted them, and so they went forward, being resolved to make War
upon none, unless thereto provoked; nor to settle in any place to the prejudice
of the Ancient Possessors, though they might have done it, as being
sufficiently numerous, and well provided with Arms. After they had wandered two
Years and two Months, at length they came to this Sunny Region, which when they
found abandoned, here they stopped, and satisfied themselves with the Fruits
which they found growing here and there among the Plants, that Nature
voluntarily produced, the same upon which we live at this day; though perhaps
somewhat bettter, through the Industry of our Progenitors, who grubb'd up the
Lands, and in process of time brought them to that Perfection, wherein we still
preserve them. They shared the pains and labor of Tillage one among another,
every one according to his best Skill, making use of the Instruments and
knowledge which they had brought along with them; some for planting Vinyards,
others for sowing, others for forging the Smiths work, and others for building
and Architecture. When they either cut or grubb'd up the Wood, they did not so
destroy it, but that they reserved at convenient distances, enough for Firing,
or for other uses; having divided the Country, which in Diameter is Four
hundred and fourscore Furlongs, which is Fifty nine English Miles, into as
many Cantons and Country Seats, as it contains at this day. Afterward they
built a City in the very Navel of their Teritory, for the seat or residence of
the Soul of this Mysterious Body, from the middle equally to influence all the
Parts of its Circumference. This City they called Heliopolis in Honor of the
Sun, which we believe to be the Center of the World, and the Heart from which
those Spirits flow that enliven it. After that, they took into Consideration
all the Forms of Government of which they had any knowledge, either by their
own experience or by reading, and observing the defects of each, they thought
it more to the purpose to cull out of every one what they deemed to be most
profitable, taking the liberty to add or deminish, as they thought it most
suitable for the Common Good, as aiming to Erect this their Body of Government
upon the Pattern and Foundation of a Family well order. To this purpose they
agreed upon a General Assembly, where all the Men above thirty years should
have a Right to vote: So that of twelve thousand Souls, which made up the whole
Body, three thousand were privileged to be at the Assembly, partly
Philosophers, partly of other Professions who had run the same Risco, either
for Affection or Interest. Out of these three they made choice of a thousand,
to whom they submitted the Determination of all their Concerns, having so great
a Veneration for them, that they believed them Infallible. But afterward
considering that the number was too great, they chose rather to lose their
share which they had in the Sovereign Government of a growing Republic, than
to expose it to Confusion, which usually happens, when a number too vast is
therein concerned. Thereupon they reduced their number to three hundred, to
whom they surrendered the whole Authority which had been surrendered to them by
the General Assembly. Which three hundred being convinced of the necessity of a
President or Chief, made choice of Misargyre, whom they invested with an
Authority to make Laws, and to call together the Council for their Approbation.
This Philosopher, not so much reverenced for his Age, as for the integrity of
his manners, which was known to all the People, found little or no difficulty
to establish what he thought most convenient; nor did he propose any thing but
what was highly to be applauded. And therefore having summoned a Council about
eight days after, he thus delivered himself.

Gentlemen, having retired both my self and my own Thoughts, that I might
discharge the Trust to me committed, instead of pursuing the usual Stratagem of
Legislators, who were wont to feign Familiarity with the Gods, thereby to
oblige the People to a veneration of their Laws, I have seriously examined the
various Thoughts that turmoil'd my mind, to make a choice of Constitutions, and
thereupon have reduced them all to one single Law, the only Law that ever I
heard of in all my life, and which I believe to be understood by all that are
endued with a clear Understanding; and this is the Law of Nature, imprinted in
our Hearts, confessed and acknowledged by all those who have not a Reason
perverted and disordered by their Passions; and therefore to come to the Mark
at which every good Legislator chiefly ought to aim, that is to say, the
maintaining of Peace among this People, who have willingly submitted themselves
under our Conduct, I think it sufficient incessantly to admonish them to follow
the Luster of that Flambeau which enlightens them to obey Reason, and above all
the lovely Precept which that divine Mistress infuses into the Breast of all
Men. The Nature of man is his Reason. Does not she alone teach every particular
man not to do to another what he would not have done to himself? Now this
Command alone being punctually observed, is not this alone sufficient to
preserve peace among men? And therefore let it be sufficient for us to ordain,
That the most prudent among us be obliged to undeceive all those, in whom false
Mistakes and Prejudices have stifled the Sentiments which Nature inspires into
us, for by this means we shall avoid multitude of Laws, and the Trash and
Trumpery of Process that attends them. Now there is no need of publishing this
Law of our Reason, it is already within us: But in regard the Employments of
Life, or our Passions veiling and clouding our Understandings, hinder several
from taking notice of it, my Opinion is to publish a Decree, That every Master
of a Family have fairly written in large Characters, and in the most
conspicuous part of his House these two words, (...), Follow Nature, to the end
that being always thus in view, it may be never out of their Memory. Let us
also make another Decree, That our Children be well educated in pursuance of
this Law. Let them be taught betimes, in the first place, that by it all Civil
and Criminal Processes ought to be determined, according to the Sentence of
those wise Men, with whom the Office and Dignity of the Magistracy is
entrusted. Then having divided all the People into four distinct Classes, of
Children to the Age of seven years; of Youths, till eighteen; of young Men,
till thirty; and of Men in their perfection, from thirty to the end of their
lives, he ordained that the first should remain purely under the tuition of
their Parents, who besides their instructing them in good Manners, should also
teach them to read: That from thence they should be sent to the several
Schools, there to be instructed by Masters chosen by the Council, in the
liberal Arts, in Military Discipline, and in Moral and Natural Philosophy: That
such as should be deemed incapable of learning the Sciences, should be put to
Trades and Manufactures most suitable to their Genius's; for certain it is,
that Nature, besides an inclination to Arts, furnishes us also with Faculties
necessary to attain those Arts. That being arrived to the Age of the third
Classis, they should be sent to the Country-Houses, where after they had served
twelve years under the Directions of a Governor deputed by the Council, they
should return to the City to be married, and then to spend the rest of their
days in Peace and Tranquillity. That the young Virgins also should be brought up
in Schools apart, and instructed in Arts most suitable to their Sex, then sent
into the Country for the Country husbanding, under the care of a Mistress who
should be answerable for their Education to the Council; with this difference
only, that they should serve no longer than only twenty five years of age, and
then to be sent home to their Parents to be married at their discretion,
preferring before all, the Persons to whom they shall have engaged their
Affections in the Country, whose Dispositions they have more reason to know
than those of others whom they never saw in their lives.

Then considering that differences among Citizens generally proceed from
disputes about Property, it was ordained, That every thing should be in Common;
and that there should be Magazines in several Quarters of the City; whence
there should be a distribution made of all things necessary for Food and
Raiment. They also enacted several other Laws and Constitutions, of which you
will sufficiently be informed if you make any stay among us.

He also proposed to continue this number of three hundred, the members of
which should be called Wise Men: That thirty of the most ancient of this number
received, should be of the standing Council, to the Assistance of which the
rest should be called upon extraordinary Occasions, when the thirty should
think it expedient; and that these thirty should have for their President the
most ancient among them, who should be also the chief Person in the State; and
that when one Place fell vacant, it should be filled up with the most ancient
of the hundred and seventy, and his place should be supplied by one chosen by
the Thirty.

All this was approved by the three hundred; and to the end these Constitutions
might remain inviolable to perpetuity, as the fundamental Law of the Kingdom,
they summoned together once more the General Assembly, who having heard these
Constitutions read, subscribed them without the least Hesitation, promising to
observe and defend them with their lives; and unanimously pronouncing an
Anathema upon all such as hereafter prove refractary and disobedient; that is
to say, the Curse of Banishment, which is indeed the only Punishment that we
inflict for the highest Crimes, and which we fear more than Death. So that of
three of our Citizens that have been condemned in all since the first
settlement of our Commonwealth, to this present time, there was not one but
would have rather chosen to have been his own Executioner, than to have been
expelled his Country by perpetual Banishment. Misangyres also presently gave
testimony of the sincerity of his Soul by his submission to those Ordinances
which he had made; for that in regard he was not the most ancient of the
Society, he surrendered his Presidentship to his Senior: but it was answered
him, That as to that particular, the Law was not to take place till after his
Death, and so obliged him to keep his Station. From that time forward the
Thirty have been Sovereign Rulers in all affairs both private and public. The
rest are entrusted with the Superintendency over the Tribes, and Inspection
into the Schools, the Manufactures and Magazines. They are also the first
Judges of all differences that arise within the several Cantons where they
dwell, from whom because they are looked upon as they are, to be Persons of
great Equity and Integrity, you shall very rarely hear of any Appeals to the
Thirty from their Determinations.

This Discourse gave me so great an Idea of the City, that I most earnestly
desired him to vouchsafe me an occasion of seeing it with the first
opportunity. Thereupon, to morrow, said he, I shall send away the Carts
according to order, by which means you will have the opportunity of going along
with my Deputy, to whom I will give order to be your Guide, and to present you
to the Wiseman of this Precinct, who will take care of your person. These
Wagons which are built much after the manner of Holland, are drawn by Bulls
that bear the mark of the Country House that sends them, and of the Tribe to
which they belong; and after they have delivered their Provisions into the
Magazines, they carry back what is contained in the Governor or Archon's Note,
for the Service of the Farm, together with such Parents as have a desire to see
their Children, as also sick Persons, to whom change of Air is prescribed for
their recovery.

Having therefore taken leave of the Archon, whom I presented with a Case of
English Knives with Oriental Agate Handles embellished with Gold; I took the
first Wagon, and placed my self next to the Deputy, who drove the Wagon in a
Seat covered over, and large enough to hold three Persons with ease. The way,
which is about five and twenty miles, or two hundred Furlongs, according to
their measure, to me seemed very short, as well through the learned Discourse
of the Waggoner, as for the Diversity of Objects which presented themselves to
me in this enchanted Country. We baited at all the Country-houses upon the
Road, and were treated with Dancing and Music. There is not one navigable
River in all the Country, but a great number of small Streams and Brooks, of
which some have Water enough to turn their Corn-mills and Paper-mills. They
have no high Mountains, but only some few Hillocks, fertile in Wine and Oil,
which set forth the Beauty of the Plains, like precious Stones enchas'd in
Goldsmiths Work. The Soil yields fifteen for one, and the goodness of the
Pasturage discovers it self by the excellent taste of their meat.

The Philosopher caressed me with more than ordinary Civility, and carried me
to the Foresteria, or Foreigner's Lodge, which is a House built at one of the
ends of the Town adjoining to the Manufacturies and Schools, where strangers
are entertained, and their Expenses honorably defrayed. The first two days,
besides the days of arrival and departure, they feast very splendidly; but if
the Stranger stays any longer, he is treated as a Citizen: Though to say the
truth, they are not much troubled with Strangers, for very few travel thither,
for that the Europeans, who are the greatest Travelers in the World, have no
knowledge of the place; either imagining that there is nothing so beautiful in
Tartary, or that the difficulties of traveling thither are unsurmountable.
However, there was in the City when I was there, a Muscovite of Astracan, two
Tartars and one Persian, whom mere chance had brought thither as well as my
self.

The Reports of my Arrival being spread among the Philosophers, I never wanted
Company, which the rarity of the Accident brought to visit me. They told me
that they had not seen in their City before sixty years together any of the
third Part of the Continent which we inhabit, and which they only know by means
of the ancient Geography, but one; which Person was a Frenchman who died three
Months after his Arrival, with a Surfeit of Champignons and new Wine, which he
drank to excess, it being then Vintage-time. Upon that I told them, that I was
likewise a Frenchman, which put them into a Laughter, because they said my
Language spoke the contrary; for that as they said, they had in their Library a
Book that they found in stripping a deceased Pilgrim, wherein they saw nothing
that resembl'd my speech. It Is true, Gentlemen, said I, that in France they
speak otherwise than I do, for I understand the Greek which I learned by my own
endeavors, out of a natural inclination which I had for a Language that was
formerly spoken by the most excellent People in the World.

But of all that came to visit me at my first coming, Persons of Wit and and
Learning, Eugenes was the Person toward whom my Affection most inclined, as
being one whose humor I found to be most agreeable with mine. Thereupon I
entered into a strict League of Friendship with him, so that whether at our
Recreations or our Studies we never forsook each other. Which he might the more
easily do, in regard that being, by reason of his Youth, excluded from the
management of public Affairs, he was the more at leisure. So that he was my
constant Guide, wherever my Curiosity led me.

In the first place he carried me to a Pillar built much like the Monument in
London, but rising higher, from whence I could take a full view of the City. It
is seated in a Plain, watered within and without with several Rivulets of
Running Water. The Houses are Low-built, all but the public Buildings; which
because they take up a larger extent of Ground than the private Houses,
generally over look them. But none either public or private are above two
Stories high. The Figure of it is round, and it is about three good Miles in
Diameter, without Walls, defended only by a single Moat, which is fed by the
Rivers that water it both within and without. From this high Pillar I had also
a Prospect of all the pleasant Country round about in its most beautiful Trim;
as also of the Country Houses scattered up and down at equal distances, like a
Fleet of Ships upon the Ocean in a Calm, or like so many Stars in the Firmament
in a serene Season. About Two hundred Miles from hence, they that have a very
quick sight may discern a Chain of Mountains, which by reason of the vastness
of the distance, seem to be embodied with the Clouds themselves.

And thus having considered the City in general, we descended to view it in
particular. It is divided into three Quarters or Wards, of which the first in
the heart of the City, derives its name from the Sun, the second from the
Council, and the third from the Schools. The Streets are wide, clean and
straight, like those of Amsterdam, but without Trees; and instead of Filthy
Kennels it is stored with Rivers that carry away the nastiness of the Street,
and all uncleanness from the City. As well the Piazza's as the Streets are
adorned with Portico's like Boligna, as neat and elegant as the Cloister of the
Chartrena at Pavia. So that you may walk about your Business at all Seasons
free from the annoyance of heat or rain. The Roof of these Portico's is
supported by Pillars without, and Pilasters within (I mean adjoining to the
Wall it self of the Houses) of the Dorick Order, in the Council Ward; of the
Ionick Order in the Schools Ward; and of the Corinthian in the Ward of the Sun.
The Doors and Windows observe the same Symmetry. The tops of their Houses are
covered with Lead, in a Figure of a Duomo, ending with a Cuppola of Copper all
gilt over. The Gutters also being gilded are laid upon a Balister of hard
Stone, between the Windows of which they discharge the Rain Water into the
Rivulets underneath. Every House has a Garden belonging to it on the back side,
with a Fountain, causing a delicate Prospect at the Entrance. And both the
Streets and Portico's are so ordered, that the back sides of the Houses face
each other the Gardens lying between, only parted by a Rail, from on both sides
there is a continual fall of clear Water from the Mouth of some Antic Figure
or other.

In the middle of the Piazza of the Suns Ward, which is Six hundred Paces in
Diameter, there stands a Structure like the Pantheon at Rome, with this
addition that it is surrounded with a Portico, supported with Columns of
Porphyry, the Chapter and Bases of which are gilt. There are four entrances
into it at four opposite Doors fronting the four Cardinal Points; and the
coming to it is through as many Gutters leading to the Circumference of the
Grand Portico of the Piazza. The Roof opens in the middle, as well to give
light to that Pompous Enclosure, as to give vent to the Perfumes that are burnt
therein. In the Body of the Wall under that part where the Roof begins to rise,
are Three hundred and sixty round holes, answering to the Three hundred and
sixty degrees of the Ecliptic, to mark out the Point of the Zodiac which the
Sun touches every day above the Earth, which according to their Opinion moves
and not the Sun, whom they will have to be fixed to the Center of the World.
This vast Cupola is reared up into the Air with a double row of Alabaster
Pillars, of the Order of the Caryatides; the workmanship most delicate, the
Drapery of Gold, and the Base of the same, upon a Pedestal of Jasper. The Frize
enriched with Releifs of Gold, having its Corniche also of Alabaster, is
surmounted with a Balister of the same Metal. The Counter Pilasters of the
Corridore are proportionable to the beauty of the Columns, their hollow spaces
being filled up with Serpentine, as is the whole Concavity of the Duomo with
Lapis Lazuli, the most beautiful that ever I saw in the most curious Cabinets
in Italy. From the Center of the Pavement which is of Alabaster as white as
Snow, rise three round Steps of Steel, adorned with Arabic Figures of Report,
also of Gold, which frame the Base of a Tripos all of massy Gold, enchas'd with
precious Stones, of which the upper most Figure, like an Eagles Head, bears a
little Perfumer of Gold likewise, to which Rubies and Diamonds contribute such
a Luster, as dazles the Eyes of the Beholder. The uppermost of the Steps
publishes also the Magnificence of the Person, that presented so rich a Jewel
to the Republic, by this Inscription in Letters of Gold, (...). The Gift of
Chosores King of the Persians. The Circle of Gold that surrounds the Overture
of the Duomo, spreads his Beams of the same Metal upon the lead that covers it
without.

Astonished at so much Riches, I could hardly believe my own Eyes. But my Guide
gave me to understand that the Quarries that afforded the Marble which adorned
this sumptuous Temple, were not far distant. And then considering with my self,
that that same Luxury which ruins larger and more Potent States than this, was
banished hence, I began to think, that in so many Ages they might have probably
heaped together so much Gold as I saw.

From thence I went to the Piazza of the Schools, where stands a Fountain
adorned with a larger Aigret than both those together in the Vatican: And the
fall of the Water like Dew, is so artfully contrived, that the Beams of the Sun
continually form in the drisling Rain the Daughter of Thaumantes.

The Piazza of the Council Ward was adorned with a more Magnificent Fountain
representing the Celestial Sphere, supported by a Column of Granate Stone; so
conformable to the Systeme of Copernicus, that I began to think that some of
his Followers had communicated his design to these Philosophers; but they told
me that the same Doctrine had taken Root in their Schools above a thousand
years before; and that as for Copernicus they had never so much as heard of his
Name. The Globe of the Sun, which makes the Center from all the Points of its
Convexity, casts an infinite number of watery Beams, with which it besprinkles
the Earth; the Moon, withal the rest of the Planets, and all the Parts of the
Spherical Concavity, whence the same Beams descend like Rain into a Receptacle
fashioned like a Roman S or Oget in Architecture, made of a Stone so hard that
they were twelve years before they could hollow and polish it.

In this Piazza live the Thirty, who assemble every Morning in the hall of the
Grand Palace, either to do Justice to particular Persons, or to consult about
the public Affairs. If the President be indisposed, the most Ancient next to
him presides; and they Summon the Senior of the Two hundred and seventy to
supply the number of the Thirty.

There are neither Proctors nor Notaries, nor Advocates to be seen in this
Place, every one Pleads for himself. But if they find the Person to be
incapable to Plead for himself, he has liberty to bring a Philosopher, who is
his Friend, who does him that kindness gratis. I often frequented their Courts
through pleasure, which I took in hearing the Polite Orations which are there
spoken. For the stream of discourse is not interrupted with the irksom Citation
of Law Cases, with which our Advocates stuff their Pleadings: They having no
other Law to study but that of Nature, instead of the Volums of Codes and
Digests, they read themselves, and draw from their proper Fund the Arguments by
which they maintain the Right of their Cause, yet not without the flourishes
and beauties of true Reasoning neither. Among the rest I was present at the
Oration of a young Philosopher upon a Fact, which merits the Relation by reason
of the Extravagancy of the Case.

Philaretes (for that was the young Philosophers Name) had made his own Caravan
in the same Country House with Urania, whose rare Beauty, accompanied with her
sweet and obliging humor had rendered him her absolute Adorer. But he was not
her only Admirer, for he had a Rival whose Name was Philip; and the strife was
between these two who should gain this Incomparable fair one by the Assiduity
of their Services, or who should give her the most undeniable Marks of his
Passion. One day Philaretes being in the Fields, a Fire took hold of a Barn
through which there was a necessity to pass to the Chamber where Urania was
crying out for help. Presently Philip ran to her assistance, darting through
the Flames, which a Fire more scorching, though invisible, would not suffer him
to be sensible of. So soon as he was got to his Beloved, he threw off the rest
of his Clothes which he had saved from the Flames by his swiftness, and of them
makes a long Twist, which he girt about her waste, and so letting her down
through the Window threw himself after her. After that he looked upon her as the
purchase of his Merit; nor did she her self scruple to declare her self in
favor of him who had so generously exposed himself to save her Life.
Philaretes however ceased not to continue his Courtship, extenuating the
Gallantry of his, and still speaking slightly of the danger to which he had
exposed himself for her sake.

Some time after Philip put two young Colts into his Chariot on purpose to try
them before Urania; to whom a Companion of hers being gained before hand by her
Lover, made a proposal to get up into his Chariot and take the Air for a Mile
or two, engaging her self that care should be taken of the Sheep till their
return. But they had not rid above four Furlongs, before the Colts, being
frighted at the shade of an Oak, fell a running with such a fury, that all the
Skill of their Driver could not stop them, so that Philip was constrained to
leap out of his seat to take hold of the Reins, but he was too feeble to be
their Master: insomuch that now obedient to nothing but the Impetuosity of
their fury, they had already whirled the miserable Urania within ten Paces of a
dangerous Precipice, which Philaretes perceiving, scotch'd the Wheel of the
Wagon so luckily, that he had time to get before, and with his own Body to
prevent the furious Animals from running any farther. By that means he
delivered his Mistress from the danger, but it cost him the loss of his right
Leg, which was so broke and mash'd, that there was no cure for it, but by the
Amputation of the Member. That unfortunate Maim, which still pleaded in behalf
of Philaretes, obliged her to give him the precedence in merit, yet she knew
not how to resolve to withdraw her heart from Philip, to bestow it upon a
Mutilated Lover. At length after the Services performed, they returned all
three to the City, where Urania being pressed by her Parents, declared in
favor of Philip. Whereupon Philaretes understanding her resolution, took upon
him another Resolution, that is to dye. Now though by the Law of Nature, which
only takes place in this small Territory, a Man might lay violent hands upon
himself without a Crime, however who does it without consent of the Council, is
looked upon as an uncivil Companion that would take a Journey without taking
leave of his Friends; and therefore there is a Decree, that his Body shall be
carried forth of the Territories of the State, as a Fugitive adjudg'd unworthy
of burial. Thereupon the Dispairing Lover to avoid the scandal and Affront,
requested leave to make himself away in this manner.

My Lords, if there be no person within this venerable Assembly that has
experimented the Rigours to which I am reduced by the excess of my Love, it
will signify nothing for me to speak, since I have nothing to hope from the
Equity of my Judges. It behooves me to be a person that has loved with the same
Passion, which still I have for the fair Urania, notwithstanding her Refusal of
me, to be in a capacity to do reason to the Justice of my demand. But if there
be not any Person here, as probably it is so well experienced, the Torments
which I suffer being too violent to continue to that venerable Old Age that
adorns those Seats of Judicature, I hope that Reason will supply the defect of
an Experience which your Wisdom was too great at any time to undergo. The loss
of so principal a Member had been a pretense specious enough for me to have
demanded your Permission to die; and I had done it before now, had not my hopes
of possessing Urania moderated in some measure the bitter Woes of my
languishing life, after that only Blessing has failed me, that could create
within me a desire to save it. Now then since her Resolution has condemned me
to Miseries that never will end, and that by this condemnation I find my self a
burden to my self, troublesome to my Parents, ridiculous to the World, and
unprofitable to the State, I have bethought my self, that there is no other way
to shun this perpetual and cruel Torment, but by the only way that Nature puts
into our Hands. You grant it to a poor decrepit old Creature, with the same
Freedom as you permit the pulling down of a House when it is ready to fall. Nor
do you refuse the same leave to young Paralyticks, nor to any person that is
seized with an incurable Distemper. Seeing then my Disease is such that nothing
but death can cure, it is not reasonable that you should deny it me, seeing my
Condition is worse than that of the most miserable. Now if my misfortune will
not prevail to persuade you to do me justice, I beg your Permission as a Favor.

The Novelty of a Cause, for which there had not been a President in any Age
before, so strangely surpised the Judges, that they had never agreed in favor
of the Suppliant, but that Alcibiades assured them, That he had just such
another design in his Youth, from which nothing could have diverted him but the
change of a better Fortune, and that most certainly it was a great piece of
Cruelty to constrain a person to live whether he would or no, in torments
unknown to any but himself that endures them. So that his Opinion having
brought over those that dissented before, the President pronounced sentence in
this manner.

Philaretes, the Senate gives you leave to depart the World; you may do it when
you please, and after what manner you think fit.

But Urania being informed of the matter, came to the Senate to prevent him;
for her heart could no longer resist the sensible Attacques of a Passion so
tender. After Sentence pronounced, she met him coming out of the Senate House,
to whom Philaretes, preventing her, Behold, said he, my Goddess, the Victim
which my Love offers to your Divinity! How! said she, have they pronounced the
Sentence of my Death? For your Death will infallibly be mine. No, replied
Philaretes, I am going to die, that you may live and enjoy your fill of
Happiness and Content. At those words she seemed to be in a Trance; from whence
recovering her self, she accompanied her Martyr to his Lodging, and besought
him to surcease the Execution of the Decree for some days: Which he did, in
regard his Affection had rendered him a perfect Slave to her Will. All that time
she spent in persuading him to live, with an absolute Promise to marry him. But
it was impossible, out of an Apprehension that the Senate would take him for a
mere Deluder and a Braggadochio. Urania therefore seeing him unflexible,
resolved to follow his Example, no less tormented than her Lover; and the
better to bring her Design to pass, she requested him only to marry her before
he died; to which, not knowing the design that lay concealed in her Breast, he
readily consented. Thereupon they were married in due form, with the mutual
Consent of their Parents, who kept the Nuptial Feasts according to the Custom.
At the end of which, Philaretes withdrew himself privately from his
Father-in-law's House to go and kill himself in his own, without the knowledge
of his Wife. But he could not deceive her, for she was soon at his Heels, and
finding him ready to swallow a large Quantity of Opium, which his Mother had
brought him in a Gold Cup; Since, said she, I can by no means engage you to
live with me, necessity obliges me to end my days together with you. And so
saying, she desired her own Mother, who had followed her, to prepare her a Cup
of the same Beverage, which could not be refused her, since the Custom of the
Country permits that such Wives who will may follow their Husbands in death.
Thereupon the two Mothers paid that mornful Office to their Children with those
sad Sentiments which are natural to Women upon such Occasions. They drank both
together, and then embracing each other, after a thousand tender kisses, they
both fell into a sweet slumber, never more to wake. Their Bodies were both
burnt in the same Funeral Pile, and their Ashes being mixed together, were
thrown upon the same Bed of Earth, according to the Custom of their Funerals.
However to preserve the Memory of so rare an Action, they caused to be engraved
upon a Marble Monument against the Garden Wall two Rings one within another, in
the midst of a flaming fire, with this Motto (...), to intimate, That neither
Death it self could part them.

The Wards are subdivided into Tribes; the Council Ward into Twelve, the Suns
Ward into Thirteen, and the Schools Ward into five only, because the Colleges
and Manufactures take up the greatest part of it. The Council of Thirty also
deputes Three out of the Two hundred and seventy to govern every Tribe; of
which the one takes care of the Concerns within, the other without; that is to
say, of the Farms belonging to his Tribe, and the Third is superintendant over
the Magazines; for every Tribe has its particular Magazines, to which the
private People repair every day to fetch their necessary Provisions. There is
nothing of servitude among them, for they are all their own Servants, only when
they grow old they are waited upon by their Children, who upon their returns
from performing their Duties in the Farms, or other Places, retire to their
Parents whom they Honor and Reverence as long as they live.

The Schools are their Seminaries of Virtue, Sciences and Arts, as well
Military as Civil, where their Children are educated under excellent Masters,
who the first year try the Disposition and Genius of their Scholars, and if
they find any one incapable of learning, they inform the Superintendant, who
sends him to the Manufactures with leave to make choice of what Trade he
pleases, which he is taught by Masters made choice of by the Council of Thirty:
And under these Masters it is that they follow their several Callings, in
several Apartments of the Building, bestowing their pains upon all things
either necessary or seemly for the use of human Life, and their Labors are
afterward distributed into the Magazines for the common Service of the People.

The first things taught in these Schools are the Mathematics, of which they
learn all the Parts, even to Astronomy, wherein they excel: For as for
Astrology they reject it as a frivolous thing. And indeed I could wish that
such as waste their Time in that Study, or make it their business to consult
our Astrologers concerning their future Destinies, and all such who shall read
these Travels had the same scorn and contempt of Astrology which this wise
People, by me so fortunately discovered, have. Give me leave therefore to say
this by the by, for the Edification of my Reader, since so fair an Opportunity
presents it self, that I my self formerly studied this Art, and had made so
fair a Progress in the knowledge of Schemes and Horoscopes, that I began to be
in high Request; but more the success which my Master had who taught me at
Rome, who was Astrologer to Queen Christina. However the better to assure my
self of the solidity of this Art, I was resolved to surprise him: To this
purpose, one Morning I presented him the Figure of my Nativity, which I had
been calculating all night long, accompanied with his own Directions. Very true
it is, that he knew of himself that it was mine; but then the Opposition of
Saturn to my Ascendant in the third Degree, which is my third Year, he made a
doubt of it, not believing that I had escaped so fatal a direction. Thereupon
requesting him to tell me what it was, A Shipwreck, said he, wherein I should
absolutely perish. This answer, more convincing to me than that of Thrasibulus
to Tiberius in the Island of Rhodes, made me stand in Admiration. Afterward
searching by what means I might avoid the danger, he observed that Venus came
to my assistance, by correcting the Malignity of Saturn. This lucky Accident
having encouraged me to make a farther Progress in a Study, whereby I thought
to have raised my self above Humanity, I fell to it seriously, and spent six
Months in the examination of Ptolomy, till I came to that passage, where he
says, That they whose Horoscope or Ascendant the Leg of Capricorn governs,
should be troubled with Diseases in the Legs; which is one of the grand Maxims
held at this day by the Astrologers, as are all the rest of this great Master
in their Art. But then said I to my self it is not the immovable Point or space
of the Heavens which influences, but rather the Constellation which is there
placed, of which the Leg makes a part, and from whence that twelfth Part of the
Zodiac derived its name, in the time of Ptolomy, above seventeen Ages ago. Now
every Age the Stars of the Figure advancing a degree from the East to the West,
they ought to have recoiled as much. Nevertheless our Astrologers at present
call those Parts or Spaces by the same name, and ground their Predictions
thereupon, as if the Figure were still fixed in the same place. Besides
supposing that the Leg of Capricorn had not changed place, who does not discern
that this Maxim was grounded upon the Relation of one Limb to another purely
Imaginary, there being nothing of Reality in any of these Figures; so that the
Foundation of their Art appearing to me so vain, I took a disliking to the
Science it self. Many other Reasons also so cleanly convinced me of the falsity
of it, that at length I quite and clean abandoned it. Seeing that if the
Astrologer lit upon a past Accident for once, I attribute it, as the Learned
Persons of this Country of the Sun do, merely to Chance, which sometimes may
produce a Truth among thousands of Lies.

From the Mathematics they pass to Grammar learning, withal at the same time
to write and speak well; and among all the other Dialects the Attic there
prevails, in regard that they have not had any Commerce with Foreign Nations,
whence proceeds the Corruption of Languages; whereby it comes to pass, that
they have preserved the purity of their own, as have also some Villages of
Greece in Europe, where they speak the pure litteral Greek; for that living at
a distance from the Sea, and in a Country of difficult access, they enjoy the
same good Fortune. For which, besides the Testimony of Davity, I have also the
Authority of the Reverend and Learned Papa, Michael of Epirus, who but lately
assured me at Venice, that he had met with such in his Travels.

By this time their Judgments being rightly informed, they become more fit to
read Philosophy, which they learn in the last place. They have also their
bodily Exercises, being taught at the same time to handle their Arms both
Rapier and Back-sword, to shoot with their Bows, and to ride the managed Horse,
in a place appointed for that purpose, where also are admitted the Manufacture
Apprentices. They never teach Logic nor Rhetoric; alleging that those two
Sciences are as natural to a Man as to go, or to make use of his Hands; and
that no man can arrive to be an exquisite Logician, or a perfect Orator that
has not an excelling Genius that way. However they give their Scholars certain
general Precepts, very much agreeing with the Maxims of the Epicureans.

They also read and expound in their Schools Aristotle, Plato, Socrates,
Epicurus, Democritus, Thales, Diogenes, and all the ancient Philosophers, of
which we have only the Names; and whose writings they preserve; leaving to
their Scholars to choose what Opinion they think most probable. They also
permit them to read the Poets, though very much incensed against them, for
their Invention of Fables concerning Deities that never were. For by the
Converse which I had among them I found that their knowledge in Philosophy was
altogether bounded by Sense, which they take for the only Rule of their
Reasoning, the Extravagancies of which are to be moderated and corrected by
themselves, being persuaded that what cannot be apprehended by the Sense, is
not at all, nor can be the object of our Meditations. To which when I answered
that the contrary was taught in our Schools, that is to say that Reason
corrected the Sense, they looked upon it as ridiculous, as if a Blind man should
go about to correct his Guide.

They generally believe the Eternity of the first matter, not being able to
conceive how any thing should be made out of nothing; that the World with all
its varieties was produced by the sympathy and antipathy of the first Body's,
which as they had no beginning will have no ending. They make some Bodies
moveable of themselves; others by the impulse of those only in a void space.
They acknowledge no other Cause but one, which is the Material. For all which
Opinions of theirs I do not here produce their several Reasons, as designing at
present only a Historical Relation; which else would require a larger Volume by
it self, which perhaps I may hereafter put to public view.

If any one begin to broach new Opinions they cite him before the Council, who
examine them, and if they find them ill grounded, the Person is not commanded
to recant, but only to hold his Peace, under the Penalty of being put into the
number of the Scandalous; a List of whose names is affixed to the Door of the
Temple, there to remain to perpetuity: an affliction, which next to exile, they
stand most in fear of.

Their Library more spacious than the Vatican, is so much the more Curious, by
how much it is furnished with an infinite number of Authors, of which we know
not so much as the Names, and such as lived before Aristotle. Those they call
the ancient Authors; for the Modern they esteem to be those that wrote after
their settlement, which is above Two thousand years ago. They showed me also
Translations of Egyptian Books, which make the World to be much more ancient
than we believe it to be; our Chronology being no more than a Great Grand Child
of theirs.

As for Printing though they well know what it is, yet they make no use of it; so
that all their Books are in Munuscript, either in Parchment or Paper, in the
Greek Language, in regard they know no other; unless it be the Tartarian, which
by what means some of them come to understand I shall relate in due place.

They distinguish their Books according to the Quality of the Subjects. And if
any Author of their own writes any thing new, his Book is not admitted into
this Noble Society of Volums, till it has had the Approbation of the Council of
Thirty: Private Men may have it before, but few care for it till then; so great
a veneration they have for the Judgment of that most noble Assembly, all
composed of learned and chosen Men, the flower of Philosophers, as are also the
two hundred and seventy.

Among the Legislators, I saw the Pentateuch of Moses, translated by the care
of Alexander, and sent to his Master Aristotle, as some Lines under his own
hand, at the end of Deuteronomy, witness. I asked them their Sentiments
concerning that Law; to which they answered that they had a great esteem for
the Moral part, disliked his Sacrifices, condemned his Ceremonies, and for his
Historical part, some they deemed probable, the rest very improbable: One of
the Company added that he was a Philosopher, that he had too enigmatically
described the Generation of the World, and of the Creatures therein to a
blockish sort of People, incapable to apprehend it by methodical Reasoning:
That he believed with Moses, that man was produced out of the Earth, and that
without doubt he had borrowed that Opinion from the learning of the Egyptians,
among whom he confesses himself to have had his Education.

At length I came to the Book which was left by the French man of whom I have
already made mention. They kept it apart, not knowing where to range it,
because they did not understand it: I found it to be a New Testament. Whereupon
they earnestly requested me to translate it for them, if I thought it worth my
while. Upon which I pulled out a Greek Testament out of my Pocket, that had
been my Vade Mecum in all my Travels, and by way of prevention, instead of a
Translation, said I, here is the Original, which you may read at your leisure,
because I do here present it to your Library. At which they were overjoyed, and
gave me a thousand Thanks. After which they led me into the Apartment where all
their Curiosities were kept; and there I beheld a Collection of all that ever
the Bosom of Nature produced, or ever was invented by Art. Among the rest I saw
several Cases of Letters with all the furniture belonging to a Printing House;
several sorts of Fire arms, of which they praised the Invention, but condemned
the use as treacherous and cruel; Pyrobolick Mirrours, that cast forth Fire in
a moment; a flying Engine; Prospective Glasses, by which I could distinguish in
the Moon Hillocks, Valleys, Medows, Forests, and if not Animals, at least some
small moving Machines. They also showed me in the same place, Monsters, half
men, half beasts, of I know not what kind, preserved in Chrystals filled with
Spirit of Wine. Microscopes, showing all the Vital Parts of a Hand-worm, and of
all those little Insects flying in the Air, which the most piercing Eye could
hardly discern without the assistance of these Glasses: Curious Watches and
Clocks, of which they make no use, as believing them superfluous, in regard
that being so expert as they are in Astronomy, they can tell what hour it is
either by day or night; for that the Air is not there much subject to be
overcast. As for their Climate their own Astronomical Observations reckon it
two and forty Degrees, far from the Equinoctial Line; and their own Miridian is
the first in their own Maps.

Now though they inhabit a Country abounding in all things that may render Life
agreeable and commodious, yet they live after a most sparing and austere
manner. For they affect not the delicious tastes of Drink or costly Viands,
unless when they are sick, or make great Banquets, which they never do but only
upon certain Occasions, and that very rarely, as at Weddings, the Birth of
their Children, Receptions of Strangers or the like, without being thereto
constrained, however by any Laws or Decrees. They eat about some three hours
after they rise in a Morning; but their chief Meals are in the Evening about
three hours before they go to bed. Their Magazins furnish them with course
Food, Bread and Wine; but for Venison and Fish they eat none, but what they
hunt and catch themselves, or what their Children send them from their Country
Houses.

Their Habit is plain, made of Wool died of a Violet Color for the Men, and
white for the Women; which is the only distinction of their two Sexes. As to
the fashion, it is the same used all along by the Ancients, with a Stole upon
their Shoulders after the manner of the Venetians, to cover them in the Country
from the Sun, or when they are forced to go in the Rain. As to other things,
bareheaded and bare footed, only in a Leather Sandal lined within side with
Wool. They that have Jewels may wear them; and as for the three hundred they
are distinguished by their Scarlet habit, which none besides are allowed to
wear.

There are no professed Physicians among them, for they all understand Physic.
It Is very true that in difficult Cases they call a Philosopher, who comes upon
the same Conditions as their Pleaders without any Fee: Their usual Remedies
they take from Trees, Herbs and Roots growing in their own Grounds, which have
the same Qualities, with Cassia, Senna, and Scammony, and with which they
suddenly cure all Distempers that are curable. For in regard that Noble Science
is there practiced for no advantage of gain, the Philosopher who is sent for
never seeks to prolong the Cure; besides that making up their Prescriptions
themselves, they have nothing to fear on the Apothecaries part, whose Avarice
or qui pro quo often times does the Patient more injury than the Distemper it
self. There is not a Surgeon nor a Barber to be seen, for they never let blood,
as not being to be persuaded that they ought to wound a Patient to cure him; or
that the Blood which is the seat of the Soul, with which it has so strict an
Alliance, that it seems to be inseparable, ought to be spilt to make it better,
seeing that which remains in the Body is as bad as before the Blood letting;
but that it is better corrected by Catharticks, which separate from its Mass
the Humors which infect it, without taking away that which is good, and that
the quantity of it may be diminished at any time by Diet, Exercise, and
Sweating.

As to Wounds and Bruises, they proceed after the same method as in Fevers;
that is to say, they cure themselves with the assistance of a Philosopher if
need require.

The Women shave and trim their Husbands, of whom they are so jealous, that
they will not suffer any bodies hands to come near their Faces but their own.

The Philosophers have also specific Remedies for the Diseases of the Soul, the
continual use of which fortifies the Memory and purifies the Wit in such a
manner, that they will make a Dunce Ingenious. It is a Composition of which we
have the ingredients in this part of the World; and of which I have often made
use since my return into Europe, with good success as well to my self as to
others. You see there none that are troubled with the Gout, in regard they are
both sober, temperate, and active; besides that the Continence of the two Sexes
is so great, that there is no harbor there for that same Disease which the
Italians call the French.

If a sick Person be given over as past recovery, there is no need of a
Comforter, because they do not conceive there is any evil in death, which they
look upon as only a mere Cessation from Action and Thought, which may possibly
return one day, if the Particles from whence the same Action and Thought
derived their first beginning should happen to reunite. The Children burn the
Body of their Parents deceased in their own Gardens, and scatter their Ashes
upon the Earth; believing that the enlivening Atoms are charioted up in the
Flames to their first Original, which they believe to be the Sun; and by their
mixture of the Ashes with the Earth, they believe that in eating the Plants
which proceed from thence, that they enliven the more gross and terrestrial
Portion of their Parents. To speak the truth, I attribute the goodness of the
Air which they breath in those Parts, partly to this Custom, which renders it
so free from those Infections which the stinking Exhalations of the Bodies
interred in our Cities are the certain cause of among us.

In regard their Commerce is not great, it is not very possible should be Rich.
However they are not poor neither; for that the fertility of the Soil furnishes
them with all things necessary for the support and pleasure of Life, and to
spare. So that they send the superfluity of their Provisions and Manufactures
once a year to a Fair that is held between the Confines of this State, and the
Great Moguls Country, where they Barter their Commodities for Pearls, Diamonds,
and other Precious Stones, or else for Gold and Silver coined, for the benefit
of the Public Treasure, which surpasses in value those of St. Denis, Loretto
and St. Mark, put them altogether though they be the Richest that I have seen in
Europe. Nor do they prohibit private Persons from sending their Goods thither,
and Trading upon their own accounts. For after they are out of their times, and
have done that Service which is required from them for the Benefit of the
Country Farms, or otherwise, till they come to be Thirty years of Age, they
have then liberty to work at home, for the Ornament of themselves and their
Houses. Besides, that whatever they do for the Service of the Commonwealth is
sure to be publicly rewarded; and with this wealth, either purchased by their
Industry or their Virtue, they feast and give Portions to their Children when
they marry them.

Now although they lie surrounded by the Tartarians, yet are they not at War with
any body: For the Great Kam, who has always had a high esteem for them, by
reason of their Integrity, permits them to live in Peace and Tranquillity one
among another. In acknowledgment of which favor, they furnish him at all times
with a small Regiment of 300. Men, under Thirty years of Age, who go to serve
him voluntarily, and all the time that they stay there, is looked upon as if
they had spent it in the Service of the State. These 300 choose themselves
their own Colonel, who swears fidelity to the Great Kam; who at his first
arrival presents him with very fair Arms and Weapons, and gives him leave to
make choice of six Leiutenants, to Command every one under him Fifty Men a
piece. Nor do they ever return from his Service without a considerable Reward;
and they that signalize themselves by any extraordinary Achievement, are
rewarded moreover according to their Merit. Thus it is that they come to
understand the Tartarian Language, of which the People of this Country make use
in their Commerce by the assistance of one or two of these Interpreters, who
are deputed by the Council to attend the Fair. When they are ready to March to
the Great Kam, the Council gives them an Order to take Arms out of the Arsenal,
which is always furnished to Arm Sixty thousand Men upon occasion. Their
Offensive Arms are a Bow, a Scimitar, a Mace of Iron, a Javelin, and a Pike;
their Defensive only a Buckler and a Helmet.

All the while that I conversed with them I could not find that they had any
Notion of God after our manner; in regard that as I have said, their Philosophy
solely depends upon Sense. As for those Deities which either Poetry, Fear, or
Imagination has set up, they are too wise to acknowledge; so that I have nothing
to say concerning their Religion, except you call Religion that which they
believe and practice concerning the Sun.

For they unanimously hold that Planet to be the most Lovely, the most
Powerful, and the most Beneficent of all the Beings. They are persuaded that it
is the Soul of the World, and that the Beams of the Sun being incorporated into
the Creatures give motion to their Corporeal Mass, the external Figure of which
makes the Principal difference which we see between them. Though they do not deny
but that their different Internal Operations may proceed as well from the
variety of little Bodies, with which they are mixed, as from the Beams of the
Sun more or less purified. They assert the Sun to be a Globe of Fire exactly
rarified, and shining in the Center of the World, as being the heart which
animates all the Parts of it; and the Element or Principle of Souls to which
they all return upon their separation from the Body, as the Water returns to
the Sea, discharging it self from the Land. Every tenth day of the year they go
to the Temple to be there when the Sun Rises; and as soon as the Sun appears
through one of those holes which mark out the Degrees of the Eccliptick, the
(...) or Priestess, who is chosen for the excellency of her Beauty out of all
the Virgins in their Territory, ascends the uppermost Step that serves instead
of a Triposs, clad in a Vestment of Cloth of Gold, with open and hanging
Sleeves, whence, her Arms come forth covered with a fine Linen shift, which is
fastened together between her Elbows and her Shoulders with a Bracelet of
Diamonds; her head Crowned with a Garland of Flowers, a Necklace of large Peral
about her neck; two Emrauld Pendants Pear-fashion'd, hanging at her Ears, her
Hair dishevelled, crisp'd and curling without Art, and carelessly flowing down
her Breast and Back; her Mantle clasped under her Chin, with an Oriental
Girasol, weighing thirty Carats, and enchas'd in Diamonds, of which a great
number glittered upon her Fingers. To this Priestess thus accouter'd, a most
lovely Youth presents her with a little Casket of Gold curiously wrought, out
of which she takes a certain quantity of Perfumes, which she throws into the
Perfumer of which I have already spoken; after the performance of which
Ceremony, presently you hear a noise of Trumpets placed upon the Cornish, and
after that a Symphony of excellent Voices and Instruments chosen out of the
School, who sing the following Stanza's, the Hautboys and Violins intermixing
their harmony by turns. I (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Let us sing that Glorious Star
In splendid Luster past compare,
And his surpassing Power extol,
Glorious and Ineffable.
He the Worlds Soul does all command,
Filling the Air the Sea and Land,
And penetrating Depths profound,
Impregnates all that is under ground,
As by the first Decrees of Fate
To him we owe our Mortal State;
So dowe hope, this Life once done,
All to return to him the Sun.
The People below also repeat these Stanzas, keeping time to their Voices with
a confused but merry dance, while the Priestess is busily employed in supplying
the Censer with Incence; who after she has sufficiently embalmed all the People
with her Perfumes, ascending by the middle of the Roof, goes up to the Sun it
self to refresh him with a costly Repast; for they believe him to be nourished
with the Exhalations which ascend to him incessantly, as well from the Earth as
from the other Planets, by the Order of Circulation, which they acknowledge to
be in the great World as well as in the Microcosm. The rest of the day they
spend in Pastimes and divertizing themselves, either in their Houses, or in
their Delightful Vicinities, which consist in Medows, Groves or Fishponds,
which are formed by the Concourse of the adjoining Rivulets.

From the Principal Outlets of the City, you walk to the Confines of their
Country Houses, under the Shade of long Rows of Elms planted in a straight
Line, which affords the pleasure also of a fair Prospect, to those that
promenade through the Chief Streets, at the end of every one of which there
stands a Portal all of costly Architecture, which at night are only barred with
a single Drawbridge about the height of a Man, as being made rather to
terminate the sight than for any defenee. For the City has no more than one
single Moat of running Water, to prevent the entrance of Wild Beasts, (which
rarely happens) nevertheless they do adventure so far, by reason they are
continually hunted by the Youth of the Country that are put to manure the Land.
Besides that they breed up great Mastiff Dogs so strong and so courageous, that
they will encounter with success the most Savage of Wild Beasts, against which
they only exercise their fierceness, being no less tame in the Company of Men,
whose Guardians they seem to be, taking their Rounds day and night about the
Fields, with their Iron Collers stuck with sharp Nails. When the Hunters take a
Lion, or any such dangerous and mischeivous Creature, they nail him to a Tree
at the Avenues into the Territories, as formerly the Carthaginians did upon
their Walls. And indeed the small number of those Wild Beasts which is to be
found in a Country whither the numerous Herds and Flocks of Cattle are
sufficient Baits to entice them, shows them to be terrified by such Executions.
Their Tillage and rural Habitations take their beginning at about a Mile
distance from the City Moat, all the Delightful space between being allotted
for public Recreation.

Their year which begins just at the Winter Solstice, is divided into six and
thirty Decads of days, and so they count the first, second, etc. day of every
Decad; and the time which remains till the Point of Revolution, they call the
Surplusage; and pass it altogether as they do the tenth day of every Decad. By
which means they avoid the Fopperies and Trifles of Bissextiles and Epacts,
which the most cautious corrections of our Kalenders cannot free from mistakes.

They begin their Epochs from the Solstice next ensuing the Installation of
Misargyrus, and adjust their Chronology by his Successors, whose Portraitures
to the Life they preserve in their Treasury, to the number of One hundred and
fourscore, till the time of Philopoemen, their Chief President at the time when
I was there. And this is all the Chief recompense of their Supreme Presidents
for all their care and pains in the Government of the State; the Public Causes
two fair Medals of his Face to be cast in Gold, of which the one is laid up in
the Treasury, the other is bestowed upon the Person himself, who leaves it to
his Family at his death, as a Mark of Honor to encourage his Posterity to
follow his Steps. In a word, for a Conclusion of all that can be said touching
the Manners and Customs of these People, I must needs aver, that they are so
regular and just, that the Age of Gold may seem to continue still among them
They mutually assist each other in all their Affairs, and love one another to
that Degree, that you would take them all for Brethren.

Thus therefore having taken a view of all that was to be seen in this
admirable City, I spent the best part of my Time with Eugenes, either in the
Schools, or in the Library; where I was present at their Readings and Disputes.
For besides the lesser Apartments appointed for their youth, there is one large
Hall where the married People of both Sexes meet every Morning and Evening, to
hear the Discourses of Physic and Morality which the Philosophers there make
in their several Turns; and where they take all the Liberty which our Preachers
assume to reprehend Vice. Their Disputes contain nothing of the Pedantick,
there is not to be heard I deny your Major, or I prove my Minor. The Head of
the School propounds a Thesis, which a Scholar undertaking maintains with the
best Arguments he can produce, and is then opposed by another; after which
three Philosophers give their judgment who has done best.

As to their Ponunciation it agrees with that of our Critics; in which they
differ from our Europian Greeks; and I made it my Business also to turn over
the Books of several Ancient Philosophers, which we want, the suppression of
which, though falsely, is laid to the charge of Aristotle's Ambition. By the
reading of which I found the Modesty of those Great Men, who never asserted
their Opinions like Arrogant Dogmatists, but only as Doubts, or as Answers
which to them seemed probable, in satisfaction of the Questions which were to
them proposed. So that Anaxagoras's Fire, Thales's Water, Democritus's Attomes,
set forth by another whose name I have forgot, are only means to explain the
Generation of things which to them seemed probable, being there supported by
Chemical Experiences without asserting any thing Positive.

Among their Authors of Mythology I found the Greek New Testament which I had
presented them. Of which I demanded the Reason from the Library Keeper: who
answered me, That he had observed most excellent Precepts of Morality therein;
but by reason of a Celestial Genealogy, and some other particulars, that did
not seem rationably to be believed, he had ranked it among those Volumes, by
advice of his Council composed of Four other Philosophers, deputed as he was,
by the Thirty. Thereupon I took an occasion to unfold to them the Principles of
the Christian Religion, so universally believed by the Princes and Potentates
of Europe; however without making any progress among them, because I had to do
with People that acknowledged no other Authority but that of Sense and Reason,
which cannot apprehend the Mysteries of Faith. But when I came to tell them of
one Nature in three Persons, of two Natures in one Person, and one invisible
incorporeal Deity, who was All in All, and All in every Part; born in a Stable,
Crucified upon a Cross, and reproducing himself every day in a thousand Parts
of the World to be swallowed by his Adorers, they began to discourse among
themselves that I was frantic, and talked already of sending me among the mad
Folks, so that I was forced to change my Language.

If there be such a God, said one to me, as you describe, who would be Worshipped
by all the Earth according to the Religion which you propose, and that this
Faith is the only way to gain Heaven, and shun everlasting Torment, it had
become his Wisdom, his Goodness and his Omnipotency, to have caused it to have
been divulged abroad at first through all the Universe, after the clearest and
most intelligible manner imaginable, to prevent the ruin of so many Men who
have perished according to your Principles, for these sixteen Centuries past,
because they never heard of any such thing. Instead of exposing an Innocent Son
to the severity of Torment, he should have sent him into the World with an
Equipage answerable to his Birth, that he might have been heard with more
respect; with an Army to render him formidable; and with Lightning in his hand
to terrify those that would not obey his Law. Here I showed them the necessity
of Christ's Humility, unfolding to them the Mystery of our Redemption; and
giving them to understand that there was no other way for the Redeemer to
expiate our Crimes, and fully to satisfy the Justice of the Father. Where is
that Judge, replied my Antagonist, that would condemn an Innocent Son for the
sake of Criminals? especially it being in his sole and only Power to save by a
mere amnisty. Notwithstanding all this, after I had laid before them all that
the Sorbon, and the best Divines of the Church had taught me, of most profound
and most refined concerning these Matters, I was constrained to put an end to
my Dispute, in regard those Centlemen denying my Foundations, it was impossible
for me to make any breach in their Belief.

I remained a whole Month in this Sun-adoring Country, sometimes in the City,
sometimes in the Country, whither I kept some of the Citizens Company, who went
to make merry with their Children. And indeed I could willingly have ended my
days in this place, had not the Remembrance of my Friends and my Affairs in
Europe obliged me to return. Which I did, after I had taken leave of the
Senate, who ordered that I should be furnished with a Wagon to the Borders of
their Territories; and that the Archon of the last Country Farm should in my
behalf agree with a Tartar to conduct me to the Caspian Sea. I must confess I
made a Proposition to Eugenes and some others, to have taken a Journey into
Europe; but they very frankly told me, That there was not any thing which I had
related to them, concerning our Parts of the World that bred in them the least
Inclination to undergo so great a trouble. Upon that I presented my Friend with
an Emrald sorrounded with Diamonds; and he presented me with the Works of
Democritus, and Thales the Milesian, together with a certain Stone, which our
Lapidaries know not what to make of. After that taking leave of my Friend upon
the Frontiers, whether he had accompanied me, as well out of friendship, as by
the Orders of the Thirty, in hopes to see each other again, I betook my self to
the Conduct of my Tartar, who taking a nearer but more difficult way than what
I had traveled before, gave me opportunity of seeing several Countries, not
much unlike those Beautiful and Charming Glooms that adorn the Alps of
Switzerland, of which I intend to give a Description, if these my present
Travels find a favorable reception.

In six Weeks time I came to a Village by the Seaside, where to comfort me for
the loss of Eugenes, I had the happiness to meet with Monthresor, who after the
usual Embraces, and Tender Expressions, which such an unexpected meeting could
invent, gave me an account, how that after he had been carried away by the
impetuosity of the Current, he entered into a deep Water, salt and still; which
made him believe himself to be in the Sea, where he often lanch'd himself forth
according to the Art of swimming; that at first he found some resistance at the
top, which made him swim between the two Waters, darting himself forth withal
the strength he could, till at length he gained the Shore of the Sea that
washes this Coast. I asked him what he saw remarkable under that same Tartarian
Pausillipus. To which he answered that by the thick darkness of that dreadful
Cave, though it were at Noon day, he could make no Observation by his sight, but
that his Ears were terrified with a Horrid Whistling, of which he had no time
to examine the Reason, in regard his Thoughts were all employed how to save
himself. After that we made a Relation one to another of our past Adventures,
while we staid to embark in a Fisher-boat, like those of Marteguois, and so
swift that it brought us to Santa Maria in four days, from whence we held the
same Course backward as we had done forward.

Returning through Athens I visited my Host Epiphanes, who received me with a
great deal of joy, returning me a thousand thanks for the good Effects of my
Antipodagricon, finding himself absolutely freed from the Tormenting pains of
the Gout by the use of it. And I should have been much more glad to find my
self so Instrumental in the Recovery of a Person from whom I had received so
much kindness, had not my Joy been abated by the news which I received at the
same time of the death of Demetrius and Constantine.

From Athens I had a design to have taken a Journey to Parnassus, but
understanding I should see nothing but a Mountain, like to other Hills, with
out any Footsteps of Antiquity, I laid aside those thoughts. For I am not of
the humor of many Men that put themselves to a great deal of trouble, merely
that they may be able to say they have been at such or such a place when
mentioned in Company. If the Beauties of a Country do not draw me thither,
there must be at least some remainder of those that formerly inhabited those
Parts, whence I may in some measure understand the Fashions of Living, and
Customs of a People whom History has represented to the World with Applause;
nor is the knowledge of the Manners and Customs of the present Inhabitants,
able to make a Parallel between them and their ancestors unworthy a Man of Wit;
and therefore above all things I fly to a place where once Learning
flourished. If a Traveller does not propose to himself these Advantages, he
will find himself often deceived, in regard he will not see the fourth part of
what he expects, upon reading of Relations, no less flattering and deceitful
than Paintings, that generally represent Faces much fairer then they are;
unless it be that a Man is desirous to know of himself the Situation of Places,
which I have found to be very much mistaken in the best Maps.

From Athens we returned to Naples, whose delicious Climate constrained
Monthresor to stop there. For my own part I returned into France, where after I
had experimented all the Rigours of a Cruel Fortune, in the year 1676, I
embarked at Rochel in an English Vessel, which brought me to Plymouth the 28th.
of September, having a desire to terminate my Travels and my days in this
Kingdom. But the Enemy of my repose would suffer me to take no rest, having
found out new necessities for me to revisit as well France, as several other
parts of Europe, through Roads not common, where I have made several Remarks,
which I shall communicate to Public view, when I understand what kind of
entertainment this my first Volume has received: For nature not being wholly
shut up in one small Corner, it behooves a Philosopher to sound for Experience
in various Parts, which he cannot otherwise do than by Traveling; else the
Company of Learned Men and rare Wits, which are in Kingdoms and Countries like
so many Phoenixes, is not to be acquired, but by a strict survey of those
Kingdoms. And indeed by the means of these two assistances it was, that I found
what I sought for in the Study of Philosophy, which of all the Studies I have
labored in, even to the maintaining of General Theses, concerning all that
could be known, is that which I have taken most delight in all my Life time for
these thirty years together, that I have applied my self solely to it,
renouncing all the rest, excepting only Physic, which following like her
Daughter so close at the heels, no less deserved my Courtship. Besides that the
exact knowledge of the Body of Man, which she promises her followers, making me
hope that she would favor my designs of diving into the Secrets of Nature,
bred in me a strong Inclination from that time forward to apply my self
devoutly to that Science. And the Progress which I made both in the one and the
other seemed sufficient to my Friends to importune me to take the Degree of
Doctor in both Faculties. Wherein I proved successful with all the Honor that
an Honest Man could wish for, during a Winter that I sojourned at Padua, after
I had undergone the utmost rigours of a strict Examination both in Public and
Private. Nor was it less than I desired; though being informed of my Birth, they
would have treated me more Nobly, that is to say, they would have passed me
without Examination. However though I hold my self highly honored with these
two Degrees, yet I do not pretend to value my self upon that of Physic; as
being too mean and prostituted to the most ignorant in the Esculapian School,
who arrive to be no more than bare Mountebanks; besides that the Faculty is
extremely decry'd by the Dishonor done it by idle and silly Practitioners.
Neither do I practice it my self, as well to avoid the Reproaches to which a
Physician is exposed if he fail of success which often befalls him, as for that
my Constitution will not brook that nastiness and stench, wh^^^ (...) Physician
is forced to swallow for his Breakfast, when he comes to do his Duty; according
to the Verse, Stercus and Vrina medici sunt prandia prima. To what purpose,
then (will some object) are all those noble Secrets which you have acquired in
your Travels? What will become of your Pneumatopharmacon, that will create a
Memory and Understanding in those that want it? that excellent Remedy against
the Gravel, and that other which unfetters Gouty Feet, extirpating the Cause of
the Distemper? To which I answer; these are Medicines which I give to such as
think it worth their while to desire them, where I live at my House in Beaufort
Buildings in the Strand, in the Court that goes from the Fountain Tavern to the
Waterside.

FINIS.

