THE French KINGS DECLARATION OF WAR Against The SPANIARD.
By The KING.
THe Sincere desire the King has had to maintain the Truce concluded in the
Year 1684. put His Majesty upon winking at the Conduct of the Spanish Ministers
in the Gourts of all the Princes of Europe, where their only design has been to
excite them to take up Arms against France, and the share they had in the
Negotiation of the League of Ausbourge was not unknown to His Majesty. His
Majesty has likewise been informed of the interest the Governors of the Spanish
Netherlands had in the Prince of Orange's Enterprise against England; but not
believing that his behavior in that respect had been prescribed him by the
King his Master, who by so many reasons, of Religion, Consanguinity, and the
general safety of all Kings, found himself obliged to oppose such an
Usurpation. His Majesty hoped to be able to bring the most Catholic King to
join with Him in the reestablishment of the Lawful King of England, and for the
preservation of the Catholic Religion against the Union of the Protestant
Princes, or at least to keep an exact neutrality in ease the posture of the
Spanish Affairs did not permit the Catholic King to undertake the like
Engagements. (His Majesty has to this purpose ordered several different
proposals to be made to him since November last, the which were well received
whilst the success of the Prince of Orange's Enterprise appeared doubtful. But
these favorable dispositions vanished, as soon as they knew at Madrid of the
King of England's departure out of His Kingdom, and since, they discoursed of
nothing but of War against France. His Majesty at the same time understood that
the Spanish Ambassador in England saw the Prince of Orange daily, and pressed
that the English should declare War against France; that the Governor of the
Spanish Netherlands raised Troops with all diligence, that he promised the
States General to join them to theirs in the beginning of the Campaign, and
solicited them as well as the Prince of Orange to march Troops into Flanders,
to put them in a condition of making War upon France. All these advices having
made the King judge, that in prudence he ought to know what to depend upon, He
gave order to the Count de Rebenack His Ambassador at Madrid, to demand a
positive Answer from the Most Catholic King's Ministers, offering Him the
continuance of Truce, Provided he would oblige himself to an exact Neutralitie
not to Succor directly or indirectly the Enemies of His Majesty. But evil
Councels having prevailed, His Majesty was informed that the Resolution was
taken to favor, the Usurper of England, and to join with the Protestant
Princes. His Majesty was also informed much about the same time that the Prince
of Orange his Agents had received considerable Sums at Cadis and Madrid; That
the Holland and Brandenbourgh Troops, were Entered the Principle places of the
Spaniards in Flanders, and that the Catholic King his Governor of the Low
Countries caused the States General to be solicited to advance their Army to
the Walls of Bruxels, all these advices joined to the answer that compte de
Rabenack had received at Madrid, not leaving his Majesty any Room to doubt but
that the intention of the Catholic King was to join his Enemies: His Majesty
believed he ought to loose no time to prevent his evil designs and resolved to
Declare War against him, as well by Sea as Land, as his Majesty does by these
presents. And to this effect, His Majesty does order and enjoin all his
Subjects, Vassels and Servants to Attaque and fall upon the Spaniards, and most
expressly forbids them to hold hereafter any Communication, Commerce, or
Intelligence with them upon pain of death, and to this end his Majesty from
henceforth has revoked and does revoke all Permits, Pasports, Safeguards and
safe Conducts which might have been granted by his Majesty or by his
Lieutenants Generals, and other his officers contrary to these presents, and
has Declared, and does Declare them Null and of none effect and Force, and
forbideth any whatsoever to have any regard for them. And his Majesty does
Command and ordain the Admiral, the Marishals of France, Governors and
Lieutenants Generals, for his Majesty in his Provinces and Army's, Marishals of
Gamps, Colonels, Masters of Camps, Captains, Chiefs and Leaders of his Troops,
as well Horse as Foot, French and Strangers, and all other his officers, whom
it may concern; that the contents of these presents they cause to be executed
within the extent of each of them, his power and jurisdiction; for such is his
Majesty's will. And his Majesty wills and expects that these presents
should be published, and affixed in all his Towns, as well Maritine as others,
and in all his Harbors, Ports, and all other places of his Kingdom, and
Countries under his obedience, where need shall be, so that no body may pretend
Ignorance.

Given at Versaill's the 15th of April 1689.

