French Kings Manifesto, PROPOSALS of PEACE with the Emperor and Allies.
Propounded on the Behalf of France.
Translated from the Dutch Original, Published at the HAGUE, by the Authority
of the States of Holland and West-Friesland.

Licensed according to Order.

SIR,
I Have at last procured what you have so long desired of me, viz. An exact
Copy of the French King's Manifesto, which he caused to be dispersed all along
the Rhine, by the Officers of the Dauphin 's Army, to invite the Emperor and
Empire to a speedy Peace; it is published here by the Sieur...... in this
Monthly Remarks, with the States License.

Several Princes of the Empire earnestly desiring, that the Most Christian King
would unbosom himself, upon what reasonable and just Conditions, he would be
willing to agree to a Peace, and speedily stop the shedding of Christian Blood;
His Majesty finds himself obliged no longer to defer the making known, as well
by the Interest of the King of Sweden, who first offered his Mediation, as by
other Princes most desirous of the Public Peace, the Terms upon which it may
be Reestablished, with all the securities that can be reciprocally desired, to
render it everlasting, and to prevent its being disturbed, by any Persons
whatsoever.

To which purpose the King desires, that the Treatise of Westphalia and
Nimeghen may remain in full Force and Vigor. That that which was agreed on at
Ratisbonne, in Aug. 1684. under the name of a Truce for 20 years, may be
changed into a Treaty of Peace Defensive, with such Conditions as shall be
hereafter explained, and which ought to serve for a convincing Proof to the
whole Empire, that His Majesty does not in the least think of making any new
Conquests, but only to establish anew, and confirm, as well for himself as his
Successors, a good and entire Correspondence, as well with the Empire, as with
the Princes and States of Germany; having this in his Thoughts, that in lieu
for the City and Citadel of Strasburgh, which the Most Christian King is in
Possession of, and which he expects to keep unchangeable to himself and his
Successors; first that Trarback and Montroyal shall be raised, and restored to
the Prince, to whom they appertain, and that neither of those Two Posts be
Fortified again. 2dly. That all the Fortifications of Fort Lewis and Hunninghen
that are beyond the Rhine, shall be likewise destroyed. 3dly. The most
Christian King offers to surrender Phillipsburgh, Fortified with the Fortress,
and Friburgh in the same Circumstances they are in at present. His Majesty is
persuaded, that all the States and Princes of the Empire who (...) Peace, will
be persuaded that ^uch advantageous offers will not only be a sufficient to
recompense for the City and Fortress of Strasburgh; but also to serve as a
Pledge and Assurance of His Majesty's sincerity to hold an entire Correspondence
with them, and to remove for the time to come, all occasions of Disturbance and
Distrust; they cannot truly desire a greater demonstration of it, than the
quitting a Place of such Consequence, as Montroyal, which His Majesty has
caused to be made almost Impregnable, by the Fortifications, which he has
raised about it, thereby sacrificing to the good of Peace, those immenc'd
Expenses he has been at to deliver all the Neighboring States from the just
Disturbance which that Fortress might give them. That of Philipsburgh, which
His Majesty possessed near Twenty Years by Virtue of the Munster Treaty, is of
no less importance; and as he has added strong Fortifications to it since he
took it last, at present, that it is returned to him by Right of War, he might
reap great Advant^^es, if he were not convinced that the Peace which he offers
to make would never be altered on either side: It Is on that account also that
the Most Christian King is willing to destroy the Fortifications which are
beyond the Rhine, as well Fort Lewis as Hunninghen, and to r^tore to the
Emperor Friburg; the Fortifications of which want nothing to render it almost
Impregnable. Besides all these Conditions the King is willing to restore to the
Electo^ Palatine the Possession of Heidelbergh, and all the Dependances o^ he
^^^^inate, (...) on his part, that although he has sufficiently demonstrated,
that the Claim of (...) Step-Sister, by reason of the Succession of the two
last Electors, her Father and Brother a^^ well established to several Lands and
Fiess of the said Palatinate; notwithstanding His Majesty is willing absolutely
to take upon him to quit his Claim, and repair the Losses sustained, so that
the said Elector may continue the peaceable Possessor of all the said Country;
and though that after the last Dukes refusal of what was agreed upon in his
favor by the Treaty of Nimeghen, the Empire has no farther Right to concern it
self any more in that Affair: Notwithstanding the Most Christian King is ready
to grant the Princes eldest Son, the same Advantages which the Emperor and the
Empire caused to be incerted in the Treaty of Nimeghen, except Sarre Lovis,
Biche, and Homburgh, for which His Majesty is willing to condescend to an
equivalent of equal Revenue. The Most Christian King also farther agrees, that
if any Re^union have bee^ heretofore made, which are not conformable to the
Treaties, that Commissioners may be appointed on both sides to examine anew the
Reasons of those that shall make their complaints; and in case the said
Commissioners cannot agree, His Majesty will refer himself to the Arbitration
of the Republic of Venice. And in consideration the King desires a Peace with
all the Potentates, with whom he is at War, he will readily agree to such
reasonable Propositions as shall be offered to regulate the Differences between
other Confederates, Princes, and States; so that all Contests may be brought to
an end. These are the Terms upon which the Tranquillity of the Empire may be
quickly Re-established, and consequently the Peace of all Christendom, which
the Ambassador of France at Stockholm, has Orders to impart to the King of
Sweden, with Command to let him understand, that these Conditions are to be
looked upon as the ultimate Determinations, upon which His Most Christian
Majesty is willing to explain himself to the King of Sweden, to the end that if
he think it meet, he may communicate 'em to the Emperor, and to all the Princes
and States of the Empire, that so they may with the first be informed of the
benefits they may reap by a speedy acceptance of these Terms; and which if they
refuse, they can impute it to none but themselves, the effusion of Christian
Blood, and all the Calamities and Mischiefs of a War, that spreads still more
in the Empire, through the Number of those Forces, which are under the Command
of the Dauphin.

It Is a Truth now well known to the whole World, that the People of France are
almost quite exhausted, the most certain forerunner of a Kingdoms downfall; and
yet the King of France sets up his Auctions for Offices and Employments, as if
his Subjects had the Spanish Indies in their Pockets: But the Most Christian
King knows better things, whatever outward shows he makes: and this is one of
the main Reasons for which he is so weary of the War, and which obliges him to
flatter his Subjects, that they shall suddenly see an end of it, all his
Letters to the Archbishop of Paris at St. Dennis, all the swelling Declarations
of his Battles and Victories, in a word, all the Writings he causes to be
dispersed abroad, tend only to make the People believe that he is in a fair way
to a Peace, though nothing at present is more remote from his afflicted
Kingdom. The Confederates know too well the King of France desires that
Blessing only to take a little Breath, that he may be able afterward to devour
them one after another.

Whatever Advantages France has Reserved or Acquired during this War, they are
not so Great as the Charge he is at, in regard those Advantages are only the
Monarchs, but the People bear the Expenses; Whose Sufferings and Miseries cannot
extend so far as the Kings Ambition. It Is a real Mischief, of which every body
is sensible, and which increases every Day with the Additions of Conquest.

Secondly, These Advantages are Uncertain, and depend upon the Event of this
War; the greater they are, the more are the Back-blows of Fortune to be feared,
and a single Misfortune may change the Face of Affairs: There are a Thousand
Accidents not to be foreseen, and inevitable; and other, foreseen, that may be
avoided, but cannot always be prevented.

Thirdly, The Fear of losing them, requires that France should secure what she
has at present, and not trust to the Future, since all past Advantages remain
in suspense, and liable to the Decision of a new Peace.

Fourthly, So much the rather, because hitherto France has made greater Effects
against the Confederates, than she has ever been forced to withstand on their
side: Besides, that she has had the good Luck to make her Advantages of several
Disapointments and Diversions, which may probably Surcease; as the War which
she has fomented between the Emperor and the Turks.

Fifthly, He is therefore concerned to talk of Peace, and to endeavor to
procure it before the Confederates get the Vpperhand, and are in a Condition to
enforce him to receive Conditions more moderate than that of the Truce.

Sixthly, It is Policy in him to offer and conti^^e this League, to possess
(...) people that he really desires a good Peace, and that it is the
Confederates Fault that they do not see an End of the War: For while he
Conceals his intended Iniquities under the Name of Peace, he gains the
appearance of Right on his side, and throws upon his Enemies the Blame of all
those odious Calamities which he has been (and still continues to be) the Cause
of. And this Delusion serves h^^ no less, both to make the People Patient, by
showing them how seemingly Willing he is to shorte^^ ^ir Suffri^gs, and to
throw from time to time (as Occasion offers) some Apples of Discord among the
Confederates.

London, Printed for J. Wallis near Fleetstreet, 1693.


