A New and Perfect RELATION Of the Taking and Apprehending Five Pirates, VIZ.
P.F. J.M. J.F-G. Irish-men. I. G. and I.F. Englishmen. That stole a Merchants
Ship in Amsterdam; and having her at Sea, they Killed all the men that were
aboard the Ship, and brought her to Ireland, and there sold her Merchants
Goods. Together with their Trials, Speeches, and Confessions at the Place of
Execution; as they were truly gathered by one that was present at their Trials
and Execution. D. M.

Printed for I. Conniers, in Duck-Lane.

A New and True Relation of Five Pirates.
THese five Pirates of whom we intend to give you a full account: Three of
these were Irish men: Viz. E. F. J. M. and J. F. who were in Amsterdam in
April, and got their living by unjustness and wicked practices, as they did cry
out of very much when it was too late; but their trade failing them, and they
wanting wherewith to uphold their riotous living, could not tell what course
best to steer; they at length heard of a Ship that was very richly laden with
all manner of Merchandise, they contrived to enter then selves as Passengers to
go with the Ships company where she was bound; but resolved to kill all that
were aboard the Vessel if once they had her at Sea, and then to carry the
Vessel for Ireland, and there to make her their own; and they had so contrived
as to make over P. F. a natorious rogue, to be the Merchant of her; which
wicked practice they most wickedly pursued and brought to pass in a short time
after; but before they could bring about their design, wanting the help of some
Seamen, it was the unhappy fortune of two English Seamen, I. C. and J. F. to be
at that time in Amsterdam, waiting to enter themselves aboard some Ship that
first presented to come for England; and one of this P. F. company, J. M.
having been in their company a short time before, goes and tells this P. F.
that he had found out two stout Seaman; whom if they could but persuade to be
true to them, they would undoubtedly do their business.

Which did a little puzzle at the present the wicked Brayn of this P. F. but at
length these Irish rogues so ordered the matter as to keep these poor English
men in ignorance until the very last half hour of time, wherein they were to
seize the persons of those that belonged to the Ship, and so murder and destroy
them; And this P. F. made himself an Irish Lord, and said he owed the Ship, and
had many thousands of pounds in Merchants goods aboard on her, only he wanted
Two English Seaman to go along with her to Ireland; so sending forth his wicked
confederates E. F. his Brother, and I. M. and I. F. to find these two poor
English Seaman, who after much search they found, I. F. and I. C. whom they
desired to go and to drink with them, and C. and F. refused not their request,
but went along with them to a house of entertainment, where in discourse they
told C. and F. that they supposed them to be out of employment, and if they
pleased to except of their kindness they would help them to great preferment,
and that they should wait upon an Irish Lord that had a Ship richly laden that
was suddenly bound for Ireland, and if they would go and enter themselves in
the said Ship they should not want for no money, and when they came to Ireland
they should be highly preferred by this Irish Lord; so hearing their favor,
though trappaning and undoing speeches, they consented to go with them to see
this Irish Lord, and as soon as they came into his presence, this P. F. the son
of a poor Tailor, not worth mentioning, who was born in a Town called Mallow,
twelve miles from Cork, and there lived while they were hanged, drawn, and
quartered; This P. F. had so ordered the matter that they all stood bare-neaded
before this spawn of a poor Irish Tailor, and with cap in hand told him, May it
please your Honor my Lord, these are the two Gentlemen that we told your
honor of, and we have acquainted them with what your honors business is with
them. And then began this P. F. to present himself to them in great eloquence,
and much courtesy; telling them that he had a Ship richly laden that waited
for a wind to go for Ireland, and that he wanted two such stout English men as
they were to go along in her, and if they would go in her they should want for
no pay; and when they came in Ireland he would advance them; thus with these
and more such like betraying speeches, they contracted with them to go in the
Ship, and he immediately furnished them with money, and drinking high with
them, he at length persuaded them to take an oath upon the Bible to be true to
him upon all concernments whatsoever, and not to reveal any of his secrets to
any person or persons whatsoever.

But at length the Ship being ready to sail, P. F. enters himself and his
company to go as Passengers in her; but all this time he kept the two English
men ignorant of his hellish and murderous design, till at length having sailed
many days they began to draw near to Ireland; and then this P. F. calls his
company to him, and tells them that the time grew near that they must kill all
belonging to the Ship, and that I. C. and I. F. must then steer the Ship; which
cruel and bloody news, caused the hearts of C. and F. to tremble: F. fell upon
his knees to F. and begged for the Lords sake that no man's blood might be
spilt; but F. turned up the glass, and swore a bloody Oath that before it was
out there should not be a man lest alive that belonged to the Ship, and before
it was out this P. F. went to the Masters Cabin and with his Pistol shot him;
the Masters Mate hearing the Pistol to go off, was coming to see the matter,
and this P. F. met him and killed him; M. and F. killed two more of the men,
while the two brothers Killed the other two, and having thrown them overboard
they were coming to kill another Dutchman that was upon the Watch, but J. F.
and C. begging greatly with F. telling him that if they killed him the Ship
would be lost and they should all perish: then they came to a youth who was the
Merchants Son of the ship to kill him; but F. and C. begging hard of this
bloody Murderer to spear the poor youths life, telling him that he would want
the Boy to write the Dutch Bills out into English, and if they killed him then
they would not know what to do with the goods; whereupon F. spared the boys
life for a day or two, forcing him to write our all the bills of Lading into
English, and when he had done, then neither the pleading of the youth, nor the
pleading of the two Englishmen could move the hearts of these cruel murderers
to spare the youths life; but they bound him hand and foot, and tied a great
weight to him and threw him into the Sea, and then came to serve the other poor
man the like that was left alive, but by the great providence of God his life
was spared, to the end, that their blood might be brought upon their heads,
having committed these murders, the ship at length put in at Kingsayl in
Ireland, where P. F. began to sell the goods almost for nothing, keeping the
Dutch man under Deck, but making great waste he began to be suspected, upon
which he fled with his ship to Watterford; but a Captain of that Port persued
the ship and took her and five of his company, but he made an escape, the
Vessel was brought to Kingsayl, and the men being brought before a Justice, and
the Dutchman declaring against them they were sent to Cork to Prison, where
they remained till the Assize, at which they were found guilty, and were
sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered; which upon the fifth day of
August was performed on them.

The first that suffered was P. F. who being upon the Ladder, cried out to all
spectators to take example by him, there being ten Irish men hanging upon the
Gallows at that time: F. desired all young men to have a care, and to be
contented with that estate that God should think best for them in, and not to
presume too high as he had done, crying out over and over, I am a bloody rogue,
I am a bloody rogue, O that I who am not nineteen years of age should dye so
bloody a rogue as I am: So having said his Paternoster, and taking his leave of
the Priest, telling all persons that the two English men were not in the least
guilty of blood, he was turned off; and the next was M. who made a large
confession much after the same manner of F. crying out of the blood he had
shed; and after him was F-G. who made a large naration in English, French,
Irish, and Dutch, all of them clearing the English. men from this Murder.

Next came I.C. who made a large and eloquent speech to the people, begging
that they would all flee from sin which was the cause of his ruin, and that
all Seaman would take heed what company they come into, for fear they should be
brought into such a snare, and to such an end as he was brought to; he declared
that he never wronged man, woman, or child, but he confessed he had highly
dishonored God in keeping company with Lewd Harlots; which he said was the
cause that the Lord God had given him over to be deluded with those false
speeches of that wicked P. F. who told him that he was an Irish Lord, and that
he would highly prefer both him and I. F. as soon as they came to Ireland; he
was asked whether he was willing to dye, he said he was, and he declared to the
people that he was sure that the Lord had pardoned his sins, and would receive
him to glory, so taking his leave of those Ministers that had spent much time
with both of them in prayer, both at the place of execution; and for some hours
with them before they came to the place of execution, and also of the people,
he gave himself up to prayer for a long time, using many arguments to the Lord
for pardon of his sins; being accompanied with all spectators, he at length
with abundance of humility, committed his soul to the mercy of God, and his
body to the Executioner: being turned off, I. F. fell immediately upon the
ground on his Knees, pouring out his spirit to the Lord by prayer for a long
time; at length he went up the Ladder, and looking round about him he cried out
to all spectators to take example by him, especially to young men that they
should take example by him, and not to spend their precious time in sinning
against the Lord, least his anger should break forth against them, and bring
them to such a shameful end as he was come to; he begged of all Seamen and
others to have a great care of what company they came into, least it should
provoke the Lord to deliver them up to such wicked delusions as he was
delivered up to: Oh, the wicked F. cried he, Oh, this bloody F. that would have
pity of none, in sparing of them, although I begged of him so to do, as though
I had begged for my own life, as I did for half an hour together upon my knees,
O this cruel Murderer P. F. And giving many Exhortations to the people he
turned him about and looked on his poor companion I. C. after that he prayed
again very excellently, and with a cheerful voice bad the Executioner to do his
office; so taking his leave of all he humbly committed his soul to the mercy of
the Lord; Where in the judgment of charity we hope it now rests; after he
was dead and quartered he was coffined, and the next day buried, with a great
compaay of Seaman and other persons of quality; there being a Funeral Sermon
preached at his burial, and much mourning was given at his burial; A large
burial was made by the Seamen and others for I. C.; They dyed both in white
from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, declaring their innocence
of Murder; when the ten Malefactors that dyed that day were executed, then
these were brought from the Merchants own house, who walked on foot with Bibles
in their hand, all in white, the other three with Mass books in their hands;
ill five indeed for flesh and blood were as brave men as are seen in a whole
Country, four of them not exceeding 23 years of age; I.C. as he said was above
thirty. After they were all dead and quartered, the heads of the Irish men were
set upon several Gates in several Seaport places in Ireland, as an example to
all Traitors and murderers to take warning by.

Finis.

