THE PRODIGAL Returned HOME; OR THE MOTIVES OF THE CONVERSION TO THE Catholic
Faith OF E. L. Master of ARTS In the University of Cambridge.

Et tu conversus, confirma fratres tuos, Luc. 22. 32. Printed Anno Domini 1684.

THE PREFACE TO THE Protestant Reader.
Whenever it pleases the Almighty Goodness to enlighten with the glorious
beams of Divine Truth those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death in so
powerful a manner, as that forsaking the perplexed labyrinth of Errors, they
betake themselves for repose and safety into the bosom of the Catholic
Church; it is Satan's policy by his Agents to make the World believe that the
motives of their Conversion were but weak and carnal, least others should
follow their example.

Herein I have been as deeply censured as others, to whom God has vouchsafed
the like extraordinary mercy: Yet truly, whatever calumnies have hereupon been
cast upon me by some who have embittered Spirits, and Hearts swollen with rancour
against the Catholic Church, as much as concerns my self, I should for many
reasons bave contentedly sat down in silence, rejoicing in the testimony of a
good Conscience, if the good of those, upon whom my conversion may have most
influence, had not in charity obliged me to refuse no pains that might afford
them help or satisfaction in a business of the highest nature and concernment.

This was the pressing consideration, which at last prevailed with me to give
these Motives of my Conversion a public being, and common air to breath in;
that their own eyes might be Judges, what just cause I had to change my
Religion, and how much reason there is for them to follow me.

Of which I conceive great hopes, when to me it seems impossible for any
prudential man, who seriously enters into the consideration of the grounds of
Christian belief, with a Soul wholly divested of all prejudices and
self-interests whatsoever, earnestly imploring the Divine assistance and
direction; I say, it seems to me impossible for any prudential man in these
circumstances, not at last to discover the truth of the Catholic Religion, and
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the only high-road to Heaven and
Happiness, he will hear a Divine voice whispering Jerim. 16. 16.
to him, This is the old path, walk in it, and thou shall find rest unto thy
Soul.

Thus by Gods blessing I sought, and this rest at last I found; and never found
it, 'till after much pains and study, after many Prayers and Tears, after many
Fastings and Watchings, after many tossings and turnings, after many sad delays
and expostulations, after many conflicts and agonies in Spirit, my resolutions
by the powerful workings of Grace on my Soul breaking through all difficulties,
did effectually bring me into the arms of the Roman Church.

In which I saw no reason to suspect any delusion, when my most serious
reflections pass d judgment on it; seeing this happy change was not wrought in
me by any humane persuasion, but the God of Truth, did by his immediate
inspirations begin this work of mercy on my Soul, when, having no thoughts at
all of becoming a Roman Catholic, and finding much bitterness in the ways of
sin and worldly vanities, I was earnestly seeking of God, what course I might
best take how to please him, and save my precious and immortal Soul.

But to prevent all fear of Enthusiasm, pretended illuminations and false
lights, (wherewith many poor Souls in our Nation are so miserably misled) God
who is as well essential Reason as Goodness, did not only move my Will, but
also rationally convince my Understanding, that all Communions professing
Christ beside the Roman, were more or less erroneous, and she only the true
Catholic Church, according to the constant notion of Antiquity, out of which
ordinarily Salvation was not to be expected. And therefore I must fly to her,
as to the saving Ark, that I might not perish in the deluge of my sins.

So then this change in me was not a passionate distortion of an interessed
will, pushing forward the blind understanding to fix suddenly, and adhere
pertinaciously to more then the light of reason did clear up to the eye of the
Soul, but undoubtedly mutatio dexterae Excelsi, the work of God wrought in my
heart by convincing arguments, as the following Motives do sufficiently
evidence.

Nor could it be to satisfy the inclinations of sensual nature, when I was to
forsake my Relations, my Friends, my Temporal Revenues and Preferments, and all
worldly contentments; to take up my Cross and follow Jesus by contempt of the
world, in the perpetual practice of self-denial and mortification. And happy is
he, who had rather have a Cross with Christ, than a Crown without him.

Thus the Father of Mercies was graciously pleased by an efficacious call to
bring his Prodigal Son Home; For his Church is his House, where he dwells among
his Saints on earth with his special presence, to govern and provide for them
all things conducing to their happiness. From which household of Faith I was an
Alien, while I was a Member of the Protestant Church, which stands dis joynted
from Catholic Unity by a Schism too notorious to be justified. And until we
(like true Penitents) return unto our Mother Church which made us Christians,
we like Prodigals feeding on rattling Husks of formal Devotion, without any
substantial nourishment to our Souls, miserably mispend our precious time, on
which inevitably depends Eternity,

And this shall suffice by way of Preface for an Introduction. The door is
open, enter, and view well the Motives, and the eternal Sun of righteousness,
who is the true Light of the World, open thine eyes to see, and guide thy feet
into the way of Peace.

Yet before the Lecture, I thought good to advise whosoever shall peruse these
Papers, that bear is not to be expected that variety of Arguments which may be
found in more Judicious Controvertists; but a true Narrative of what principal
Motives prevailed with me to forsake Protestanism, and yield my self into the
Arms of our Mother Church. And yet methinks they are sufficient to convince the
ablest Heads, if they have but hearts resolved to yield to Truth.

I must likewise tell thee good Reader, that these Motives had long since seen
the light, if some accidental occasions had not retarded their birth into the
World. However, though they lost their choicest season of publication, which
is, when such Conversions are most fresh in memory, yet 'twas thought fit by
persons as well judicious as zealous, that they should by no means live any
longer in obscurity, but be set upon a Candlestick in the House of God, to give
light to others; and I did acquiesae in their judgment, and was content to have
them published for the common good. Read them Impartially, consider them
Seriously, and practice Faithfully what God shall inspire into thy Soul. And
remember in thy Devotions,

Thine in Jesus Christ, E. L.

The first Motive, containing the grounds of the Catholic Faith.
Sect. 1. AN Introduction. page 1. Sect. 2. A prepatory discourse to
Church-Tradition, and what it is. page 6. Sect. 3. Universal Tradition
demonstrated Infallible. page 12. Sect. 4. Universal Tradition the Churches
Rule of Faith in all Ages. page 22. Sect. 5. Tradition asserted against
Protestants by Scripture; and the notable advantages thereof above writing.
page 32. Sect. 6. An introductive discourse concerning the judiciary power of
the Church. page 49. Sect. 7. That there is a supreme Visible Judge to decide
Controversies in matters of Religion instituted by Christ, Infallible in all
points of Faith, with an obliging power to belief and obedience under pain of
damnation, made apparent from Scripture. Some Reasons thereof. page 51. Sect.
8. The Churches Authority or Infallibility taught, and asserted by the Ancient
Fathers. page 63. Sect. 9. The said Authority of the Church cleared and
demonstrated by the constant practice of all Ages. page 63. Sect. 10. A further
declaration of the Churches Authority or Infallibility in General Councils from
Antiquity. page 84.
The second Motive showing the Protestant Faith without foundation.
Sect. 1. An Introduction to the following Discourse. page 97. Sect. 2.
Heretics from the beginning were accustomed to appeal to Scripture as the sole
Rule of Faith whereby they would be judged, the Catholic Church always
believing and practicing the contrary. page 101. Sect. 3. A declaration of the
English Protestants Doctrine; how, and why they make Scripture the only Rule
and Judge of Faith. Sect. 4. That the Holy Scriptures are not the sole and
perfect Rule of Faith. page 125. Sect. 5. That Divine Scripture is not, nor can
be a Judge to determine Controversies in Religion. page 132. Sect. 6. That
private Reason in Controversies of Faith, is not the Interpreter and Judge of
the true sense of Scripture, to rely upon for our Salvation. page 148. Sect. 7.
An answer to some of the principal places of the Scripture upon which
Protestants rely for their Rule and Judge of Faith. page 188.
The third Motive showing the Heretical Schism of the English Protestant Church.
Sect. 1. The nature of Schism and Heresy declared from Scripture, and the
Ancient Fathers. page 188. 2. The Protestant Church of England is notoriously
guilty of Schism and Heresy by their separation from the Roman. page 203.
Sect. 3. Wherein the Protestants plea, that they did not separate from the
Church, but were forcibly cast out from her Communion, and therefore the Schism
not imputable to them, etc. page 212. Sect. 4. Wherein is showed the emptiness
of the Plea, that they did not separate from the Universal, but the particular
Church of Rome. page 217. Sect. 5. The Vindication of the word Catholic to its
notion as used by the Church. page 224. Sect. 6. Wherein the Protestants Plea
of pretended errors to justify their separation from the Roman Church, is
confuted. page 252. Sect. 7. Wherein the Protestants Plea, that the Popes
Vuniversal Pastorship is an usurped Power, crept into the Church, and therefore
without Schism might be forsaken, is refuted. page 273. Sect. 8. Wherein the
Popes universal Jurisdiction in Gods Church, is further manifested and made
good from Councils, and the Ancient Fathers, grounded on Scripture. page 282.
The fourth Motive, showing Miracles wrought in the True Church.
Sect. 1. A preliminary Discourse. page 209. Sect. 2. That Miracles were always
vouchsafed to the true Church. page 316. Sect. 3. Wherein the nature of true
Miracles is declared. page 322. Sect. 4. Some reasons of Gods proceeding in
this manner. page 331. Sect. 5. Some undoubted and most famous Miracles
relating to the present Controversies between us and Protestants. page 340.
The fifth Motive, showing the eminent Sanctity taught and practiced in the
Roman Church.
Sect. 1. An Introduction. page 367. Sect. 2. A further Declaration of the
Sanctity taught and practiced in the Roman Church. page 371. 3. A further
prosecution of this Motive from the new Doctrines and profane practice of
Heretical Communions. page 379. The Conclusion. page 393.
ERRATA.
PAge 38. l. 27. r. fallible, p. 44. l. 12. r. other, p. 63. l. 3. r. Catholic
Church, p. 73. l. 3. r. Parish, p. 75. l. 10 dele in Councils p. 78. l. 26. r.
loud, p. 82. l. 15. r. meanest, p. 86. l. 2. dele of, l. 3 dele that, p. 89 l.
10. r. nonnunquam, p. 90. l. 14. r. by general, p. 112. l. 13. dele or, p. 119.
l. 20. r. a too notorious imposition, p. 122. l. 2. dele of, p. 127. l. 24. r.
be. p. 148. l. 3. r. absurdness. p. 149. l. 21. dele the, p. 151. l. 1. r.
authoritatively, p. 165. l. 22. dele the, p. 176. l. 14. r. deceiving, l. 15.
r. obscure, p. 178. l. 20 r whom, p. 182. l. 6. r. puts him in mind, p. 188. l.
3 r. vers^, p. 192. l. 11. r. but, p. 216. l. 15. r. from Christ, p. 218. l. 3
dele a, p, 223. l. 10. r. their, p. 230. l. 4. r. reason thus satisfy, p. 241.
l. 23. r. danger, p. 267. l. 14. r. mazes, p. 277. l. 21. r. the least, p. 294.
l. 25. del^ it; p. 303. l. 18. r. by the divine, p. 329. l. 15, r. possible not
only to, p. 333 l 22. r. if incredulous, p. 342. l. 21. r. on Bereng^riu^, p.
352. l 3. r. say, p. 354. l. 23. r. apposite, p. 357. l. 13. r. purified, p.
303. l 15. r. Case, p. 379. l. 3. r. declaime, p. 386. l. 1. r. of a
^^^^smatick, p. 395. l. 1. r. prosperity p. 398. l. 8. r. unwilling;

The First Motive.
SECT. I.
That the two chief externe Grounds or Motives of Credibility leading to the
Truth of what Christ and his Apostles taught the World, are Universal
Tradition, and Church Authority.

GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke unto the Fathers by his
Prophets; last of all in the fullness of Time revealed his Will unto us by his
Son: So that the Word was made Flesh, not only as a Savior to lay down his own
Life for our Redemption, and Suffer for us, but also as a Lawgiver to instruct
us what we must believe, and do for his sake and our own good, if we will be
saved. Before this last and perfect revelation of all supernatural means to
attain to Life, delivered to the World by Christ; the Jews were the peculiar
people of God, their Synagogue the true Church, and their Ceremonial Rights the
True Worship, instituted by God himself, to continue in force during that
Pedagogie. But the eternal Sun of Righteousness appearing, those Shadows were
in him fulfilled, and so vanished to give place unto the Gospel, whose glorious
Beams were to Enlighten those that sat in Darkness, and the shadow of Death, to
the uttermost Corners of the Earth.

Hereupon there being a change of the Law, it was necessary there should be a
Translation of the Priesthood also, (the time being now come foretold by
Malachy, That from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, Gods Name
should be great among the Gentiles, and they should Sacrifice in every place,
and Chap. 1. 11.
a Pure Offering should be offered to his Name.) a new form of Worship,
prescribed a new form of Government erected, new Sacraments instituted, new
Precepts delivered, Councels super-added, agreeable to the Evangelical Law; And
in a word, a Catholic Church founded to continue for ever.

This Church of Christ, as it is one body, so likewise it was of one heart and
of one mind, while Apostolical purity remained unspotted. The Professors were
all united in the same Faith, Worship and Government; holding close to
Church-Tradition, the Pillar and ground of Truth, without any rent or Schism;
Till among Act. 20. 29. 30.
themselves arose Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing, not sparing the Flock; teaching
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them; That is, who set up a
Congregation of Christians separated from the Communion of that Church which
was founded by Christ and his Apostles. And so by this means unity being
destroyed, and Faith perverted, Heresy shut up the gate of Heaven, against
false Christians, as Infidelity did against Unbelievers.

A sad case this; yet not so much to be wondered at, seeing the Apostle tells us,
Opportet esse Haereses, There must 1 Cor. 11. 19.
be Heresies for the Trial of others, and greater glory of the Truth. And
therefore the true Church has in all Ages been more or less vexed with them.
But never more then in these last and perilous days, which since Luther's
Apostasy from the Church of Rome have produced such an innumerable brood of New
Gospels and Sects; all pretending to believe and practice those Doctrines and
that Worship, which were taught by Christ and his Apostles; and to be the only
true Church of God, or at least the purest Members of it.

Now it being acknowledged on all hands, that they only are the true Church,
who believe and observe all points taught by Christ and his Apostles necessary
to Salvation, and it is impossible, contrary Beliefs and Worships should be all
true, and come from the Fountain of Truth, Christ Jesus, those whom a more
serious desire and care of their Eternal Good may excite to seek for
satisfaction in so important a business, shall upon diligent inquisition, by
the blessing of God, find, that the chief externe grounds or evidence ordained
by Christ for the guiding us in the knowledge of what was taught and left by
him, to be believed and practiced to the Worlds end; and consequently also for
discerning which is the true Church among so many Pretenders, are those,
according to which the Church of Rome regulates her Faith and Worship; namely,
Universal Tradition, and the Authority of the present Church, as shall
hereafter be made manifest: And the farther they search into the Rule of the
Protestant Religion, that is, sole Scripture interpreted by private Reason or
Spirit, exclusively to Tradition and Church Authority; the more they will see
such unsteady Maxims are destructive to Faith, and manifestly leading to
endless Divisions and Errors in matters of Religion. This Conviction I had in
examining the Fundamentals of the Roman and Protestant Religion, and therefore
am not to be blamed for the Change I made; and to my understanding, whosoever
searches as I did, will easily receive the same satisfaction.

SECT. II.
A Preparatory Discourse to Church-Tradition., and what it is.

Though whosoever examines aright the Motives of Christian belief, cannot
rationally but become a Catholic; that is, find evidence how he may come to
the certain knowledge of what Christ and his Apostles taught the World; yet
Faith is not grounded on Reason, but Authority; and that no less then Divine,
which excludes all possibility of Error. Whatever it is that brings men to
know what they must believe, Faith has for its formal Object Divine
Revelation, into which it finally is resolved. So that we believe nothing as of
Faith, but what is revealed; and because it is revealed by Essential Verity,
who can neither deceive, nor be deceived. Catholics then believe by Divine
Faith, Truths only revealed by Almighty God, wherein Protestants agree with us.
But Catholics believe the same Truths as they are ascertained, declared and
handled down to us by the Testimony of the Church, wherein Protestants are
defective; the difference thefore between us in Faith, arises chiefly from
hence, in that we use not the same externe Medium to convey unto our
understandings the knowledge of what Truths are revealed, and what not. For
could we once agree about this latter, we should soon be of one Heart, and of
one mind in all points of Faith, especially when once this Medium is proved to
be infallible.

As to this Medium therefore Catholics regulate their Faith by the Rule or
Standard of Tradition and Church Authority as the externe Proponent of Faith, a
Proponent also evidenced to them by the same Rule to be Infallible, and thus
they safely rely on the Testimony of Tradition and Church. Authority in
Declaring and Expounding both the Sense of Scripture, and all other Christian
Mysteries necessary to Salvation. Whilst on the contrary, Protestants relying
on the sole express Texts of Scripture, interpreted by private Reason or
Spirit, as their only Rule and Guide in matters of Faith, become unsteady in
their Belief, obnoxious to dangerous Errors, and divided amongst themselves
into endless Sects and Factions. But because a more clear understanding of this
matter in some sort depends on a right notion of Tradition, we shall here
define it in the sense it is usually understood by Catholic Divines.

Tradition then is the delivery of that Doctrine which was taught by Christ and
his Apostles, from hand to hand, descending as such from Fathers to their
Children, making up the body of the Faithful. This is the true notion of
Tradition among us Catholics, and it matters not whether it be called Divine,
Apostolical, or Universal, being only the same thing expressed by diverse
adjuncts: For it is called Divine, because Christ our Lord, as well true God as
true man, is the Springhead of it. It is called Apostolical, because the
Apostles immediately received from him things so delivered, and Preached them
to all Nations. And Universal, because Attested by the Catholic Church of all
Ages to have been handed to her as originally proceeding from Christ and his
Apostles.

And to prevent all mistakes, let Protestants take notice that the Church of
Rome, sends not her Children only to search for what is Divine or Apostolical
Tradition in matters of Faith and Discipline out of the Writings of the
Fathers, or other Libraries of Books filled with dead Words, which are subject
to various Interpretations by Critical heads, without any hope of Agreement;
and can have no Authority dependent on Tradition; (though upon this account she
has infinite advantage against all other Communions in the World, to justify
her Faith and practice, in any unbiased Judgments.) But sends them to a
visible, living Oracle, Oral Tradition, that is, the voice of the present
Church, attesting that what she teaches as of Faith, she so received from the
Age immediately foregoing, and so from Age to Age, from Millions of Sons to
their Fathers, up to the Apostles, and the Sacred Mouth of Christ himself.

From Church-Tradition thus explained, briefly may be drawn those Positions.

First, that the Doctrine taught by Christ and his Apostles, comprises all
points necessary to salvation.

Secondly, That all such points taught by Christ and his Apostles have been
continued in the Church from believing Fathers to their Children, by an
un-interrupted succession, without Diminution or Addition, and shall so
continue for ever. Which involves these two Propositions; that nothing comes to
us upon the tenure of Faith but what is of Tradition. (Yea, though contained in
Scripture, seeing we only are ascertained what Books the Apostles wrote, and
what is the true sense of them, by Tradition.) And that there are no new points
of Faith in the Christian Church, quoad Substantiam, as to the substance of
what is revealed; the present Church only believing what it received from
precedent Ages. Which assertion whosoever opposes, contradicts not me, but the
Sublime Angelical Doctor St. Thomas, expressly teaching that in Doctrina Christi
and Apostolorum etc. 22ae. 1 q. ar. 10. ad 1am. and 2am. Et in 1a. par. q. 32.
ar. 4. corp. In the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, the Truth of Faith is
sufficiently unfolded; but because perverse men pervert the Doctrine of the
Apostles and other Doctrines and Scriptures, to their own Destruction, as is
said in the 2 Ep. of St. Peter, and the last Chap. Therefore the explication of
Faith was necessary against arising Errors in aftertimes, not containing
another Faith, but the same more cleared.

Thirdly, That this universal Tradition, or handing of Christian Doctrine by
oral Teaching, and visible practice of the Christian World, is, and was the
constant Rule of Faith, as well after as before the Scriptures were written,
and received by the Church.

The first Thesis or Position, though it has been denied by some Heretics, as
namely the Montanists; yet is not controverted between us and Protestants. The
proof lies upon the second; which being demonstrated, the third will follow of
it self, and cannot be denied with show of Reason.

SECT. III.
The clearness and certainty of Tradition in delivering Matters of Faith.

NO other externe prudential evidence or assurance in matters of Divine Faith,
(whose efficient Cause is Divine Grace,) is necessarily required, then a Moral
certainty, that what is proposed to be believed as of Faith, is the very same
Doctrine which was taught by Christ, and his Apostles. Which assurance neither
is, nor can be had among Protestants, who build their new Church upon their own
confused and unsteady Interpretations of Scripture: But is manifestly to be
found in that Communion of Christians, viz. the Church of Rome, which grounds
its Faith as to such evidence, upon Universal Tradition; a Principle not well
liable to Error, and therefore cannot rationally be expected to fail those who
rely upon it. As I shall endeavor to demonstrate thus.

Christian Religion is supernatural, descending from Heaven to us by
Revelation; that is, such a one, as is not to be learned but from Almighty God
and his Missioners; namely from Christ and his Apostles; and so successively
from them brought down to us by Church-Profession. Wherefore the Apostles being
Commissionated by him to whom was given all Power in Heaven and Earth, to this
end and purpose, delivered to the World wholly and entirely the Law of Jesus
Christ; making so long stay in those places principally in which by mutual
consent they had chosen to plant the Gospel, 'till by often inculcation it was
written in their hearts, and by practice so confirmed and cleared to their
Judgments, that rationally they could not mistake or doubt concerning any
points so delivered; all things being by this means sufficiently provided for
the constituting and governing of the Church. Now though the Apostles were
many, yet being all taught by the same Master, empowered by the same
Commission, and guided by the same Spirit, in all parts of the World did bring
up their Disciples in the belief and practice of the same Doctrine and
Discipline to continue for ever, so that all particula^ Churches, though of
different Nation^ and Languages, founded by several Instructers, and so far
distant from one another, yet did harmoniously meet in the unity of Faith in
all points Traditionary whatsoever. Neither could it be otherwise, they only
believing what was taught them by the Apostles: and these only teaching them
what they received from Christ, and were Infallibly directed in by the
extraordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost. Amongst which Apostolical
Doctrines, one main Article was, That there should be in all Ages to the Worlds
end, an Universal Visible Body of Pastors and People, termed a Catholic
Church, Divinely assisted and authorized to preserve, teach and hand down to
Posterity, without Error, all Truths necessary to Salvation.

This Catholic Church thus founded, practiced and taught their Children what
they received from the Apostles; condemning by her Authorative Rule of
Tradition all such for Heretics and Shismaticks who taught any contrary
Doctrines, and divided from them. By this easy method all Critical
Disputations about points of Faith were cut off, having only to inquire what
had been taught and practiced from the beginning, and to receive all Doctrines
witnessed for such by the voice of the 1 Timothy 3. 15.
present Church, The Pillar and ground of Truth, and consequently Infallible in
her Attestation. Who leave this Rule, must needs be obnoxious to Error; but how
those who stick close to so safe a Principle should fail, is morally
inconceivable. For such Traditionary Doctrines (abstracting from Authority)
cannot loose, but gather strength by time, because the multitude of Believers
increafing, and delivering to their Children all points of Faith as they
received them, the Tradition becomes more famous and universal, carrying along
with it a greater evidence of Truth, and moral Impossibility to be deceived.
Unless we will say that the Mystical Body of Christ so diffused and numerous,
can forget to day what they believed and acted yesterday, and so ignorantly
mistake; or knowingly conspire together to teach their Children to receive any
Doctrines as originally proceeding from Christ and his Apostles, which yet they
never had from their immediate Forefathers upon that tenure. Questionless that
such a Body of Christians should be wrought upon wilfully to damn their own and
others Souls, by attempting to gull the World to their faces in a business of
no less then Eternal Interest; or that in things of so high a nature, so
visible, so easily contradicted, they should prevail to introduce the belief of
a noonday Lie, is surely to be ranked in a high degree of Impossibility. And
whososever sees it not as such, I know not whether all the Hellibore in
Anticyra will cure him.

For where can one pick a hole in the everlasting coat of universal Tradition,
to make a way for Error or Heresy to creep in at? Does it not shine bright in
the visible Practice and Profession of the Church scattered over the whole
World, so continually exposed to all men's Eyes and Ears, that it cannot be
conceived, how Doctrines so delivered, should be innovated without discovery
and opposition, or perish unless with the ruin of Christianity? If Protestants
considered this aright, they could not deny the presence of the Body and Blood
of Christ in the Blessed Eucharist by a real change of the Consecrated
Elements; subjection to the Bishop of Rome as Supreme Head of the Church under
Christ; Invocation of Saints and Angels, the Sacred use of Images, Veneration
of Relics, private Confession to a Priest, Indulgences, Extreme Unction,
Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, to be Apostolical Doctrines; being handed
Traditionally to us from Age to Age, by an Universal and more Visible Practice
than the Scriptures themselves; which yet they receive, as the Word of God,
upon the same Authority: Neither could they demand of us a farther proof of
what carries along with it in its very face, an Evidence of Credibility beyond
all Exception. Nor ask of us in what secret Repositaries of the Church these
Traditions of the Church are preserved; when they might in a manner as
rationally demand whether it be day, when the Sun is in the Meridian of our
Horizon.

In vain therefore do Protestants pretend Innovation in Faith, to justify their
Separation from the Catholic Church; for let them choose what Age they will,
this Principle is equally sure rationally evident alike in all: And as firmly
established now in the attestation of the present Church, or in the days of
King Henry the Eighth, when the Fatal Defection from the Church of Rome in
England first began, or in the Sixth, or Fifth, or Fourth Century, (for they
cannot agree about the time) a^ in the very next Age succeeding the Apostles;
and consequently all Traditionary Doctrines of Faith Taught and Attested by the
voice of the present Church of any Age, the self same for substance which were
at first deliver'^ to the Saints without Increase or Di^minution: Universal
Tradition, and Innovation in Faith being in a manne^ (...), and Incompatible.
And wha^ Arguments soever the Protestants produce to the contrary in their
Controversal Skirmishes, is merely the playing of Wit against Pure Evidence.

If any one should seriously endeavor by Elaborate Arguments to persuade us
really, that there was never such a man as King Henry the 8th. King of England,
would we not think him Fool or madman for his pains. Seeing that if it were not
true, millions of persons, not only in our own three Kingdoms, but in other
Nations, of Credit and Reputation, without any causes sufficient to produce
such an effect, must conspire to be notorious Liars: And natural reason tells
us, if the first Reporters had not related it of their own knowledge with
undeniable evidence, it would never have obtained to pass so constantly and
uncontroulably as it does without the least doubt or question. And yet thus
have Protestants lost the immemorial Possession of their Ancient Faith, and
misled with mere Sophisms, will not believe those points to have been handed to
us by Tradition from the Apostles, which are attested for such by infinite
multitudes of People of several Nations in their respective Ages to this
present; with a far more transcendent evidence of Credibility than the former
instances. Notwithstanding, such is the blindness of some men's understanding,
or rather the hardness of their hearts, that as the Scripture says, Matthew. 13.
v. 14. Seeing they will not perceive, and hearing they will not understand,
that they may be healed; Though it be a Rule, plain, certain, and exposed to
all men's view in such visible Characters of public practice, that who runs,
may read, as well the Unlearned as the greatest Scholar; and upon which the
Pope and Peasant depend alike for their Salvation.

Wherefore to contract this Argument; seeing such vast multitudes of several
Nations cannot mistake in what has been a thousand times over and over
inculcated unto them, cleared to their Judgments, and rooted in their Hearts by
continual practice; seeing that a World of Believers cannot conspire together
to Damn themselves, and Cosen their Posterity in matters of the highest moment,
whereof men are most tender and tenacious; seeing mankind cannot give credit
and entertainment to any Doctrine to which their daily Religious Worship gives
the Lie, and cannot be accepted without the destruction of some evident
Principle, of which they are in present Possession as Divine and Apostolical:
(unless such a Doctrine bring with it a manifest demonstration of Truth, which
is impossible to be done in any point of Faith controverted between Protestants
and Catholics:) Seeing these are the safe and sure Grounds of Universal
Tradition, truly methinks, whosoever will not acknowledge it for a Rule or
Evidence sufficient in points of Faith, but desires a more certain or manifest
conduct, to bring him to the knowledge of what Doctrines Christ and his
Apostles taught the World: Or who is satisfied with less, that is, with a Rule
which may easily deceive him in a business of Eternal Interest; seriously such
persons seem to me not Impartial Searchers; and if ever it please God to clear
up their understanding in Divine matters, they will confess it.

SECT. IV.
Universal Tradition, the Churches Rule of Faith in all Ages.

DId not Protestants of the Church of England pretend to Antiquity as on their
side against the Catholics in this Controversy about the Rule of Faith; any
farther Discourse of this Subject for the present had not been necessary, but
because such is their claim, I shall take some pains to show the Injustice of
it; and let the Reader see, that as well in this as other points they who are
our Enemies, have no Friends of the Fathers to maintain them in their
opposition, but are equally Contradictors of Them, and Us, Yet before I shall
urge Authority, I shall press them with Reason.

The Apostles, having among other necessary points of Christian Faith, rooted
this Doctrine in their Disciples hearts. To believe only what was delivered to
them; and also guarded it with the thunder and Lightning of Excommunication,
Gal. 1. 8, 9.
even against an Angel from Heaven, that should presume to teach otherwise;
(because of points necessary what was to be the Rule and ground of all the
rest, was most carefully to be preserved,) one would think, understanding heads
could not doubt that the Fathful were to receive and hold their Faith upon the
same tenure of Tradition to the Worlds end, as attested to them by the public
voice of the present Church. Yet questioned it is, and contradicted also by
English Protestants; but doubtless they do not consider as they ought.

First, That the Church being in the possession of this Belief upon the tenure
of Universal Tradition, (unless they can demonstrate such a tenure actually to
have failed in this particular) must needs acknowledge this point concerning
the Rule of Faith to be Apostolical.

Secondly, They do not consider, that seeing it cannot be denied, but Tradition
was at first the usual means of Planting and Conserving the Law of Christ, the
greater part of the World being converted before the Scriptures were written
and received by the Church, so that when any false Teachers did arise, they of
necessity had recourse to Tradition, whether they had been so Taught; and not
to Scripture, whether it was so written, being impossible to Rule before it had
a Being: I say, this being undenyably evident, they will never be able to give
a rational account to Intelligent persons, why an immutable Faith should have a
mutable Rule, and a standing Edifice should have a moving Foundation. If they
think to salve this soar, by saying Tradition was necessary 'till the written
word took place, they will never be able to prove that all things at first
delivered necessary for the Salvation of the World, were afterward committed
to writing by the Apostles. And yet 'till this be done satisfactorily, who sees
not the insufficiency of this assertion?

But then Thirdly, if they could prove, that the whole Law of Christ necessary
to Salvation, at first Traditionarily conveyed, was afterward entirely
committed to writting by Infallible Inspiration, and deposited in the Church;
They do not consider, that were it so, (as most certainly they will be never
able to prove) yet it is necessary, Tradition should be the Rule of Faith, as
well after as before the reception of such a Canon, it being impossible for
Scripture by its self to perform, what Tradition did without it in the
beginning. For dead words being capable of endless controversy, because liable
to various Interpretations; Heretics will either shroud themselves under the
Umbrage of obscure Passages in Sacred Writ, or darken plain places with
Metaphors or Clouds of witty Criticisms, so that no evident Conviction can be
had, or possibility to hold up Church-unity in Faith and Government; except the
controverted Doctrines be brought for their trial to the Touchstone of Oral
Tradition, which, with the same unerring voice delivers Scripture and the true
sense of it to the Household of Faith in all Ages. And therefore it is, Lih de
Praescript, c 19. S. Irenae. cont. haeres. St. Aug. eont. Ep. Fund. Vinc. Lyri.
in Com.
that we find Tertullian, and other Ancients affirming, That no good can be
done with Heretics by disputing out Scripture to reduce them to Truth. And if
we will not take their word, our own experience is an evidence beyond all
exception.

Lastly, they do not consider, that as in Natural Sciences there are some Prima
Principia, fundamental Axioms, which need no proof, into which all Conclusions
rightly from them deduced are reducible: So in supernatural Revelations there
must be some selfevident Principle a Rule of Faith, into which, points of Faith
are resolvable having it self no need of further probation as to such evidence.
Or else we run in a circle, not having any satisfactory ground, upon which we
may without any more ado, rely for the Truth of what we believe. Now Scripture
is not, nor can be such a Principle; it depending manifestly, as Protestants
themselves acknowledge, on Tradition, by which we only come certainly to know
and accept it for the Word of God; and so is the Rule of Scripture as well as
of other necessary points, and consequently the ground or evidence of what we
believe upon Scripture-Authority. Which yet is not to be understood, as if
Tradition made the Word of God Infallible, but that thereby we are rationally
assured what is Scripture, and the true sense of it; which otherwise is subject
to perpetual quarrels, of Dissenting minds.

For my part, I see not how Protestants can answer this Argument; for they
acknowledging Tradition to be the Rule of Scripture, and contending for
Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, Tradition must necessarily be the prime
Rule, that is, the Rule of their Rule, and antecedent ground of their
foundation. And so by unavoidable consequence, all their Faith is built upon
the credit of Tradition. See it clear by a parallel. We Catholics rely upon
the Church for points of Faith; will Protestants therefore say that we rely not
upon Tradition? For in relying upon the Church, we rely also upon what the
Church relyes, which in all points of Faith is Tradition. We rely upon the
Church immediately as an Infallible Guide, we rely upon Tradition as an extern
Evidence. It Is easily applicable to Protestants receiving the Scriptures upon
the credit of Tradition. Who, while they shun it as a stone of Offense, fall
upon it as a Rock of Foundation. And truly 'till they show us some other
selfevident Principle, which can assure us what Doctrines Christ and his
Apostles taught the World, we must believe and maintain Universal Tradition to
be the Fundamental Rule of Faith to the Christian Church in the sense hitherto
explained.

Thus they might be satisfied with reason in this controversy; but because they
pretend to be moved more with the Authority of the Fathers, than our Arguments,
they shall hear them speak; and truly, (one would think,) plain enough, to
their condemnation.

Witness St. Iraeneus, an Anti-Protestant certainly while he teaches; Lib. 3.
cont. Haer. c. 4.
What if the Apostles had not left us Scriptures, ought we not to have followed
the Rule of Tradition, which they delivered to those to whom they committed the
Churches. Which is not to be understood, as if because they have left
Scriptures, the order of Tradition is by them evacuated; but that revealed
Truths depending on Tradition only, are as Divine and certain, as if no
Scriptures had been left unto the Church by the Apostles. Or else we make the
Saint; while he is showing the excellent use and necessity of Church-Tradition,
so Incongruous as to say there is no need of it at all. But Arguments might be
spared, when the following instance of Nations believing by Tradition only,
without Scripture, makes his meaning evident.

Before him in the front of the second Age B. Ignatius St. John's Disciple;
Exhorted the Churches to hold themselves inseparably to the Tradition of the *
Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 35.
Apostles; as Eusebius testifies. Had the Rule of Faith been only Scripture, as
Protestants contend, could he have given such advice? Yea, it inevitably
implies, Tradition to be the sure ground to rely upon for Christian Doctrines.

Does Origin assert Scripture or Tradition for a Rule while he teaches, In
Tract. 27. in c 23. S. Matt*
That in our understanding Scripture, we must not depart from the first
Ecclesiastical Tradition, nor believe otherwise then as the Church of God has
by Succession delivered to us? And elsewhere he tells us, That only is to be
believed * In Praef. lib. (...).
for Truth, which in nothing disagrees from the Tradition of the Church. What
more full for Catholics?

Did not Tertullian depend upon Tradition for his Faith, when he professes,
Lib. de Praesc. c. 21
What I believe I received from the present Church, the present Church from the
Primitive, That from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ.

The Arrians indeed (as the Protestants now) appealed to Scripture for a sole
Rule and Judge of their Faith, seeing their condemnation (as Protestants do
likewise) inevitably and evident by the practice and Tradition of the present
Church. But what did St. Athanasius, that great Bullwark of Catholic belief,
reply to this? Even the very same which, the Church of Rome now takes up
against her Adversaries: * Lib. de Decr. Sym. Nic. cont. Arianos.
Behold, we have proved the Succession of our Doctrine delivered from hand to
hand, by Fathers to Sons; but as for you new Jews, and Children of Caiphas, (
but as for you Protestants) what Progenitors can you show of your Speeches? Had
he not held Tradition for the Rule of Christian belief, could he have produced
this as a satisfactory answer to their appeal to a Scripture-Tryal, and a
sufficient demonstration of Catholic Faith?

They who hear St Austin saying, Cont. Ep. Fund. c. 5.
I would not believe the Gospel, were it not that the Authority of the Church
moved me to it. What think they? Was he for Protestants or us; for sole
Scripture, or for Tradition too in his Controversy?

More ample satisfaction may be had, if desired, from Vincentius Lyrinensis, in
whose words we may tell a Protestant, * Faith is that which thou have Cont.
haer. ca. 27.
received, not that which thou have devised, a thing not of private usurpation,
(as their Exposition of Scripture are) but of public Tradition.

Quotations might be infinite, but these may suffice to let the World see, that
Antiquity was of the same belief with the present Church of Rome in this point;
And Protestants by contradicting Her, contradict the Fathers also.

SECT. V.
Tradition asserted against Protestants by Scripture; and the notable
Advantages that way of delivery has above Writing.

IF the Testimony of the Fathers will not suffice, we shall bring Scripture it
self in defense of Tradition. And truly to me it seems wonderful, that
Protestants professing to believe all things contained in the Scriptures,
should deny Tradition to have any thing to do with their Faith, to which those
Sacred Oracles bear so great witness. The places are not few, and full; some of
them I shall produce as translated in their own Bibles.

The first is that famous Anathema of St. Paul's upon the occasion of some
false Teachers troubling the Church of Galatia, with Doctrines contrary to 1
Chapter ver. 3, 9.
Tradition. * If we, or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any other Gospel unto you
then what ye have received, let him be accursed. Would they have one more
express? Let them mind well his exhortation to the Thessalonians, * Therefore
Brethren, stand fast, and Ephesians. cap. 2. v. 15.
hold the Traditions ye have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle.

The same point he presses home to the first Bishop of Ephesus, writing in his
first Epistle to him, * O Chap. 6. v. 20, 21.
Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain
bablings, and oppositions of Science, falsely so called; which some professing,
have erred concerning the Faith. Which Deposition of Faith he calls (...), in
his second Epistle renewing the same charge, Hold fast the form of sound words
which thou have heard of me, Chap. 1. v. 13.
in Faith, and Love, which is in Christ Jesus: Inculcated also in the Verse
following, That good thing v. 14.
which was committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us.
And again, in the 3d. Chapter he presses it as the only Antidote against the
Infection of new-poisonous Doctrines scattered by Seducers, Chap 3. v. 13, 14.
Continue in the things that thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. And with no less care and charge
recommendeth it to Posterity, in the 2d. Chapter of the same Epistle; The
things that thou have heard of me among many Witnesses, commit thou to Faithful
men, who shall be able to teach others also.

From which Texts, and such like, the Fathers collect three things. First, That
there are Traditions unwritten, Romans 16. Phillip. 4. 12. Judes Ep. 3d. ver. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
as well as the written Word, deposited in the Church, which is the Pillar and
ground of Truth.

Secondly, That such Traditions belong equally to Christian Doctrine, and alike
to be credited aad observed. Written and unwritten being but accidental
differences of the word of God, substracting or adding nothing essential to the
formal Object of Faith, which is Divine Revelation.

Thirdly, That Traditionary Doctrines being termed a Depositum by St. Basil. ut
habetur Hist. Trip l. 7. c. 39. Vinc. Ler. c. 26. etc.
the Apostle, and so from him frequently called Depositum Fidei; and the
Governors of the Church, in Timothy, constituted the sacred Depositarii and
Keepers of it, makes it incapable of any adition or diminution, (and
consequently excluding the expectation of any other points necessary to be
revealed) the nature of a Depositum requiring it should be kept unalterable in
the hands of those to whom it is committed. And therefore (...) applied to
false Teachers by the same Apostle, is directly opposed to this Depositum. And
the Church collected in General Councils, when truth and peace requires it,
makes no new Articles of Faith; but all her endeavors are, that revealed
Truths, whether written or unwritten, delivered from the beginning, may be
defended, conserved, illustrated, and explicated against arising Heresies that
would pervert them.

To which a fourth may be added, That the Apostle writing to Churches fully
constituted, still refers them in his Epistles to Tradition for the trial of
all Doctrines; those sacred lines delivering no new point of Faith, but only in
as much as Doctrinal, in things necessary, explicating according t^ present
circumstances, and confirming what had been taught by word and practice.

Protestants indeed will own no such things from these Texts; but In 2 Epist.
ad These. c. 2. 15.
St. Chrysostom tells us, * Hinc perspicuum est, etc. From hence it is
apparent, that the Apostles have not delivered all things by Epistle, but also
many things without writing: Now both those, and these deserve equally to be
believed. It Is a Tradition, what would you more? Thus he, and Theophilact
comments thereupon almost in the same words: And from the 2d. ver. of the 11th.
chap. of the 1st. Epist. to the Corinthians, * Now I praise you Brethren, that
you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, ficut tradidi vobis, as
I delivered them unto you: Not only inferrs the same Doctrine, but likewise
uses the selfsame phrase, Ex hoc loco perspicuum est, etc. It Is apparent from
this place, that he* (St. Paul) and the other Apostles, delivered many things
not committed to writing. Which Epiphanius also applies to the same Haere, 61.
purpose, teaching us, Oportet autem and Traditione uti, etc. That we must make
use of Tradition, seeing all things cannot be taken out of sacred Writ. The
Apostles have delivered some things in Writing, and others by Tradition; Even
as St. Paul says, Sicut tradidi vobis, As I have delivered to you. And no less
St. Lib. de spir^ S.
Basil, It is an Apostolic thing to persist constantly in Tradition not
written; for says the Apostle, I praise you in that you are mindful of
whatsoever thing came from me, and observe the Traditions which I have given
you. And affirms them to be so many, that the day would fail him should he
enumerate them. Moreover, That no man will contradict Ibid.
it who has the least experience in Ibid.
Church Laws. And as potent Patrons of the same Doctrine are St. Iraeneus l. 3
cont. Haer. ca. 3, and 4. Tertullian de corona militis cap. 3. and lib. de
Praescrip. S. Aug. Ep. 118. ad Januarium; and lib. 5. de bapt. cap. 23. The
second famous Nicene Council in the 7th. Act, etc. by whom Traditionary points
are invincibly vindicated.

And teach otherwise they could not, except their words should contradict their
Faith and practice; though Protestants, who are of a contrary belief, are also
of a contrary Doctrine; and have invented several evasions to darken the
evident light of these Texts, whereby they (alas) deceive poor Souls. To the
native luster of Scripture, if we add the unanimous consent of the Fathers
expounding them for us, they more manifestly make good against the Protestants,
that the same Scriptures cannot be an un-errable and complete Rule of Faith to
Christians without Tradition. And indeed Catholics do not deny Scriptures to
be a Rule, but that they are not the complete Rule of Faith; nor can be a Rule
of Faith at all, as interpreted by private reason, or particular fallibility.
Congregations, (which is their new way, and practice) but as expounded
authoritatively by the Catholic Church according to the line of Ecclesiastical
Tradition; the constant custom of all Ages.

Now why Religion was settled in the Christian Church by Universal Tradition, as
a perpetual Rule of Faith, rather then written Precepts, will presently appear
to any one, well considering how that way of delivery is far more secure from
mistakes and errors than Writings, this being notoriously visible in actions
common to all mankind, in which all sorts of conditions do agree, and can read
the inward belief of their hearts in those outward well-understood expressions:
whereas written words are different, and if understood by some few eminently
Learned, yet liable to a thousand casualties, and misapprehensions, conveying
erroneous Thoughts sometimes, even where exactest diligence is observed. And
withal, that it is more lasting then written Books, which may perish totally
by the fury of Persecution, or be lost by some accident or other, as most
certainly some Scriptures are; Whereas Christian Doctrine thus conveyed, cannot
perish but with the total ruin of all Believers. But principally, that sacred
Scriptures themselves, both for Canon, Incorruptness, and true sense of the
Text, are necessarily depending on Tradition; not It on them, being a
self-evident Principle that needs no proof.

Which great and notable advantage will be more evident, if we consider that
the main end and principal errand of the Apostles being to deliver entirely to
the World the Gospel, or Law of Jesus Christ, what they Preached throughout the
whole World, with their common and united endeavors, inculcating it in season,
out of season, and ingrafting it by daily and visible practice in the hearts of
Believers, must needs descend to us with more certainty and evidence of Truth,
because accompanied with a higher degree of Tradition than the Books of
Scripture; which were not any part of their Commission, or by any joint consent
intended to comprize the whole Law of Christ; but merely an occasional work of
their Apostleship, according as the present circumstances did require, writ by
some single Apostle or Evangelist, sent to some particular Church or Person,
(as all the Apostolical Epistles) upon whose Authority and Credit the whole
Church originally must rely, to believe it to be the true Writing of such an
Evangelist or Apostle, that is, to be the undoubted Word of God.

And this is the genuine reason, that while Traditionary Doctrines being on all
hands acknowledged, because founded in Universals which cannot easily fail: The
true Books of Scripture, because at first of particular and unknown Authority,
(agreeing therein with all errorus) were cauceously rejected by some particular
Churches, and could not obtain due veneration and acceptance but by degrees, as
they were communicated to other Christians by those to whom they were at first
delivered, and so at last upon diligent inquisition received by the whole body
of Believers for Canonical. In which examination, the Traditional Doctrine
being universally Famous, and first planted in their hearts, and that of
Scripture originally obscure, and of an after Birth; They neither did, nor
could rationally argue thus: The Doctrine we have been taught, is the Doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, because agreeable to this Book: But thus, this Book
attested to us for Scripture, may safely be received for the Writing of such an
Apostle or Apostolical man, as they witness who have already accepted it for
such, because we have no reason to think they are herein deceived, or lie
against their Conscience, in that we find it conformable to the Doctrine we
have been taught and have received by Tradition. For to have proceeded e
converso, had been to prove, I say not obscurum per obscurius; but clarum per
obscurum, and contrary to all Rules of Logic and Reason.

Hence it is that we find the Ancient Fathers expounding some Texts of
Scripture for Traditionary Doctrines of the Church, which afford sometimes
perhaps scarce probable Topics for those points to which they are applied. Now
this they do, not as if they founded their belief of such Articles upon the
Scriptures St Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 20. c. 24. lib. de fide and Oper. c. 15. S.
Am* in ca. 3. ad Cor. St. Jer. in ca. 5 Matt. Origin in eandem locum, etc.
(as might be specified in the 1st. Corin. 3. from the 12 ver. to the 16. and
Matthew. the 5th. ver. 25, 26. for Purgatory. The 15 of the foresaid Epist. ver.
29. For a state wherein the dead may be helped by the living. Luke the 1st.
ver. 34. For the perpetual Virginity of the Mother of God, etc.) But being in
possession of the belief of such points with the present Church of their Age
upon the tenure of Tradition, they only bring such places for the further
confirmation and explanation of their Faith, that very probably such
Traditionary points may be involved in those Texts. So that we may safely argue
thus far from such expositions; they held such Tenets, or else they would not
have applied those places for the confirmation of such Doctrines, though such
Doctrines cannot manifestly be concluded from those places. And therefore when
Protestants rationally show, that some Texts so applied by the Fathers may
admit their Interpretations; yea sometimes perhaps with greater probability,
they must not think they then carry the cause against Them and Us in those
points. This indeed is enough for Catholics to do in all Controversies of
Faith against Protestants, who depend wholly upon Scripture, as explicated* by
Wit and private Reason or Spirit for their Religion; But it is no concluding
argument against some Ancients for their over-credulity, as I may say, in
relying on such Texts for some points now denied by Protestants; or against the
present Church of Rome as relying upon them, when that the Fathers neither did,
nor does the Church of Rome now only rely upon such Texts for those particular
points; nor yet upon Scripture for any point of Faith at all, but as handed and
fensed to us by Tradition.

But to conclude this point, seeing Scripture thus manifestly descends to us by
a lower degree of Tradition than Christian Doctrine; and being received for the
Word of God upon the credit of Tradition by Protestants themselves; we cannot
enough wonder at their unreasonable prevarication, in taking the Churches word
for the whole Rule of their Belief, and yet refusing to rely upon her credit
for any one Article of Faith; in acknowledging her Authority Infallible in the
delivery of the Letter, and yet denying to believe her Tradition for the
Ssense; nor will be persuaded to conform to her in those points and practices
which are handed to us by her attestation with far greater evidence of
credibility. And this being clear to me, could I any longer continue a
Protestant? Had I not all the reason in the world to become a Catholic?

The second ground of the first Motive, viz. The Authority or Infallibility of
the Church in determining all Controversies concerning Faith; and defining what
is of Faith, and what not, when called in question.
SECT. VI.
An Introductive Discourse concerning the Judiciary Power of the Church.

YEt notwithstanding this certainty of Tradition, handing from Age to Age the
Evangelical Law with so much evidence, unreasonable men have arose of perverse
minds questioning and contradicting the Truths of Jesus Christ; Insomuch, that
hardly, yea, perhaps not any one fundamental point of Christianity, but has
been controverted in some Age or other. Wherefore as Tradition is a constant
Rule, so the Wisdom and Goodness of Almighty God has provided in his Church an
Authoritative Judge, to give Sentence by the guidance of the said Rule, if
there happen to be contentions about matters of Faith among Believers. For
unless in such cases an Authoritative Judge be allowed to give a definitive
Sentence from which there is no appeal by the contending Parties, for the
decision of such Controversies, Authoritatively assuring us what Doctrines were
taught by Christ and his Apostles, if denied, and what not; when falsely
pretended, Actum est de fide and unitate, Faith and Churchunity must
necessarily be destroyed and all Religion lost in a Chaos of disagreeing
judgments, without any probability of reconcilement.

A supreme and unerring Judicature being then absolutely necessary for the
ordering and preserving of the Church in all things essential to Salvation; how
little satisfaction (and that not without just cause) I received in this point
from the English Protestants, who indeed grant a Judge, but one wholly
Inefficacious to this purpose; yea impossible to reconcile Dissenting
Litigants; as the super-abundant experience of above sixteen hundred years (for
all Heretics fly to the dead Letter of Scripture for their refuge,) has
sufficiently evidenced, I shall make hereafter appear in the examination of
their Rule and Judge; and for the present endeavor to demonstrate how all
Christians ought to be contented and acquiess, as I did, in what the Church of
Rome teaches, and the Catholic Church always has, and does practice on such
occasions.

Now what the Catholic Church teaches, and always has delivered in this
point, is briefly this. That all Divine Truths taught by Christ and his
Apostles necessary to Salvation, whether Traditionary only, or also Written,
are deposited in the Church as a Witness to attest them, and as a Judge
Divinely assisted to Interpret, and give an Authorative Sentence, if their be
any Controversy about them, which all Christians are obliged to believe and
follow under pain of Damnation A Doctrine brought down to us from the
Apostolical Times by a more visible practice and unquestionable Tradition than
the Scriptures themselves, which yet the Protestants receive for the Word of
God upon the same Authority.

What concerns the Church as a Sacred Depository of all Revealed Truths,
written and unwritten, has already been manifested in the precedent Discourse:
And that the Spouse of Christ is an Authoritative Judge, or Infallible Guide to
determine all Controversies of Faith among her Children, that they may know
with security what to believe and follow according to their Duty, I hope shall
be made no less evident in the following Sections.

SECT. VII.
That there is a Supreme Visible Judge to decide Controversies in matters of
Religion Instituted by Christ, Infallible in all points of Faith; to which as
such all Christians are obliged to a submission of Judgment under pain of
Damnation, is here made apparent from Scripture, And some further Reasons also
given.

TO acknowledge a visible Judge to interpret and apply Laws in Controversial
matters, is so conform to common Sense and Reason, and so confirmed by the
experience and practice of the whole World in all kinds of Governments, that to
deny such a Power from God in his Church, is in effect to say; That Jesus
Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, has not so well provided for the regulating
and preservation of his Kingdom and peculiar People, purchased with his own
most precious Blood, in order to their eternal Good and Happiness; as mere men,
subject to manifold weaknesses and Passions, do by the common Light of Nature
and ordinary Principles of Prudence and Discretion provide for the well-being
of Families and Commonwealths in Temporal matters. A Position unavoidably
drawing after it so many strange and (to say no worse) dangerous consequences,
that they will be here better lamented than infisted upon.

But because Protestants, whom I have forsaken, fly to Scripture as the only
Infallible Judge in all Controversial matters of Faith; thither I shall bring
them first to be tried, and show them out of those Sacred Oracles of Divine
Truth, which they acknowledge, what ample and most abundantly satisfactory
provision the Wisdom and Goodness of Almighty God has made and left in his
Church to bring us securely to the certain knowledge of his revealed will;
nothing being wanting on his part, if we neglect not so great Salvation.

The chief Texts for the Churches supreme Teaching, and consequently Judging
and determining Power, when any controversies of Faith arise, by Commission
from Christ the Head-spring of all Spiritual Jurisdiction, are these, and such
like: Mat. 28. 18, 19.
Go ye, make Disciples of all Nations, teaching them io observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. And that this Authoritative Teaching is
performed by the Pastors of the Church as his Delegates and Representing his
Person, is plain from that of St. Luke, He that hears you, hears me, and he
Chap. 10. 16. Mat. 14. 18.
that despises you, despises me. Again, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth,
shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be
loosed in Heaven. And again, He Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, etc.
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ; 'till we all come to the unity of the
Faith, and be not tossed too and fro with wind of every Doctrine. What more
express.

And yet, if it may be, the Churches Infallibility in the delivery of the Law
of Christ is taught us in plainer terms; as namely in Chapter 14. 26.
those Promises in St. John, The Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. When the Spirit of Truth Joh. 16. 13. S. Matt.
ch 28. 19.
is come, he will guide you in to all Truth. And those in St. Matthew, Teach
them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you, and behold, I am with
you always, even to the end of the World. And that in the 16 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Chap. Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. Such a Church as this, thus founded, thus assisted, thus
guided, cannot possibly teach damnable Haeresies or dangerous Errors, but must
needs be the Pillar and ground of Truth, as that glorious Vessel of Election
the great Apostle of the Gentiles does assure us.

And therefore we may securely rely upon her word; to do it also so much
concerns us, that not to hear and obey is no less then under pain of damnation,
and that too from no obscure Texts. He that 1 Epist. 4. 6.
knows God, hears us, says St. John, and he that hears us not, is not of
God; and by this we know the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error. And
that famous place, Dic Ecclesiae, Matt. 18. 17.
Tell it to the Church, and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to
thee as an Heathen and a Publican. Persons doubtless in no fit case for Heaven.
I Will name but one more out of St. Mark, Go ye into all the World, Mark. 16. 16.
and Preach the Gospel unto every Creature. And what then, He that believes
not shall be damned. Plain and sad places these are to all Unbelievers and
Incorrigible Heretics: But especially to these last, who receiving these
Scriptures for the Word of God, do notwithstanding not only not hear the Church
Obediently in her delivery of the Gospel, but with obstinacy and pride of
heart, presume to teach the Church, and will needs force upon her a new Creed,
which was never taught by Christ, nor handed to us from the Apostles. How can
such as these escape the punishment threatened in the abovementioned Sentences.
Their account must needs be heavy; and the light they had will only serve to
augment their guilt.

And I cannot omit for a Testimony of these and such like Texts against
Protestants, that being so express and unavoidable for the Churches Authority
and Obedience to her; in their first Editions of their English Bibles after
their defection from the Church of Rome, for Church they translated
Congregation, least common understandings should discover how they were
withdrawn from their Ancient Faith by new Doctrines, and Expositions so
expressly contrary to the Word of God. 'Till afterward, when by diverse
Artifices these Teachers perceived they had bred in their Followers a strong
aversion from the Church of Rome, and that they were sufficiently confirmed in
their Errors, the word Congregation in the later Translation was turned into
Church, that from the evidence of such Texts they might gain some credit to
their usurped power, set up against the pre-existent Authority of the whole
Christian World.

Neither is it without reason, that Christ has set up in his Church such a
supreme Judicature; when to deny this Power to those whom he has appointed for
ever to be Governors of his Kingdom on Earth, is doubtless to advance the
Jewish Synagogue, above the Christian Church, their Sanedrim or Great Council,
whesein the High Priest was supreme Judge in all doubts Deuteronomy. 17.
and questions about the Law, having such absolute Authority in giving
Sentence, that no man could appeal, but was bound to obey under pain of death.
And yet that was but a temporary Pedagogy delivered by Moses a faithful Servant
of the House of God, in Types and Shadows prefiguring and leading to
Evangelical Perfection, whose Ministration is far more glorious, endowed with
more transcendent and admirable Privileges, foretold by the Prophets, and in
plenitude of time fulfilled, revealed and established in Person by the Eternal
Son of God, Lord of all things, upon better Promises to continue for ever.

Secondly, Christ our Lord having so dearly purchased a peculiar People, and
furnished his Church with all means necessary to the Salvation of mankind; if
we deny such Authority in her, namely Infallibility to witness, and when
circumstances require, to determine by a finally decisive unerring Sentence
what these means are, they cannot be effectual to the end for which they were
with so much Sweat and Blood Instituted to continue for ever; being otherwise,
according to the ordinary method of Divine Providence, impossible to be known
with an assured certainty, and by consequence also to be put in practice.
Neither indeed could it be truly said that Christ has provided in his Church
all things necessary for our Salvation without this Authority; when amongst
things necessary that questionless seems to be most so, by which* we can only
come to a certain knowledge of all the rest.

Thirdly, seeing God has made his Church a Proponent and Witness of his Truth
in all Ages, (for 1 chapter 8.
that of the Acts, Ye shall be witnesses to me, both in Jerusalem and all
Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth: As to the
substance of it; belongs not only to the Apostles, but to their Successors in
the Office of making Jesus Christ and his Law known to the Worlds end,) the
unanimous consent of the Catholic Church must needs be an undoubted testimony
of revealed Verities, seeing it contradicts the Justice, Goodness, and Veracity
of God to authorize any to be a witness of his Truth, that might lie and
deceive the World in their attestation. And methinks it concerns as well
English Protestants as Us, to maintain the Catholic Church for an Infallible
Witness, seeing at this distance from the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles;
they, as well as we, have no other Infallible assurance then her Testimony
whereby to know either, which are the undoubtd Books of Scripture, or what the
true meaning of them. And thus that Religion (which Protestants pretend to be
contained in only Scripture, must rejecting Church Authority necessarily float
in an Ocean of incertainties, and we miserably be left in the mysts of
conjectures among dead Letters, with the twilight of natural reason, to search
out Faith, and the Eternal Salvation of our Souls.

Lastly, the fore-quoted Texts being so express for the Church to have a Power
from Christ to oblige all men under pain of Damnation to believe and submit to
her Proposals as to Faith. God has also endowed her with Infallibility in
bringing to our knowledge revealed Verities, seeing otherwise such a Power in
the Church, and a correspondent obligation in her Children would not bear an
equal proportion. And therefore these two are inseparably linked together, a
Power to bind to Believe, and Infallibility in the Obliger; Christ assisting
his Church with his Holy Spirit to guide her Infallibly into all Truth, because
he has invested her with a Power to bind to believe; and giving her a Power of
obliging to believe, because he has made her Infallible in such Proposals. It
seeming most conformable to the Divine Goodness and Providence, that such an
externe proponant of Faith should be established, as might afford no just cause
to suspect whither it be true or no, which is proposed; and in all reason no
greater assurance can be desired then to have an absolute certainty that that
Authority cannot err in points of Faith, to whom we must in such Proposals
captivate our Wills and Understandings. For this is but to assent upon
undoubted evidence; then which nothing is more agreeable to man's nature*
Neither is it rational to believe that God, who is essential, Reason and
Wisdom, ruling all his Creatures according to the several Dispositions
Imprinted in them, would impose such a Duty on Discoursive Entities upon other
terms.

Blessed be God who has so carefully provided for us, in giving us a Law which
is the only means to Salvation, and also an authorized guide to direct us in
the certain knowledge of it; namely the Catholic, which cannot possibly lead
us into error, as has been formerly shown.

Thus certainly these Scriptures witnessing the Churches Authority are
agreeable to reason; now let us see what further light can be added to them
from the Writings and universal practice of Antiquity.

SECT. VIII.
The Churches Authority or Infallibility taught and asserted by the Ancient
Fathers*

IF I should produce what Antiquity affords us on this Subject, I should rather
transcribe Books than Passages, so Copious and Industrious have the Fathers
been on all occasions to press a point so necessary; S. Athana. coni. Aria. S.
Hier. S. Aug. Pole. St. Cyp. de unit. Ecc. Tert. etc.
especially in their Polemical Discourses against Heretics, to vindicate their
dear Mother the Church in her Just Rights and Privileges against all
Rebellious contradictors of her Authority. And thither I refer such as desire
more ample satisfaction; for the present I shall content my self with some few
choice places, and they are these.

We must believe (says Irenaeus) ^ l. cont. hae. ca. 49.
those Priests that are in the Church, those that have a Succession from the
Apostles, who together with the Episcopal Power, according to the good pleasure
of the Father, have received the certain gift of Truth.

We must not believe, (says the English Protestant Church,) those who in their
Episcopal Chaires have had an un-interrupted Succession from the Apostles; seek
not for the Law of God from their Lips, for they are fallen from the Truth;
yea, General Councils can err, and have erred in Art. 21. of the 39.
their Definitions, having no certain gist of Truth by Divine assistance. Thus
they, flatly contradicting good Irenaeus and Ancient Doctrine. Now, whom shall
we believe? The old Saint, or the new Protestant?

Give him a little more Audience, for he proceeds thus, The Church Cap. 62. l.
praed.
shall be under no man's judgment, for to the Church all things are known, in
which is the perfect Faith of the Father, and of all the Dispensations of
Christ; and firm knowledge of the Holy Ghost, who teaches all Truth. But say
he what he will, Protestants will assume a Power to judge, and condemn her of
no less gross and damnable Errors then Idolatry and Superstition, to justify
that thing they call the Reformed Church* Though it were no difficult matter
for them to perceive the Injustice of such Proceedings, when the same Saint
goes on and tells them, and us, That it is easy to receive the Truth from Gods
Church, seeing the Apostles have most fully deposited in her as in a rich
storehouse all things belonging to Truth. For what if there should arise any
contention of some small questions, ought we not to have recourse to the most
Ancient Churches, and from them receive what is certain and clear concerning
the present question. Thus far he. And if this course is to be taken, in small
questions, doubtless much more in matters of high concern, as many points are
now controverted between Us and Protestants. In such to be left to our own
private conjectures and Interpretations, would be most unsafe and unreasonable.
And had Protestants taken the course here prescribed by the Saint for the
inquisition of Truth, when they first raised questions about Religion, (as in
such cases all Christians ought to do) could ever such a thing as the
Protestant Church have had a being or existence? For it is as visible as the
Sun, that there was no pre-existent form of Faith in the whole Christian World,
according to which they modeliz'd their Religion in England, and with whom they
communicated, when they divided from the Church of Rome, their Catholic Mother.

If great St. Austin was not little in esteem with our modern Heretics, they
might receive full satisfaction from him in this point, if they would
Impartially peruse his Writings against the Donatists, and other Enemies of the
Churches Faith and Unity. That of his is very remarkable against Crescontius;
Though (says he) there cannot be produced Lib. 1. cap. 33.
from Scriptures any examples of such a thing, yet the Truth of the same
Scriptures is held of us in this matter, when we do that which pleases the
whole Church, which the Authority of the same Scriptures commends; that
because the Holy Scriptures cannot deceive us, whosoever fears to be deceived
with the obscurity of this question, let him require the judgment of the
Church, which the Holy Scriptures without any ambiguity do demonstrate: To the
end that because the Scripture cannot deceive us, whosoever is afraid to be
deceived by the obscurity of any question, may have recourse to the Churches
judgment concerning it, which Church the Holy Scriptures demonstrate without
any ambiguity.

Two things are suitable to our present purpose which are clear from hence.
First, that though we may sometimes doubt what is Truth, yet we can never doubt
which is the true Church, demonstrated to us by the Scriptures; upon whose
judgment while we rely, we are secure from holding any thing contrary to the
written Word commending to us her Authority.

Secondly, That though the Scriptures are Infallible and cannot deceive us, yet
if we will not deceive our selves and kill our Souls by the dead Letter without
the quickening sense, we must believe what the Church believes, submitting our
private reason to her public Interpretation. For else let Heretics never so
much boast of Scripture for them, we may tell them in the words of the same
Saint; This ye Cont. Faust. l. 32. c. 19.
seem to do, that Scriptures may loose all Authority, while every one may allow
or disallow what his own mind suggests to him out of them. That is, may not
subject his Faith to the Authority of Scripture, but subject Scripture to his
Faith. It being indeed the property of all Heretics not to take sense from,
but to bring sense to those Sacred Oracles, forcing them by manifest
distortions or dark conjectures to speak in defense of their prejudicated
Tenets; and so make nothing of Scripture, while they seem to value nothing else.

Now what remedy against this intolerable abuse of the Word of God, and
everlastingly-quarrelproducing evil but that of Origin. Quoties, etc. As often
as they (Heretics) Ho. in Mat. and Praef. l. (...).
bring forth Canonical Scriptures, which no Christian but believes and assents
to, they seem to say; Behold the word of Truth is in our Houses; but we must
not believe them, nor depart from the Primitive Ecclesiastical Tradition; nor
believe otherwise then as the Churches of God by succession have delivered to
us. And to put them to silence with that of L. de Praes. p. 19.
Tertullian. We must not appeal to Scriptures, neither is the controversy to be
settled upon them, in which either there will be no victory at all, or very
uncertain. Yea, there is no good got by disputing out of Texts of Scripture,
(that is, as interpretable by private reason, and played upon by wit,) but
either to make a man sick or mad. But that is only to be believed for for
Truth, which in nothing disagrees from the Tradition of the Church. Thus he,
fully agreeing with Origin in the fore-quoted place. And I cannot omit here
what the glorious Bishop of Hippo has, so apposite for our present purpose to
his Catechumens; The Holy Church, the Church which is one, the true S. Aust. de
Symb. lib. 1. v. 6.
Church, the Catholic Church fights against all Heresies. She may be resisted,
but cannot be conquered: All Heresies have gone out of her, as unprofitable
branches cut off from the Vine; (see Protestants your Original) but she remains
in her Root, in her Charity: The gates of Hell shall not prevail against her.
Nor that to Honoratus; when therefore we see God standing for us, and so much
fruit and proficiency, doubt we to repose our L. de util. Cred. c. 17.
selves in the bosom of that Church, which from the Apostolical Chair by
Successions of Bishops, Heretics on all sides barking in vain against her,
has obtained Supremacy of Power? To whom not to give the chief, is truly
either the highest Impiety, or harebrain Arrogance.

Thus the Fathers always brought Believers to the Church for a firm foundation
in tottering times; there they cast Anchor, and fixed themselves amidst the
storms of Controversies and Contentions raised by unreasonable men with the
wind of strange Doctrines, lest they should make Shipwreck of their Holy Faith;
this still they pressed upon all Christians in doubts of Disputations, the
Church, the Church, believe the Church, the Pillar and ground of Truth, the
Sacred Depository of revealed Verities, the rich Storehouse of all things
belonging to Salvation, protected by Christ to the Worlds end, endowed with the
certain gift of Truth by the special guidance of the Holy Ghost, founded upon a
Rock that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. Which is nothing
else but what they had learned and received from Scripture and Tradition.

A Truth so convincing, that it extorted from Dr. Field, a great Patron of the
English Protestants, In his Book of the Church.
words to this effect: Controversies are now a days grown to that height, and
so numerous and intricate, that few have time to discuss and search into them
thoroughly for satisfaction; fewer wit and abilities to do it as such a
business of concernment require, that no security remains but to fly into the
arms of the Church, and acquiess in her judgments and definitions. But from
words let us proceed to deeds, from the Doctrine to the practice of Antiquity.

SECT. IX.
The aforesaid Authority of the Church cleared and demonstrated by the constant
practice of all Ages.

IF we cast our eyes through the whole Christian World, not a Popish Priest in
the exercise of his Spiritual Jurisdiction, but is in some sort a practical
proof of this Authoritative Power, wherewith the Church is invested by Jesus
Christ: Yet residing more eminently and with larger extent in Bishops, the
supreme Order of the Clergy, made Overseers of their respective Flocks by the
Holy Ghost; it appears more gloriously visible in the Decrees and Acts of
General Councils, the highest Ecclesiastical Tribunal, determining all emergent
Controversies in Spiritual matters, with Anathemae's against all Contradictors
whatsoever. And Catholics in all Ages acknowledging their Sacred and obliging
Authority, paid most inviolably the just Tribute of Obedience to their
Decisions, with submission of their private Judgments and Opinions, however
rational before they seemed unto them. So that what points soever were once
declared to be of Faith by lawful and approved Councils, those who persisted in
the contrary Doctrines where accounted Heretics; and being justly
Excommunicated for such incorrigible obstinacy, shunned by all the Faithful, as
no better than Heathens and Publicans.

Now I cannot think that English Protestants will say, though such Decrees
issued out from General Councils, yet it was by an usurped Power not of Right;
and so though such exact obedience was paid by Christians to them, yet it was
in their own prejudice, and not of duty or obligation; (though truly in deeds
they assert it) because they pretend much veneration to the first four General
Councils; and Bishop Montague, one of the Learnedest In his Appello ad Casa.
men they ever had, proceeds so far, as to defend against his more zealous
Brethren of Romes ruin the Infallibility of all such Councils in Councils in
Decrees of Faith. And indeed (abstracting from the Institution of Christ and
Apostolical practice) it is so notoriously unreasonable a thing, and
destructive of all Government to deny Occumenical Synods to be the fi^^est
Judges in such matters, that few or no Heretics ever had the confidence
absolutely to disclaim against the Authority of such Assemblies as Tyrannically
assuming a Power over other men's Consciences in things not appertaining to
them; but acknowledging their Authority, still causelessly picked quarrels,
either about their Calling, or Convening, or Proceeding, or Confirming, or
Receiving; pretending them to be Defective some way or other, to justify their
Disobedience to their Decrees.

And doubtless, as fittest, so if they were not lawful Judges in all spiritual
matters by Commission from Christ, the Supreme Head of his mystical Body, and
necessary, when made so by present circumstances: the Apostles themselves (when
Controversies arose in the Infant-Church among Believers about some legal
Observances) would not have taken this course to define those matters; Neither
would they have prefixed to their Decrees a Visum est Spiritui Act. 15.
sancto and nobis, and so justly father those determinations upon the Holy
Ghost, had they not been Divine Sanctions, though made by men, yet according to
the appointment and will of God, infallibly assisting their endeavors; Neither
would the Universal Church in after-Ages have on the same occasions insisted in
their steps, or presumed in the same authoritative style to attribute their
Meetings and Decisions to the Holy Spirit. A Power, as Divine, withal so
necessary, that no other way could with so much efficacy and satisfaction
preserve, declare, or explicate the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
extirpate Heresies, maintain Peace and Unity in the Church, strengthen the
Nerves of Ecclesiastical Authority, reform Clergy and Laity, and depress the
Enemies of the name of Christ our Lord and Savior: Insomuch that Hooker (a
very learned Protestant) pleads strongly for Submission and Obedience to
Decrees of General Councels; telling those that are otherwise In the Pres. to
his ^ccl. Politic.
minded, That the way of Peace they have not known, going against the dictates
of Nature, Reason, and Holy Writ; And, as I remember, gives instance in the
first Council celebrated by the Apostles, the pattern of what were to follow;
whose Decrees put to silence all former doubts and disputations, every
Christian obeying without the least scruple to be misled by them, and with all
readiness, as if God himself had spoken to them. And questionless the Divine
Providence thus ordered, that this main point of the Authority of Councels
should as well be delivered to the World by Apostolical Practice as Precept,
that with greater evidence they might know whom and what to follow, when
questions about Christian Doctrine did arise; and that after the definitive
Sentence of that supreme Judicature, all wranglings were to cease, and they had
then nothing to do but to obey.

In the Centuries immediately succeeding, though Satan's Missioners were
spreading false Doctrines to corrupt the Faith, and Perturb the Peace of the
Church, yet no Ecumenical Synods could be celebrated, by reason of those
General Persecutions which haled the Christians to their Martyrdom as far and
wide as the vast Roman Empire had Arms to do it. And indeed all that while the
Blood of those Noble Armies of Glorious Martyrs spoke as loved and as
Powerfully for the Faith of Christ, as the Decrees of living Confessors could
have done; supplying as it were in that extraordinary manner what these had a
constant Power and will also to perform, but no convenience to put in
execution. However they met as well as they could, and took the best course
those sad times would permit to kill Souldestroying Heresies, and keep true
Faith and unity alive in the Christian Church.

Afterward in the time of Constantine that Great and Glorious Emperor, the
first public Nursing Father of his Catholic Mother, when Arianism had
Instilled its Poison into the Veins of many Christian Bishop, or Antichristian
rather, and so diffused its Contagion into a great part of the Body of the
Church, by denying the Divinity of the Son of God; the first Ecumenical and
most Famous Synod was Celebrated at Nicaea in Bythinia, Ann. Chapter 327.
to provide an Antidote against his Venomous Infection; where after most mature
deliberation and debate, the Consubstantiality of the Son of God with the
Eternal Father was defined and declared by the Council to be of Faith, against
the Arch-Heretick Arius and all his followers.

And the prime end for which General Councils were instituted and endowed with
this supreme Judiciary power, being for the preservation of the Catholic
Faith, by the Authoritative condemnation of incroaching Heresies, the next
Ecumenical Synod celebrated at Constantinople, against Macedonius and Ann. Chapter
381.
whom he had taught, contrary to the Doctrine of the Church, to deny the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the Sacred Trinity. Ann. Chapter
431.
The next at Ephesus, where Nestorius the Patriarch of Constantinople with his
Adherents were Condemned for distracting Christ into two Persons. And the
fourth at Chalcedon, against the Eutychians for contracting Christ into one
Nature. Ann. Chapter 451.
And so others in following Ages to our present times were called on emergent
occasions to determine and declaring to all Christians what was to be believed
as sufficiently revealed by Almighty God; and the like practice will be to the
Worlds end, when the necessities of the Church require it.

Yet not as making new Substantial Creeds, or precise Articles of Faith not
before in being, (for that would require new Revelations of God's Will, which
Catholics pretend not to, acknowledging Christ to be a perfect Lawgiver by
himself and his Apostles) but only declaring and explicating what already is
revealed when called in question. For the definitive Sentence of a General
Council in a matter of Faith, includes and presupposes an universal Tradition
of that Doctrine, and is but a public Authoratative and more explicit
declaration of what has been taught by Christ and his Apostles, and what the
Church holds upon that tenure, when any Contradictors endeavor to rob us of
our Holy Faith.

For Catholic Faith always is the same, although the Evidence and verbal
Notions of that Faith are not always alike; nor is it material, so they be but
sound and agreeable to Tradition; yea, sometimes words never before in
Ecclesiastical use, are accepted by General Councils into the Churches language
to express her immutable Faith, as circumstances then require, for the more
efficacious redress of present evils; and preventing all mistakes of that
nature for the future, even in the earnest understandings. For by this means
Catholics knowing assuredly what to hold and stick close to in points
controverted, could not be circumvented by the subtle insinuations and wily
expressions of Heretics, whereby they lie in wait to deceive the unwary, and
insensibly instill into well-meaning Souls their Pernicious Doctrines for
saving Truths.

And this is the true reason why the Arians did so storm at the word (...), (
Consubstantial,) and in furious rage cry against it as an innovation, when
first inserted into the Creed by the Nicene Fathers as a most proper and
powerful Antidote against their poison. And why those Sons of subtilty did take
such indefatigable pains, and put in practice such curious Artifices to
counter-check, or wholly extirpate that term out of Christian Confessions, as
well knowing if that word lived and prosper'd in the Church, all their Arts and
Eloquence could not easily gain more Proselytes, but their Anti-Doctrine must
die and perish. And as upon the same account the General Councils of Lateran
and Trent after the unhappy birth and growth of the Sacramentarian Heresy, did
make use of a new word ( viz.) Trausubstantiation, to express more aptly the
Ancient Faith; so for the same reason our modern Reformers exclaim against that
term as a novelty in Religion, because it manifestly contains their
condemnation, and enervates their main Plea of Reformation.

SECT. X.
A farther Declaration of the Churches Authority or Infallibility in General
Councils from Autiquity.

THe Church of God in all Ages by General Councils giving an decisive Sentence
in controversies about Faith, as has been shown in the precedent Section, each
Decree and Anathema speaks in deed and reality her Infallibility in such
Decisions. Notwithstanding lest perverse minds or weak apprehensions should
misconstrue her Actions, and not judge aright of the grounds of such
proceedings; the Ancient Fathers, who best understood the belief and meaning of
their Catholic Mother, have in their Writings left undoubted Testimonies to
the World that they cannot err who follow her voice, declaring by those
Assemblies what ought to be believed for revealed Truths.

S. Athanasius so famous for his Confession of Faith and Sufferings for it, in
his Epistle to the Affrican Bishops, tells them, that Verbum Domini per
Oecumenicam Niceae Synodum manet in aeternum; Not doubting to affirm the
Doctrine of the Nicene Fathers to be the Word of God, and of Eternal Verity.
From whom and other Fathers the Glorious Emperor Constantine had Learned to
write to the Churches. That whatsoever is Decreed in the In Epist. ad Ecc. apud
Sacta. l. 1. c. 6.
Holy Council of Bishops is altogether to be ascribed to the Divine Will. S.
Ambrose, that great maintainer of Ecclesiastical Authority and Discipline,
professed resolutely that he would rather part with his Life then the Nicene
Faith. Sequor tractatum Epist. 12.
Niceni Concilii a quo nec mors, nec gladius me poterit separare: The Council
of Nice is my guide, from which neither Death nor the Sword of Persecution
shall divide me. And what of St. Hilary and other Catholic Bishops and
Confessors that suffered from the power and malice of the Arians, before they
would part with one Syllable or Letter of the Nicene Faith, by changing (...)
or (...) (of the same Substance) into (...), (of the like Substance) is well
known from the Faithful Records of those times.

When above six hundred Fathers were gathered at Chalcedon in a General Victor
Afri. de Persec. Wand. ca. 61. Barronius, etc.
Council there celebrated, and some, perhaps secret Arians, proposed the
re-examination of the Nicene Decrees, it in no sort would be permitted, the
Holy Synod crying out, Si quis retractat, etc. If any one retract, let him be
Accursed. If any one inquires anew about them, let him be accursed. Cursed be
he that adds, Cursed be he that Innovates. For in such definitions in points of
Faith, being rather the Decrees of God than men, should they have been
subjected to a fresh Inquisition, had not been so much to question the Fathers
Assembled in the name of Christ; as the Infallibity of the Holy Ghost assisting
their endeavors in such Decisions. Which is not my collection, but the
assertion of St. Leo the Great, both for his Sanctity and Supreme Pastorship in
the Church of God, in his Epistle to the Emperor Martian in these words.
Praenoscat Pietas nostra Venerabilis Imperator, etc. Venerable Emperor, let
Ep. 78.
your Piety first know, that whom we send from the Apostolical Chair, are not
directed to combat with the enemies of Faith, we daring not to go about to
handle those things which have been defined by the good pleasure of God, both
at Nice and Chalcedon, as if they were weak and doubtful, which so great an
Authority has ratified by the Holy Spirit. And therefore the Emperor, that
the said Decrees might be more vigorously Habetur in Codice Justini.
executed, published an Edict, Strictly commanding humane contentions and
Inquisitions to cease about those matters, and all Christians under the Roman
Jurisdiction to submit their Judgments to the Decrees of the most Holy Synods:
Because (besides the penalties of the Laws) they would by such quarrels
incur the just censure of joining with Jews and Pagans against the Church.
Yet alas Protestants do so, and will needs be the only or truest Christians.

St. Austin, the Oracle of Antiquity, De Bapt. cont. Donat: l 1.
tells us, That though concerning Rebaptization of Heretics, persons of
eminent Learning and Piety did dispute among themselves peaceably the question,
insomuch that there were contrary decisions of particular Councils in the
business, 'till in a plenary Synod of the whole World that which was soundly
believed was without all doubt confirmed. And elsewhere, That concerning the
validity of Baptism Cont. Parm. lib. 2.
given by any one not a Christian, nothing ought determinately to be concluded
without the definition of some General Council. And that concerning the
validity of Baptism given by Heretics there was no question to be made, being
already agitated, perfected, and defined in the unity of the whole World. Which
had it been done before St. Cyprians Glorious Martyrdom, he makes no doubt but
the Holy Martyr would have submitted his Judgment to the L. 7. cont. Donat. ca*
53.
Authority of an Ecumenical Synod.

And therefore that saying of Lib. 2. de bapt. cap. 3.
the same Father, Priora Concilia nunquam a posterioribus emendari; That former
Councils are sometimes corrected by the later, is not possibly applicable to
decisions in points of Faith, as if something amiss in such Decrees might be
amended; for then the Saint must needs contradict himself in his well-known
assertions. And therefore is to be understood either of further explications of
such points, and then it is sound and Catholic Doctrine; or Customs and Rights
appertaining to Church Discipline, which are alterable by the Authority of
Councils for the better, as present circumstances shall require. And doubtless
many opposite Canons of Lawful Councils may be found in such matters, and makes
nothing against the Doctrine of the Church concerning her Infallibility. But in
matters of Faith no General approved Synods did ever make contrary Decrees; so
that when any are shown opposite in words, they may with sufficient
satisfaction be reconciled, and manifested to agree in the Catholic sense of
Doctrine therein contained.

For could there be really contrary Decrees in points of Catholic Faith
determined, General Councils confirmed by the Pope, and received by the Church,
that would be eternally false, and most unreasonable, which is ratified for a
most manifest Truth, and most agreeable to right reason by universal
Churchpractice; namely, That all those who will not he accounted Heretics,
must conform themselves to the Deerees of Ecumenical Synods. And are the words
of Vincentius Lyrynensis in his Admonitory against Profane Novelties, a
Discourse as express for us, as if it were now ex professo writ against
Protestants in this controversy.

But not to be tedious, I will close up these Testimonies (so pregnant for the
Infallibility of the Church declaring her Faith by Ecumenical Synods) with the
most famous Speech of St. Gregory the Great, Sicut Sancti Lib. 1. Ep. 24 ad
Pat. Constan. and Alexan.
Evangelii, etc. I confess my self to receive and venerate the four Councils as
the four Books of the Holy Gospel. And then names them, yet not with any
intention to exclude the like esteem of the fifth, being the second Ann. Chapter
553.
General Council at Constantinople, which afterward he specifies; and were all
the General Councils celebrated before his happy Government of the universal
Church. Neither will the Protestants be ever able to give any satisfactory
reason why they do not give the same veneration and acceptance to all approved
Ecumenical Synods, and in particular to that of Trent, being confirmed by the
same visible Head, and received by the Body of the same Catholic Church.

And to make this more evident; I will make a brief parallel of the Protestants
Case with the Arians, (by them confessed to be Heretics) by which I think will
easily be discovered that they can say nothing to justify themselves against
that Council, but will be as good and strong for the Arians against the Nicene
Fathers; their trials being alike upon their disturbance of the Peace of the
Church with new Doctrines, and their condemnation alike by the same Authority.
If they say the Council of Trent was not a lawful General Council; did not the
Arians pretend the same against the Nicene Synod, and all Heretics take up the
same Plea against the Councils by whom they were condemned? If they say, true,
they did so; but They without cause, We justly. Let them give us a
demonstration of this, and we are satisfied; and nothing else can carry it in
this controversy.

Did not the Arians repute the Novatians Heretics, being condemned by a
Council, though not General? And yet refused themselves to stand to the Nicene
Synod though Ecumenical. Why? The Novatians, say the Arians, complain without
cause; We justly. Did not the Nestorians and Eutychians abhor the the Arians as
justly anathematized by the Nicene Fathers, and yet these refuse to obey the
Decrees of the Chalcedon Council, those of the Constantinopolitan? Why? The
Arians contradicted without cause, say the Nestorians and Eutychians, but we
justly. In a word, it is a plea common to all condemned Heretics, with
Protestants; and if they would speak fully, amounts to thus much: We will
receive no Councils farther then they agree with us, and will never acknowledge
or submit to any as lawful that condemn our Doctine. For when they they have a
long time hunted up and down for excuses, this in reality is the only and
justest cause they have of their disobedience.

If they appeal from the Council to the Scriptures, as in their Opinion
standing for them; did not the Arians do the same? And I dare be bold to say
with far more probability then Protestants can pretend to in many points
controverted between Them and Us. If they say they never had a fair hearing
before Sentence was passed against them, and that they were condemned by their
Enemies, being Judges in their own cause. Did not, or might not the Arians, and
any other Heretics, pretend the same against the respective Councils by which
they were condemned? And it is all one, as if some Rebels stubbornly refusing to
answer for themselves in a just Trial according to the established Laws of the
Kingdom which they have transgressed, should after Sentence pronounced complain
of Illegal proceedings as not being heard for themselves, and having no reason
to plead, where the Party offended was their Judge by his Commissioners.

This is the parallel; And seriously for my own part in the most Impartial
examination of it, I cannot see any possible evasion for the Protestants, but
that in all Doctrines of Faith wherein they contradict the present Church of
Rome, they are as notorious Heretics by the decisions of the Council of Trent,
as the Arians for denying the Divinity of Christ by the Authoratative Sentence
of the Nicene Fathers.

And to conclude this Section and Motive; after all these express Texts of
Scripture for the Churches Authority and Obedience unto her under pain of
damnation; with the sense of them so brought down to us by the Writings of
Antiquity and Church-practice of her jurisdiction; (which is an evidence that
all contrary Interpretations are false and spurious) for any blinded with
Interest or Passion to venture his eternal Salvation upon a May be otherwise,
or a probable argument deduced from Scripture, leaning on the weak crutches of
private reason, or a particular Fallible Congregation, is a strange and
dangerous presumption. For in Fine, the Authority of the Catholic Church in
such matters, is of more weight than ten thousand Arguments of private Reason.
It being a thing manifest to judicious men, that there is no place for Ifs and
Ands, where there can be no evidence brought against a point of Doctrine, which
the highest Tribunal upon earth had already Decreed, and proposed to be
believed by all Christians, as sufficiently revealed by Almighty God.

The second Motive:
That the English Protestant Church making Scripture the only sufficient Rule
of Faith, without any Visible Judge to Interpret and give the Sense of it
Authoritatively to Christians, stands on a most uncertain and groundless
Foundation.

SECT. I.
An Introduction to the following Discourse.

THus having by the Grace and Blessing of God on my endeavors in the
inquisition of Truth found sure Principles whereon to build Faith and Religion,
in the Roman Church, and no where else; nothing remained; but notwithstanding
all interposed difficulties, to betake my self to that Communion, wherein
rationally, that is, upon Infallible grounds I was persuaded Truth only was to
be found, and Salvation, ordinarily to be expected. However, that I might give
the Religion I had professed so long a full hearing to the best of my abilities
and understanding, before I shak'd hands with it, I diligently examined the
grounds of the Protestant Church and Doctrine, (which too few do,) and after
much enquiry, it was evident to me, they could not afford to Impartial
Judgments any solid and real satisfaction. For the main Pillar of the
Protestant Religion, being to make the Scripture the sole Rule of Faith, I
finding by clear conviction this foundation to be without Solidity, how could I
in Reason or Conscience stand firm to that Church which I saw built on so
unstable a bottom. And indeed were Protestants able to perform what they
promise, that is, to resolve all Controversies of Faith by Sacred Scripture, we
should be so far from being true Christians, the best of men, that we were
worse than Beasts if we should refuse to be judged thereby.

Wherefore it is a wrongful Imputation in them to bear the World in hand, that
we have not a due veneration of those Sacred Oracles of Divine Truth; when our
reverence and respect to them is in reality more than theirs, our Canon more
general, our Expositions more elaborate, humble and submissive, and our Assent
unchangeable to whatsoever the Church declares to be revealed by them, or is
contained in them evidently by necessary consequence: They in the interim only
believing by a Spirit with a strange presumption, what they please, saying and
unsaying, (in Civil Wars among themselves, as well as against us, whom they
call the common enemy,) what they think is for their present advantage, to
serve their turn on all occasions.

And while we necessarily urge to all Christians the Authority of the Church,
as the Pillar and ground of Truth, we are so far from intending any diminution
of their just esteem, that if they can produce but one single place of
Scripture evidently containing the contrary to what we believe, Conclamatum
est, The controversy is at an end, we will confess we are in the wrong; and for
this Miracle (for 'twill be no less when ever it is done) yield the whole cause
unto them. But 'till then let them cease to traduce us as Non-Venera^ers of
Sacred Writ, because we will not receive it for what God did never intend it;
and leave it to his Church: And against the evidence of our own Eyes and long
experience, acknowledge it to have conditions fit and requisite for the plain
and Infallible instruction of all Christians of the whole Law of Christ, and
final decision of all Controversies. For that Scripture by it self cannot
perform those necessary Offices in the Church, will manifestly be made to
appear in the following Sections.

But first I shall show that herein they agree with other Heretics, and
Dissent from the Ancient Church as well as from Us in this main fundamental of
their Religion.

SECT. II.
Heretics from the beginning were accustomed to Appeal to Scripture as the
sole Rule of. Faith whereby they would be judged; in opposition to the
Traditionary Doctrine and Sense of the Catholic Church.

THat whatsoever is purely of Divine Faith, depends necessary on the Word of
God, is sound Doctrine; but that all Supernatural Verities revealed to the
Church are so written in the received Canon, as none can misunderstand them, is
a most dangerous position; yet the Anchora Sacra and chief refuge of old
condemned Heretics, as well as of our modern Adversaries; who groundiug their
novel Opinions upon Texts of Scripture as interpreted by their own private
Reason, do at last make them Heretical by choosing pertinaciously to adhere to
them, against the Sense and Judgment of the Church. A sad Case this, that with
the Waters of Life they should suck in Eternal Death into their Souls. But
alas! Thus they turn Remedies into Diseases, and blind their Eyes with the
Heavenly Light of the Word; becoming so much the more incorrigible, because
they persuade themselves (even against evidence, (if seeing they would see)
that they have Divine Authority for their Doctrines.

The Arians in the Controversy between them and Catholics about the Divinity
of Christ, would admit nothing but Scripture, as St. Austin testifies, bringing
in Maximus an Arian Bishop thus disputing with him. If you produce any thing
Cont Max. l. 1. Init.
out of the Divine Scriptures, which are cemmon to all, of necessity we must
give ear unto it: But these words which are without Scripture in no Case are
received by us. The direct Language of Protestants, who in this however are
perfect Arians.

The Macedonians impugning the Divinity of the Holy Ghost; rejected the Gloria
Patri and Filio and Spiritui Sancto, whereby the Church professes her belief of
a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, because not contained
in Holy Writ. Witness St. Basil; They Li. de Sp. S. c. 25, and 26.
(the Macedonians) cease not to brag up and down that the Glorification of God
with the Holy Ghost wants Testimony, wants Scripture. Thus they then, and thus
Protestants now in points controverted between them and us. But hear the same
Holy Fathers answer, Verily against The Church then in ^h^r Doxology used Cum
Spiritu Sancto, as El Spiritui Sancto
that they say the Preposition, cum (Spiritu Sancto) to want Testimony, nor to
be extant in Scripture, we reply thus: If nothing else be received without the
Scripture, neither truly let this be received by us without Scripture, let us
also receive this among many other. For I think it Apostolical to adhere to the
unwritten Traditions. You see we need not new words to condemn the Protestants,
who will never be able to give any rational satisfaction why they receive some
things not in Scripture only upon the score of Church-Tradition, and yet refuse
other alike commended to them by the same Authority. In all reason they deserve
an equal reception, and so they must become Catholics.

Euryches the Arch-Heretick denied Christ to be perfect man as well as perfect
God, and for his defense appealed to Scripture, Ergo a S. Scriptur^s, (...)
(says he) have vet learned from the Sacred Scr^ptures of two Natures. To whom
it was replied, Neither have we been Concit. Chalced. Act. 1.
taught (the word) (...) from Sacred Writ. Which must needs put him to a
bashful silence; the verity of Christ's Humane Nature being as fully delivered
in Scripture as his Divine, though not in such express terms as they required:
And therefore both either to be necessarily received or rejected by them. But
Protestants certainly have far less to say for themselves, who with the
Eutychians receiving the term (...) not found in Scripture, yet deny the
Corporal presence of Christ in the Blessed Eucharist by a real, though
Invisible Change of the Visible Elements, when, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink Joh. 6. 51. 55.
indeed: And again, The Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I will give
for the Life of the World: And the most Sacred words of Institution, This is my
Body, This is my Plood, are plain and express terms, as any Doctrine can be
delivered unto our capacity.

The Pelagians (to name no more, and only such as Protestants themselves repute
Heretics) those Arch-Enemies of the Doctrine of Grace so abundantly delivered
in Sacred Writ, yet fly thither also to set up Nature against it; as St. Austin
who best knew, relates of them in these words, Let us, say they ( the L. de
Not. and Great. 39.
Pelagians) believe what we read, what we read not, let us believe unlawful to
maintain.

Thus Scripture, was their Sword and Buckler against the definitions of the
Church whereby they were condemned; neither could they so escape the brand of
Heresy: And Protestants taking up the same Weapons, in the same manner, to
uphold themselves against the Faith and practice of all Ages, by treading in
the steps of such Predecessors, show sufficiently of what Generation and Spirit
they are, and seem justly involved in the same condemnation.

Thus having made good the first thing I promised in this Section, namely, that
the common course of Heretics is to have recourse to sole Scripture, and to
urge it as Interpreted by themselves, against the Churches sense and judgment;
to speak any thing of the second, to wit, the different Faith and Practice of
the Christian World, would be but actum agere, a superfluous labor, being so
largely before declared Sect. 5. of Trad. and the two last Sections of the
Churches Authority.
in the handing of Tradition, and the Infallibility or Authority of the Church,
and thither I refer the Courteous Reader.

Only for the present give me leave to say, that I carefully comparing both
these together found manifest different Rules of Faith without any possibility
of reconcilement; old and new Heretics appealing to Scripture, and resolute to
be tried by nothing else, without any visible Judge to interpret them: The
Ancient Fathers and present Catholics asserting the word of God, whether
written or unwritten, as delivered to us by the universal Tradition of the
Church, and declared by her voice in approved General Councils, to be the only
sufficient and sure foundation of Christian belief. I found that if these built
their Faith on solid and safe Principles, (as it appeared to me they did) the
other must needs rely on an uncertain and groundless foundation for their
Religion; and having a desire to be numbered with the Saints, not Heretics of
old, I found I could not be so, except I did relinquish Protestancy, and unite
my self to the Roman Church, of the same belief and practice with Primitive
Christians.

SECT. III.
A declaration of the English Protestants Doctrine; how, and why they make
Scripture the only Rule of Faith.

FOr the clearer handling of this point, and prevention of all mistakes, I
shall faithfully deliver what the Protestant Church of England teaches
Principally in this main fundamental of her Religion; and not injure it, or
her, to the best of my judgment, by any Observations made thereon.

First, she teaches, That Holy Scripture does (explicitly) contain all things
necessary to Salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite and necessary to Salvation. This the Composers of her
Articles do teach, and this they must teach who will make the written Word an
entire Rule of Faith; that is, comprehending all points necessary to Salvation.

Now in all reason to satisfy those whom they would persuade to be of this
belief, it ought to be made evident, that the Apostles in their Writings did
intend plainly and perfectly to comprize whatsoever is necessary to be believed
and practiced by all Christians, and deposited them in the Church as a complete
Rule of Faith for the trial of all Doctrines, she also receiving it for such,
and practicing accordingly in all Ages. Which once done, their position is then
a most clear and rational inference. But this being impossible for them to
prove, because contradicted by the Faith and practice of the Primitive Church,
which could not be ignorant of all Apostolical Doctrines and Constitutions, and
also of present Catholics receiving them from her by an uninterrupted visible
Tradition, must needs be a false and most dangerous Principle, though laid for
the foundation of their Religion.

Secondly, for a further groundwork she teaches, That General Councils may, and
have erred, even in things appertaining to God. That is, in matters of Faith,
as well as of Fact, as her own Expositions more freely express her meaning. A
Doctrine, the first Reformers would never have given place in the foundation of
their Spiritural building, even for their own sakes, but that it was not
possible their new Fabric of Faith could stand for any considerable time
without fall of the Churches Authority. Were not they then sit men to be
credited, if General Councils may err?

But that which follows, Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary unto
Salvation have neither strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that
they be taken (explicitly) out of Holy Scriptures, Is the very quintessence of
Anarchy and Rebellion, so destructive of all Government, (though an Engine made
only to batter down the Church) that were it put in practice as here taught,
confusion would cover the face of the earth, and the World would run quickly
back into its first Chaos. For if things ordained by General Councils, have
neither strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that it is made out
to every private Judgment that they are taken out of the Holy Scriptures; I
demand by whom this may be, or must be declared. Now let it be considered that
Church Governors are instituted by Jesus Christ, having the Keys of so
wonderful and transcendent power committed to their hands. That whatsoever they
Mat. 18. 18.
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever they shall loose
on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: With a promise from Christ, That where
they meet in his Name, he will be in the midst of them; and ver. 19.
that he will be always with them to the Mat. 28. 20.
Worlds end: And that the Holy Spirit shall guide them into all Truth. Joh. 16.
13.
I say, let this be considered, and if the Decrees of such a Tribunal ordaining
concerning points of Faith, and proposing them to all Christians to be
believed, as the revealed will of God by his word from Heaven, and necessary to
Salvation, have no strength nor Authority 'till it may be further declared that
they are taken out of Holy Scriptures; those that require this condition to
make them obligatory, cannot possibly give any reasonable satisfaction to this
demand, unless they find out such a Judge, who is fitter, and in all
probability more likely not to err or deceive us in teaching what are revealed
Truths. But how impossible this is to be done, any one of an ordinary
understanding may without much study determine. Yet while they are in vain
attempting it, if men should take their word, as too many have already in
denying submission to the Churches Decrees in things necessary to Salvation,
and likewise in virtue of the same Principle (as in all equity they extend it)
withdraw their obedience from the Secular Magistrate in his necessary commands,
as he Judges, for the public good, 'till it be made out to them, that they are
in the present matter, though not taken out of the Holy Scriptures, yet
agreeable unto them; doubtless all Government and Order is brought to nothing,
and their Edicts and Laws will be evacuated, as often as the pride, or
prejudice, or passion, or Interest of Subjects shall think them not warrantable
from Holy Writ. Neither could such sad effects be hindered from daily breaking
out to the Worlds disquiet, were they not curbed in with fear of present
punishment: For when they, who are thus taught, think themselves secure from
the lash, their deeds sufficiently evidence what Temporal Magistrates are to
expect from their hands.

But to stick close to the Church which they have forsaken. If they think they
have kept firm ground enough for Church Authority to stand upon by inserting
these words, In things necessary to Salvation; thereby implying, that though
her Decrees in things necessary to Salvation, have no strength or Authority
'till it may be declared (not by her self, for she has already made her
declaration) that they are taken out of the Holy Scriptures, yet in things not
necessary and indifferent, her Authority is absolute and independent on such a
declaration, with an obligation of obedience from Believers: If this, I say, be
their meaning to keep up Church Authority, it will not do the business, but is
only to put a Reed in Christ's hand instead of a Royal-Scepter, and to allow his
Church a Mock-power only in Spiritual matters; as will easily appear to any
one considering the end for which our Lord and Savior set up a Government in
his Church. For having founded and furnished his Church with plentiful means
for the Salvation of mankind, and instituted a Government therein to conserve
and apply those means, that they might be effectual for the foresaid end and
purpose, Church Governors cannot possibly make a sufficient application, as
Coworkers with God by his appointment in the great work of our Salvation, if
their Power extended it self absolutely to things indifferent without which we
may be saved, and in those things necessary to Salvation can ordain things,
'till a Declaration from God knows whom and when, makes it good and valid. For
they tell us not by whom, or when, this Declaration must be made in such Cases,
but inveloping their conceit in general words, only deliver that what
Ecumenical Synods ordain in things necessary to Salvation have no strength nor
Authority, 'till it may be declared that they are taken out of the Holy
Scriptures. Is this Doctrine consistent with the end of Church Government?
Would not those Superiors be invested with a goodly power, who can without
dispute bind their Subjects hands from scratching their own Faces, but have no
obliging Authority to hinder them from thrusting a Sword into their Bowels, or
striking a Dagger to their Heart? Has Christ given some Apostles, Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and Ephesians. 4.
some Pastors to feed and govern his Church, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, 'till we
all come into the unity of the Faith, and yet what points they teach as
necessary to Salvation, have no strength nor Authoriry, 'till their Disciples
and Learners of them shall declare that they are taken out of Holy Scriptures?
Would God exact of Church Governors an account of their Subjects Souls
committed to their Charge, threatening to require their Blood at their Hands if
any perish Acts 20. 26, 27.
through their negligence, and yet not invest them with an Authority
essentially requisite for the sufficient discharge of so dreadful a duty? What
says St. Paul to this point? Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give an account for them. Now comes the
English Protestant Church with a Paraphrase, and teaches, Obey them that have
the rule over you, who watch for your Souls because they must give an account
of them, and submit your selves to their commands and order in things
indifferent, and not necessary not in what they teach and ordain, as, without
which, Salvation cannot be had; for such Decrees have no strength nor Authority
'till it may be declared that they are taken out of the Holy Scriptures. Can
any Conscientious or Rational man possibly persuade himself that this is the
Apostles meaning?

Thirdly, the English Protestants teach, That the Church has power to Decree
Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith. Had they stopped
here, and stood to it, they had soon returned to their Catholic Mother. But
forsooth it is with this Provisoe, That she ordain not any thing that is
contrary to Gods word; nor expound one place of Scripture that it be repugnant
to another. But never tells us who shall be this Judge to determine when her
Decrees and Orders are contrary to the Word of God, or not; or when she gives
the true sense of Scripture according to the Analogy of Faith, so that one
place be not repugnant to another: And so leaves us in a maze for our Salvation.

They had denied the Catholic Church Representative to be an Infallible
Witness of the Truths of Jesus Christ, and Authoritative Interpreter of
Scripture, to guide Believers in the true sense of it; and so it would have
been too a notorious Inquisition to have assumed it to their Conventicles;
wherefore having taken away the Pillar and ground of Truth, the Churches
Authority or Infallibility, they laid no other sure foundation, nor set up any
other determinate Column to uphold Religion, but leaves it in uncertainties to
certain ruin.

Well fare the Churches under St. Paul's care and governance, who had received
a Power not for destruction, but edification, and could do nothing against the
Truth, but (...) 10. 8.
for it: The English Protestant Church can do nothing for the Truth, but
against it; has no Power at all for edification, but only for destruction.
Neither indeed might she exercise her new assumed Jurisdiction without
destroying her self, when she could not be builded up but by pulling down to
patch up a Fabric out of the ruins. For the Composers of her Articles did
very well perceive if they admitted the Church to be the Authorized Visible
Judge of the Sense of Sripture by the Rule of Tradition, shining bright in the
practice of the whole Christian World, and immemorial possession of such points
they contradicted, it was not possible to escape the Sentence of condemnation;
but in the Controversy giving a decisive power only to the dead Letter of
Scripture, (the refuge of old condemned Heretics) they feared no Anathema
while themselves were Interpreters. And having the supreme Magistrate on their
side to prohibit Catholics to speak for themselves in any public defense, it
was easy to delude vulgar apprehensions with this plausible Sophism, The
Papists refuse to be tried by the Word of God.

Which things whosoever lays together, and seriously ponders, as I did, cannot
but discover that the English Protestant Reformers did not receive a Rule of
Faith from the Catholic Church, which had been the Square of Christian belief
in all Ages, and is to continue so for ever, but invented (or rather assumed
from their Predecessors the Ancient Heretics) a Rule of Faith for the Church
they were setting up, whereby they thought their new Doctrines might with most
likelihood be maintained, and found no better expedient then by denying an
authorized Visible Judge to pronounce a definitive Sentence in Controversies of
Faith, that so they might keep in possession of what they had usurped by
eternally wrangling about the right.

But that we may come to some issue by bringing them out of a mysterious may be
declared, to stand to something in this main Principle of Religion; admit that
the written word were the sole and perfect Rule of Faith, it being impossible
for dead Letters of themselves to rectify things applicable to them for that
end and purpose, they must needs acknowledge some animated Judge to perform
this Office among Christians by applying the Rule to all particulars. Now they
having denied the Church this right, and so cast off her living voice and
Authority in plain terms, though insisting in generals, they assign no other
determinate Interpreter, yet must have recourse to Reason, or Revelation; for
besides these three I know not any. I say, they must either let private Reason
make this declaration, and Judge of the true sense of Scripture, by her innate
Light; or fly to Revelation, and Pretend that the Holy Ghost Infallibly
declares by a Divine Light his meaning to them.

This later way of Divine Inspiration is laid claim to by the Calvinistical
party, and those strange broods of other English Sectaries. who have nothing
but Scripture and the Spirit of God in their mouths, upon whom in a most
Prodigious manner they Father all their Blasphemies, to the shame of
Christians. But it is rejected by all Protestants in any degree rational as
merely Fanatical, and invincibly convicted of Imposture by the manifest
contradictions of several pretenders to the Spirit of God. For can the Holy
Ghost reveal to the Calvinists that the Government of the Church by Presbytery
has a Divine right from Scripture, and by the same Divine Unction teach the
Independents that it is against the written Word, etc.

Private reason therefore is only left them to resolve their Faith into, and
rely upon in their inquiring after and belief of Supernatural Truths, and those
sublime Mysteries, to the knowledge of which nature has not sufficient Light
to advance her self, by her sole native powers; beside those mists of passion,
or prejudice, or Education or Interest, to which we are daily liable, and which
must needs make this way more dark and difficult in order to eternal Happiness.
However they must take to it, unless they will openly recant what they have
publicly approved. For though at first they kept secret this grand mystery of
their State-Religion, yet at last great Patrons of the English Protestant
Church have with Authority and much applause enthroned Mr. Chilling worth etc.
private Reason as a sole Queen and Mistress in the Churches Chair, to direct
and interpret the Holy Scriptures, and from them to give a final Sentence what
are the Truths of God revealed to us. Without which Sentence or Declaration the
Churches Decrees in things necessary to Salvation have no strength at all, or
obligation. Nor then neither, as these Rationalists explain it, upon the score
of Authority, but Reason only. But how unreasonably and without ground, I doubt
not to make appear in the following Sections.

SECT. IV.
That the Holy Scriptures are not the sole and perfect Rule of Faith.

TO evidence the groundlessness of this main foundation of the English
Protestant Church, as declared and explicated in the precedent Section, with
full satisfaction, I conceive it lies upon me principally to make three things
good against them.

First, That Scripture is not the sole and perfect Rule of Faith.

Secondly, That it is not, nor can be the Judge of Controversies in Religion.
Which is the common Tenet of modern Heretics.

And thirdly, That admitting it for a Rule of Faith (as in part it is) private
Reason is not the Interpreter and Judge of the true sense thereof, for every
Christian to rely upon for his Salvation.

In clearing the first point I need not labor much, having already by
convincing arguments established in the 4th. and 5th. Sections of the first
Motive, the Catholic Rule of Faith, Universal Tradition; whither I desire my
Reader to return for satisfaction. And which standing firm, the Protestants
Rule of Scripture only must needs be as well a ruined as ruinous Principle, and
fall to nothing. Yet that discourse being more general, I shall here descend to
some particulars, to make it visible to very ordinary Capacities that Scripture
does not contain fully all things necessary to Salvation, nor is clearly
evident without dispute in all points necessary therein contained; and
consequently cannot be the sole and complete Rule of Faith, wanting those two
most necessary conditions belonging to it.

First, I say, not full and comprehending all points necessary to Salvation of
mankind. For I demand of them whether it be not a fundamental point of Faith to
believe the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God; and yet Mr. Hooker, one of
the most Judicious Writers of the English Protestants, acknowledges this cannot
be grounded upon Scripture. Of all points (says Hooker's Ecc. Polit, l. 2. ^^
I remember*
he) the most necessary to be believed, is that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, which is confessed impossible for them to prove. And proceeding, makes a
demonstration of it against the Puritans. How then, themselves being Judges,
can the Holy Scriptures being a complete Rule of Faith, not comprehending what
is most necessary to be believed by every Christian?

If they say this Objection is not pertinent, because whosoever makes the
written word of God the sole and sufficient Rule of Faith, must necessarily
pre-suppose the belief of Scripture founded upon some other Principle. I reply,
it is impertinent to say so, because the necessity of a pre-supposition of some
fundamental point is a sufficient conviction that the Rule they have chosen
cannot be complete and perfect, as they would have it: Especially if it be
confider'd, that the fundamental point pre-suppos'd independent on Scripture,
but Scripture depending on it, must needs be the ground quoad nos (to us) of
all things believed in it. Which ground or antecedent Principle upon which
they, as well as we, build their belief of such Scriptures to be the undoubted
Word of God being the universal Tradition and Authority of the Church; not
they, but this can only truly and rationally be asserted for a complete and
perfect Rule, comprehending all things necessary to Salvation; handing them
down from the Apostles themselves to us now living, as the revealed Truths of
Jesus Christ, and believed as such by all respective Ages upon that tenure.
Among which Truths so attested, That such Writings are the undoubted Word os
God, is a Principal one, and believed, because so attested. But all other
Traditionary Doctrines of Faith having the same convincing proof that they came
from Heaven, whatever of them were occasionally committed to Writing afterward
by the Apostles, are still to be believed upon the same account, ( viz.)
Tradition and Church Authority; the certainty of Scripture as well for the
Sense as Letter depending thereon.

Again, I demand of English Protestants by what Authority they condemn the
Anabaptists to be Heretics, whether by Scripture, or Tradition? If they say by
Scripture, they must give me leave to tell, that St. Austin with the primitive
Christians were of another mind, who tells them very plainly, That Consuetudo
Matris Ecclesiae, etc. The L. 4. cont. Donat.
custom of the Church our Mother in Baprizing* Children is in no sort to be
despised, nor by any means thought superfluous, nor at all to be believed,
except it was an Apostolical Tradition. But if they value not Antiquity, and
presume the Fathers were but Schoolboys to them in the understanding of Sacred
Writ; let them produce any one Text for Infant Baptism so clearly proving it,
that the Contradictors must be unavoidably convinced, and left confounded
without any shadow of reply, before thoroughly knowing and expert Judges in
such Controversies, and will confess the Fathers were but dull and heavy men
compared to their quicker and more deep-sighted judgments in diving into the
sense of Scripture, and rest satisfied that upon the score of only Scripture,
Anabaptists may be condemned In his Reply Fisher.
for Heretics. I remember Bishop Land much presses that place in the Acts to
be convincing for Infant* Baptism, Repent, and be Baptized Act. 2. 38, 39.
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the promise is unto you, and
to your Children; Yet not without the help of Tradition enlightening and
exalting it to that force and efficacy. But Dr. Hammond In his Ans* to 6.
Quaeres.
a great Scripturist and Defender of the Protestant Church, confesses it is not
at all concluding for it. Without more ado, the Truth is, did not
Church-Tradition shining bright in universal practice decide the controversy,
they could not satisfactorily answer those Texts of Scripture wherewith the
Anabaptists confront those other produced by them, nor justly enroll them in
the black Book of Heretics* Does not this manifestly destroy their main
foundation of Scripture to be the only and sufficient Rule of Faith?

Besides, it is not an Heretical practice to Re-baptize those who have been
Baptized by Heretics, observing the true form of Baptism? Can they evince it
for such by any Scripture? St. Austin tells them, That custom which was opposed
to Cyprian, L. 2. de Bap. cont. Donat. ca. 7 and l. 5. c. 23.
is to be believed to have taken its rise from the Tradition of the Apostles,
and that he believed it for such. Moreover, the form of Baptism is not expressly
delivered in Holy Writ; nor the number of the Sacraments, nor yet the word
Sacrament in the Scripture applied at all to those they acknowledge for such,
at least generally necessary to Salvation. But for all these we are beholding
to the practice and Tradition of the Church.

This is not all, for farther yet; let them show any precept in Scripture for
the Abolishing of the Jewish Sabbath, and observation of the Lords day in its
stead. A point doubtless necessary for Christians, however as applied to
multitudes in Church Communion. Here also they are forced to leave Scripture,
and betake themselves to Tradition for the condemnation of the Sabbaterians.

Moreover, would they willingly part with the Apostles Creed, the Observation
of Lent; which their In his Sermon upon Lent.
Bishop Andrews contends to be Apostolical, and see all Christian Festivals
trampled under the profane Feet of furious Fanatics with most Ep. 118. ad
Janua.
insolent madness, as St. Austin calls it? Yet they are all gone, if Scripture
must hold them up without Tradition. In a word, the greatest Champions of the
English Protestant Church, in these later years especially, perceiving by sad
experience the Under* Sectaries, who were Spawned from them, to endanger, and
at last for a time wholly to destroy their new form of Belief and Worship by
virtue of this Principle of Only-Scripture, do now betake themselves to the
Sword and Buckler of Tradition, to defend and justify themselves against their
Treacherous Brethren. And thus, although they fly to our Rule of Faith,
Universal Tradition, for conviction of their Adversaries in some points by
themselves accounted necessary, yet they will needs have the Holy Scriptures to
be the only and perfect Rule of Faith. Doubtless it had been more safe and
ingenuous to have acknowledged with the Ancient Fathers Traditionary Doctrines,
as well as the Holy Scriptures, to complete the Rule of Christian belief; but
contradicting Antiquity by contracting the Rule of Faith into Scripture alone,
they have likewise contradicted themselves, the inevitable Fate of all
Truthopposers.

Secondly, The Holy Scriptures are not clearly evident without dispute in all
points necessary contained in them; and consequently no complete nor certain
Rule of themselves, as the common experience of all Ages makes good. Can any
say the Consubstantiality of the Son of God with the Father is in evident or
express terms in Sacred Scripture? Yea, or so contained in it by inevitable
consequence, as to destroy all probability in the Texts brought for the
contrary by Contradictors? Then certainly the Arians, who had as subtle Heads
and able Brains as any Protestants, to understand the Logic of their
Adversaries, were mad men to appeal from Councils and Tradition to the written
Word. They knew very well, that without the Tradition and practice of the
Church delivering the sense of Scripture, they could handsomely enough evade the
force of all Arguments, might be raised from the bare and dead words of
Scripture, though stretched upon the Tenters of most rigorous Criticism. Yea,
they doubted not but there were Texts for them more evidently asserting the
Inferiority of the Son, and appropriating the Divine nature to the Father only;
which was the ground of their confidence in appealing to the written Word, to
be tried thereby without Tradition. And yet the Protestants condemn the Arians
for Heretics, and justly too; But how they can do it rationally upon their own
Principles, I confess surpasses my understanding, True it is, add to Scripture,
the Tradition of the Church, and the Authoritative Sentence of an approved
General Council so interpreting it, and the case is clear; but these are
Catholic foundations which they contradict, and therefore no lawful weapons in
their hands against the Arians.

Again, it is no doubt but a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, is
substantially or materially contained in the Holy Scriptures, but in formal
express terms Trinity, and Personality or Person, are not to be found; nor yet
so evidently in any Texts, as from them satisfactorily to convince the
Antitrinitarians that the same indivisible Essence, is equally and perfectly in
three distinct Persons, unless we call in Church Authority and Tradition
constantly so explicating those places to our assistance. For it is well known
by expert Controvertists, that such Texts are confronted by others which seem
to contradict them; with an appearance plausible enough to vulgar
understandings; yea, and which are sometimes so perplexed and intricate as to
vex the most Learned for a satisfactory Solution. And even might shake the
Faith of many good Christians, had they not Universal Tradition, and the
Infallibility of the Church for a more sure retreat to retire to, and securely
rely upon after the disquieting storms of Disputation. And this is a manifest
and undeniable Argument, that those who forsake these Principles to ground
themselves on Scripture only for all points necessary to Salvation, have always
made Shipwreck of Faith, and run into Heresies. A thing as manifest in
Protestants as in any Separatists from the Church in former Ages. And this
Gangreen, bred out of this corrupt Principle, has eat so far into the very
heart and bowels of Religion, that in process of time scarce any Article of our
Creed but has been called in question by such Scripturists; and now by too
many are contradicted. And so will continue till the Church be restored to her
right, and Authoritative Power to interpret the written Word, and determine all
Controversies in matters of Religion. For while Scripture is the only Rule left
to every ones Fancy there is no redress, and therefore doubtless when writ,
never intended for such by the Apostles.

SECT. V.
That the Scripture is not, nor can be a Judge to determine Controversies in
Religion.

IT being clear, that the Sacred Scriptures are not the sole and sufficient
Rule of Faith; much less can they be a Judge to pass a definitive Sentence for
the final decision of points controverted among Christians. For the proper
Office of a Supreme Judge being to end Controversies arising among Members of
the same Community, by a perspicuous and evident Sentence, which cannot be
mistaken by the Parties litigant so as yet to proceed in their former
contention; it is as manifest as the Sun, that Scripture cannot perform this
efficaciously, when there are irreconcilable differences, eternal jarrs, and
most inveterate enmities about fundamental points, among those who appeal to
only Scripture for their trial. Neither is it possible there should be any
better agreement about supernatural Truths, so sublime and mysterious as to
transcend our comprehension and capacity, where contending Parties left to
their own liberty with prejudicate Opinions passionately favoring their
opposite Interests, make nothing but dead words a judging law according to
their own Interpretations.

But in what concerns our present debate this impossibility will be much
augmented, if it be considered that the Holy Scriptures speak nothing at all of
some necessary things, nor possitively and clearly of many other, about which
Controversies are risen since their writing, and reception by the Church*
Neither are there cases wanting in which they are in no sort capable to give a
definitive Sentence for their decision. For seeing there is a Controversy
between Protestants and us in a main fundamental point about what Books are to
be received for Canonical, and believed for the undoubted Word of God; can
Scripture it self judge this? It is confessed impossible, and they appeal to
Canon and Tradition, of the Jews to judge and give Sentence in this quarrel.
Wonderful! A Jewish Tradition founded on the agreement of one particular
People, shall be of sufficient Authority to justify them against us; but the
voice of the Catholic Church grounded on the consent of all Tongues and
Nations dispersed over the whole World, or represented in a lawful General
Council, is nothing for us against them in any Controversy. Is not this
strange? However let them say what they will, we rest satisfied with the
Authority of the Catholic Church, believing for Innocentius primus Ep. ad
Exuperium. cap. 7. Conci. Carthag. 3. S. August de Doctr. Christiana, l. c. 8.
Canonical what she receives, and accounting for Apocryphal what she rejects;
which is built upon better promises than the Jewish Synagogue; and so guided by
the Spirit of Truth in all matters of Faith, that the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against her.

In Decretis Gelasii Papa prope finem Council. Florentinum. Conc. Trident. Sess.
4. Machabaeorum libros, non Judaei, sed Ecclesia pro Canonicis habet, S. Aug. l
18. de Civ. Dei ca. 36. Hebraei non recipient libros Tob^ae, Judith and
Machabaeorum, Ecclesia tamen, eosdem inter Canonicas Scripturas enumerat.
Sapientia and Ecclesiasticus parem cum reliquis Canonicis libris tenere
noscuntur Authoritatem. Isidor. in proemio de Libris Vet. Testamenti and Novi.
And having mentioned the Jews, we shall from Gods institution for the decision
of all Controversies about matters of Religious Worship during that Pedagogy,
borrow an Argument against Protestants, in my poor judgment altogether
unanswerable. For though all Ceremonial Rites and Observances about Religion
were expressly ordained by God himself, and so particularly and minutely
committed to writing by his Servant Moses for the instruction and Deuteronomy. 17. 8,
etc. Paralip. 19. 8, 9, 10, etc.
direction of that people in all things relating to God and his Worship:
Nevertheless when any difficulty or doubt arose, the written Word was not to
decide the question as a Judge, but the Sentence to be given by the
High Priest; and obedience thereunto required under pain of death: How comes it
to pass, that under the Law of Jesus Christ not committed in that exact manner
to writing, yet in things relating to God and his Worship, Scripture it self
should be the only Judge of Controversies, and those to whom Christ has
committed the Government of his Church, should not have one Authoritative word
to say for their final decision? Is this rational? Alas, poor Christian Church
whose Glory is out-shin'd by legal shadows! For with them Sarah the Mistress
has less power then her Handmaid Agar.

Again, when the contention is concerning the sense of Scripture in any
fundamental point delivered, but obscurely, it is possible for the written Word
to give a clear Sentence and determine the Controversy about it self: For then
it would be both obscure and clear in the same matter, and in the self same
respect, at the same time, flat contradiction.

If they say there is no fundamental point but is evidently contained in Sacred
Writ, the contrary has been manifested in the precedent Section. And for
further confirmation; I here ask, whether, Hoc est Copus meum, Hic est Sanguis
meus; be not plain words without any Ambiguity in their Grammatical
construction? We Catholics indeed taught by the universal Tradition and
practice of the Church, doubt not of the Sense of them: But can Lutherans,
Calvinists, and English Protestants maintain their meaning to be clear and
perspicuous, among whom above forty several Interpretations, some flatly
repugnant to each other are found about them? Can such variety and contrariety
proceed but from obscurity? Either from that, or else some of them must
wilfully contradict Scripture, and resist the Holy Ghost by maintaining a
dangerous Doctrine against their own knowledge and Conscience. But who those
are, I leave them to wrangle, upon their own grounds eternally, among
themselves. In the interim, I Am sure upon Catholic Principles, they all stand
unanswerably convicted of wilful Heresy.

Besides, Christ's real descent into Hell, is an Article of Faith, yet the
Calvinists deny it, against Scripture, Acts 2. v. 27, and 31. as plain Acts 2.
27, 31.
in our judgment (and so think the English Protestants also,) as the Apostles
Creed. They bring no other Scripture for their Negative, but flatly deny this
place to be evident and concluding. Now what must be done to end this
Controversy in a fundamental point? The clearest Text Scripture affords is
already produced to give them satisfaction; it is unsuccessful, and they raise
clouds of new invented Interpretations to hide it from their own and others
eyes. Can Scripture now judge, and conclude this Controversy?

Moreover, the Lutherans and English Protestants agree with Catholics in
asserting the necessity of Baptism to Salvation, grounding themselves on that
of St. John, Except Joh. 3. 5.
a man be born of water and the Spirit; he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. The Calvinists hold the contrary, and by no means will allow Water there
mentioned to be taken literally for natural Water, but drink it all up with a
dry Metaphor. How can they convince them if Scripture alone be judge? If with
us they urge them with the consent of Fathers, Universal Tradition, and
practice of the Church so interpreting these words of our Blessed Savior, the
Controversy is at an end. Or if Calvinists will be yet contending, they can
speak nothing Solid or Rational in their own defense.

To all which may be added that judicious and accute Observation of an able
Controvertist, That though Apology for Tradit. p. 137.
one intent and end of writing St. John' s Gospel, was to show the Godhead of
Christ, which the Arians afterward denied, yet the design proved so
unsuccessful, that never any Heresy was more powerful and spreading than that
which opposed the Truth intended by his Book. So he; yea, and it is most
certain the Arians at this day do make more use of that Gospel than any other
part of Scripture to beat down the Divinity of the Son of God. A manifest
argument that Scripture was never intended by the Author of those Sacred
Oracles for the final decision of controverted points, but for something else
proper and agreeable to the nature of dead writings. However, we make no
question but all Catholic Doctrines are contained in the Bible by Rational
deductions, with infinite advantage above what our Adversaries can produce for
their defense upon the same grounds, as has been made to appear by able
Controvertists before any Impartial and understanding Judges. More need not be
said in a matter condemned by the common sense and experience of the whole
World.

SECT. VI.
That private Reason in Controversies of Faith is not the Interpreter and Judge
of the true Sense of Scripture, for every Christian to rely upon for his
Salvation,

SOme English Protestants of Critical Heads, to qualify the absurdance of the
former. Thesis, still holding close to the written Word for a completely
sufficient Rule of Faith, make private Reason the Interpreter and Judge for
every Christian. A Principle, which though it may seem plausible and gain
followers, because it makes every one Sui juris, independent and his own
Master, a thing so desirable and sweet to flesh and blood; yet no less than the
other, does it contradict the whole Christian World, always teaching, Vt
Scripturas ipsas, sic Scripturarum sensum, pure and imperturbate solum ad nos
Traditionis alneo deferri, That the pure and uncorrupted sense of the Scripture
does depend upon Tradition as well as the Scriptures themselves: And accounting
it a giddy Spirit of Heretical rashness. Scripturae interpretationem ex proprio
ingenio petere; To refuse to give ear to the voice of the Church, and give ear
to the Whisperings of private Reason; which is so exterminating a Principle,
and destructive of Religion, that it does not ruin this, or that, or some few
Catholic Truths, but like a general deluge with an irresistible torrent sweeps
away the Church it self, by overthrowing the unity in Faith, the Life, and
Soul, and Essence of it.

It Is a subject would afford a large field of Discourse, but I shall content my
self with brevity, and I hope others also. Whosoever shall desire more ample
satisfaction, I refer him to the Exomologesis of Mr. Cressy, where it is solidly
confuted in answer to Mr. Chillingworth, the great Patron and first public
Assertor of it with approbation.

The principal Arguments which convinced me, (for I was one of those very
unreasonable Rationalists when I was a Protestant) and with which I rest fully
satisfied, are these following.

First, if private reason be the only Interpreter and Judge of Scripture for
every Christian, I desire those who are minded, to give a satisfactory Answer
to those places of Sacred Writ; which in my poor judgment cannot stand with
their position. St. Peter teaches us, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, etc.
That no Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation, but Holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost That is, as the Sacred
Penmen of Gods Word writ by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, being his public
Instruments to reveal the Divine Verities to the World; so those Sacred Oracles
are not to be interpreted Authorative by the private Reason and Will of men;
but their true sense and meaning, (if called in question,) is to be received
from the Governors Concilium Trid. Ses 4.
of the Church, whom God has authorized to declare his will unto his People. Of
which he gives a convincing reason in his 3d. Chap. telling 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16,
17.
us, That in his dear Brother Paul's Epistles, are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. This is not compatible to the
definitive Sentence of a Judge in any Controversy, which must be so clear and
perspicuous, that the most unlearned or refractory cannot doubt or mistake
after pronunciation. Neither is this difficulty in matters of no moment; but in
points necessary, where Souls do perish through misbelief.

We find in the Acts of the Apostles, that Philip the Deacon drawing near to
the Chariot of the devout Eunuch, and hearing him read Act 8. 30, 31, etc.
the Prophet Isaias, said, Understand thou what thou read? And he said,
how can I except some man guide me? He had not learned the Principle of their
Rationalists to bid the Holy man spare his pains of Exposition; or if he would
be doing, that he was not bound to believe one word he spoke for Truth 'till
his own reason made it Authentic. For this wild Doctrine frees every man in
matters of Eternity from all Authority of humane Teachers though of Divine
Institution; so that be we Jews, or Heathens, or in what Church soever we have
been Baptized, we must stand to no Creed, believe no Catechism or abridgement
of points necessary, though confirmed by the practice of the whole Christian
World, rely on no Instructors, but believe and practice the quite contrary, if
our private reason judges it to be contained in Sacred Scripture. Doubtless if
his judgment had been preposess'd with this proud, arrogant Principle, Philip
had preached in vain, nor had he believed unto Salvation, but would have
dismissed the Evangelist with some such words as these: I have a desire to save
my Soul, and therefore have given you a hearing; but all this is nothing yet to
me, I will search the Scriptures farther to see what I must believe; and when I
have made my Creed, I will send for You to Baptize me. Which plainly
contradicts the method of saving instruction delivered by the great Doctor of
the Gentiles in that famous Climax; How shall they call Romans 10. 14, 15.
on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? A
Preacher with Mission and Commission from Jesus Christ: But no place is more
convincing than that 1 Timothy 3. 15.
to Timothy, The Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth. And if the Church,
how then must every one build upon his private Reason, for the true sense of
Scripture in all things necessary to Salvation? St. Paul was an Apostle of
Jesus Christ; whose Missioners then are those who teach the contrary?

Lastly, I desire them to reconcile this Article of our Ancient Creed, I
believe the Holy Catholic Church, with their novel Doctrine, The Caetholick
Church has nothing to do with my Faith, I believe my own Reason, and nothing
else; in giving the true sense of Scripture to me. For my part, it being clear
to me from the written Word, that the Church has a promise of Infallibility in
matters of Faith, That there is a command from Christ laid upon every one to
hear her voice under pain of damnation, and that otherwise the above named
Article would not have been inserted into the Apostles Creed as a fundamental
point, I could see no safety or certainty in matters of eternal Interest, but
by wholly renouncing my most weak, deceitful self, and delivering up my self
entirely into the hands of the Catholic Church, to be taught by her what I
must Believe and Do to be saved: Nor found I any thing more reasonable then to
captivate my understanding to the obedience of Faith, when the God of reason
does require it at our hands.

Secondly, to make every one an Interpreter and Judge of the true sense of Holy
Scripture for himself unappealably by Reason, seems evidently to me to deprive
us of the only rational and solid means which is required to produce a well
grounded Faith of Supernatural Verities in the Soul of man. Which thus I
manifest.

Supernatural Faith being an assent of the understanding to things revealed,
merely for the Authority of the Relator, without any farther dispute when once
we have an assurance that God has revealed them; two things must necessarily
concur in all mediate productions to beget this act firmly and rationally in
any Soul; namely, Is It. Divine Revelation of things to be believed, which is the
formal Object of Faith, into which it is ultimately resolved; And 2dly. A
certain knowledge or moral evidence that such are revealed, by the mediation or
intervention of which the understanding elevated by Grace proceeds to the
foresaid assent. Now suppose there were no Objects of Supernatural and Divine
Faith but what are contained in the written Word, it is not the bare and naked
Letter, but Scripture rightly understood, that is the Word of God and of
Infallible verity; except therefore we have some Medium, or means to convey
assuredly to our understanding the true sense of Scripture, our Faith cannot
but halt and totter, when we cannot rationally afford a firm assent to such a
thing as revealed, and have just cause to suspect whither we rightly understand
that Scripture which contains the Revelation. And certainly this cause of
suspicion will be ever just while private reason is the Interpreter and Judge
of Holy Writ, when abundant experience tells us nothing is more Fallible,
nothing more deceitful, nothing sooner bribed with pride, or passion, or
prejudice, or education, or interest; to make words speak what never the Author
intended by them. Insomuch that hardly any fundamental point delivered in
Scripture, but has been called in question, and still is by too many,
protesting withal their sincerity and endeavors to attain to the true sense
of Scripture by the light of their own Reason, to which they appeal as their
Judge and Protector in those wilful and irrational proceedings. Neither indeed
have Heresies arose in the Church but from Scripture misinterpreted by private
reason, as the Non aliunde natae sunt haeredes, nisi quod Scripturae been
intelliguntur non been St. Aug. Tract 18 in Jeab. Er de Genesis ad Lit. l. 7 ca.
9. Non ob aliud siunt haeretici nisi quod Scripturas non recte intelligentes
suas Falsas opiniones contra earum veritatem pertinaciter asserunt and alii
passiom, S. Ambr. in Titi. Vincentius Lyrin. ca. 36. S. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 1. S.
Hier. ad ca. 23. Isaiae. S. Hilar. in lib. ad Constantinum Origenes Hom. 31. in
Exodum, etc.
Fathers and Church History sufficiently testify. Alas poor Souls that have
such a guide to carry the Light which must direct them to eternal Happiness. If
they make their Light Darkness, how great is that Darkness? When their guide
misleads them, what remedy is there left to recall them into the path which
leads to Heaven?

The Catholic Church indeed is enriched with so great a privilege by Christ
our Savior, that she cannot err in things necessary to Salvation (as has been
manifested in the precedent Motive by Reason, Fathers, Councils, Scripture,
Tradition and practice of the Christian World.) Whom we may as undoubtedly
believe in delivering to us the true sense of Scripture as the Letter; and upon
whom relying we have only a firm and rational belief of revealed Verities,
constant and immovable among all the changes of Sects and Heretics.

True it is, in every act of Faith there is use of Reason, whether it be
referred to the Authority of God revealing, or the Church proposing. For we
captivate our understanding to the obedience of Faith, because we judge nothing
more reasonable than to believe God; and we securely rely upon his Church whom
he has promised to assist with Infallibility in such proposals. But shall we
say therefore that Reason is the prime intrinsical Motive of Faith, and into
which it finally is resolved; Nothing less. For this discourse and approbation
of Reason are but necessarily previous and antecedent to our deliberate and
rational acts of Faith; the acts themselves are acts of the understanding not
discoursing, but purely assenting. Which assent is not for Reasons sake, but
for Authority. Were the last resolution into the judgment of private Reason,
Faith could not be Divine or Supernatural. Reason indeed produces an act of
Faith as well in Catholics as Protestants, but with a vast difference. For a
Protestant believes such a Truth to be from God, relying upon his Reason only
that it is revealed; and this assent is not rational, because his ground is
deceitful. But in a Catholic Reason acts only so far in points of belief as to
bring him to Authority, declaring such Truths to be sufficiently revealed by
Almighty God, which he cannot with any reason suspect to be Fallible in such
declarations. I believe this, says a Protestant, because my Reason tells me it
is revealed, and will allow no other judge of this Revelation. I believe this,
says a Catholic, because an Infallible Authority assures me i^ is revealed;
and my Reason tells me there is no other sufficient ground or evidence for
Divine Faith, and therefore give up my private judgment to the Church. And
which of these Principles is more safe and rational let Reason judge.

Thirdly, I demand of these Rationalists, whether there be any such thing as
Heresy in the World, and what it is? Oportet esse Haereses, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
etc. There must be Heresies; St. Paul has said it, and that is sufficient. And
as for what it is, it is well known the Church has always, taught, That Heresy
is the voluntary Election of some private opinion, contradicting the Doctrine
of the Church. And that he is to be accounted an Heretic who neglecting the
Churches Authority with a stubborn mind defends wicked opinions. But if we
should admit their new definition, That Heresy is to contradict any
fundamental point expressly contained in Scripture; In my poor judgment
according to such a definition, there is no such thing as Heresy, or Heretics;
but both Arians, Anabaptists, Fanatics, etc. are as good Catholics as any
Christians of the World. For if private Reason be the only judge of the true
Sense of Scripture for every one to rely upon, these, and all other condemned
Heretics (the Montanists excepted) relying upon the written Word, as
interpreted by Reason, with sober enquiry and real endeavors to find out
Truth, cannot justly be so reputed. The Arians have so much Reason and
Scripture too in the bare Letter on their side, that take away the Churches
Infallibility and universal Tradition interpreting and delivering to us the
true sense of it, the Controversy would never be decided. All places would
swarm with Nestorians, Eutychians, Anti-trinitarians, Barengarians,
Anabaptists, etc. neither could we condemn them, if this Principle be good, for
doing their duty in following Scripture as the Light of their own private
Reason or Spirit dictates to them.

Let them not say, that these, and such like are justly condemned for
contradicting express Scripture, against their knowledge, and the judgment of
their own Reason. For they must remember; first, that themselves do not condemn
the Anabaptists upon only Scripture grounds, Secondly, that it has been
demonstrated that all fundamental points are not so express in Scripture as
they imagine. And thirdly, that it is most uncharitable to say, That all those
whom they condemn for Heretics do against their own knowledge and Conscience
contradict the express Word of God, and run headlong to hell with their eyes
open. Can we possibly imagine, that among so many Millions of Arians there was
not one single person had any Conscience? It cannot be denied but that many
Heretics have, and do live Virtuously in the Eyes of the World: For who knows
not, That Satan sometimes transforms himself into an Angel of Light? And while
they profess, and protest, that if it was once made apparent to them that their
Tenets are against the Word of God, they would not one minute persist in them;
we judge it uncharitable to affirm, that notwithstanding the protestations of
their sincerity and real (though misguided) zeal, they all wilfully sin against
the Light and knowledge of their Consciences. We Catholics indeed assert, That
sufficient evidences of credibility are produced by us to convince them of
their Heretical opinions and dangerous state without Repentance: But withal we
say, That God in his just Judgments, which are inscrutable, suffers them
through strong delusions to believe Lies, in that the Light of Truth is veiled
from their Eyes by passion, or prejudice, or worldly Interest, while they so
continue; and we pray for them, in hope that the Father of infinite Mercies
will in his good time discover Truth unto them, and bring them home unto his
Church. But for these Rationalists to damn all those whom they esteem
Heretics, as contradictors of the Word of God against their Conscience and
knowledge, is a censure most unreasonable, and little beseeming such whose
lives are not so Gospel-like, but that many Sectaries who differ from them in
fundamentals may justly be reputed at least as conscientious, and in charity
cannot be thought otherwise. All which duly considered, plainly proves, that
they must either change their Judge of Controversy in points of Faith, or give
us some new Rule, to discover Heresy. And withal, that if they will stick
close to this Principle, they must maintain that all the General Councils of
the Church, even that celebrated by the Apostles themselves, were mere
tyrannical Usurpations, in obliging all Christians to believe and practice
according to their Decrees, whatever their private Reason could say to the
contrary.

Fourthly, in vain and to no purpose has Jesus Christ instituted Authoritative
Overseers and Governors in his Church, For the perfecting Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, etc.
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edification of the Body of
Christ, till we all come in the unity of Faith, etc. If every one must
acknowledge no visible Authority upon Earth, to have any obliging power over
him in Doctrines appertaining to God, but be his own Teacher in all points of
Faith according to the Dictates of private Reason.

Fifthly, If every one be sent to Scripture to compose a Creed for himself,
it is impossible there should be any unity among the Christians in Faith and
Worship. That is, it is impossible there should be any such thing upon earth as
one only Catholic Church. Of the breach of which unity, endless divisions
amongst those who adhere to this Principle are apparent and most visible
demonstrations.

Lastly whosoever seriously considers the difficulties of Languages, the
multiplicity of the occasions and intentions of the Writers, the various
lections in Copies of the Original, the infinite and considerable differences
in Translations, the equivocation and ambiguity of Words, the variety and
obscurity of Circumstances, together with the weakness of all, and ignorance of
most men, endeavoring by themselves from dead Letters to attain to the
knowledge of the sublime mysteries of our Holy Faith, transcending all humane
understanding and comprehension, cannot but conclude that it is altogether
impossible, that private Reason should be the only Interpreter and Judge of the
true Sense of Scripture, for every one to rely upon for his Salvation; seeing
nothing can be certainly gathered and concluded out of naked words considered
barely in themselves, involving so many difficulties and uncertainties, in
regard to incomparably the greater part of mankind. And if a Protestant
Preacher will speak out ingeniously in this point, he must tell his Auditors in
these, or such like words: Beloved, we exhort you to search the Scriptures; and
whatsoever we say is necessary to Salvation, to believe us only so far as your
own Reason does tell you we teach according to the Word of God; for that is the
Rule, and private Reason the sole Judge to give an unappealable Sentence in
such Cases. This is our Doctrine, and this is also your practice; but truly
Beloved, all things rightly considered, we must needs confess that it is an
unsteady foundation, to build your Faith and Salvation upon; for after this way
of proceeding, you are infinitely obnoxious to dangerous errors, and cannot
but deceive your selves in matters that concern your everlasting Happiness. So
he preaching ingenuously: Neither indeed can rational security be had in things
of eternal Interest; 'till reposing our selves in the bosom of the Catholic
Church, we take her word as well for the Sense of Scripture as the Letter. A
ground doubtless sufficient for me to justify the change of my Religion, and
for others to follow me.

SECT. VII.
An answer to some of the principal places of Scripture upon which Protestants
rely for their Rule and Judge of Faith.

IT being a main fundamental point of Faith to know what is the Rule and Judge
of all the rest, they who hold the written Word for a completely sufficient
Rule and Interpreter of its self, or give private Reason the Authority of a
Judge in expounding it as such a Rule; must necessarily ground themselves upon
Scripture for this Article. And some, if not most, of the principal places are
these. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this
Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isaiah 8. 20. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal Life, and they are they which
testify of me, Joh. 5. 39. These are written that ye might believe that Jesus
is the Christ the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life thorough
his Name, Joh. 26. 31. And Paul reasoned with them out of the Scriptures. And
they searched the Scripture daily, whether those things were so, Act. 2. 11.
All Scripture divinely inspired is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly instructed to every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are
written in this Book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book
of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, Apocal.
22. ver. 18, 19.

To all which, and whatever other Scripture-proofs Protestants produce for
themselves against us; I first by way of general reply demand of them, whether
they bring such Texts as demonstrative arguments evidencing their position, or
only as probable? If only as probable, they conclude nothing against us
Catholics, who have the judgment and practice of the Universal Church, the
best Interpreter of Holy Scriptures and conveyer of true Sense, standing on our
side, with infinite advantage against their Novel Expositions. But if they
produce them as demonstrations, how comes it about that any doubt of them,
seeing every demonstration is such, as that granting the Premises, the
conclusion cannot be denied.

From that of Isaias they urge us thus. Behold O Papists, the Prophet of the
Lord sends the Jews to the written Word of God as the Rule and Judge of what is
taught them.

I answer, Doubtless they who affirm this, have quite forgot that the
High Priest in all doubts of any moment about Divine Worship, was constituted
Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, etc.
by God the supreme Judge, to give a definitive Sentence under pain of death to
the disobeyers. And so they set up the Holy Prophet against Moses, and make one
Scripture, as they Interpret it, contradict another.

This plainly shows they abuse the Text, whose genuine Sense will easily appear
by light borrowed from the Context. Isaias prophesied in troublesome times; and
the Jews were very sollicitous what the event would be; and neglecting to
enquire of God, had no recourse to the Law and the Prophets, but 1 Samuel 28. 6.
sought unto them who had familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards. The Prophet
grieved at this Vengeance provoking sin, sends them to the Law and to the
Testimony, where this grand impiety was forbidden; and withal puts them in
mind of Levit. 20. 6 27. Deuteronomy. 18. 9, 10, etc.
their great folly in seeking to such who had no Divine Light for the
Revelation of future contingences, which could not possibly be in them who
undertook it against Gods Word* Now in the name of wonder what is this to a
Judge of Controversies in points of Faith? It is not lawful to consult the
Devil to know future events, because he is a Liar, and it is a thing forbidden
in the written Word; therefore the Scripture is the only Rule and Judge of
Controversies in points of Faith and Worship among Christians. 'Twere well such
Disputants would learn to be Logicians, before they turned Controversial
Divines.

To the second, Search the Scriptures, etc. I find so satisfactory an Summa
Theolo. par. c. 7.
Answer in Becanus, that I shall do little more than translate his words. Our
Blessed Savior in this Chapter Joh. 5. 39.
is disputing with the unbelieving Jews who denied him to be the Son of God, or
sent from him; To convince them he makes use of four Topics. First, The
witness of John the Baptist, whom they accounted a Prophet, and had formerly
told them pointing to our Blessed Savior, Behold the Joh. 1. 29. 34.
Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the World. I bear record that this is
the Son of God. Secondly, The Testimony of his Divine works, and stupendous
miracles in these words, I have a greater Joh. 5. 36.
witness than that of John, for the works which the Father has sent me to
finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me that the Father has sent
me. Thirdly, The Testimony of God the Father in the Verse following: And the
Father v. 37.
himself who has sent me has born witness of me. And that by an audible voice
from Heaven at his Baptism in these words, This is my beloved Mat. 3. 17.
Son, in whom I am well pleased: As also at his Transfiguration, where the same
words were spoken with this addition, Hear ye Him. Which Mat: 17. 5.
first voice, if none of the Jews there present heard, (as certainly they did
not, unless in the words following, Joh. 5. 37.
Neither have ye heard his voice; hearing is to be taken for obeying) yet to
them the Testimony was Authentic, who seeing his most Holy Life and many
Miracles to attest his Mission could not rationally think he would deceive them
with a Lie.

Now more they could not desire, when the force of these invincible arguments
or nothing could dint and mollify their rocky hearts to receive the impression
of saving Faith. However, our Blessed Savior to give them all possible
satisfaction, makes use of a fourth Topic from the Holy Scriptures, ver. 39.
which he bids them search, For in them, says he, ye think ye have eternal
Life, and they are they which testify of me. Which Paraphrased is thus much. If
ye will not receive the three former Testimonies, which are most proper and
efficacious to work Faith in your hearts, but shut your eyes against Light
sufficient to turn the darkness of Sodom and Gomorrah into day; yet the
Scriptures, which ye receive and acknowledge, bear such witness of me, that if
ye did search into them with humble hearts, ye could not but be convinced of
the Truth I preach unto you. In them indeed ye think ye have eternal Life, but
while malice and pride thus blind your eyes, ye deceive your selves, and make
them a killing Letter to your Souls.

Now let who will apply it, the Argument runs thus, Our Blessed Savior having
made use of the most powerful means to convince the Jews of their Infidelity,
and they yet persisting in their Blasphemies, at last for their greater
confusion made use of an argument from Scripture which they received, Therefore
Scripture is the sole Judge of Controversies about Religion. How this follows I
understand not, when our Blessed Savior in the present contest, sends them not
only to the written Word, but uses it as the last, and perhaps least evidence
of his Divinity and Mission.

It clearly makes indeed for us Catholics, who as our Blessed Savior brought
St. John's Testimony against his Advetsaries, so do we likewise against the
Protestants produce the Ancient Fathers, Martyrs and Confessors of all Ages to
witness for us in the present Controversies; as also the voice of God from
Heaven by many Miracles speaking in defense of the Truths which we profess.
They in this like to obdurate Jews despise these unanswerable evidences, which
are Motives sufficient to work on Infidels, and will admit no Rule nor Judge
but the Holy Scriptures to decide the quarrel. Thinking, as the Jews did, to
have Eternal Life in them, but with that incredulous people likewise deceive
themselves, do observe the Light of Divine Truth, by drawing as it were a vail
of private and perverse Interpretations over their Eyes, to their eternal
Perdition.

I add moreover, that had our Blessed Savior only appealed to the Prophesies
of the Old Testament concerning himself, as sufficient to convince the Jews
that he was the true Messiah, so that nothing else was necessary or requisite
for the clea^ing of that point; yet I see not how this conclusion will follow,
therefore all necessary points of Faith are so fully and plainly delivered to
writing in the New Testament under the Law of Grace, that there is no other Rule
nor Judge to know and determine how many, and what they are, when controverted
among Christians. Yet this must follow, or this Text does them no good for the
end they use it, as most certainly it does not.

Which answer likewise takes away all strength from that place in the Asts of
the Apostles, where the Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures,
whether those things were so as St. Paul taught, and they believed before they
consulted the written Word, upon the Authority of their Teacher, confirming his
Doctrine to be the Word of God by frequent Miracles. Upon inquiry indeed it
could not but be much satisfaction to them to find so much of the Light of the
Gospels involved in the Shadows of the Law; and the Predictions of the Prophets
to be so exactly fulfilled in the person of Christ; and about these it was that
St. Paul disputed out of Scripture, and for which they searched after their
believing, and and so comes not home to the question. For that the whole Law of
Christ or all Catholic Doctrines necessary to Salvation are plainly contained,
and may satisfactorily be proved from Moses and the Prophets I presume our
Adversaries will not maintain, and so their Argument from hence is at an end.

To that in the 20th. of St. John I answer, that the true sense and meaning of
those words is this: That St. John testifies to the World he has written a
Book of the Life and Death of our Blessed Savior, when the Miracles wrought by
him, and therein delivered, did sufficiently evidence him to be the Son of God
and the true Messiah according to his Doctrine, without belief in whose Name
they could not be saved. And not that all necessary points of Faith were so
delivered in this Gospel, as to be intended by him for a complete Rule of
Belief, and Judge of all Controversies in Fundamentalls to the Christian World.
Neither can any rational man, except blinded with Passion, or bribed with
Interest, but perceive this latter Exposition to be forced, and the other
natural. To believe in Christ as the Son of God, and Savior of the World, is a
fundamental of fundamentals, without which Salvation is not to be had; But to
believe this only is not sufficient, nor can be the scope of this Text; when
it is certain many necessary points of Christian belief are not contained in
this Evangelist. Who, as it is usual with other Sacred Penmen of Gods Word,
ascribes the virtue of that effect to some principal or special causes, though
but partial, which proceeds also from other by a necessary concatenation or
connection, to make up the whole and adequate cause of such a product: We are
said in Scripture to be saved by Hope; Romans 8* 24:
is it therefore of it self sufficient for Salvation? Is therefore Faith
excluded? No doubtless, For without Heb. 11. 6,
Faith it is impossible to please God. Or because, The Just shall live by Romans
1. 17.
Faith, are not good works necessary? What means then St. Paul to tell us, That
though we have all Faith 1 Cor 13. 1, 2, etc.
without Charity tt profits us nothing? He also teaches us, That whosoever
Romans 10. 9 etc.
calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved; Is it therefore enough of it
self to bring a man to Heaven? The Truth is, Prayer saves us, good Works save
us, Faith saves us, Hope saves us; and therefore properly enough they are said
to do it severally, though only conjointly they are sufficient: And when St.
John tells us, He writ the Life and Death of Jesus Christ, that thorough Faith
in his Name we might be saved; He little dreamed that in after Ages a
Generation of men would arise that should affirm he taught; That his Gospel did
comprise in particular all fundamental points of Faith sufficient for the
Salvation of mankind.

To that in Timothy I answer, First, it is evident by the Gontext that the Holy
Scriptures of the Old Testament, being such as Timothy had learned from his
Childhood, (when little, if any, of the New could be written and divulged) out
of which I am confident our Adversaries will not pretend to determine all
points of Catholic Doctrine acknowledged by themselves necessary to Salvation;
which quite overthrows their Argument from this place.

Secondly, suppose we should grant it to be understood of the Scriptures of the
New Covenant; yet it will not follow from hence that therefore they are a
complete and perfect Rule of Faith, whereby to judge all Doctrines whether they
be revealed verities, or not; when from the 4th. Verse it is clear to any
understanding eye, that St. Paul exhorts Timothy to hold constant to the Faith,
received principally upon the tenure of Tradition: Which is our Catholic Rule,
and to which we must stick close, as he elsewhere teaches us, Though an Angel
Gal. 1.
from Heaven should preach the contrary. This Timothy was to do, this
Traditionary Depositum he was to keep, whether ne had been ver'd or no in the
Old Scriptures, or any New written and deposited in the Church. Yet withal, he
puts in mind of a peculiar advantage to confirm his Faith received by Oral
Tradition, And make him a perfect man of God or Bishop thoroughly furnished unto
all good works proper to his Pastoral Office, in that from his Infancy he had
been brought up in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make
men wise unto Salvation through Faith in Jesus Christ, and are profitable for
Teaching, for Arguing, for Reproving, for Instructing in Righteousness the
Flock committed to his Charge. And thus indeed it makes against themselves, and
for us highly, who makes use of Scripture for a Rule of Faith as regulated and
expounded by Tradition. But to force the words to speak what they would prove
from hence, cannot be without manifest absurdity and contradiction. As if the
Apostle should say; Timothy, continue thou in the things which thou have
learned and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them: And
yet do not trust Oral Tradition, though from the mouth of an Apostle, but the
Scriptures only for your Religion.

Thirdly, weigh well the words themselves in the balance of right Reason, and
they will easily be found too light to carry the cause on their side. All
Scripture divinely inspired, is profitable for teaching, for arguing, for
reproving, for instructing in Righteousness, etc. True, it is so, taken
collectively; yea, distributively every verse of Scripture is profitable for
some such end and purpose as is here specified. And what then? Therefore it is
sufficient to regulate our Faith in all points necessary to Salvation, and to
determine all Controversies in Religion. Good God! As if what is profitable for
our Salvation must presently be sufficient for all things required to it. Speak
ingenuously, is there such a word as sufficient, or complete Rule of Faith, or
sole Judge of Controversies, or words equivalent contained in this Text? Or
does St. Paul say that Scripture is all-sufficient of it self to perform these
Offices without the Churches Interpretation? Because it is profitable in the
hand of a Learned Bishop to Teach, to Dispute, to Correct, to Instruct the
Souls for whom he must give an account to God; Is it therefore a sufficient
Rule for every learner and ignorant Christian to square and cut out his own
Faith by, to interpret and judge of according to his own private Reason, and to
compose himself a Creed, though contrary to Fathers, Councils, and the whole
Christian World? Does St. Paul say this? Will this Text justify such an
inference? Yet this he must say, or this place concludes nothing against
Catholics.

To the last out of the Apocalypse, and not the least they rely upon in this
Controversy; I shall give a brief answer, as seeming to me of all other most
impertinent and nonconcluding. For the true meaning thereof is plainly this:
Whosoever shall presume to add to these Divine Revelations any other than what
I have already described in this Book, and endeavor to obtrude them upon the
Church with the stamp of my Authority to gain credit to them; or shall deny any
Prophesies herein contained to be written by me; let such a wretch expect the
Vials of Gods Vengeance to be poured on his accursed head, for so wicked an
Imposture and Infidelity. Which being evident, thus must run their Argument:
God will severely punish those who shall add deceitfully, or substract
maliciously from St. John' s Prophesies; therefore the Bible' s a complete Rule
of Faith, and the sole Judge of Controversies about Religion. An inference too
gross to be confuted. Yet from particular premises they draw an universal
conclusion; and on such weak and absurd reasonings from Scripture build their
Church.

But how English Protostants will defend their Brethren the Lutherans from the
wrath of God, I say not for diminishing, but even taking away this whole Book
of St. John's Revelations from Sacred Canon, I know not. Thus therefore it
appears, there is nothing here produced by our Adversaries that proves
evidently the all sufficiency of Scripture for a Rule and Judge to decide all
Controversies in Religion; that the above cited Texts but being thoroughly
examined, either conclude not for them, or for us. So much we are beholding to
our Antagonists.

To conclude, after an impartial and full examination to the best of my
Abilities, I finding the foundation of Protestanism to be really groundless,
and built upon mere uncertainties, I forsook it, and my own self, to rely on
the Catholic Church for my Salvation. I renounced my own deceitful and weak
reasonings upon Scripture, to believe what the Fathers have plainly and
unanimously taught, what has been declared in approved Oeneral Councils, and
what has been delivered by Universal Tradition from the Apostles to us for the
Infallible and undoubted Word of God.

The third Motive.
That the Protestant Church of England is involved in the guilt of Schism and
Heresy, which crimes are inconsistent with Salvation*

SECT. I.
The nature of Schism and Heresy declared from Scripture and the ancient
Fathers.

TO make good this Motive of my Conversion, my first task shall be to lay open
the nature of Heresy and Schism from Sacred Scripture, and the ancient Fathers
of the Church.

Secondly, I shall make it appear, that the English Church is highly guilty of
those sins, by its separation from the Doctrine and Discipline of the Roman
Church its Catholic Mother.

Thirdly, I shall discover the weakness and insufficiency of those Allegations
which are commonly produced to maintain the Protestants Separation to be lawful.

The Church of Christ is the highest Tribunal on earth, a Judicature of Eternal
life and death, from whose living voice we receive our Faith, and the grounds
of it, as is said and proved before. Whom whosoever will not hear in her
definitive Sentence in Spiritual matters, Is to be accounted as a Heathen Mat.
18. 18.
or a Publican, by the judgment and determination of our Blessed Savior. Hence
arises an indispensable necessity to Believe as the Church Believes, Explicitly
or Implicitly; so that the Faith of the Cardinal and Collier (there being no
difference in men as Believers, but all equally ignorant as such) must be the
same, as to the substance, under pain of damnation. And as to separate from her
life-giving Communion is formal Schism, so to recede from her Doctrine in
points of Faith with obstinacy, is flat Heresy.

Let therefore Schismatics never so much pretend Sanctity, or Heretics Truth,
from hence they may easily be discovered to be those false Prophets whom our
Blessed Savior forewarns us of, coming to us in Mat. 7. 15.
sheeps-clothing, but inwardly are ravenous Wolves: To be those whom St. Paul
describes to his Auditors, telling them, Among your selves shall be men
speaking perverse things to draw Act. 20. 29, 30.
away Disciples after them, not sparing the flock: To be those whom St. Peter
deciphers, There shall be lying 1 Pet. 2. 1.
Masters, who shall bring in Sects of perdition, and denying the Lord that
bought them, pulling upon themselves speedy destruction: To be those
Antichrists St. John speaks of, They 1 John 2. 18, 19.
went out from us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they had remained with us; but by this they are manifest not to be of us: To be
those whom St. Jude calls, Raging waves of the Sea, foaming ver. 13, ^^ 19.
out their own shame, wandering Stars for whom the storm of darkness is reserved
for ever. These are they who separate themselves, sensual, not having the
Spirit. Or as elsewhere, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Having indeed a form of godliness, t denying the power thereof.

And therefore St. Paul earnestly desires the Faithful to be of one heart, and
of one mind, and that in most moving and soul-melting expressions; I beseech
you Brethren, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
says he, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
things, that there be no Schisms amongst you, but ye be perfectly of the same
mind, and of the same judgment. Neither is he less pathetical in this point to
the Ephesians; I the prisoner Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, etc.
of the Lord beseech you to be careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace. One Body one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
And that this unity might be preserved in the Church, He gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, ^er. 11, 12.
others to be Evangelists, others Pastors and Doctors, for the perfecting the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the body of
Christ, 'till we all meet in the unity of Faith, and be not tossed and carried
about with the wind of every Doctrine. And no less earnestly does he desire the
Romans to stand upon their guard against all Separatists and false Christians.
I beseech Romans 16.
you Brethren, says he, observe them who make dissentions and scandals amongst
you, contrary to the Doctrine which you have received, and void them; for such
men serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own lusts; and by kind Speeches
and fair words seduce the hearts of the simple. And being an important point,
tells also the Thessalonians, If any one obey not our word, accompany not with
such a one, that he may be confounded. And in his Instructions to Titus Bishop
of 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14,
Crete, A man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition avoid,
knowing that such a one is subverted and finneth, being condemned by his own
judgment. Yea, St. Paul thunders out excommunication against the very Angels
themselves, if they should offer to pervert the Tradition of Faith, by that
famous place so much urged against Heretics, If we, or an Angel from Heaven
Gallat. 1. 8, 9.
preach unto you any other Gospel then what ye have received, let him be
accursed. Upon which words Vincentius Lyrinensis thus descants, Ne forsitan
perfunctorie, etc. Lest it should seem to be the superficial effusion Common.
ca. 12, 13.
of humane passion, and not the decree of Divine reason, he does inculcate and
strike it home with the pondrous force of a reiterated insinuation, as we have
pronounced; so I say again, If any preach unto you but what ye have received,
let him be accursed. This indeed is a sure Rule of Faith amongst Catholics,
(viz.) Oral Tradition of the Church, upon which grounding our selves for what
is revealed, our Faith is one and the same throughout the whole World, without
any change or alteration: which Heretics forsaking, are tossed about (as the
Apostle says) with the wind of every Doctrine, deceiving and being deceived,
ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the Truth.

From all which appears. First; That Church Communion consists in unity of
Faith and Worship, under the same Rule and Government of Divine Institution;
there being no other way to bring many into the Integrity of a mystical Body.

Secondly, That when Schisms arise in this body by men of perverse minds, to
break Church-unity; or Heresies, to pervert Church. doctrine; the Apostles, to
prevent such contagious evils, have instructed true Believers to know
Schismatics, who become such by separating themselves from the Communion of
the Church, whereof formerly they were Members, and erecting new Churches or
Congregations; and to discern Heretics who become such in teaching Doctrines
contrary to the Faith delivered to the Saints by Apostolical Tradition; of
which that Church being the only Preserver, of necessity must be the sole Judge
of the other.

And thirdly, when such were obstinately contumaceous in breaking unity, and
corrupting Faith, they did cast them out of the Church by Excommunication, That
in delivering such to Satan, others might learn not to Blaspheme. And after
that direful Sentence, though they did profess the Name of Christ, they were
never esteemed as Members of the Catholic Church, but as Heathens Mat. 18.
and Publicans, 'till they were restored upon repentance.

Answerable to which is the constant Doctrine of Antiquity, contained in the
Fathers, as a cloud of Witnesses, not to darken, but clear up Truth, if it be
not yet bright enough to discover Heresy and Schism to us. St. Irenaeus
notably describes Church-unity in these words. Hanc fidem, etc. This Faith, L.
1. adv. haec. c. 3.
as aforesaid, the Church scattered over the face of the Earth does carefully
keep, as dwelling in one House, Believes alike, as having one soul and one
heart; Preaches and delivers to her Children alike, as having one mouth. For
though in the World are different Languages, yet the virtue of Tradition is one
and the same. And neither the Churches which are founded in Germany do believe
otherwise; and teach otherwise by Tradition; nor those who are in Iberia, nor
those in the East, nor those in Egypt; but as the Sun is one and the same in
the whole World, so the Light of the Gospel shines every where, and enlightens
all men with the same beams, who will come to the knowledge of the Truth. And
neither he who among Church Governors is powerful in Speech preaches otherwise
then these, for none's above his Master; nor he who is less Floquent will
diminish Tradition. For Faith being one and the same, neither he who is large
in his explications, adds; nor he who is brief takes away. What can be more
express for the unity of Faith, and the ground of of it, Tradition?

And St. Cyprian is no less clear for unity of Government, Ecclesiae L. de vni.
Eecl.
unitatem, etc. Whosoever keeps not the unity of the Church, does he think he
holds the Faith? who disobeys the Church, who forsakes the Chair of Peter, upon
which the Church is founded, does he believe that he is in the Church? Can a
Protestant read this, and not see his own Condemnation? This has been the
Original, not only of theirs, but of the Heresies and Schisms in all Ages.
Neque enim S. Cypri. Epist. 55. ad Corn.
aliundo Haereses obortae sunt, neque nata sunt Schismata, etc. For Heresies
and Schisms, says the same glorious Saint and Martyr, have sprung from no other
head, but that the Priest of God is not obeyed; nor one Priest for the present
in the Church, and Christ's Vicar is not thought on: Whom if all Christians
obeyed according to the command of God, no man would rend the unity of the
Church by Schism; nor pleasing his own fancy, and swelling with full sails of
pride by himself, out of the communion of the Church, would shipwreck his Faith
on the rock of Heresy.

What is Schism, says St. Austin, but a Separate communon of such, who Cont.
Gresco Gram.
are united in the same Faith and Worship with the Catholic Church? But
Heresy is a diverse belief from the Faith of the Church. So that Schism
properly is opposed to Charity, because it is a breach of Unity: Heresy
properly is opposed to Verity, because it is a corruption of Faith. To which
Schism does so fatally dispose, that that of St. Hierom is no less than an
Oracle, Nullum Schismae est, quod Super illud Titi 3. Haereticum hominem, etc.
non sibi aliquam Haeresins confingat; ut recte ab Ecclesia rescessisse
videcatur. There Is no Schism, which does not invent some Heresy, to justify
its separation from the Church.

Which is not to be taken so rigorously, that every one who errs in a point of
Faith is presently to be censured for an Heretic. For one may hold what is
Heresy, and yet not be an Heretic; (as St. Cyprian holding the invalidity of
Baptism given by Heretics) pertinacy being essential to make an Heretic,
after the Churches declaration in the point. Which is manifest by that of St.
Austin against the Donaetists, Haeresis semper pertinaciam adjunctam L. 4.
cont. Donat. ca. 16.
habet, etc. Heresy is always joined with pertinacy, which consists in this;
that any one knowingly and witingly holds any point against the Catholic
Faith, and neglecting the Authority of the Church, makes choice of his own
Opinion, and persists in it: Grant some body believes of Christ what Photinus
believed, being persuaded it is the Catholic Faith, I do not pronounce him yet
an Heretic, except the Catholic Doctrine being manifested to him, he had
rather resist Faith, and choose to adhere to his own Tenet. And therefore the
same Holy Father says of himself, Errare possum, Haereticus esse non volo,
Though I may err, I will be no Heretic. Because in all points of Faith he had
a mind prepared to submit his private judgment to the public Sentence of the
Church* By which means it came to pass, that St. Cyprian holding a material
Heresy was absolved, and those who adhered to his judgment, after the Churches
determination to the contrary, were condemned for Heretics. Whereupon
Vincentius Lyrinensis breaks forth into exclamation, O rerum mira conversio,
etc. Cont. Haer. ca. 11.
O wonderful change of things! the Authors of the same Opinion are Catholics,
but the Followers are adjudged Heretics: The Masters are absolved, the
Disciples are condemned; Writers of such Books shall be Sons of the Kingdom,
but Hell shall receive the Maintainers of them. For who doubts but most B.
Cyprian, that Light of all Saints, and Bishops, and Martyrs, to reign with
Christ in everlasting glory? Or who on the contrary is so Sacrilegious as to
deny but that the Donatists, and such like Diseases of Religion, who by the
Authority of that Council boast that Rebaptization is lawful, shall burn for
ever with the Devil in Hell fire?

Thus the Holy Fathers believed and taught. And therefore we find St. Hierom in
his Exposition of the Creed submitting himself and Writings to Damasus, the
then Bishop of Rome, as supreme Pastor of the Universal Church, Haec est Fides,
Papa Beaptissime, etc. This is the Ad Dame. Papam in fine.
Faith, most Blessed Pope, which we have learned in the Catholic Church; in
which if any thing be delivered not with sufficient skill and circumspection,
we desire you to correct it, who professes the Faith and Chair of Peter. But if
this our Confession be approved by your Apostolical Sentence, whosoever will
find fault with me, will prove himself ignorant or malevolent, or also no
Catholic, not me an Heretic. And Optatus concludes the Donatists Contra
Parmeno. l. 3.
not to be Members of the true Church, because they were not in communion with
Syricius, who was then Pope of Rome. Neither is St. Austin less positive in
determining who are Schismatics, Ille est Epist. 171.
in vera Ecclesia, etc. He is in the true Church, who knows himself by
communicatory Letters, (which anciently were in use) to be a Member of the
Roman Church, in which the Primacy of the Apostolical Chair always flourished.

More need not be said at present to show that to be true Members of the
Catholic Church is to live in the same communion with the supreme Pastor
thereof, under the same Government, in the acknowledgment of the same Articles
of Faith, in the participation of the same Sacraments, in the same manner of
worship, brought down to us by Tradition from Christ and his Apostles: And to
be separated from this One and Catholic Communion, after once we have been
Incorporated by Baptism, is formal Schism; pertinaciously to contradict her
Doctrines of Faith, is formal Heresy.

Thus the Scripture and Ancient Fathers concerning the nature of Heresy and
Schism. Now let us see whether the Protestant Church of England, by separating
from her Catholic Mother in Doctrine and Government, be not both Schismatical
and Heretical, whatever is pretended to the contrary.

SECT. II.
Wherein is showed that the Protestant Church of England is guilty of Schism
and Heresy, by their Separation from the Roman.

THe Separation of the English Protestants from the whole body of Christians,
into a Church by themselves, is a matter of Fact not so Ancient, that it cannot
be easily traced.

The Case in short was this, King Henry the Eighth was of the same Faith and
Communion with his Pious Predecessors, from the very first Conversion of our
Island, and the whole Church in all Ages, 'till the Popes Spiritual Power did
cross his Amorous desires. And then (alas) the unruly passion of Love so
blinded his Reason, that he could not see, or would not longer acknowledge the
Primacy of the Church of Rome, which not long before he had so famously
maintained against Luther the Apostate, that deservedly he was rewarded with
the glorious Title of Defender of the Faith. For giving way to his Intemperate
pleasure, he fell passionately enamored on Anne Bullen; who being of a subtle
wit, and perceiving the King charmed with her Beauty, was resolved not to yield
to his Will, unless he would first marry her.

This her resolute denial did blow up the fire of his Love to a greater height,
and he being tossed up and down with the billows of several passions,
determined at last with himself to quench those raging flames with her
embraces, according to her own terms, though the impendiments seemed almost
insuperable, and the consequences might prove very sad. Hereupon he pretends
scruples of Conscience about his Marriage with Queen Catharine, no less then 22
years after their solemn Espousals, sealed with the endearing pledge of Issue
to succeed him in the Royal Throne. And upon his hot Devotion to his new Saint,
he grew suddenly so tenderhearted in the point, that by all means his former
Marriage must be disannulled, that the storm and inquietude in his breast might
be appeased. And forthwith Addresses are made to the Pope, to Commissionate
Legates in England to hear and determine the business with all possible speed.
But the Queen appealing from them to Rome, by the advice of her most Learned
and Counscientious Council; and the Pope understanding the equity of her Case,
and how much it might be endangered where the King had so much power, accepting
of her Appeal, recals the hearing of it to Himself; and after mature
deliberation, notwithstanding all attempts and political motives to the
contrary, gave it, as he was bound in Conscience, on the Queens side, against
the King. Which indeed was no more then to ratify what before had been adjudg'd
lawful both by the Apostolical Chair, with the approbation of the Christian
World.

His Majesty now perceiving that all hopes were passed to procure from Rome a
Divoce from his Lawful Wife, and Virtuous Queen, (whom he could not but Honor,
even while he persecuted) and a Dispensation to Marry his Beloved, he grew
highly enraged; and passion so far prevailed, that abandoning Catholic
Christian Peace and Unity, he renounces all obedience to the Church, casts the
Popes Authority out of England under pain of death to the Acknowledger, makes
himself sole Head of the Church in his own Dominions, and consequently Judge in
his own Cause, and then no question all things must pass for him, and an
usurped power would effect what Justice could not: In a word, he Divorces
himself from his most Religious and Virtuous Queen, shakes hands (as I may say)
with Religion, and joins himself to Anne Bullen.

This was the original of this fatal Schism; from this impure fountain streamed
a deluge of miseries upon our ('till then) most happy Island. For no sooner had
he, to satisfy his lusts, removed the rampire of Church Government, (the sole
preservative of Faith and Unity) but an inundation of Evils broke in violently
upon us; and with Schism, likewise Heresy, Sacrilege, Oppression, ruin of
Churches and Monasteries, extirpation of Holy Orders, contempt of Religion, by
making it liable to perpetual changes, uncertainties and and confusions, as sad
experience has but too clearly manifested.

Thus was the Protestant Reformation (as they call it) in England first brought
forth into the World, and these are the Miseries which attended it.

I wish this point might be serionsly and impartially weighed, and I doubt not
but by God's Grace it would prove to others, as it did to me, a strong motive
to return to Catholic Unity.

And here it will not be amiss to take notice what mark the Holy Scriptures
have stamped upon Schism, and Schismatics to be known by. Among your selves,
says Act. 20.
St. Paul, shall arise men teaching perverse things, to draw Disciples after
them. So did their first Reformers, being Members of the Catholic Church, till
they contradicted the Doctrine which they before believed, with the whole Body
of Christianity, to come from Christ himself and his Apostles, teaching new
Doctrines to draw Disciples after them, They went out from us, 1 John 2.
says St. John: And so did they, erecting a new communion distinct from the
universality of Christians, under a new Church Government; it being never heard
of before, that a Secular person should be Head of a Spiritual Body, or that
Christ had left such an Economy in his Church. Scripture then condemns them,
for it condemns such, Who will not hear Mat. 18.
the Church; it condemns such, who 2 Thessalonians. 3.
will not obey the word of her Governors; it condemns such, who sepeperate St.
Jude Romans 16, 17.
themselves, who cause Dissension and Scandals, contrary to the Doctrine
delivered to the Saints. And such were they as evidently in matter of fact, as
any thing that is left upon Record in the World. If therefore, whosoever before
them in the like sort separated themselves from the Church, were accounted
Schismatics by all Catholic Christians, how came they to be no Schismatics
by their Separation?

Never let them pretend any cause given on the Church's side to justify them;
for the Church can give no just cause to her Children to separate from her
communion; except they will say Christ has not left his Church sufficient
means to maintain Unity. Besides, the Fathers tell them that it is impossible
there should be just cause for any to separate from the Communion of the
Catholic Church, St. Iraeneus is very plain, It is impossible to receive such
an injury or provocation from the L. adver. haere.
Governors of the Church, as to make a separation excuseable. And St. Austin
is as positive, It is impossible there should be any just cause to make a
separation from the Communion of all Nations. And therefore Antiquity Epist. 48.
judged a separation from the body of the Church, how specious soever were the
pretenses of the dividers, to be a sufficient evidence to prove such, formal
Schismatics by the very matter of fact, without any other argument. I object
to you the crime of Schism, says the same Holy Father to the Donatists, which
St Aust. cont. Petilian.
you will deny, and I will presently prove, because you do not communicate with
all Nations. Upon which grounds, if the Ancient Fathers were now living, they
must of necessity condemn Protestants, as well as Arrians or Donatists in their
days. And thus being condemned both by Scripture and Antiquity for
Schismatics, I know not what, or who can justify their Separation, or the
continuers and maintainers of it.

It is not the Votes of a Parliament, whom Christ never made Church Governors,
nor Judges in Controversies in points of Faith; it is not the Acts of a National
Synod held by a few Schismatical Bishops, when such Councils even of Catholic
Bishops may, and have erred; It Is not the consent of two Universities, either
for fear, or flattery, or selfinterest renouncing the Papal Authority in
England, and acknowledging the King Supreme Head of the Church in his
Dominions; it is not any or all of these can bear them out, and make them
innocent. Yea, these consequent Acts make their Schism far more inexcusable:
For what in the beginning the height of passion might somewhat extenuate, by
this solemn deliberation became more voluntary, and so aggravated the former
malignity.

However, notwithstanding this undeniable prevarication, they have patched up
some Fig Leaves together to cover the nakedness of their Schism; and that they
are no better, I shall endeavor to make appear in the following Sections.

SECT. III.
Wherein the Protestants plea, that they did not separate from the Church, but
were forcibly cast out from her Communion, and therefore the Schism, which is a
voluntary recession from the Church, not imputable to them, is answered.

SEeing it cannot be denied, but that the first Reformers were bred in the
bowels of the Roman Church, communicating with her before this unhappy rupture,
to wipe off from them the odious crime of Schism, they lay the fault upon the
Catholic Church for casting them out by force from the Communion; whereas
Schism is a voluntary recession from the Church, and theirs was not, they not
separating themselves, but being separated.

In answer to which I say first, that never were any Heretics or Schismatics,
even whom they acknowledge for such, in any Age cast out from among the
Faithful, by Sentence of Excommunication for their contumacy, but they might
with as much show of reason use the same plea for their justification.

Secondly, how can they impute their separation to the Church, when after her
utmost endeavors to maintain unity, they would by no means be persuaded that
it was lawful to communicate with her in Doctrine and Worship; herein
preferring their own private opinions before the judgment of the whole
Christian world.

But thirdly, how frivolous this plea is, will most manifestly appear, if they
will but consider what was acted by themselves wholly antecedent to the censure
of the Church.

That the Church has just Power and Authority to Excommunicate such of her
Subjects who deserve it, is confessed on all sides. Yea, that she is obliged to
cut off corrupted and incorrigible Members from the body of Christianity, (lest
others be infected with their errors,) is plain to common sense. And that it
was the practice of the Church in all Ages to enjoin the Faithful to abstain
from Communion with those who pertinaciously maintained a different Faith from
her, no man can doubt, who knows any thing in Church History.

Now, when they had voluntarily receded from the Doctrine and Government of
their Catholic Mother, (or if any compulsion appeared in the business, it was
not on the Churches part, but from their new Spiritual Head the King:) when
they had demolished Monasteries, ceiz'd on their Revenues, Persecuted the most
Conscientious of the Clergy, Confiscated the Estates of contradictors, and put
to death some, most eminent for Learning and Piety, because they would not
prostitute their Faith and Conscience to the Kings assumed Authority in Church
Affairs: When they had abolished the public Worship of the Church as
Superstitious and Idolatrous, and cast out most of the Sacraments as profane
and unholy things. when they had molded a Religion according to the policy of
State, and Interests of the great ones, who had added to themselves by taking
from the Church: When they had forsaken the only certain Rule of Faith, and
made way for innumerable Sects and Subdivisions, which they have found too true
by sad experience: (God lashing them with their own rod, that they may see
their sin in the glass of their punishment.) And lastly, when to fill up the
measure of their sins they remained unrelenting and obstinate in their manifold
disorders, and miss-called Reformations in the Churches Faith and Discipline
when they had done and acted this in a most violent and headstrong manner, to
the wonder and pity of the understanding World; and all possible means being
used to reduce them to the Catholic Unity, from which they were fallen, but
all in vain: The Church then, and not Anno 10. Eliz. Reg.
'till then, by Authority Christ proceeding according to her duty and constant
practice in like cases, to the just Sentence of Excommunication: They cry out
not guilty, they are innocent and have done nothing amiss, the Schism is not to
be laid to their charge, who made no voluntary recession from the Church; But
to the Church, who against their wills did cast them out. Just as if a
Malefactor, who has made himself incapable of Mercy by his unpardonable
offenses, should accuse the Judge as guilty of his death, because he pronounces
on him the Sentence of Condemnation. Is not this a pretty plea to excuse
themselves from Schism? So bad a cause stands in need of better Arguments to
maintain it self.

SECT. IV.
Wherein is showed the emptiness of their Plea, that they did not separate from
the Universal, but only from the particular Church of Rome.

BUt seeing there is a palpable Schism in the Church by their new erected
Ecclesiastical Government, and they cannot make the World believe that the
Church of Rome, not They, was the dividing party and Actors in this separation;
being so contrary to the nature and notion of Schism from Scripture and
Antiquity, yea, and a common sense; (for how could a Church possibly separate
from a Communion whereof they never were Members?) though it should be granted
that they made the separation, yet they say, that Schism being a voluntary
departure from the Communion of the Catholic Church, they cannot be condemned
for Schismatics who only separated themselves from the particular Church of
Rome.

But alas! this is no better then a Cob-web Plea to keep Protestants from
falling into the Gulf of Schism.

For first, grant that the Church of Rome be but a particular Church, yet as
such it is a true Member of the Catholic Church; as the most Learned
Protestants of the Church of England not only grant, but contend for against
other Dissenters, and so they could not separate from the Church of Rome as
such, but of necessity they must separate from the whole, with whom she, as
part thereof communicated.

Secondly, if the separation was only made from the particular Church of Rome,
and not from the Universal, let them show us any Body of Christians agreeing
with their Protestant Church in all Material points of Faith and practice, to
whom the first Reformers united themselves when they made a separation from
their Catholic Mother. If Communion with the Greek Church be pretended, it is
most irrational, when condemned by themselves in their Belief concerning the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, Mass, Transubstantiation, etc. And indeed if they
will be of their Communion, they must agree with us almost in all points
wherein they now differ from us, and allege as just causes of their
separation. But how justly, shall be scanned hereafter. If with the Lutherans,
it is as vainly pretended, for by the Confession of those who made a full search
into the Lutheran Tenets, they agree in more points with the Church of Rome
against the English Protetestants, then on the contrary. And it is well known
that when the Controversies were hot between the Remonstrants and
Contra-Remonstrants, as Heretics are always as well fighting among themselves,
as against the Church) the Remonstrants plainly asserted, they would sooner
return into the Bosom of their Catholic Mother, then join in those points
with the Calvinists; with whom of all other Sects the English Protestants may
most pretend to have Communion. Which nevertheless has as airy a foundation as
either of the other, when the greatest Patrons and Goliahs of the English
Reformation condemn the Calvinists of fundamental Errors, in denying Episcopacy
to be jure divino, and the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters; and for
differing from them in other points contained in their 39 Articles and Book of
Common Prayer, their public Liturgy, and way of Worship. And so while they
separate from the particular Church of Rome, as they pretend, and not from the
Catholic, from which they grant no man ought to separate; they notwithstanding
are found to be left by themselves, a Church of their own constituting, finding
no part of Christ's Catholic Church, or any other, with whom, when they
separated from the Roman Communion, they actually joined themselves, or do yet,
in the belief of the same Articles of Faith, in the acknowledgment and
submission to the same Church Government, in the participation of the same
Sacraments and way of Worship, which are essentially requisite to Churchunion.

But thirdly, though no Catholic denies the Church of Rome, as taken for the
peculiar Diocese belonging to the Bishop of Rome, is a particular Church, as
well as the Church of Ephesus, or Church of Corinth; and the Pope as Bishop of
this Roman Congregation belonging to no other Jurisdiction, is a particular
Bishop: Yet seeing also, that all Catholic Christians do, and the first
Protestant Reformers did believe before their separation, that the Roman Church
as taken for the whole collection of the Faithful (as holding Communion with
the Sea of Rome, is the Catholic Church;) and that the Pope of Rome, as
succeeding St. Peter in his Primacy by divine Right add Institution, has a
Universal Headship and Jurisdiction in Spiritual matters over all particular
Churches: I say, the whole Catholic World, and first English Reformers thus
believing before their separation, they stand condemned for Schismatics by the
most Sacred and highest Tribunal on Earth; not for separating from the
particular Church and Bishop of Rome, but from the Communion of the Roman
Church as Catholic in respect of the extent of her Power and Jurisdiction, and
the Pope as St. Peter's Successor, supreme Pastor and Head thereof. And this
guilt will never be wiped off, 'till it be evidenced that the Christian World
is in an error, and believes a lie; and that the Supreme and Universal
Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome is but a mere usurpation and innovation in the
Church. But this the Protestants neither have done, nor ever will be able to
do, and yet ought to have been done by the first Reformers before they
separated; or by the continuers of it, for the justification. Which is an
attempt no less desperate, then to endeavor to persuade the World that the
judgment of a few interessed, passionate persons, may not only balance, but
also ought to outweigh and be preferred before the greatest Authority and
certainty we have on earth.

This is enough to manifest the unity of this Plea to any unbyassed and
indifferent judgments. But because Protestants do sadly deceive themselves in
being persuaded they are true Members of the Catholic Church, by imposing upon
the word Catholic a notion different from the most usual and common sense of
the Church in all Ages; and thereby satisfy themselves that their separation is
neither damnable nor dangerous, that is, not Schismatical; this being a proper
place for it, I shall endeavor to undeceive them by applying the word to its
genuine acceptance, in which sense it had much influence on my Conversion.

SECT. V.
The sense and meaning of the word Catholic, as it is used by the Church.

THe Church is said to be Catholic in three respects. First ratione loci,
according to universality Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15. Jo. 4. 21. Act. 1. 8. To.
1. 17. To. 10. 12. Ephesians. 2. 14.
of place, whereby it is distinguished from the Jewish Synagogue. For the
partition wall being broken down by Christ the chief corner stone of this
Spiritual building, both Jew and Gentile were united into one and the same body
of Christianity, extending it self into all corners of the World. Hence it is
that of St. Cyril, The Church is called Catholic, because it is spread over all
the World from one end to the other. Whereas before, the true Worship was
confined to Judaea and the Jewish Nation.

Secondly, the Church of Christ is Catholic, ratione temporis, according to
universality of time from its first existence; because being once founded by
our Blessed Savior Mat. 15. 14. Dan. 3. 44. Ecclesia vera neminem latere
potest S. Aug de unit. Eccl. cap. 14.
our and his Apostles, it is to continue by a non-interrupted visible succession
of Pastors and People to the Worlds end. Which is no less express in Scripture
than the former. Take it from the mouth of an Angel, And of his Kingdom there
shall Luke 1. 18
be no end. Or if that be not sufficient, from the Sacred Lips of Truth Mat.
16. 18.
it self, Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. What? but for a time? No, not so; But behold Mat. 28.
20.
I am with you always, even to the Worlds end.

This universality is as essential to make the Church Catholic as the former,
and hereby it is not only distinguished from the Jewish Worship, which being
Ceremonial and Typical, was but to continue for a time, and to vanish when the
Sun of Righteousness appeared: But also from all Shismatical and Heretical
Communions of false Christians, who separating themselves from this Catholic
Church thus founded to continue for ever, do erect new Congregations distinct
from it. Which newborn Communions, whatever were their pretenses to separate
from the old, though professing the name of Christ, Catholics did never
account any more true Members of Christ's Mystical Body, or part of the
Universal Church, as now Protestants pretend to be since their separation, then
either Jews or Heathens, who never acknowledged Christ to their Savior.

Witness St. Irenaeus, We must obey I. 4 contr. Haer. ca. 13
those Priests that are in the Church, those that have a succession from the
Apostles, etc. And all the rest who have departed from the original succession
(where ever they be assembled) are to be looked upon as Heretics or
Schismatics, and all these fall from the Truth.

Witness St. Austin, whom some Epist. 48. contr. Dom.
call the Tongue of the Church, and certainly he speaks her Doctrine, when he
tells the Donatists, You are with us in Baptism, in the Creed, and in the other
Sacraments of our Lord, but in the Spirit of Unity, and finally in the
Catholic Church you are not with us. And therefore he says confidently with us
elsewhere, Let him adore Idols, says the Devil, he is mine; let him remain in
the superstition of the Jews, he is mine; let him quit Unity, and pass over to
This, or That, or any Heresy, he is mine. And no wonder, seeing that corruption,
optimi est pessima, Nothing is so bad as the greatest good corrupted; For
though extensive Judaism and Paganism involve a far greater number of damnable
errors; yet intensive more malignity is often couched in Schism and Heresy, by
reason of their exceeding perverseness and obstinacy, being sins against the
greater light and means of grace to come to the acknowledgement of truth.

Now the Protestants finding themselves wholly at a loss in this particular, it
being impossible for them to show a visible succession of their Doctrine and
Government in Pastors and People from Christ and his Apostles to this present
Age, (which is a sufficient evidence they neither are the true Church, nor any
part of it) they will by no means allow the word Catholic in the Creed to be
understood of a un-interrupted visible succession of Christian Belief and
Worship in external Communion, as Antiquity interprets it; but referring it to
Doctrine S. Aug. Ep. 48.
only, will needs have it sufficient to be true Members of the Catholic
Church, to profess the name of Christ, and believe some Articles always taught
and acknowledged, though of a distinct Communion wholly, and in many points of
a different belief from the perpetually visible Church. And think they have
done enough to prove their Church Universal in respect of time, because the
Church of Rome, from whom they separated, did never fail nor cease to be a true
Church, though, as these men pretend, much corrupted. Which to my apprehension
is as much as to say, that they who are of different Faiths in a different
Communion, are notwithstanding, of the same Faith, in the same Communion; and
parts separated from the Body yet actually continue Members of it. And that a
Commonwealth of ten years old may justly maintain themselves to be of a
thousand years standing, because Monarchy, which they cast out to set up their
new Commonwealth, was of such continuance by a visible succession, and agrees
with them in some common Principles of Reason and Government. Who can resolve
these riddles? Are not these pretty props to uphold the new Protestant Church
to be of the Ancient Catholic Faith:

Strange! Can men of Reason satisfy their Consciences in what concerns eternal
Salvation? What is the Catholic Church but a Congregation of Believers united
in Faith, and Worship? And yet to hem these men in, Jerusalem must not be as a
City at unity with it self, but a body composed of Antipathies and
Contradictions. Let them speak ingenuously, will not this way of arguing make
Arrians, and Donatists, or any old condemned Heretics to be Members of the
Catholic Church as well as Protestants? The Arrians did deny but one point of
Catholic belief, and were cast out; And shall the Protestants, who deny many,
be kept in, and reputed Members? Shall that absolve the Protestants, which
condemns the Arrians? For it is not denying this, or that, but any point of the
Catholic Faith with pertinacy whatever it be, (though Heresies may be more or
less malignant and dangerous) that casts us out of the true Church, and makes
us cease to be actual Members of it.

Besides, can they as a Protestant Communion have a perpetual visible
succession from the Apostles, and yet begin to appear first in the World in the
days of King Henry the viii. 100 years since, and somewhat more? Is it any
thing to their purpose, to produce a visible Congregation of Believers in a
never-interrupted succession of the same Faith with them in sueh point wherein
they agree with the Catholic Church, when such points are not those which
constitute them a Protestant Church, but those wherein they differ from us? If
they will with any show of reason defend their Protestant Faith, as such, to
have universality of time from the Apostles, they must produce a visible Body
of Christians in Church Communion, professing those points wherein they differ
from the Roman Church, and for which they separated from her, and condemning
those points and practices in her, which they now do. Otherwise to talk of a
perpetual succession of the Protestant Religion in a Communion from the
Apostles to their present Pastors, is no better then a sick man's dream, or any
airy Vtopia without any real being or existence.

Now the Puritan-Protestants and many other Sects, either not well considering
the grounds why the most Learned of the Reformation defend the Church, of Rome
to be a true Church and perpetually visible; or else plainly seeing the
impossibility of rationally maintaining their deductions thereon depending; in
the storm of a blind zeal against the Church of Rome, split themselves against
another rock, (never caring for perpetual succession and visibility to make
them Catholic, confidently assert) that the Church of Christ was overspread
with the infernal darkness of Superstition and Idolatry, that it wholly ceased
to be a true Church for a thousand years and upwards, more or less, (for they
cannot agree among themselves about the determinate time which gave this fatal
period to Christianity) 'till by their blessed Reformation the glorious light
of the Gospel did dawn anew unto the World; and with the ruins of the Whore
of Babylon, (hopeful Children to cast such dirt in their Mothers face) they did
beautify the revived Spouse of Jesus Christ. Wherein they wholly agree with the
Donatists of old, who after their separation from the Catholic Church, thought
they could not defend themselves from Schism and Heresy, unless they would
maintain that the Universal Church was totally perished, and shrunk into their
newborn Conventicle; which has in it the the mixture of thus much Truth, that
no separation from an acknowledged true Church can be justifyable. But this is
wonderful, that those very men who pretend so much veneration of Sacred
Scripture, as to make it the sole and adequate Rule of Christian belief, should
(notwithstanding to free their own Religion from Schism and Heresy) affirm the
Church of Christ to have perished totally for so many Ages; the contrary to
which is so plainly contained in those Sacred Oracles.

Our Blessed Savior says, That he Met. 16. 18.
will build his Church upon a rock, so that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: The Angel says, Of his Luke 1.
Kingdom there shall be no end. Can possibly Jesus Christ be with the Mat. 28.
20.
Governors of his Church to the Worlds end, to direct them by his special
assistance, to pretect them by his irresistible Power, and yet the Devil so far
prevail over his beloved Heritage as to ruin it? Can he make good his promise
of leading Joh. 14. 26. 16. v. 13.
them into all Truth, and yet suffer his Church to be corrupted with damnable
errors and practices, as totally to perish? St. Paul says, God has placed in
his Church some Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11, etc.
some Prophets, others Evangelists and Doctors, for the perfecting of the
Saints, that we might be one and the same faith, and not tossed and carried
about with the wind of every Doctrine. And that the Church is the Pillar and
ground of Truth. These 1 Timothy 3. 15.
are plain express Texts for the Churches Indefectibility, needing no
Interpreter; as St. Austin says De Unit. Eccl. c 16.
in the like case of evident places out of Scripture for the universality of
the Church against obscure Texts objected by the Donatists. And yet this
generation of men will palpably pervert plain Texts of Scripture, rather then
confess a guilt in separating themselves from their Catholic Mother.

Perkins a great Champion of the Reformed Religion, says expressy, Exposit. of
the Creed, pa. 226.
That during the space of 900. years the Popish Heresy had spread it self over
the whole Would.

Calvin affirms, That the Church of Instit. l. 4. c. 18.
Rome made all the Kings and People of the Earth drunk with the cup of her
abomination, from the first to the last.

Bennet Norton says, The whole Christian World knows that before Luther, Treat.
of the Church, p. 145.
all Churches were overwhelmed with more then Cymerian darkness.

Bibliander a Lutheran is very positive, That without all question, from In
Orat. ad Princ Germa.
the time of Gregory the Great, the Pope is Antichrist, who with his
abominations has made drunk all Kings and People, from the highest to the
lowest.

Yet Simon Voyon affirms no less Catal. Doct. Ep. ad Lect.
confidently, That when Boniface was installed, then was that universal
Apostasy from the Faith, foretold by St. Paul.

And to name no more, Chamierus says, That Apostasy averted the whole body
from Christ.

Consider well these expressions, and then tell me if any thing can be more
contrary to Sacred Scripture. Lay them close together that the opposition may
more visibly appear. The Church is builded upon a rock, and the gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it. Of his Kingdom there shall be no end. I will
send you the Spirit of Truth, who shall lead you into all Truth. The Church is
the Pillar and ground of Truth. Thus teaches Scripture.

Now these new Pastors tell us, That Heresy (which is the strongest bar of
Hell gates) overspread the whole Christian World. That all Churches were
overwhelmed with more than Cymerian darkness. That there was an universal
Apostasy from the Faith. That Apostasy averted the whole body from Christ. Are
not these Doctrines directly contrary to each other? Now which shall we
believe? For both we cannot, 'till contradictions be both true: Are not these
rare men to make Apostles?

Yet before I part with them, I will ask them one question in St. Austin's
words, wherewith he expostulates the same case with the Donatists: In
Scripturis didicimus Ep. 166. ad Donat.
Christum etc. In the Scriptures we have learned Christ; in the Scriptures we
have come to the knowledge of the Church. These Scriptures are common to us
both; why do we not from them keep as well the same Church, as the same Christ?
And afterward, If for the verity of the Scriptures ye believe in Christ, whom
ye read of, and see not; wherefere do ye deny the Church, which ye both read
and see? A Church, which the same Father assures you, The Prophets have In
Psalm. 30. L. de vti. cred. c. 7, 8, etc.
more plainly spoken of then Christ himself, to prevent mistakes in a matter of
so great moment. A Church, which the Scriptures assure you, shall (as militant)
continue in a visible succession to the end of the World, as triumphant, world
without end.

After this one Catholic and Apostolic Church was founded in the World, and
began to spread it self into all corners, the Members of it were called
Christians, to distinguish them from all not professing Christ. But when some
of themselves arose teaching perverse things to draw away Disciples after them;
and so separating from the Church, whereof once they were Members, erected new
Communions; then those Christians who stood firm, adhering fast to the Church
and Doctrine established by Christ and his Apostles, were called Catholics, to
distinguish them from such false Christians, who had separated themselves into
Schismatical or Heretical Congregations. Which if the Protestants would
consider aright, they would never argue thus incongruously. The Roman Church is
not the Catholic Church, because it comprehends not Us and others in her
Communion, who are Christians: when Catholicism in its genuine notion denotes
an Universal Communion of true Believers, continuing in the Faith and Worship
first delivered to the Saints, in opposition to all Sects of Christians divided
from it, though never so many or so numerous. Which separation from a
Mother Church is as manifest in the Protestants as in the Arrians, or any other
Schismatical Heretics, who might as well have objected to the true Church,
from which they separated, that she was not Catholic, because they professing
the Name of Christ, and holding most points of the Christian Faith, were not
Members of her Communion.

So then, a Catholic is a Christian communicating with that Church in Faith
and Practice, which was founded by Christ and his Apostles. Which Church, does
evidence it self for such, by a perpetual visibility and succession from that
time to this present Age: By consequence he is no Member of any new Communion
of Christians, gathered together by some Doctor teaching contrary to the
aforesaid Church and Faith received.

Neither would there have been any need of adding Roman to the word Catholic
had not Heretics arose, denying the Church of Rome to be Mother and Mistress
of all Churches, and St. Peter's Successor to be the supreme visible Head and
Pastor of the Faithful; and yet in their divided Communions pretending either
to be the only true Church, or a part of it. But then true Believers did, and
do commonly call themselves Roman Catholics to distinguish themselves from all
such false Churches: And a Roman Catholic, is in plain English a Member of the
Church of Christ founded by the Apostles, scattered over the face of the whole
Earth, in Communion with the Bishop of Rome as supreme Head and Pastor of it.
Which the word Catholic by it self signifies as vertually, this only more
expressly. The Church always being very careful upon emergent occasions to
express her self by distinctive marks or terms, sufficient to point out the
only safe and high-road to the haven of Happiness; that those belonging to her
charge might not shipwreck their Faith on the rock of Heresy, or be swallowed
up in the gulf of Schism. And those who are without might know their dadger,
and fly to the saving Ark, to preserve themselves from perishing in the deluge
of their sins.

Hereupon with the Ancient Fathers, to be a Member of the Catholic Church, or
of the Roman Church, signifies the same thing; and to be a Catholic, is to be
in Communion with the Roman Bishop. Qui Cathedram Petri, etc Who has forsaken
the Chair of Peter, upon which the Church is founded, does he persuade himself
that he is in the Church? So that St. Cyprian, St. Hierom De unit. Eccl. ca.
finding divisions in Syria, and every one being greedy to gain such a person
to their Communion, gave them this Answer; I communicate Ep. 58. ad Dam. Papam.
with him, who communicates with the Chair of Peter. Which they all pretending
to, and it being not possible for them to be all Catholics in divided
Churches, he earnestly desises of Damasus then present Pope, Even by the Cross
and Sufferings of Christ to write unto him with whom he might communicate in
such distractions. As is manifest at large in his 58 Ep. to the said Bishop.
And in his 57 Ep. to the same Pope among much more, he has these words; Ego
Beatudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae Petri communione consocior, etc. I
communicate with your Beatitude, that is, the Chair of Peter, I know the Church
is built on that rock, Whoever eats the Lamb out of this House, is a profane
person. So then in St. Hierom's judgment, He was no Catholic who did not
communicate with the Bishop of Rome; and whoever in Church-divisions adhered to
him, could not be otherwise: The Catholic Church being founded on the Chair of
St. Peter, as a rock to remain for ever, maugre all the malice of her enemies.

The words related by St. Ambrose De Obit. Satyri.
of his Brother Satyrus, are home to this purpose. Rogavit, etc. He demanded
(says he) whether he was of the same judgment with the Catholic Bishops, that
is, the Roman Church. Optatus Milevitanus proves L. 3. cont. Parme.
the Donatists not to be Members of the Catholic Church, Because they were not
in communion with Syricius, the then Bishop of Rome. And St. Austin tells every
Christian, He may Epist. 162. and 163.
know himself to be in the True Church, if he be a Member of the Roman Church
by Communicatory Letters (in use Anciently) in which the Primacy of the
Apostolical Chair always flourished. Of which this also is a manifest argument,
in that the Fathers to convince Separatists that they were no Members of the
Catholic Church, by showing the true Church to have a perpetual visible
succession of Pastors by Divine institution, always made use of the succession
of the Roman Bishops, reckoning from St. Peter to the present Bishop then in
possession of the Apostolical Chair. So St. Irenaeus adver. haer. l. 3. ca. 3,
4. St. Aug. l. cont. Epist. Manich. quam vocant Fundamenti, ca. 4. St. Athana.
Orat: 2. cont. Arianos. Epiph. haer. 27. St. Cypri. l. 1. Epist. 6. etc. And at
present in the common use of the word (the best key of language) in the mouth
of our Adversaries, all Christians in Communion with the Roman Bishop are
called Catholics. St. Austin observes the same in his time. Velint, nolint,
etc. Will they, nill they not, (says he) Heretics and Schismatics themselves
cannot but call a Catholic, a Catholic. And therefore advises to hold the
Christian Religion in the Communion of that Church which is Catholic, and so
called even by her Adversaries.

In vain therefore do Protestants pretend to be Members of the Catholic
Church, if the Fathers be Judges, not communicating with the Church of Rome,
acknowledged by them to be true: And as vainly will the Puritans have the
Church of Rome cease wholly to be a Church, to make themselves a true one;
being both alike condemned by Antiquity. Neither can they possibly escape the
force of St. Austin's dilemma, wherewith he set upon the Donatists. Did the
Church Lib. 1. cont. Gaud. c. 7.
perish, or did she not? If she did, what Church then brought forth the
Donatists? (We say, what Church then brought forth the Puritans? Where received
their first Founders their Faith and Baptism? From whom had they delivered to
them the Sacred Oracles?) This argument strikes them dead. S. Austin proceeds,
If she did not perish, what madness moved you to separate your selves from her,
on the pretense of avoiding the communion of bad men? This argument confounds
the Protestants who acknowledge she did not perish, and yet will not confess
the madness of their separation; but endeavor to justify it, though the same
Father affirms positively, We Epist. 48.
are certain, no man can justly separate himself from the communion of all
Nations. And again, All separation L. 2. cont. ^ p. Parme.
made before the drawing of the net on shore (alluding to the Parabolical
expression of the day of judgment, Mat 13. 47, etc) is damnable, and the sin
of Schism, which surpasses all other crimes. This is so home and punctual,
that to quote any more will be superfluous; neido I see, admitting the Holy
Fathers Authority, what can rationally or satisfactorily be replied by our
Adversaries.

But thirdly, the Church is Catholic, respectu hominum saluandorum; in
respect that as many as are saved are called to be Members of it: Therefore
it is said Acts the 2. v. 47. That there were added to the Church daily such as
should be saved. And St. Paul tells us, Quos praedestinavit, Romans 8. 30.
hos est vocavit, etc. Whom God has predestined to Grace and Glory from all
eternity, those he in time calls out of the World into the Congregation of the
Faithful, (which is the proper notion of (...) in the Original, from whence
comes the word Ecclesia) that in the Communion of his Catholic Church they may
make their calling and election sure, by working out their election with fear
and trembling. Testimonies of the Fathers in all Ages are very copious to this
purpose. View a few of many.

The Holy Catholic Church (says L. 14. Moral. ca. 2.
St. Gregory the great) teaches, that none can be saved except within her;
affirming that none can be saved in anywise who are without her. Whosoever Ep.
152. ad Donat.
(says St. Austin) shall be separated from this Catholic Church, how laudibly
soever he thinks he lives, by this only wickedness in that he is divided from
the unity of Christ, he shall not have life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. And again, Being Do unit. Eccl. c. 19.
out of the Church, and divided from the collection of unity, and bond of
charity, thou should be punished with eternal fire, though burned alive for
the Name of Christ. St. Fulgentius his Scholar has the fame, l. de fide ad
Petrum, ca. 37, 38. St. Cyprian's words are little different. Do they De un c.
Eccl.
think (says he) Christ is amongst them when they are assembled out of the
Church of Christ? No, though they were drawn to torments and execution for the
confession of the Name of Christ, yet this pollution is not washed away, no not
with blood; this inexpiable and inexcusable crime of Schism is not purged away,
even by death it self. Which is no more then what they have learned from the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, when he says, Though 1 Cor 13. 1, 2 3.
I give all my substance to maintain the poor, and though I give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it will profit me nothing. And the reason is,
because it is a sacrifice without charity, which Schism destroys. For charity
(says St. Austin) no man transports out of the Church.

Are not these loud Alarms in the ears of Protestants, and all other
Separatists, to awaken them from their present Lethargy, and make them sensible
of their sad condition? Can they hear these terrible accents, and yet continue
to deceive themselves with the specious Name of Reformed Christians? While they
are divided from the Communion of the Catholic Church, can their morally good
Lives, their civil Conversation, their formal Piety without the power thereof,
their Saint-like zeal, which in the preciser sort dazels the eyes of common
People, who think all is gold that glisters; Can any, or all of these save
their precious and immortal Souls? No, they cannot; For out of the Catholic
Church (says the same St. Austin) Epist. 48. cont. Donat. etc.
they may have Faith, they may have Sacraments, they may have Scriptures, they
may live laudably, they may do good works, they may suffer death it self for
the Name of Christ, all this they may do, and have, but out of the Church
Salvation they cannot have.

Thus the Ancient Church always taught, and we with them. And this all
Heretics and Schismatics will sadly find true without repentance. But God of
his mercy make it work effectually on them, as it did on me, to bring them into
the bosom of the Catholic Church. I will close up this discourse with that
famous place of St. Austin, Multa L. cont. Ep Fund. ca. 4.
sunt quae in Ecclesiae Catholicae gremio me justissime teneant. Tenet
consensio populorum and gentium; tenet auctoritas miraculis inchoata, spe
nutrita, charitate aucta, Vetustate firmata; tenet ab ipsa sede Petri Apostoli,
cui pascendas oves suas post resurrectionem, Dominus commendavit, usque ad
praesentem Episcopatum successio sacerdotum; tenet postremo ipsum Catholicae
nomen, quod non fine causa inter tam multas haereses sic ista Ecclesia sola
obtinuit, ut cum omnes haeretici se Catholicos dici velint, quaerenti tamen
peregrino alicui, ubi ad Catholicam conveniatur, nullus haereticorum vel
basilicam suam vel domum audeat ostendere. Ista ergo tot tantaque Christiani
nominis charissima vincula recte hominem tenent credentem in Ecclesia
Catholica, etiam si propter nostrae intelligentiae tarditatem, vel vitae
meritum, veritas nondum se apertissime ostendat. Apud vos autem, ubi nihil
horum est quod me invitet ac teneat, sola personat veritatis pollicitatio.
Which is to this effect, That the consent of Nations, an Authority set up with
Miracles, nourished with Hope, increased by Charity, established by Antiquity,
the uninterrupted succession of Priests in the Chair of Peter the Apostle to
the present Bishop; and lastly, the very name of Catholic most justly kept him
in the Catholic Church, while only the empty name of Truth did keep a noise
and rattling among Schismatics, wholly destitute of all these arguments to work
upon a rational understanding.

And let any man, who desires sincerely to follow Truth and save his Soul,
judge, whether these motives which kept St. Austin in the bosom of the
Catholic Church after his Conversion, ought not to convert him to become a
Member of the same Church, and keep him in it.

SECT. VI.
Wherein the Protestants Plea of pretended Errors in the Church of Rome, to
justify their Separation, is refuted.

BUt they object further, that the Church not only may, but did err in points
of Faith and Worship; and that they separated not from the Church of Rome, but
from her Errors and Corruptions, that they might not communicate with her in
her sins.

But certainly, whoever impartially considers what has been said in the
precedent, and some other Sections concerning the Churches Indefectibility can
never think it possible that such gross errors and corruptions could invade the
Church to her utter ruin.

The Church of Christ, which is the pillar and ground of Truth, (and could not
be so, was she her self liable to error in points of Faith) has always been
more Faithful in keeping the Depositum of the Gospel entrusted to her
inviolate, and unspotted from all blemishes of corruption, which unreasonable
men, that is, Schismatics and Heretics have endeavored by all means possible
to introduce, thereby to defile the Virgin-purity of Christ's Spouse;
contending so earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, that in
this Holy quarrel she was ever very liberal of her dearest blood, willing
rather to undergo the greatest tortures, then it should suffer in the least
manner. Yea, so vigilant and eagle-ey'd has she been hitherto in the discharge
of this important duty, that no Authority, Learning, or Sanctity of any person
whatsoever could introduce the least innovotion in Religion, without vigorous
opposition and condemnation. As is evident in Origin and Tertullian, those
wonders of their times; to name no more, being a thing so obvious in Church
History. See Vincentius Lyrin. ca. 23, 24.

Moreover, all points of Christian belief being taught and established in the
Church by Christ and his Apostles, and as such conveyed down to us ever since
that time, by Universal Tradition, and for the most part most visible practice,
as the Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayer for the Dead, Invocation of Saints, etc.
It Is altogether impossible the Church should fall into such damnable errors as
are imputed to her by our Adversaries, except so many millions of Christians,
of different Nations and Languages, scattered over the face of the whole earth,
should to no purpose in some Age conspire together to teach the World a
palpable lie, in direct opposition to what they had received, and in matters
whereon depend no less then the eternal Salvation of themselves and Posterity;
a thing inconceivable to humane reason. But impossibilities clouded in
plausible terms shall be asserted for truths, before some men will confess
themselves Schismatics in separating from the Roman Church; and Infallibility
must err, before they be condemned as erroneus, who yet confess themselves
Fallible.

But let us suppose (though it be not true) that the Church was liable to
errors in matters of Faith; can these men, who accuse her to be erroneous,
assure us that they err not in the accusation? For being by their own
confessions Fallible, that is, not certain whether what they affirm be true or
no, unless they can evidence that those are errors indeed which they lay to the
Churches charge, no man can rationally believe them, seeing the public
judgment and attestation of the Church to the contrary is incomparably of far
greater Authority, and will overpoise whatever amounts to less then
demonstration. And in all Justice, the right ought to be thought on the
Governouts side, 'til the revolters from them, by producing causes sufficient
to justify the withdrawing of their obedience, make the contrary undeniably
clear to every eye.

They are the accusing Party, the Church defends her right; without a
definitive Sentence can be no decision. What Judge will they therefore stand to
in this Controversy? We know they ought to submit to the judgment and
determination of the present Church, her voice being as it were the voice of
God in declaring what is of Faith, or not; and cannot but wonder that they will
not also acknowledge it, when our Blessed Savior says plainly of Luke 10. 16.
Church Governors, He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me, and who despises me, despises him that sent me. And 1 Thessalonians. 4.
8.
St. Paul, He that despises these things, despises not man, but God, who has
also given to us of his Holy Spirit. But because by her they already are
convicted and condemned, and therefore refuse to stand to her determination,
(as Heretics and Schismatics have done in all Ages) will they refer it to
Antiquity, and let the Ancient Fathers give the Sentence? This they cannot
rationally refuse; neither in word (to make a flourish,) do some of the most
Learned of the Protestants, but only pretend to reform the present Church, that
they may conform to Antiquity, and undertake to rectify the Church of Rome in
points wherein she has forsaken her primitive purity.

But they are at great variance and in disorder amongst one another, in that
they cannot agree when Religion began to be adulterated, and when these errors
crept into the Church. For being no less then damnable errors, as they pretend,
in things practical and daily in use by so great a Body, and therefore
notoriously visible, and speaking aloud their original, seeing they can assign
no certain time (a task impossible, as we have before shown) when first they
were brought into the Church, it is an undeniable argument that they are not
innovations, but of Apostolical practice and institution: According to that
famous Rule of St. Austin, Quod ubique ab Ecclesia Catholica observatum est,
etc. Whatever the Catholic Church observes in all places, if we find it to
have been instituted by no General ouncil, we must believe it to have come from
the Apostles themselves to us by Tradition.

Some of them allow the Spouse of Christ to continue in her Virgin purity for
the first five or six hundred years, 'till the time of Gregory the great, that
glorious Saint and Pope, so affectionate to our Country, and justly called our
Apostle. Others think this confession too liberal, and will have the Mystery of
Iniquity to begin sooner, (which is true if understood of Apostates from the
Church, not of the Church Apostatizing,) and so with them this defection from
the Faith, by the mixture of Antichristian Doctrines and practices, must invade
the Church immediately upon the first 300 years after Christ, or thereabouts,
some maintaining this, others that Pope to be the Antichrist; every one
fancying a time, which they conceited most advantageous for their purpose. For
after trial finding that the Fathers of the first 600 years could not be
admitted Judges in the Controversy without a manifest condemnation of
themselves, they warily retreated within the first 300 years of Christ, which
being times of hot and bloody persecution more or less, and little then written
by the Fathers of the Church, they thought nothing considerable could be
produced against them, within those Ages for their condemnation in the present
Controversies not then started; or what was upon record, might easily some way
or other be evaded. So that they will have the light of their new Gospel to be
tried only by dark times, as to the decision of the present points; like
Litigants, who will admit only of such Witnesses who can say little, or nothing
to the cause in hand; and by all means will have those debarred to speak who
can give sufficient evidence against them. For no rational cause possibly can
be given why they should assign 6, or 5, or 300 years after Christ for the
beginning of the Apostasy from the Faith, (as if Christ should just then forget
his promise of p^rp^tual assistance and guidance of his Church into all Truth,
or else not be able to perform it) more then any other time; but only they were
resolved, wh^^ they found those Doctrines and practices to be evidently
asserted by the ancient Fathers which they condemn as Erroneous and Idolatrous,
they would determine That to be the time when the Church grew rotten and
corrupted. And so, after all their seeming veneration of Antiquity, the Ancient
Fathers shall not be any Rule whereby to judge of their Faith and Worship; but
their Faith and Worship shall be a Rule whereby to judge when the Fathers are,
or are not erroneous, A sure way, I confess, for a new Religion.

But they cannot escape so neither without condemnation, and that even by their
own confessions, so impossible it is for those who contradict Truth, not to
contradict themselves also; and to confute themselves while they oppose her.
For take the first 5, or 600 years after Christ to be the limi^s of primitive
Purity, and it is manifest from their own Champions, that what they call errors,
as just causes of their separation from the Church of Rome, are Catholic
Verities.

It Is true (says Whitaker,) what Cont. 2. q. 5. c. 7.
Calvin and the Centurists have written, that the Ancient Church did err in
many things, as touching Limbo, Free Will, Merit of Works, etc.

I confess (says Tulk) Hierom, Riot Brist. page 36.
Austin, Ambrose, etc. hold the Invocation of Saints.

Most of the Fathers (says Kemnitius) Exam. Con. Trid. p. 3. p. 2000
did not dispute, but avouch that the Souls of Martyrs heard the Petitions of
those who Prayed to them; they went to the Monuments of Martyrs, and invocated
Martyrs by Name.

As long as we stand to Councils and De Noto. Col* 1559.
Fathers, we shall remain always in the same Errors. So Peter Martyr, Which
words being indefinite, may as well involve the Councils and Fathers of the
first 300 years, their utmost refuge in Antiquity, as after* Ages.

But Whitguift an English Protestant Defen. p. 473.
Bishop, put it out of all doub^; for he affirms, That all the Bishops and
Learned Writers of the Greek and Latin Church too, for the most part wrre
spotted with the Doctrines of Free Will, Merit, Invocation of Saints.

It was a custom (says Calvin) 1300 years ago to Pray for the Dead. Inst. l.
3. c. 5. para. 10.
But all of that time, I confess, were carried away into Error. Which computed
from the time he writ, must of necessity adulterate the Church in the days of
her pre-acknowledg'd Purity. And Dudidius plainly acknowledges to his Brother
Beza, That if it be true Apud Bezam Ep. 1
which the Fathers have professed with mutual consent, it is altogether on the
Papists side. What can we desire more, as to the judgment of Antiquity, for our
justification?

Thus these men while they pretend only to forsake errors, and reform Religion,
by clothing the the Church, a new with the snowy garments of primitive purity,
confess unawares, enough to condemn themselves out of their own mouths, and
flatly give the lie to what they produce for their justification. They flee to
Antiquity to absolve them from error, and yet accuse the same Antiquity as
erroneous. But while they thus condemn the whole Church, Councils, and Ancient
Fathers of errors, certainly they could not intend that their own single words
should be of any Authority, or deserve to be credited by rational men. Who
desires more satisfaction in this particular, I refer him to that most
excellent Treatise called, The Protestants Apology for the Catholic Faith;
which in an argument ad hominem is unanswerable, and plainly demonstrates that
Protestants must upon their own grounds either become Catholics; or else
confess that their Faith and practice is not the Faith and Practice of the
Ancient Church. With whom to consent, is, notwithstanding the Plea of these
men, to defend their separation from the Church of Rome their Catholic Mother
not to be Schismatical.

Some therefore seeing their Church not only to totter, but wholly to fall,
while it pretends to stand on the legs of Antiquity, have with greater zeal,
though with less reason, invented another way to justify their Schism; and will
have no Authority at all attributed to the Fathers and Councils, the constant
practice and Tradition of the Church, for decision of the present
Controversies; but affirm all things to be uncertain upon that score, though
never so plainly and unanimously asserted; and the Sacred Scripture independent
on them, must be sole judge, and give the decisive Sentence by it self. Which
position (if made speak out,) says thus much, that since the Apostles days
there is not one sufficient witness of what they taught the World to believe and
practice as Christ instructed them; but that the Doctrine of the Church is to
be brought to the touchstone of Scripture by every one in particular, and after
examination to be accounted counterfeit or true, accepted or refused, as fancy
and private reason shall determine. For after these magnificent pretenses of
their great veneration of Sacred Scripture, and deferring all to it, this is
the up-shot, and their Faith is finally resolved into no safer Principle. A
Position so wholly destructive of the certainty of Christian belief, so
inconsistent with the majestic gravity of Religion, such a never* dying Hydra
of Schisms and Heresies, that I know not what can make a surer way for Atheism
to triumph over the ruins of Christianity. And had our Forefathers been of
this judgment and practice, doubtless before this time the Cross of Christ had
not been the glory, but contempt of Nations.

Besides, methinks, they cannot but see, that while they flee to to Scripture
as sole Judge in these Controversies, and deny all Church Tradition and
Attestation, they thereby take away those Sacred Oracles of Divine Truth also;
when it is confessed by all who can pretend any right to reason, that there is no
possible way for us to know undoubtedly what is the Word of God, or not, but by
the Tradition of the Church.

Moreover, if the written Word must be sole Judge, seeing the Scriptures
themselves send them to the Church, obliging them to stand to her determination
in such Cases (as is manifest by what has been said) are they not confounded
upon their own grounds, and must obey the Churches decisive Sentence in all
Controversies of Faith, or else deny to stand to Scripture? In such
inextricable waves do they miserably loose themselves who obstinately defend so
bad a cause.

But if notwithstanding these Paralogisms and self-contradictions, the
Scriptures must still be sole Judge in the present controverted points, and
they will have them to speak for them against us; except it be so convincingly,
that the Propositions by the very connection of terms cannot be denied without
some implicancy, they are in as bad a case as they were before. For if the
places produced are justly liable to various interpretations, can they think it
reasonable that their private glosses should be preferred before the public
judgment of the Church, to whom we owe the Scriptures themselves, and from whom
we ought to receive as well the sense of Scripture, when it is controverted as
we do the Letter? I know in their popular discourses they make fine flourishes,
and after a long combat with pretended monstrous errors of the Church of Rome,
they clap their wings, and crow triumphantly upon their own dunghill, demanding
of their deluded Auditory, whether the Church of Rome or Scripture is to be
believed? This is their custom, but it is not the question. For let them produce
but one sentence out of those Sacred Oracles of Truth, that in express terms
contradicts the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in any one controverted point,
for which they pretend just cause of separation, and it would be something to
the purpose; but who can imagine that Catholics who have taught the
Protestants that the Scripture is God's word, should themselves in express and
positive terms deny the Doctrine of it.

And therefore seeing the question is (if Scripture alone was to deside the
Controversies) whether the sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost in those Sacred
Writings, is to be taken upon the credit of Ecclesiastical Tradition, or
newborn interpretations of some few private men; certainly none, except much
oversway'd by passion or interest, can prefer the bare conjectures and
probabilities of those Interpreters before the evidence of such Authority.
Especially the Scriptures themselves witnessing, That things in them 2 Pet. 3.
15, 16, 17.
difficult to be understood, are wrested by the unlearned and unstable to their
own destruction. And the experience of all Ages making it evident, that the
Interpretation of Scriptures by private Spirits in a sense contrary to the
attestation and practice of the Church, has been the very source and fountain
of all Heresies. And in such cases there is no possible way to be secured from
seduction and falling into errors, but by firmly adhering to the Doctrine and
Tradition of the Church. Sine ego, sive quis alius, etc. If I, or any other
(says Vincentius Lyrinensis) will discover the frauds of newborn Heretics,
and shunning their snares abide sound and firm in the right belief, he must by
the help of God fortify his Faith with a double bullwark; first the Authority
of Divine Law, and then the Tradition of the Catholic Church. For Sacred
Scriptures being liable to such variety of Interpretions, that almost so many
men, so many minds; Novatian, Photinus, Sabellius, Donatus, Arius, Apollinaris,
Belagius, Nestorius (Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants, Anabaptists,
Independents, Fanatics, etc.) every one pretending the Scriptures to stand for
them according to their several glosses and expositions, of necessity to shun
the Labyrinths of so many errors, we must follow the line of Apostolical
Writings, as handed to us by the sense and Tradition of the Catholic Church.

And yet if we should exclude the universal Tradition of the Church, with the
undoubted Testimonies of Councils and Fathers of all Ages (by which Protestants
stand convicted of Schism and Heresy beyond all rational contradiction) from
having any thing to do in the decision of these Controversies, granting all
that they desire, let bare words of Scripture be taken according to the
exactest Criticisms of private reason, in the judgment of Learned and
Un-interessed men, and even upon that score those Sacred Oracles of Divine
Truth will cast it clearly on the Catholics side against our Adversaries. And
if they cannot be convinced from them to be Heretical in all material points of
Faith wherein they differ from us, yet as much as concerns the formal part of
Schism and Heresy, they stand thereby as manifestly guilty of those heinous
sins as ever any one who separated from the Churches Doctrine and Communion;
yea, and by Protestants themselves condemned for Heretics. But never any place
has been produced by them from the Scriptures against the Church in the
present Controversies, as to evidence her in any one point erroneous; But
Catholics have sufficiently shown, that by such endeavors they have troubled
those waters of Life with the mud of their corrupted fancies, and by injurious
distortions forced them to speak what never the Holy Ghost intended.

What remains therefore, but that Protestants acknowledging themselves to be a
Congregation Fallible and subject to error in points of Faith, confess also
that they never afforded a more pregnant demonstration of their Fallibility,
than in assering the Catholic Church to have erred, whereby their separation
from her Doctrine and Communion might be justified.

SECT. IV.
Wherein the Protestants Plea, that the Popes Universal Pastorship in an
Usurpation crept into the Church, and therefore might, and ought to be
forsaken, without Schism, is refuted.

YEt another Plea they have, that the Popes Universal Authority and Primacy
over the Church is a mere Usurpation and Tyrannical, and consequently to oppose
and expel the exercise of such a Power out of England, or where ever else it is
introduced, cannot be a Schism, but a Godly Reformntion, by reducing the
Government of the Church to its primitive institution, as founded by Christ and
his Apostles. These are fine specious words, and will be found nothing else in
their due examination.

For it being of Faith in the Catholic Church, that a Primacy or Supreme
Jurifdiction in Ecclesiastical matters over the Universal Body of Christianity
in St. Peter and his Successors, (the Bishops of Rome) is of Divine
Institution, and maintained by her, as so taught, and practiced in all Ages;
yea, and the Popes being in peaceable possession of such an Authority in
England for about 1000 years by confession of Protestants themselves, (being a
thing not to be denied, as notoriously evident from unquestionable Records in
Church affairs) to deny such an Authority to be lawful, and thereupon to
withdraw their obedience from such a Government, without any more ado,
declares them Schismatics, unless first by rigorous demonstration they prove
it to be a mere usurpation. For it is not abused Scripture, much less other
Testimonies either justly suspected or wrested to their purpose, that can weigh
any thing against the selfproof of so long a continued possession; the like to
which cannot be shown by any Authority upon Earth, to fortify their right
against opposers. I say, nothing but rigorous demonstration will serve their
turn in this case, which no prescription can evacuate.

But when the Papal Authority was first cast out of England, God knows, they
were thinking on other matters; Lust and Self-interest had quite blinded the
eye of reason in King Henry the 8th. and his flatterers, resolving first upon
the fact, and then endeavoring to maintain it just and lawful. But with such
weak Arguments as may be strong proofs to induce all un-interested Souls to
believe the contrary; though indeed the strength of our evidence against them
needs no help from the feebleness of their defenses. However thus liberal they
are to us against their wills.

No cause actually working, can but produce effects correspondent to the nature
of its activity* No man can deny this, but he must deny his reason. If
therefore the Pope's Supremacy over the Universal Church was introduced by
Tyranny and Corruption, it is morally impossible that such novelty as an
universal Usurpation in matters of the highest concern should insensibly creep
into the Church without discovery, and invade the whole Christian World without
opposition, and this too in producing notoriously visible effects, which
necessarily must accompany such an innovation. Doubtless such a change in a
matter of pretended Divine Institution, would have made a strange clamor and
confusion in the Christian World. One may as well maintain, that the bloody
alterations of Government in our Island, have crept into the Nation, and after
the sad miseries of so long a war leaving behind it evidences to every eye, no
man can tell how, or be sensible when, and in what manner those grand mutations
happened. Yea, this might be defended with more show of reason, those
alterations being in Temporal matters, acted in a corner of the World, and
therefore more easily brought about with lesser noise and better stifled in
their birth, that they might not be transmitted to posterity, then this
usurpation in a Spiritual Government, founded by Christ himself to continue for
ever, over all the Nations of the Earth, in those things which concern the
eternal Salvation of their Souls.

Those reverend Witnesses of our Ancient Faith the Holy Fathers, who were so
tenacious and careful of Christian Customs, and the Doctrine once delivered to
the Saints, that they have exactly observed and registered in the least
innovations of Faith or practice which new Teachers would have brought into the
Church, and were always more ready to part with their lives than any one point
of their Religion, would they have quietly suffered the Government of the
Church (the sole Conserver of its Doctrine) instituted by Christ himself to be
changed, and not generally complain, contradict, oppose, register and publish
it to the whole World, that they might know it to be a usurpation, a spurious
issue, no plant of our Heavenly Fathers planting, and therefore to be
abominated and rooted out? It is incredible, that they who were so eagle-ey'd
to observe, and eager to contradict matters of far less moment; should in a
business of such concernment be wholly silent and betray the Truth. For if they
have declared the Bishop of Rome's supreme Power and Jurisdiction in Gods
Church, as Successor to St. Peter in his Primacy, to be an usurped Authority
and of humane invention, and as such opposed it; let them show it out of their
Writings, that we may know when, by whom, and by what means 'twas introduced
into the Church, so as to invade the whole Body of Christianity. And if they
cannot, as most certainly they cannot, (having labored in vain to do it for
above these 100 years, and their own differences about the time, when 'twas
first brought in, being a manifest proof, it can never be assigned, and
confessed so by the most ingenuous among them) seeing it is a Government that
has been in quiet possession of the Christian World time out of mind, with a
belief of its divine institution, handed as such to us by Universal Tradition,
unless they will divest themselves of reason, they cannot but acknowledge,
that, ab initio fuit sic, it is as old as Christian Religion; and all those
Schismatics who disobey so Sacred a Power under the pretense of usurpation.

The Divine Right of the Pope's Supremacy in Spiritual matters being thus
vindicated, those pretenses of a Godly Reformation, and reducing Church
Government to its Primitive Institution, fall to nothing of themselves; what
they call Reformation being a violent usurpation of another right, and upon
what Motives, is too notorious to be justified.

'Twere much to be wished, they would lay to heart how in the late Revolutions
by Gods most remarkable judgments on them, those very weapons which they used
against Papal Power have been taken up by the Presbyterians, to the ruin and
extirpation of Eposcopacy for some time: And those Zealots in the same sort as
handsomely cudgelled by the Independants, all equally pretending a Godly
Reformation, and reducing Religion to its primitive Purity.

Here I might conclude this Motive of my Conversion (wherein I have been very
large, because Schism being a matter of fact is more discernable by ordinary
capacities, than disputes of things more abstracted from sense, and
consequently it is more easy to discover to all Seperatists the danger of
their condition, that they may return to Catholic unity) especially
considering the proof wholly lies on our Adversaries side, to demonstrate so
long a continued Government as the Pope's Primacy over the Catholic Church to
be a mere Tyrannical Usurpation; or else to stand unanswerably convicted of
Schism for renouncing such an Authority, evidenced unto us by Universal
Tradition, which is our tenure in points of Faith. However, in that many poor
Souls not knowing or not considering the strength of universal practice and
immemorial possession on the Catholics side, are still seduced and kept in
error by some places gleaned here and there from Sacred Scripture, and the
Writings of Antiquity wrest'd to their purpose, that they may evidently see
that all such verbal proofs from dead Letters are made to speak what the
Authors never intended; I shall, ex abundante, to give them all possible
satisfaction in a matter of so great consequence, produce such clear
Testimonies from undoubted Records of Antiquity, speaking the Faith and
practice of the primitive Church in the point of the Pope's Supremacy, to be
the same with the new present Church of Rome, that more cannot be required by
men of Reason.

SECT. VIII.
Wherein the Pope's Universal Power and Supreme Jurisdictidiction in Gods
Church is farther manifested, and made good from Councils and the verdict of
Ancient Fathers, grounded on Sacred Scriptures.

WE holding St. Peter to be constituted by Christ himself the Head and Prince
of the Apostles, that is, to have a Supreme Power and Jurisdiction in Gods
Church peculiarly entrusted to him, and the Pope's universal Pastorship to be
founded on the Primacy of St. Peter as his Successors; the Testimonies we are
producing, must make good too things.

First, that the Ancient Church believed St. Peter to be Prince of the
Apostles, and Head of the Universal Church.

Secondly, the Bishops of Rome succeed him in that Authority and Jurisdiction.

Here the Fathers first declare their belief in these particulars. I begin with
Anacletus Pope and Martyr immediately after the first Century, speaking the
very words of the present Church, Haec Sacrosancta Ann. 101. Epist. 3. ad omnes
Epist.
Romana, etc. This Holy, and Roman, and Apostolical Chair has obtained the
Primacy, and eminency of Power over all Churches and the whole Congregation of
Christian People, not from the Apostles, but from our Lord and Savior, as he
said to Blessed Peter the Apostle, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my Church.

Julius the first of that Name in the Roman Chair, writing to the Bishops of
the East in behalf of St. Athanasius, that invincible Bullwark for the
Catholic Faith against Cent. 4. Ep. ad ori. Episc.
the Arrians, is no less express and punctual to our purpose, Sicut B. Petrus
Apostles, etc. As Blessed Peter was chief of the Apostles, so the Roman Church
consecrated in his Name, by our Lords institution was first and Head of the
rest; and all great Churches and Assemblies of Bishops should have recourse to
her as to the Mother Church and Supreme. I have put these too together, because
Popes, which cannot derogate from their Authority, our Adversaries having
nothing justly to say against them.

St. Irenaeus surely was no Protestant in this point; affirming, The most
ancient known Church to all men, L. 3. cont. haer. c. 13.
founded and established at Rome by the two most famous Apostles Peter and
Paul, brought down by succession of Bishops to his time, to be that Church to
which by reason of its more powerful principality, every Church, that is, all
the Faithful over the World ought to resort.

Tertullian calls St. Peter, The Rock of the Church, and the Bishop In praeser.
c. 22, 36.
of Rome the High Priest, and Bishop of Bishops.

Origin is clear, When (says he) the chief charge of feeding Christ's sheep was
given to Peter, and the In ca. 6. Ep. ad Roma.
Church founded upon him, etc. There was required of him the confession of no
Virtue, but Charity. Relating to that place in the 21 of St. John's Gospel,
where is described, when and how our Blessed Savior invested him with this
Supreme Pastorship and Jurisdiction.

We, (says St. Cyprian, as the Epist. ad Ju
mouth of the Church,) hold Peter the Head and Root of the Church, But that
famous place elsewhere is more full and convincing. The enemy perceiving De
unit, Eccles.
his Idols to be forsaken, and his Temples to be deserted by the multitude of
Believers, invented a new deceit to gull the unwary by the name of Christian,
raising Heresies and Schisms to corrupt Verity and subvert Faith. This is, O
Brethren, because we have not recourse to the Origin, nor seek to the Head.
Which if we would consider and examine, there would need no long Treatise, nor
many arguments to find out the Truth. Our Lord said to Peter, Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. And again, after resurrection, saying, As my Father sent
me, so send I you, etc. Yet to John 20. 21, etc.
manifest unity, he constituted one Chair, and by his Authority he disposed the
Origin of that Unity to begin from one^. The rest of the Apostles were that
which Peter was, the Primacy was given to Peter, that the Church of Christ
might appear to be one, and one Chair.

Here are couched many things remarkable. First, That all Heretics and
Schismatics are not true Members of the Catholic Church, but mere nominal
Christians.

Secondly, that Heresy and Schism in their own nature are as damning sins as
flat Idolatry, being Satan's new-invented snare^ to catch poor Souls, and his
utmost endeavors to keep up his tottering Kingdom after the promulgation of
the Gospel to all Nations.

Thirdly, That unwary Souls are only taken by these ginns of the Enemy, who
have not recourse to the Visible Head of the Church, in communion with whom
Truth is only to be found.

Fourthly, That St. Peter is this visible Head of the Church, constituted by
Christ himself; first by Promise, afterward by Commission. The Promise, Thou
art Peter, and Mat. a6.
upon this rock will I build my Church, unto thee will I give the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Commission, Feed my Lambs, feed my Joh. 21.
Sheep; Being words spoken to St. Peter, and no other Apostle.

Fifthly, To prevent an Objection, that they were all Apostles as well as
Peter, and therefore equal in Authority, he grants they were equal in the
Apostleship as much as concerns an illimited Power and Commission to Preach the
Gospel to all Nations, and so they were all foundations of the Church. But St.
Peter in a more peculiar and eminent manner was a rock on which the Church was
founded, in as much as he was made their Head, and supreme Pastor of the
Faithful.

To whom St. Hierom wholly accords, affirming, That although all the Apostles
were alike in Apostleship, yet Christ for the better keeping of Unity L. 1.
adv. Jouin. c. 14.
and Truth would have one to be Head of them all; that a Head being once
constituted, occasion of Schism might be taken away. Neither is he less
punctual in asserting the Bishop of Rome to succeed Peter in this Primacy,
writing thus to Pope Damasus, Ego Beatudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae Petri
communione consocior, Ep. 57, and 58.
etc. I am joined in Communion with your Holiness, that is, the Chair of Peter;
I know the Church is built upon that rock; whosoever eats the Lamb out of his
Family, is a Profane person. Whosoever is not in Noah' s Ark, perishes in the
flood.

Ask St. Austin his Faith in this Tract. 56. in Joha.
point, and he tells us, The Primacy among the Apostles by special grace is
pre-eminent in St. Peter. And elsewhere he calls St. Peter, The Head Ep. 86.
of the Apostles, the Gate-keeper of Heaven, and the foundation of the Church.
And what he believed concerning the Power of his Successors is evident by these
words, Sedenti Ep. 162.
in Cathedra Romanae Ecclesiae, etc. The whole Christian World in the
transmarine and remotest parts of the Earth, is subject to him who sits in the
Chair of the Roman Church.

St. Gregory also assures us, that he knows no Bishop but is subject to the Sea
Apostolic. And that the care and Principality of the Church L. 4. Epist 32.
Ep. ad Maurit.
has been committed to St. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and yet he is not
called Universal Apostle. That is, as if there was no other Apostle but He.
Thus vindicating the supreme jurisdiction and Primacy of the Roman Bishop as
St: Peter's Successor against John the proud Patriarch of Constantinople,
arrogating to himself the Title of Universal Bishop in a sense contrary to the
Doctrine and practice of the Catholic Church.

To cite more at large would be tedious; but to these might be added the
Epistle of St. Marcellus Pope and Martyr to the Bishops of the Province of
Antioch, concerning the Primacy of the Chair of Rome. Leo the great Ser. 3.
Anniu. Assump. and Ser. 2. in Not. S. Petri. and Epist. 89. S. Athana. Ep. ad
Faelicem. S. Ambr. in ca. 2. ad Galatas. and l. 6. ad Lucam c: 2. S. Epipha.
haer. 51. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matt. Optatus Milevit. l. 2. cont. Parm.
Fulgentius de Incar. and gratia c. 11. Prosp. l. 2. de Voca. Gentium ca. 6.
Eusebius. Ep. 3. Campaniae, etc. And many others, but these may suffice.

This harmony we find among the Ancient Fathers concerning the supreme
Pastorship and Jurisdiction of St. Peter and his Successors the Bishops of
Rome, while they speak severally in their Writings. Let us now hear them speak
united in General Councils, the most Sacred and Supreme Judicature that is on
Earth in things that concern our Eternal Happinefs.

The General Council at Florence Ann. Chapter 1234.
declares the Faith of the Catholic Church in these words, Definimus S.
Apostolicam Sedem, etc. We define that the Holy Apostolic Chair and Pope of
Rome, has Primacy over the whole World; and that the said Pope of Rome is
Successor to S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and true Vicar of Christ, and
Head of the Universal Church, and Father and Pastor of all Christians; and that
full Power was given to B. Peter by our Lord Jesus Christ to feed, rule and
govern the Universal Church, as is contained in the Sacred Canons of
Ecumenical Councils. Which though celebrated but 400 years since and upwards,
yet I first produced it, because not only subscribed by the Latin Fathers, but
by the Greek Church also, and taken out of more Ancient Councils, as the words
express, and former Acts make good.

For in the first General Council Ann. Chapter 325.
at Nicaea, so famous for Anathematizing the Arrian Heresy, it was defined,
That who holds the Sea of Rome is the Head and Chief of the Patriarchs, seeing
he is the first, as Peter to whom Power is given over all Christian Princes, and
all their People, as he who is Vicar of Christ our Lord over all People and the
Universal Church of Christ.

The General Council of Chalceden Ann. Chapter 451. Acti. 16.
consisting of above 600 Fathers, after mature deliberation, declare, That all
Primacy and Chief Honor, according to the Canons, is to be kept for the
Archbishop of old Rome. Which is not so to be understood, as if the Sacred
Constitutions of General Councils first gave this Supreme Authority to the
Roman Bishop, but upon several occasions the Councils defined this Supremacy of
Jurisdiction to belong of right to the Bishop of Rome by Divine Institution.
Else how could the sixth Canon of the first General Nicene Council say,
Ecclesia Romana semper habuit primatum, The Church of Rome always had the
Primacy. And by what tenure she held it in their judgments, is manifested in
the Preface of the said Council in these words, Ecclesia Romana, etc. The
Church of Rome by no Synodical Decrees was set over the rest, but by the
Evangelical voice of our Lord and Savior obtained the Primacy. And in the
second Session of this Council of Chalcedon, after the Epistle of Leo the great
then Pope to the Fathers was publicly read, confirming the Nicene Creed
against the Arrians, there arose an unanimous acclamation, Haec Patrum fides
Apostolorum fides, etc. This Faith of the Fathers is the Faith of the Apostles,
we all believe so, all Orthodoxal believe so; let him be accursed who believes
not so. Peter has spoke by Leo, etc. Which last words signify nothing, if they
had not believed Leo then Bishop of the Roman and Apostolical Chair to succeed
St. Peter in his Faith and Jurisdiction. I am sure the same Leo believed so,
when he tells us, That our Blessed Savior said only to Ser. 3. Anniu. Assump.
St. Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not. And chose him alone
of all the World to be set over the vocation of all Nations, and all the
Apostles, and all the Fathers of the Church, by a peculiar Commission to feed
and govern his whole flock.

Besides, in the third Session they style him, Universal Archbishop and
Patriarch of old Rome; and afterward give sentence against Diosorus in the
name of Leo and St. Peter, to acknowledge and testify thereby that they
believed him to succeed St. Peter in his Universal Pastorship. Which Title of
Universal Bishop, though St. Gregory the great out of Humility refuses, as not
used by his Predecessors, and bitterly inveighs against it in that sense, the
then Patriarch of Constantinople did proudly arrogate it to himself: Yet it is
most certain and evident from the same Epistles, he did maintain it to belong
by Divine right to the Bishops of L 4. Ep. Ep. 31, 34. L. 7. Epis^. 30.
Rome as St. Peter's Successors, that very Supremacy and Jurisdiction in Gods
Church, which all Catholics now attribute to the Apostolical Chair. And
whoever confesses the thing, we will not quarrel with him about the Name. If
our Adversaries will assert with St. Gregory, That the care of the whole Church
is L. 4. Ep. Ep. 32. L. 11. ca. 54. L. 7. Ep. Ep. 63.
committed by our Lord himself to Peter the Prince of the Apostles. That the
Roman and Apostolical See is Head of all Churches. That all Bishops found in
fault are subject to it: We shall not much press him to call the Pope of Rome
Universal Bishop; neither ought he in that sense which St. Gregory condemned.
And indeed the usual style of the Church is not to call the Pope Universal
Bishop, but Bishop of the Universal Church.

More may be seen to this point in the Letters of the said Council to the same
Glorious Pope Leo. And in the first Act of the Council of Constantinople under
Menas, they address themselves to Pope Agapetus in these words, To our most
Holy and most Blessed Lord Archbishop of old Rome* and Ecumenical Bishop. To
which may be added Conc. Sardicense Gener. ca. 3. Synod. Romans sub Sylvestro ca.
20. Conc. Tolet. 1 sub finem assertionis fidei. Conc. Milet. ad Innocent.
Papam, ejusque responsum, Conc. Turon. ca. 21. Conc. Afric. ca. 15. ad Papam,
Celestinum, Syno. Romans 4. ca. 3. Conc. Bracanse primum ca. 23. Conc. Aurelian
4. ca. 1. etc. with many more, which none ver'st in the Acts of Ecclesiastical
Synods can be ignorant of; and these may suffice being so full and punctual to
the purpose.

If to these Testimonies so undeniably asserting the Popes Supremacy over the
whole Church we should add universal practice, which from undoubted Records
would appear by the Popes calling of General Councils, presiding in them
personally, or by their Legates, confirming their Acts; by Appeals to the
Apostolical Chair from all parts of the Christian World in Ecclesiastical
Causes, by determining Controversies, reforming Abuses, by investiture of
Bishops, Depositions, Censures, erecting new Sees, Conversion of Nations by
Apostolical Ann. Chapter 596.
men, and in particular of our Nation by St. Austin and his Fellow Monks sent
hither by St. Gregory the Great, and in a word, by their Authoritative ordering
and care over all the Churches of the Christian world; the prosecution of these
particulars would swell whole Volumes, and therefore not here to be undertaken.
But by what has been said it is apparently manifest that our Adversaries herein
cannot be of a different Faith from us, but they must also forsake the Ancient
Church.

Now the places a Sacred Writ by which the Ancient Fathers usually prove their
Belief in this point, are principally two; our Saviors Mat. 16. 18.
words to St. Peter, I say unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: And I will
give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. The other John the 21.
15, 16, 17. verses, Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon Son of Jona, love thou
me more then these? He said unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee.
He said unto him, feed my Lambs. He said to him the second time, Simon Son of
Jona love thou me? He said to him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee.
He said to him again, feed my Lambs. He says to him the third time, Simon Son
of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was sorry that he said unto him the third time,
love thou me? and said unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou know
that I love thee. Jesus said unto him, feed my Sheep. These I say, are the
principal Scriptures which the Ancient Fathers make use of to prove St. Peter's
supreme Jurisdiction in Gods Church, and his Successors the Bishops of Rome; as
may be seen by most of the Testimonies before alleged, and might be shown by
many more. I shall produce but two or three.

Ecce clavis regni caelestis, etc. Behold, Peter received the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, power of binding and loosing is given to him: The care and
government of the whole Church is committed to him; Are L. 4. Ep. Ep. 32.
St. Gregory's words relating to these Texts, and vindicating the Primacy of
St. Peter and his Successors the Popes of Rome; as may be seen at large in his
Epistle to the Emperor Maritius.

Petra dicitur Petrus, etc. Peter Ser. 47.
is called a rock, says St. Ambrose, because as a stone immovable he bears up
the compacted body of the whole Christian Fabric. Though it is not denied but
the Ancient Fathers sometimes take this rock to be St. Peter's Faith, whereof
he had then newly made confession; however more unanimously they expound this
Rock to be St. Peter's Person as Head and Pastor of all the Faithful. But never
understood it of St. Peter's Faith as separated from his person. So the Rhemish
Testament, Madonate, etc. upon the place do assure us.

As for the Text in St. John hear Dr (...). S. J^^^^
Eusebius Emissenus expound it, Our Lord first committed his Lambs, and then
his Sheep to Peter, because he made him not only a Pastor, but the Pastor of
Pastors. He Is therefore the Pastor of all, for besides Lambs and Sheep there is
nothing in the Church. And though Protestants will not see it, yet St. Gregory
says, It Is plain to all that read the Gospel, that from our Lords own mouth the
charge of the whole Church was delivered to Peter Prince of the Apostles.
Insomuch that as Maldonate has observed upon the place, there was never any
Father, Greek or Latin, who ever understood or expounded it in a contrary
sense.

So then Scripture-grounds the Ancient Fathers had for their belief in this
point. Upon which Scriptures notwithstanding they did not rely as barely
considered in themselves, but as so expounded by the universal Practice and
Tradition of the Church, the only Infallible Interpreter of the written Word,
and unerring Rule of Catholic Faith. Which being applied to these Sacred
Texts, make them speak clearly our belief to any Impartial understanding; and
therefore considering the Fathers Faith and practice, they could not be liable
from them to other Interpretations. Of which this is a manifest Argument, in
that they first of all began to expound them otherwise, who deny St. Peter's
and the Pope's Supremacy.

Which yet they cannot do without much injury to the Sacred Texts upon their
own grounds. For if, abstracted from Church-tradition and practice, they be
with all their circumstances impartially weighed in the balance of reason,
they very much declare a peculiar power entrusted to St. Peter in the Economy
of the Church, not at all imparted to the rest of the Apostles.

For here is a promise of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven made to St. Peter
alone, though the rest were present; I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. And this singular
promise is ushered in with singular circumstances, all relating solely to St.
Peter. For upon our Saviors interrogation, Peter making an express Confession
of his Faith in these words, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; our
Lord gives him in particular a solemn Benediction, saying, Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-Jona, and I say unto thee, thou art Peter, Et supra hanc Petram,
alluding to his name (the very name our Blessed Savior gave him when he chose
him to be an Apostle; and it is remarkable, that 1 John 42.
having immediately before called him Simon, he now calls him Peter, which
signifies a Rock, of which no reason can well be given, but that the allusion
to this name of his by the next words might let him and the rest understand,
that he was the person designed, upon whom, as upon a Rock, the Church should
be founded in a peculiar manner) and upon this Rock will I build my Church. And
then follows, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.
Now put them together, and sum them up, Blessed art thou Simon; I say unto thee
thou art Peter, Et super hanc Petram, I will build my Church, I will give unto
thee the Keys, etc. Doubtless all these particularities concerning Peter, and
none else of the Apostles, though all were present, must in all reason amount
to thus much, That St: Peter was to be invested with some eminent Authority
over all the rest.

And as St. Peter had good grounds from these particularizing circumstances
solely, relating to himself, upon so solemn a promise, to believe and expect
that it would be fullfill'd, when the time designed for it by Divine Wisdom was
fully come, by the collation of some extraordinary power peculiar to himself:
Joh. 21.
So we find in the other forequoted Texts, that Truth it self was as good as
his word, expressly and by name intrusting to St. Peter the Charge and
Government of the Universal Church, by a Commission repeated thrice, for the
greater certainty that the promise before made, was hereby fullfill'd; and
withal to leave a greater impression in his mind of the dignity and difficulty
of the Supreme Office and Pastorship, wherewith he only now actually was
invested.

It Is frivolous to say they are but admonitory expressions to mind St. Peter of
his duty in doing the work of an Apostle, when the words carry as much in their
face, an Authoritative Commission, as; Go teach all Nations, spoken elsewhere
to all the Apostles. Let them give any convincing reason why, Feed my Lambs,
Feed my Sheep, spoken by the fountain of all Jurisdiction to an Apostle, should
not be an Authoritative Commission, as well as, Go teach all Nations? Matt. 28:
Besides, had they only been admonitory words to excite St. Peter to the work
of his Apostleship, they would have been as necessary to have been spoken to
all the rest as to him, who were equally Apostles with him; and therefore not
now minded of their duty, because afterward they were all to receive power
from above by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, for the performance of
that great and glorious work.

So then being a Commission, and only given to St. Peter, it must necessarily
follow, that he was thereby invested with some Spiritual Authority which the
other Apostles had not, though all Apostles. And the question put to St. Peter
by our Blessed Savior immediately before the words of his Commission, have no
small influence to prove a Superiority of Power to be instated upon Him above
the rest. For being asked, Simon Son of Jonas love thou me more than these?
Those words of command Feed my Lambs, Feed my Sheep, do not correspond, nor are
at all emphatical, as what follows relates to them, if thereby no Authority
more, or above the rest, was not imparted to him as a reward of his
extraordinary affection, in that he loved our Lord and Savior more then the
rest of the Apostles. Moreover, in short, as St. Peter did profess his Faith
before the rest, when this supreme Authority was promiss'd to him, so now our
Savior would have him profess his love especially above the rest, when he
conferred upon him this Jurisdiction.

Thus if these places be expounded according to the light of present
circumstances, in all reason Scripture makes for a Supremacy in Peter above the
rest of the Apostles. And (as has been shown) the Ancient Fathers from these
Texts unanimously assert, That the Church was in a special manner founded on
St. Peter, in being constituted Universal Head and Pastor of it. To which if we
add the voice of the present Church attesting it to be a Universal Tradition,
handed to her as such from Age to Age, the unerring Rule of Catholic Faith, it
amounts to an Infallible certainty, and puts the question out of all question
and further dispute. And how unsafe it is, and dangerous, to forsake the direct
Texts of Scripture, the the constant interpretations of the Ancient Fathers,
and the consent of the whole Christian World, in matters of the highest
concernment, and to rely upon the bare Authority of private and new* invented
glosses of a few interessed and confessedly Fallible Doctors, or our own more
vain presumptions, let any sober-minded man be judge.

And whether the Protestant Church of England in separating from her Catholic
Mother, the Church of Rome, can possibly be upheld from falling into formal and
notorious Schism, leaning only on such unstable grounds.

The fourth Motive.
That the many Miracles God has been pleased to work in the Roman Catholic
Church, and still continues to do more or less; and in no other Communion
divided from her, are manifest proofs that she is the true Church: And those
Miracles which in a special manner regard some Doctrines denied by Protestants
to come from God, are Divine Testimonies that the said Doctrines are as well
Heavenly Truths as others, taught by the Church, are confessed to be so.

SECT. I.
A Preliminary Discourse.

IT being manifest by what has been discussed in the precedent Motive, that
the Protestant Church of England is undeniably guilty of Heresy and Schism in
a high manner, by their wilful separation from the Church of Rome in Faith and
Government; and thereupon the universality and perpetual visibility of the true
Church by a never interrupted Succession of Believers, teaching and practicing
the same Faith and Worship from the Apostles to these present days, have been
in some sort handled as points co-incident and con-natural; I shall not make
any large discourse of them severally, though they did not a little contribute
to my Conversion, but contract their strength into one Syllogism; and so
proceed to show what efficacy Miracles wrought in the Catholic Church, for
visible confirmation of her Faith and Worship to come from Heaven, ought to
have upon our Adversaries, to reduce them to the bosom of that Chuch they have
forsaken. The Argument runs thus.

The true Church of Christ has Universality, perpetual visibility, and
Succession of Pastors and People, from Christ and his Apostles to this time,
and so to continue to the Worlds end, inseparably annexed to it.

But no Schismatical or Heretical Communion of Christians can possibly be
universal, or have a perpetual visibility and Succession of Believers in those
points which constitute them a distinct Communion from the Catholic Church, of
which they were Members before their separation.

Therefore no Schismatical or Heretical Communion of Christians can be the true
Church of Christ.

That the Minor, or second proposition belongs to the Protestant Church of
England, is manifest from the former Motive, where 'twas evidenced to be
Schismatical and Heretical; which once proved concerning any Communion of
Christians, it is implicatory in ipsis terminis to say, that it is, or can be
universal visibly Successive from Christ and his Apostles to this time; being
all one as to assert, That it was founded by Christ and his Apostles, and yet
began afterward by a voluntary separation from the true Church so founded;
(which is the Essence of Schism) and that they were a Congregation Believing,
Ordaining, Preaching and Administering Sacraments, before they had a Being in
the World: That is, they were, and were not at the same time.

The Major, or first Proposition, is manifested from Scriptures and Fathers
briefly thus.

From St. Matthew, Behold, I am Mat. 28. 20.
with you always, even to the end of Word. From St. Luke, He shall reign Luke
1. 33*
in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. From
St. John, The Comforter, the St. John 14. 16, 17.
Spirit of Truth shall abide with you forever. From the promise of God, All
Nations shall flow unto it. From Isa. 2. 2.
the Commission of Christ, Go teach Mat. 28.
all Nations. Which clearly demonstrate the Church of Christ, from its first
foundation to be Catholic, both in respect of Time and Place,

This also is the Doctrine of the Fathers. It Is only the Catholic L. 1. ca.
ult.
Church has the true Worship and Service of God, says Lactantius. Let Praefa.
in l. ^^^^ar.
the Doctrine of the Church be kept (says Origin) which is delivered from the
Apostles by order of succession, and remains in the Church to this very day.
See more in Iren. l. 1 c. 3. St. Aug. Ser. 131. and 181. de Temp. de Unit.
Eccl. c. 2. Tert. contra Judaeos.

For the perpetual visibility of the true Church in an un-interrupted
Succession of lawful Pastors and true Doctrine, Scripture is very copious. I
shall name a few. A City seated on a Hill cannot be hid. The Mat. 5. 14. Is. 2.
2. Psalm. 18.
mountain of the house of our Lord shall be prepared on the top of mountains.
In sole posuit tabernaculum suum; Isa 59. 21.
My Spirit which is thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed for ever. All
Dan. 7. 13, 14.
Nations, Tribes, and Tongues shall serve him, his power is an eternal power
that shall not be taken away, and his kingdom shall not be corrupted. Thou art
Peter, and upon this Mat. 16.
Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it. Christ gave some Apostles, some Ephesians. 4. 11 etc.
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Doctors, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the Body of
Christ, etc. 'Till we all meet in the unity of Faith, and be not as Children
tossed about with the wind of every Doctrine. See more in Esa. 62: Ezekiel. 37.
Matt. 5. 15. etc.

From which, and such like places, this Major Proposition is evident. As also
from Antiquity, We must seek for Truth among whom the Succession L. 4. de hae:
c. 45.
of the Church from the Apostles, and the Purity of Doctrine is maintained in
its Integrity, So St. Iraeneus. What I believe (says Tertullian) I received L.
de praesc. c. 37.
from the present Church, the present Church from the Primitive, that from the
Apostles, the Apostles from Christ. And St. Austin tells us, That the
succession of Priests from the Contr. Ep. Fund. c. 4.
very seat of Peter to the present Bishop held him in the Church. Which if it
shall not continue here on earth to the end of the World, to whom did our Lord
say, Behold I am with you always to the Worlds end? It is easier L. 3. de
Bapt. cont. Donat.
(says St. Chrysostom.) that the Sun should be extingush'd then the Church
should be obscured. Concerning which, St. De utilit. cred. c. 7.
Austin assures us, The Prophets have spoken more plainly and manifestly then
of Christ himself. And therefore it is no wonder (the same Saint affirms) That
the Church has this most certain mark that it cannot be hid. Cont. Petil. c.
104.
And certainly it is not hid except to those that are lost, the Children of
perdition; who seeing will not see, and hearing will not understand. Who shut
their eyes against a light set upon a Candlestick, and are so blind as not to
see so great a mountani as the Catholic Church. As the same Father complains
of the Heretics of his days.

From which premises thus proved, it invincibly follows, that the Protestant,
L. 3. cont. Parm.
and all other Heretical and Schismatical Churches, being wholly destitute of
these inseparable badges or marks of the true Church, viz. Universality,
perpetual visibility by an uninterrupted Succession of Pastors and People from
Christ and his Apostles to this time, cannot possibly be the true Church, Whose
builder and preserver is God. All which manifestly belonging to the Church of
Rome, and those in Communion with her, by most undoubted Records of all Ages;
it likewise, as inevitably follows, that this Church of Rome only is the true
Catholic Church, and all other Communions but false Worshippers.

Thus briefly of these indubitable marks of the true Church from Sacred
Scripture, so much made use of by the Ancient Fathers to reduce the Heretics
and Schismatics of their times to the Catholic unity, that I may not too long
detain you from beholding Miracles wrought by God in his Holy Church for the
confirmation of our Faith.

SECT. II.
That Miracles were vouchsafed always to the True Church.

SUch is the Sublimity and Purity of Christian Doctrine, so sublime in respect
of knowledge, so pure in respect of practice, that if there was nothing else to
witness that it came from Heaven, they of themselves are sufficient evidences,
that the Author of it can be no less then of incomprehensible Wisdom and
infinite Holiness. Notwithstanding as God was pleased by wonderful Signs and
frequent Miracles to set his Sea^ to attest the truth of it, that it might find
entertainment from contradictors; so in after Ages (in opposition not only to
all false Religions, who deny Christ, and maintain their Worship to be right,
but also to many seduced Christians, who pretend to have among them the Purity
of this Doctrine) the same infinite Goodness has more or less continued
Miracles in his Church, that we may see with our eyes, what we ought to believe
with our hearts, and not be deceived by false Teachers.

This Heavenly Testimony God vouchsafed to the Jewish Worship whilst it was in
force; and therefore cannot in reason be denied to the Christian Church, being
in every respect a Ministration much more Divine and Glorious, and no less
standing in need of such a Privilege. Moses brought forth the Children of Exodus
Israel from the house of bondage in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. The
Sun stood still at the Prayer of Jos. 10.
Joshua; and went back 15 degrees Isa. 38.
at the earnest request of Hezekiah. The bones of Elizeus the Prophet raised a
dead man to life. The constant cure Joh. 5. 3, etc.
of Lame and Diseased persons in the Pool of Bethesda immediately after the
motion of the water by an Angel, was a standing Miracle, etc. All which, with
many more, were evident Testimonies of the Divine presence among them; that the
Creator and Governor of Heaven and Earth was their God in a special manner,
and they his peculiar Church and People. To which might be added, their many
Prophets of extraordinary Power and Sanctity, not only miraculous in their
predictions, but sometimes mighty in signs and deeds. Though it is observable
that St. John the Baptist, though more then a Prophet, then whom none greater
was born of women, yet did no Miracle to attest his Mission. Doubtless not
without some singular cause; perhaps because the Jewish Synagogue was then
expiring and giving place to the Christian Church, as a Handmaid to her
Mistress, or glimmering twilight to the Sun arising in beams of Glory.

The most remarkable Miracles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are left
unto his Church by the Evangelists, in the History of his Life and Death, That
we might believe, and believing have Life Eternal by him. After the Holy
Apostles had received Power from above by descent of the Holy Ghost upon them,
to fit them for the great work of converting all Nations to Christianity, what
wonders and signs were frequently wrought by them in the first planting of the
Gospel, are made famous, and wellknown to us Acts.
in their Acts, related by St. Luke of Divine Authority. And how in after Ages,
to this present, the Truth of Christian Belief was attested to all men by signs
from Heaven, more or less wrought in the Catholic Church by her Professors, is
manifest by the undoubted Records and Histories of the whole Christian World.
Yea our Adversaries themselves, who are Magdebu. Centuria.
no friends to Miracles, have distinctly set down and asserted manifold wonders
wrought successively in the Church for 1300 Ages after Christ; and why they
should not as well believe the Miracles of the 14th. Century and upwards
wrought in the same Church, related by as credible Authors as the former, with
as much evidence of certainty, no man can imagine; but that they were resolved
Miracles should cease before their Church had a Being in the World, lest they
should justly be thought to introduce a false Religien, having not the voice of
Divine Miracles to attest it. Wonderful! The frequent use of Miracles was
afforded to the the first Promulgators of the Gospel to give give it rooting,
and afterward for increase; and no sooner comes their Religion up, but down
goes Miracles to gain credit to It. As the Fathers must loose their Authority,
and begin to be erroneous, when they manifestly assert what condemns their
Doctrine: So Miracles also must be put to silence, and witness no longer to the
Truth, because they will not speak for their Religion. And indeed themselves
being wholly destitute of Miracles to confirm their new Faith, and confessing
they had been so long continued in the Roman Catholic Church, they were
necessitated (if they would be obstinate in their way) though against all
evidence of Authority, to deny any such to be now wrought in her, least thereby
they should confess that she only is the true Church of Christ.

But that the strength of this Motive may the better appear, I shall in the
further prosecution of it; first, declare wherein consists the nature of true
Miracles. Secondly, I shall set down the causes why God is pleased to work such
signs and wonders in, and by his Church. And thirdly, I shall cull out, among
infinite, some special Miracles which relate to our present Controversies;
being no less then so many Seals from Heaven stamped upon them in Divine
Characters, as visible evidences of Truth on the Catholics side: And those who
assert the contrary, do, as it were deny God's attestation, who can neither
deceive, nor be deceived.

SECT. III.
Wherein the nature of true Miracles consists, is declared.

A True Miracle is an effect beside the ordinary course of the whole Creation;
and so above the Power of any Created entity, visible or invisible Man or
Angel. Deus solus qui sacit mirabilia magna; it is God alone who works such
wonders, being the products of no less then Omnipotency it self. For the order
of the Universe in the concatenation of Causes and Effects being set a going by
the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of our great Creator, the first mover, not by
necessity of nature, but as a most free Agent according to the good pleasure of
his will* when it seems good unto him, he can act besides this appointed course
of nature; either by producing the effects of secondary causes without their
concurrence, as by restoring sick and maimed persons to their perfect health
and soundness in a moment, by a word; or (as we read in the Acts Acts 3. 7. ca.
4. 30. ca. 5. 3. ca. 19 11, 12, etc.
of the Apostles) by Aprons and Handkerchiefs, and such like things, which
having first touched the Bodies of his Saints, are applied to the parties
ill-affected for their recovery. Yea, Act. 5. 15, 16.
the very shadow of St. Peter did cure many sick and infirm persons, who were
exposed in the Streets, lying in their Beds as he passed by. Or else by
restraining and curbing in the innate virtue of secondary causes from producing
such effects, to which by nature they are determined necessarily in the present
circumstances; as when the furious flames did not consume the three Dan. 3. 22,
etc.
Children in the fiery furnace; yea, not so much as the smell of fire took hold
on their Garments: And as when the Sun was darkn'd at our Blessed Saviors
passion, the Moon being in opposition to it in its natural course. Or else by
producing some effects beyond the activity of created Agents, to which second
causes, though strained to the utmost with their united forces, cannot extend
themselves; as causing two bodies at the same time to be in the same place, as
when our Blessed Savior came into his Disciples through the doors shut; or
raising the dead to life again, as Lazarus was by our Blessed Savior.

Notwithstanding our Souls being clouded with ignorance, so that we apprehend
not the utmost energetical virtue of created causes, many things which are
effected by a power secret and unknown to us, are accounted by us, (though
falsely,) truly Miraculous; which indeed are either but Phanta^mes and mere
deceptions; Vide S. Tho. 22 ae. q. 178. a. 2 in corp.
that is, things not really done, but only seem so. Or if really produced, and
not in appearance only, they are done by the application of natural causes,
though indiscernable to dim-eyed reason. Vera mira, truly wonderful to us,
because effected by a secret virtue: But not Vere Miracula, not true Miracles
in their nature, created causes producing them in the hand of quicksighted,
strenuous and nimble Agents. Of which sort are all those wonderful things which
Magicians and Witches bring to pass by the Power and assistance of the Devil.
Such as the Egyptian Magi wrought to harden Pharaoh's heart, that he might not
think Moses was sent from God, or did by a Divine Power work true 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9
etc.
Miracles to confirm his Mission. And Antichrist will come in great Power, and
signs, and lying wonders, according to the operation of Satan; not true
Miracles the only and peculiar work of Omnipotency. Antichristi De Civ. Dei l.
20. c. 19.
opera possunt dici esse signa mendacii, etc. The works of Antichrist (says St.
Austin) may be c^ll'd lying wonders, either because he shall deceive men's
senses by Phantasms seeming to do what indeed he does not; or if they be true
Prodigies, yet they shall draw men to believe a lie. For they shall give credit
to that man of sin, as if he brought them to pass by a Divine Joh. 14 12.
Power, though only are effected by natural causes unknown to them.

Now though all things are alike easy to Omnipotency, and so no Miracle
properly greater then another, 1 p q. cv. a. 8. corp
as having eye to the Power producing such effects: Yet as more or less
exceeding the faculty of created causes, and looking that way, they are truly
said to be more or less Miraculous according to that of our Blessed Savior Who
believes in me, the works that I do he shall do also, and greater than these
shall he do. And therefore Miracles by St. Thomas are marshalled into three
Heads or Classes.

First, those which wholly exceed the power of created Causes in the very
substance of the effect. As the Sun standing still at the Prayer of Joshua;
going back at the request of Hezekiah. A mortal body to be glorified, as in the
transfiguration of our Blessed Savior. Transubstantiation in the most holy and
dreadful Sacrifice of the Mass. Which are the greatest of Miracles, and in no
sort produceable by the utmost Powers of created nature.

Secondly, such which transcend the faculty of nature, yet not if we have an
eye to the thing it self that is done, but the qualification of the subject, in
whom it is done or effected. That is, natural causes can produce the substance
of the Miracle, but never in the present circumstances. As to give sight to the
blind, or raise the dead to life; And does in daily vital productions, but not
to one dead, As Lazarus and Tabitha were: And can give sight, but not to one
blind, As he who was born so, cured Joh. 9.
by our Lord and Savior. However these being Miraculous only in respect of the
subject wherein such effects are brought to pass, yet are altogether above the
virtue of secondary causes, and so as true Miracles as those of the first
Classis.

The third and lowest sort are those which exceed the faculty of Nature;
neither according to the substance of the effect, or subject wherein they are
produced, but only according to the manner and order of their production. As
when persons, not incurably sick or lame in the hands of Artists with an
ordinary concurrence of the supremest cause, are suddenly restored to health
and soundness without the help of Physic, Chyrurgery, or the usual proceedings
in such cases. And so the Apostles speaking with diverse tongues, which are
attainable by time and industry in subjects capable of such perfections, yet in
them was miraculous, in that they being ignorant, were suddenly endowed with
such extraordinary knowledge and eloquence, to the amazement and confusion of
their enemies. Of which sort are also sudden Thunders and Lightnings, Winds and
Storms, when second and immediate causes are not so big with such effects as to
be delivered of them; but rather in all probability promising the contrary to
the best sighted understandings in such matters.

Now such miracles as these, though always produced by a divine power when Holy
persons are the Instruments, yet may, and sometimes are (when God permits)
wrought by Magic and compact with the Devil, who can so improve natural
causes, as on a sudden to bring forth such effects. Which being possible to
Omnipoteny, and consequently not true Miracles in a strict and proper
acceptance, but in a large sense so called from the wonderful manner of their
production; if the Catholic Church had no other but such to attest her
Doctrine to come from Heaven, they could not simply of themselves be sufficient
evidences of the Truth of Christian Religion, and that the Workers of them are
sent by God. However such wonderful effects, when they Manifestly tend to
destroy the kingdom of Satan, invincibly prove their origin to be from the
Author of Holiness. And therefore it is not difficult to discover when these
wonders are effected by a Divine Power and assistance, and when by the help of
the Devil. Namely, when either the Sanctity of the person is such as is no way
liable to be suspected to have any dealing with the Powers of Darkness: Or if
this be wanting, when the Purity of the Doctrine, as a glorious ray beaming
from the Sun of righteousness, is such, that a confirmation thereof in such a
manner cannot rationally be thought but to come from Heaven: Or when God is
pleased, besides these inferior wonders, to work also such Miracles by the same
person, or others professing the same Faith, which cannot really be produced by
any but himself. Of which his true Church was never destitute, and no other
Communion could ever boast, or justly challenge.

SECT. IV.
Some reasons of Gods proceeding in this manner.

WHen the infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God is pleased to work
Miracles in his Church, ordinarily the Instruments he makes use of to produce
such effects, are persons eminent for Sanctity. Yet not so, as that we ought to
make the number or greatness of their Miracles the rule to judge of the degrees
of their Holiness. Yea, it is not an Infallible argument to conclude such an one
to be a Saint; for the grace of working Miracles being conferred upon the true
Church, principally for the edification of others; a person not justified, and
so not righteous in the sight of God, may be a wonderworking Instrument to save
his Brethren, and yet himself become a Reprobate. Of which we need no more
evident testimony then from the mouth of those Pleaders in St. Matthew; Lord
have not we Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name Ch 7 22, etc.
cast out Devils* and in thy Name wrought many Miracles? And yet they receive
this dreadful Answer, I know ye not, depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. The
cause whereof St. Austin gives us, Admonet nos Lib. 83. Quaesti. 79. qu.
Dominos, etc. Our Lord puts us in mind that we may understand wicked men also
to do some Miracles, which Saints cannot do. Therefore they are not granted to
all Saints, least the weak should be deceived with a most pernicious error,
supposing greater gifts to be in such deeds than in works of righteousness, by
which we purchase eternal life.

Now God confers this grace and wonderful power on his Church: First, for the
confirmation of the Christian Faith, as his visible Seal set to it, that it is
true and came from Heaven, as the only means to bring us thither; and ought to
be entertained as such, by all who desire to save their precious Souls. This is
manifest from the Promise of our Blessed Savior to his Church, Mark 16. 17.
These sings shall follow those that believe, in my Name they shall cast out
Devils* they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay their hands
upon the Sick, and they shall Recover. This is the Promise.

See the performance in the 20 ver. And they went and Preached every where, our
Lord cooperating and confirming the Word with signs following. For so the Eyes
of their Auditors might tell them the Doctrine they heard was from God, and no
humane invention, and therefore inexcusable incredulous. As in the 16 verse,
Whosoever Believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, but who believes not shall
be damned. Hence it is, that Signs are said to be for Unbelievers, that by such
evidences of Truth they may be Converted, and all the ends of the Earth see the
Salvation of our God.

And this way of Divine attestation, the wisdom of God has thought good to
use, as most proportionably to our present capacity, and consequently most
likely to produce the effect for which it is intended. For Truth entering into
the the closet of our Soul through he port of our Senses; as by the innate
light of the understanding, with an ordinary concurrence of the prime cause,
man can attain to some degree of the knowledge of God by natural effects, and
is utterly inexcusable if he does not: So to induce us to the belief of things
wholly supernatural and unattainable but by Divine Revelation, he is pleased
sometimes by extraordinary and supernatural effects, namely Miracles, to work
upon our Senses, that we might believe and be saved; or we rendered inexcusable,
when unbelief shall be laid to our charge. And therefore it is said, (...)
believes not Mar. 16. 16.
are condemned already. As having nothing to say for themselves, in that they
so wilfully shut their eyes in Sunshine. that they might not see and be
converted. And our Blessed Joh. 15. 22, etc.
Savior says elsewhere, If I had not done those works among them which none
other has done, they had not sinned, but now they have no excuse for their sin.

But as Miracles are to beget Faith where it is not, so the next use of them is
to give strength and growth to it, where it is already planted, least at any
time we should have a heart of Infidelity to depart from the Truth received;
either by flat Apostasy, which more rarely happens; or by Schism and Heresy,
which are Satan's commonest snares wherein he catches unwary Souls to their
destruction. What can they say for themselves, to whom in so much Heavenly
Light the Cross becomes a stumbling block, so as to fall away from their
stability; or once fallen, if they will not rise again, and be recalled into
the bosom of the Catholic Church by the voice of such wonderful works crying
aloud after them; even sufficient to engrave Faith in a rocky-hearted Jew, and
introduce belief into very Infidels?

From whence appears the absurdness of that Protestant Thesis, That all
Miracles are now ceased in the Church. For besides indubitable testimonies from
clouds of Witnesses enough to satisfy any rational man, these causes yet
continuing, viz. Infidelity, Heresy and Schism, God will also still continue
the same supernatural effects to beget or confirm supernatural Faith in the
Souls of men. But why they are not so frequent as in the first planting of the
Gospel, this may be one reason, in that the true Church being manifested to the
World by those Miracles, which more or less in every Age are wrought in her
Communion, and here is only, entitle her justly to all the rest confirming the
same Faith, which others cannot claim by the like evidence. For the principal
end of Miracles being for the confirmation of true Faith, taught by Christ and
his Apostles to the World, either to give it birth or growth, if God did
vouchsafe to work in the same manner such wonderful Signs and Prodigies by any
persons in other Communions than his Catholic Church, they could not be
sufficient Testimonies from Heaven of Divine Truth, but be instrumental
likewise to set a luster on deeds of Darkness, and harden poor seduced Souls in
erroneous Worship. Neither had the Ancient Apologists for the Christian Faith
rationally made use of Miracles as a convincing argument of the Truth thereof,
if Infidels, or others, could have produced justly the like evidences to give
Testimony to their false Religion. See Heb. 2. ver. 3, 4. St. Joh. 5. 36. chapter
7. 31. chapter 9. 30. chapter 10. 28. chapter 15. 22, 24. Hence St. Gregory, Quia carnales
adhuc, etc. Hom. 2. in Evan.
Because the Disciples being yet carnal could not understand his mysterious
words, he proceeds to a Miracle, a blind man receives his sight before their
eyes, that who understood not the words of Divine Mystery, Heavenly deeds might
work Faith in them.

Thirdly, God works Miracles in his Church to manifest the extraordinary
Sanctity of some persons to whom he is pleased to vouchsafe a special Honor,
and thereby proposes as singular examples for others to imitate in their
glorious walkings. And this is done either while they are living, or after
death by their Sacred Relics and Intercession; and sometimes in both they are
alike glorified by him who only works Miracles, whomsoever he makes choice of
for the Instruments. Which no false Worshipers in the World can challenge to
their Profession. Yet that such have been, and are still wrought by Saints in
the Communion of the Roman Catholic Church, there are as good proofs to
evidence it to the World, as that there was such a man as Henry the 8th. once
King of England. Which certainty none pretend to deny.

And though Protestants cannot lay claim to any true Miracles for the
confirmation of their Faith and practice, yet how fain they would have their
new Religion so attested, is manifest in that they greedily catch at shaddows,
and interpret any thing that is somewhat strange and not ordinary, as the
singular actings of God in their behalf. Or if any among them observe some
austerities in the contempt of worldly Pleasures and Contentments, (which is so
frequent among Catholics,) presently this is a Sanctity without parallel, and
by the wind of vainglory is puffed up to the Prodigious greatness of a wonder.
And I confess, if all rare things are Miraculous, this among them may justly be
so accounted.

To these I might add the manifestation of the power of his Godhead, and the
riches of his Goodness toward his Church, by such extraordinary workings,
beside the course of universal nature, to make up the number of his Elect and
consummate them in Glory But these last are not proper to my present purpose,
and the former related reasons are those for which God is pleased principally
to work Miracles in the true Church; and ought to be operative upon rational
Souls, to bring them to the knowledge, and the embracing of the Truth.

SECT. V.
Some undoubted and most famous Miracles relating to the present Controversies
between Us and Protestants.

ST. Austin having related some De Civi. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
Miracles wrought upon Devotes at St. Stephens Shrine by his special
intercession, whereof himself was an eyewitness, affirms, That if he should
record all that he knew to have been done in those Territories, he must fill
Books. And so might I too, with much more reason, if I should set down but the
tenth of those which concern the present Controversies between Protestants and
Us, having confined my self to no less limits then the Christian World,
affording innumerable Miracles, the truth of which cannot justly be questioned,
because delivered to our knowledge with as much certainty as matters of fact
are capable of. However I shall be brief, and only select out some few which I
conceived most convincing to Souls yet hardened with unbelief. And had wholly
spared this labor, but that I know particulars are pr^ssing and powerful,
being fallen unhappily among Gospellers, who besides other evidences of Truth,
will not believe except they see signs and wonders to attest our Faith. And
which is far worse, as the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 12. 38.
demanded of our Blessed Savior, A sign from Heaven to witness he was sent
from God, when a Miracle just now wrought before their eyes was yet warm: So
this evil generation, while they are surrounded with the Heavenly light of
Miracles wrought in the Church, yet seeing will not see, and ask of us a sign
from Heaven to confirm our Doctrine. Which that we are not destitute of, I hope
what follows will give them satisfaction.

I begin with the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, which our Adversaries call
our Idol, being it self the greatest of Miracles, or rather a concourse of many
in a most wonderful and mysterious manner, and therefore has been attested
oftentimes by others to confirm our Faith in a point so far transcending the
comprehension of our intellectual powers. And were so operative, Circa an. 1050.
among other Arguments; one Berengarius, the first that ever denied the real
presence of Christ in the blessed Eucharist, that he recanted and abjured his
Heresy, to believe as formerly he had done the undoubted Doctrine of all Ages.

St. Bernard saying Mass in the In vita Ber. c. 2. ca. 3.
Cathedral at Millain in a great Assembly, they presented to him a Woman who
had been a long time vexed with a Devil, earnestly requesting his help, with a
strong belief that God would free her by his Intercession. Being overcome with
their entreaties, and the miserable Object, proceeding in the Sacrifice, as often
as the Sacred Host was to be signed, he turning toward the woman, made also as
often the sign of the Holy Cross upon her. Which how ill the unclean Spirit
could endure, he quickly discovered by more lamentably tormenting the poor
wretch. The Holy man having now finished the Lords Prayer i^ the Canon, makes a
fiercer on-se upon the Enemy; for putting the most Sacred Body of our Lord and
Savior upon the Paten, and holding it over the woman's head, said, Unclean
Spirit, thy judge is present, a Power above thee is present, resist now if thou
can; he is present who being ready to suffer for our Salvation, said, now
shall the Prince of this World be cast forth. This is that Sacred Body which
was assumed of the Blessed Virgn, that Body which was nailed unto the Cross,
which was laid in the Grave, which rose from Death, which in the sight of his
Disciples ascended into Heaven. Wherefore in the dreadful Name of this Majesty
I command thee, thou Malicious Spirit, to depart out of this handmaid of God,
and presume not hereafter to touch her. Whereupon the unclean Spirit playing
the Devil indeed, by exceedingly tormenting her, because his time was short, in
rage and fury left his habitation, as soon as the Pax was given, after the
Saints return unto the Altar. And she being so miraculously recovered, gave
thanks to the Almighty goodness, and beholding the happy Instrument of her
deliverance, cast her self humbly at his feet.

Thus our most merciful and powerful God was pleased to reward the Faith of his
People, to magnify his Servant in their sight, and manifest his invisible Deity
under the visible species by this wonderful effect. And truly methinks, those
very words spoken by so great a Saint, and confirmed by so evident a Miracle,
if well considered and laid to heart, could not but as well dispossess the
Sacramentarian Heretics of their Devil of Unbelief concerning this dreadful
mystery of our Holy Faith, as they did that Woman of the unclean Spirit,
wherewith she had been so long vexed. A Miracle no less famous then evident,
for it follows in the Author, Fugato diabolo ingens per Ecclesiam tollitur
murmur, etc. The Vita S. Ber
woman being dispossessed, the Church ecchoed with sounds of joy, old and young
bless God sor't, and what was done at Millian is noised abroad through all
Italy.

At Brussels in Flanders some Jews Ann. Chapter 1442.
having stolen the Consecrated Hosts out of the Tabernacle of St. Catharine's
Chapel, on Good Friday following with intention in despite of our Blessed
Savior, to put to death again, as much as lay in their Power, the Lord of
Life, stabbed the Sacred Hosts with Pen-knives and Bodkins; from which wounds
miraculously issued out drops of Blood to their great astonishment and
confusion. At which being horribly amazed and terrifyed with the apprehension
of some present judgment to fall upon them, not daring to touch the Sacred
Hosts, they sent for one Catharine, formerly a Jew, now a Christian, and
confessing to her what they had done, and what had happened, desired her to take
away the Consecrated Hosts, and keep the whole business secret from the
Christians. She promised; but troubled in Conscience at the horror of the Fact,
carrying with her the Blessed Hosts, revealed it to the Clergy of the City.
Whereupon after a full trial and examination, the said Jews were condemned to
be Burnt for this most execrable Impiety, and Executed accordingly. Part of
which miraculous Hosts being kept in the aforesaid Chapel, and part in the
great Church of St. Gudile in the said City, God was pleased to work many
Miracles upon such persons who resorted thither out of special Devotion to the
said wonderful Hosts; the blind recovering their sight, the sick their health;
the lame their Limbs, leaving their Crutches behind them as monuments of Gods
extraordinary mercy by Gods means vouchsafed unto them. Of all which there is no
reason to doubt, being attested by Witnesses beyond all exception, and
thereupon approved by authorized persons, were committed to the public Records
of those places, for the confirmation of the Churches belief in the mysteries
of that most wonderful Sacrament, so much Blasphemed by Jews and Heretics.

Pontianus relates, That one Paul L. 5 de Mirahil.
Form having stolen two Consecrated Hosts, sold one of them to the Jews, who
out of malice and contempt stabbed it, saying, If thou be the God of the
Christians, manifest thy self. Whereupon to their confusion, and confirmation
of our holy Faith, Blood miraculously issued out of the dreadful Host. Which
being discovered, thirty eight of them were Burnt at Knoblock in Brandenburg,
and all the rest banished out of that Marquesate L. de locis Com. p. 87. Epist.
116.
for this horrible Fact. As it is recorded also by John Mandevil a Protestant,
and Osiander a Lutheran.

I cannot but relate what Thomas Waldensis our Country man relates he was an
eyewitness of in St. Paul's Tom. 2. de Sacr. ca. 63.
Church in London, Where one of Wickliff' s Disciples, who renewed the Heresy
of Berengarius in these parts, being commanded by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
to acknowledge the real Presence of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, and adore
him; he refusing, said, A Spider deserved more veneration than the Eucharist.
And forthwith from the roof descended a monstrous Spider to his Blaspemous
Lips, which the standers by could hardly keep from running into his mouth,
which had spit worse Venom against our Savior.

Who desire further satisfaction in this particular, let them consult
Paschasius de corp. and Sang. Christi. Algerus de Sacramentis. Among the more
Ancient St. Cyprian de lapsis, Prosper. de praedict. part. 4. cap. 6. S. Greg.
l. 2. Dialog. and Petrus Diaconus in vita S. Gregorii.

As for the Catholic practice in having recourse to the intercession of Saints
glorified, and veneration of their Sacred Relics, Antiquity and all Ages
abound with unquestionable Miracles, as so many Seals set upon them by the hand
of God for their approbation. St. Austin relates De Civit. dei l. 22. c. 8.
Epist. 103. Ser. 31, 32, 33.
many; the certain knowledge of some of them being conveyed to his Soul through
the windows of his own eyes, the rest famous and of undoubted verity. See also
Greg. Turon. l. 1. de gloria Martyr. Barotom. 5. an 416. Niceph. l. 4. Hist.
Eccl. ca. 9. Theod. Ser. de donis collatis intercessione Martyrum. One or two
will not tire the Reader:

There was one Martial a chief man his rank, Aged, and much abominating S. Aug.
l. 22. de Civ. c. 8.
the Christian Faith: Who being dangerously sick, and much importuned with the
Prayers and Tears of his Daughter and Son in Law, who were Christians, to be
Baptized; refused, and in sullen indignation thrust them from him. His Son in
Law thought good to go to St. Stephen' s Memory or Shrine, and Pray there
earnestly for his Conversion. Which performing with great devotion in sighs and
tears, and so departing from the Altar took some Flowers, and at night laid
them at his Fathers Head. He took his rest, and behold before morning cries out
to send for the Bishop, (who then by chance was with me at Hippo) and
understanding he was absent, desired his Priests to come to him. They came, he
confesses his Faith in Christ, and was Baptized among the wonders and joy of
them all. And afterward as long as he lived, for he lived not long after, he
still had in his mouth, Christ receive my Spirit; which were the last words of
Blessed Stephen when Martyred by the Jews.

God was pleased to reveal by a Vision to St. Ambrose where the Bodies of the
Holy Martyrs Gervasius and Protasius lay buried, and 'till then uncorrupted, in
a place not well befitting those Sacred Relics. Their Graves are opened,
their Bodies taken up, and while they are carried in solemn Procession to be
honorably Interred in the Cathedral of that City, many possessed with unclean
Spirits were perfectly cured; and a certain Citizen well known to all the
Inhabitants, who had been blind many years, hearing the noise asked the cause
of their present Jubilee: Being told it, he leaped for joy, and desired to be
led to the Bodies, whither being come, he begged to be admitted to touch with
his Handkerchief the Bier made Holy with those Sacred Relics: He did so, and
applied it to his Eyes, and forthwith recovered his sight, to his exceeding
great joy, and admiration of them all, giving glory to God for vouchsafing such
Honor to his Saints. St. Austin mentions this also in his 9th. Book of
Confess. chap. 7. and de Unit. Eccl. c. 10. St. Ambr. Epist. 85. ad Sororem.
and Ser. 91. Whole Volumes might be writ of undoubted Relations of this nature,
and yet Protestants will not believe, but follow profane Vigilantius, says St.
Austin and the Catholic Church what they can to the contrary.

For the confirmation of Purgatory, I shall insert one or two Miraculous
Relations out of Venerable Bede; whom I have made choice of because our
Countryman, and as of great Learning, so of singular Integrity, which other
circumstances concurring in him, render his History most unquestinable. I give
you not all, nor always his words, but am Faithful to his sense and meaning.

A noble young man by name Imma, L. 4. Hist: ca. 22.
in a battle between Ecgfrid King of North-humber and Edilred King of Mercia,
being left for dead among the slain, at last revived, and seeking help was
taken by the Enemy, and carried to their Governor; before whom counterfeiting
himself a Country Fellow that brought Provision to the Army, care was taken
for him; and beginning to gather strength, command was given to fetter him with
Chains, that he might not escape by night; but by no means could he be bound,
seeing no sooner were they gone who bound him, but the Chains loosed of
themselves. For he had a Brother by Name Tunna, a Priest and Abbot, who hearing
he was slain in the battle, came to seek his Body, and finding one very like
it, carried that away for the Body of his Brother to his Monastery, where he
honorably interred it; and took care that many Masses should be said for the
Absolution of his Soul. By reason whereof none could bind him, but forthwith he
was loosed. The noble man, whose Prisoner he was, began to wonder, and
suspecting Magic, demanded of him the cause thereof: Who answered, I have a
Brother who is a Priest, and I know, he supposing me to be dead, says Mass
often for me, as if I was in another life, where my Soul might be loosed from
pains by his intercessions. This passed on, and being perfectly recovered, he
sold him to another; but what kind of bonds soever were put upon him they were
all loosed; but most commonly after the third hour, when Masses are usually
celebrated, All which he relating to his Brother after his Redemption, his
conjectures were found to be real Truths. And many hearing these things from
the foresaid man, were inflamed with Faith and Devotion to Pray, to give Alms,
or offer to our Lord Sacrifices of the Oblation for the deliverauce of their
deceased Friends. For they understood that the saving Sacrifice was prevalent
for the everlasting redemption of Soul and Body. This History I had from some
who heard it from the person himself on whom this Miracle was wrought, and
therefore have inserted it for an undoubted Truth.

The other is in the 13th chap. of his 5th. Book of the foresaid History,
whereof I shall only take so much as I conceive opposite to our present purpose.

In these days a notable Miracle to be equaled to those of old happened. For
to stir up the living from a Spiritual death, a certain man, by name Drithelm,
dead for some time, was raised again to his Natural life, and related many
things which he had seen worthy to be remembered. An Householder he was in the
County of North-humber, living Religiously with his Family. Whom sickness
seizing on, and increasing daily, at last agonizing, died in the beginning of
the night. But reviving about break of day, and sitting up suddenly, the
weeping Watchers fled away for fear, his Wife only, whom love had fixed,
(though trembling and quaking) stayed behind, Whom he comforting, said, Fear
not, for I am truly risen from Death, and permitted to live again among
Mortals: But from henceforth in a far other manner then I have been accustomed.
And presently rising, went to the Chapel of the Village, and continuing in
Prayer 'till day, then divided his Estate into three Portions; one for his
Wife, another for his Children, and the third, which he reserved for himself,
he without delay distributed to the Poor, that he might have Treasure in
Heaven. And not long after, being now freed from the cares of the World, he
came to the Monastery of Mailros, which is almost surrounded with the River
Tweed. And taking the Tonsure, lived in a private Cell which the Abbot had
provided, and there continued to the day of his death in such Contrition and
Austerity, that though his Tongue were silent, his Life did speak what wonders
he had seen above others. Now the Vision was this.

My guide, said he, had a shining countenance and bright apparel, we walked in
silence, and (as I thought) toward the Solstitial rising of the Sun* At last
we came into a Valley of vast breadth and deepness, but of infinite length,
which being situate on our left hand, did present unto us one side very
terrible with enraged flames, the other not less intolerable with storms of
Snow and Hail overturning all things. Both were filled with Souls of men, which
seemed now and again to be tossed hither and thither as with the horrible
violence of an impetuous tempest. For not being able to endure the fury of the
excessive heat, (poor Souls!) they threw themselves into the midst of the
insufferable cold. And when they could find no rest neither in those Winter
quarters, again betook themselves to the torrid Zone, etc.

Know thou, said my Guide, all these things which thou have seen? I
answered, no, he replied; that Valley, which you behold so terrible with
intolerable heat and cold, is that place wherein the Souls of those are to be
pacified and chastis'd, who deferring to confess and amend their wickednesses,
fly at last to repentance on their deathbeds, and so leave their Bodies; who
yet, because they confessed and repented, though but before their departure,
shall at the day of Judgment be all received into Heaven. But the Prayers of
the Living, and Alms, and Fasts, and especially the saying Masses do help many,
that they may be freed before the day of judgment, etc.

And this I had, says S. Bid, from one Genegils a Monk and Priest, of a very
holy and rigid life, who often conversed about these things with this
miraculous Liver, so famous for his wonderful Austerities and Visions, that
both by word and deed he wrought powerfully on many to repent and spend their
time well, on which depends everlasting bliss, or eternal misery.

And yet Protestants are never the better, refusing to believe that there is
never a Purgatory for penitent Souls thoroughly purged at their departure from
their Bodies, though this man and others have been sent from the dead to
testify to the World the truth thereof. Which I confess I cease to wonder at,
when I consider, that they are deaf to the living voice of the Catholic Church.

If I should proceed in relating what wonderful Miracles God has been pleased
to work for the Approbation of a Monastical Life from Heavenly, by men famous
in that Angelical Profession, both in former and later Ages; as St. Benedict,
St. Bernard, St. Dominick, St. Francis, St. Teresia, St. Ignatius, I should
utterly destroy my intended brevity; and therefore refer you to their Lives
faithfully transmitted to Posterity. But especially to the wonderful Life of
that great Saint and Patriarch of Monastical Profession in the West, S.
Benedict, which the Church owes to that famous Light and Doctor St. Gregory,
deservedcalled Englands Apostle.

For he was embarked, and on his way to bring the glad tidings of the Gospel
to our Nation, though recalled to Rome against his will and inclination. And
afterward when advanced to the Popedom, he sent St. Austin and his fellow
Monks to perform what he intended. Who Ann. Chapter 596.
succeeding in the Holy attempt, and converting Edilbert King of Kent with his
People, and from thence diffusing the Christian Faith by degrees into other
parts, did Preach and establish all those doctrines, rites and Ceremonies
practiced at this day by the Church of Rome, as Protestants confess, being
fore'd to it by the evidence of unquestionable Records. And yet now esteemed by
them but as Superstitious Innovations, though God has been pleased to own them
for his, and confirm the word and practice of the said Teachers with following
Miracles, which were wrought so frequently by the Holy Monk St. Austin, that B.
Gregory exhorts him him to Humility in these words, I know most dear L. 1.
Hist. S. Bedae c. 31.
Brother, that Omnipotent God has shown great Miracles by you to the Nation
whom he would have elect. Wherefore it is necessary that concerning this
Heavenly gift you rejoice with trembling, and tremble with joy. You may rejoice
in that the English Nation is brought to inward Grace by these outward
Miracles. But fear, least by reason thereof the infirm mind should exalt it
self in presumption; and while it is extolled with honor abroad, be depressed
at home with the levity of vain Glory, etc.

And why these Miracles wrought by the said Saint in his Apostleship should not
be evidences, as well of his Mission and Doctrine, as those accompanying the
first Promulgators of the Gospel to the World, no reason sufficient can be
given. This I am sure of, as they converted Infidels, so they stopped the mouths
also of the Britains who long before had received the Christian Faith, and in
some few external Observance differed from him. About which the British Bishops
and the said Apostle meeting to make up a persect unity between them, when
neither Arguments, nor advice, nor entreaty, nor reproof could prevail to
persuade them to the Catholic customs in the observation of Easter, Tonsure,
and some other Ceremonial Rites in Baptism; A blind man was brought in, and
they upon trial not obtaining of God a Miracle for the confirmation of their
practice; Tandem Augustinus just a necessitate compulsus, etc. (they are St.
Bedes words) At length Austin Hist. l. 2. ca. 2.
forced with just necessity, bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, beseeching him, that he would restore to the blind man his lost sight,
and by the corporal illumination of one. Spiritual Grace might enlighten many
Faithful hearts. Hereupon immediately the blind man receives his sight, and
Austin is extolled by all for a true Preacher of the Supreme Light. Then the
Britains confess indeed that they perceived it was the true way of
righteousness which Austin Preached.

This I had not specifyed, but that I know some English Protestants, against
all History and common sense, derive their Religion from the Ancient Britains:
Who differed only from the Apostle of the Saxons and his Converts in some few
External Rites, which afterward in tract of time they generally received, and
in the interim acknowledged to be worthy of acceptance, while the fresh wounds
of deeply-resented injuries were the greatest cause of nonconformity.

One more I cannot pass over in silence, because I conceive it such as may much
conduce to the conviction and conversion of our Adversaries. It Is to be found
in the Life of St. Bernard to this effect.

In the part of France about Thoulouze, L. 3. c. 5.
one Henry an Apostate Monk by deceitful words perverting the Souls of many
with Heretical Doctrines, prevailed so far that every where thereabouts the
Grace of Baptism was denied, Prayers and Oblations for the dead were mocked at,
Invocation of Saints derided, Excommunications of Priests, Pilgrimages of the
Faithful, building of Churches, Consecration of Oil and Chrisme, and all
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, were despised. Our cause in England.

St. Bernard being entreated by the Catholics sadly lamenting to see so many
poor Souls seduced to follow an Apostate, as if he had been an Apostle, was
conquered by their Prayers, and came thither to hinder the further spreading of
so contagious an evil, and to try his skill on the infected. Where Preaching
with wonderful demonstration of Spirit, as well as admirable Eloquence, he in a
short time instructed the Ignorant, strengthened the Weak, recalled the
Wanderers, restored the Subverted, put to sil nce the Perverters, God
confirming his Doctrine with signs following. I shall relate but one so home
and evident, that Cap. 6. l. 3. praed.
it is enough to convert and confound all Contradictors.

During these his travails in the work of an Evangelist, being come to the City
of Sarlet, the Sermon ended, they brought to the Servant of God Bread to be
blessed and distributed among the Faithful, as is the custom in Catholic
Churches. Which he blessing in the Name of God, with his hand elevated making
the sign of the Cross, said, By this ye shall know that the Doctrine which we
Preach is true, and the things which Heretics would persuade you to, are
false, if your Sick tasting this Bread, shall be recovered.

A venerable Bishop present, fearing the trial, said, They shall be healed if
they take it believing* To whom the Holy man replied in a full belief of the
event, I say not so, but such as taste it shall be healed, and thereby know us
to be truly sent of God. Whereupon a great company of Diseased persons tasting
of the said Bread, forthwith recovered, Praying God for such singular
manifestations of his Truth and Goodness. And the Fame thereof spread round
about.

Now what more express Testimony by Deeds can be given from Heaven for Prayer
for the Dead, and Mosses for them, Invocation of Saints, Consecration of
Chrisme, etc. which were then opposed by those Heretics, and now denied by the
Protestants, their Successors in false Doctrine, against the conviction of
Miracles from Heaven.

And now I have done with this Motive, only give me leave to say, that if
Protestants could produce the like Miracles to attest their Faith and practice,
they would make the World ring with the noise of them in every place, and
crying Victory, set up their triumphant Banners with this, or some such like
Inscription or Motto, God with us against the Roman Church. And then add some
such Invective as this in their Popular Sermons, See what hardhearted Wretches
the Papists are, who wholly given over to a reprobate sense, will not
acknowledge our Doctrines to be glorious and revealed Truths of Jesus Christ,
which he has witnessed for such to the whole World by the thundering voice of
Divine Miracles.

The fifth Motive.
That the eminent Sanctity taught and practiced in the Roman Catholic Church,
not to be found in any Heretical Communions divided from her, is a manifest
mark that she only is the true Church of Christ.

SECT. I.
An Introduction.

FRom works of Wonder, we pass to works of Piety, to point out to us the true
Church of God; which, though less admired, yet are far more precious, as being
that Divine Seed, the Fruit whereof is eternal Glory. For we Spiritual
Travelers, cannot come to rest our selves in the Heavenly Jerusalem, but by
walking perseverantly in the path of Holiness.

Now, this Holiness is not to be had but in the true Church, whose attribute is
not only Catholic, but also Holy, as we profess in the Creed, and
distinguishable by it in the Effects from all different Communions whatsoever;
who, though they may cloak their deformity with Angelical appearances, yet in
reality are Synagogues of Satan, having a form of Godliness, and denying the
power thereof. And the truth is, though by sad experience I found that the
Protestant Church, (especially that part of it which I judged more pure in
Doctrine,) could not lay claim to much Sanctity, still crying down the Puritans
for mere Hypocrites, whose zeal in their way did shine far brighter to dazzle
vulgar eyes* yet such prejudice I had conceived against the Church of Rome by
my education in a contrary Religion, that I thought her really Antichristian,
and Holiness to have no more agreement with Her, then light with darkness, or
Christ with Belial. So that after the Divine Goodness, by strowing Thorns in my
indirect ways, had made me sensible what a bitter thing it is to forsake Him,
the Fountain of living Waters, for broken Cisterns; and had put me upon a
serious Inquisition to find out Truth and Holiness, to follow Them: it was no
less wonder then satisfaction to me, to meet with such heavenly Doctrine, and
such holiness of Life in the Roman Catholic Church, and no other Communion
divided from Her: And I plainly discovered, that Protestant Leaders could not
detain their followers in Schism and Heresy, but by keeping them in ignorance
of the right Faith and Worship of the Roman Church, and laying to her charge
such Doctrines and Practices which are not justly imputable unto Her. Yet this
Motive was set more home to my heart, when my eyes were made happy spectators
of some of that innumerable Company of her Members, who in the continual
exercise of most sublime Spirituality, live more like Angels then men, though
in mortal Bodies. But most of all, when our Lord was pleased so to shine upon
me with the extraordinary light of his countenance, as to bless my weak
endeavors, in following (though afar off) those Stars of the first Magnitude,
beautisying his Heaven on Earth in their glorious courses. And truly I have
from hence such a strong persuasion of Truth to be in the Church of Rome,
wrought in my Soul, that, was there no other Motive to confirm me in the
Catholic Religion, my heart very much deceives me, if I should not upon this
score rather forgo my life, then forsake my present Faith to become a
Protestant. Thus, by the grace of God, this wrought on me; and that it may work
on others, I thus proceed.

SECT. II.
A further Declaration of the Sanctity taught and practiced in the Roman Church.

OUr Creed assures us, that Holiness is a badge of the true Church, that being
one Article of the twelve, I believe the Holy Catholic Church. The Psalmist
tells us, That Holiness Beautifies the House of Ps. l. 92.
God for ever. We learn from our Blessed Savior, That a tree is known Mat. 7.
16, 17, 18.
by its fruit; and therefore as a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit; so a
bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit. The great Apostle of the Gentiles
informs us, That Christ gave himself Ephesians 5. 26, 27.
for his Church, cleansing her by the laver of Baptism in his word, that he
might present her to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, but
that she might be holy and unspotted. And beside Precepts, the Evangelical Law
does council us to walk in a way of sublime perfection, by following Christ our
Master with no ordinary Cross on our shoulders; which Protestants think
insupportable, yea impossible, and it is so indeed to flesh and blood. But he
who invites us to it, has born the burden of it himself, that it might become
not only tolerable, but easy and delightful to willing Souls. Else we had
never heard from his Sacred Lips. Qui potest capere, capiat, He Mat. 19. ^2.
that can receive it, let him receive it. After he had told us of those who
make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven. And afterward, If thou will
be perfect, go and ver. 21.
sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
Heaven, and come and follow me. And to make this Heavenly Counsel more
operative, assures us, That whosoever forsakes House, or Brethren, ver. 29.
or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for his Name
sake, shall receive a hundred fold, and also inherit everlasting life.

Now the rays of this sublime Holiness do not only shine forth gloriously in
the Lives of Catholics; among whom multitudes of Souls enflamed with the fire
of Divine Love, by forsaking whatsoever is near and dear to flesh and blood, by
a generous and wonderful contempt of the World, the Honors, Riches, and Glory
of it, by Crucifying even the Lawful Pleasures of the Flesh, by a perfect
abnegation of their Wills in exact obedience to Spiritual Directors, by wholly
devoting themselves to a Life of Spirituality, in the continual exercises of
Prayer and Mortification, Do perfect Holiness in the fear of God. These are
those Angels on earth who make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven;
who breathing after perfection, and panting after Glory, make God their only
Treasure; who with Mary, choosing the better part which shall never be taken
from them, do forsake all things whatsoever to follow Christ. These are those
Virgin-Souls, Who cleansing 2 Cor. 7. 1.
themselves from all defilements of Flesh and Spirit; or as St. Paul elsewhere
Phrases it, Sollicitous to be holy in Body and Spirit, are altogether 1 Cor. 7.
32, etc.
busied about the things of our Lord, how they may please him. Who spend their
lives in voluntary Afflictions, in wonderful Austerities, in much Patience, in
admired Chastity, in Love unfeigned, in profound Humility, in Watchings and
Fastings, in Solitude and Silence, in Prayer and Contemplation, in abstraction
from Temporal Affairs, that no ordinary pollutions of sin contracted by
conversing with the World may sully the purity of their hearts, which only
makes them precious in the Eyes of their Spiritual Bridegroom, and in a most
inexpressible manner united to him. And indeed by these means vigorously
prosecuted with perseverance, they at length arrive to such a transcendency and
forgetfulness of all created things, to such a contempt and annihilation of
themselves, to such a Heavenly-mindedness and attention to God only, to such
glorious manifestations of him, to such a gustful knowledge of his infinite
perfections, to such an experimental apprehension of the Divine presence within
them, to such an unspeakable fruition and repose in him with the full extent of
their wills, that in a manner they become deify'd, and enjoy as much of Heaven
as Souls are capable of in mortal Bodies. Which most intime union and communion
with God, so sublime and ravishing, none either are, not can be partakers of,
who walk not in the use of the same means, whereby it only is attainable.

For purity of heart is a necessary and the immediate disposition to divine
union, and according to the degrees of Holiness in the Soul, this glorious
union is more or less participated. Now the nature of Sanctity consisting in a
separation, as well of persons as things and places from profane and common
uses, with a special reference to God; or as some explain it, importing
principally two things: First, Purity in being washed from the filth of sin,
and drained from the polluting commixture of terene dregs; (which the Greeks
had an eye to in expressing a Saint by the word (...), that is, one without
Earth.) Secondly, Firmness and Stability in the ways of God; it necessarily
follows, that those Happy Souls more especially attain to this transcendent
union with God, who become perfect Nazarites in separating themselves from the
World and the things of it, that they may the better love, and please, and
serve God with all their Heart, with all their Mind, and with all their
Strength: And to confirm their Wills in these endeavors after the perfecting
of Holiness, do by Religious vows offer themselves to God, that he may be
wholly theirs, and they wholly his for Time, and for Eternity.

Now I appeal to Protestants themselves, whether these means of Sanctity are to
be found among them, who not only practice not, but deride and Scoff at this
sublime way to perfection in the Church of Rome, making themselves merry with
our Devotions. But as Wisdom, so Holiness is manifested by effects in her
Children. And there needs no more to testify who is their Father.

And if any doubt whether such earnest endeavors after Holiness, and this
sublime way of walking with God, by having our Conversation in a manner
continually in Heaven while we are on earth be the constant Doctrine of the
Roman Church, if they will be pleased to consult Catholic Authors, they may
receive abundant satisfaction from that incomparable Book of the imitation of
Christ, the Heavenly Writings of St. Francis de Sales Bishop of Geneva, the
excellent Works of Ludovicus Granatensis, so famous for practical Divinity,
that sublime Piece of Spirituality the Scale of Perfection; and to name no
more, Sancta Sophia; for Books of this nature are infinite.

And if they desire to see the best Commentaries of such Heavenly Doctrines; in
those happy Countries where Catholic Religion is publicly professed, they may
(waving the failures of some, who like as in the College of the Apostles, such
is humane weakness, deviate from what they are taught, and what they profess,)
be eyewitnesses of the Angelical Lives of thousands of Holy persons, to their
admiration, and confusion also, if they will not be moved to repentance by such
examples. And methinks, the most understanding Protestatents, who acknowledge
for glorious Saints many who live and die in the Roman Arms, when a Protestant
Saint was never heard of, and notwithstanding will not tread in their Holy
Steps, do sufficiently condemn their own practice, and in effect say, We know
the way to Heaven, but will not take it.

SECT. III.
A further prosecution of this Motive from the new Doctrines and profane
Practices of Heretical Communions.

NO man can be ignorant that the Religion of Protestants does disclaim against
the practice of this super-eminent Sanctity, and condemns it in Catholics as
mere Superstition and Will Worship. Forgetting, or not regarding that 'twas
first councel'd by our Blessed Savior, Preached unto the World by his
Apostles, and practiced in all Ages of the Church. Indeed for Protestants to
have commended it, and yet not to follow it; was too gross an absurdity to gull
the World withal, and would have given too palpable a lie to the godly name of
Reformation. They were resolved therefore to enlarge the narrow way to Heaven,
thus straightened for more security in a business of highest concern, by
abolishing the glory of Christianity under the pretense of Christian liberty:
And they easily persuaded themselves that a sensepleasing Religion backed by
the Secular Power, (as it was in England by King Henry in its first
Introduction,) and advanced by Temporal Interest in impoverishing the Church to
enrich greedy Courtiers, would overbalance in Carnal minds the strict
Austerities of Catholic Purity: Or, to make the best construction of this
strange piece of Reformation on the Clergy's part, who had a hand in the
business, when they saw nothing would quench the Avarice of the sensual King,
but the Revenues devoted for ever to the maintenance of extraordinary Devotion,
they thought it policy not to withstand his will, but to flatter him by
palliating the matter with specious colors. Especially when they considered
that the Rich Bishoprics, and Cathedral Preferments might be the better
preserved, when this auri sacrae fames in the Great ones who were sharers with
his Majesty in these Spoils of the Church, could not but be appeased by
engrossing to themselves so many Rich and Sumptuous Monasteries and Religious
Houses, the Glory and Envy of our Nation. For I am persuaded the Clergy in this
change were not all well pleased in this particular. And I remember a
remarkable saying of Doctor Jackson, a Protestant of no mean note, sadly
complaining in these words, or to this effect, If three persons in the Sacred
Trinity had been as great an eye-soar to us as three Monasteries in every
Shire, we should have been as well reformed Atheists, as reformed Christians.

But whatever were the Motives of several Interests in erecting a Religion
founded on State Policy, this is most certain, that the Substantial practice of
eminent Sanctity was banished out of England at the same time with the
Catholic Faith.

Neither was the birth of the Protestant Church in England the death only of
super-eminent Holiness, but its malevolent influence did cool the fire of true
Devotion in all sorts of Christians who gave it any entertainment. For no
sooner had this tree of Reformation took rooting in our Land, but it spread it
self into arms and boughs on every side, plentifully yielding the bitter Fruits
of Dissoluteness, Uncharitableness, Oppression, Envyings, Back-bitings,
Strifes, Ignorance of necessary Truths, Curiosity in knowledge, vain and frothy
disputes, staggrings in Faith, Spiritual Pride, contempt of Ecclesiastical
Authority. Irreligion, Profaneness, Sacrilege, Abuse of Holy things, casting
off the Sacraments, Blasphemies, Atheism; and in short, whatsoever is contrary
to true Godliness, and Evangelical Precepts of Jesus Christ. So bad a tree
could not bring forth better Fruits wheresoever once it took sure rooting, so
notorious and visible to the World, that the Arch-reformers themselves could
not but confess it, and to their shame and conviction have left it upon record
to Posterity.

It Is fit Luther the first Founder of this new Faith should have the precedence
in delivering his Verdict. Give him Audience while he tells us, that, Mundus ex
hac Doctrina, etc. The World by this Doctrine Con^. 2. Daw. 1. Adventus.
daily becomes worse. Now seven devils are entered into every one, who formerly
were only possessed with one. Whole troops of Devils now get into men's hearts,
that in this so glorious light of the Gospel they are more covetous, more
crafty, more unjust, more inhumane, more stubborn then formerly they were in
Popery. And observe it, that he confesses those evils did proceed from his new
Doctrine, not occasionally, but as the natural fruit of it. And if ever he
spoke Truth after his Apostasy, here we have't. For they that consider what an
innundation of evils broke in upon a great part of the Christian World, upon
his breaking from the Catholic Church, and Preaching a new Gospel first in
Germany, may very well think that now Apoc. 20. 1, 2.
was the time come, For unchaining Satan, and Hell was broke loose to torment
us mortals here on earth.

Witness Calvin, In exiguo illorum numero, etc. Amongst the small number of
them who have forsaken Popish In c. 11. Dani. v. 34
Idolatry, the greatest part of them are full of Perfidiousness and
Treacheries. They outwardly profess a notable Zeal, but if examined inwardly,
you will find them abounding in deceits. Neither indeed could a false Faith
bring forth any other but a counterfeit Holiness. For these are those
Hypocrites whom our Blessed Savior speaks of, That are ravenous Wolves Mat. 7.
in Sheaps. clothing; that cleanse Mat. 23. 25.
the outside of the cup and platter, leaving the inside full of rapine and
uncleanness. Or, Like whited Sepulchers, ver. 27.
which appear beautiful to men, but within are stuffed with dead men's bones,
and putrefaction. These are those Reprobates concerning the Faith foretold by
the Apostle, Having 2 Timothy 3. 5, etc.
a form of godliness, denying the Power thereof. Those Saints of the highest
elevation in their own conceits, whom St. Jude calls, Clouds ver. 12.
without water, darkening only the splendour of the Gospel, not making it
fruitful in good works by any refreshing influences of real Piety: Which the
same Calvin discerned so clearly through these clouds, that Comm. in 2. Pet. 2.
1.
he confesses, Vix eorum decimus, etc. Hardly the tithe of those who gave their
name to the Gospel, (that is, who left the Church of Rome to be of their
Religion) did it for any other end then to wallow in wantonness more freely
without restraint.

Andreas Musculus affords us likewise as ample a testimony, extracted from him
by evidence, of Truth against his will. Quod si veritatem, L. de noviss. die.
etc. If we will confess the Truth, we cannot but testify this concerning us
Gospellers, that no men in the whole World are more given to Whoredoms, Usury,
Circumventions and Deceits, then our selves.

Bishop Andrews, perhaps the greatest Scholar that ever England bred of
Sehismatick, and in whom was some relish of Catholic Piety, in his Sermon
upon, Bring forth Mat. 3. 8.
fruits worthy of repentance, has words to this effect, We have taken away
Auricular Confession, and instead thereof brought in Auricular Profession. Our
Religion is good at In and In, we are all for hearing Sermons, for taking in,
but we bring forth nothing, no fruits I am sure worthy of repentance. And in
his Sermon upon, ( um jejunatis, etc. When Mat. 6. 16.
ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, etc. he speaks after this manner, The
Romanists will needs have us to be those locusts St. John saw coming out of the
Apoc. 9. 2.
bottomless pit to plague the earth. Now the locusts are devouring Creatures,
all belly; and truly while we are such enemies to religious fasting, I know
not how to answer their accusation. So that the words made use of by our
Blessed Savior against the wicked Servant in the Parable ( Luke the 19, 22.)
Ex ore tuo te judico, Out of thy own mouth I will judge thee, may fuly be
applied to the Protestant Church accused to be false at the bar of Justice, Ex
ore tuorum judicaberis, What need we further proof or witness, when thy dearest
Sons and greatest Patrons do give in evidence for thy condemnation?

Neither could it possibly be otherwise, where ever their new Faith took
possession. For the affections of the will, which are the feet of the Soul,
walking after the light of the understanding, the eye thereof, their practice
of necessity must be answerable to their Doctrines: The first wheel of a Clock
gives motion to all the rest. The effect cannot but follow the nature of its
cause. Do men gather grapes of S Mat. 7. 16 S. James 3. 11.
thorns, or figs of thistles? Can a poisonous fountain send forth wholesome
streams? When the Protestant Reform condemns it for Superstition to forsake all
sensual contentments to follow Christ, and account it abominable Will Worship
to live in perpetual Virginity, that we may in a holy vacancy from all earthly
eneumbrances, mind only the things of God: could it be, but the Love of the
World, Luxury, and Carnality would take deeper rooting in the hearts of men so
poisoned, and bring forth fruit of that nature more abundantly, while manured
with such Dunghill Doctrines? When they with much vehemence preach down Merit
of good works (which they condemn, because either they do not, or will not
understand in what sense the Church holds it) as derogatory to Christ's
sufferings; was it possible but a general decay of Piety should follow among
them, and good works in a manner be confined among Catholics, who believe that
a cup Mat. 10. 41, 42.
of cold water given to the meanest of the household of Faith for Christ's 2 Timothy
4. 7.
sake, shall not loose its reward; and a Crown of Justice shall be rendered by
the just Judge to all who fight the good fight of Faith with perseverance? And
well had it been for poor England, if the current of the Protestant Gospel had
stopped in the omission only of good works, for then the streams which make glad
the City of our God, might more easily have returned into their wonted channel;
but their self-interested Religion has swallowed plentifully what the Piety of
Catholic Ages had devoted to the perpetual Service of the most high God.

When they so labor to disgrace Church-Tradition, and bring it in contempt,
that in the Interpretation of Sacred Scripture private reason may be admitted
for the Judge of Faith; do they not inevitably open a passage to an everlasting
deluge of Heresy and Schism in the Church? Can this be denied after the
miseries of so much experience? In virtue of such a Principle, must not men
necessarily become lovers of themselves, high-minded, proud, blasphemous,
disobedient 2 Timothy 3. 1, etc.
to Spiritual Superiors, resisting the Truth, reprobate concerning the Faith,
ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the Truth? The very
Heretics St. Paul forewarns us of, that we may shun them. For says he, From
such turn away. I would not here willingly be too tedious.

Only good Reader, give me leave to tell thee, that there are other deadly
fruits naturally springing from this fatal tree of Reformation; as disobedience
to Magistrates, Tumults, Seditions, Rebellions, Bloodshed, Murders,
Assassinations, Rapins, over-turnings of Kingdoms, changings of Governments,
and all those miseries which accompany the worst of evils, a Civil War; (the
dregs of which cup of Gods displeasure our poor Island has so deeply drank of,
that reeling and staggering up and down she knew not where to stand or fix,
'till at length she happily pitched upon her true and right Basis for Temporal
Power, Charles the II. our Dread Sovereign) all necessarily flowing from
Principles of the Protestant Religion. A certain Argument that it cannot come
from God, who is the God of Order, and not of Confusion. For their new Faith
being brought into the World and propagated by disobedience to the Church of
Rome, and casting off her Ecclesiastical Authority: when they had thus shrunk
up the sinews, or rather quite broke in pieces the reins of spiritual
Government established by Jesus Christ to continue for ever, it was not
possible the secular Magistrate could long stand firm though, guarded with the
Sword: But if he would not suffer his subjects, so minded, to do what ever
seems good in their own eyes, and cast Religion into a mould they fancy most
agreeable to Scripture, and the purity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, they
would (this gap once made in the hedge of Government,) gather head, and when
ever they found it feasible take up arms against him as a destroyer of
Christian Liberty, a violator of their Consciences, an Antichristian and Bloody
Tyrant, a Persecutor of Gods Saints; and if they thrive in the attempt, take
all Power into their own hands, and make themselves Lords and Masters as well
of their Sovereign as of their Brethren. For it could not be rationally thought
that men would long suffer a Religion to be imposed upon them by a Secular
Prince and his Counselors, who themselves had contradicted in points of Faith
the Authority of the Church, and consent and practice of the whole Christian
World: And whether the transactions and strange revolutions in our Native
Country, during the Civil War and subsequent usurpation, do not make this Truth
a History, let the World judge. And that the same has been attempted, or
really effected, in what ever places the Protestant zeal took any considerable
footing, the Chronicles of other Nations are sad Witnesses.

Thus false Prophets, and false Doctrines, whatever the pretenses be, may be
known by their Fruits; Mat. 7. 16, 17.
the (...), or mark our Blessed Savior refers us to in such Cases. From all
which it appears, That the general Piety and singular Sanctity taught and
practiced in the Church of Rome, proceeds from the Author of all Holiness; and
that their tree of Reformation could never take rooting or influence from
Heaven, which brings forth such evil fruits upon the earth.

The Conclusion.
ANd now it is high time to indulge my Pen, which I little thought, when first
set to Paper, would have labored so long in this employment: However, I shall
not repent of my pains, though so much exceeding the limits of my intentions in
the Essay, if any poor wandering Soul receive hereby the least light to guide
her toward the Mansions of Blessed Eternity, and so prove instrumental for her
Salvation. This is my aim and hopes also; and yet though they should become
wholly unsuccessful, I shall rest satisfied, in that I have used the best of my
endeavors toward my Countries good, in matters of the highest importance; and
especially the Spiritual profit of my dear Protestant Friends and Relations,
whom the more I love since this happy change wrought in me, the less perhaps am
I beloved of them. Amongst whom, some I know for certain, who have so alienated
their hearts merely for Religions sake, as to return me hatred for my good
will. But I do, and shall, betake my self unto Prayer for such Objects of pity
and compassion, with a hopeful persuasion that they will be Converted as well
as more moderate tempers, seeing all things are alike equal to an Omnipotent
goodness; and experience tells us, that the most violent Protestants have
sometimes become the most zealous Catholics, By the mighty working of him who
is able to Phil. ^21
subdue all things unto himself.

It Is true, the Case with Catholics in England is sad, by reason of those
oppressive Laws which are in force against them: and doubtless is the cause why
some forsake us for the love of the World, and do not actually unite themselves
to the true Church. In a word, Temporal Advantages, Worldly Interests and
Prosterity standing on the Protestants side, Persecution and present Sufferings
on ours; renders the Conversion, or at least the Profession of the Faith to
many ineffectual. Let one be convinced, and he replies, What shall I do with my
Wife and Children? Would you have me ruin my Estate and Fortune? O miserable
England! where Truth is oppressed. And O unhappy those who yield so cowardly in
the time of Trial and Temptation! Had the primitive Christians been thus
minded, the Catholic Faith long since had been buried in oblivion, and such
glorious Saints as Martyrs had never been known.

What is Time to Eternity? What are Friends and Relations, to the everlasting
Society of Saints and Angels? What are Worldly Advantages, to Heavenly Riches?
Shall we not endure a momentary Cross, for an Eternal Crown? Is it not the high
commendation of Moses the Faithful Servant of God, That he chose rather
Affliction with the People Heb. 11. 25.
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season? Know we not, That he
who loves Father, or Mat. 10. 37.
Mother, or Son, or Daughter, better than Christ, is not worthy of him? Alas!
What will it profit a man, to Mat. 16. 26.
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul? Certainly whoever lays this sadly to heart, cannot but
cry out with that devout Saint, Deus meus, and omnia. Malem Crucem cum Christo,
quam Coronam cum mundo. Whatsoever I lose, I Will not not part with my Savior;
he is all in all. I had rather have him with a Cross, than a Crown without him.

This is indeed an Heroic resolution becoming a Christian, and answerable to
the nobleness of our Religion, which appears in nothing more then the contempt
of this World; and this resolution is agreeable to the Purity of our Holy
Faith: This is the Promise we solemnly made to God at our Baptism in the
presence of the Church Militant and Triumphant, why will we become Renegadoes
from our Colors? Why will we not courageously fight the good fight of Faith,
under, the glorious Standard of Christ, against all the enemies of our
Salvation? Whatsoever we part withal for God's fake, we shall not be loosers
by it. He will superabundantly reward us, who has promised, Mat, 19. 29.
That whosoever leaves Houses, Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Child^en, or Lands, for his Names sake, shall receive a hundred fold
here, and hereafter inherit everlasting Life. Believe me, dear Country men,
it is very true; I know the first by happy experience, If spiritual riches, (as
St. L. 3. in Mat. ca, 19.
Hierom expounds it) and comforts pass for payment; and wait for the latter in
Gods good time.

But, alas! things Spirital are little operative, 'till we have a gust and
feeling of them, which cannot be without some progress in Spirituality; and
things eternal are further off, and seldom apprehended with fixed thoughts,
while Worldly contents and advantages being present and visible, work strongly
on us, to win and fetter our affections to them. And therefore many of us
living more by sense, then faith or reason, are willing to possess our Souls
with patience in sufferings for Christ, and expectation of that far more
exceeding weight of glory which they work for us. We think it intolerable to
part with any Temporal Possessions for an Heavenly Inheritance; And so
procrastinating our receptition into the Catholic Church from time to time,
refer all to Gods Mercy and a Deathbed repentance. A sad case this, yet too
common among us.

A case, wherein I might have perished eternally, had not the infinite goodness
and extraordinary favor of God vouchsafed unto me with patience and long
sufferance, at last loosed my bonds and fetters, and brought me into the bosom
of his Catholic Church, setting my feet at liberty to walk in the path of
Holiness to ever-blessed Eternity. The Psalm. 113.
snare is broken, and my Soul is delivered. And blessed be the God of Psalm. 107.
my Salvation. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and
Psalm. 115.
give praise. I will now pay my vows in the presence of his Saints, and call
upon the name of the Lord. I will offer to God the sacrifice of Thanksgiving,
and praise his Name while I have my Being. All creatures in Heaven and Earth
bless God for me, Psalm. 102.
and bless God with me. Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul. Amen, Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

