The Monsieur: OR, A LETTER from a French Catholic at London to his Friend at
Paris, concerning the present State of the English Nation.
SIR,
I Know you expect to hear how I find the State of Affairs in this Country,
which I will assure you are in no point so benign and promising as we were made
to believe, and as I hoped to find them before I came over, by which I see that
flattering our condition, and rendering things better than they are, is the
common-disease of all Nations, and that therefore there is no such effectual
cure of false reports as being on the spot.

You know, Sir, we were both told of three Parties in this Kingdom, but I can
find but two, the Protestants and the Catholics, the latter has many of the
Gentry for its favorers, but the greatest part of the Nobility, the body of
the Gentry, and the generality of the people are all on the other side. Which
had we known in time, I should never have advised the English Catholics to
this Attack, which whatever may be told you, if it be not very tenderly and
dexterously managed to bring them off, I doubt it will prove their utter ruin;
for to attempt the restoring a Religion against the universal temper of a
Nation, where Principle in many, and Interest in (almost) all have possessed
the people with an inveterate and invincible prejudice against it, though it
may well enough become the foolish zeal of a few devout Priests and Bigots, yet
that other persons of wisdom and fortune should be drawn in to engage
themselves in such an unaccountable piece of indiscretion, is to me one of the
greatest wonders in nature. For if I am not abused in my information, I do
believe, to make Spain Protestant is as easy an undertaking as to make England
Catholic; and then how near this attempt is to an impossibility, I leave you
and all men to judge.

And now to think of engaging Authority on our side, is I doubt a notion as
wild and idle as the undertaking it self; for it is but to request Authority
that it would please to play the fool for our sakes; and how we have deserved
such a kindness from it, I fear will be too hard a difficulty to demonstrate.

Besides, natural defects that carry an impossibility in them, cannot be cured
by Authority it self, no more than Authority can cure a man that is born blind
or lame, and make him to see or go; so that if we could bubble Authority to our
side (which I totally despair of ever doing) yet would not that effect our
business; it is true it might hurt it self, but cannot at all help us, because
there is such a natural defect in our present undertaking that no cure can
reach or help it. For the English compute their men at Twelve hundred thousand
at the least, and of these the Catholics and their Interest make scarce Fifty
thousand; now what a brow must that man have that would go about to persuade
Authority that it is its true interest to stick by the four and twentieth part
of its people against no less than the whole three and twenty parts thereof?
would not Authority think you judge such a man fitter for Bedlam than to be
conversed with? especially an Authority that has so often and publicly
professed it self Protestant, as the Authority of England has done.

Again, what arguments can we lay before Authority (admit it would hear us) to
attain our end? For there are but two ways to effect it, either legally or
forcibly; if by Law, then it must be done by Parliament, (which is the greatest
thing we dread) for there can be no Laws made but by Parliament, nor no
Parliaments but by the Peoples choice, and the Votes of the Protestants being
above twenty to one to ours, there is an utter impossibility that ever we can
have a Parliament for our turn, and so cannot bring about our point by Law; and
if by force we should attempt it, the impossibility is as great every way,
because the odds still bears the same proportion, and we may as rationally hope
that one man can beat three and twenty, as that the English Catholics can
subdue the Protestants by force.

Now if you please to add to all this, that the Authority of the Nation is
already engaged, and by their many public Manifesto's have declared, That
there has been, and still is, a horrid Hellish Popish Plot carrying on,
against the Life of the King, and the Protestant Religion; and can we ever
think that the Government will cast that reflection on their own reputation as
to suffer themselves to be wheedled to unsay this, and say the contrary, and
all this for so inconsiderable a minor part of the Nation, against so vast a
majority thereof? I confess for one, I must totally lay aside the understanding
of a man before I can ever incline to this opinion. I know, Sir, you expected a
fairer face of things from hence than I have sent you; but if I am valuable for
any thing in the world, it is for fidelity, and the faithful discharge of what
I am entrusted with. I believe you have more pleasing accounts given you by
some, that ou^ Interest here is on the increasing hand, and that both the
Gentry and Clergy of the Church of England in Court and Country do come off
apace to us, with a many grateful things of that nature; but if you will please
to credit me, somewhat nigh this account I have sent you, is the very truth. I
do not deny but that some of the Clergy and Gentry may have come over to us,
but must also tell you, that they are such a some as are none but such as mere
Indigents, or so debaucht that they are a very scandal to any profession they
are of; and that Churches reputation must needs run exceeding low that glories
in such Converts; and to compensate this accession too, I do assure you that
the Dissenters and sober Church of England men have a far greater kindness for
each other than formerly, and for ought I can learn, are very hearty in their
union against us, as the common enemy to both; and to tell you one sad truth
for all, both the riches and industry, the landed-men, and the trading part of
the Nation are against us as one man; and consider, if the number, riches and
trade of the Kingdom are against us, what small Cards must be left for us to
show for our game?

It Is true for sometime we did make good earnings in persuading the Church of
England men that the Dissenters would pull them down again, and at the same
time persuading the Fanatics that the Church of England would extirpate them.
But that day is done; for now both the one and the other see that all those
sentiments were nothing else but our arts and shams upon them; and therefore as
the lo^sest of the Church of England men are friendly to us, so the more solid
have now such a friendship for Dissenters as themselves are in pain when they
are prosecuted, and looking upon them us part of their Interest, esteem all
such as ill friends to the Protestant Religion as busy themselves against
them; for since they see liberty is given to French Dissenters, the English
think that Charity ought to begin at home, and therefore may very well be
allowed to their own Dissenters also. We hang now only by our Sheet-anchor,
That these kind of people will serve his Majesty as they did his Father, but
how long such a fright will prevail upon a Prince of his understanding,
especially there being no better bottom to hold such a surmizes keep, me in a
continual apprehension; for I am sure when ever this Anchor comes home, there
is nothing but a wreck to be expected for us.

Three Parliaments successively you have seen already stand ready to swallow us
up, and had assuredly done it had not this notion preserved us. So that when
ever this slips, we are gone to all intents and purposes. For the people are
still the same, and in reason will choose much the same Parliaments; for look
what the people are, such are always their Parliaments, which is the truest
measure you can take of the People of England; for were the People Catholic,
you would have Catholic Parliaments; but to expect a Popish Parliament from a
Protestant People, is as unnatural an expectation as to look for the Sun at
midnight; and therefore we had no other way to preserve us from these
Parliaments, but this single sham, That they were as much enemies to His
Majesty as to His Brother; whereas in truth they were no enemies to His Majesty
nor His Brother neither, but to the Catholic Profession, and to the Duke as he
was the Head thereof in this Kingdom, and thereby had as much unfitted himself
for the Government of Protestants, as our Harry the Fourth of France had, being
a Protestant for the Government of Catholics. And to say all, we did but
oppose those Politics in these Protestant Parliaments which we our se^ves have
practiced in all Catholic Countries; and as long as we can continue this Cheat
to persuade the World that the Protestants are enemies to Monarchy and his
Majesty, we shall keep off the deadly blow; but when that art cease, as God
knows how soon it may, we may bid good night to all other designs for ever. For
I do not see that our new device of fetching off Witnesses does effect what
some fancied it would, our game being gone too far, and grown too unweildy to
be retreived by such little tricks at these, and the reason is plain: for there
is not a man that we fetch off, but that has some intimate friend or other,
with whom he does advise, before he comes over, and to whom he does impart the
offers and terms of his coming to us, or else he huffs it out that he will not
be starved and neglected, as he swears he is by the other party. For turning
tales and sides, is so shameful an Act especially to men of any mettle or
ingenuity, that they reckon themselves Debtors to their own Reputation, to say
something in the excuse thereof, which sayings, when they are brought into open
Courts of Justice against them, does so blast and stain their Testimony, that
not one of a hundred that hears it, will give the least credit; and therefore
though many of our Friends talk high what great Gainers we were by the Trial of
the man at Oxford, yet I must crave liberty to dissent from their opinion, and
assure you, That we were very great Losers by his Blood.

Sir, Whatever may be told you, This is the true State of matters here; and
therefore if the Government cannot be persuaded to accept of the Blood already
shed, for payment, and cross the Book by an Act of Oblivion; I shall quit my
Post here, as foreseeing that all things will revert with a vengeance on us;
and that it does not lie within the compass of humane Prudence to prevent it. I
am

Sir, Your most faithful, most obedient, and most humble Servant.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row,
1681.


