A PLACAT Of the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Netherlands; Containing a sharp Prohibition to the Inhabitants of these Lands,
and also concerning the Navigation and Commerce of the Neutrals to the Havens
of France and England, and also Goods of Contrabande, and Assurances of Ships
and Goods belonging to the Subjects of the Kings of France and Great Brittany.
THe States General of the United Netherlands, to all those who shall see or
hear read these Presents, Greeting, Do make it known that since the Kings of
France and Great Brittany have found good to declare and begin a War against
us, contrary to all right and reason, we are therefore necessitated according
to the Law of Nature and the Right of Nations, to take up Arms, as well for the
necessary Resistance of the aforesaid hostile proceedings, as for Redress and
Reparation of the damages and losses thereby unjustly sustained; and
consequently on our side likewise to enter into an open Rupture against the
aforesaid Kings; And further we to the aforesaid end, and especially for so
much as in us is, to prevent all further mischief from that side, are obliged
and holden according to our power, and as far as it may be without prejudice to
our Allies, Friends, and Neutrals, according to the Law of Nations, to
intercept and hinder the aforesaid Kings from the Commodities and Provisions
with which they might be able to do further injury to the State of these Lands,
and the good Inhabitants of the same. SO IT is that we have found good, and
judge it necessary to Ordein, and sharply to forbid all those who are under our
Obedience, and friendly to advertise and warn all other Nations who are in
Alliance, Friendship or Neutrality with this State: And we do Ordain, forbid,
and warn respectively by these,

I.
FIrst, That from this time forward none of the Subjects of these Lands shall
transport out of these Lands, or out of any other Lands, Kingdoms, Places or
Towns, carry or transport directly or indirectly to any Havens, Islands, Towns
or Places of France, England, Scotland or Ireland, or others under the
Obedience of the aforesaid Kings of France and Great Brittany, any Wares, Goods
or Merchandise of what sort, quality, or nature the same may be, none excepted;
or also to hold in any manner any correspondence and communion with the
Inhabitants of France and England aforesaid, or those that belong to them, by
Letter or otherwise tending to the Prejudice of these States; and also that no
man in the World, although Stranger and no Inhabitant of these Lands shall
without these Lands transgress that which is aforesaid, upon pain to be
punished therefore, without any connivence, as an Enemy of these States, and
further upon the Forfeiture of all the Ships and Goods which we can find, that
have been designed to be conveyed to France or England aforesaid, or other
Places aforesaid, or the value thereof, in case they be already carried out, or
cannot otherwise be come at.

II.
And whereas according to the duty of all lawful Superiors, we are obliged to
protect and defend our good Inhabitants and Subjects with all possible means
against Force and Oppression, we cannot according to common Right and the
Practice of all Nations, be obliged to suffer that the aforesaid Kings, or
their Subjects should be supplied by any one in the world with such Necessaries
and Materials wherewith they may apparently be enabled to offend us and our
Inhabitants; therefore we would by these have all our Allies, Friends and
Neutrals, and generally all People and Nations to be advertised, and seriously
entreated and warned, that during the present Differences between this State,
and the aforesaid Kings of France and Great Brittany, that they will not send
out, carry, or transport from any Lands, Kingdoms, Places or Towns, directly or
indirectly to any Havens, Towns or Places of France, England, Scotland or
Ireland, or others under the obedience of the said Kings. any Ammunition of
War, or other Materials useful to the setting out of Ships, of what name, sort,
quality, condition or nature, soever they may be, none excepted, because our
meaning is to take and confisque for good Prize, the aforesaid Materials for
War, and Ships, which shall be found to be laden to be carried thither contrary
to this our Advertisement and Ordinance.

III.
And to prevent the aforesaid Transportation with the better security, and to
provide in special that no Victuals, Materials for War or Ships may be carried
out of these Provinces under false pretenses: So shall no man from henceforward
lade in these Lands, or cause to be shipped, any kind of Victuals, or any of the
aforesaid Materials, to be carried or transported to any of the Lands, Towns,
or Places of the Allies, Friends or Neutrals of this State, without having
first obtained the special consent of the Court of Admiralty; in whose
District, such Lading or Shipping shall be done, and over and above the payment
of the Lands Duty, shall have put in sufficient Caution of twice the Value of
the Goods to be transported, that they shall be carried and unladen in no other
place than in the Kingdoms, Havens, Towns and Places of the aforesaid Friends,
and in no manner directly or indirectly, at any Places of France, England,
Scotland, and Ireland, or others under the obedience of the aforesaid Kings,
and that within a certain convenient and sufficient time to be expressed in the
Passport, according to the Condition and Distance of the Places, to deliver
over Certificate, or other sufficient Evidence to make it appear that all the
aforesaid Victuals or Materials have been unladen and landed in the whole at
the Place for which they were declared and entered to be carried to, or in case
of faileur, and that the aforesaid expressed time shall be passed, the Surety
for the aforesaid double value of the exported Victuals or Materials of War and
Shipping shall be presently taken in Execution for the Sums they were taxed and
valued at, at the Time of giving the Caution.

IV.
Further we do order all our Inhabitants and Subjects, and do advertise and
warn all our Allies, Friends or Neutrals, and generally all People and Nations
that will sail from this State to any Kingdoms, Lands, Towns or Places lying
East, West, or Northward, or would come from thence hither to keep the Open
Sea, because we understand and declare by these that all the Ships that shall
be found upon the Coast of France, England, Scotland, or Ireland, or other
Lands, Islands, or Places under the Obedience of the Kings of France and Great
Brittany, and especially within the Banks and shallow Waters along their
Coasts; and whereas they cannot but be suspected to have designed something
against this our Ordinance and Advertisement, therefore if they shall be laden
either in whole or part with any Ammunition of War, or Materials for Ships,
they shall be taken by the Captains and Officers of War and Privateers of these
Lands, and sent in to be sentenced by the Lords of the Admiralty in such manner
as is expressed in the second Article, unless the aforesaid Ship were forced
thither by Storm or other great Necessity; and shall be so judged by the Lords
of the Admiralty from the Circumstances which shall be made to appear to them.

V.
And further the better to prevent and defend against all deceit which may be
designed against this Ordinance and Advertency; We charge and command by these
all Skippers and Merchants being Inhabitants of these Lands, or who sail their
Ships and Goods from these Lands; and we advertise and warn all others of what
Nation soever they be, or from whencesoever they shall come, not to lade or
cause to be laden any Goods, Wares and Merchandise in their Ships, or to carry
or cause them to be carried otherwise than with one sort of Sea-Brief, due
Passport, full Charter-party, Bill of Lading, Freight-Advice, and
Convoy-Brief, or such other Dispatches as are required to the Lading and
Exporting of the same, according to the Laws and Placats of the places, where
the Goods, Wares, and Merchandise shall be laden; because we shall hold for
forfeited, and do from this time forward declare for good Prize all the Ships
together with the Goods, Wares, and Merchandise laden in them, in which there
shall be found more than one Sea-Brief, Charter-party, Double Freight-Briefs,
Bills of Lading or other Dispatches, and likewise all the Ships and Goods which
shall not be furnished as they ought with the aforesaid required Dispatches.

VI.
To the end that all the Officers and Commanders of the Ships of War, as well
of the States as of particulars set out by our Authority, may be assured that
the Ships which they shall meet at Sea may be intended for none of the
aforesaid Havens, Towns and Places of France, England, Scotland and Ireland, or
others under the obedience of the aforesaid Kings of France and Great Britain,
with Ammunition of War or Materials for Shipping, the aforesaid Captains may
seize all Ships in Sea of whom they have any Suspicion, and require of them
their Sea-Briefs, Pass-ports, Charter-parties, and Bills of Lading; for
evidence to what Place the Ship belongs, where and at what Place the Lading was
made, whereof the Lading consists, and at what Place it was to be unladen;
which having been shown them, and it being found that the aforesaid Ships were
not intended with any Materials of War or Shipping for any Haven or Place under
the Command of the aforesaid Kings of France or Great Britain, they shall let
the said Ships pass free without hinderance; but if the contrary shall be found
by the dispatches, or otherwise; they shall bring up such Ships, with their
Lading, in sure Custody, and take into their hands, all the Dispatches they
found in the said Ships, and which shall be shown them, and shall cause to be
put in writing, in the best form; also what the Ships and Seamen shall have at
that time declared, both in regard of the intended Voyage, and also concerning
the condition of the Ship, and Lading; and shall cause the Ships to sign it,
that it may be sent up, and delivered over, together with the aforesaid
dispatches found; and the Ship, and her Lading, to the Lords of that Admiralty
from whence the taker was set forth.

VII.
Further it is also our meaning, that all the penalties here before decreed,
shall take effect, and be executed against our Inhabitants Offenders, whether
they be Merchants, Shippers or others, whoever they may be, with Confiscation
of the Ships, and the Goods laden in them; or a part of them in the case before
recited, or otherwise, if they be not to be come at; with a pecuniary Fine to
the value of them; each in their respect; in case of their return into these
Lands: or, if otherwise the opportunity shall happen, that it shall be
understood, and made appear, that they have acted contrary to this our
Advertisement, and Order, in any point, they shall be punished, as if they had
been taken in the fact, and brought in from the Sea, by the aforesaid Ships of
War; or otherwise arrested, and taken here at Land, by other of the Land
Officers.

VIII.
And to the end, that no just reason of Complaint may be given to any Kings,
Republics, Princes, Potentates, or Towns, in alliance with these States, by
the Execution of this our Ordinance, and Advertisement; We do charge and
command very expressly by these, all our chief, and other Officers at Sea, as
well of Ships of War of the State; as of particular Ships set out for War by
our direction, to regulate themselves punctually, according to the Obligations,
and Treaties concerning this thing, which are already made, or shall be made by
us, with other Kings, Republics, Princes, Potentates, and Towns; ordering to
that purpose, our Lords of the Admiralty particularly to advertise, and
instruct, as they ought to do, all the Captains of War thereof, that do sail
out their respective Districts.

IX.
The Judicature of the Transgression of this our Ordinance, shall belong to the
Court of Admiralty, in whose District the Offense shall be discovered, or from
whence the Captain that took the Ship in Sea did set forth.

X.
But in case the said Transgressors shall not be found in the fact, but may
afterward be accused thereof, then the Cognizance thereof shall belong to the
Lords of the Admiralty, or the ordinary Judges; before which the Suit shall be
first commenced; and to the end that all the Officers, and also all others, who
lay the welfare of this State to heart, and are enemies to such Contraventions,
may the more actually endeavor, that this Ordinance may every where, and by
every one be punctually observed, and the Offenders punished according to the
Contents hereof to the example of others; all the Moneys that shall come to be
raised by Confiscation or otherwise out of this our Ordinance; shall be applied
as usually all Fines, Mulcts, and Confiscations, by the Placats of their
respective Provinces of these United Netherlands; are applied and distributed;
to wit, one third part to the profit of the taker, or Informer; whether he be a
sworn Officer of the Land, or not; one third part to the profit of the Officer,
who shall make the Challenge and Execution; and the remaining third part to the
profit of the Public.

XI.
But what concerns the Ships and Goods, which shall be taken at Sea, by any of
the Ships of War of this State, or by any particulars, with Commission of
Reprisal, and by them brought up, upon account of Transgression against this
our Ordinance, and Advertisement; and upon the Prosecution, Confiscated, and
declared good Prize, by the Lords of the Admiralty, the sharing of that shall
be according to the Instructions, Placats and Ordinances thereof, heretofore
made, or to be made.

XII.
To the end that all Ships, and Goods, which, for the Offenses committed
against these our Ordinances and Advertisements, shall be taken, kept and sent
up, may be duly deliverd over into the hands of the said Lords of the
Admiralty, We do by these very expressly command, that all the Takers of the
same, and all others whom it may concern, shall regulate themselves precisely,
according to our Placat of December. 1, 1640. made against the disorderly
plundering and taking of Ships, with warning, that the Penalties established by
the said Placat, shall be surely executed against all those who shall have
attempted any thing contrary to this Prohibition.

XIII.
And to the end that we may prevent on the one side, that the loss which must
fall upon the Offenders against this Ordinanee, by the Confiscation of their
Ships, and Goods, may not come, by means of assurance, to redound to the loss
of any the Inhabitants of these Provinces; and that on the other side, the
faculty of the French and English Navigation and Commerce may, as much as
possible, be disturbed. So it is, that we do very expressly ordain by these, not
only that none of the Inhabitants aforesaid shall further any Goods, or Ships,
belonging to the Subjects of the aforesaid Kings of France and Great Britain,
nor assure directly or indirectly, by themselves or any other, either within
these Lands or without, any Ships, and Goods going or fraighted to any Haven,
Towns, or Places of France and England, Scotland, Ireland, or others, under the
Obedience of the aforesaid Kings, or coming from the said Havens, Towns, or
Places; nor shall they give or take any Ranversals, thereby to make this our
Placat Illusory, whether it be directly or indirectly, or under what pretense
soever it shall be done, under the penalty that there shall be forfeited such
sum as shall be assured by the Assurers; and that the same shall take place,
and full effect, as well in regard of making the assurance, as of giving the
Ranversal to be applied, and executed as aforesaid; and the Officers that shall
be found to have been negligent therein, shall be arbitrarily punished, both by
being deprived of their Service or otherwise, as shall be found to belong to
the condition of the offense.

And to the end that no man may pretend hereafter ignorance hereof; We desire,
and entreat the Lords, the States, the Comittee of Council, the deputed States
of the respective Provinces of Guelderland, and the Earldom of Zutphen,
Holland, and West- Friezland, Zealand, Utvitcht, Friezland, Overyssell,
together with the Towns of Groningen, and Ommeland and all other Justices, and
Officers of the same; That they forthwith every where make known this our
Ordinance, by publishing and affixing it in all places where it shall be
needful, and where usually such publication and affixing is done; We charge,
and command further the Lords of the Admiralty, the Advocate fischal, together
with the Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Captains, Officers, and Commanders; as also
the Commissaries, and Searchers, as well in the Seaports, as elsewhere, to
observe, and cause to be observed, this our Ordinance, proceeding and causing
proceeding to be made against the Offenders of the same, without connivance,
favor, dissimulation, or collusion; for we have found this to be needful for
the Service of the Land. This done, established, renewed, and exemplified in
the Assembly of the aforenamed States General, in the Hague the 14th. of April
1672. attested J. Van Gent, Vt. underwritten by the Order of the same, signed
Gasp. Fagel, upon the space was impressed a Seal of their High and Mightiness
upon a red Wafer covered with a jag'd Paper.

PLACCAET, Van de Hooge Mogende Heeren Staten Generael der Vereenichde
Nederlanden, houdende scherp verboodt jegens de Ingesetenen der felver Landen;
end voorts raeckende de Navigatie end Commercie van de Neutralen op de
Havenen van Vankrijck end Engelandt; als mede de Waren van Contrebande, end
de Asseurantien van Schepen end Goederen de Subjecten van de Koningen van
Vranckeriick end van Groot Britannien toe-behoor-ende.
DE Staten Generael der Vereenigde Nederlanden, Allen den geenen die dese
jegenwoordige sullen sten often hooren leesen, Saluyt. Done te weren, Dat
nademael de Koningen van Vrankriick end van Groot Brittaunien goedt gevonden
hebben ons buyten all recht en redenen den Oorlg te verklaren en aen te done:
Wy derhalven genootsaeckt ziin geworden, naer de Wet der nature, end 't recht
der Volckeren, de Wapenen aen te nemen, so tot afgeperste teghenstant van de
voorsz vyandtlijcke proceduren, als tot redres end reparatie van de
verongelijckingen en schaden daer door onrechtvaerdeleck geleden, end dien
volgende van onser zyde mede tegens hoogstgemelte Koningen te treden in
openbare rupture. End nademael Wy ten voorsz eynde, end well voornamentlick om
so veel in Ons is, all verdere af breuck van die zyde voor te komen,
verobligeert en gehonden ziin, naer Ons bermogen, end so berre het buyten
verongelijckinge van onse Geallieerden, Vrunden end Neutralen, naer 't
Volckeren recht, geschieden kan, hoogst-ghemelte Koningen te benemen end te
verhinderen de commoditeyten end behoeften, daer mede de selve den Staet deser
Landen, end de goede Ingesetenen van dien verder af breuck soude konen done.
SO IS IT, Dat Wy goetgevonden end noodich geacht hebben, allen den geenen die
onder onse gehoorsaemheydt ziin staende, te ordonneren, end well scherpelick te
verbieden, oock in 't vrundtlick 't adverteren end te waerschouwen all andere
Natien met desen Staet in verbondt, vrundtschap often neutraliteyt staende,
gelijck Wy ordonneren, verbieden, end waerschouwen respective by desen.

I.
EErstelick, dat van nu voortaen niemant van d' Ingesetenen deser Landen hem
sal hebben te vervorderen uyt dese Landen, of oock uyt eenige andere Landen,
Koningriicken, Plaetsen often Steden te vervoeren, often transporteren,
directelick often indirectelick, na eenige Havenen, Eylanden, Steden often
Plaetsen van Vranckrijck, Engelandt, Schetlant often Yerlandt, often anderen,
onder de gehoorsaemhendt van de meer-hoogst-gem: Koningen van Vrankrijck en
Groot Brittannien staende, eenige Waren, Goederen often Koopmanscoppen, van wat
soorte, qualiteyt often nature de selve oock souden mogen wesen, geene
uytgesondert, often oock eenige correspondentie end gemeenschap met d'
Inwoonderen van Vranckriick end Engelandt voornoempt, often hare onderhoorigen,
door Brieven often andersints, streckende tot nadeel van desen Staet, te houden,
in eeniger manieren. Dat oock niemant ter Werelt, al hoe well even Vreemdelingh,
end geen Ingesetenen deser Landen zijnde, hem 't geene voorsz is, uyt dese
Landen sal hebben t'onderwinden, op poene van daer over als Vnanden van den
Staet, sonder eenige conniventie ghestraft te worden, end voorts op verbeurte
van all de Schepen end Goederen, die men bevinden sal, dat gepoocht worden
naer Vranckrijck often Engelandt voornoemt, often andere Plaetsen als vooren,
bervoert de worden, often de waerde van dien, by so verre de selve albereydts
uytgevoert, often andersints niet te bekomen sullen wesen.

II.
End nademael Wy uaer de plicht van all wettige Oderheden, als schuldigh
ziinde, hare goede Ingesetenen end Onderdanen, met all moghelicke middelen
voor gheweldt end overlast te behoeden, end te beschermen, niet en konnen
oock volgens het gemeyne recht, end de practijcque van all Volckeren, niet
gehouden zyn te ghedogen, dat de hooghstgedachte Koningen often haer Subjecten,
van yemandt ter Wereldt werden gesuppediteert soodanighe behoeften van
Materialen, daer mede de selve evidentelick soude werden ghesterckt, omme ons,
end onse goede Ingesetenen te beledigen, So willen Wy by desen allen Onse
Geallieerden, Vrunden end Neutralen, end generalick all Volckeren end
Natien gheadverteert, end well ernstigh versoeht end vermaendt hebben, haer
niet te willen vervorderen, geduyrende de jegenwoordige differenten tusschen
desen Staet end de hooghst-ghedachte Koningen van Vranckrijck end Groot
Brittannien opgeresen, te voeren often te transporteren uyt eenige Landen,
Koningrijcken, Plaetsen of Steden, directelick often indirectelick, na eenige
Havenen, Steden often Plaetsen van Vranckrijck, Engelandt, Schotlandt often
Yerlandt, often anderen, onder 't gebiedt van de meer-hooghstgemelte Coningen
staende, eenige Munitie van Oorloge, often eenige Materialen, dienende tot
uytrustinge van Schepen, hoe die genaemt, van wat soorte, qualiteyt, conditie
often nature die oock souden mogen ziin, geenige van de selve uytghesondert,
alsoo Wy ghemeynt ziin voor goeden prinse end verbeurt te houden de voorsz
Oorlogh end Scheeps-behoeften, die contrary dese onse advertentie en
ordonnantie bevonden sullen werden geladen te ziin, om derwaerts gevoert te
worden.

III.
End omme de voorsz toevoer des te beter met seeckerheydt te beletten, end
insonderheydt te voorsien, dat uyt dese Provincien, onder valsche pretexten
geen toevoer als boven van levens middelen, Oorlogh often Scheeps-behoeften en
kome te geschieden: So en sal niemandt voortaen hier te Land moghen laden,
often done schepen eenigerhande Vivres, often eenige van de voorsz behoeften,
omme na eenige Landen, Steden, often Plaetsen van de Geallieerden, Vrunden often
Neutralen van desen Staet getransporteert, often vervoert te worden, sonder daer
toe alvooren te hebben bekomen speciael consent van de Raden ter Admiraliteyt,
in welckers districte soodanige ladinge often inschepinge geschieden sal; end
boven de betalinge van s' Landts gerechtigheden, de sullen hebben gesteldt
suffisante cautie voor tweemael de waerde van de uyt te voeren Goederen, dat
die op geen andere, als op der voorschreve Vrunden Rijcken, Havenen, Steden
end Plaetsen, end geensints directelick of indirectelick, op eenige Plaetsen
van Vranckrijck, Engelandt, Schotlandt, Yerlandt, often anderen onder 't gebiedt
van de hooghst-ghemelte Coningen ziinde, sullen worden gevoert, end gelost,
end dat binnen seeckeren tijdt in het daer toe te veerleenen Pasport, na
gelegentheydt end distantie van de plaetsen, te expresseren, behoorlick end
den Rechten ghenoegh ziinde, by over te leveren Certificatien, often andere
ghenoeghsame bewysen, sullen done blijcken dat all de voorsz Vivres often
behoeften in 't geheel, ter plaetse daer op die verklaerdt end aenge geven
zijn, vervoert te sullen worden, gelost end aen Landt opgeslagen sullen wesen,
often dat by gebreecke van dien, end den voorsz ge-expresseerden tijdt
overstreecken zijnde, de Cautionaris voor de voorsz dubbelde waerde van de
uytghevoerde Vivres, often Oorlogh end Scheeps-behoeften sulcks als die ten
tide van de te stellen cautie ghetaxeert end ghewaerdeert sullen ziin,
aenstondts ge-executeert sal worden.

IV.
Ordonneren voorts allen onsen Inghesetenen end Onderdanen, adverteren end
vermanen allen onsen Geallieerden, Vrunden often Neutralen, end generalick all
Volckeren end Natien, willende varen na eenige Kijcken, Landen, Steden often
Plaetsen van desen Staet, Oost, West often Noordtwaerts gelegen, often die van
daer herwaerts aen souden willen komen, te kiesen end te houden de ruyme Zee,
alsoo Wy verstaen end verklaren by desen, dat all Schepen die op de Kusten
van Vranckrijck, Engelandt, Schotlandt, often Yerlandt, often andere Landen,
Eylanden, end Plaetsen, onder 't gebiedt van de hoogst-gemelte Koningen van
Vrankrijck end van Groot Brittannien zijnde, end voornamentlick binnen de
Bancken end ondiepten langhs de selve gelegen, gevonden sullen worden, end
die alsoo niet buyten suspitie sullen zijn van tegens dese onse Ordonnantie
end advertentie yet voor te hebben, so wanneer die in 't gheheel often ten
deele met eenige Ammunitie van Oorloge often Scheeps-behoeften geladen sullen
ziin, by de Capiteynen end andere Officieren van Oorloge, oock
Commissie-vaerders deser Landen aengheaelt, end opghesonden sullen worden,
omme daer over by de Raden ter Admiraliteyt te worden gesententieert in maniere
als in 't twede Articul hier vooren staet ghe-expresseert, ten ware nochtans de
selve Schepen aldaer ghedreven end geraeckt mochten zijn door storm, often
andere swaren noodt, end dat het selve by de opgemelte Raden ter Admiraliteyt
uyt de circumstantien, in dier voegen opgenomen, end geoordeelt sal konnen
worden.

V.
En om wyders te beter all bedrog, 't welk tegens dese Ordonnantie end
advertentie voorgenomen soude mogen worden, voor te komen, end te verhoeden;
Belasten end beveelen Wy midts desen all Schippers end Koopluyden,
Inghesetenen deser Landen zijnde, often hunne Schepen end Goederen uyt dese
Landen uytvoerende; adverteren end vermanen voorts all anderen, van wat Natie
die oock zijn, often van waer die komen sullen, egeene Goederen, Waren often
Koopmanschappen in hare Schepen te laden, often te done laden, de selve te
vervoeren, often done vervoeren, anders dan met eenderhande Zee-brieven,
gehoorliicke Pasporten, volkomen Certe-portyen, Cognossementen, Vracht, Advis
end Convoy-brieven, often diergelijcke andere bescheyden, als na de Wetten end
Placcaten van de Plaetsen daer de Goederen, Waren end Coopmanschappen,
ingeladen sullen zijn, tot der selver inladinghe end vervoeringhe worden
gerequiereert, alsoo wy voor verbeurf sullen houden, end van nu af aen voor
goeden prinse verklaren all de Schepen, midtsgaders d'ingeladen Goederen,
Waren end Coopmanschappen, daer van dat mere als even Zee-brief, Certe party,
dobbele Vrachtbrieven, Cognoscementen, of andere bescheyden ghevonden sullen
worden, midtsgaders oock all de Schepen end Goederen die met de
voor-verhaelde gerequiererde bescheyden niet ua behooren versten sullen wesen.

VI
Ten eynde oock all de Officieren end Bevelhebberen van Schepen van Oorloge,
so van den Staet, als van particulieren op onse bestellinge uytgerust,
verseeckert mogen zijn, dat de Schepen die sy in Zee sullen komen te
rencontreren, op gene der voorsz Havenen, Steden end Plaetsen van Vranckriick,
Engelandt, Schotlandt end Yrelandt, often anderen onder 't ghebiedt van de
hooghst-gemelte Coninghen van Vranckrijck end van Groot Brittannien staende,
met eenige Ammunitie van Oorloge often Scheeps-behoeften, mogen hebben gemunt,
So sullen de voornoemde Capiteynen in Zee all Schepen, daer op eenige
suspitie sal vallen, mogen aendoen, end de selve afvorderen hare Zee-brieven,
Passeporten, Certe-partyen end Cognoscementen, tot blijck waer het Schip soude
mogen t'huys behooren, waer, end op wat plaetse de ladinge zy geschiet, waer
in des selfs ladinge bestaet, end op wat plaetse de ontladinge sal hebben te
ghestchieden, welcke aen haer vertoont ziinde, end bevonden wesende, dat de
voorsz Schepen met geeve Oorlogh often Scheeps behoeften naer eenige Havenen of
Plaetsen onder 't gebiedt van de hooghst gemelte Coningen van Vranckrijck end
van Groot Brittannien zijnde, hebben gemunt, sullen sy de selve vry end
onverhindert lateen passeren, maer so het contrary van dien by de selve
bescheyden, often andersints mochte worden bevonden, so sullen sy de soodanige
Scheppen, met hare ingeladene Goederen, in goede verseeckeringe hebben op te
brengen, end on der haer bewaringe t'aenvaerden all de bescheyden, die in de
selve Schepen gevonden, end aen haer vertoont sullen zijn, oock 't geen de
Schipper end 't vorder Scheeps Volck, so ten reguarde van haer voorbebbende
reyse, als oock aengaende de gelegentheydt van't Schip end ladinge, te dier
tijdt sullen hebben verklaerdt in de best form by gescrifte done stellen,
end by den Schipper done onderteeckenen, omme nevens de voorsz ghevonden
bescheyden, met het Schip, end des selfs ladinge, aen de Raden ter
Admiraliteyt daer den Veroberaer uytgevaren sal zjin, opgesonden end
overgelevert te worden.

VII.
Vorders is mede onse meyninge, dat oock all de poenen bier vooren
gestatueert, effect forteren end ge-executeert worden sullen, tegens onse
Ingesetenen, Overtreders, 'te zy Koopluyden, Schippers often andere, wiede selve
oock souden mogen wesen, met confiscatie van de Schephen, en van de ingeladen
Goederen, often even gedeelte van dien an voeghen hier vooren verhaeldt, often an,
dersints so de selve niet voor hauden sullen zijn, met pecuniele boeten, ter
concurrentie van de waerde van dien, elcx in hun reguard, in ghevalle t'haerder
aenkomste in dese Landen, often oock andersints de ^^elegentheydt daer toe
gebooren zijnde, sal vernomen end bewesen werden, dat sy dese onse advertentie
end Ordonnantie in eenige poincten sullen hebben gecontravenieert, even
geliick of sy op 't feyt behonden, end by de voorsz Schepen van Oorloge daer
over uytter Zee opgebracht, of andersints hier te Land by andere 's Landts
Officieren achterhaelt end betrapt waren geworden.

VIII.
End ten eynde door d'executie van dese onse Ordonnantie end advertentie
geene rech^veerdige redenen van klachten mogen werden gegeven aen eenige
Coningen, Republijcquen, Princen, Potentaten often Steden, met desen Staer in
Alliantie often Verbondt staende, so belasten end beveelen Wy well expresselick
by desen all onse Hooften end andere Officieren ter Zee, so over Schepen van
Oorloge van den Staet, als over Schepen by particulieren op onser bestellinge
ten Oorlog uytgerust, gesteldt, haer punctuelick te reguleren naer de Verbonden
end Tractaten by ons desen aengaende met andere Koningen, Republijcquen,
Princen, Potentaten end Steden albereydts gemaeckt, often noch te maecken.
Ordonnerende ten selven eynde onse Raden ter Admiraliteyt, all Capiteynen van
Oorloge, uyt hare respective districten uytvarende, daer van particulierlick te
adverteren, end to instrueren, als naer behooren.

IX.
End salde judicature over de transgressie deser onser Ordonnante toekomen de
Raden ter Admiraliteyt, in welckers districte de contraventien sullen worden
overdeckt, of well de Capiteynen die d'acterhalinge in Zee sullen komen te done,
uyt-gevaren sullen zijn.

X.
Doch by so verre de voorsz Transgresseurs niet op het feyt bevonden, maer
naemaels daer over geaccuseert mochten worden sal als dan de kennisse daer af
toekomen de Raden van de Admiraliteyt, often ordinaris Rechters, voor den welken
de selve eerst in recht betrocken sullen worden. End en eynde all de
Officieren midtsgaders allen anderen die den welstandt van desen Staet ter
heart soude mogen gaen, en Vyanden van de socdanige contraventien ziin, des te
blytiger mogen letten, dat dese Ordannantie oock alomme, end vy even yeder
punctuelick word geobserveert end de Contraventeurs na den inhouden deser,
andere ten exemple gestraft, So sullen all de peninghen, die by confiscatie,
als andersints, uyt dese onse Ordonnantie komen te resulteren geappliceert
werden, so als gewconlick all penen, mulcten end confiscatien, by Placcaten
vande respective Provintien deser Vereenighde Nederlanden, geappliceert end
verdeylt werden, te weten* even derde part ten profijite van den Aenhoelder often
Aenbrenger, 'tzy de selve in eedt end bedieninge van 't Landt soude mogen
zijn, oste niet, even derde^part ten profijte van den Officier die de calangie
end executie sal hebben gedaen, end het resterende dehde-part ten profijte
van de gemeene saecke.

XI.
Maer belangende de Schepen end Goederen, die by eenige Schepen van Oorloge
van desen Staet, often van eenighe particuliere Commissie-ofte
Retorsie-vaerders, in Zee achterhaelt end van daer, ter saecke van contr
ventien teghens dese onse Ordonnontie end advertentie begaen, opgebracht, end
vervolgens door de ghemelte Raden ter Admiraliteyt verbeurt, en van goeden
prinse vertklaert sullen worden, daer van sal de ver deylinge geschieden,
volgens d' Instructien, Placcaten end Oordonnantien daer van hier bevoorens
gemaeckt, oftenoch te macchen.

XII.
Ten eynde oock all Schepen end Goederen, die ter oorsaecke van de
contraventien tegens dese onse Ordonnantien end advertentie begaen sullen
werden, achterhaelt, aenghehouden, end hier te Land oyghebracht aen handen
van de gemelte Raden behoorlick overgelevert mogen werden, so lasten wy by
desen well expresselick, dat de Aenhaeldees van de selve sich precise sullen
hebben te reguleren, oock all die het selve aengaen mochte, done reguleren na
onsen Placcate op den eersten December 1640. tegens het onordentelick plonderen
end veroveren van soodanige Schepen ge-emaneerr, met waerscouwinge, dat de
poenen by het voorsz Placcaet gestatueert, severliick sullen werden
ge-executeert, tegens all de geene die contrary het voorsz Verbodt yets
geattenteert sullen hebben.

XIII.
End ten eynde aen de eene zyde match worden voorgekomen, dat de schade die by
confiscatie van de voorsz Schepen end Goederen op de Contraventeurs van dese
onse Ordonnantie moet vallen, niet door middel van asseurantie en kome te
redunderen, tot schade van eenige andere Ingesetenen deser Provintien, end dat
aen de ander zyde de faculteyt van de Fransche end Engelsche Navigatie end
Commercie, so veel doenlick werde besnoeyt. SO IS IT, Dat wy well expresselick
ordonneren by desen, niet alleen dat sich niemandt van de Inghesetenen
voornoemt en sal hebben te bevorderen eenighe Goederen often Schepen de
Subjecten van de hooghst gemelte Koningen van Vrankrijck end van Groot
Brittannien toe behoorende, nochte oock eenige Schepen end Goederen gaende,
often bevracht naer eenige Havenen, Sieden often Plaetsen van Vrankhijck end
Gogelandt, Scotlandt, Yerlandt often anderen, onder 't gehiedt van de hoogst
gemelte Koningen staende often oock van de felve Havenen, Steden often Plaetsen
komende te verasseureren, directelick often indirectelick, selver of door
yemandt anders higher te Land, of daer buyten, op wat maniere het selve oock
soude mogen geschieden, nemaer oock het geven end ontfangen van renversalen,
om daer door desen onsen Placcate illusoir te maecken, 't zy mede directelick
of indirectelick, onder wat pretext sulcx oock soude moghen geschieden, op pene
dat verbeurt sal ziin, end werden soodanighe sum, als by de Asseuradeurs sal
wesen verseeckert, end dat 't selve so well ten reguarde van 't deen van de
asse^rantie als van t'geven van renversalen plaetse hebben, en effect sorteren
sal, 't appliceren end te executeren als vooren. End sullen d'Officieren die
daer inn bevonden sullen worden naelatich geweest te zijn, daer over
arbitralick werden gecorigeert, oock met privatie van haer bedieningen, of
anders, so als nae gelegentheydt bevonden sal worden te behooren.

End ten eynde niemant hier van eenige ignorantia ^emaels kome te pretenderen,
Ontbieden end verloecken wy de Heeren Staten, Gecommitteerde Raden, end
Gedeputeer de Staten van de Provincien respective van Gelder andt end 't
Graefschap Zutphen, Holandt end West-Viseslandt, Zeelandt, Vtrecht, Vtse^land,
Over-Yssel, mitigader Stadt Groningen end Ommelanden, end allen anderen
Iusticieren end Officieren van de selve, dat sy dese onse Ordonnantie van
stouden aen alomme done verkondigen, publicar^^: end affigeren in allen
plaetsen daer suix nodich w^sen sal, end men gewoon is soodanighe publicatie
end affixie te done. Lasten end beveelan vooirs da Raden ter Admiraliteyt, de
Advocaten ^scaels, mit^gaders Admiraels, Vice-Admiraels, Capiteynen Offcieren
en B^velhebbe ren, als mede de Commissarisen en Commisen ter recharche, so in
de Zeegaten als ^wers, dese onse Ordonn^ntie te achten volgen, end done
achtervolgen prrcederende end doende procederen regens de Contraventeurs van
dien, sonder ^ooghsuychinge, ^av^ur, dissimulatie often verdrach, want wy sulx
alsoo tem^diencte van den Land bevonden hebben noodigh te zijn. Aldus gedaen,
geatresteert gerenoveert en geampiteert ter Vergaderinge van de hoogh-gemelts
Staten Generael. In den Hage den veertienden April 1672. Was geparapheert, J.
van Gent, Vt. Onderslondt. Ter Ordonnantie van de selve. Geteeckent, Gasp.
Fagel. Zijnde on it spatium gedruckt het Cacht van ha^^ Ho. Mog. oppeen rooden
Owel, overdeckt met even Papieren Rupte.

In the Hague Printed by Jacobus Scheltus Printer to the High and Mighty Lords
the States General, dwelling in the Inner Hoff, Anno 1672.

IN s' GRAVENHAGE, By Jacobus Scheltus, Drucker van de Hoogh Mog. Heeren Staten
Generael, woonende op het Binnen-Hoff. Anno 1672.


