REFLECTIONS ON TWO DISCOURSES CONCERNING The Divinity of our Savior: Written
by Monsieur LAMOTH in French, and done into English.

Written to J. S.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCIII.

REFLECTIONS on two Discourses concerning the Divinity of our Savior, etc.
AMong our other Opposers, we are at length attacked by the Preachers; and
Monsieur Lamoth, an eminent Demagogue of the French Nation, has published two
of his late Declamations against us.

I know not whether he was chosen to, or put himself upon the Employment; but I
will allow, that a more fit Person cannot be readily found for the Work by him
undertaken. He has Art and Address enough; and such a Degree of Confidence, as
to be above both Shame and Fear. If he had either of those, in any Degree, left
to him, he would never have said as he does at page 15, 16, 17, 34. that the
Apostle Paul had not common Sense, nor any tolerable Degree of Understanding,
nay was a Madman, and the rest of the Apostles were Blasphemers; if we do not
grant that the Doctrines of the Trinity and of the Divinity of our Savior, as
they are now held, are true. Concerning all the Writers of the New Testament,
he pronounces at once, as here follows; I make no Difficulty (says he, p.
33.) to assert, they have deceived us most shamefully, and their Writings are
no better than continual Blasphemies, if Christ be not true God. As to the
Christian Religion, he says at p. 18. It has nothing in it that is great and
sublime, if you take from it the Divinity of Jesus Christ.

It Is not to be doubted, that in his next he will tell us, our Savior himself
was an Impostor, to speak of himself as he did, if he were the Great Prophet
only. But in the mean time, I shall tell him, that it is ill manners, nay it is
unchristian and impious, to set the Persons of the Apostles, and the Holy
Scriptures themselves, on the same Level with the litigated controverted, ( and
therefore) doubtful and uncertain Doctrines, of this or the other Party of
Christians; so that both must stand or fall together: for it is to equal in
their Authority our private Interpretations of the Word, with the Word it self.
The latter will have its true Value allowed to it, by all wise and good Men,
while the other (private Interpretations or Opinions) shall even among such,
undergo various Changes, be believed in some Ages, and rejected in others;
which (all learned Men know) has been the Fortune of the Doctrines, in Debate
between us and the Church.

But Monsieur Lamoth is heartily troubled; that, if you take away the Divinity
of our Savior, we shall find our Religion to contain nothing that is GREAT or
SVBLIME, p. 18. The Socinians, on the contrary, judge, that the Design of
Religion being (confessedly) this, to direct our Conversation and Manners, it is
no Matter how plain and obvious it is; and that it being intended for the
Unlearned and Vulgar, as well as for others, there was a Necessity, it should
neither be sublime nor great. We are well satisfied with the Character that
Moses and St. Paul give of Religion; It Is not in Heaven, or beyond the Sea, or
in the Deep, (as who should say, it is neither sublime nor mysterious) but it is
in thy Mouth and Heart, that thou may do it. As if he had said, It Is an easy
intelligible thing, congennit and connate to every Man; that none may say 'twas
sublime, and he understood it not, 'twas great, and he could not grasp it. This
is the Description that Moses makes of true Religion, Deuteronomy. 30. 12. And St.
Paul repeating his Words, applies them to the Gospel, This is the Word of Faith
(says he) that we preach, Romans 10. 8. But Mr. Lamoth and his Party are not for
such a Religion, they must have a Religion that is great and sublime; and
accordingly they have contrived to themselves such a Religion, a Religion of
which they not only say, but profess and boast, that it is above and beyond all
Reason.

You require of me, Sir, that I should examine the Defense that Monsieur Lamoth
has made of the great and sublime Religion; I will do so in the following
Method:

1. I will make short Remarks on the General Arguments dispersed up and down in
his two Discourses, as his Translator has complemented him, though he should
have said his two Declamations.

2. I will give an Account of the Texts, which (whether they will or no) he
has impressed to serve his Cause.

On his general Arguments.
I Omit that he is pleased to call us, p. 52, 55, 62, 63. Enemies of Jesus, the
Profane, Innovators, Adversaries of the Lord Jesus, near Neighbors to
Irreligion: for these are Complements that some Preachers readily bestow on as
many as differ from them. Though again, when he is in the Mood, (as at p. 62.)
he confesses, that we seem to be innocent Lambs: and that in our Writings are
found glittering Notions, and ingenious Explications. We will not thank him for
the Acknowledgments which Truth it self has extorted from him; nor will I
resent much his ill Language to us: but I will endeavor to treat him, though
somewhat sharply, yet in a more Gentleman-like way.

He says, p. 52, 53, 54. By denying the Divinity of our Savior we make the
Bible the strangest Book in the World. -- The Old Testament will scarcely have
the least Agreement with the New; we find nothing but Thwartings and
Contradictions between them. -- This once supposed ( viz. that Christ is not
the most High God) it is evident, that Christ came not to fulfill the Law and
Prophets, but utterly to confound and destroy them. Let us speak only of the
New Testament: -- What a Book shall we have of it, if Jesus Christ be not God?
-- The New Testament is full of ancient Oracles ( he means of Quotations out
of the Old Testament) to the Honor of the Living God: but it is as clear as the
Noonday, that the Applications that the Apostles make of them are mere
childish Triflings and Blasphemies, if our Savior by one of his Natures be not
the Living God.

Afterward, at p. 53, 54. he proceeds to tell us, how the Holy Ghost ought
(says he) to have spoken, if Jesus Christ be not God. For if he is God, the
Holy Spirit (according to this Author) has been as faulty and as blasphemous as
the very new Testament and the Apostles are. Let us hear what he says; Why,
say the Socinians, might not the Holy Ghost speak magnificently of that
Redeemer, to whom we are so vastly obliged, and whom Providence has raised to
such a Degree of Glory? For that Reason say I ( I Monsieur C. G. Lamoth) the
Holy Ghost ought to have spoke with more Reservedness of the Glory of Christ.
The greater he is, the more is the Danger of his being taken for God; his very
Greatness makes us the more stand in need of Preservatives. -- If he had not
been God, the Excess of our Obligations to him should have obliged the Holy
Ghost not to speak of him: Or at least, seeing it was not possible to teach his
Doctrine without speaking of his Person, to make use of such Expressions as
might make it evident, that he is not God. It was necessary, in most express
Terms, and on several Occasions, to tell Men, this Jesus, whom you worship, is
not God for all that. -- Neither can any thing be said in the Case, ( he
means, that the Holy Ghost has not spoke as Mr. Lamoth here directs) but only
this, that the Holy Ghost was willing to deceive us.

Hold, Jehu; lest instead of hearing that thou drivest furiously; they call to
thee, that thou drivest madly. Declamations did I call these Sermons; they are
Debacchations: For I will affirm, that no Example or Instance can be given of a
bold and heady Writer, who hitherto ever durst exalt his Opinion, or the
Opinion of his Party, above the Apostles, the Scriptures, and the Holy Ghost it
self; so that if the former were not allowed or supposed to be true, the other
must be mere Blasphemies, Blasphemers and Fools.

If the hundred and fifty Sects, or more, into which Christianity is divided,
should all fall to scribbling, and should be as extravagant in their Imputations
on the Bible, as this Frenchman has dared to be, what would become of the
Christian Religion? It would be turned into Ridicule, by all that heard us,
magnifying so much our own Glosses, Interpretations or Opinions, and regarding
the Text it self, and the Authors of it so little.

Our present Author's Book is vouched or licensed by two French Ministers, who
tell us, that being appointed by the rest of their Brethren to read it, they
find it entirely conformable to the constant Doctrine of the French
Protestants. I will not believe them, though they gave it upon Oath; for it
never was the Doctrine of the French Protestants, nor of any Protestants, no
nor of any Christian, that if their Creed be not true, the Apostles were
Madmen, the Scriptures Blasphemies, and the Holy Ghost knew not how to speak
as he ought; which are Words often repeated by Mr. Lamoth.

But you will say, Sir, but Mr. Lamoth has perhaps some particular and especial
Grounds for his unusual Confidence; he has advanced something that is wholly
new, and very forcible, in behalf of the Doctrines of the Trinity, and our
Savior's Divinity. Nothing less, I assure you; you may meet with as much in
every Catechism, and with much more in every little System: I mean, setting
aside his gaudy Flourishes and childish Exaggerations upon mere Nothings; his
Exclamations, and other Schemes of Schoolboys and Preachers Rhetoric, with
which the World has been so long tired, as to nauseate them. But this you will
better see when we come to the Examination of his Texts.

2. To his own ridiculous Confidence of his Opinion, he adds as a farther
Strength to it, some (impertinent) Quotations out of the Fathers, particularly
from Tertullian and Gregory, surnamed Thaumaturgus. He says farther at p. 61.
that the Doctrine he has asserted in these Sermons is the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church. And at p. 162. that Christians have been in possession of it
above these sixteen Centuries. I suspected all along what an observant Reader
of Fathers and Church History Mr. Lamoth is; but here he himself has showed us,
he considers not so much, as how many Years he is to reckon, from this present
Year to our Savior. Why, Man, the Socinians will give to thee and thy Fellow
Tritheists the whole 16 Centuries which thou here insistest on, and are content
with the seventeenth, of which (it should seem) thou know nothing. The
Century of our Savior and the Apostles, the seventeenth from us, is to us
instead of all the rest; and in the Opinion of all true Protestants that alone
is worth more than all the rest, if they were never so many Sixteens more. But
we are ready to contest it in the Presence of all the learned World, from the
(genuine) Writings of the Fathers before the Nicene Council, that the Doctrine
of the present Church, of three equal, consubstantial and coeternal Persons,
now called the Trinity, was expressly rejected by them; that is to say, as
consubstantial, coeternal and coequal, are now understood by the Church, and
opposed by the Unitarians.

Trinitarians boast in vain of the (pretended) Consent of the ancient Church
with them, till they can answer the first Dissertation the (...) or Quaternio
of Dissertations, written by S. Curcellaeus against S. Maresius, concerning the
Judgment of the Fathers and the Primitive Church, in the Questions of the
Divinity of our Savior, the Words Trinity, Consubstantial, etc. Neither
Maresiu^* though an able and learned Person, nor any for him, have offered to
reply; and the more learned of the Trinitarians, among the rest D. Petavi^s,
and the learned and exact Dr. Cudworth, have owned the Dissent of the ancient
Church from the present, about the Sense of the Words Consubstantial,
Coeternal, and Coequal, in which the whole Controversy concerning the Trinity
does consist.

3. From p. 55 to p. 61. he considers the Difficulties advanced by the
Socinians (or Unitarians) on behalf of the Unity of God, and against the
(imagined) Divinity of our Savior; he learnedly distinguishes them into
Heart-Difficulties, Wit-Difficulties, and Scripture-Difficulties:
Heart-Difficulties being a new sort of Cant, he explains by saying, p. 55, 56.
that such is the Temper the Heart of Man has received from the Impressions of
Sin, that whatsoever comes from Heaven is suspected, though indeed there be no
other Reason to suspect it, but that it comes from Heaven. And again, Heaven
says it, this is sufficient for Man to doubt, deny it, contradict it.

This is a Slander upon humane Nature; it is inconsistent with our rational
Faculty or Power of Reasoning; and the Experience of Mankind contradicts it.
For every Body knows that the general Fault of the World is not Unbelief, but
Inconsideration, and an Omission or Neglect of Duty from a vain Hope and
Expectance that we have yet time enough and to spare, in which to amend all
Faults, and make our Peace with Heaven. But if Mr. Lamoth is indeed acquainted
with any, who therefore will not believe, because Heaven has said it, as he
affirms; my Advice to him is, to let those resolute People alone, for if they
will not believe Heaven, they will much less believe him.

But as to all these Difficulties (the Heart-difficulties, Wit-difficulties,
and Scripture-difficulties) which he has pursued in diverse Pages, he has
represented them so meanly, as well as answered them so weakly, that the
Socinians own them not for theirs. We define the Reader to inform himself of
the Diffi^^^^ or Arguments advanced by the Socinians, not from Mr. Lamoth, but
from our own Writings, that is to say, from the Brief Notes on the Creed of
Athanasius; the first Letter in the brief History of the Unitarians; the Letter
of Resolution concerning the Trinity and Incarnation; the Trinitarian Scheme,
with Notes thereupon; the Answers to Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Wallis, and Mr.
Milbourn. In which Pamphlets he will see enough to furnish him out against a
much abler Sophister than Monsieur Lamoth.

His last General Argument against us is this, that we cannot endeavor the
Propagation of our Opinions wichout troubling the Peace of Men's Consciences,
and setting Christians together by the Ears. They own us, says he, to be in a
State of Salvation, and that we have retained all the Fundamental and saving
Points of Christianity; where therefore is the Charity of these rash Persons,
to shake a Doctrine which cannot be attacked with any Success, without filling
the Consciences of Men with Trouble, and shedding whole Torrents of Christian
Blood? Such a Design as this cannot be the Effect of any thing but Pride: they
have a Mind to distinguish themselves by the Novelty of their Opinions, and to
advance their own Glory, by abating that of Jesus Christ. This is the Sum of
what he says, p. 62, 63.

He is the unhappiest Man alive at arguing a Point, whether great or small. Let
us suppose it to be as he says, that Trinitarians have retained all the
Fundamental Points of Christianity; must we not therefore open our Mouths in
Defense of so sacred a Truth as the Unity of God? The Papists have retained all
the Fundamental Points of Christianity, in opinion of all Protestants but the
Socinians; their Fault and Error is only this, that they have added abundance
of Wood, Hay and Stubble, to the Gold, Silver and precious Stones: Shall I say
hereupon with this Author, where therefore was the Charity of those rash
Persons, the Authors of the French Reformation, to fill the Consciences of Men
with Trouble, and hazard the shedding (nay actually to shed, as they did) whole
Torrents of Christian Blood? He says, p. 62. Nothing can warrant the Attempts
of the Socinians, if the Doctrine which Trinitarians teach and believe is
consistent with Salvation. Then say I, what shall excuse the first Reformers,
Luther and Calvin, for Protestants believe Popery to be consistent with
Salvation? and I do not think that this bold Man himself will say, all Papists
are damned.

But I desire to know of him, why Torrents of Christian Blood must be shed, on
Occasion of the Socinians peaceable Declaration of the Reasons which convince
them of the Unity of God, and their modest Defense of themselves, from the
Imputations of being Innovators, Enemies of the Lord Jesus, near Neighbors to
absolute Irreligion; and such like barbarous and inhumane Scandals? He does not
think the Socinians will shed his Blood, or any Man's else. He owns, p. 62.
that we (at least) seem to be innocent Lambs; nay our Principles and Carriage
have wrested also this from him: I am willing (says he) to believe, that they
cherish nothing of the Spirit of Persecution. What Danger then is there, that
Torrents of Christian Blood should be shed? The Truth is, were it not for the
Preachers, there never had any Blood been shed, by occasion of the Questions
and Disputes about Religion* Matters had been fairly reasoned, and we should
have thanked one another for the Light and Information we received from one
another, were it not that the Preachers by their importune Clamours have always
set one Part of the Christian Flock against the other: They have been nothing
less, for the Generality of them, than their Office requires, even Preachers of
mutual Candor, Charity, Forbearance, Love, ingenuous Freedom of Mind, against
the unhappy Biasses of Education, Prepossession, Interest, and other
Adversaries, to the Discovery of Truth, whether Religious or Philosophical.

It can be nothing, he says, but our Pride, and a Desire to advance our own
Glory by the Novelty of our Opinions, that occasions our Dissent from other
Christians. Nay so wicked are we, as well as vain, that to exalt our selves we
care not how we abuse Jesus Christ, whom we confess to be our Redeemer and
Savior: But Mr. Lamoth should have been very sure of it before he proclaimed
to all People, that we honor our selves more than we honor Jesus Christ, nay
to the Dishonor of Jesus Christ; and that our Bottom is nothing but Pride.
It Is nothing, it should seem with him, that we have this Charge given to us in
the very first Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; no other,
whether they be real Persons, or only imaginary and fictitious ones. It Is
nothing that our Savior says to the young Man whom he loved, Why call thou
me Good, there is none good save one, that is God. Nothing that St. Paul tells
all Christians; there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Jesus Christ. Nothing that an Almighty Father, an Almighty Son, and an Almighty
Spirit, different in Number from both, can no more be conceived to be one
Almighty, than a mortal Father, a mortal Son, and a third Person who also is
mortal, can be conceived to be but one Mortal, not three Mortals. If you
require Scripture, we bring the express Words of our Savior, at John 17. 3.
the Father (says he there) is the only true God. If you demand Reason, we
demonstrate it with more than mathematical Certainty, that three Divine Persons
must needs be three Gods, because three Divine Persons is nothing else but the
Periphrasis or Circumlocution for three Gods, even as three humane Persons and
three angelical Persons are the Circumlocutions or Periphrases for three Men
and three Angels. Mr. Lamoth's Answer is, that all this (and an hundred times
more) is nothing. It Is true indeed, that the Sun cannot shine so brightly as to
force it self to be seen; for after all, it is but shutting ones Eyes, and the
Sun shines in vain.

He urges us with it, that we grant that Trinitarians have retained all the
Fundamental Articles of Religion. Who grants it? First, they themselves own,
that if they are mistaken, they are Idolaters; they are conscious, nay they
profess and dispute for it, that they are guilty of Polytheism, if there be no
such Persons as they have imagined, even an eternal Son of God, and an Almighty
and Living Spirit, different in Number from that Son, and from God the Father
of all.

But the Socinians grant it: I cannot answer for every particular Writer of the
Socinians; for my own part, I shall never grant that the Unity of God, or but
one Divine Person, is not a Fundamental Article. My Reason is this; it is
confessed on all sides, that both the Covenants (the Old as well as the New) is
between the one true God, on the one part, and his Servant Man on the other:
but if so, the Covenant is utterly dissolved on our Part, if besides this one
true God with whom we are in Covenant, we set up, and equal also with him,
another Person or Persons, whether real or imaginary ones: I mean such as
knowingly do so, and worship accordingly. As the Covenant of Allegiance and
Protection (Allegiance on the Part of the People, and Protection on the Part of
the King) is broken on the Peoples Part, if they set up or own any other Person
as King, besides him who of Right is so. But come we now to the true Strength
of his Book, the Texts that he has alleged.

On his first Proposition from the Words of his Text.
HE chooses for his Subject or Text the Words of St. Paul, Phil. 6. 7. Who
being in the Form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, but made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made
in the Likeness of Men. He says these Words present us with three Propositions.

1. That Jesus Christ was before he was in the Form of Man. 2. That he was in
the Form of God before he was in the Form of Man. 3. That he thought it not
Robbery to be equal with his heavenly Father.
The first of these, that Jesus was before he was in the Form of Man, he
proves thus: The Text says, that being in the Form of God, he humbled himself;
or as it is in the Original, he emptied himself. But what Sense shall we make of
the Words, says he, if it be not true, that our Savior before his Birth of
the Blessed Virgin, was in a more glorious State than was that State upon which
he entered at his Nativity?

It Is an Impiety that runs through our Author's whole Book, that the Scriptures
have not spoken Sense, if they do not always mean as he would have them. I
pray, Sir, see the seventh Chapter of the Answer to Mr. Milbourn, and then tell
me, whether the Socinians have not made Sense of St. Paul's Words, without
supposing (as Trinitarians here do) that Paul advances another, or a second
God! It is shown there, that to be in the Form of God, is common to our Savior
with all other Men: all Men (say the Scriptures) are made in the Similitude,
Form or Likeness of God, Jam. 3. 9. But our Blessed Savior was more in the
Form or Likeness of God than any other Man or Men, because he had a more
perfect Holiness, and a miraculous Power and Authority over the Devils,
Diseases, the Sea, the Winds, for the Confirmation of that Doctrine which he
was to deliver to Men in the Name of God.

Our English Translation adds, he thought it not Robbery to be equal with God.
But it is now known even to Schoolboys, that the Greek Words should have been
rendered to a just contrary Purpose: their Lexicon upon the Greek Testament
(made by the industrious and learned G. Pasor) teaches them to read here, Non
rapuit aequalitatem cum Deo; he assumed not to himself to be equal with God. So
that the Sense is, though the Lord Christ was in a greater Likeness to God than
ever any other Creature was, yet he was far from imitating the Pride and
Ambition of Lucifer, he took not on him to be equal with God; but on the
contrary, he took on him the Form of a Servant, that is, to set us an Example
of Humility and mutual Toleration, he submitted to Reproach, and even to Blows,
without reviling again, or other ways avenging himself on those that wronged
him.

Every one knows what Great Erasmus has said upon this Text, that though the
Fathers were wont to urge it against the Arians, to prove that the Son is God
equal with the Father; yet the Apostle, says he, had no such Intention.
Therefore he approves the Explication of St. Ambrose, Non defendit sibi
aequalitatem; Christ did not defend himself to be equal with God. M. Luther,
the first Reformer ( lib. de duplici just.) admonishes his Reader, that we must
not understand this Text affirmatively, but negatively; not as saying that
Christ made himself equal with God, but as denying that he is equal with God;
which I mention only that the less learned Reader may know, that besides the
Socinians, some of the principal Interpreters and Critics, among our Opposers
themselves, have been aware, that this is not a Context to be insisted on, as a
Proof of our Savior's Divinity.

Our Translation goes on; and took on him the Form of a Servant, and was made
in the Likeness of Men. I could never yet see any Greek Testament that so reads
the Words; and I dare affirm that no Greek Copy, whether Printed or Manuscript,
so reads. All the Original Copies (with one Consent) read thus; But made
himself of no Reputation, taking the Form of a Servant: being made in the
Likeness of Men, and found in fashion as a Man, (that is, being a Man like to
all other Men; so the Trinitarian Interpreters themselves understand the Words)
he humbled himself, and became obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross;
i. e. he submitted to the unjust Powers that then were, and cheerfully
underwent Death, even the painful and ignominious Death of the Cross. This, all
learned Men know and own, is the true Reading of this Text; and it blows away
at once all the little Devices that Monsieur Lamoth uses to pervert its plain
and obvious meaning.

But in pursuance of this first Proposition from his Text, that Christ was
before he was made Man, he urges diverse other Texts, nine in all.

1. He says, that Jesus Christ declares, that he was come down from Heaven,
and that he was in Heaven, before ever he ascended thither. We answer, Mr.
Lamoth makes use of a peculiar Bible of his own; he will never be able to show
us such a Text in any Bible but that which is in his private Custody.

2. John the Baptist says, John 1. 30. After me comes a Man who is preferred
before me, for he was before me. We answer with his learned Countryman Th.
Beza, the Lord Christ was preferred before John, because though he was after
John in Time, yet he was before him in Merit and Dignity.

3. But St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of
them (the Israelites in the Wilderness) tempted, and were destroyed of
Serpents. This Text were indeed to the Purpose of our Savior's Pre-existence,
if it had been said here, that the Israelites in the Wilderness tempted (i. e.
murmured against) Christ. But this is not said; and it is certain they tempted
God, not the Lord Christ.

4. It is said of Moses, Heb. 11. 26. He preferred the Reproach of Christ
before the Treasures of Egypt. We answer, with almost all the Commentators on
the Scriptures; the Israelites were reproached by their Oppressors the
Egyptians, with their Hopes of a Savior, or Messiah, or Christ; but Moses
preferred this Reproach, as the Egyptians counted it, before all the Treasures
of Egypt.

5. Our Savior again says, John 8. 58. Before Abraham was I am. It is to be
understood as when it is said of the same our Lord Christ, Rev. 13. 8. The Lamb
who was slain from the Beginning of the World. Christ was, and was slain before
Abraham, and before the Foundation of the World, not actually, but in the
Ordination and Decree of God. Accordingly St. Peter says of him, 1 Pet. 1. 20.
Who verily was foreordained (not only before Abraham, but) before the
Foundation of the World, but was manifest in these last Days.

6. We are assured by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 19. Jesus Christ preached to the
Spirits that were disobedient in the Time of Noah. Here again he makes use of
his own private Bible; when he puts the Text in the Words of the known and
authentic Bibles, we will give him an Account of it. In the mean time he may
see it explained, and the Explication warranted by the Authority of thirty
Fathers, in the fourth Letter of the Brief History of the Unitarians.

7. It Is affirmed by the Evangelist John, chapter 1. 1. In the Beginning was the
WORD. We answer, In the Beginning of the Gospel-State Christ was.

8. The same Evangelist says, John 1. 3. All things were made by him (by the
WORD) and without him was not any thing made, that was made. We grant it, in
that Sense in which only it is consistent and reconcilable with those
innumerable Texts which assure us, that only God was the Maker of the first or
old Creation. But St. John speaks here of the new Creation, or the
Gospel-Oeconomy and State, that new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness. This Creation was begun by the Ministry, and perfected by the
Directions of the Lord Christ; who has made all things new, by abolishing
Judaism and Paganism, Ceremony and Idolatry, and introducing in their room
moral Righteousness, and the Knowledge of the one true God. All these (great)
things were made by him, (or as the Original may be rendered, done by him) and
without him was nothing done that was done. But of this I have spoken fully,
and I hope satisfactorily and effectually, with respect to considering Men, at
Chap. 3. of the Answer to Mr. Milbourn.

9. He finds too the Pre-eternity of our Savior, even in the Proverbs of
Solomon, who introduces Wisdom as saying, When there were no Depths, -- before
the Mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought forth, Prove. 8. 24,
25. It falls out here somewhat unluckily, for our Author, and such learned and
judicious Interpreters as he is, that if this Wisdom must needs be (not a
Quality or Property, but) a real and a divine Person, she was a Goddess, not a
God. For it is undeniable that Solomon speaks of her as a Female: She begins her
Discourse at the first Verse of this Chapter; Does not Wisdom cry, and
Understanding lift up HER Voice? SHE stands at the Top of the High Places; --
SHE cries at the Gates.

On his second and third Propositions.
HIS second Proposition from his Text is, our Savior was in the Form of God
before he was in the Form of a Servant: which he takes to be the same with
this; he was in the Form of God before he was Man. He gives two Reasons:

1. Because it is said here, being in the Form of God, he emptied himself: So he
translates the Words instead of the Vulgar English, He made himself of no
Reputation.

2. Because otherways, the Opposition here plainly intended by the Apostle,
will not be exact: for if the Form of God must be taken figuratively, so as
only to make this Sense, he was like unto God, was the Similitude or Likeness
of God, as all other Men are; it will not answer to the other Member of the
Opposition, which is not Figure but Reality; for the Form of a Servant, and the
Likeness of Men, was intended to signify that Christ was a real Man, and not
only that he was like to Men.

It Is a very thin Sophistry this: When our Author left off to speak to the
Vulgar, and would needs undertake (in this Passage) to speak to the Learned, he
should have brought something that was more substantial, wherewith to blind
such Eyes as theirs.

First; he says, Jesus Christ was in the Form of God; that is, he was really
God before he was Man; because this Text adds, that he emptied himself.
Methinks that very Translation which our Author has affected, should have
minded him of the Absurdity and absolute Impossibility of his Doctrine; for can
he that is true God empty himself? can he lessen, much less evacuate himself?
To what Labyrinths, to what Mazes and Wildernesses does Error lead Men: God,
they are forced to say, emptied himself; their next News will be, he ceased to
be, or was annihilated. But God is not only necessarily existent, as
Philosophers speak, but he is always necessarily the same; no Change, much less
any emptying himself (as they have learned to cant) can befall to him.

And why is this Preacher so hard to understand, that our Lord Christ might
indeed (as he calls it) empty himself, though he were not God? Why cannot he
call it an emptying himself, that our Savior submitted to Apprehension,
Persecution, Scourging and Death, at that very time when he could, by his
miraculous Power, have destroyed all his Enemies, both Jews and Romans? Why
must we say Christ was in the Form of God, and interpret it thus, that he was
God before he was Man, on the Account that he emptied himself; when the very
contrary is so obvious and easy to be discerned, even this, that he was not
God, because he could and did empty himself?

Secondly; But the Opposition intended by the Apostle, he says, will not be
exact, if the Form of God must not signify Reality, as well as the Form of a
Servant. Who told our Author, that the Form of a Servant here must be taken in
Reality? Was our Savior really a Servant to any Person? Do not all Men know,
that he was only in the Form of a Servant, by his voluntary bearing of Injuries
and Blows, without answering again, or avenging himself; that he might teach us
by his Example, as well as by his Doctrine, to forgive one another? The
Opposition is most exact: for as he was in the Form of God, without being
really God; so he was in the Form of a Servant, without really being Servant to
any. But Mr. Lamoth would clap together these two, was in the Form of a
Servant, and was in the Likeness of Men; as if they were one, or signified the
same thing: and it is upon this Mistake that his Argument proceeds; But the
Form of a Servant, and the Likeness of Men, are most different things: and he
ought also to have been aware, that a new Sense begins at these Words, Being
made in the Likeness of Men, as I have shown before.

His last Proposition, from his Text, is, that Jesus Christ did not think it
Robbery to be equal with God; so he words his Proposition at p. 9. I have
observed before, that now the very Boys know, that (...), is not to be rendered,
he thought it not Robbery to be equal with God; but non rapuit aequalitatem cum
Deo, he assumed not to himself to be equal with God. If Monsieur Lamoth knew of
this Translation, but dissembled it, he prevaricated with his Hearers, and
sought disingenuously to impose upon them: if he knew of it, but disliked it,
why did he not give his Reasons against it?

Here our Author takes leave of his Text, and falls to proving our Savior's
Divinity from the 5th Chapter of St. John's Gospel: the Words he picketh out
are these; As the Father raises up the Dead, and quickneth them, even so the
Son quickneth whom he will. -- That all Men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father. -- The Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear
the Voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. For as the Father
has Life in himself, so has he given to the Son, to have Life in himself. And
as if these Words had ended the whole Controversy between him and the
Socinians, he falls to his French Rhodomontades, and Paedagogical Triumphs. He
tells us, It Is impossible for any to equal himself more positively with God
than our Savior here does in these Words: They do not in the least need a
Commentary to warrant us, to say with St. Paul, that our Savior thought it not
Robbery to be equal with God his Father.

He takes no notice, that in what Sense soever we are to understand it, that
the Son quickneth whom he will, and is to be honored as the Father, and will
make the Dead to hear his Voice, and has Life in himself: yet he professes
here, that the Father has given them to him: that is, he professes that
himself is not God, because he has not these Powers of himself, but by the
Goodness and Gift of another Person. Our Author too passes it over, that as a
farther Caution against being mistaken by any, our Savior solemnly prefaces
his whole Discourse here with these Words, Verily, verily I say to you, the Son
can do nothing of himself, nothing by his own proper Power and Authority; and
that he concludes them with another Antidote, against being either
misunderstood or misrepresented, even with this, the Works which the Father
has given me (has given me Command and Power) to finish, bear witness of me,
that the Father has sent me, i. e. that I am the Father's Messenger and
Ambassador. Finally, he omitteth too, that all these Expressions are so
interpreted by the more Learned even of his own Party, as that they suppose
that our Lord Christ here speaks of himself only as a Man: for they say, the
Son quickneth whom he will, in that he raised from the dead Lazarus, the
Widow's Son, and some others, and could have raised many more, even as many as
he should please. And all Men should honor the Son as they honor the Father;
because the Ambassador representing the Majesty of him that sends him, his
Person is sacrosanct, and in diverse Respects to be honored as his Principal
is, by the Law of Nations. Again, the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of
God; for he would call diverse from the Dead, as former Prophets had done. It Is
added, last of all, he has Life in himself: all agree, that the meaning is, he
so possesses the Fountain of Life, by the Gift of God, as that he restores
Life to whomsoever he will. If Mr. Lamoth was not aware of these
Interpretations, it is his Dullness or his Negligence; if he was, that he
dissembles them, is his Dishonesty; out of respect to his Coat I am desirous to
think the former.

I see nothing further that is considerable in his first Discourse, but an
impious Reflection on the Person of our Savior, and another on the Scriptures.
Of our Savior he says at p. 19. that if he is not God, the Sum of the
Christian Religion will be this, that a certain Teacher is come to instruct Men
by exact Morality, and by a perfect Example, with regard to those Virtues that
we ought to practice in our Lives; but against whom are some things to be
objected, with regard to those Virtues that are of use at the Point of Death.
This usual Scandal of some Trinitarians upon our Savior, that he was
pusillanimous or fearful at the Point of Death, is fully answered at Chap. 11.
page 55. of the Answer to Mr. Milbourn. But I wonder that they should not
consider that this (false) Charge of theirs against our common Master is much
more colorable on their Hypothesis, and much less excusable than on ours: For
we say, the Lord Christ was a Prophet; they say, he was also God. Now that a
Man should have quick Apprehensions of approaching Death, especially of a Death
shameful, painful and undeserved, is no wonder, be sure is not sinful; but that
a God-man, as they think him, should be disturbed at Death, is altogether
unaccountable.

As to the Scriptures, he says at p. 20. If Jesus Christ was no more than a
Man, those Texts of Scripture that speak of that wonderful Mercy and Love of
God, in giving this Savior to Mankind, have no Sense at all. He affirms
moreover, that for God to make only a Creature, that by his Means he might save
so many Millions of Men, was no more than if he had given a Straw to save them.
I had thought (I confess) that French Ministers would n^^ have licensed such
Outrages to the Press: And if it was with so little Regard to the Honor of our
Savior, and to the Holy Scriptures, that they managed their Controversies in
France, I had almost said they were deservedly banished.

To his Objections concerning the Names of God, which he says are also given
to the Lord Christ in Holy Scripture.
MR. Lamoth's second Discourse begins with an Acknowledgment, that to mistake a
Man for God is the most dangerous of all Errors whatsoever. Is it so, then why
has he said so often, that nothing can excuse the Socinians for opposing the
Doctrine of our Savior's Divinity? For if that Doctrine is an Error, he
himself has confessed, it is the most dangerous of all Errors whatsoever. But he
says, that Doctrine is no Error; for that our Savior is true God, is made
evident by these three Observations.

1. He has the Names of God given to him by the Writers of Holy Scripture. 2.
Besides the Names of God he has also the Attributes of God ascribed to him. 3.
And to put the whole Matter out of doubt, the Worship due only to God is also
given in Scripture, and there required to be given to him.
First; The Lord Christ has the Names of God given to him, John 1. 1. The WORD
was God. Nay he is called the true God, and the great God, 1 John 5. 20. Titus
2. 3. He says moreover, that St. Paul writing to Titus, called our Savior
God, at least four or five times; and after a Line or two forgetting himself,
he says in that short Epistle, Christ is called God three or four times.
Finally, he cites some Texts in which he thinks the Name Jehovah is bestowed
on our Lord Christ: But because we are sure he cannot show us that Jesus Christ
is once called God in the Epistle to Titus, but only out of that single Bible
which is in his own keeping; and because the Words of St. John, the true God,
and of St. Paul, the great God, are evidently spoken not of our Savior, but of
God; and because what he says of the Name Jehovah, that it is applied to our
Savior Christ, is abundantly answered at Chapter 2. of the Answer to Mr. Milbourn;
therefore here I shall only consider what he has offered on the other Texts,
in which (as it is commonly supposed) our Savior has the Name God given to him.

He takes notice, that we answer, that our Savior is called God sometimes,
because he represented the Person of God, bringing to us the Commands of God;
for which Reason Moses is called God, and that by God himself; Exodus 7. 1. See
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh. Solomon also is in this Respect called God,
Psalm. 45. 6, and 11. and so are the Magistrates, Princes and Judges of Israel,
not only at Psalm. 82. 6. but by our Savior, John 10. 34, 35. Nay it appears by
1 Samuel 28. 11, 13, 14. that the Prophets who spoke in the Name and Person of
God, were therefore called Elohim, Gods. To the Examples of Solomon and Samuel
Mr. Lamoth says nothing, I suppose, because he saw that neither of his two
Shifts would serve him at all against those evident Instances: But to that of
Moses he says, his being a God is limited to Pharaoh; it is said of him by God,
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, not to others. But our Savior is called God
absolutely, without any Limitation to this or that Person or Persons. To the
Example of the Princes and Judges of Israel, he says, it is not any Magistrate
in particular, who is ever called God, but all of them in general; but our
Savior is in particular called God.

Let us begin with his second Answer, that no Prince or Magistrate in
particular is called God; but it is said of them in general only, Ye are Gods.
But why has Mr. Lamoth parted with such a Secret, that he understands not
Grammar, no nor common Sense? For does not every sensible Man know, that
Generals include in them Particulars? If I say to many, Ye are Gods, do I not
thereby say to every one of those many, Thou art a God? When the King says to
his House of Peers, My Lords; or to the other House, Gentlemen; does he not
acknowledge every one of the former to be a Lord, and every one of the other to
be a Gentleman? And why has our Author so unadvisedly said, that no
Magistrate, Prince or Angel, is ever in particular called God or a God in Holy
Scripture? Samuel and Solomon are so called in particular, Psalm. 45. 6, 11. 1 Samuel 28. 11, 13, 14. The Angel that spoke to Moses in the burning Bush, is
called God; and so is Moses himself, Exodus 3. 2, 4. Exodus 7. 1. Other
particular Angels are called Gods (it may be) twenty times in the Scriptures,
by Confession of the ablest Critics and Interpreters of our Author's own Party.

Nor is his first Answer a-whit better than the second, but rather less
considerate and advised: He says, Moses is not called God simply and
absolutely, but with Limitation; he is said to be a God to a particular Person,
a God to Pharaoh; not absolutely God or a God. Now either he will abide by this
Reply as sound and good, or he will not. If he will not, then our Answer (that
Moses as well as Christ is called God) remains in its full Force. But if he
says, he will abide by it as a good and sufficient Reply to us, then he has
given up to us that only Text, in which the Name God is bestowed on our
Savior: For the Socinians easily satisfy the more learned of their Opposers,
that all the other Texts in which it is by some supposed that our Lord Christ is
called God, were indeed intended, not of the Lord Christ, but of the Almighty
Father, whom all acknowledge to be God: but the Words of St. Thomas (at John 20.
28.) Thomas said to him (to Jesus) my Lord and my God, are generally allowed,
as well by Socinians as others, to be spoken to and of the Lord Christ. To this
Text therefore Socinus answers, in the same manner that Mr. Lamoth does here
concerning Moses, that the Lord Christ is not called God, simply and
absolutely; but with Limitation to a particular Person, he was a God to Thomas:
Thomas does not say absolutely, O Lord God, but my Lord and my God; the
personal Pronoun my limits the Sense of the Words to Thomas, and suffers us not
to extend them, or take them in an absolute or a general Sense. For my part, I
always thought this to be a frivolous shift, but it should seem Mr. Lamoth
approves of it; he thinks a Person is not really called a God, or has not the
Name God really given to him, if he is not called God absolutely, without
Limitation to a particular Person. I say therefore, let him take his Choice;
either let him say, he will not abide by this Answer; and then our Answer also
(that Moses too is called God) will be sufficient and home; or let him abide by
it, and then he has given up to us that only Text in which the Name God is
given to the Lord Christ, even these Words of Thomas, My Lord and my God. But I
desire you, Sir, to remember also, how clearly I have satisfied that Text, the
Words of Thomas, at Chap. 6. p. 32, 33. of the Answer to Mr. Milbourn.

To his Proofs that the Attributes of God are ascribed to Christ.
HIS second Proof, or rather his second Class of Proofs, that the Lord Christ
is God, is this, that the Attributes of the Divine Nature are ascribed to him
no less than to God. And I will make choice, says he, of six of the Divine
Attributes to verify my Argument; Eternity, Immensity, Holiness, Knowledge,
Power and Mercy. These Properties, says he, are in the Lord Christ, in such
manner as belongs to God only; therefore the Lord Christ is also God.

First; For Eternity, he says, it is proved to be in Christ, because the Author
to the Hebrews (Chapter 1. 11.) applies to our Lord Christ what had been said by
the Psalmist concerning God, namely these Words of Psalm. 102. 26, 27. They (the
Heavens) shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old
like a Garment: as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed;
but thou art the same, and thy Years have no end. He quoteth this Text to prove
the Eternity of our Lord Christ; that I may use his own Words, not only the
Eternity which is to come, but his Pre-eternity, or the Eternity which is past.
If he had alleged it to prove the fifth Attribute, the Power of the Lord
Christ, because it is here said, he shall change the Heavens: We would have
informed him, that the Heavens here spoken of, are not the material Heavens,
but the new Heavens and new Earth, or the Gospel-Oeconomy and State of things,
as I have largely proved at Chap. 3. of the Answer to Mr. Milbourn. But seeing
he cites this Text to prove the Pre-eternity of our Savior, or the Eternity
which is past, we are constrained to answer in short, that (till he shows it
more particularly) we cannot discern the least Shadow of a Pretense to draw
that Conclusion from this Text.

But the same Epistle to the Hebrews says, This Man (Jesus Christ) was counted
worthy of more Glory than Moses; inasmuch as he who has built the House has
more Honor than the House, Heb. 3. 3. We answer, the House here meant is Domus
Dei, the Christian Church, of which the Lord Christ was (under God) the
Builder; but this House was not from Eternity.

Next he quoteth Heb. 7. 3. He was without Father and without Mother, without
Descent; having neither Beginning of Days, nor end of Life. But all
Interpreters, of both Persuasions, are agreed, that these Words are spoken of
Melchisedec, whose Father and Mother, and the time of his Birth and Death, not
being recorded any where in Scripture; he is therefore figuratively said to be
without Father and Mother, without Beginning or End of Life. But he is not
herein like to the Son of God, (the Time of whose Birth and Death is registered
in Scripture, and whose Mother was Blessed Mary, his Father the everlasting
God) but he is like the Son of God, in that he abides a Priest for ever: Which
he is said to do in respect of the Continuance (not of his Person, but) of his
Priesthood, which cease not, as did the Levitical, but is continued for ever
in the Priesthood of the New Testament.

At Heb. 9. 14. it is said, that Christ through the eternal Spirit offered
himself to God. This eternal Spirit Mr. Lamoth thinks was our Savior's own
eternal Spirit; but he has not quoted the Place right: the Words are these,
Who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without Spot to God; i. e. the
Lord Christ by the Cooperation of the Spirit and Grace of God, was sinless and
spotless, and so offered himself as an immaculate Sacrifice to God. The
Emphasis lies not, in offering himself, or by the Spirit, but in offering
himself without Spot, which was by the Cooperation of God's Grace or Spirit.

I see not what Weight or Force there is in his next Allegation, Heb. 13. 8.
Jesus the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. When he tells us what he means
by it, or how he forms an Argument from it, we will consider of it. But whereas
he adds, that the Words at Rev. 1. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the Ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which shall be, the
Almighty, are spoken of the Lord Christ; he should have proved it as well as
said it, which when he does, we will give him the Cause: But he may see in the
fourth Letter of the Brief History of the Unitarians, a demonstrative Proof,
that the Words are spoken of God, not of the Lord Christ.

Come we now to the Attribute of Immensity, by which, he says, our Savior is
present in all Places at the same time. For this he brings first those Words
of our Savior, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I am in
the midst of them, Matthew. 18. 20. We answer, Christ, though in Heaven, is in
the midst of his People, partly by prophetic Vision and Knowledge, as St. Paul
says to the Colossians, Though I be absent in the Flesh, I am present in the
Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, Col. 2. 5. And partly by that powerful
Aid and Help which he affords to us; what by his Mediation with God for all
in general, Heb. 7. 25. what by the Intervention of Angels, who are under his
Directions, and by him engaged in the Defense of the Faithful, Heb. 1. 14.

As another Proof of our Savior's Omnipresence, he gives us John 3. 13. No Man
has ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of
Man, which is in Heaven. If he will needs have the last Words to be, which IS
in Heaven, contrary to all the considerable Critics, who read here, which WAS
in Heaven: We say, the Lord Christ was then in Heaven, was in Heaven while he
was upon Earth; in the same Sense that St. Paul says the like of himself, when
he propounds himself for an Example to the Philippians, Phil. 3. 20. Our
Conversation is in Heaven: Namely, by Heavenly-mindedness, an heavenly Frame of
Spirit, by heavenly Meditations and Contemplations. Mr. Lamoth dismisses the
Consideration of these two Attributes, Eternity and Immensity, with this
Reflection, that they are absolutely incommunicable to Creatures. But the most
eminent Philosophers have been of Opinion, that they are both of them found in
Matter or Bodies, as they speak. They suppose, that the Moles, Matter or
Substance of which the World is made, was from all Eternity; and that it is
immense and interminable.

The third Attribute is Holiness; and the Lord Christ, says our Author, is
holy, as God is holy. He proves this, because the Prophet Isaiah heard the
Seraphims make this Acclamation to God, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts:
And the Evangelist St. John assures us, that this Lord of Hosts whom the
Seraphims praised, was our Lord Christ; John 12. 41. These things said Isaias,
when he saw his Glory, and spoke of him. But the Critics (both Fathers and
Moderns) of our Author's own Party, plainly saw, that the Words of St. John are
intended, not of the Lord Christ, but of God. They give two Reasons, which Mr.
Lamoth (in his next) may do well to remove. They observe, that the Words
immediately foregoing are certainly spoken of God; and that the best Greek
Copies read here expressly, these things said Isaias, when he saw GOD's Glory.

He goes on; We say further, the Lord Christ knows whatsoever God knows. He
thinks this wild Affirmation is proved by St. Peter's Words to our Savior,
Thou know all things, John 21. 17. And by what St. John says of him, he knew
all Men; and again, he knew what was in Man, John 2. 24, 25. but especially by
what our Savior says of himself, I am he which searches the Reins and
Hearts, Rev. 2. 23.

Let us begin with the Words of St. John, that he (Christ) knew all Men, and
knew what was in Man. The Occasion of these Words will show us their Intent and
Meaning; certain Persons upon hearing our Savior's Doctrine, and seeing his
Miracles, believed on him; nevertheless, says this Evangelist, Jesus committed
not himself to them, because he knew all Men, and needed not that any should
testify of Man, for he knew what was in Man. As who should say, The Lord Christ
was not free to commit his Person or his Secrets to these new Believers; he did
not judge them fit to be trusted till they were well grounded and settled in the
Faith: he knew what all Men are, how sickle and uncertain, nay oft-times
designing and malicious; so he needed not that any should bid him be cautions,
or aware of Men: Himself knew better than all Men the Infidelity, Treachery,
Variableness, and all other Infirmities of Men; therefore he would not confide
in Persons not known to him by some Experience first had of them. This is the
natural and obvious Sense of St. John's Words; they are (very evidently) a
Testimony of our Savior's Prudence as a Man, not of his Omniscience as a God.

There is no more Force to Mr. Lamoth's Purpose in St. Peter's Words to our
Savior, Thou know all things. The Lord Jesus had said to Peter, Peter,
love thou me? Peter grieved that such a Question should be put to him,
answers, Lord, thou know all things, thou know I love thee. His undoubted
meaning is, There is no Secret hid from thee; thou fore-sawest my Fall, my
unhappy Weakness in denying thee; but neither is it hid from thee, that I love
thee; and then also loved thee, though for a Moment Fear overcame Love. What is
there in this Answer to persuade any reasonable Man that Peter made his Master
to be God, or believed another, a second God? Thou know all Secrets; but was
not Peter aware that it was by Revelation from God, by God's inhabiting Spirit
or Inspiration, that our Savior and so many other Prophets knew all the
Secrets of the Persons with whom they conversed? Let us see whether we cannot
even wrest it from our Opposers, that all our Savior's Knowledge, whether of
Secrets or of things to come, was by Revelation from God; not from his own
proper and natural Omniscience as God! St. John speaking of our Savior, in his
present State of Exaltation, has this Passage; Rev. 1. 1. The Revelation of
Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his Servants things that must
shortly come to pass; and he (Christ) sent and signified it by his Angel (or by
his Messenger) to his Servant John. What Artifices, what Elusions or Shifts
will Mr. Lamoth betake him to, to get rid of this Text, which indeed puts an
End to the Question of our Savior's Divinity! For were he indeed God, were his
Knowledge of all Secrets and of things to come, from his own Omniscience as God,
it could never have been said of him, the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave to him, to show to his Servants.

Our Opposer's last Hope is in the Words of our Savior, I search the Reins and
Heart. He ought to know, that to search the Heart and Reins is an Hebrew and
Scripture Phrase or Form of speaking, and signifies no more but this, to know
the most secret Thoughts and Purposes of the Mind and Heart. This Knowledge is
originally in none but God; but it may be in others derivatively, by Derivation
or Revelation from God. Only God knows the Reins and Heart originally of
himself, or by his own proper and natural Omniscience: but Prophets, and more
especially our Savior, search and know the Hearts, secondarily, derivatively,
by God's Revelation to them, or by his inhabiting Spirit in them. We are
assured, that only this last was our Savior's meaning, in these Words, I
search the Heart; by the first Words of this Book of Revelation, before quoted,
even these, the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him. There could
be no need that God should make a Revelation to him, if he himself knew the
Reins and Heart by a natural Omniscience of his own. In one Word, we ought not
to stick at the mere Syllables, I search the Heart, but should consider the
Import or Sense of that Phrase in the Scripture Language; If it signifies only
thus much, to know the Thoughts of the Heart or Mind, it will not prove the
Person, of whom they are spoken, to be omniscient, or God, unless it be also
said he knows the Heart by his own Omniscience, and not (as it is said of our
Savior) by Revelation from God, or God's inhabiting Spirit.

The fifth Attribute of God is his Power; and this Author fears not to say, at
p. 40. the Lord Christ is as powerful as God. I marvel that a sensible Man
could say such a thing; for as powerful as God, is plainly to say, two
Almighties, and two Gods. It Is impossible for Mr. Lamoth to evade this
contradictory and blasphemous Consequence, but by another which will be as
silly as this is impious. He cannot escape it, but by saying, that the Lord
Christ himself is that God; but then, as powerful as God, amounts to this, as
powerful as himself. Has Mr. Lamoth taken a Journey from France into England,
to bless us with such a Discovery, that the Lord Christ is as powerful as
himself, or is as powerful as he is powerful?

But here too we must examine his Proofs; our Savior says of himself, John 5.
19. What things soever the Father does, those also does the Son. Again he
says, John 6. 40. He that believes on me, has eternal Life, and I will raise
him at the last Day. And St. Paul says of him, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change
our vile Body, that it may be like his glorious Body, according to the Working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Lastly, we have this
Argument of our Savior's Almighty Power, that St. John says, Without him was
not any thing made that was made, John 1. 3. Which thing St. Paul dilates more
largely in these Words; For by him were all things created that are in Heaven,
and that are in Earth, visible and invisible; -- all things were created by him
and for him, Col. 1. 16.

It Is the perpetual Method, Sir, of our Opposers, to argue from imperfect
broken Passages of Holy Scripture, concealing what goes before, and what
follows after; as also how those Expressions are elsewhere interpreted by the
Scriptures themselves. But the Reason of this is, never so little Sincerity in
quoting the Scriptures would ruin their Cause. Be you Judge, Sir, whether this
be not a just Charge: The Lord Christ, says Mr. Lamoth, is as powerful as God;
for he himself says, Whatsoever things the Father does, those also does the
Son: but he conceals what goes before in the same Verse, Verily, verily I say
to you, the Son can do nothing of himself: And what again follows at ver. 30. I
can do nothing of my self. He was aware that these (explicatory) Expressions
would destroy his Argument from that part of the Verse which he alleged to
prove that our Savior is another Almighty: therefore he was resolved only to
quote the Part of the Verse, which being separated from the rest, and repeated
by it self, would seem to make for his Purpose. But if you add to these Words
which he has dislocated from the rest, even to these, What things the Father
does, those also does the Son: I say, if to these you add, the Son can do
nothing of himself; and again, I can of my self do nothing; our Savior's
meaning will be clearly this; The Son raises the Dead, gives Sight to the
Blind, and does whatsoever else of that miraculous Nature that the Father
himself sometimes does; but it is with this immense Difference, that the Son can
do nothing of himself, nothing by his own proper Authority or Power, but by the
Power and Spirit of the Father dwelling in him, as in former Prophets. It is
our Savior himself, and after him the Apostle Peter, that make this
Explication, and give this Account of that miraculous Power of our Savior, by
which he did whatsoever things the Father does. John 14. 10. The Father that
dwells in me, he does the Works. Matthew. 12. 28. I cast out Devils by the
Spirit of God. Acts 2. 22. Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you,
by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of you.

We have seen with what Conscience our Author quotes the Scriptures; I am
desirous to make trial whether his Judgment be no greater than his Sincerity!
Those Words of our Savior which he is so desirous to conceal, the Son can do
nothing of himself; and I of my self can do nothing: I beseech you, Sir, are
they the Voice of God, or of a Man? Will he that is true God and Almighty, say,
I can of my self do nothing; it is by the Power and Authority of another by
which I do whatsoever I do!

Come we to his two next Places, that Christ will raise Believers at the last
Day, and that he will change their vile Bodies, to be like his glorious Body,
according to that Power by which he is able to subdue all things to himself. I
will put a Question to this Gentleman: Does Mr. Lamoth think that the Lord
Christ, in his present State of Exaltation, now raises (or will raise) the
Dead, by any other Power but that by which he raised the Dead while he lived
upon Earth? His Hypothesis will not allow him to say that the Lord Christ has
now any greater or other Power than he had while he was upon Earth: It remains
therefore that our Lord Christ will raise the Dead at the last Day, by the same
Power by which he raised diverse Persons in his Lifetime. But I will
demonstrate to him, that Power was not our Lord's inherent, proper or own
Power, but given to him by God, pro renata, for the present Occasion, and that
too at the Instance, or Prayer, or Suit of our Lord Christ to God. We see this
very plainly in the case of Lazarus, whose vile Body (nay whose corrupted Body)
was by him changed and restored to Life: For when Jesus came to the Grave of
Lazarus, to call him forth to Life again, before he says, Lazarus come forth,
he first devoutly owns by whose Power he enterprised this Miracle; see his
Words, John 11. 41. Jesus lift up his Eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee,
that thou have heard me: And I knew that thou always hear me; but because of
the People which stand by, I say it, that they may believe that thou have sent
me. When he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud Voice, Lazarus, come forth. I
am willing, Sir, that our Opposers try all their Skill, use all their wonted,
or any new Elusions, to wrest this Text out of our Hands. Let them tell us,
whether our Savior does not here attribute both his Power and Authority of
raising this dead Person, to only the Prevalence of his Prayers with God, who
always (says he) hears me. Let them tell us, if they dare, and if it
destroys not their Hypothesis; that now however, in his State of Exaltation,
the Lord Christ has a new Power; and that he shall raise the Dead, not as
while he was upon Earth, by an extraordinary Power conferred on him by God,
(who has sometimes given the same Power to dead and dry Bones, 2 Kings 13.
21.) but by a Power newly grown up in himself.

To the Text of St. John concerning the WORD, without him was not any thing
made that was made; I have largely shown in the 5th Chapter of the Answer to
Mr. Milbourn, that the Evangelist is there speaking of the new Creation, or the
Gospel-Oeconomy and State of things, not of the outward, visible, or material
Creation or World. If Mr. Lamoth will satisfy the Reasons alleged in that
Answer, the Socinians will be indebted to him for ever.

But he urges us, in the last Place, with St. Paul's Words, Col. 1. 16. For by
him were all things created, in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible; all
things were created by him and for him. It must be confessed that this
Allegation has but one Fault. In the Judgment of all the Critics and
Interpreters of Note, of our Author's own Party, it is most falsely translated:
they read the Text after this manner, for by him (by the Lord Christ) were all
things modelled that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible; they were all modelled by him, and for him. The invisible Powers of
Heaven, even the Angelical Orders, and the State of Affairs upon Earth (more
especially those of the Church) have undergone a very great Change, have been
modelled, and as it were new-made by the Lord Christ. On Earth he has
abolished Paganism, Idolatry and Superstition, and introduced in their room the
Knowledge of the one true God, and a moral Righteousness. In Heaven the Angelic
Orders are put under his Directions, and by him engaged in the Defense of the
Church, Heb. 1. 14. Mr. Lamoth may see in the fourth Letter of the Brief
History of the Unitarians, how many learned Persons (Fathers and Moderns) of
his own Party, have thus understood this Text: They plainly saw, that St. Paul
speaks here of the new Creation, not of the original making, but the modelling
or new-making of things: and I cannot think it necessary further to answer
Monsieur Lamoth upon this Text, till he has satisfied the Reasons of the
Judicious and Learned of his own Party.

The last Attribute to evince that the Lord Christ is equal with God, is his
Mercy. Our Author says, Christ's Mercy is sufficient to demonstrate him to be
true God. His Proof of this is, that St. Paul so commonly wishes Grace and
Peace to the Churches, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. He
says at p. 43. An Apostle would be better advised than to wish them Grace from
any other but only God: the Scriptures he says, never tell us of the Grace of
Angels or of Men. He advances another Example of his Ignorance or his
Forgetfulness, when he tells us, that it is said by our Savior to the
Disciples, Baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. And St. John says* There are three that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: but in the Scriptures nothing that is
created is made to go hand in hand with God, or is reckoned in the same Line or
Period with him. He adds further, but the Lord Christ is (in some Texts) not
only reckoned with God, but is set before him, as in those Words of St. Paul,
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, the Communion of the Holy
Ghost be with you; therefore without doubt he is true God. Can we imagine,
says this wary and judicious Author, that the Scriptures would have committed
such an Absurdity, if the Son were no more than a Creature?

He is a pretty Gentleman; and seeing his Superiors have not thought fit to
restrain his Extravagancies, it is necessary that his Opponent, who has the next
Right, should. He is positive that Creatures are never set in the same Line or
Context of Words and Sense with God, much less are set before him; and that
Grace is never wished to the Churches from any but God. Now in his Hypothesis,
the Lord Christ is God; therefore let him take his Bible, and find there this
Text; Rev. 1. 4, 5. John to the seven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be to
you, and Peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and
from the seven Spirits which are before his Throne, and from Jesus Christ. Here
Grace is wished from the seven Spirits of the Presence, and these are reckoned
in the same Context of Words and Sense with God, and are se^ before our
Savior, who according to our Author, is true God. Nay, and the Author of this
manner of speaking is St. John, that St. John on whom Mr. Lamoth has bestowed
some Pulpit-Rhetorick, telling us at p. 38. Let us make no Scruple to believe
the beloved Disciple, who reposed himself on the Breast of the Son of God:
Trust we to the piercing Sight of this Eagle, who took a View of this glorious
Sun; Let us rely on the Testimony of the Evangelist, whose very End in writing
his Gospel was to prove that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. With more such
Pedantry, which however he takes to be Wit.

To what he says concerning the Worship of Christ; and the Conclusion.
WE are near our Deliverance from his Impertinencies: for at p. 44. he begins
to speak to the last Argument of three, by which he undertook (at first) to
prove our Savior's Divinity, which is that he is worshipped. He says here,
that Worship is (as it were) the Shadow of the Godhead; let us therefore, says
he, thereby take the Height and Elevation of our Savior. I showed this
Expression to a Friend of mine, asking him, what might be the meaning of it, or
in what regard Worship is (as it were) the Shadow of the Godhead? He said, that
I understood very little; for this is one of the Mysteries of the Trinitarians,
which must be believed with an humble and implicit Faith, and not saucily pried
into or enquired after. For all that I was of Opinion, that it happened here to
Monsieur Lamoth as to other Orators and eloquent Men, who when they come to the
latter End of a Discourse, having well near spent their Embellishments and
Flourishes, they fill up the vacant Spaces with a curious Mixture of Flourish
and Nonsense. Worship is (as it were) the Shadow of the Godhead: there is the
Nonsense; Mr. Lamoth himself will not deny it, upon second Thoughts, to be pure
Nonsense. But then, let us thereby take the Height and Elevation of our
Savior; there is the Flourish, Decoration or Gild with which to cover it from
Fools.

For the rest; Mr. Lamoth not having urged any thing from Scripture or Reason,
for the Worship of our Savior, but only what had been before said by Mr.
Milbourn, to whom I have answered (so far as concerns this Part of our
Contest) at Chap. 10. of my Reply to him. I will pass now from the
argumentative Parts of his Book to the historical; for he has obliged us with
the History of a new French Synod, held at London by ninety six French Divines,
March 30, 1691.

He gives us the Result and Conclusions of this either Synod or Riot (for it
assembled by no legal Authority, and the Assistants at it are punishable by our
Laws) in seven declaratory Propositions; which seven Propositions may however
be reduced to these two, that the French Ministers are no Socinians, and that
they are no Presbyterians. The first of these Declarations is wholly
ridiculous; the other is equally surprising and unadvised; I will dispatch with
both in two Words.

1. The French Ministers are no Socinians: Bless me! who ever said they were?
Such as know the French Ministers, know very well that they are so far from
being Socinians, that they never rightly understood what Socinianism is; they
are so perfectly ignorant of the Merits of the Socinian Cause and Questions,
that it is notoriously known, they are not conversant enough in good Books, to
distinguish Socinianism from Remonstrantism: A Socinian and a Remonstrant are
convertible Terms with the Generality of the French Ministers. Thence it is
that their Brethren in Holland count the Clergy of the Church of England
Socinians, because they are generally Remonstrants; and those Refugee Ministers
who have joined in Communion with them, to be like as they are, unsound in the
Faith.

2. They add, the French Ministers are (now) no Presbyterians. A foolish and a
rash Declaration: What needed they to proclaim to all the Presbyteries here and
abroad, that since their coming into England, they have turned their Coats? Was
it worth their while to disown so publicly (as well as so causlesly and
rashly) the original Discipline of their Church?

Let us hear how they have worded their famous Recantation; We heartily
subscribe to the Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches of France,
without pretending to meddle with Matter of Discipline. They take here a civil
Leave of Presbyterianism, and in a Meiosis, renounce the half of their Religion
at once: We meddle not with Matters of Discipline, that is, as we heartily
profess the Points of Faith of our Churches, so we relinquish the Discipline of
the same: They were not willing to anathematize the Presbytery, that had been
somewhat too rigid for new Beginners and young Episcoparians. But we meddle not
with it; we let it go in God's Name, to shift for it self, for we will be no
longer concerned with it, or for it. I hope Mr. Quick will insert the Decrees
of this London-Synod into his Synodicon Galliae reformatae; that the World may
know, that the French Ministers, to their other Virtues, have added also that
of the Age, to temporize. Nor am I so much their Enemy, but that I wish them
some Fruit of so great a Complaisance to the Church of England, as the giving
up to her, at once, the Moiety of their Religion.

Mr. Lamoth has acquainted the World, what the French Ministers are not; I
cannot restrain my self from declaring what some of them (too many) are: They
are Peepers, Lurchers and Trapans; they skulk about the Presses, Booksellers
Shops, and even at private Houses, to get Informations about unlicensed Books,
and heterodox Opinions and Persons: They are Informers, not only in the Houses
of Bishops, (who disdain at it) but in the Courts of Judicature, to the
indelible and perpetual Scandal of their ministerial Function, as well as the
Trouble and Danger of the Persons whom they illegally inform against, and
prosecute for Matters of mere Conscience and Religion, or rather for their Love
of Peace, and Desire of Catholic Unity.

Among the rest there is one Monsieur (I will conceal his Name for this once,
but it is very like to) Hocus, who is excellent at the Discovery of an Heterodox
Book, and at prosecuting the Author before the Ecclesiastical Judge, and then
before the Civil. He is so brisk and home an Informer, that it is enough with
him if a Book has nothing directly heterodox, but only speaks less
considerately and advisedly, and so may have an Heterodox or scandalous
Construction put upon it: But withal he is so sneakingly false, that while he
is informing and setting the Officers at work to apprehend, he will very
solemnly deny that he was the Mover of this Trouble. If he and his Fraternity
would not be further exposed, not only here, but in France, where they will be
glad to hear the evil Report of the French Ministers; they will for the time to
come take some honester Course to recommend themselves to the small Gratuities
which they may expect from such Services; Services that are odious (I can
assure them) to those very Persons for whose Interests they are done. I will
conclude with minding them of two things; that it is dangerous for particular
Men to irritate a whole Party by Prosecution, there being no Party that can be
called small or weak. And next, that if they find themselves harshly answered
in this Reply to Mr. Lamoth, let them remember that they have given us an
insufferable Provocation, there being nothing so intolerable as that Refugees
for Conscience, should turn Informers and Persecutors for Matters purely
conscientious, for mere Dissent in Points of Faith.

But I have done with them for this time: If hereafter Mr. Lamoth, or any
others, shall think fit to engage in these Controversies, and can forbear
reproachful Reflections on a whole Party, keeping themselves to Matter of
Argument, and to the Mistakes of this particular Defendant, they shall be
answered accordingly. I will reply as shall become a Christian and a Gentleman;
I will as little be guilty of Disrespect, without a notorious Provocation in
the same kind, as I will quarrel with a Person that informs me of my Way, when
he perceives I am out of it. I need add no more now, but that, Sir, I receive
respectfully the large and surprising Favors you have done to

Your most Obliged and most Assured, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Send you herewith the Answer of one of our Friends, to the two Discourses of
Mr. Lamoth, concerning the Divinity of our Savior; if you send it to the
Press, I pray let this present Supplement go along with it. For having seen the
Articles of some French Ministers, exhibited at the Ecclesiastical Court of my
Lord the Bishop of L. against Dr. A. L. at first I admired at the Impertinence,
the Boldness and Malice of their Undertaking; but afterward I thought also it
might be fit to take this Occasion, to mind them of some things, of which (I am
persuaded) they have never duly thought.

In the first Place they have dared to article against a Person, in an
Ecclesiastical Court, contrary to the express Words of a Statute or Act of
Parliament: For the late Act of Parliament concerning Toleration and Indulgence
in Matters of Conscience and Religion, granted to Socinians as well as other
Protestants the Benefit of that Act, except only in Case that they shall print
or preach in Defense and Vindication of their Opinions. The Socinians are as
much tolerated and favored by that Act as any other Sect of Dissenters from
the Church of England, if they content themselves to hold their Opinions, or to
reason and discourse of them in familiar Talk; the Act debarreth us from only
the Liberty of Preaching or Writing in favor of them. But now the Person
against whom the French Ministers article, has committed no such Offense; they
do not so much as pretend that he has written or preached against the received
Doctrine of the Church: these Ministers therefore are guilty of an Insult upon
the English Laws, and the Statutes of our Kings and Parliaments; and are liable
to a Prosecution thereupon in the Civil Courts, by the Persons whom they have
particularly wronged, or by any other publick-spirited Persons, to whom the
Liberties of the Nation are dear. They may happen to find some not obscure
Persons, who in due Place and Time will make the Ministers sensible, that it is
not for Refugees to trample upon the Laws of the Country where they are
received and protected; and least of all upon those Laws which were made and
designed for the Ease and Peace of the Nation, and on which the Welfare and
Safety of the Nation do much depend.

But the Person, it should seem, against whom they article, has no need of any
Relief from the Act of Indulgence; he is accused by the Ministers as a
Socinian, only because he is not a Sabellian, and because he holds the
Necessity of good Works. They article, that he has ( maliciously and wickedly)
affirmed, speaking concerning the Blessed Trinity, that he could clearly prove,
that three are not one, and that one and two are three. He answers, that he
meant thereby, that three Persons are not one Person; that is, he is no
Sabellian, he believes the real Distinction of the Persons, or as the
Athanasian Creed says, he confounds not the Persons. They article, that he
has ( maliciously and heretically) said, that Jesus Christ has merited
nothing for us, and that he has but done what he was obliged to do; or Words
to that effect. He answers, that his Words were not to that Effect; the true
and whole meaning of his Words was only this, that the Merit and Satisfaction
of the Lord Christ is to be so interpreted, as not to destroy, supersede or
dispense with good Works of our own, that is to say, a holy Life on our Part.
This indeed is to be no Calvinist; but for all that, it is neither Heresy nor
Socinianism; but it serves to confirm what our Friend has said in his Answer
to Mr. Lamoth, that it is notoriously known, that the French Ministers
understand not what Socinianism is, and that they confound Socinianism with
Arminianism or Remonstrantism. I am sorry for this same honest Dr. A. L.
because though it appears by these and the rest of his Answers, that he is no
Socinian, yet he is for the Necessity of Holiness, a good Life, or good Works;
which Doctrine was ever so displeasing to Mr. Calvin and his Followers, the
French Ministers, that sometimes they deny there is any such thing as good
Works; and otherwhile they affirm, that good Works are not only no necessary
Conditions of Salvation, but are even pernicious, dangerous and destructive
thereof. They are so much of this Mind, that they make the contrary Doctrine to
be Heresy; and because they think they cannot any way render it more odious,
they call it Socinianism; but I advise them, seeing Popery is now so much
abominated in England, that they would rather call it Jesuitism; they should
have prosecuted this Dr. A. L. as a Jesuit rather than as a Socinian; that had
been a way to set the Rabble, as well as the Spiritual Court, upon him.

But if Socinianism and the English Socinians are indeed such Eye-sores to
these Ministers, as seems by their frequent Prosecutions of diverse Persons on
that Account before the Ecclesiastical Judges, and in other Courts, they should
at least have shown so much Justice, as not to misplace their Accusations, so
grossly too, as they have done. This Dr. A. L. is the fourth or fifth Person to
whom they have given a Public Trouble, on the Account of Socinianism: they
have been always baffled, and sometimes severely checked by the Judges and
Court; all this has not discouraged them, they having no Reputation to lose,
from renewing their Persecutions of innocent Persons. But I advise them much,
to lay the Saddle upon the right Horse; and let them not so wholly despise the
Imputations of Calumny and Malice, Vices so unsuitable to their Profession of
Ministers: Let them cease to accuse those that are not guilty, when they may
easily find so many who are not only guilty of Unitarianism, if it be a Guilt,
but are also liable upon that Account; my meaning is, have preached up and
written for Unitarianism. They have, for Instance, the four Evangelists and the
Apostles, notoriously guilty of the Heresy now called Socinianism; and their
Words are so clear and express for it, that the Ministers need not fear the
Imputation of Slander, if they shall article against them at the Places and
Courts where they have lately libelled Dr. L. and Mr. Gr. If the Reader will
pardon me, and not abate of his due Reverence, I will be content to prepare the
Articles for the Ministers, in their own Forms and Terms; they shall have no
other Trouble but what they so much affect and like, even to exhibit them in
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts.

1. You Matthew, styled Apostle; and you Mark, called an Evangelist, have mal.
and wic. complotted together, to teach and write the Heresy which denies the
Omniscience of the Son our Lord Christ, while you have reported and published,
as from the Mouth of Christ himself, that the Son knows not the Time of the
last Judgment; and that only the Father (whom all Men grant not to be the Son)
knows of that Day, Mat. 24. 36. Mark 13. 32.

2. You John, calling your self Evangelist and Apostle, have not spared to
write and publish scandalous, heretical and blasp. Words against the
Omnipotence of the same our Lord Christ, affirming most injuriously and falsely,
that he can do nothing of himself: and further, that it was not be, but the
Father dwelling in him, that did all the miraculous Works. So you have said
expressly, John 5. 19, 30. John 14. 10. With which monstrous Doctrine you Peter
also symbolized when you preached to the Jews concerning the Lord Christ: for
thus you say of him; Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you, by
Miracles and Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him, Acts 2. 22. Et objicimus
and articulamur ut supra.

3. You the said John, not having the Fear of -- before your Eyes, but led by
an heretical and blasp. Spirit, have written and published, and as from the
Mouth of our Savior, that the Father is greater than he, John 14. 28. To which
Heresy you Paul have consented, when you do write to the Corinthians, that the
Head of the Woman is the Man, and the Head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11. 3. But
the divine Athanasius has in his Creed expressly contradicted you.

4. And further, you John have written and published Words, in which it is
evident that you designing to deny the supreme Authority of the Son our Lord
Christ; for you make him to say, that he came not of himself, but as sent by
the Father, and that his Doctrine was not his own, but the Father's that sent
him; and that as the Father had commanded him, so in all things spoke he; John
8. 42. John 8. 28. John 12. 49.

5. You Luke, called also an Evangelist, have been yet more audacious; you have
published to the World, that the Lord Christ was not only not God, but that he
needed to be strengthened in his Agonies before his Passion by an Angel, and
that he prayed earnestly to God; as if he who was himself God, and the only
true God, could need the Aid of an Angel, or to make Prayer to any whomsoever.
The others, your Companions in this Heresy, have with some Modesty contented
themselves to deny our Savior's Omnipotence; but you have represented him, as
in some Respects, impotent and weak, Luke 22. 43, 44.

6. All of you, jointly and severally, have spoken of God by only the singular
Pronouns, I, Thou, Me, Him, Himself, Thy self, and such like; which Pronouns
are never used in any Language but only of one single Person, not of more
Persons; and hereby you have fully assured us, that your Belief is, that there
is but one Person of God, not three Persons, or a Trinity of Persons. But you
Paul have presumed to say, even in Terms, that God is but one Person: for you
write to the Hebrews, that the Son is (what, God? No, but) the Image of God's
Person, Heb. 1. 3.

7. To leave no Place for doubt, you John and Paul have expressly taught and
published, that only the Father is true God; and him you make to be even the
God of the Son, or the God whom the Son worshippeth and serves: You have said
and written, Father, -- This is Life eternal, to know thee (the only true God)
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: or, Jesus Christ thy Messenger. And
again; To us there is but one God, the Father: -- and one Lord (or one Master,
that is, Teacher) Jesus Christ. And you Paul, above all others, have inculcated
and repeated this Doctrine: You tell the Corinthians, that Christ shall deliver
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. And you advise the Romans, that with
one Mouth they should glorify God, even the Father. Plainly, as if only the
Father were God; John 17. 1, 3. 1 Cor. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 24. Romans 15. 6.

8. To burden you at present with no more; All of you, jointly and severally,
have in such manner distinguished between God and the Lord Christ, that your
way of speaking amounts to a plain Denial, that the Lord Christ is God. You
make our Savior himself to say to the young Man whom he loved, Why call
thou me Good? there is none Good save one, that is God. You say, There is one
God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Jesus Christ. You exhort,
Let every Tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord (Gr. that the Lord Jesus is
the Christ) to the Glory of God, the Father. You cry out, To God only Wise be
Glory, through Jesus Christ. You have taught, that the Son shall be subject to
him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all; Luke 18. 19. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Phil. 2. 11. Romans 16. 27. 1 Cor. 15. 28. If we put all these
Expressions together, you are found to deny the Omniscience, the Omnipotence,
and the supreme Authority of the Lord Christ: and in some Cases you make him to
be even impotent and weak; and having thus divested him, as much as in you
lies, of all the Grand Characters and Attributes of the Divine Nature, you add,
that God is but one Person, and that this one Person is only the Father, and
that Christ is a Man, whom we must always carefully distinguish from God.

Thus it is, and these are the Men against whom the French Ministers (in
pursuance of their Principles) should have articled, in the Ecclesiastical
Courts: these are the true Unitarians, and Fathers of Unitarianism, on whom the
Blame and Charge should light. It Is in vain for the Ministers to rail at, and
be Informers (in a strange Land) against modern Unitarian Books and Persons,
unless they can first get the Apostles and Evangelists censured, and their
Writings suppressed. But in presenting the Articles, I would have Mr. Lamoth be
Foreman, because they are suited to his Doctrine. I need not, Sir, add any more;
I am of Opinion that the Ministers, for one while, may have enough of this.

I am your Assured, E. E.

FINIS.

