THE LONDON-MASTER: OR, THE JEW DETECTED, CONTAINING I. A True Discovery by
what Tricks and Devices the Ship Laurel of London, with a rich Cargo, worth
several thousand pounds, was cast away in a most horrible manner in the River
of Killmare in Ireland. II. The evil Motives of Lucre that instigated them to
that Wickedness. III. Their bloody Designs to have Sixteen Innocent Persons
questioned for their Lives, for pretended Felony and Treason. IV. A brief
Apology to the Clergy, the Army, and the London-Masters. V. An Appendix to
prove every Allegation, directed by the Margent.


Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo. Printed at Dublin, and are to
be sold at the Treasury Coffee House in Crane-Lane, at Mr. Norman's in
Dames-Street, Dublin; at Mr. Jones's in Cork, and Mr. Letcher's in Tralee. And
the Original Vouchers are to be seen at the said Coffee-House. 1694.

To the Right Honorable, CHARLES Lord Baron of Shelburne.
May it please your Lordship,
HAving the Honor of being a Servant both to your Lordship and your Excellent
and most Worthy Father, and from my Infancy a dependence upon your Family, I
humbly presume to dedicate the following Narrative to your Lordship, being an
Account of a most Scandalous Examination, given by one Jacob Myars (a Jew)
which has not only brought me, but also a great part of the Kingdom, under
severe Censure and Reflection; as if the Ship Laurel had been most barbarously
plundered by the Country through some Contrivances of mine; a Crime so
abominable, that were I guilty, I deserve not only to be dismissed your Lordships
service, but to be stigmatized, and excluded from the Society of Mankind. Yet
as the glimmering Candle being snuff'd, does straightway give the clearer
Light, so I doubt not but your Lordship will find by perusing this Narrative,
That their false Insinuations and Unjust Aspersions will cause my clouded
Innocence to shine so much the brighter.

These and other Considerations obliges me to publish matter of Fact: And since
Addresses of this kind are a mode of the Times, and that it has pleased the
Divine Powers by their several Endowments of Learning, Wisdom, Justice and
diverse other Honorable and V^rtuous Qualities, to bless You as a Pattern to
the Age You live in; I shall not omit, in all Humility, to beg Your Lordships
Favor in other Occurrences, but to this no manner of Patronage, other then to
Read and Judge one that desires Life no longer than while he demeans himself a
faithful Subject to their Majesty's, and in all Sincerity and Truth,

Your Lordships most steady, and most Obedient Servant, RI. ORPEN.

IN LOCO PRAEFATII.
SInce it is in a manner as unfashionable to write without a Preface, as it is
to Dance before you have first made your Honors; so it may be as morose to
urge the Reader to jump at once from the Title page into the Book, without
leading him thither Modishly by a Preface; though otherwise the Title page it
self might have supplyd that.

When an infamous Rumor has once taken place in the minds of the Public, it is
as difficult a matter to remove the impression, as to confute a Bigot in his
first received Opinion of Religion; the nature of the one aspiring to judge,
being prone to Positiveness and Censure, is as ready to condemn upon false
information, as on the other side to applaud and cry up a person for some great
Merit, that never deserved it: so the other shall, for want of Arguments, stand
up, Rail and Redden, nay venture his life, and fight for that which he knows no
more of then the Game-Cock when carried from the Pit, knows of the grounds of
that Battle wherein he has all day so inveteratly managed the Gauntlet against
his like ignorant Challenger. The more uncensorious and impartial, are perhaps
waiting for the true Narative of that matter, which is said to be nine parts of
ten of the present discourse of many Courts, Exchanges, Walks and Coffee-houses
throughout Christendom. But least this may be over-masted, and so provoke the
passionate Inquisitor impatiently, to say that There is too much Sail for such
a Vessel, we shall here put the Reader aboard, and then let him speak as he
finds.

THE LONDON-MASTER: OR, THE JEW DETECTED, etc.
IN the West of Ireland, in the Province of Munster, lies the River of
Kilmare, about 11 Leagues from the Main up into the Country, adorned on each
side with diverse capacious and defencible Harbors, wherein thousands of the
best Ships may safely ride at once, with ready Outlets for the Outward or
Homeward bound Ships; and many Conveniences for great Fisheries, as Herring,
Pilchard, and Salmon; To say nothing of diverse kinds of Hook-Fish, as Hake,
Cod, Ling, Polluck, Mackarel, etc. wherewith this River abounds, capable ^l
Trade both by Sea and Land; as it was before ^he last War, after Sir William
Petty had erected ^everal considerable Fisheries, built the Iron-Works, opened
the Lead-Mines, and promoted ^he Trade of Rape-Seed on each side of the Ri^er,
and planted a Collony there of 815 Souls ^f English Protestants at his Expense
of above ^0000 l. Sterling. to the general Enrichment of that part of the Kingdom,
and the great Augmentation of the Kings Revenue; all which were demolished and
destroyed by the last Wars and not above 75 of those Protestants now left in
being; so greatly the Heirs of Sir William Petty, and this Collony of
Protestants, have been Sufferers in the late Troubles by their Adventures in
that desolate part of the Kingdom, where the Natives by the right Numbering of
the People were found to be above 900 Papists to one single Protestant; who
were never thoroughly subdued since the War of 1641, nor in the best of times
brought ameanable to the Laws of England, until the same was performed, in a
great measure, by this English Plantation; where now again, ever since the last
War, 20, 30, and sometimes 100 at a time of Toryes have marched openly in Arms
up and down that Country, and upon the approach of any consider ^ole part of
the Army, have dispersed themselves into smaller Companies, and are concealed
among the Glins and Fastnesses; where if any of the Inhabitants are suspected
as Discoverers, They and their Friends are immediately destroyed, by burning
their Houses, cropping their Ears, and cutting ou^ their Tongues, and sometimes
keeping them Prisoners whole Nights, stark naked, in the open Fields.

Into this River, as a place for the purpose, arrived the Laurel of London,
Christopher Ly^ Master, she carried ten Guns, Burden 150 Tun^ richly Laden (as
gathered from the Master and People belonging to her) with Sugars, Logwood,
Fastick, Lyme-Juice, Indigo, Ginger, Cotton, Paint, Pemento, and great store of
Gold and Silver, and diverse Ingots besides; from Jamaica, bound for London,
having on Board as Passengers, Jacob Myars (the Jew) and Peter Row, as also one
Mr. Spyers, who was said to be Son-in-law to one of the Owners of the Ship, but
so indisposed and sickly, that it is doubtful whether he was concerned in the
Stratagem or not. They gave an account that on the 27th of January 1693, in the
morning, they were four Leagues to the West of the Bull, Cow, and Calf,
Skellox, until they were undeceived by the Main Land so near them; and though
they declared a Resolution for Kinsale, and to lie there London; yet one may
conclude that they shaped an extravagant careless Course, to stand for the
River of Killmare; whereas the wind being at West, four leagues to the west of
the Bull, etc. Old Head of Kinsale; The heavens acted nothing to the contrary;
and had they designed what they pretended, It Is very manifest by Scale and
Flovver-de-luce, and by the accounts of the Winds, and the sufficient good
order of the Ship, that she might have arrived there with less difficulty then
she did in Killmare.

But Killmare was the place alloted for the fatal knock, which without
Resolution, or premeditated intention, could not be well accomplished in that
River, by reason of the many Harbors gaping on every side thereof to receive
and entertain any Ships whatever, and by reason of the boldness of the Shores
upon the River, and all these Harbors; so as a Ship Turning up the River, or
into the Harbors, may safely dare to Nose every Rock with her Boltsprit; I say
not Capanacossy is the only Shole and lies near the upper end of the River;
But so landlockt, that there is no manner of Danger, because the greatest Winds

Into this River, as the place of Execution, they arrived on the 27th of
January 1693, in the evening, and dropped their best Bower, and so came to an
Anchor under Rossmore-point, about midway up the River, where, as the winds
continued still at West, she might ride well enough, as she did all that night,
for they were not resolved to cast her away until they had fixed upon a
convenient shore to save themselves, and their money, in their long boat. That
evening they had a full prospect of the greatest part of the River, and the
openings of the several Harbors; Next morning, a little after Six a clock,
they cut their Cable, pretending that she would not ride for want of the
Mizen-Mast, for they had taken care to cut That by the board, before she came
into the River, to prevent her yawing as she sailed before the winds, as though
nothing could prevent it, but the cutting away of that Mast; But the reasons
why they wounded and hackt the main-yard, the fore-yard, and the
fore-top-saile-yard in several places about the middle of the yards, are yet
Black-Water, a very good Harbor, and right before the wind, which Black-Water,
Black-Water to the house of one Dermot mac Owen, at Cappanacossy, about seven a
Clock that morning; but their Ship was got Cappanacossy almost as soon as they,
without

But their greatest concern was how to provide Horses and Conveniencyes to
carry themselves

Having spent that day in jollity and carrousing after the Treasure was
distributed, The Thomas Palmer, a Minister, and one of the Justices of the
peace of that County, living about three miles up the River side from
Capponacossy. And in his letter he pretended some Palmer went to him in the
evening, and told him that his Ship was in very Palmer bid him still be of good
courage, and told him that she could be saved without any ^anner of difficulty;
And then by further discourse, ^e understood that they had great quantityes of
^old and Silver at Dermot mac Owen's house, ^d did therefore alarm them to go
on board

Mr. Palmer Returned home that night, and

Next morning being the 29th, Jacob Myars the mate of the Ship, and the
greatest part of the seamen, went off by Boat with their Treasure in some
Chests, and put the same ashore at Mr. Palmer's house, which were handed in by
their own men, and set them in an open Palmer that there was any thing besides
their clothes in the Chests; And on the same day Mr. Palmer and Mr. Myars rid
down to Cappanacossy, and took along wit^ them one Mr. Richard Orpen (Son in
law to Mr. Palmer) to consider the best and speedyest mean^ for saving of the
Ship, etc. he having judgment in Myars, leaving Mr. Palmer (being a corpulent
man) Orpen got a board (being Palmers to lighten an^ get off the Ship, and that
they would bring h^ off that very tide; And desired him to hoist u^ all the
heavy Goods that could be readily come (...) to be put ashore, and also his
Guns, for that their weight aloft, would incline her to swaddle; adding, that
one pound aloft would do her more prejudice then ten a low, and bid him strike
the ^ore-top-mast as well as the main-top-mast, and ^old him that she would
ride the quieter, especially while she had no Mizen;

To all which discourse, the Master answered nothing, only said, that he could
not part with Orpen told him that the Gunns could be of no great use to him in
that condition, since that the Privateers could engage him (where he lay) ^n no
other manner than in their Longboats; and Orpen discourst him further, and
asked him how many men belonged to the Ship, he answered nine, and two boys;
and being a very pretty show indeed! when all the Gunn^ except two, lay heads
and points along-ships u^ Orpen enquired of him about his Anchors and ground
tackle, and their condition; and what anchors h^ had then out? The Master
answered that she Ross-more when they cut two days ago, and that the^ had a very
good Cable. But their sheet ancho^ wanted a stock; upon which Mr. Orpen desire
the master to send his Carpenter, who was the Orpen walked upon the
Quarter Deck, and sent down for the Master, wh^ was making merry with some
company in the great Cabin, and observed to him that the She fleeted, and
sheard to and again, and bid him s^ his men to work and get her off, the wind
being temperate, and kindly shifting to the N. W Ships Company, to two, were
ashore at Mr. Palmer's, along with the Passengers; so that he missed getting
her off that Tide for want of his men; whose minds leand more toward the
Treasure, than toward the Ship and Cargo.

While Mr. Orpen was yet on board, he ordered that a Country Fellow, who was
brought before him for some Petty Larceny, should be forthwith tied Neck and
Heels, and be exposed Orpen to serve the Master, that he ordered the Fellow to
be brought on board again, and had both his hands tied to the Gang-Way, and
with a Ropes-End was beaten with many stripes, to the terror of

In the mean time, the greatest part of the Seamen went from Mr. Palmers to
Roughty Bridge, a small Village about 2 miles from thence, and carried their
Proportions of the

Mr. Orpen took leave of the Master in the Evening after Sunset; and presently
afterward there came to the Ship several stout boats manned with English men
and their servants, which were Palmer to bring the Ship out of that

Sir, we are whereupon the master answered That they came to do him good
service, an^ That they heard that the Torys did resort near the shores, to robb
people a^ they came and went by land to and from the Ship, and that themselves
could not well row back against the violent Ebb of a spring, (being the^ near
high water) and 'twas not safe for them t^ go ashore, least they should fall
into the hands o^ their enemies: but he told them again that h^ cared not what
became of them, and if they did no^ hasten out of his Ship, he would fire upon
them against them for their kindness. But to avoid his malice, they got into
their Boats again, and so went ashore.

That night about 12 a clock, Mr. Palmer's house was set on fire in several
places by the Toryes, who made several Shotts in through the doors; ^he men then
in the house, were Mr. Palmer, the Ships Mate, Mr. Spires, Mr. Myars, Mr. Row
and George Fleming, from whom several ^hotts were returned out of the doors and
windows; but the fire increasing vehemently about their ears, they were forced
to break open the doors, and submit themselves to the Toryes, who presently
entered the house, and Mr. Myars showed them where the Chests lay that had the
money; which the Toryes immediately took away out of ^he house; wherein (besides
the Treasure) were great store of fine embroidered clothes both for men and
women, which (as supposed) did be^ong to the right Master of the Ship and his
wife.

All thinking People of that part of the King^om, agree, That the putting the
treasure of ^he Ship into Mr. Palmner's house after this clan^estine manner,
without acquainting him therewith (especially while their Ship lay in no
dan^er) was for some sinister ends; and nothing ^ore evident, then that the
Master, Passengers and Seamen were resolved to slip away with the to allege
that all this Treasure was likewise plundered and rappareed by the Rabble of
the Country. But designs of that sort, have their end most commonly, not
unlike their beginning, for its believed, that the master, passengers and Ships
company, had as little right to that treasure, as the Toryes that Robbed them;
Neither did it prosper much better with the Toryes, for soon afterward, they
grew into high variance about dividing the spoil, and their leader who had the
greatest share, was shot through the body with three bullets, by such another
as himself, whereof he dyed without giving any manner of account where he had
hid his Talent; Thus the iniquityes of the wicked have fallen upon the heads of
the righteous: for Mr. Palmer, whose Life and Conversation have been an
Ornament to his Profession, and who has always had an unspotted Reputation, is
hereby, together with his Family, utterly ruined, his house and all his
substance, burnt to the ground; himself, his wife and children, forced to flee
naked out of their bedds, without saving so much as their wearing Apparel^
January, he had an account of what hapen'd at Mr. Palmer's; Then began his
confusion in London, the Owners will be upon my back for the money; For, how can
I answer such an unpresidented thing, to put the money ashore, when the ^hip was
in no manner of danger?

O wretched state of Man! which greatest things
To greatest downfall and confusion brings.
Had not the money been lost, I had enricht my self, and could have made the
better terms about it, ^hether I had sunk the Ship or saved her, Had ^ot the
money been lost, I could have sunk the ^hip, and pretended that all was lost
together, and havockt away by the Country: What shall do? The holes are already
bored throw her ^ottom, and much water already in her hold, she ^es now in
three foot water at lowest Ebb, and and how will it be with the Sugars when it
flows 2 foot more this next Tide? Come, I am re^olved; Sirrah go flip the Warp
that she rides ^y, and let her fill, and beat, and drive to the

The Master was heard to put forth several eja^ulations the holes are bored
throw her bottom. While ^e was thus railing at his fate, and cursing his ^arrs,
The People with the boats (whom he

Killowen, a small English village, bringing ashore, he met Mr. Orpen, and told
him that all the Orpen dispatched several people to the Ship; amongst them was
one Mr. Bryan Kelly Kelly accordingly did, and got Richard Clark, Samuel
Aldwell, Charles Carthy, Dermot Sulivan and Dermo: Sulivan Junior, to be named
in the note (along with himself, knowing them to be Mr. Orpens friends) as soon
as he had got the Orpen were got on board her, and Kelly went on board her, and
told them, that Mr. Orpen Orpens management, and that he Orpen was forced to
bring his people Aldwell, Capt. Carthy, Squire Sulivane and Mr. Kelly, to
oversee the safe putting of the goods ashore into convenient houses, which
Orpen and his men had very hot work, being all that night at close firing; and
it is credibly reported, that above twenty rapparees were wounded in that
nights service. They appeared several nights Orpen undertaken to manage and
defend the concern, that the Rabble and Rapparees to say that the Sea or Land
had swallowed it from them along with the Ship and goods; and the only cause of
crime against any of that country, is because that any thing was saved. The
next day being the 1st of February, (the third day after the Ship was
stranded,) The Master came again the blood freshens at the murderer when he is
brought to lay his hand upon the Corpse before the Inquest; But stepping Orpen
showed him that the water was in her hold within a foot and a half of the Beam;
whereupon the Master ordered that a hole

Upon the 2d of Febr. Capt. George Gregory commander at Ross-Castle, and Mr.
James Bland Minister of Killarny, came to the Ship, where they made about two
hours stay, and returned again, with full assurance, that she was ensured, or
that the Master, passengers and company had wilfully destroyed the Ship and
Cargo for the lucre of the Gold and Silver, and said that it was a just
judgment upon them that they were robbed by the Toryes: Next day, being the
third, Mr. Bland writ the following Letter to Mr. Thomas Crump the Kings
Officer, wherein are high enducements that Capt. Gregory ought to be attended
with some presents or bribes: with menaces of peril in case of Failure.

Glannerought Febr. 3d. 93. Mr. Crump,
THough Capt. Gregorye's modesty will not give him leave to ask any gratuity
for his Soldiers service, yet I hope your discretion will tell you what he may
expect upon this occasion; and I hope what his extraordinary Civility forbids
him to ask, your Gratitude will make you give him; he has sent away the Bagg of
Sugar, having the convenience of a Guard But he setts a very small value upon
it; If you deliver two Firkins of Lymejuice to his Sergeant, and what ever else
you think worth his acceptance, it will come safely to his hands; The Captain
of the Ship says, there are Sweetmeats Chocolett and Jamaica Peper and Ginger
aboard; But I need not advise you in this case, You that have been so much
conversant in those things, need not to be at a loss what to do; only I take
leave to tell you as a friend, that as you may incur his Favor by this, So you
may his Displeasure, by the neglect of it, which may prove more dangerous then
you imagine. My service to Mr. Orpen.

Sir, I am Yours, JA. BLAND.


It Is very evident what unjust errands the Capt. and Mr. Bland went upon the
day before, when they visited Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump on board the Ship, which,
though (as the Letter speaks,) bashful to ask for, yet they blush not to write
for, next day; Mr. Orpen, returned this answer, That the Soldiers must be paid
if they did any service; And as cases stood, he would not dispose of any thing;
but hoped that in a little time, a division would be made; And as soon as he
had his share Set out, which was due to him for Salvage, he would pay his
respects to them, with Presents of every sort; which unsatisfying answer not
fuiting well with the covetousness of the Captain and the Parson, proved of ill
consequence to Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump; For the Capt. and Mr. Bland set up for
the Master and Crew, Maing them now Saints, whom but lately before they had
condemned for Devils; they incensed Edward Herbert the high Sherrif, a man of
no small Power, and Charles Monk Esquire; Collector of the County of Kerry, against
Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump, as though they were the only persons that had destroyed
the Ship and Cargo; And had forced the Master by head and shoulders out of the
Ship; And having obtained from the Master and Passenger what Orpen, had refused
to give upon the request of that most disingenious Letter, They still continued
to raise and foment diverse evil reports, especially against Mr. Orpen, as
though he had been, not only the principal destroyer of the Ship, but that he
had also contrived the burning of Mr. Palmer's house: Haste is now the
necessity; and Major Steers the Grand Informer of the County of Kerry, was
posted away to Dublin, to fill that City with the noise. The Sh. joines with
the Capt. and Mr. Bl. and represents Orpen as a person very obnoxious and
culpable in the whole proceeding of the Ship. What cannot a man accomplish,
though never so ill a member? Can he want Friends while he has any thing to give
away? The Sh. the Cap. and Mr. Bl. have received Presents from the Master,
Passengers, etc. whom they immediately restored to their reputation again; and
Mr. Orpen is as soon traduced to the World: who if he had been but earlier in
Presents then the Master, had undoubtedly bore the Bell; But neglecting to pay
the Twenty Guinnyes which the Sh. desired to have, as a br. or gift, and for
refusing compliance to an unlawful Request of a Minister, is now under those
dangers which are preached out against him and Crump, in the perclose of Mr.
Bl's Letter.

The Capt. having carried away several considerable Ross-Castle, leaves the Sh.
in Glannerought to come up in his place, Giving him the command of his men; The
stores being nevertheless frequently robbed while the Sh. and the Master had
care of them; No

Now let any unbyast man consider the condition of that part of the Country,
and how liable the poor inhabitants thereof are to entertain Toryes in their
houses, when Capt. Gregoryes Soldiers have made such neighborhood with them,
which is not obsevable altogether in them only, for the Cap. himself who lives
by the sword, Moderate Fighter, or Worse; of which the former indeed is more
dispensable: For, if a man be not inspired with Courage, how can it be expected
where it is not? And if God and Nature designed it for him, he must blame the
ineptitude of his own Organs, or the Imbecility of the Womb that did not
sufficiently purify them, so as to make them capable to entertain a Spirit
suitable to his Profession; Oportet ut men's sana, sit in corpore sano; It is a
thousand pities that a Man of his Nerves should want a Mind: For the other
there can be no manner of Pardon in any Person whatsoever, that is false to his
God, and Traitor to his King; and for a small Pattern of his Heroic
Achievements, look into the Appendix, page 35, 37, 40, 26. And are not the
rest of the Noble Acts of Cap. Greg. and his Men, (and how they have ruined
above a hundred Families) writ in a particular Book of his Life, while he ruled
in that Country?

But behold, while they are thus in Neighborhood with the worst and most
bloody of the Tories, Lo! they are at the same time at work before Lords
Justices and Council against Mr. Orpen Cashiered Servants were tampered with,
Indigent Persons tempted, and Scavengers on every side, were employed to rake
up Dirt against him; a^ length they produced a Letter of his, (which has lain
asleep since October last) to the Commander Ross-Castle, to set at liberty one
Cnohor Boy, if he were not guilty of some Crime, being no^ Tory at that time,
but had been the Detector of all the rest of the Tories throughout the Province
of Munster, if he had not been ill rewarded for his good Services, and so
forced to escape; whose Liberty would not be granted to Mr. Orpen for the
Public Good: And it being then discovered Tories for himself, there Soldiers,
or the unrighteous Mammon; and so ^fterwards became the most notorious Robber
in

Thus, we our selves have forced them to be Toryes, that were the very
Instruments to detect them. Thus with a seeming Zeal to the cause, ^hey run to
the Government (the Fountain of justice) with their clandestine complaints
against Mr. Orpen about Cn^her Boy; whereas indeed it ^s with no other design
then to sculk behind the Laws, for that complaints of this kind, are cog^isable
before any Justice of the peace in the pro^er County, against a person that is
not of the ^rmy: nor in the Comision of the peace. See how ^hey have dealt with
the Government in this ^atter; after all their noise about Cnoher Boy, (...)
show them at length a Reed shaken with the ^ind, for the intent of that great
clamor could ^im no further, then highly to involve Mr. Orpen into Censures and
Expenses, and so have him condemned before he was heard, thereby to wound him
sorely in his Reputation and Purse, the better to carry on their other designs
against him, about the Ship; for why did not they after all the stir which they
made in Dublin about the Toryes, bring somewhat of that kind against him before
the Grand Jury at the last General Commission of Oyer and Terminer held in
Kerry on the 26th of March 1694, when he dared them to it in open Court, and
when the Ld. C. J. Pine told Major Steers their late confident in Dublin, that
'twas now a very firt time to do it.

But to return again to the Ship, without making five days, digression, as the
Master did, for he February, that Mr. Monk persuaded him to go on board, and
then he made but about an hours stay, and went not to her again until the 12th
where Richard Clarke to look after things on board) who until that day never
went to concern Orpen; Mr. Clark Rumidg'd for an hour or two up and down her
hold, and betwixt Decks; and then left her, and the Master went not nigh her
any more until the 15th. Now had the Master any manner of inclination for the
preserving of the Ship and Goods, he would not have lain away from her, while
her Decks could be kept dry; Nay, though he were forced to lie in his clothes all
the time. All this while the Master, Passengers and Seamen never mentioned
February, that the Country began to ring of it. For it seems the Mate or
Carpenter as they traveled, had made discovery thereof to some persons that
brought the account of it back to Killmare. Then and never before, the Master
owned, that there were holes bored in the Breadroom through her bottom, and that
he did it purposely to lodge her in the strand, that by the weight of water in
her hold, she might Sit the faster from beating; But sure he will not impute

During these Transactions, the Master, Mr. Myars, Mr. Row and Mr. Orpen, were
very good Friends, save that one Firebrand was cast in among them by Capt.
Gregory, by Stirring up both sides to speak hard of each other, and carried the
same from one to the other; which lost nothing in the carriage; so that he raised
some heats which lasted not above a day or two; and it appears, that hitherto
Cap. Gregory's incendiaryes, took no great root among them, for that the Master
and these Passengers went frequently to eat and drink at Mr. Orpen's house; and
upon the 11th of February after dinner, all three called him aside, and told
him, how well satisfied they were with his behavior in that affair of the Ship
and Goods, and desired him to take the trouble England; but would first make a
conveyance of all to him, and he to deliver up the same to them or their Orders
upon Monk, and having made him acquainted with what they had motion'd to Mr.
Orpen, they prayed the favor of him to draw writings between them to that
effect: and in the evening, they took leave of Mr. Orpen, and every one went to
his uarters, and Mr. Monk spent a considerable part of the night in drawing the
Instruments.

But the Sh. who lay all the while in ambush for a grasp at the Goods, lodged
in the same House with Mr. Monk, and by some means pried into the Writings, and
next morning he came along with Mr. Monk, accompanied with Cap. Gregory, to
Killowen, where they found the Master, the two Passengers, and Mr. Orpen, very
friendly together. Now or never was the time for the Sh. to set them at
variance, which indeed he accomplished with a witness: For he plainly saw that
he was at that instant like to be put by from ever having any concern with
these Goods: And there upon, in vehemence and wrath he insinuated to the Master
and Passengers, That himself was high Sh. of the County, a Justice of peace of
the County, Lieut. of the County, who could command the Army, as well as the
Militia of the County; and what was it that he could not do in the County? And
withal told them soberly, that they were under some censures for casting away
their Ship, and destroying the Cargo; and that he, and only he, could set them
right with their Owners in England, and with the Government in Ireland; And
then turned to some old Law-Book, directing (as he pretended) that all Wrecks
ought to be deposited with the Sheriff. The valiant Cap. Gregory, (who had made
them understand by the daily Outrages of himself and One Horse Nabs another;
and People of a sort soon agree: The high Sh. the Cap. the Master, Jacob Myars,
and Peter Row, sprung presently as a sworn Covey, and Mr. Orpen was no more to
be consulted with, but looked upon as a Person qualified to ruin their
Councils and Designs.

From hence forth Cap. Gregory, the high Sh. and Mr Bl. (being well sweetened
with some of the best Sugars) became Patrons to the Master, and these
Passengers, and by the frequent incursions of the first, That part of the
Country about Killmare, was harassed as though it had been the Enemies
Quarters; for he had always a ravenous pack at his heels, who preyed upon the
Country day and night, without paying for the Provisions which they exacted
from the poor People in their continual marches, under the notion of searching
for the Ships Goods, Tumbling and tossing all their little housholdry, and
janting it in that manner, from house to house, they beat and wounded the Men,
Ravished Women and Maids, and set Houses afire; But when they had Forced the
People to give them all their money, they put out the fire again. These doings
past under the notion of serving the Owners, who have also paid dearly for
their Services, and had they thought fit to have consulted Mr. Orpen, he had
made appear the many havocks which were committed by the Master, Passengers, the
high Sh. Cap. Gregory and Mr Bl. and they should find at what rate the Master
and Passengers have bought the patronages of those three Gentlemen; which began
more openly upon the 12 of February; and on the 13th the Sh. framed an
advantageous Narrative by his Letter to the Government, in the behalf of his
Sweet Clyents, and becomes Merchant for great part of the Goods, and waited at
Killmare for an order (in answer to his Letter) to Seiz both Ship and Goods
into his own possession; and so by his power of Shrievalty, Replevins, etc. to
wrest from Mr. Orpen and the rest of the English of those parts, what was due
to them for Salvage; and by his merit of that kind, to win the Owners favor,
into some great Presents for his good services, whom the Master and Passengers
in the mean time visited by their Letters, Setting forth the worthyness of the
Sh. as the only persen fit to be trusted in the whole concerns of the Ship and
Goods; and how highly he had appeared against Mr. Orpen and the rest of their
Enemies.

But Mr. Orpen and the English Petitioned to the Government against the
proceedings of the Sh. who waited big with expectation of a power to seize,
etc. But no such thing appearing, nor finding the success he wished for, and
that his Letter was not so taking as expected, Mr. Myars hastens away to
Dublin, well trained to every particular requisite to back the Letter of the
13th, who arrived there about the 5th of March, and on the 6th made his
examination ready, and on the 7th was examined before the Honble Sr. Henry
Ecclin, one of the Barrons of the Exchequer, which Examination scream'd so
loudly against the behavior of Mr. Orpen and the English, that the Government
conceiving it necessary to take cognizance thereof, sent to the Right
Honorable Sir Rich. Pyne, Lord Chief Justice of their Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas (then upon the Munster Circuit) to inquire into the whole matter,
and to report the same, and Colonel Denny and Col. Hasset, two of the
Deputy-Governours, and Justices of the peace for the County of Kerry, were
required to have Mr. Orpen and Mr. Crump apprehended, and thereupon they issued
their Warrant to the H. Sh. to that purpose, who was overjoyed to see the
growth of his labor and wit arrive to that perfection, and put the Warrant in
execution after a strange manner; Not by himself, or any of his Underofficers,
but employed Sergeant Fullerton (brother in law to Capt. Gregory) who with ten
Musquetteers came to Mr. Orpens house, and took him prisoner, without letting
him know upon what account, other then that their Capt. had commanded them to
do it; He asked them, was it by warrant or by order? The Sergeant told him that
he had a warrant; But would not be prevailed upon to show it, or to give the
least hint of the purport thereof. But at length he said that it was for
Harboring of Toryes, and gave out to the neighborhood (inter alia) that 'twas
for supplying the Torys with ten quarts of Powder.

Notwithstanding that Mr. Orpen seemed unconcerned at these proceedings; Yet
the new English Collony which he brought into that Country, began to repine at
their misfortune, and wished that they had never come out of England; And
finding him thus troubled on account of Gregory, and Mr. Bl. would soon have
them all accused, and prosecuted upon the like account, and thereupon resolved
to be gone bag and baggage as fast as they could out of their reach. The
Sergeant and party took away Mr. Orp. out of his house in great hurry, not
affording him time to put on his clothes, to the great glory of the high Sh. to
see his prisoner carried through the Towns with ten Musquetteers; a very
unpracticable way of executing the warrant of the Civil Magistrates.

But Mr. Orpen is now Prisoner at Tralee, and by the 23th of March was
Examined, and Bailed to appear the 26th, being the day that my Lord Chief
Justice had appointed for the Trial; which was bu^ very short time to provide
himself and his witnesses, being at that time of the year accounted four days
Journey from thence home to Glannerought, and back to Tralee again; However, he
was there on the 26th, with several Witnesses. But his Enemies having informed
themselves who they were, made interest to have them all accused for Felony;
and thereupon procured apprehended for this pretended Felony, to put them off
with Fear and Expense, from giving their Testimonies.

Upon the 27th in the morning, a Bill of Indictment against Orpen and Crump,
was found by the Grand Jury, for taking two Hogsheads of Sugar, and eight
Hogsheads of Lime-Juyce, of the proper Goods of Peter Row, out of the Ship
Laurel; In the afternoon they were called: but for want of Witnesses to prove
the Accusative Allegations, 'twas put off till next morning; and the Trial
could not yet be brought on, for want-of such Witnesses: Whereupon Mr. Orpen
told the Court, That he confessed to have saved such Goods, and that he would
prove the Master's Orders for it; and prayed to have the Trial go on; not
thinking what kind of Preparations were made against him. The Courageous Major
Steers, who was principal Engine to inform against him in Dublin, and a chief
Cock-Feather in the Jews Cap, was called to be Foreman of the Jury; Theophilus
Morris, who was not of the County, but Agent for the Owners and Merchants, was
the next called, both which were excepted against by Orpen; and some were
called and answered, Samuel Aldwel and Bryan Kelly, were sworn on behalf of the
Prosecutors. The Master made (in terms) a long Harrangue of his Course, and
Departure, in his whole Sailing, until his Arrival in Kilmare, and how he was
forced in by distress January in the morning, January. But denied that ever he
desired Mr. Orpen to save any thing belonging to her, and that he went into her
without his consent, and turned out those whom the Master had employed, Vizt. O
Sulivan More, Capt. Carthy, Mr. Aldwell and Mr. Clarke.

Mr. Aldwell swore, That himself went not on board, till after she was brought
safe to the Creek, And that Mr. Orpen did not turn Orpen showed them a Broad
Seal, but 'twas to encourage the men to their Arms against the Rapparees. And
that had not Mr. Orpen taken the matter upon him, the Ship and Cargo had been
destroyed, as appears by his Affidavit.

Bryen Kelly Swore that he was present when the Master desired Mr Orpen to go
on board and save what he could, who thereupon employed him and others; But
sent him to the Master for That none of the persons which the Master pretended
to have been employed by himself, came Orpen had brought her safe to the Creek;
as appears by his Affidavit.

There were Sworn on the behalf of the Traversers, Joseph Tailor, Charles
Mansfield, and Tymothy Murphey; Joseph Tailor Swore, that the Master showed a
full resolution against saving the Ship: That he expressed several frivolous
pretenses pro ut his affidavit.

Charles Mansfield Swore, That the Master had no mind to save the Ship; And
that he was with him the day he left her, being the 30th of January, when he
desired Mr. Orpen to go and save what he could, and that Mr. Orpen did
Accordingly employ several persons, who saved her, Orpen to stay and bring his
men to help to save the Goods, but promised him Salvage. Vide his Affidavit.

Timothy Murphy swore, That he was present on the 30th of January, when the
Master desired Mr. Orpen to go and save what he could; Mr. Orpen to go on
board, who went accordingly, and loosed the fore-top-sail, and placed a Man at
the Helm, and so brought her safe to the Creek; that the Persons which the
Master pretends were employed by himself, went not on board until the next
morning; and had not Mr. Orpen defended her from the Rabble, they had torn her
to pieces; That the Seamen broke open the Hatches, and made havoc of the
Indigo, and of the best of the Goods.

There were 14 Witnesses more on the Traversers behalves; but Bryen Kelly being
snubb'd in Court by the high Sh. for giving any Evidence in favor of the
Traversers, and the rest of Mr. Orpen's Witnesses being frighted by the Warrant
for the pretended Felony, they held their Tongues, for fear that Mr. Bl. whom
they suspected had contrived to have them thus falsely accused, should with no
less just prosecution prevail to have them Arraigned and Tried for their Lives;
fore-thinking that whoever had gone so far into such a Ford, would leave
nothing unattempted to wade quite through, to the utter Ruin, if not of their
Persons, at least of their Purses.

By thus much you may plainly perceive, how far the Presents made by the Master
had prevailed: And though the Lord chief Justice gave him such a scope of
delivering himself, as might satisfy the World that all Gates were open for
Strangers to come before his Lordship for Justice; yet the whole Court took
notice how he fettered himself in his own Discourse: For being asked by his
Lordship why he refused the Assistance of a great He answered, That 'twas a
most dismal stormy night, and so dark, that a man could not see his hand.
Whereupon Mr Orpen cried out for an Almanac, and proved it to be full Moon,
and the Witnesses proved it a

But the Jury soon returned to the Court with two Verdicts to this Indictment;
First, That Crump was not Guilty of any thing, but Orpen was Guilty of the
whole Cargo, except the Lyme Juice, though indicted only at the Suit of Peter
Row for two Hogsheads of Sugar and eight of Lyme Juice; Secondly, That he was
Guilty of two Hogshe^ds of Sugar, and no more; Though it does not appear by the
Examination of Peter Row, or any other Examination taken hitherto, that Peter
Row ever had any Sugar in that Ship; but Mr. Orpen told the Court that he hoped
that one Verdict was Sufficient to one Indictment; whereto the Sh. answered,
Another time, Mr. Orpen, another time. But the Witnesses for Mr. Orpen, Orpen
Gregory, Major Steers, etc. met together soon afterward in Dublin, and upon
their consult, a Writ marked ten thousand pounds, was taken out of the Kings
Bench against Mr. Orpen, at the Masters Suit; so that he that was lately but
principal Evidence, is now made Plaintiff.

Consider how naturally the Master Swore at the Trial to carry on a cause
wherein he designed that himself should be Plaintiff afterward; Mark that,
with the Rest. But least Bail should be given in to the Action, they prepared
another Expedient, (being the last Shift common to turbulent Spirits) That is,
to Accuse a man falsely into some plot or conspiracy against the Government,
which they intended should admit of no Bail. Thereby to plague him further with
Imprisonment and Expense, until he could obtain a Trial. And the better to
accomplish this barbarous design, they passed by the late Commission o^ Oyer
and Terminer, and framed a new and a mos^ unnatural Accusation against him,
viz. That h^ had Traitorously contrived the Burning of (his Father-in-law's)
Mr. Palmer 's House; and in orde^ thereunto they procured a Warrant of Treason,
from one of the Judges of the said Kings Bench, against him.

And in fine, the Sh. made him Prisone^ upon the writ and the warrant, and for
the further suppression of Justice, and to carry on their design^ against him
with the more facility, they have provided fresh warrants of Felony to hamper
an^ at will to aw all those who they think may serve as witnesses for him, and
have promised great rewards to such as will swear on their side.

While he is in custody, their Agent is very buisie about taking away all the
goods that were saved, and the Sh. stands by to grant Replevins, if in case
that any of the goods should be stopped for Salvage. But to make sure work, and
to prevent Orpen's bringing Actions against the same, he is hurryd away by the
Sh. and their Agent hurrys the goods away as fast, without giving Mr. Orpen any
manner of satisfaction for saving the Ship and goods; Notwithstanding that its
plainly proved, that all had been lost had not he and his men taken upon them
to save and defend the same as appears under the hands and Orpen, and by the
oaths not only of Orpen.

And that this is no more than what has been ^lready Attempted, will appear by
the following Affidavit.

Edward Dunigan of Nedeen in the County of Kerry, Yeoman, came before me this
day, and made Oath, That on the 31 of January last, he this De^onent, being a
Servant to the Reverend Mr. Thomas ^almer; was employed along with others, by
his said Ma^er, to search and pick up whatever things they could find ^n the
Rubbish of the walls of his Masters house, which was ^urnt and Robbed the night
before by the Toryes, And ^ith that amongst several pieces of Metal, some
Brass, ^ome of Pewter, etc, there was a Lump about a pound and ^alf weight,
taken up and thrown among the rest; And ^aith that 'twas reckoned at Brass. And
says that this De^onent reached it to one William Mabury, who put it up in ^is
pocket, And the Shape thereof was about two Inches ^road, about three inches
long, and about three quarters ^f an inch thick, after the Shape of a
disordered square, and ^hicker in some parts then other; And ruffish; And this
Deponent says that in a very few days after, he this Deponent was along with
the said William Mabury, as the said Mabury was coming from the burnt Walls,
where he the said Mabury had left the said Lump; And says, that he this
Deponent saw the said Lump with him the said Mabury; And says, that the said
Mabury told him this Deponent, that Jacob Myars the Jew, a Passenger of the
Ship Laurel, had sent for the said Piece or Lump, the said Myars alleging
that he had left a Gold Wedge in the house, when it was set on fire, and
believed that the said Lump was the Wedge of Gold; and this Deponent says,
that he saw Mr. Monk the Collector, Mr. Myars, Mr. Orpen, and the said Mabury,
walk away privately into Mr. Aldwell's Garden at Killowen, and this Deponent
believes, the said Mabury did then deliver the said Lump unto the said Mr.
Myars. And says, that presently afterward the said Myars called to this
Deponent and asked him (after he had showed the said Lump to this Deponent) Was
that the same that was taken up by him this Deponent within the burnt walls of
Mr. Palmers house, which he had delivered to Mr. Mabury? This Deponent told the
said Mr. Myars, That it was the the same; Mr. Myars asked him again, Was he sure
of it? This Deponent answered, that he was sure of it. But, said Mr. Myars
again, Can you take your Oath that it is the same? This Deponent Replied, he
could; And this Deponent does still say, that he is very well assured that the
piece or lump which was showed him by Mr. Myars was the same which this
Deponent had reached and delivered unto William Mabury at the burnt Walls
aforesaid, on the said 31 of January, and that he this Deponent knew it by some
remarkable Specks which were on the upper side thereof; And this Deponent
further says, that one James Barret came to this Deponent, and tempted this
Deponent to Swear, That the Lump which the Deponent Saw with the said Mr.
Myars, was not the same which the Deponent had formerly delivered to the said
Mabury. The Deponent told him, That 'twas a hard matter for any man to do it:
The said Barret told the Deponent, That Captain Gregory, Governor of
Ross-Castle, and Mr. Bland, the Minister of Killarny, had sent him to this
Deponent, and to assure him that if he would but swear that it was not the same
Lump, he this Deponent should have Twenty Pounds. But the Deponent told him,
That for a Thousand Pounds he could not do it. And the Deponent says, That one
Thomas Hely did likewise tempt the Deponent in the same manner; and says, that
the said Hely told him, that Mr. Bland had sent him to give him Twenty Pounds,
if he would but swear that the Lump which the said Mr. Myars had from Mabury,
was not the same Lump which the Deponent had formerly delivered unto the said
Mabury.

Ed. Dunigan.
Jurat coram me uno Justiciar. Commit, Kerry, 28 die April, 1694.

J; Blenerhaffet,



This Affidavit is a Sample of the contrivances now on foot concerning a wedge
of Gold, which Mr. Myars pretends he threw aside under the bed when the Toryes
entered the house; and by the Philosophers Stone reversed was turned into Brass.
But whether he threw it there or not, there was a lump of Metal taken up among
the rubbish, and being delivered to M. Myars, he did at several times in the
hearing of several Gentlemen, own and declare that it was the same lump or
wedge which he had thrown by, and described it by the color, shape, and size,
and by several private marks, and particularly by two specks or bubbles upon
the upper surface thereof; Now whether he left any such lump there as he
pretends; or whether he would not, if he thought 'twere Gold, have laid his
Challenge to any lump, were it the right one or no; or whether, if it were the
right one, he had not a mind to deceive the right owner of it, and so caused a
counterfeit to be made afterward; or whether he was cheated in Jamaica, is yet
a question; But it admitts of this discourse, that it is very manifest that the
piece or lump which was delivered by Mr. Mabury to Mr. Myars, carried the
several marks and specks upon the upper-side or upper surface, as the true
piece had, which is indeed an infallible assurance (if Mr. Myars description
were true) that it is the right piece, be it Gold, Brass, or any other Metal
whatever; For though its in the power of any ordinary capacity that can run
Metals, to imitate in some sort in the bottom sides or ends of the Counterfeit
the marks of the true Piece, yet the specks, or bubbles, or any other mark upon
the upper surface, are accidentals in casting, (and in a coat as different from
the rest, as the upper countenance of a Pann-pudding differs from every part
of the Geometrical superficies of the sides and bottom) and not to be imitated
by the best of Artists; and for further satisfaction in this point, Enquire at
all the Laboratories and Founderies within Humane management, and they will
tell you that its as impossible to raise (ad libitum) a single bubble or two
(or more properly honeycomb) of exact shape and place upon the upper surface
(that side only in such flat castings being liable to this kind of windy
sputter) as it is in the power of a Physician to lay a well man to bed and
bring a small pox through his Skin in exact numbers where and when he pleases;
and what man will take two pails of water of equal Cylinder and Depth, and
having set out upon the margins the 32 points with their Aliquots, and by the
plounce of a Pebble-stone having raised a bubble accidentally in one of the
pails, shall afterward undertake that in the dropping a thousand pebbles more
into the other pail, to raise a single bubble of exact shape point and distance
from the Center, with the former? And if he ever accomplisheth it, he may
afterward say that its a thousand times more impossible to raise (ad libitum)
in any Counterfeit a honey comb of exact depth, shape, and place, with the copy.
Notwithstanding that Ca. Greg. and Mr. Bl. were unsuccessfull in their
adventure if they designed to lay out their twenty pounds a piece with Edward
Dunigan for this intended subornation, which in some parts of the Kingdom, and
among some sort of folks, might perhaps have purchased a Post-knight for every
pound, especially when a poor man is threatened to be hanged if he refuses to
swear what is desired; yet they were cautious of laying out their money with
every man, being as supposed only in trust for the Master and Passengers, who
perhaps would not allow of the charge, unless they saw the value thereof in
good Thundering Oaths, such as would lay to the ground all whom they had
designed for the slaughter, to save their own Credits; so that not above two or
three of the Country are yet got to Swear, upon this particular; one being a
Blacksmith, and a very boon Companion at the Pot and Noggin, and has often
joined with the Minister Fervently in that sort, and sometimes it has been
observed that a few Pots of Ale shall prevail more with a drunken Fellow, than
Twenty Pounds with another. This Fellovv has svvorn, as it is said, That Mr.
Mabury asked him, Could he cast a Piece of Brass of some certain size or shape,
which would serve his turn? Or to that effect. But this Affidavit being a very
slight one, its supposed to be no more than the price of some small Reckoning
at the Alehouse. But if he swears thus far it self for nothing, or in Forma
Pauperis, what will his Affidavit be, when the Minister shall receive Orders
from his Owners to lay out the Twenty Pounds? Do they play upon the Easiness
of his soft Temper? Or will they use him as the Blind do a Staff, which they
thrust out before them to grope out their way among the Sloughs, to save their
Feet from the Mire, and their Heads from knocking against the Walls?

And though that the many Allegations and Assertions herein mentioned, can be
proved by diverse good Gentlemen, Yet to avoid too great a volumn at present,
take only this Small Appendix as a relish of what the whole Country ar^ Eye
witnesses of, and can manifest to be true, whilst his Enemies are in the mean
time, contriving by their dark devices, to take away Mr. Orpen's life; for no
less then that, can be looked upon as Satisfaction, for such soul Crimes whereof
he stands now accused; But their Mountain-belly'd conceptions ended only in an
abortive Mouse, for having brought him Seven-Score miles in custody upon this
Warrant of Treason into the Court of Kings Bench, Mr. Myars was there present,
and made no less violent prosecution against him, then Mr. Bl. had done
formerly against the 14 Witnesses upon the pretended Felony, who after they
were apprehended and brought in, had not a word to say against them: But Mr.
Myars took an occasion to slip away immediately out of Court, and so out of the
Kingdom; Leaving the Judges of the Land to consider the horridness of his
Judaical Informations; Tu fixo aculeo fugis: and so the Treason came to
nothing, save that Mr. Myars Savored [of a False Informer] in the nostrills of
common Justice. ' It Was the Boy's ambition to rule the Equiferos; and the Jew
would be the man should punish the great Malefactor; the Butcher that should
bring the mad Bull to the Ring, the Copped-Crown-Goose to pen up the Fox; But
should the due merit of the matter come to his Ears, then his Caravan of pretty
Girls would rock this Son of Clymene in his Phaetontical Chariot, and so
tumble him down with a vengeance, in the name of him that sent him, In quo quis
pe^cat in eodem punietur: O the powerful ingenuity of a Jew, when the same is
mixed with the Tipto-wit of a Jesuitish Master, Envigoratly boiled up to a Scum
by a Sh. a Capt. and a Minister. But every one to his Trade; and had Major
Steers revised this Juramentum of the Jew with as much Judgment in the Economy
of a Navy, as he has in extending of a Tenterhookt Examination, he had
questionless, by the Shooing -- horn of his practice, fitted it on to the
design with an exquisite adaptness: But as it is now, it is so extravagantly too
wide for the pretty designing Foot of the little Ulyssis, that a Gigantick
Polyphemus may jump into it with both Feet at once; and it is past Work for a
Cobbler now.

Lest his great Provocations might carry Mr. Orpen into insufficient Arguments,
as to his own Vindication. or into less becoming words as to the Authors of his
Sufferings, he showed his Pape^ to several of his Friends; one whereof sent him
the following Letter.

SIR,
I Take as a Favor your permitting me the sight (...) your Papers, which I
have read with all the Care (...) could; and to answer the confidence you have
put i^ my Friendship and Judgment, I have made a few Alterations in some Words
and Phrases; I hope that none of the Army, any more then the London Masters,
can take ill you^ defending your self; especially while you do it so directly
against a particular enemy only. But I have also made a^ Asterisk (*) where I
would have you consider whethe^ somewhat more caution should not be used in
Speaking of Mr. Bl. so indefinitely as you do sometimes, by the Appel^ations of
Parson and Minister, looking like a reflection ^on his Order, no less then
Himself; Its wonderful to me why these Gentlemen should drive at you with such
an impetuous flood of Iniuryes, for the good Services you have done; I hope
that what I attempted to do you in this small instance, may be Acceptable,
because I am willing to be esteemed, SIR,

Your Obliged Friend and Servant, R. T.


The Answer.
SIR,
THis Morning I had the favor of yours; what I have said, is but the flash of
my Pan, for (since I conceive my self reciprocally obliged to draw them to the
Life on horseback, that would paint me a Prodigy upon all four) I have writ a
more professed account of this whole matter which I may publish after my Trial,
to embalm my reputation against my Enemies putrid Vapors, which may be an
Ointment that none of their Ven^mous Flies will dare lick of; With a Series of
my own Services and Sufferings; Another shall ^e, The Privateers Packet Boat,
or the Magne^ick Influence of an Ensured Ship, upon a Py^ats Light, etc. very
useful for the times.

They that accused my Witnesses for Felony, and my self for Treason, having
played Bo-Peep with ^he Government and the Laws, whereby I live, may oppress me
too; Sed nemo me impune Lacessit; If I am hurt by popular Rage; I am not the
first; I, that have received Good things, must be content to take my share of
the Evil also; If storms of Injustice for pretended Felonyes and Treasons, or
other vexations, should continue, I shall admire at the long suffering of God,
and Sing Evigila Domine, quare Dormires, etc. But the Judges who will
understand the Justness of my Cause by the true Harmony of my Clamours; will be
Just, when many dare not venture to be so.

You have perused my Narrative, and yet you wonder at my Enemies impetuousness
against me; Don't you plain^y perceive that its mostly for these three Reasons?

First, Because I have saved what they had resolved to destroy, whereby they
are exposed for ever.

Secondly, They would revengfully deprive me of my Salvage, which after all
their Juggles, will be allowed me by the Law; Since that the Ship and the
Salvable part of the Goods are Saved

Thirdly, They would prevent my having any Public Employment; but they are
highly mistaken; for I desire none, while any of these are to be my
Yoak-fellows.

I own my self highly obliged for your kind Remark (*) But when its understood
how nearly I am related to more then a few Ministers; I presume that it will
not be easy to win any man to believe, That I mean reflection on their Order;
I, that have suffered so greatly for the Protestant Religion, shall (with due
submission) for ever have an Honor and regard to the Teachers in that Faith,
whereby I hope, after this Life, to possess a Heavenly Mansion, in a fuller
perfection then the Tongue of Man can express: I mean no other, then in
particular Himself to be taken notice of, for too much abusing the Order by his
uncooth behavior in and out of his drink; sometimes taking upon him the mean
Office; that is, What would you say, if he has in person executed the Sherifs
Warrants? Since I averr it, that he has made a Gentleman prisoner at the Suit
of another: and that some of his Parishoners have slighted the Church, and dare
not come to the Holy Communion, for fear of being Clap't upon the Shoulder by
the Ghostly Father. So that as for Mr. Bl. and the Jew, or any other
Professors, who Labor by such indirect methods to be what they would be, and
so manifestly abuse what they should be, I would have it known, that I contemn
them, and do not in the least fear the consequences of declaring it; I have no
such guilt as may compel me to daub with any such persons, and do call to God
and all good men for Judgment.

And by London-Master, in the Title Page, Mr. Lyel only is singled at, for his
singular Skill in Augur-holes; I have had the good fortune of being acquainted
with many of the London-Masters, and understood them to be Gentlemen of good
Reason and Sense, and most able Artists, and too ingenious ^o imagine that ever
I should design the least. Derision or Reflection upon any of them.

But why should you think that any of the Army would resent my holding of Cap.
Gregorye's Glass before him? I am confident, I stand well with them, or at
least with so many as know me; for when I was employed by his Grace the late
Duke of Schomberg, and afterward by the Government to command the
Artillary-shipping, I kept the Coast to and fro, as the Army advanced and
retired, during the late War, and furnished them duly from Sea; and so I did
the Seaport Garrisons; which I performed from time to time, to the
satisfaction of the Government, and the General Officers, as by their ample
Certificats may appear; I don't Remember that I have said, or meant any thing
that even malice it self can wrest, to the disrelish of the meanest Just Man in
the Kings pay; But if a particular Cap. or so, should come obstreperously in my
way, with design to have me beaten out into a Whim-wham for a Horse-Mill; I
hope that others of the Army will not judge me rude at the Table, if I hold the
Brimmer to his Nose, and make him drink as himself has brewed. I am sorry I
cannot alter any thing pursuant to your wholesome Counsel; However I heartily
acknowledge your kind Caution, and subscribe,

SIR, Your truly Affectionate Friend and Servant, R. O.
To R. T. Esquire;




DUring the whole Transaction hitherto, an Examination of Jacob Myars, the Jew,
taken before the Honorable Sr. Henry Ecclin, one of the Barrons of Their
Majesty's Court of Exchequer in Ireland, upon the 7th of March 1693, was kept
private from Mr. Orpen until about the last of May following, that the Copy
thereof came to his hands from his friend in London. The reason of this great
privacy, was, because the same contained the main grounds of incensing the
Government; and Mr. Orpen was not to know the Contents thereof, least he should
too early Answer it, and so ruin a Design yet in Embryo, before it had
received its birth into the world. Here you have that most abominable
Examination in its distinct Paragraphs, with the several Remarks inherent
thereto, respecttively, Viz.

I. This Examinate says, That on the 28 of January last past, the Ship Laurel
of London, burden 150 Tunns, Captain Christopher Lyell Commander, from
Jamaica, bound for London, was drove into the River of Killmare in the County
of Kerry, by distress of weather, and very heafy, that the Ships Crew could
hardly perceive any land, only the tops of the Mountains.

Answ. They were four Leagues to the west of the Bull, Cow and Calfe, and took
them for the Skellox, the wind at W. Was it distress or design that forced them
into Killmare? she came into the River on the 27th, and Anchored at Rossmore,
about midway up the River; But the Examinate says nothing of cutting the Cable,
and driving from thence, and it was on the 28th about 7 in the Morning that she
drove to Capanacossy, Vide all the Historyes of Ireland.

II. And in the distress of weather, the Ship lost all her sails, so that she
could not be steered any longer, and the Commander of the said Ship, Crew and
Passengers, hoist out the long boat and rowed ashore to save their lives; and
on 7 a clock the same morning, they all came ashore, and traveled on the land
about two miles from the place where the Ship lay; and afterward, found the
said Ship drove in among the Rocks.

Answ. Diametrically Opposite, she had all her Vide Affadavits Charles
Mansfield, John Kelly, etc. There Black Water, (right before the wind) a very
Capanacossy upon easy ground, at low water, where she touched no Rocks; but
drove to and faces, while they made merry, and beheld her Where she lay, for
she lay no where until she drove to Cappanacossy, two miles from the place
Cappanacossy, and divided among

III. That about two of Clock in the afternoon the said Captain, Passengers,
and all the Crew, returned on board; and the said Captain being informed that
one Thomas Palmer, Clerk, and Justice of peace in that County, was near him, he
wrote to him, to desire his assistance and advice to save him from the Irish
Rabble; on which the said Palmer immediately came down and sent on Board a
Corporal and five Soldiers, to guard them, which was all the assistance he said
he could assist them with, and advised them to stay on Board, which they
accordingly did, the storm yet continuing.

Answ. They returned not on board until the Palmer came, and that he had not a
Sail left; would any Master, if his Ship was not in a willful distress, stand
Palmer did promise more asistance then the Corporal and five Soldiers, and
Palmer told

IV. The next morning (being the 29th of January) they all thought it most
convenient, for the saving of their lives and money, the Ship lying so very
dangerously between the Rocks, that some of them should go ashore and carry the
money with them to the said Mr Palmer's house; and that accordingly this
Deponent, and the rest of the Passengers, and a few of the Ships Crew, brought
the money ashore, about 12 a clock, to the said Mr. Palmer's house at Needen,
and on the account of the Captain and themselves, desired the said Mr. Palmer
to shelter the same; which did amount, in pieces of Eight and Wedges of Gold,
to the value of 2500 l. or thereabouts, which he accordingly did.

Answ. They must needs think it convenient a few of the Ships Crew, when they
left but two of the Crew on board? And they did not acquaint Palmer with the
Treasure in the Chests, until after the house was burnt and Robbed.

V. That the said Examinate was ordered by the said Captain to desire the said
Palmer to come down to the Ship, to advise him the best way for saving the
Ship and Cargo; who accordingly went down with one Mr Richard Orpen his son-in
law; and sent the said Orpen on board to advise with the Captain; whose Advice
was that the said Captain should send his Gunns ashore, which he refused to do,
saying it would disable him from the common Enemy, (the French) who not long
before, had taken two Ships out of that River.

Answ. When Mr. Orpen went on board, he tried the Pump, and found that the
water in the Ship was dirty and stunk, whereupon he told the Master etc. But
the Master could not abide to Orpen told him that a Battery on the shore,
within Pistol Shot of the Ship, would do much better, and small Arms would do
much better on board. For the Enemy could not attack him any way, but in their
boats. But the Master would not hearken to it; Though his Orpen asked him about
his Anchors, and how he rid? The Master answered, By a small Kedger that That
his sheet Anchor wanted a stock. Then Mr. Orpen desired him to send his
Carpenter a shore, Orpen observed to the Master, but the Master (though 'twas
fine Weather) Excused the not getting her away that Palmer's.

VI. That the said Captain agreed with Mr. Palmer to send him seven or eight
Long Boats to unload part of the Cargo, whereby the said Ship might be
lightened; and so with the first opportunity of a moderate wind and high water,
be got off from the said Rocks.

Answ. Mr. Palmer without any agreement, January, and

VII. That the Examinate, with the rest of the passengers, and some of the
crew, being in the said Palmers house about 12 a clock of night, the Torys or
Rapparees came and set the house on fire upon them, which as they supposed were
upwards of sixty in number, and shot in upon them throw the windows and doors,
so that they were forced to rise out of their beds and defended themselves
about a quarter of an hour, but the fierceness of the fire increased, and they
were forced to break open the doors to save their lives, and immediately the
Torys entered the house, brought out the Chest and opened it, and took all the
money that was in it; and stripped this Examinate and some of the passengers, of
their very Shirts, and beat them extremely.

Answ. Now when the house was set on fire and Robbed, Mr. Palmer was made to
understand that this great Treasure was brought into the house

VIII. That on the 30th in the morning the Captain came ashore to see what was
become of the passengers, and left the Ship with an Anchor and Cable out to
keep her from floating, and orderd the Carpenter to bore two or three holes in
the Bottom of her, to hinder her from rising where she lay, that she might not
float and beat against the Rocks; for by that means the Ship would lie safe,
which was accordingly done, the lower Tire of the Sugar being all wasted by the
leakiness of the Ship in her voyage, and the rest of the Sugar lying high with
the Indigo and Cotton, Ginger, and Logwood, Fustick, and Roman Vittrioll, could
come to no damage by boring of the holes.

Answ. The Examinant was sadly put to it to find an excuse for the Masters
forsaking the Ship, To see what was become of the Passengers, as tho he had
past a Bill of Lading for them, and for fear he had lost them, he goes ashore
to get a receipt for their bodies, Leaving the whole Ship and Cargo to a Mob,
whose mercyes are very crueltyes, etc. he ordered three holes to be bored
through (wilfully by mischance) to have three Guns fired at once through her
hold, and then he need not doubt her speedy Sinking.

IX. That the Captain advised with the Examinate who^ they should do to save
the said Ship and Cargo from the Rabble and Toryes, and thereupon they thought
fit to desire O Sulivan More, Captain Carthy, Mr. Aldwell, and Mr. Clark, two
English Protestants, to go on board to secure the said Ship and Cargo from the
Toryes, O Sulivan and Captain Carthy, of the Irish the head in that Country,
and this deponent believes that by that means to prevent the meaner sort from
useing any violence, That the said four persons went accordingly on board and
promised to secure the Ship and Cargo, having an order from the Captain, and an
instrument under his hand to have the one half for the Salvage.

Answ. They had it seems packed the Cards before they could well hide the
cheat, and without grief was all lost, and the Ship to their disgrace safe in a
Creek, It remained now how to blind the owners and the world, that they might
not see the money carried ashore with any other then a harmless intention to
save it; and to manifest their industry, he says, that these four persons
employed, went aboard; But had not Mr. Orpen sent Mr. Kelly to have them named
in the instrument for Salvage, as in trust for him the said Orpen, and as his
friends, It Is presumed that Carthy, and Aldwell went not aboard until the next
morning after the Master had deserted her, and until after Orpen; Mr. Clarke
came not near her in ten days after, O Sulivan knew not any thing of the
matter,

X. That after they went on board, they confessed they found all things in good
order save 2 barrels of Indigo which the Captain brought ashore, and one
hogshead of Indigo, whereof some part was taken out.

Answ. What a confession is here expressed by the Examinat, when that the Master
in open Court declared upon Oath, and as you see by the Affidavits

XI. That the same night the said Orpen, and one Mr. Thomas Crump along with
him, came on board the Ship, and demanded of the said O Sulivan More, by what
authority they came on board, who thereupon showed them their order from the
Captain; But the said Orpen and Crump forced the said order from them, and
seized the said Ship and Cargo, the sa^d Orpen for the Admiralty, and Crump for
the King; the s^id Orpen producing a Broad Seal, and turned the men ashore
which frightened them away.

Answ. The Ex^minant runs on with a most chymerical Concatenation of falsityes;
For 'twas in the morning that Orpen and Crump went on board; and how was O
Sulivan More Demanded Sulivan turned ashore that never was on board, and Clark
that came not near her until ten days Aldwell and Capt. Carthy, who came not
till next morning and were then employed by Mr. Orpen to help to save the
Goods: But now comes the dead doing Blow, Orpen for the Admiralty, and Crump
for the King, Seized the Ship; and Orpen showed a Broad Seal. O Terrible piece!
what necessity for a broad Seal after Orpen Orpen's discourse to the Master
when he returned Orpen's men,

XII. That when they left the Ship they gave charge to the said Orpen and Crump
to take care of the goods being in the condition they found them in as
aforesaid, and then went to the Captain, and gave him an account of what was
done, who the next morning, with several of his men, went a board and demanded
the reason of their proceedings. But they turned the Captain and his men
ashore, and quite dispossessed him, having seized her as aforesaid; The Captain
charged them to take care of her, and not to imbezle the Cargo on board, for
that they should be accountable for it and their proceedings. But they answered
him that he needed not to concern himself, he neither had nor should have any
thing to do with it.

Answ. He goes on still with the same thread O Sulivan More Clark leave the
Ship, that were not near Carthy and Mr. Aldwel leave her, that went not aboard
till after she was safe in the Creek, and were employed all along by Mr. Orpen;
and the Master went not to the Ship in the morning, but in the afternoon, being
the third day after he had deserted her; neither had he of his men along with
him any more then the Gunner, who was one of the principal Caballers about
boring the holes; and though the Examinate says that they were quite
dispossessed; Its manifest they were earnestly entreated,

XIII. That the next day this deponent saw several hundred horse-loads coming
from the said Ship, loaded with part of the Cargo belonging to the said Ship,
by the said Orpen and Crumps order; and this Examinat says, that he was told
by several who bought thereof, that the said Orpen and Crump disposed and sold
the said goods to every one that would buy.

Answ. It Is very probable that the Examinate savv some horses, but not one
hundred, laden with the Ships goods; The greatest part whereof Orpen, and
others carried away the Sugar in great quantityes, which the Master gave them
while he was aboard. But its not in the power of man to say that Orpen or
Crump sold a penny vvorth of the whole Cargo, though hundred^ will prove that
the Master, Passengers, and seamen,

XIV. And the said Crump being Officer for the King, forgave the buyers the
duty and discharged them thereof; and also gave them Permitts, and that the
said Crump and Orpen sent eight horse-load of the said goods (as this Examinat
is informed) to Kinsale to Captain John Waller Deputy Governor of
Charles-fort.

Answ. What pains would not the Examinat undertake to out the Kings officer,
or any one that had a hand in saving what they would have destroyed; at
length he performs it with this most execrable assertion, that he had forgiven
the Kings duty, and gave Permits, the only taking thing to turn him our, who
was never guilty of any such behavior, and before the Wars was employed for
20 Years together, and for his faithfullness and integrity, was in very great
esteem with his Superior Officers; Nor does the Examinat regard how he
bespatters any person of what vvorth or quality soever to rid himself and Crew
of that indelible spatter which they will never be rid of; The Lt. Governor
of Charles-Fort, who is known to be a person of Honor, and abhors any dirty
action, must be brought into the story for eight horse-load of Goods sent him;
and Sulivan More was turned out

XV. And that the said Orpen sent several boat loads of the said goods up the
River to his own House, and other places, by which proceedings of Orpen and
Crump, there is not visibly left the value of 500 l.'s worth of goods of all
the said Cargo; Though at the time that the said Orpen and Crump took
possession thereof, it was, and this Examinat believes to be worth between 5
and 6000 l. the whole damages sustained both as to Ship, Money and Cargo, being
about 10000 l.

Answ. A far fetched aggravation, That Orpen carried some of the goods to his
own house. Had there been room for them, he had sent all the rest l.'s worth
of the goods were saved, its 500 times more then was expected or hoped for by
the People belonging to her and in all appearance the Ship, Cargo and money, was
worth some thousands of pounds; but observe, it [was] and then he [ believes,
etc.] all which might indisputably have been saved had not the Examinat and the
rest carried the money ashore, with some sinister design, and had not the Master
caused the holes to be bored

XVI. And this Aexaminat says that the said Orpen and Crump took the very
Sails, Riggins, and Furniture that were left of the said Sh^p, and conveyed
them away among the rest of the goods.

Answ. How now, Mr. Examinat! you want the main property of the fourbe or
fripon. Wit, a good memory: Has the tediousness of your bladderblown
Examination made you forget in the Rear what you have said in the Van thereof,
it is not above half an hours reading since you have plainly said in Page 56.
that she had lost all her sayls; Had the Sailors, Master, and Examinat, been as
sound at heart as the Sails, all had been well, and the adventerous Owners
might have received a Successful return. Now Mr. Examinate, you must call aloud
to your high Sh. Captain, and Mr. Bl. and try if the other bagg of Sugar a piece,
to each of them can help you? Nay can any pecuniary mulct wipe this Blot out of
your Escutchcon, if you have any coat of Arms? What Hocus-Pocus tricks are
here? It Is and it is not. The Master in his Letter January to Mr. Palmer, and
you in the forlorn part of your Examination, agree, that she had not a sail
left, yet toward the faggend of the same Examination, Orpen and Crump took
away the very sayls, etc. But least the curious Reader might be at a loss to
know which is which, Orpen and Crump.

XVII. That this Examinat, Passengers, and Ships Crew, being strangers in the
Country, the said Orpen and Crump gave out ridiculous reports about them,
purposely to frighten them, and make them odious to the Country, the said Orpen
confessed to this Examinat; and afterward advised him to run away and leave Ship
and all behind them, telling them that if they would stay, he believed they
would be all knocked in the Head.

Answ. Though they were strangers in the Country, 'twas the Mate and Carpenter
that gave out ridiculous reports of them, and discovered the whole intrigue of
destroying the Ship; 'twas their own Consciences, whose ghastly Spectrums they
could not be rid of, and not Orpen and Crump, that advised them to flee from
the place where they had committed so vile a fact; but few abiding upon that
ground where themselves have been Guilty of Bloodshedding, or other foul
crimes.

XVIII. That within 12 days after the said Orpen and Crump had taken possession
of the said Ship, Mr. Charles Monk the Kings Collector for that County, Mr.
Edward Herbert the high Sh. Mr. Gibbings the Surveyor, and Capt. Gregory
Governor of Rosse-Castle, came with several Soldiers to take the Examinate and
the rest belonging to the Ship prisoners, the said Orpen having informed them
by Letters that they were Pirates, or little better.

Answ. The Examinate has not yet found his Journal, for 'twas within Seven
days after the possesion, that Mr. Monk, Mr. Herbert, Capt. Gregory and Mr,
Gibbings, came into that Country; and the Soldiers came to guard them, and not
to take the Examinate and company Prisoners; Neither were there any such
Letters as the Examinate Speaks of. But there wanted not grounds enough to have
them taken up; The Carpenter having upon Oath, before the Capt. and high Sh,
discovered the whole plot that destroyed the Ship. and Cargo; But they had more
Grace then to take them up, having a far greater appetite to take up some
Wallets of Indigo and Sugar.

XIX. But the said Collector understanding by their Clearings of the Office and
Government of Jamaica, which the Captain produced, that they were wronged, gave
no Credit to the said Orpen and Crump, but was highly incensed against them,
and told them that he would acquaint the Government of their villanys,
whereupon the said Orpen delivered up the Ship to the said Captain, But stopped
the goods that were visible in his posession, alleging that he ought to have
the half Salvage, and quitted the seizure.

Answ. The Collector never understood by their Clearings that they were honest
men; for they Orpen made it appear to their faces that there was a great deal
more, and other sort of Casks, as Punchions Lyell was never Shipped as Master;
but the Master dying (as they allege) after they left Jamaica, Mr. Lyell (as
he pretends) was desired to take upon him the charge of the Ship; and thus
Jaimaca, or a true Invoyce from thence was never produced, so that whether any
part of the Cargo was transhipt into any other Ship at Sea, is yet doubtful.
And though they appeared as very honest men to the high Sh. Capt. Greg, and Mr.
Bl. It was not so until some handsome oblations of Sugar, Indigo and Cotton,
were first made. But as for delivering up the Ship, etc. the Master would not
be persuaded upon any terms to look after her, and had not Mr. Monk cried Monk
for his Negl^gence; and though he remained in the Country for three weeks
afterward; so careful he was, that he went away and left the Fustick lying
among the water and Ballast.

XX. The said Examinat further says, that the said Orpen produced a Letter to
him, which he said he received from Thomas Farren Esquire; Judge of the Admiralty
as Cork, and the said Captain Waller, ordering him to seiz the said Ship and
Cargo aforesaid.

Answ. There was no Letter from Mr. Farren; and Capt. Wallers Letter was dated
the 25th of February being 12 days after the Examinate left that Country, in
which Letter, are these words [Be careful of every thing belonging to the Ship
Laurel, for since the men are saved, the Ship and Goods are still the Owners,
for which you are to have Salvage] but the distorted optics of the Examinant
have extorted words of other shapes and hews, from a Letter which he never saw.

XXI. And further says that the said Orpen did confess to this Examinat, that
he gave out many false and Scandalous reports upon the said Captain and
company, but it was in passion.

Answ. This is such another confession as O 's, where the Examinat says that
he confessed that he found all things in good Order on board the Ship, who
never was on board her.

XXII. And this Examinat further says, that the said Captain Gregory, the
Surveyor and the high Sh. of the County of Kerry told him that the said Orpen
did offer to bribe them purposely to set them against the Ships company, but
they refused to do the same, and this Examinat says that he has bribed
several on that account, as this Examimat has been informed.

Answ. Notwithstanding that it is believed that the Sh. and Captain Gregory
would say any thing for their votaries, its a question whether the above
Paragraph be not the Examinats own, though after the Country had labored greatly
under the frequent extortions of the Captain and his Soldiers; And the Sh.
sometimes granting his Replevin to these Soldiers against the new English, with
no other design then to possess himself of their Goods, and then Superseading
his own Replevin when be found that the Soldiers would not bring the goods to
himself; The whole Country being in a tumult through these oppressons, which
astonished the English to find the Laws administered in this manner, where they
expected such uprightness as might be leading to all the rest of the Orpen's
hands, His sending to Mr. Orpen that if he would give him Twenty Guinea's, he
would compose all matters to his content with the Master, and always fideing
with one or another, and setting the people of the Country and the people of
the Ship at variance; It Is very manifest that though there was no Bribery, there
wanted not Inducements of the first Rate.

XXIII. And this Examinate further faith that the said Orpen wrote to one
Captain Cuningham then Governor of Ross, as he was informed, to let one Cnoher
Boy O Sulivan, who was then one of the chief of the Toryes, then in custody, to
make his escape; who accordingly made his escape and was the head of the Toryes
as this Examinat was informed that burnt the house and Robbed the Examinat and
company of their Money aforesaid.

Answ. Though this paragraph is already answered, page 27. yet it is not amiss
to ask the question, How came Cnoher Boy to escape at Mr. Orpen's instance,
when Capt. Cuningham's own Orpen's instance, how came it that he carried his
Orpen's instance, why was he pursued immediately by the Soldiers? If he se
defendendo, to set up a company for himself, and became the worst of Toryes.
But has Capt. Gregory committed one Tory to Goal dureing the whole time of his
Governing in that Country? Mr. Orpen has, by the discoveryes of Cnoher Boy,
brought into Goal great numbers Cnoher Boy was forced Orpen (who was the
greatest Prosecutor of Malefactors) must now be accused as a friend to such. In
the mean time, while these Loyalists are telling a story of Cnoher Boy; they
have sufferd great part of that Provence to be over Run with Toryes; and these
Soldiers (being a sort somewhat tamer) do imitate their footstepps, and under
pretense of beating for them, (whether for want of Pay, or to oblidge their
Capt.) have Robbd the Country almost of what the Toryes lest; And the
Commissioners of the Revenue will find but a very sorry return from thence for
many years to come, by reason that great numbers of Families have fled from the
crueltyes of the lawless Robbers, and as little Lawful Government of this
Captains Soldiers, the latter having plundered at the heels of the former, those
parts are in a manner laid waste.

But this being a Discourse which has a volume of its own; Its high time to
return again to the Examinat, who has made such a horrible Narrative in his
topsy-turvy Examination of things, that were and were not, in a sort of
Legerdemaine and sometimes a Hysteron Proteron Scene, where there was no manner
of Horse at all to be found, nor a Cart to set before him; yet from the 30th of
January to the 7th of March (being the day whereon his abominable Examination
came into the World,) was a considerable time to frame his Heteroclitical
Model of the whole proceedings upon the Ship Laurel, who left her the January,
and was never any nearer to her afterward, then 3 long miles distance;
Quaecunque and after this his Pike-and-dagger-account, (some too long, as some
too short for any reconcilable medium of Truth) the religious man will judge,
that the Jew had but little regard to either Testament, when he fired off this
Examination at random with both eyes winkt at once; The tonitruous bellowing
whereof, has not only frighted away many innocent people from their Houses,
but has also smitten the minds of the Nations with a wrathful concussion of
concerned displeasure against them; and at length it proved A Puddle-Fight, or
Battle of Squirt;
Never a Man killed, and no Body hurt.
Save that it grazed upon Mr. Orpen, and so stunned him into 5 weeks
confinement in Kerry; and from thence tumbled him most Unbailably headlong for
7 score miles together, in custody, closely begirted with some of the
treasonable Chain-Shots; But in open Court, He brake those Withs as a thread of
tow when it touches the fire.

But Mr. Myars went not to Dublin upon that affair, without the advice of the
high Sh. who having by his letter of the 13th of February given the Government
a partial account of the proceedings upon the Ship, did not omit to instruct
the Examinat in such particulars as were requisite to justify that Letter.

NOw the Unbyast Inquisitor may from hence make the following Observations,
vizt.

1. That the Ship was 4 leagues west of the Bull, and Calf, and the wind at
west, when first they made them, and designed for Kinsale, and might have Saysd
thither right before it, when they stood extravagantly for Killmare; and then
what danger could there be when they were got nine leagues up into such a River?



3. That they forsook their Ship at Black-Water-mouth,



Palmer told them of the Toryes.

6. That Mr. Palmer told them their Ship

dropped by a stranger, and she fleeted day and night. 3, 12, 29, 14.

8. That the Master denied that he had any

9. His refusing to have a stock made in an

10. That the Examinate positively says that O Sulivan More, Mr. Clark, Mr.
Aldwel and Capt. Carthy were turned out of the Ship; Whereas O Sulivan More
never came near her, Mr. Clark Aldwel and Capt. Carthy Orpen, to whom all do
attribute the right of Salvage.

11. That the whole Cargo (especially the Sugars) Orpen

12. That the Master (when he forsook the

13. That by Peter Row's Examination before Barron Ecclin, and by all other
Examinations hitherto, it never appeared that he had any Sugar at all in that
Ship; yet Orpen was found guilty for two hogsheads which Mr. Row had not in the
Ship, and not guilty for the Lyme-juice which was in the Ship.

14. That the Master at the Trial of the indictment, answered upon Oath, that
he could not Accept of the assistance of the boats to bring



16. That there is one thing more observable in Mr. Orpen's Justification, Viz
that there were but eight hogsheads of Lyme juice on board, and so many he
saved without imbezlement, and might have done the like with the Sugars and all
the

January 1693, being the day before the Master etc.) is Supplementally repaired
in his idaeal Examination of the whole proceedings, which he likewise never
saw, and were not.

Greg.'s men sold the Ships Goods, and he imprisoned the Buyers till they
compounded with him for 6 Guineas Bribe, and then set them at Liberty, yet sent
his Brotherinlaw and other Soldiers to take away the Goods.

19. That it is admirable, that neither the Examinate nor the Master, has in
all this progress, given an acompt that they fired some great number of Guns
for Pylots, Since they fired none at all during the whole time of their
pretended distress.

20. That by their own confession upon Oath, S.W. Quarter S. Moon gives high
water in the River of Killmare, then, about 8 a Clock in the morning on the
28th of January last, gave low water in the same place; and all those Mariners
will say that a Ship striking at low water was never before known to stick in
a calm pool, but infallibly brought off, unless some leaks had set her down,
and so kept her f^st as the ^yde arose. But to clear that point she Remains (in
Killmare) Tight to this day, save the holes that the Master caused to be made
in her, which was not till three days after she struck.

21. That the Master, Passengers and Ships Company have no way to save
themselves, but by laying their horrid Crimes upon others; and what will not
such Principles allege, say and Swear? And what will they not give for
witnesses, rather

22. That the high Sh. Capt. Greg. and Mr Bl. have been more then ordinary
mercenary in the whole proceedings, Et dabit Deus his quoque finem.

23. Why is Mr. Orpen prosecuted, who saved

24. How easyly all the money might have been Palmer's ruin prevented, had they
but told him in time, that the Treasure was in his house, which he was never
made to understand till after all was lost.

l. has been the Ruin of the Main Cargo; And the whole Practices hereupon have
been absolute combinations, etc. as the profering Ed. Dunigan 20 l. for a
Orpen's vvitnesses for Felony upon no other etc.

The Sh. and the Master offering 23 Guinnyes and 2 hundred weight of Sugar to
get the Master 's Orpens hands etc.

The Sh. sending to Mr. Orpen for twenty Guinnyes and he would settle matters
with the Orpens liking; and because he could not have the 20 Guinnyes, he swore
that Mr. Orpen offered to bribe him, etc.

26. That all the Ships crew (except two)

27. That Mr. Orpen had full power to manage

28 That the Note which the Master passed Orpens use and behoof,

29 Why did the Master profer 23 Guinnyes and 2 hundred weight of Sugar as a
bribe to get Orpens hands?

30 The abstruseness of the Examinats Excuse, for the Master's forsaking the
Ship, [To see what was become of the Passengers] leaving a

32. That they had premeditately resolved to



33. And you may remember that it has been an ancient custom when Ships have
been wilfully cast away in this manner, to have the Owners or Merchants
embroiled into Law Suits by the Master, and to have the Country (though never
so inocent where such wickedness has been committed,) made a Sacrifice to the
Loosers, for a warning to future ages that all others might hereafter flee from
a Ship in distress, and shall not dare presume to save her, for fear that the
Master had premiditatly resolved to throw her away; As the lamentable
consequence which happened soon afterward to the Joseph of Bristol burden 260
Tuns, from Mevis with a rich Cargo, being forced into a real distress near
Killmare, nothing was more posible then to have saved her with a very little
assistance; But the Country who were freshened with the late fate of
Killmare-people; That are impeached as a pack of Traitors for performing a work
of Christianity; made fast their doors, and with their whole familyes wives
and Children, fled from their houses as from an epidemical plague, and Returned
not again till she and her Cargo were utterly lost for want of help. And must
the nations suffer shipwreck thus for the Laurells sake? The Mob indeed might
basten in to rend out Gods penny (so called) But People of repute who could
help and preserve, Sneakt away from her relief, for fear they should soon be
forced to run the Gantelop of prepaired Combinations; Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum.

33. That Mr. Orpen has taken and sent to Cunarum labor est angues Superare
mearum. And though Capt. Gregory has not brought in one during the whole time
of his Governing in that Country; yet he serves now as an Informer to impeach
him for a Traitor that brought in the 92; But God forbid that such doings
should ever incline the mind of any good Subject to that odd saying upon true
Service contemned, Think not by doing well, a Fame to get;
But be a Villain, and thou shall be great.
And how necessary the consequences of such impeachments can be to the good of
the Kingdom, the Government will undoubtedly Judge.

And when the most Just GOD, that sees into the bottom of all hearts, shall in
his due time think fit that these and suchlike Gentlemen (who have disturbed
the greatest part of Their Majesty's Dominions, with their false and scandalous
Insinuations; and the better to pass in M^squerade with their horrible
Machinations, have labored to fix their vile clandestine Facts upon the
Innocent) should be called to a Court of Justice, to receive their condign
Punishments from Humane Judicature; Then the Bells of the Nations would
counter-ring their Stratagems to the World; and so the Owners, which are indeed
the greatest Sufferers, would come to know the grounds of their Misfortune; and
the Loyal Subject would stand right with the Government, and be well looked
upon for his good Services.

A POSTSCRIPT To the Owners of the Laurel.
Gentlemen,
I Heartily condole your bad fortune in that Country where I am concerned: But
yet since it was a designed Wickedness, it is all one to you upon what ground it
happened: Though it is not so to me, that have suffered so much by it in my
Reputation.

Now whether the Jew, the Master, the high Sh. Captain Greg. or Mr. Bl. was the
Atteria Magna that gulpt out the respective motions to every one of the rest in
his Station, of Transforming good Service into Felony, Treason, etc. I presume
Mr. Myars can best inform you, and the Reasons thereof.

Who were the chief Projectors to ruin a rich ship, thereby to gain an
opportunity to carry off the Treasure behind the Curtain? Mr. Lyell may tell
you that it was Mr. Myars and himself.

Who brought the Ship (of ten foot in the hold, with their 3 political
Augur-holes in her bottom, in 15 foot water) into a safe Creek? I take that
upon my self, as done by my people. But,

Who were they that Dabbled up to the Elbows in dirt for Witnesses? Perhaps
these two Gentlemen will excuse themselves, and say that Capt. Greg. Mr. Bl.
and that Braying Engine of Information, the Major, profer'd their service.

And as for the barsh account which they have given you of my Behavior, I
conceive it to be some Miscelany Scraps of the Jew's Examination, which he
forgot to put into Writing whilst he was in Ireland. Therefore for the General
Satisfaction, and very much for yours (for its you indeed that have paid the
Piper) I have here stepped into the Press, with this short Narative, which I hope
you will find sufficiently justified by the following Appendix. Most heartily
wishing that you, and all other good Men, may never have Occasion to put
confidence in such a Master as Mr. Lyell, or such a Friend as Mr. Myars; I take
leave to subscribe,

Gentlemen, Your very humble Servant, R. O.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Book, Page 18. line 7. for good, read Goods; in page 41. line 11. for
present, read pretended; page 75. line 29. for the, read these.

In the Appendix, Page 22. line 13. for extraordinary, read ordinary; p. 31. l.
1. for 1694, read 1693. p 45. l 3. leave out not.

THese being the most material Faults that have escaped the Press, the Printer
desires the Reader to amend them, and to excuse the literal Errata; and for
others (if any be) to enquire of Mr. Orpen himself for his own Sense concerning
them.

AN APPENDIX, Containing the Vouchers that Justify the foregoing NARRATIVE.
TImothy Turtane of Toasista in the County of Kerry, Mariner, came before me
this day, and made Oath, That on the Twenty-Eighth day of January last, the
Ship Laurel of London came up the River of Kilmare with her Fore-sail and
Main-sail loose in disorder, without any person on board her, and says that
about seven in the Morning she drove up to Cappanacossy upon the S^rand; and
about the same time the Master came to Cappanacossy with several Bags of Money,
carried by his Ships Company, and went all together into the House of Dermot
Mac Owen, about a quarter of a mile off the ^hip; and says that the Master
remained there about eight hours, without seeming to take any notice of the
Ship, which drove to and fro in his sight, as the Tide ebbed and flowed; but
says, that the Master sent for a quarter Cask of Rum, and about one hundred
pounds of Sugar, wherewith the Master and his Company, together with some of
the Country People, made themselves merry ashore, while the Ship was driving
up and down with the Flood and Ebb before their Faces; and says, that toward
the evening the Master ^ent on Board, as did likewise this Deponent, and the
Ship was still driving to and fro, without any Anchor dropped; whereupon this
Deponent asked the Master to put out an Anchor; the Master answered, That his
Cable was not in order; this Deponent told him that he this Deponent would put
out the Kedge-Anchor that had a small Warp to it; the Master told him he might
let it alone; however this Deponent by the Masters consent at length dropped that
Anchor; and says that the Master never caused any other Anchor to be put out,
but that the Ship rid out wholly by that small Warp until the Master deserted
her, which was the third day after, notwithstanding that there were then on
board the Sheet Anchor, and small Bower, with Cables suitable; and says that
he called to the Master, and ^old him that his Ship was Tight, and that the
worst Weather made but very little Seas in that place, and that she was in no
manner of danger; and told the Master that if he would permit him, that he and
his Boat-men wou^d save the Ship, and get her off immediately. The Master then
bid this Deponent hold his Tongue, and that he would be this Deponents Friend.
The Deponent finding that the Master was then resolved to cast her away, came
no more near him, but told every Body he met with, that he was so resolved; and
says that the Master did accordingly leave her most shamefully at a time when
a Man could wade to her side, as there did five men, who having no Boat, waded
to her side, and went on Board, presently after the Master and all the Men
quitted her; And says, that two Days before the Ship was so deserted by the
Master and Men aforesaid, the Master caused the Men to open the Hatches, and
take out several Goods, and made havoc thereof to the Country People. And
says, that one Ned Dunegon did also profes to save the Ship the first day she
came to Cappanacossy, and the Master would not abide to hear of it; but Dunegon
being incessant upon the matter, the Master got him well drubb'd, and turned
ashore. And says, that the Mate of a Canary Ship was likewise on Board, when
this Deponent discoursed the Master to have his Ship saved; and this Mate
likewise told the Master that he the Mate would get her off presently; the
Master told the Mate that he should meddle with what concerned him. And this
Deponent verily believes that the Master and some of the Passengers had a
Design to carry away the money which was in the Ship, and to cast her away,
that it might be pretended that the money and all was lost together; and says
that most of that Country believes the same. And says if the master had not
caused holes to be bored in the breadroom through the bottom of the ship, he
could not well have cast her away in such a place where she lay without some
artificial prejudice done first unto her. And says that but very little of the
sugar remained undamnified being in a manner all spoiled by the water which
came into the said Ship by means of the holes which were made through the
bottom before the master deserted her.

Tim. Turtane.
Jurat coram me, Tricessimo Die Martii 1694 Ri. Pyne.

CHarles Mansfield of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me,
and made Oath, That he went on Board the Ship Laurel, Christopher Lyel
Commander, as she was in Distress on the 29th day of January last, in the River
of Kilmare, and says that she then rid only by a small Warp, and the ground
whereon she lay was sandy and gravelly, and the Ship was in no great danger,
for that the place where she lay was good ground and the greatest winds made
but very little Seas; And says, that that day the Ship fleeted, and this
Deponent says, that he told the Master that she fleeted, and that he this
Deponent with several English men, would bring her off forthwith; but the said
Mr. Lyel would not by any means consent thereunto. And further says, That the
Night following was a very fair Moonshine Night, and this Deponent told the
Master, that they would stay on Board with him, and get off his Ship, whereupon
the Master turned this Deponent and the rest out of the Ship; and says that
next day, being the 30th of January aforesaid, about Noon, the Master called to
all the People on Board, and bid them save what they could, and carry away in
their Boats every man for himself; whereupon Nine Barrels of Indigo were put
into two Boats, and the Master then desired this Deponent to save Two Barrels,
to bear his Charges out of the Country, and all the rest for themselves; and
presently the Master and all the People then on Board went off, and deserted
the Ship; and says, that as soon as they came ashore, the Master met with Mr.
Richard Orpen and told him he left the Ship in a bad condition and desired Mr.
Orpen to get all the hands he could to go on board to Save her, and desired him
the said Orpen again to make haste on board with all the hands he could;
whereupon the said Orpen sent Several men on board the Ship, and next morning
Mr. Orpen went himself on board. And faith, that when Mr. Orpen went on board,
that several of the Rabble and Rapparees were Crowded into the Ship, and that
Mr. Orpen commanded his own men to their arms, and expelled the Rabble and
Rapparees, and proceeded forthwith to discharge the Cargo, and this Deponent
says, that the Master when he deserted the Ship, declared that there was five
foot of water in her, And that all the goods would be lost the next Tide; And
says, that the master while this deponent was on board, did always renounce
and deny all help whatever to Save the Ship, and often times wished that she
would Split. And says, that when others would have Saved her, and often
offered to Save her, that the master told them they should hold their Tongues
and he would be their friend; And further says, that the Master did not return
to the Ship again, until the third day after he had deserted her; and says,
that when the Master came then on board, that Mr. Orpen desired that he and his
Ships Company would come and help save what they could, but the Master did not
give any manner of Assistance, neither did he set any of his Men about the
same; and says, that the said Orpen told the Master, that there was much water
in the ^hip; they both looked at the water in the Hold, and the water was then
within a foot and half of the Beam; and says, that the Master did thereupon
order that a hole should be made to let out the water, which was accordingly
done; and Mr. Orpen desired the Master again to stay on board, and take Account
of things, and see the hole stopped again; but the Master neglected every thing;
and this Deponent further says, that when the Master and all the people
d^serted the Ship on the 30th of January last, that one Sergeant Fullertone
then on board, told the Master, that he ths said Sergeant had no mind to desert
the Ship, and did often beg the Captain not to desert the Ship, and told him
the Master, that while he would stay, he the said Fullertone would not go out
of her; but the Master would not be persuaded to keep on board upon any
persuasions whatsoever; and says, That if the said Orpen had not been
extraordinary Active in preserving the Ship and Goods, they had in all
probability been destroyed by the Rabble and Rapparees; and says, That the
Master did often approve of the said Orpens diligence, and did frequently in
this Deponents hearing declare, that Mr. Orpen deserved to have a reasonable
Salvage, and that he would write to his Owners for an Order from them, to give
the said Orpen what two indifferent persons would award unto him the said Orpen.

Charles Mansfeild.
Jurat Coram me, 29 Mar. 94 Ri. Pyne.

And the same Deponent came this day before me and made Oath, That at the Trial
of the Indictment against Mr. Orpen on the 28th of March last, at the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer; he this Deponent Swore in Court to the same
effect of the foregoing Affidavit Sworn before my Lord Chief Justice Pyne, on
the 29th March aforesaid.

Cha. Mansfeild.
Jurat coram me, 30 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset.

BRyen Kelly of Gurtamullen, in the County of Kerry, Gent came before me this
day and made Oath, That on the 28th of January last, the Ship Laurel of London,
Christopher Lyell Master, drove up the River of Killmare close along before the
Black-Water, which being a very good Harbor, the Master, some Passengers and
the Ships Company came ashore there in their Longboat, and brought great
quantities of Gold and Silver with them in Bags, and as soon they came ashore
they sunk the Boat; and this Deponent verily believes, that some contrivance
was used in the Rudder to cause the Ship to stand up the River, otherwise, that
she had in all likelihood put into that Harbor right before the Wind, which was
then at S. W. and the said Harbor lying N. E. out of the River, and says,
that the Ship drove up about two Miles from Black-Water to Cappanacossy, upon a
fine easy Strand about seven a Clock in the Morning; and in the mean time the
Master, Passengers and Ships Company walked up by land to Dermot Mac Owens House
at Cappanacossy almost as soon as the Ship, where they beh^ld the Ship driving
to and fro with the Flood and Ebb from Morning till Night, without any Soul on
Board her, save that some of the Seamen and one John Kelly went on board her,
to fetch out some good Liquor, as also the Masters best Clothes and Sword,
wherewith they returned on shore again, without dropping an Anchor, or taking
any other care of the Ship; and with the Master and altogether made themselves
merry ashore with Rum and Sugar all that day, while the Ship continued driving
to and fro before their Faces, and says, That the Master, Passengers and Ships
Company were often desired to go on board their Ship and take care of her; but
still they replied, God Dam her for a Bitch, they would never put foot into her
while they breathed; with many other Expressions to the same effect; and says,
that the Master, Passengers and Company did divide this great store of Gold and
Silver among themselves, to every one a proportion or share thereof, and
particularly the Mate of the Ship drew out a small Handkerchief full of Gold
Rings, and distributed the same likewise among them; and says, That the Master
Ordered his own share of the Treasure to be put into a Window near himself;
saying to the rest of the passengers and company that each had his share given
to him, and let every one look to his share; as for himself the master, he
would not take care of any more than his own share which lay there near him in
the Window, And says that had not Mr. Palmer come in the evening and put them
into Some apprehensions of the Toryes, he verily believes, that they would
never have Returned to the Ship again; But after Mr. Palmer had alarmed them
and told them their Ship was the best Garrison in the country, and put them in
fear of the Toryes, they repaired on board again about the fall of the night
with all their money and Gold; And afterward were more cautious and careful
thereof; but says, That that Night was a very fine calm Night, and that
several skilful persons, particularly the Mate of a Canary Man told the Master,
that he would bring the Laurel away forthwith into a safe Harbor without any
manner of difficulty; but the Master bid him meddle with what concerned him;
and in the like manner he the Master did slight diverse other Mariners when they
offered to save his Ship; and says, That he this Deponent heard the Master and
most of the Ships Company often say, that she owed them much Wages, and Swore
that she should never owe them any more; that they had divided the money among
them, and would be gone, some to Cork, Kinsale, and other places, to be ready
to leave the Kingdom by the f^rst opportunity; and says, that when the Master
and Company were got on board, that none of them took care to drop an Anchor to
stop the Ship from driving up and down, until one Timothy Turtane dropped a small
Anchor that had a small warp to it; and says, that she rid by no other than
that small warp all he time after; and says, that the Passengers and most of
the Company went up next day in the morning by Boat, and carried some Chests
along with them to Mr. Palmers House, about 3 miles up the River, wherein 'twas
believed, that their best Clothes were; and says, that the Master, Passengers
and Seamen were about fifteen in number, and that the Passengers, Mate and most
of the Seamen seemed rather to have a mind to stay about Mr. Palmers House to
to look to the Ghests, than any-wise to be concerned any more for the Ship and
Cargo; but says, that toward the evening fix of the Seamen went to Roghty
Bridge, about two miles from Mr. Palmers and carried their share of the money
thither, and their best Clo^ths, and that Night being the 29th of January Mr.
^^^^mer's House was set on Fire and Robbed by the Teries, and this Deponent
desired the mate and men to go to their Ship again; but the mate told this
Deponent, that the Master, Seamen, Passengers and all were resolved to destroy
the Ship and Cargo, and that there was no concealing thereof any longer; and
next morning several of the Seamen went on board again, and gave the master an
Account of the Fire and Robbery; whereupon the master and every one on board
quit^ed the Ship, and came ashore at Killowen in three Boats, wherein they
brought several Barrels of Indigo, and other things belonging to the Ship,
where they were met with by Mr. Richard Orpen, this Deponent, and several
others; as soon as the master stepped ashore, h^ told Mr. Orpen that all the
Goods would be lost that Tide, and that the Ship would inevitably split in
pieces out of hand; and desired the said Orpen to go with what hands he could
make, and save what they could; whereupon Mr. Orpen did immediately employ some
Soldiers, and several of the Country People to repair forthwith to the Ship to
save what they could; and says, that Mr. Orpen employed this Deponent also to
go along with the rest, but called him back again, and bid him go to the Master
first, who was gone to an Ale House hard by, and get from the Master a Note
under his hand, of what was fit to be given for Salvage, which this Deponent
accordingly did, and got Richard Clerk, Samuel Aldwell, Charles Garthy, Dermot
Sulivan and Dermot Sulivan Junior, whom he this Deponent knew to be the Friends
and People belonging to Mr. Orpen, to be Named along with him this Deponent in
the said Note; wherein the Master promised one half for saving the other; and
says, that he this Deponent did procure the said Note upon no other Account,
than to the true use and behoof of the said Orpen; and says, that he left Mr.
Orpen behind, to provide men and boats; and that he this Deponent repaired away
toward the Ship that Night, being as soon as he had got the Note Sign^d by the
Master; and when he cam^ there, he found that the rest of the people employed
by Mr. Orpen were got on board, and loosed the Fore-top-sail, and had placed a
man at the Helm, whereby they brought the Ship safe into a convenient Greek,
though she had beaten somewhat by means of the Masters leaving her loose in a
very ill condition, without riding her by any Cable, Warp, or any thing else
whatever. After she was brought safe to the Creek, this Deponent went on board
and showed the Note which he had got from the Master, and told all the people
that were on Board, that the business of the Ship and Goods were wholly put
into Mr. Orpens Hands by the Master, and told them that Mr. Orpen had desired
them to be careful of every thing, and that himself the said Orpen would come
immediately with men and boats; and says, that the said Orpen came accordingly
in the Morning betimes with men and boats, and fitted up Teachles and and
Cannhooks, and fell to work to save the Goods; and says, that Charles Carthy,
Dermot Sulivan Jun. and Samuel Adwell came also on board about the time at Mr.
Orpen came on board; and says that Mr. Orpen did not force, or expel them from
the Ship, but commanded some of his own men to their Arms, and thereby expelled
the Rabble which by that time had crowded in abundance into the Ship, and he
the said Orpen did forthwith employ the said Aldwell, Carohy, Sulivan, and this
Deponent, to oversee and help put the Goods safe a shore into the most
convenient Houses, where the same might be best preserved; and says, O Sulivan
More, and Dermot Sulivan, Senior, were never on board the Ship at all, and that
Richard Clerk was not on board her, until ten days after she was Stranded; and
says, that when this Deponent came first on board, that she had water in her
hold, within a foot and half of the Beams of her lower Deck; so that every Cask
of Sugar in all, or in part was Damnified; and says, that the Master came not
nigh the Ship, until the third day after she was Stranded; and says, that the
Master, Passengers, and Ships Company never mentioned any thing of their boring
the Holes in the Ship, but kept tho same private, until that about ten days
after she was Stranded, 'twas spoken of all over the Country, which was
discovered by the Mate, after he was gone out of the Country, and then (and not
till then) the Master owned it, and pretended 'twas to prevent the Ships
beating.

Bryen Kelly.
Jurat coram me, un Justiciar. Com. Kery 28 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhassett.

And the Deponent further says, That in Court at the Trial of Mr. Orpen on the
28th of March last, at Tralee; that he the Deponent Swore to every thing before
mentioned, except what is said about the money, and had declared, that also if
he had not been interrupted by the High Sheriff; and thereupon the Deponent was
put by and heard no further; this Deponent says, That the master and the High
Sheriss of Kerry did often offer this Deponent three and twenty Guineas, and
two hundred weight of Sugar, if he this Deponent would but get the Note back
from Mr. Orpen, which the master had given for Salvage.

Bryen Kelly.
Jurat coram me, 28 Die April 1694. J. Blenerhassett.



JOhn Kelly of Grenune, in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this day
and made Oath, That on the 28th of Jannary last, about 7 a Clock in the morning
the Ship Laurel of London, Christopher Lyell Master, drove up to Cappanacossy
in the River of Killmare, without any person on Board her upon very good easy
ground; and says, that presently afterward, the master came up to the House
of Dermot Mac Owen of Cappanacossy; and says, that the Master and Company
brought several bags of money with them to that House; and this Deponent
discoursed with the master, and found that the Ship came from Jamaica, and that
the master and company had quitted the said Ship at Black-Water, about two
miles West ward of Cappanacossy, and admired that they did not bring the Ship
into Black-Water, being right before the Wind, which was then at S. W. or
thereabouts, and being a very good Harbor; and says, that the master sent for
Rum and Sugar in abundance from on board the Ship; and there with he the Master
and Company, with some of the Country People, made merry till toward Evening;
and says, that the Master, Mr. Myars, and Peter Row (two Passengers) enquired
very earnestly for Horses and Conveniences to carry themselves and their money
out of the Country, to Cork or Kinsale; whereupon this Deponent and others
advised the master rather to betake themselves on board with what money they
had; whereto the Master Replied, That she was good for nothing, and a Wrack,
and let the Devil take her, as for himself he would never lay his Leg over her
side again while he breathed, and this Deponent says, that the said Dermot Mac
Owen, this Deponent and others, told the Master again and again, that she could
be no Wrack in that condition; for that by her fleeting up and down with the
Tide and Ebb, it appeared, that the was Tight, and in regard that the worst of
Winds made no Seas in that place, she was not in danger; and they still desired
him the said Master to betake himself and Company to their Ship again; but the
more the Master was advised to go and save his Ship, the more he abhorred her
and renounced her, and continued saying, that if he could but get Conveniences
to carry himself, Company and Passengers, and their money our of the Country,
he did not care if the Devil had the Ship and all that belonged to her; but at
length by the persuasions of this Deponent and others, the Master writ a Letter
to one Mr. Thomas Palmer a Justice of the Peace in that Country, wherein he
seemed to pretend that his Ship was in distress, and craved Aid, and mentioned
in his Letter, that he had not a Sail left; and this Deponent says, that next
day he this Deponent was on board, and saw in the Gun Room 4 or 5 large Sails,
which this Deponent believes were New Sails; and this Deponent says, that in
the Evening, Mr. Palmer came to the Master at Cappanacossy on the 28th
aforesaid; and says, that Mr. Palmer discoursed the Master, and finding that
he had great quantities of Gold and Silver at Dermot mac Owen's House, Mr.
Palmer then told the Master that he was in danger of losing his Money, for that
the Tories were said to be hard by. Upon which apprehensions of the Tories, the
Master with his Company and Passengers, went on board again that Night, about
an hour after Sun set. But this Deponent verily believes that if the Master had
not been afraid of the Tories, that neither the Master, nor any of the Company
or Passengers, had ever returned again to the Ship, for that the Master,
Passengers, and Ships Company had divided the Money and Gold amongst
themselves, to every one a share, before the Letter was sent to Mr. Palmer, and
remembers that the Master bid his Boy to carry his, viz. the Master's share of
the Money, and lay it by in the Window; and added in these words, That every
one had his share of the money divided and given to him, and let every man
secure his own share; And says, that the mate and men declared that the Ship
owed them a years Wages, and swore that she should never owe them any more;
that they had divided what Money was in the Ship among them selves, that they
would be gone, some to Cork, some to Kinsale, etc. And this Deponent further
says, That while the Master, and the company, and passengers aforesaid, were
at Dermot Mac Owen's house; that they made themselves ready to go away out ot
the Country with their Money, having put on several Shirts a piece, and dressed
themselves up with their best clothes; And says, that the Master had also
dressed himself to be gone; And says, that he this Deponent was the person that
brought the Master his best clothes, and a fine Sword, out of the Ship by the
Masters orders; And says, that when the division of the Money and Gold was
made, that the Mate drew out a handkerchief that had about fourscore Gold Rings
in it and divided the same likewise, among them, and says that all the said
persons belonging to the said Ship, left a great parcel of their worse clothes
upon the Green, and threw the same away near where the Ship was driving to and
fro as aforesaid; And says, that one Timothy Turtane, and several others, told
the Master before and after the Master went on B^ard, on the 28th at night,
that they would save the Ship, and carry her into a safe Harbor forthwith. But
the Master still refused, and would not consent to have her brought out of that
place; And says that the Ship was driving to and fro, and after the Master and
the rest of the persons belonging to her; were all on Board again, no body took
any care to drop an Anchor; And faith that Timothy Tertane desired the Master
to drop an Anchor; the Master answered, that he had no Cable in order; Turtane
told him he would drop a small Anchor which was on board, that had a small Warp
to it; the Master told him he might let it alone; but at length the Master
consenced that it should be dropped; And says, that she rid by no other than
that small Warp, until she was deserted by the Master, which was the third day
after she arrived at Cappanacos^y; And says, that before the Master deserted
the Ship, he often said that she was not worth looking after, and that all her
Cargo, except the Indigo, was all damnified and ruined before she came into the
River of Killmare. And this Deponent further says, that on the 30th of January
last, the Master and all the company deserted the Ship; And says that as soon
as he came a shore, he the said Master met with Mr. Richard Orpen, and told him
that the Ship was left in an ill condition, and that the Goods were all lost by
that time, and that the Ship would split presently; and desired Mr. Orpen to
send all the hands he could aboard, to save what he could, and desired the said
Orpen to go and take care of the same; whereupon the said Orpen sent several
persons on Board, who took care of the Ship, and brought her safe to a Creek;
and says, that Richard Clerk, Samuel Aldwel, Bryan Kelly, Charles Carthy,
Dermot Sulivan, and Dermot Sulivan Junior, came not nigh the said Ship, until
after the other people employed by Mr. Orpen, had brought her safe to the Creek,

John Kelly.
Jurat coram me, April 7 die, 1694. Fran. Burton.

WHereas it has been alleged that Coll. Daniell O Sulivan More of Dunkeron in
the County of Kerry, (being the chief of the Irish Gentry in those parts) was
lately employed or desired by Christopher Lyell Master of the Ship Laurel of
London to go on board the said Ship as she was in distress at Cappanacossy
after the Master had deserted her on the 30th day of January last, And that the
said O Sulivan More was turned out of her by Mr. Richard Orpen.

Now for the manifestation of truth, the said O Sulivan More came before me
this day and made Oath, That the said Master, or any other person whatever, did
never employ or desire him the said O Sulivan More, to be concerned in or about
the said Ship or goods at any time whatever; And says that he the said O
Sulivan More nevar went nigh the said Ship upon any account at all; And that
there is no other O Sulivan More but himself in this Kingdom, neither can there
be any other while he this Deponent is alive; and that there has been no other
O Sulivan More in the Kingdom for many years past but only he this Deponent.

Dan. O Sulivan.
Jurat coram me, 28 die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset.

CAptain Charles Carthy of Nedeen in Glannerought in the County of Kerry, the
chief of the Irish Gentry of that name, upon the River of Killmare, came before
me this day, and made Oath, That had not Mr. Richard Orpen gone on board the
Ship Laurel of London when she was stranded near Cappanacossy, And taken upon
him the management and defense of the said Ship, he verily believes that she
and the Cargo had been destroyed and torn in pieces by the Rabble and Rapparees,
and several of them wounded by him, who were crowded in and about her in great
numbers, and were expelled and dispersed by the said Orpen. And says, that the
said Mr. Orpen did not expel nor turn him this Deponent ashore out of the said
Ship, but employed him this Deponent to help save the Goods; and says, that
this deponent was never spoke unto or employed by any person belonging to the
Ship, to go on board her, neither was he this Deponent ever concerned therein,
upon the account of any of them; And says, that he was named in the Note which
the Master gave, wherein he promises one half for Salvage. And this Deponent
says, That he was named therein upon no other account, than as a Friend of the
said Mr. Orpen, and employed by him. And this Deponent says, that he this
Deponent did not go on board the said ship after the Master had forsook her on
the 30th of January until the 31th in the morning, which was after she was
brought safe to the Creek by some other People employed by Mr. Orpen the day
before; And says, that none of the said Persons named in the said Note for
Salvage, went on board her, until she was brought safe as aforesaid into the
Creek.

Charles Mac Carthy.
Jurat coram me un Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry, 2 die May, 1694. J. Blenerhasset.

RObert Pain of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Yeoman, came before me this
day, and made Oath, That he was on board the Ship Laurel, along with several of
the English of Glannerought, when she lay at Cappanacossy on the 30th of
January last, and says, that about 12 a Clock that day, the Master, after he
heard that Mr. Palmer's House was Burnt and Robbed, b^gan to curse and rail at
the Ship, and often wished her in a thousand pieces, and called all the People
that were on board, and bid them save what they could for themselves; and after
he had given them Nine Barrels of Indigo, he desired them to help him out with
two Barrels more for himself to bear his Charges out of the Country saying that
all would be Lost forthwith, And faith that he told the Master that one of his
men had slipped the warp which the ship rid by, who took no manner of notice of
it. But the Deponent ball'd out to him again and told him that the ship would
drive as soon as the Tide would rise, whereupon the Master fell to cursing and
damning at the Deponent, and bid him get out of the Ship; and then the Master
and all the People on board quitted the Ship, without riding her by any manner
of Warp, Cable, or any thing else whatever: And says. that as the Tide arose,
the Ship did accordingly drive along the ground.

Robert Pain
Jurat coram me uno Justiciar. Com. Kerry, 28 April, 1694. J. Blenerhasset.

CHarles Mansfield of Glannerought in the County of of Kerry, Gent. came before
me this Day, and made Oath, That when he first went on board the Ship Laurel of
London, being upon the 28th of January last, he found some of the Ship-Yards
hacked and cut in several places about the middle, as the same hung at the
Masts squared, and verily believes 'twas done at Sea with an intention that the
same might break to pieces when the Sails should fill, and thereby to make a
show of distress at Sea; And says, that when he was aboard, he saw a whole
Suit of very good Sails in the said Ship, viz. a Fore-sail, Fore top-sail,
Main-sail, Main-top-sail, and Mizen-sail; and says, that while Mr. Orpen kept
the Keys where the Ship-Goods were at Killowen, there was no Waste nor
Imbezlement thereof; But after that the Master and the High Sheriff had taken
the same into their care, there were several Imbezlements, and the Stores
frequently Robbed; and says, That several great quantities of Indigo and other
Goods, were plundered and carried away out of the Ship Laurel by the Men
belonging to her, and that they broke the Hatches in pieces, and forced into
her Hold; which they d^d by the order of Jacob Myars the Jew, who bid them
publicly go take what they could of the Ships Goods for themselves; and this
Deponent says, that he was in discourse with two of the Seamen about their
Sailing, who averred to this Deponent, that they were four Leagues to the
Westward of the Bull, Cow and Calf; and the Wind at West, when they first made
the Bull, Cow and Calf; and all the Ships Company took them to be the Skellox;
and though they designed for Kinsale, yet the Master caused to shape a Course for
Kilmare.

Charles Mansfield.
Jurat coram. me uno Justitia^. Commit, Kerry, 28 die April, 1694. J.
Blenerhasset.

Cornelius Sulivan of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Shipwright, came before
me this day, and made Oath. That he was one of the men that were employed by
Mr. Thomas Palmer to go in the Boats to bring off the Ship Laurel from
Cappanacossy on the 29th of January last in the Evening; and says, that there
went two very stout Boats well manned that Evening, and several lesser Boats
also well manned; and when they told the Master that they would bring off his
Ship, he rejected them, and bid them be gone out of his Ship; they told him
that his Ship fleeted, and that the Night was very still and calm, and had
hands enough to tow her from thence, and that they came on purpose to bring her
away; The Master fell into a great rage, and bid them be gone, or he would fire
at them; whereupon they all went ashore with their Boats; admiring at the
Masters diskindness to them, for their kind offers: And says, that he was
aboard the said Ship, when the Master and all the People deserted her on the
30th of January last at Cappanacossy; and says, that when the Master had
intelligence that Mr. Palmer's House was burnt and robbed, and all the Money
lost which was carried thither out of the Ship, the Master sell to cursing and
damning, and railed at his own felf for suffering it to be put ashore before
the Ship was in danger, and that there could no better come of bad Designs, and
cursed the Ship, and swore he had no Business to carry her for London, and that
she should never leave that place, and that such doings could thrive no better;
and commanded one of his men to let slip the Warp that she rid by, which was
accordingly done, and left her to ride by nothing; and the Master bid every man
aboard to save what they could for themselves, for all would be lost before
next Tide, and to save two Casks of Indigo for himself; and commanded every one
to be gone sorth out ot the Ship; whereupon the Master and every body left her;
and this Deponent told the Master, that surely the Ship would drive and beat,
having nothing to ride by; whereunto the Master asked this Deponent, What was
it to him this Deponent what became of her, and bid him hold his Tongue; and
says that the Master never caused the Fore-top Mast to be struck, during the
whole time of the Ships lying at Cappanacossy, and says, that the Master;
Passengers, and Seamen took no manner of Care of her, but believes in his
Consc^ence that they had one and all a full resolution to cast her away; And
this Deponent further says, that when the Master was going out of the Ship,
one Sergeant Fullerton told the Master, that he the Master was a damned Rogue
for leaving her, and begged him to stay and look to the Ship, but the Master
would not be advised to stay; though if a Cable had been out, she could not be
in any manner of Danger, and the Sergeant bid the Master again to stay, and
that if he would stay, he the Sergeant would stay with him; but the Master fell
a Cursing of her more and more, and said, let her split and drive to the Devil;
and says, that that day in the Afternoon, the Master came ashore at Killowen,
and desired Mr. Richard Orpen to employ people to go on board to save what they
could; whereupon Mr. Orpen employed several people immediately and sent them on
board; and says, that when they went aboard, they found her wallowing to and
fro as the water arose, and drove upon the ground for want of Warp or Cable
out; and says, that they brought her safe to a Creek that Night, though she
had much water in her hold; and says, that the Master came not aboard till the
3d day after he had deserted her, and seeing much water in the hold, he the
Master ordered a hole to be cut in her, to let out the water, which was
accordingly done; and says, that the Master Ordered 6 or 7 Hogsheads at a time
of damnified Sugar to be hoisted over board to the Country people; saying,
'twas better they should have it, than that it should be lost; and Mr. Orpen
desired the Master to stay on board, and bring his men to work to save the
goods; but the Master slighted every thing, only that he took some sugar in
Bags and carried the same to his quarters; and says, that the Seamen of the
said Ship came on board among the Rabble, and were the first that broke open
the Hatches, and took up a Punc^ion of Indigo and several other Goods, and made
havoc thereof to the Country people, before Mr. Orpen went on board, and this
Deponent saw the Seamen receive money for the same.

Cor. Sulivan.
Jurat coram me, uno Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry, 28 Die April, 1694 J.
Blenerhassett.

Cornelius Turtane of Foromore, in the County of Kerry, Mariner, came before me
this day, and made Oath, That on the 28th of January last, he saw the Ship
Laurel driving before Black-Water, with her main-sail and foresail loose, and
lowered a Hull beating and fluttering upon the Gunnells and Anchor Flo^ks,
being about seven a clock in the morning and low water, when she drove up to
Cappanacossy upon fine easy ground, and as the Tide rose, she drove on farther
and farther upon the shoal; and says, that the master, passengers and seamen,
stood and beheld her; and says, that the wind ceased, and as the Tide fell,
she drove back again, and this Deponent went on board along with part of the
ships crew, which returned ashore again, with a Barrel of Rum for the master to
make merry withal, and none of them took care to drop an Anchor; and this
Deponent says, that he the Deponent saw then a very good Anchor stock on
board, and that the same was the stock for the sheet Anchor; and he this
Deponent asked the seamen why they did not put the stock to the Anchor, they
answered, Let her be Damned for a Leaky Bitch, as for their parts they were
resolved never to trouble themselves more about her; whereupon the Deponent
sounded the Pump, and found but fourteen Inches of Water in her, and that it
stunk grievously; and says, that toward Night, the master and all the people
belonging to her went on board again by the persuasion of Mr. Thomas Palmer,
and carried several bags of money with them; but none took care to drop an
Anchor, until one Timothy Turtane, a seaman of the Country got leave to drop
the Kedge Anchor that had a warp to it; and says, that he this Deponent is
very well acquaint d with the Western coasts of Ireland; and that on the 30th
of January, the Ship lay in three foot water at low water, the day whereon the
master left her; and that it flows twelve foot at the same place at an (...)
ordinary Spring Tide; and says, that neither of the top-masts were struck,
when she drove to Cappanacossy, but the fore top-yard had the Sail bent to it,
and that the fore-top-sail-yard was newly hackt and out about the middle; and
that the main top-sail-yard was likewise served so, and broken off in the
middle, and hung flattering against the mast before she drove to Cappanacossy;
and further says not, etc.

Cor. Turtane.
Jurat coram me uno Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry 28 Die April, 1694. J.
Blenerhasset.

TImothy Murphey of Gurtagasse in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me
this day, and made Oath, That on the 30th of January last, Christopher Lyell,
with all the people on board the Ship Laurel of London, deserted her at
Cappanacossy, and left her as a Wreck; and when the said Mr. Lyell came ashore,
being a little after twelve a Clock, he desired Mr. Orpen to employ people to
save what they could; whereupon Mr. Orpen employed this Deponent and several
others, who went on board that evening and found no body in the Ship; and
says, that the Winds blew hard at S. W. and that the Ship beat with her
broadside having much Water in her hold; that this Deponent did loose the
fore-top sail, and placed a Man at the Helm, and with Labor and Pains he and
the rest employed by Mr. Orpen brought her safe to a convenient Creek; and
says, that he left Mr. Orpen providing of Men and Boats, who came next morning
betimes with men and boats to save the goods; and says that Bryen Kelly,
Samuel Aldwell, Charles Carthy, and Dermot Sulivan, Junior, came not to the
said Ship until after she was brought safe to the Creek; and says, that Dermot
Sulivan, Senior, and O Sulivan More came not nigh her at all; and that Richard
Clark came not to the Ship, until ten days after Mr. Lyell had deserted her;
and the Deponent further deposes, that the Rabble of the Country came down,
and fell upon her with their Hatchets and Tools to tear her in pieces, and had
not Mr. Orpen beaten them off, they had undoubtedly destroyed her and her
Cargo; and says, that no body did dare resist them, until Mr. Orpen came and
did rout them all from the place; and says, that some of the Seamen belonging
to the said Ship came on board the said Ship, and while this Deponent and the
rest employed by Mr. Orpen were busy about securing the Ship, they the Seamen
did forcibly break open the Hatches, and took up a Punchion of Indigo, and
broke it open, and made havoc of the same, and of the best of the Goods in the
Ship, and distributed them to the people of the Country; and the Deponent
says, that he Deposed in Court, at the Trial of the Indictment against Mr.
Orpen, on the 28th of March last, to the same Effect as he now deposes here.

Tim. Murphy.
Jurat coram me, un. Justiciar, Comitat. Kerry, 28 Die April 1694. J.
Blenerhasset.

JOseph Tailor of Killowen, in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this
day, and made Oath, That he was on board the Ship Laurel of London,
Christopher Lyell Master, on the 29th of January last, when Mr. Richard Orpen
came on board her; and says, that Mr. Orpen was very ready to assist the
Master in every respect, to get his Ship out of Cappanacossy; and first
Examined the Pump, and finding that the water was filthy and stunk, told the
Master that his Ship was yet very Tyght and well enough; and that he the said
Orpen would bring her off forthwith; but the Master did not in the least
incline thereto; Mr. Orpen told him, that his heavy Goods, as his Guns should
be immediately put ashore, for that their weight aloft would make her swaddle,
and would do her more injury than ten times so much below; but the Master
Answered, That he could not part with the Guns, but must keep them for fear of
the French Privateers; but Mr. Orpen told him, that they could not Attack him
but in their Long-Boats, and that 'twere better to have small-Arm Men,
wherewi^h Mr. Orpen told him he could furnish him; and that a small Battery on
shore within Pistol shot of the Ship, would do much beyond what he could expect
from the Guns, if he k^pt them aboard, and discourse to this Effect; but the
Master did not like the Discourse, but Answered at length, that he would keep
the Guns for a show; and says, that all her Guns except two lay in disorder,
not fit for service, heads and points along ships, and remained so still; and
says, that Mr. Orpen discoursed him about his Anchors, and asked him how he
rid; he Answered by a small Kedge Anchor, that had a small warp at it, and said
he had lost his best bower, and that his Sheet Anchor wanted a stock, Mr. Orpen
told him, that there was very good seasoned Timber within Pistol shot of the
Ship, and desired him to send his Carpenter thither, and told him, that he
would send some of the Country Carpenters to help him, and tha^ he should have
a stock in an hours time, but the master slighted it; and this Deponent says,
that the master pretended that he had not a Sail left, and were forced by
distress into this River; but this Deponent says, that he saw a very good
main-sail to the yard, and saw a great parcel of Sails in the Gun Room, which
he believes were new Sails, but there being none of the men belonging to the
Ship on board all that day, only the Master, Carpenter and Gunner: Nothing was
done toward the getting the Ship away from that place, though she flected, and
the Weather temperate; and this Deponent says, that while Mr. Orpen was
aboard, there was a man of the Country brought before him for some misdemeanor
against the master, whom Mr. Orpen ordered to be tied Neck and Heels, but the
man slipping over the side into a Boat, Mr. Orpen ordered to have him followed
forthwith and brought into the Ship, and there caused him to be tied by both
hands to the Gang-way, and with a Ropes end to be beaten with many Stripes, for
Example, that no others might dare presume to Transgress; and this Deponent
further says, that the Night following being a Calm Glorious Night, several of
the English came with their Boats to the Ship, and told the Master, that they
would bring her off, for she fleeted that Tide; but the Master instead of
accepting of their kind offer, turned them all out of his Ship, and next day
after, he heard that the money was lost, he forsook her most shamefully, and
said all would be lost that Tide, and bid every body take what they could for
themselves; and desired them to save two Cask^ of Indigo for him to bear his
Charges out of the Country; and this Deponent says, that the Master and all
the people that were on board, came up in three Boats to Killowen, with the
Nine Barrels of Indigo and other things which the Master had given those
People, and the Two Barrels of Indigo for the Master, to bear his Charges out
of the Country; all which were put up in this Deponenrs House, for the use of
the Master and People aforesaid; And says, that about three days after the
said Goods were brought to this Deponents House, that James Charters, John
Charters, and several others of the Soldiers belonging to Captain Gregory,
were very abusive to this Deponent and his Family, and put Quarrels upon him,
and struck him several Blows, and with their Naked Swords fell upon him,
insomuch that he was forced to make his Escape through a Window to save his
Life; having no manner of Weapon about him, wherewith to defend himself; and
they then killed a Mastiff Dog of the Deponents, which was then in the House;
and says, that about four or five days afterward, this Deponents House was
robbed, while those that killed the Dog were guarding the same; and two Barrels
of the Indigo were carried away by the Robbers. And this Deponent says, that
the Master came not nigh the said Ship again, until the third day after he had
deserted her; and that Jacob Myars or Peter Row, came not at all unto the said
Ship, after she was deserted by the Master on the 30th of January aforesaid.
And further says not, etc.

Jos. Tailor.
Jurat coram me, uno Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry, 28 Die April, 1694. J.
Blenerhassett.

SAmuel Aldwell of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this
day, and made Oath, That had not Mr. Richard Orpen gone on board the Ship
Laurel of London, when she was stranded near Cappanacossy, and taken upon him
the Management and Defense of the said Ship, he verily believes that the said
Ship and Cargo had been destroyed and torn in pieces by the Country people;
and says, that the said Richard Orpen did not expel or force him this Deponent
out of the said Ship, but employed him to help to save the Goods; and says,
that he this Deponent did not insist upon being employed by Mr. Lyell the
Master of the Ship; neither did he to the best of his remembrance, all the
while the Goods of the said Ship were unlading, say to the said Mr. Orpen, that
the Master had ever desired him this Deponent to go on board to save any thing
on the Account or Order of the said Master; and says, that after the Master
had deserted the said Ship on the 30th of January last, he this Deponent did
not go on board her until the 31th in the morning after she was brought safe to
the Creek; and further says not, etc.

Sa. Aldwell.
Jurat coram me un. Justiciar. Comitat. Kerry, 28 die April, 1694. J.
Blenerhasset.
Commit. Kerry.
The Deposition of Daniel Crag and Hugh Wilson, Soldiers in Captain Cuningham's
Company, in Col. Michelburn's Regiment.



THe Deponents being duly sworn, say upon Oath, That on the 30th day of January
last, Captain Lyell, Commander of the Ship Laurel of London, deserted the said
Ship, and so did likewise the whole Ships Company, and left her as a Wreck in
the River of Kilmare; and that immediately after she was so deserted, these
Deponents went on board her, along with several others, employed by Mr. Richard
Orpen, to save the said Ship and Cargo; and says, that when these Deponents
and the rest went on board, they found no living creature in the said Ship; and
says, that the said Ship was beating and driving upon the ground, for want of
having some of the Fore-sails loosed, whereupon some of the persons employed on
board, did loose the Fore-top-sail, and brought her Head about directly before
the Wind, and so they brought her safe to the shore into a convenient Creek,
save that she took in abundance of Water by her bulging as aforesaid; and
further says, that one Bryen Kelly came on board to these Deponents, and the
rest employed to save the said Ship, and brought them a Paper from Mr. Richard
Orpen, wherein the said Orpen desired them to be very careful of the Ship, and
all things on board her, and that he the said Orpen would be with them on board
immediately; and says, that the said Orpen came forthwith on board, and
commanded that no body should come on board, but such as the said Orpen had
employed, to work upon the Ship to save her and the Goods; and says, that the
said Orpen procured Boats, and fitted up Teakles and Cannhooks with all speed,
and proceeded to discharge the Cargo with expedition; and says, that the said
Orpen was very Active in saving every thing belonging to the Ship, and put a
careful Man in every Boat to see the Goods safely put into such Houses as the
said Orpen had appointed to secure the same; and says, that be the said Orpen
provided Provisions for these Deponents, and the rest employed on board; and
says, that as soon as the said Ship came to the shore, great multitudes of the
Rabble and Rapparees came down upon her, and forcibly entered on board her, and
says, that the said Orpen and his Company got themselves to their Arms, and
fired upon the said Rabble and Rapparees, and expelled them out of the Ship,
and forced them to fly from the shore; and says, that the said Orpen and his
Company were often constrained to betake themselves to their Arms to keep off
the said Rabble and Rapparees; and says, that they were great part of an whole
Night firing against them; and says, that they have received four Cobbs from
the said Orpen in full payment for the hire of these two Deponents upon this
Service; and further says, that if Mr. Orpen had not been extraordinary
violent against the said Rabble and Rapparees, they would in all probability
destroy the whole Ship and Cargo; and further say, that neither the Master nor
Men came to give any assistance while the Ship was thus in distress, but say,
that some of the Seamen took away several quantities of Indigo and other Goods.

Dan. Crage. Hugh Wilson.

Jurat c ram me, 22 Die Martii, 1693. J. Blenerhassett.

WIlliam Sanford of Killowen in the County of Kerry, Gent. came before me this
day and made Oath, That on the 29th of January last, he this Deponent having
judgment in Shipping, was employed by the Reverend Mr. Thomas Palmer, to go on
board the Laurel, to lighten and bring her away from Cappanacossy to a safe
Harbor; and this Deponent with several boats well manned, being a calm
Moonshine Night, with the rest of the people belonging to the boats, went on
board; and says, that as soon as the Master understood that they came to bring
off his Ship, he the Master immediately turned them all ashore in great Wrath,
and would not upon any Account permit them to stay to bring off his Ship; and
next Morning this Deponent came on board again with several English Men, the
Wind then at South East; and the Deponent told the Master, that they would
bring off his Ship; but the Master would not be persuaded to consent to it, but
often wished that she would split in a thousand pieces; and says, that by and
by there came one to the Ship with News, that Mr. Palmers House was Burnt and
Robbed; and then the Master seemed less careful of the Ship than before; and
says, that about 12 a Clock that day, being the 30th of Jan. aforesaid, the
Master bid every body to save what they could for themselves; and says, that
after he had delivered to the said people on board 9 Barrels of Indigo, he the
Master desired them ^o help out two Casks of Indigo for himself, to bear his
Charges out of the Country, and bid them take all the rest of what they could
save to themselves. The two Barrels of Indigo being hoisted over the side into
the Boat, the Master commanded every one to be gone out of the Ship; saying,
that all would be lost that Tide, and the Ship would split forthwith; whereupon
every body left the Ship and came ashore at Killowen; and says, that
afterward this Deponent and the rest of the people belonging to the said
boats, were contented with some small part of the 9 Barrels of Indigo, which
the Master was pleased to bestow upon them; and this Deponent says, that he
was present at the Trial of Mr. Orpen on the 28th of March last upon an
Indictment concerning the said Ship, where Mr. Orpen made appear, that the
Master had more mind to destroy than to save the said Ship; and the Master
being asked by my Lord Chief Justice Pyne, why he turned the people ashore that
came to bring her away to a good Harbor, and why he did not suffer her to be
brought off; the Master Answered, that 'twas a most dismal Night and so Dark,
that a Man could not see his Hand; whereupon Mr. Orpen called for an Almanck.
and thereby proved it to be near full Moon, and by Witnesses that 'twas a Calm
glorious Night; and the Master did also give a further. Account, that there was
but two Tyers of Sugar in the Ship at first, and that the lower of those Tyers
was destroyed by the Ships Leakiness before she came to Cappanacossy, but Mr.
Orpen alleging, that when he Tried the Pump the Water stunk, which denotes a
Tyght Ship; The Master replied, that the Sugar made it stink.

William Sanford.
Jurat. coram me, un. Justiciar. Comitat. K^rry 28 Die April. 1694. J.
Blenerhassett.

January the 28th 1694. SIR,
THis is ta acquaint you, That by Distress of Weather I was drove into this
place, where I am altogether a Stranger, and want the Assistance of some good
Gentleman, desiring the favor of you, not doubting your Assistance to one in a
Strange Country, and in such Distress, and not having a Sail left, and our Ship
Stranded ashore, is what Serves from your Servant to Command,

Christo. Lyell.
From Mr. Sulivan at Cappanacossy, pray send by the bearer two or three Lines.

To the Reverend Mr. Thomas Palmer.



January the 30th 1693.
I do hereby Certify to all whom it may concern, That I have Empowered and
Authorized Richard Clark, Samuel Aldwell, Bryen Kelly, Charles Carthy, Dermot
Sulivan and Dermot Sulivan Junior, to go on Board she Ship Laurel, to possess
and make use of all what they can find there, as also the Ship and Rigings
thereunto belonging, and do Promise and Oblige my self to give the said Parties
the one Moity of the said Ship and Goods, as Salvage.

Given under my hand, Christo. Lyell.
Witness, Enoch Hoare.

WHereas Christopher Lyell, Master of the Ship Laurel, has lately given us a
Paper under his hand to go on board the said Ship, as she was in distress in
the River of Killmare, for which we were to have half of what could be Saved of
the said Ship and Goods on board her, According to the Tenor of the said Paper:
We do for the Manifestation of Justice and Truth, hereby aver and declare to
have been no otherwise concerned therein, then as friends of Mr. Richard Orpen,
and Employed by him upon that service, to whom we attribute the true Right of
Salvage of what was saved of the said Ship and Goods. Witness our hands this
23d day of February, 1693,

Ri, Clark. Dermot Sulivan. Dermot Sulivan. Cha. Mac Carthy. Sa. Aldwel. Bryen
O Kelly.


By the Right Honorable Sir Richard Pyne, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of their
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and one of their Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council of Ireland.
WHereas I have received Informations of Felony against Williaw Sanford,
Charles Mansfield, Teige Donoghue, Daniel Tartaine, Cnoghor Turtaint, Charles
Arthur, Chomly Parker, Tho. Gill, Junior, Robret Pain, Owen mac Daniel, Peter
Hamston, John Bush, Teige Mac Cavn, John Reagh. These are therefore in their
Majesty's name strictly to Charge and Command you and Every of you, upon sight
hereof, to make Diligent search for all and Every of the said persons, and them
to apprehend and bring before me, to answer to all such matters and things as
on their Majesty's behalf shall be objected against them. And for your sodoing,
this shall be your Sufficient Warrant.

Given under my hand and Seal this 23d of March 1693 Ri. Pyen.
To the High Sherif of the County of Kerry and all High and Petty Constables
within the same County.



2d April 1694
J Captain Charles Carthy, do hereby declare and aver' That Edward Herbert High
Sheriff of Kerry, did about the first of March last desire one Mr. Bryen Kelly
and my self, to go to Mr. Richard Orpen, and to advise him the said Orpen to
give him the said Sheriff Twenty Guinnyes; And that he the said Sheriff would
compose all differences between Mr. Orpen and Christopher Lyell, the Master of
the Laurel, and would be above threescore Guinnyes in Mr. Orpens way, and
would Settle matters with Mr. Lyell to Mr. Orpens content: And the Sherif did
further promise Mr. Kelly and my self, That we should have share of what he
could get from Mr. Orpen. And that the said Mr. Kelly and my self, did
Accordingly speak to Mr. Orpen; whose answer was, That if the Sheriff would do
him any Service, he would deal with him like a Gentleman; all which I will
Justify upon Oath, if need be.

Cha. mac Carthy.

LUke Parker of Glannerought in the County of Kerry, G^nt. came before us this
day, and made Oath, that he was one of the English which were employed by Mr.
Richard Orpen before the last War, to go along with him in Arms, to hunt Tories
in the Counties of Cork and Kerry; And further says, that he this Deponent,
with the rest of the People employed to go along with the said Orpen, took ten
most notorious Robbers, who had been at the Robbing of a parcel of French
Hugonots, which by stress of Weather were forced into the West of Ireland, and
three of those who murdered and Robbd some English near Killarny, in the County
of Kerry, And several of Captain Poor's company, who after Poor was hanged,
came down from Waterford County to the Countyes of Cork and Kerry, And murdered
Jeromy Carthye's Brother, And committed several other murders and Robberyes; And
several of the County of Cork Toryes, who had Robbd Mr. Wells, and other Bandon
Gentlemen, of great Sums of Money, And of Kerry Toryes, who had once Surprised
Mr. Orpen, when he had only one Friend along with him; But unsuccessfull, for
Mr. Orpen and his friend wounded several of them; And were closely pursued by
Mr. Orpen, this Deponent, and others, to the taking of three. And great Numbers
of other Toryes, Robbers, Murderers and Thieves, amounting in all to the Number
of fourscore and two, wounded, taken and brought to the Goals by the said
Orpen, and his English friends, in the years 1685. and 1686. to the great
terror of Malefactors, and the general quiet of that part of the Kingdom, there
being not a Tory left thereabouts, until the troubles began; And then the
friends of the Tories came in revengefully upon the said Orpen, and Robbed him
of about a thousand head of Black Cattle, And took away from him three Ship
load of Iron Mine, and a great stock of Charcoal, and several quantities of Bar
Iron, and Robbed him of all his Substance, and so they did to this Deponent,
and the Rest of the said Orpen's English friends, who had been Serviceable in
bringing in the said Toryes; And says, that Since April School, about which time
the said Orpen Returned from the War, he has brought in the Number of ten most
bloody Murderers, Toryes. and Robbers, taken in the Countyes of Cork and Kerry,
Vouchers for which, are now produceable.

Luke Parker
Taken and Sworn before us the 29th May 1694 Ed. Denny, J. Blennerhasset.

I Dermot Fallvey of Fahagh in the County of Kerry Gent. do hereby aver and
declare, that I was called about the eighth man to be upon the Petty Jury
empannell'd at Tralee, at the last Commission of Oyer and Terminer, held there
on the 26th day of March last, to try Richard Orpen and Thomas Crump, and other
Traversers; And that I answered to my name, but was not put upon the said Jury,
though not excepted against by any person; yet several others were called after
me; and put upon the said Jury; But how I came to be left out after I was
called and answered, I know not. All which I am ready to depose, when thereto
required, as

Witness my hand this first of April, 1694 Der. Falvey

WIlliam Sanford of Killowen in the County Kerry Gent. came before me this day,
and made Oath, that on the 11th of February last, in the morning, Captain
George Gregory, being at Roghty Bridge in Glannerought, in the said County, had
intelligence that the Toryes, to the Number of about twenty five, (among whom
was Dermot Leary and Cnehor Boy) were making themselves merry at the house of
one William Bush, near a mile and half from Roghty Bridge, whereupon the
Captain went out after them with a Party of about twenty Soldiers, And several
of the English inhabitants went also along with him, making in all Six and
twenty armed men; But the Toryes having an account that a party was coming
after them, hastened away toward the Glinns; And the Captain and the twenty Six
men Marched after them with all Speed, and in less then three miles March, being
upon the top of a hill, they got sight of the Toryes, And they were but a Mile,
or thereabouts, from them; And having discovered them plainly by their Number
and their Arms, the Captain would not let his men go any further; and this
Deponent, and one Mr. Benjamin Tailor, did much importune the Captain to let
the party be Guided by them two; and that they would show them a byway, and
bring them upon the Toryes before they could be aware of them; But the Captain
refused; And said that he had no mind to follow the Toryes any further. Then
they begged the Captain to let the party go directly with them, and try to
overtake them, which the Captain allowed of in the manner following, Viz. he
called to the Corporal and bid him go with the party to the Toryes who were
then before their faces, and if the Toryes should not stay for them, to go no
further, but to return back again; whereupon this Deponent, with the other
English and the Soldiers, left the Captain upon the hill to behold their
Success, and went toward the Toryes, who had refresht themselves (while the
Captain and the party were considering) and made all the have they could away;
and this Deponent and the rest of the party soon came to the Ground where the
Toryes had been, And found that they had gained half a mile in that miles
pursuit; but when they came there, the Corporal, according to the Captains
orders would not suffer the Soldiers to pursue any further; And says, that
with much ado. he this Deponent, Mr. Benjamin Tailor, and one Nicholas Rouse,
prevailed with three of the Soldiers to keep on with them still after the
Toryes; And says, that these Six men came up near the Toryes in less then a
Miles pursuit, and fired several shots in among them; But says, that
considering that they were but Six to this great Number of Toryes, and that the
rest of the Soldiers stayed behind; they did not think it prudent to pursue
them any longer, but returned again to the rest of the Soldiers, where they had
left them; And as soon as they came to them, the Corporal beat the three
Soldiers for going beyond their orders, And this Deponent says that he verily
believes that if Cap. Gregory had suffered his men to go on with this Deponent
and the English of the Country, They had in all pro, bability killed and taken
the greatest part of these Toryes, It being in the Morning in an open Country
and a very fine clear day.

William Sanford.
Jurat coram me, 18 die April 1694. J. Blenerhasset.

HUgh Hutchinson Gent. being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists of God, and
examined, says, That on or about the eighth day of February last past, he this
Examinant was in Glanerough, where one Mr. Richard Orpen of that place, gave
notice to one Captain George Gregory and the Soldiers under his Command, (who
were then at a Village called Killowen) That the Tories were then in a small
Cops, or Wood, about a quarter of a mile distant from the said Village;
whereupon the said Cap. Gregory and his men, in company of the said Orpen did
beat up and search the said Cops or Wood, but not finding the Tories, they
returned back; this Examinant farther says, that after the Soldiers
aforementioned were returned, the said Orpen continued beating and searching
the said Cops, and at length discovered the Tories, and by the Noise and
Shouting which he made, gave Notice to the aforesaid Soldiers, who returned to
the said Orpen without their Captain, and then the said Orpen brought the
Soldiers aforesaid close upon the Tories, but the said Soldiers did not engage
them, but returned again without giving the Tories any farther Trouble. The
next day this Deponent asked one Corporal Mills, who Commanded the Soldiers, why
they did not fall upon the Tories? The said Mills Replied, That they had no
Order to Fight, and had they lost a man, they should all have been questioned
for it; and farther this Deponent says not.

Hu. Hutchinson.
Sworn before me Ja. Burrowes Sovereign of Kinsale in the County of Cork, this
18th of June 1694.
TEige Donoghue of Glanflesk, Gent. being duly Examined and Sworn upon the Holy
Evangelist, says and Deposes, that about the 17th day of O tober last, he
apprehended one Cnoher Boy (a Spy) in Glanflesk, and carried him prisoner to
the Garrison of Ross, where he the said Boy remained, until the 28th of October
aforesaid at Night; he made his escape, and carried away with him his Bolts,
and the Sentinels Musket (as he this Deponent was credibly assured by the
Soldiers of Ross) and this Deponent further says, that on the 2d or 3d day of
November following, he went forth with a party of Soldiers, by the Command of
Capt. Michael Cunningham (who was vexed at the Escape) to hunt for the said
Cnohor Boy; and says, that he Ranged several Glinns and Mountains, but could
not find him; and says, that he went forth at several times afterward with
the Soldiers, in quest of the said Boy, by Order of the said Captain, who was
still very intent to have the said Boy brought in and taken; and says, that at
length the said Boy did set up a Company of Tories for himself, and became a
very great Robber; and further says not, etc.

Teige Donoghuc.
Jurat coram me, 4 Die Jan. 1694. J. Blenerhasset.

Glannerought 20th October. 93. Dr. Brother,
I am certainly informed, That one Cnohor Boy, a little pretty black yaung
fellow is brought into Rosse, upon Account of T^ry business by one Teige
Donoghue; if so, I conceive it a very great imposture; for this Cnohor Boy is
the Man who brought me upon the Tories which set upon you and me, when I took
four and had them hanged, except one that died of his Wounds in Goal in Cork,
and this very fellew I have lately employed to set the Tories for us, that I
might come upon them with this Party: and so suspicious were the Tories of it,
that they took him and half hanged him; yet finding him Railing so vehemently
against me, they thought it cordial, and set him at Liberty; and I still hoped
for my design, if he has not acquainted any of you wish this matter; it is for
fear of having it take Air, for should it be given out, he would certainly be
cut in pieces by many hundreds, that are not known to be Tories; this I
earnestly desire may be seriously weighed by the Captain, so as Cnohor Boy may
be suffered to have his Liberty by Escape or otherwise; unless some good man
makes some Heinous thing against him; and now since they have exasperated him,
let him come to me, and I will engage he will not spare his Life to pursue the
greatest Rogues of them all: You may acquaint the Captain, that I have settled
all things between the Country and the Soldiers to the content of both sides: I
troubled him la^ely with a Letter about O Sulivan, but I doubt he received it
not. Pray desire Tom Dunn to come as soon as he can with Leather and Nails to
cover the 2 Trunks he saw,

Your Affectionate Brother. Ri. Orpen.
To Mr. Thomas Crump at Killarny,



Ross, October the 29th 93. SIR,
I Have perused your Brothers to you, and do not in the least doubt but what he
Writes may be much the Truth, but no doubt this fellow is a very great Rogue,
and has been guilty of many Villainies; I am credibly informed, That he is one
of the very greatest Rogues that was in the whole Mountains; and let O Donohue
be the greatest Rogue in Christendom, it was good Service done by him to take
this fellow; and I cannot nor will not on slight Terms part with him; as for
that Letter Mr. Orpen says, he sent me when O Sulivan More came over; I do not
remember I received any such, which with my hearty Service is the needful,

SIR, Your Humble Servant. Micha. Cuningham.
To Mr. Tho. Crump at Killarny.

Commit. Kerry.
John Sughrue Aged 30 Years, or thereabouts, being Sworn on the Holy Evangelist
before me, says as follows.



THis Deponent says, That on the 19th of Febr. 1693. he this Deponent was
Apprehended and made Prisoner, by one Sergeant Thomas Fullerton of Captain
Gregory's Company at Killowen in the said County, by the Order of the said
Captain in his Letter to the said Sergeant, and Corporal John Mills pretending
this Deponent had bought Goods belonging to a Ship then in Glanerough; that on
the 20th of February aforesaid, this Deponent in his Confinement under a Guard
of six Armed Men, was carried over the Mangarton to Killarney, and from thence
to Ross; and that the said Capt. Ordered, That none of the Soldiers that could
Accuse this Deponent, should be brought with him; this Deponent being in his
Confinement at Ross, was brought before the said Cap. and Examined on the said
matter; and required to give back the Goods bought from the Soldiers, to which
this Deponent Answered, that he had none, nor never bought any from them; upon
which the Capt. Swore he would transmit him this Deponent Prisoner, by the way
of Kinsale and Cork to Dublin, which struck a great Terror in this Deponent,
though Innocent; on the 21th of February aforesaid, the Soldiers were sent for,
in regard this Deponent would not Confess, and Examined on the said matter, who
upon their Examination declared upon Oath, That this Deponent never Traded or
Dealt with them for the Value of a Farthing; that after the said Declaration
the Captain sent for this Deponent, and confessed to him he was clear from the
matter of buying Goods, but said he would not part with him, that he had other
matters which in a long time afterward, he said it was for Harboring of
Tories, to which matter this Deponent offered to appear, and begged to be
brought before a Magistrate to give Bail, or to be committed to the County
Goal, all which was refused him; but still kept in hard Confinement, until this
Deponent made a Composition in favor of himself, and one Walter Nagle then in
Confinement, to pay Six Guineas to the said Captain for this Deponent's and Mr.
Nagles Liberty; and the Captain to be assistant to Nagle in concealing the
Goods bought as aforesaid, and to put back all the Informations that thereupon
was made; upon which Composition this Deponent and Mr. Nagle were Enlarged, and
a Letter given Nagle to the Sarjeant and Corporal, to forbear searching; and if
any Goods of Nagles were discovered, to lay them aside for him, and that they
had compounded one with another, That notwithstanding they took a Barrel of
Indigo, two Large Bags of Cotton, and some Sugar from Mr. Nagle, as also took a
Large Barrel of Indigo that Mr. Richard Orpen Lodged with this Deponent to
keep, which was in the Collectors Account, in the Master of the Ships Account,
and in all other Officers Accounts. That in their way to the place where the
said Goods lay, they pressed Men and Horses, and Bags, some of which they never
since returned, and committed several other Insolences in Mr. Mahony's House,
and further says not.

J. Sughru^
Jurat coram me, 2 Die May, 1694 J. Blenerhasset.

ON the 28th of January 1693. in the Morning about 7 or 8 a Clock, the Ship
Laurel of London drove up to Cappanacossy, and came on shore there about 2 or
3 Miles from my House, and about Noon, the Master writ to me that she was in
distress, and had not a Sail left, and desired my Aid, whereupon I went to him
and found him and all his Men ashore, at the House of Mr. Dermot Sulivan of
Cappanacossy, making themselves and some of the Country people merry with Rum
and Sugar and that the Master, Passengers and Company had forsaken the Ship at
Black-Water-Mouth, about two Miles below Cappanacossy, without leaving any Soul
on board her; when I saw how the Ship was, I advised the Master, Passengers,
etc. to betake themselves to their Ship again, she being past danger, and
promised him all the Assistance I could; but the Master seemed to have no mind
to go on board her any more, or to have any regard to her Preservation, until I
understanding that they had some Bags of Money and Treasure with them ashore, I
told them that the Country abounded with Tories and ill people, and desired
them to carry their Money on Board, and stick to their Ship, and withal told
them, that she was the best Garrison in the Country; upon which Apprehensions of
the Tories, they hastened on board again with their Money; I took leave of them
that Evening, and sent them about half a Dozen Soldiers to Guard them, and sent
likewise several Boats and Men to bring her away to a good Harbor; but some of
them returned again, and told me, that the Master and Men on board minded
norhing but drinking, and none of them took any manner of care for the Ship;
next Morning about 10 a Clock, the Mate, one Mr. Myars a Jew, Peter Row, and
one Mr. Spyers, with several of the Ships company came ashore to my House, and
brought with them 2 or 3 Sea Chests, wherein I concluded were some Changes of
Clothes to refresh themselves ashore; not in the least thinking they had
brought their Money in these Chests, having before told them, that their Ship
was the best Garrison in the Country; and after they had Eaten and Drank, I rid
down to the Ship along with Mr. Myars, and took along with me my Son-in-Law Mr.
Orpen, who had judgment in Shipping, to advise with the Master to get the Ship
into a Harbor, who went on Board with the said Myars, leaving me on shore,
where he stayed about 2 hours, and returned back again in the Evening with Mr.
Myars, and among other Discourses at my House, the said Peter Row gave me a
Note of some Goods which he had on board, and desired me to employ some persons
to save them; whereupon I employed my Son Orpen to do it; That Night being the
29th about midnight, the Tories came and set my House on fire in several
places, and fired several Shots in at the Doors and Windows, and we fired at
them again; but the fierceness of the Fire increased, and the Key being lost,
we were forced to break open the Door, and submit our selves to the Tories, who
forthwith entered the House, and Mr. Myars showed them the Chest which had the
Treasure, and they dragged it out and brake it open, and carried away what they
found in it; all this while Mr. Myars, or any other Body, never told me that
they had brought this Treasure to my House, until after my House was Burnt and
Robbed; the next day being the 80th, I was told the Master quitted the Ship,
and left her to the Country; all this in Verbo Sacerdotis, I aver to be true, as

Witness my Hand June the 8th 1694. Tho. Palmer.

The Collectors Letter.
Tralee the 20th of February, 1694. SIR,
I Had sooner Answered yours of the 10th, but that I was then from home, at one
of the Remotest Places in my District, occasioned by the coming of the
London-Guinycoast Frigot homeward bound at Ventry near Dingle, which having
very narrowly escaped the Seas, had well nigh Perished in the Harbor; for
coming into the Bay, she ran up toward Castlemain, not knowing the Land; but
our Boat going out timely, gave her a Waft and brought her into safe Anchoring:
I suppose you have sufficiently heard of the Privateers coming into the River
of Killmare, and taking the Ships thence; they had likewise Intelligence and
Design to carry off this; but my going, and sending Express after Express,
partly prevented it; the Captain of her, though his Chance such, is a Rugged,
Resolute, Stout Fellow; that will stand to and defend her to the last, so that
I reckon her in no great Danger, unless he be very much over marched, while the
few Soldiers and the English that are there, and he cotton so well together.
During my being there, I received by 2 Expresses Notice of another homeward
bound Ship the Laurel, also of London, stranded within the River of Kilmare,
which being very unusual, hastened me from the utmost corner over the Mountain
to her Relief; but alas, I came too lat^ to prevent the mischiefs done her, or
to save any considerable part of her Cargo, though I have done all that was
possible in me to serve the Merchants by preserving what could be found by the
strictest searches and Examination; yet it may perhaps be difficul^ for me to
Escape free from Censure and Calumny, that came not to the place not till eight
days after the Rumage, or Scramble, and none has yet tendered himself to be
examined only the Ship Carpenter, whose Examination I here enclosed send; and
if you will accept of the rest upon common fame, as well touching your friend
Mr. Orpen, as the Captain and Crew's behavior, It appears to me that the
latter, upon what reason, or without they had a mind to forsake the Ship, and
consequently to ruin Her and the Cargo, for they carried their money ashore on
the 28 past, and left her to take her chance, when she came ashore presently
near the upper end of the River, but fleeted now and then, when they went
aboard again, having made several holes in her bottom they forsook her out
right, and then Mr. Orpen went to save what he could, but too late; who I
understand used all means possible to preserve her and the goods. The latter
were in a manner destroyed before he went aboard by the Rabble, and water, which
was got into her, especially the Sugar. When I came there, I found he had taken
much pains and care therein and appeared ready to give me an account of what
was saved, and how he had laid the goods with the best safety he could into the
most convenient houses for that purpose; and the Master and Passengers promised
he should have a reasonable salvage; as for the money which they were Robbed
of, 'twas carried ashore privately by themselves; So that he had no hand in
saving of that; if he had, it had been better for them, for he would
undoubtedly have managed with more prudence. But that Reverend worthy man Mr.
Palmer, is ruined by it; having his house (where the money lay) and all his
Substance burnt by the Toryes. Next morning after I came there, I got the
Master to go aboard, who I must say, in the condition the Ship was then in, had
but little regard of the whole; for he stayed but some few hours on board; so
that I had somewhat to do to persuade him to go to her again till about the 12th
I did again importune him to look^ after her, the Crew was gone before I came
there. He showed me an imperfect Envoyce but not the former Masters Pocket
Book; for you must conceive that this man was not Shipped as Master, but the
Master dying at Sea, he appointed this Man to conduct the Ship home. Pray let
me hear from you as often as any thing occurs, and Oblige

SIR, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant Cha. Monk.
For Mr. Thomas Dance, Dublin.



FINIS.

