A Particular of the Silks, and a Specimen of the Toys and Handicraft-Wares,
which came from the East India, on the Ships Martha, Sarah and Dorothy; with
the Rates at which they were sold at the late Sale at the East-India-House;
according to the Books of Sales of these Ships, and Printed Cargoes.
On the Ship Martha, made of Silk, Herbs, or Mixed.
l. ATlasses 4570 pieces, at 2 l. 10 s. per piece, 011425 Addaties 1030 pieces,
at 1 l. 001030 Chawters 1285, at 1 l. 001285 Cherconnes 380, at 1 l. 000380
Chucklaces 1900, at 2 l. 003800 Jam Wares 295, at 2 l. 000590 Mahobutt Bannes
936, at 1 l. 000936 Peniascoes or Penasses 1667, at 1 l. 10 s. 002500
Pholcaries 129, at 2 l. 000258 Romalls 21415 pieces, at 16 s. 017132
Seersuckers 552, at 1 l. 10 s. 000828 Sooseys 7413 pieces, at 2 l. 10 s. 018532
Shaulbafts 716, at 1 l. 000716 Taffeties 14645, at 2 l. 029290 Herba-Taffeties
2405, at 1 l. 002405 Silk Lungees 2436, at 1 l. 002436 Herba and Cotton Lungees
5200, at 3 s. 6 d. 000910 Nankeen Taffeties 118, at 4 l. 000472 Muttrasses 603
pieces, at 2 l. 8 s. 001447 Elatches 185, at 18 s. 000166 Nillas or Bengalls
11430, at 22 s. 012573 Putkaes 1238, at 17 s. 001052 Ginghams coulour'd 5691,
at 23 s. 006594 Canvas 232 Bolts, at 2 l. 000464 117225 On the Ship Sarah, made
of Silk, Herbs, or Mixed.
l. CHouters 230 pieces, at 1 l. 5 s. 00287 Gelongs 1360 pieces, at 1 l. 01360
Hockings 1000 pieces, at 14 s. 00700 Paunches 1417 pieces, at 1 l. 01417
Pelongs 485, at 1 l. 5 s. 00606 Romalls 2623, at 16 s. 02098 Shalbafts 95, at 3
l. 00285 Sooseys 401, at 2 l. 15 s. 01102 Taffeties 1552, at 2 l. 4 s. 03414
Gawzes 153, at 1 l. 00153 11422 On the Ship Dorothy, made of Silk, Herbs, or
Mixed.
l. PAunches 6207 pieces, at 1 l. 6 s. 08069 Gelongs 5192, at 1 l. 1 s. 05451
Ditto, Printed and Painted 392, at 1 l. 10 s. 00588 More striped 1018, at 1 l.
01018 Pelongs 5948, at 1 l. 10 s. 08922 Velvets 345, at 4 l. 01380 Sattins 107,
at 5 l. 00535 Damask Nankeens 103, at 5 l. 00515 Satin Nankeens 403, at 5 l.
10 s. 02216 Sattins plain 87, at 3 l. 00261 China Silks 133, at 4 l. 00532
Gorgoreas 118, at 4 l. 00472 Taffety Nankeens 81, at 3 l. 10 s. 00283 Sattins,
etc. 169 pieces, at 4 l. 10 s. 00760 31002 Toys and Small Goods, by the Sarah
and Dorothy.
l. CHina-Ware pieces 150000 Fans 038557 Lacquer'd Sticks for Fans 013470
Lacquer Trunks, Escretors, Bowls, Cups, Dishes, etc. 010500 Lacquer'd Tables
inlaid 000189 Lacquer'd Pannels in Frames, painted and carved for Rooms, 000047
Lacquer'd Boards 000178 Lacquer'd Brushes 003099 Lacquer'd Tables, not inlaid
000277 Lacquer'd Fans for Fire 000174 Lacquer'd Boards for Skreens 000054
Skreens set in Frames 000071 Paper Josses 001799 Shells painted, double gilt
000281 Parcels of Indian Robes 000098 Silks painted for Shashes 000260 Paper
painted for Fans 000377 Images of Copper, Stone, Wood and Earth, 000600
Pictures 000669 Petticoats of painted Silks 000040 Quittesolls 000098 Brass and
Iron Frames and Leaves for Lanthorns Brass Hinges in Chests Embroideries for
Curtains, Valloons, and Counterpaines Quilts and Petticoats All Sold, by the
best Account taken, for above 050000 Goods by the Martha, 117225 Goods by the
Sarah, 011422 Goods by the Dorothy, 031002 Toys and small Goods, 050000 209649

Besides great Quantities unsold.

Whether the Silks and Goods mentioned, as well as great Quantities of Painted
and Dyed Callicoes from India, not taken notice of in this List, be spent here
in England, in the room of our Home-made Silks and Woollen Manufactories, and
with the Toys and Handicraft-Wares (being it will appear upon Examination) that
all are purchased with our Money, do exhaust the Treasure of the Nation, deprive
the Poor of their Livelihood, and hinder the Consumption of our Wool and
Products, and may not probably increase ad infinitum, unless a Stop be put to
their Consumption by this Honorable House; is humbly submitted.

Since the Adversaries of the Bill now depending in the Honorable House of
Commons, For Restraining the wearing of India Silks, etc. have spread Reports
how greatly this Trade is courted by our Neighbors, and particularly how the
French King encourages Foreign Trade; we thought it necessary, for the
Satisfaction of all those Worthy Persons before whom this Affair lies, to get
an Authentic Copy of the French King's Order of Council, in that respect;
whereby any un-prejudiced Person may see the Sense they had of it, and the
Proceedings they made upon it.

Extrait des REGISTERS du Conceil d'Estat.
LE Roy estant inform que la grande quantite de Toiles de Cotton peintes aux
Indes, ou contrefaites dans le Royaume, and autres Etoffes de Soye a fleurs
d'Or and d'Argent de la Chine and desdites Indes, ont done lieu non seulement
au transport de plusieurs millions horse du Royaume, mais encore cause la
diminution des Manufactures etablies de longremps en France pour les Etoffes de
Soye, Laines, Lins, Chanvres, and en mesme temps la ruin and desertion des
Ouvriers, lesquels, par la cessation de leur travail, ne trouvant plus
d'occupation, ny de subsistence pour leurs familles, sont sortis du Royaume. A
quoy estant necessaire de pourvoir, and pour cet effet empescher le course and
le debit dans le Royaume desdites Toilles peintes and Etoffes de Soye des Indes
and de la Chine, en accordant neanmoins un temps raisonnable a ceux qui en sont
chargez pour les vendre and s'en defaire. Ouy le raport du sieur le Peletier
Conseiller ordinaire au Conseil Royal, Controleur general des Finances: Sa
Majeste' en son Conseil a ordonne and ordonne, qu'a commencer du jour de la
publication du present Arrest toutes les fabriques etablies dans le Royaume
pour peindre les Toilles de Cotton blanches cesseront, and les moules servans a
l'impression d'icelles seront rompus and brisez. Fait sa Majeste tres expresses
deffenses de les retablir, and a tous ses Sujets de peindre lesdites Toilles,
and aux Graveurs de fair aucuns moules servant a ladite impression, a peine de
consiscation des Toilles, moules and autres ustanciles, and de trois mill
livres d'amende payable par corpse and sans deport, applicable un tiers au
Denonciateur le second aux Hospitaux des lieux, and le troisieme au Fermier du
Domaine. Et a l'egard des Toilles peintes and autres Etoffes de Soye a fleurs
d'Or and d'Argent des Indes and de la Chine, Sa Majeste a accord and accord
jusq'au dernier Decembre de l'annee prochaine 1687. aux Marchands and autres
qui en son chargez pour les vendre and s'en defaire, ainsi qu'ils aviseront bon
estre; apres lequel tems fait sa Majeste deffenses a tontes perfonnes de
quelque qualite and condition qu'elles soient, de les exposer ny vendre, and
aux particuliers d'en achepter. Ordonne que celles qui seront trouvees dans les
Magazins and Boutiques seront bruslees, and les Proprietaires condamnez en
pareilles amends de trois mil livres applicable comme dessus. Permet neanmoins
sa Majeste l'entree, vente and debit dans le Royaume des Toilles de Coton
blanches en payani les droits portez par l'Arrest dudit Conseil du 30. Avril
dernier, qui sera execute, ensemble celuy du 15. du present mois jusqu' au
dernier Decembre de l'annee prochaine 1687. seulement. Enjoint sa Majeste au
sieur Lieutenant de Police de la ville de Paris, and aux sieurs Intendans and
Commissaires departis dans les Provinces and Generalitez du Royaume, de tenir
la main a l'execution du present Arrest, qui sera pubile and affiche par tout
ou besoin sera, a ce qu'aucun ne'n ignore.

Fait au Conseil d'Estat du Roy, tenu a Fontainebleau, le 26 jour d'Octobre mil
six cens quatre-vingt six. Sign, COQUILLE.
A Decree of the Kings Counsel of State, concerning Cotton Linen Cloth,
Printed in East India, or Painted in the Kingdom; and other China and India
Silks, Stuffs, and Flowered with Gold and Silver. Given the 26th of October,
1686. Extracted out of the Register of the Council of State.
THE King being informed, That the great quantity of Cotton Linen Cloth,
printed in East India, or painted in the Kingdom, and other China and India
Silk, Stuffs, and Flowered with Gold and Silver, have not only given occasion
of Transporting out of the Kingdom many Millions, but also have diminished the
Manufactures of old established in France, for the making of Silk, Woollen,
Linen and Hemp-Stuffs; and at the same time the Ruin and Destruction of the
Working-People, who by want of Work, having no Occupation nor Subsistence for
their Families, are gone out of the Kingdom. The which being needful to provide
a Remedy for, and for that effect to hinder the Course and Sale in the Kingdom
of the said painted Linen Cloth, and India and China Silks and Stuffs,
nevertheless granting to the Owners a reasonable time that they may sell them;
Having heard the Report of Monsieur le Pelletier, Counselor Ordinary of the
King's Royal Counsel, and Comptroller General of the Finances; his Majesty in
his Counsel has ordered, and does order, That from the beginning of the Day of
the Publication of the present Declaration, all the Manufactures established in
the Kingdom for Painting of the White Cotton Linen Cloth shall be abolished,
and the Moulds serving to the Printing of them shall be broke and destroyed.
His Majesty does forbid, most expressly, the re-establishing thereof; also to
his Subjects the Painting of the said Linen Cloth; and to the Engravers the
making of any Moulds, serving to the said Impression, under the Penalty of
losing the said Cloths, Moulds and other Utensils, and three thousand Livers
Fine, personally paid and without dimunition; one third part to the Informer,
the second part to the Hospitals of the Place, and the third to the Farmers of
the Revenue. And as concerning the painted Linen Cloth, and other China and
India Silk, Stuffs, and Flowered with Gold and Silver, his Majesty has
granted, and does grant (to the last of December 1687. next) to the Merchants
and others, the Permission of Selling them as they shall think fit: The said
time being expired, his Majesty does forbid to all Persons, of what Quality and
Condition whatsoever they are, the Exposing and the Selling thereof; and to the
Particulars the Buying thereof, does order, That those found in all Warehouses
and Shops shall be burnt, and the Proprietors condemned to the like Fine of
three thousand Livers, paid as abovesaid. His Majesty does permit,
nevertheless, the Entry, Sale and Retail, of the said White Linen Cloth in his
Kingdom, paying by them the Taxes, according to the Declaration of the Counsel
the 30th April last, which shall be executed; and that of the 15th of the
present Month, to the last of December, 1687. next Year. His Majesty does
command to the Lieutenant of the Policy of the City of Paris, and to the
Intendants and Commissaries of the Provinces and Generalties of the Kingdom, to
cause the present Declaration to be executed, being published and affixed in
all the Places where need shall be, that no Body should be ignorant thereof.

Done in the King's State-Council held at Fontainbleau, the 26th Day of
October, 1686. Signed COQVILLE.
AN ACOUNT Of the late SALE of India Silks, etc. WITH The French King's Decree
Concerning those Manufactures.


