REASONS humbly offered by the Company of Glass and Earthen Ware Sellers, in
Answer to the Pot-Makers printed Reasons for their Bill now Depending in this
Honorable House.
The First of their printed Reasons is,
1. THat the Manufacture of Earthen Ware is of general use in private Families
of all Conditions, and of absolute necessity in diverse Trades and Professions,
sufficient Quantities whereof are, and with ease might be made at home, for
supply of the whole Nation, in all respects as good as any Imported, the same
having been fully Demonstrated to the late King Charles, and King James the
Second; who in Testimony of their Satisfaction therein, issued out their
several Proclamations for the better putting the Statute against the
Importation of such Foreign Ware in Execution.

Answer. They never did, neither can they make such Painted Earthen Ware as is
Imported; And the Proclamations they mention were Clandestinely got (and the
first of them was in the time of the Dutch Wars) without any notice given to
the said Company of Glass and Earthen Ware Sellers, and the Act they mention
does not take notice of Earthen Ware.

II. That the said Manufacture is wholly made of English Materials, great
Quantities of Tin, Lead, Clay, and Kelpe to a considerable Value being therein
yearly used; and if the same were duly Encouraged, a much greater Consumption
would be had, the said Art be Improved, and the Exportation and Vent thereof in
Foreign Parts be Promoted.

Answer. Far greater Quantities then are or could be here Consumed of the said
Materials, are Exported to Holland, Germany, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Turkey,
Genoa, Persia, and the East Indies, to make the said Wares so desired to be
Prohibited.

Note, The said Materials do Pay Custom, both at their Exportation and
Importation, and all Earthen Ware now Imported pays Four Shillings in the
Pound; and all such Ware has constantly been Rated in the Book of Rates, and
never pretended to be Prohibited till within these Twenty Years by the said
Proclamations so surreptitiously got.

III. That the said Trade cannot be managed without great Numbers of Artificers
and Laborers, so as several hundreds of Poor Families do wholly depend thereon,
besides the several Tradesmen, as Bricklayers, Masons, Mill-Wrights, Coopers,
Smiths, Watermen, Bargemen, etc. who are frequently Employed in Matters
relating thereto, to so great a Degree, That a full Moiety of what the Goods
are sold for, is paid and expended by the Master for Labor.

Answer. There are but Six or Seven of the said Pot-Makers in England, who may
Employ Fifty Families or thereabouts; several of the Artificers they mention,
as Bricklayers, Masons, etc. being but very seldom Employed, and that only in
the Building and Repairing of their Kilnes, which are not Twenty in the whole,
and the Profit thereof to the Persons, so seldom Employed, can be but very
inconsiderable, and they but few in number; Whereas there are several hundreds
of Families maintained in the Dealing and Retailing of Foreign and Inland
Earthen Wares, whom this Bill, if it should pass, would utterly Ruin.

IV. That so great Quantities of Foreign Wares are now on diverse Pretexts
Imported, That unless a more effectual Prohibition be Established, the
Consumption of the said English Materials will cease, the Poor be unimployed,
and the said Manufacture be totally lost, and Foreigners thereby enabled to set
what price they please on the said Commodities.

Answer. That very little or no Foreign or Earthen Ware is Imported, which they
do or can make here, but chiefly China and Persia Earthen Ware, and Melting
Pots, (though some have had Patents for the sole making Fine Earthen Wares
here, after the manner of Holland, and have had all Encouragement imaginable
from the said Company of Glass Sellers and others, but could never make such
Ware or Tiles for Chimneys) and therefore cannot hinder the Consumption of such
Earthen Ware as is made here; but the Importing of Foreign Earthen Ware has
been a great Example to the very Pot-makers themselves, by making their Wares
after Foreign Patterns, to their great Interest.

Observe. That if the said Bill should Pass, it would be very prejudicial to
the Nation in general for these Reasons, Viz.

I. It would give the said Pot-Makers an Opportunity of setting what high
Prizes they please on their Commodities, which they already threaten to do, in
case the Bill should Pass, and have formerly done the same, upon the first
putting out of the said Proclamations. II. It will lessen His Majesty's
Customs, for most of the Materials of which the said Commodities are made, are
had from hence, and pay Custom, both at the Exportation and Importation, and at
the latter it pays Four shillings in the Pound by Act of Parliament. III. The
said Wares have been con^tantly Rated in the Book of Rates, and never
Prohibited till by the first Proclamation, which was Clandestinely obtained in
the time of the Dutch Wars, and by virtue of that the Prizes of all Earthen
Wares were here very much Enhanced. IV. It would be a great Prejudice to the
Mint, and to all Silver Smiths, Chemists, and others, who use Crucibles and
Melting Pots, the same being Imported from Abroad, and cannot be made here. V.
It would hinder the Exporting of several Thousand pounds a year of our English
Commodities which would never be Sold were it not in Barter for Foreign Earthen
Ware.
Note, This Bill Prohibites the Importation of China, and all other curious
Earthen Wares which can never be made here.

All which is humbly submitted to this Honorable House, and it is hoped for the
Reasons before mentioned, that the said Bill will not be suffered to Pass.

REASONS Against the BILL for Preventing the Importation of Foreign Earthen
Ware.


