REASONS Humbly Offered by the Corporation and Company OF GLASS-SELLERS of
LONDON, Against Passing the Bill for laying Duties on Glass, etc.
IF this Bill should pass, it will tend to the Ruin of many Glass-sellers, and
ancient Shopkeepers of the City of London, whose Livelyhoods in a great
measure depends upon selling of Glass-Wares, who being for the most part
obliged to Dwell in large Houses, for the convenience of Stowage thereof, will
undoubtedly by this great Advance upon Glass, fin^ such a decay of Trade, as
will render their Returns s inconsiderable, as they will not be able to support
the^ Families, and pay Rent for their Houses.

For if the Glass-maker must pay the Duties of all Glass made and put into his
Warehouse, to be sure the Glass-seller must pay so much the more before the
Glass can come into his Warehouse, one quarter of which generally lies on the
Glass-sellers hands, until out of fashion, by which he would be willing to lose
40 l. per Cent. so that the Duty itself of 20 l per Cent. will Ruin these
Glass-sellers; who by the return they have had, and the small Gain, have made
shift to maintain themselves and Families, and pay all Duties to the Crown
incumbent on them, as Citizens of London, which the intended Act will disinable
them to perform for the future.

Therefore it is hoped, the great Wisdom of this Honorable House will take into
Consideration, the great Oppression such intended Duties will be to this
Corporation, as also the Glass-maker on whom they depend, and how little and
inconsiderable an Advantage it will be to the Crown; be Graciously pleased not
to pass the said Bill.


