A Description of the Seventeen Provinces; And of the Province of HAYNAVLT in
particular, in which is the City of MONS.
THE Seventeen Provinces are, Brabant, Lembourg, Luxembourg, Gu^lders, (which
are Dutchies); Flanders, Artois, Haynault, Holland, Zealand, Namur, and
Zutphen, (which are Earldoms); the Marquesate of the Holy Empire, Friesland,
Malines, Vtrecht, Overyssel, and Groningen, (are Signiories.)

The circuit of the Country is about a thousand English Miles, or thirty-four
Flemish Leagues. Those that formerly belonged to the King of Spain, which are
now the Seven United Provinces, in these are contained 208 Walled Towns, 6300
Villages with Parish-Churches, besides a great number of other Villages and
Hamlets.

The Beeves of Friesland and Holland are very great, and weigh some of them
sixteen hundred pound weight of that Country. The Ewes in Holland, Friesland,
and part of Flanders, bring forth three or four Lambs at a time, and the Kine
sometimes two Calves. The Country brings forth much Mather, wherewith a part
of Europe is furnished; Wood, and Hemp and Flax in great abundance.

Five principal Rivers are in these Countries; the Rhine, the Meuse, the
Scheld, the Haa, the Eemes.

map of the county of Hainaut County of HAINAULT



The Meuse affords abundance of Sturgeons, so big, that some of them weigh 400,
and some 420 pounds weight, and are twelve foot long of Antwerp measure. It
yields also great store of Salmons and Salmon-Trouts, Lampreys, Shads,
Congers, Mullets, and diverse other sort of Fishes, which coming into fresh
Waters, become fat, and excellent good.

The Scheld has diverse sorts of Fishes that come out of the Sea; as Sturgeon,
Salmon-Trouts, Lampreys, Turbots, Congers, Shads, Mullets, Soles, etc. and an
infinite number of other Fish, that multitudes of people are relieved therewith.

Besides these Rivers, diverse Channels are cut out and made Navigable by Man's
hand; the principal whereof are at Bruxells, Ghent, Bruges, and Middlebourg.

The Countries have many Meers, Pools, Lakes, and Marshes, which fortify the
Country, and furnish it with Fish.

Herrings come out of the Northern Seas in incredible multitudes into our Seas
in August, September, October, until the midst of November; the sooner the cold
begins, the sooner they come: They compass our Island of Great Britain, and so
pass into the Northern Ocean.

They have in these Countries diverse Forests and Woods well stored with Red and
Fallow-Deer, Goats, Wild Boars, Hares, Coneys, Badgers, Wolves, Foxes, etc.
which yield good Furs.

The Fowl in this Country are, Partridges, Pheasants, Turtle-doves, Quails,
Blackbirds, and all other sorts of Fowl.

The People are Valiant, and very skilful Seamen: they excel in making
Woollencloth, Tapestry, Fustians, Silks, Velvets.

The Women govern all both within doors and without, and make all bargains;
which makes them too imperious and troublesome. The eldest Daughter is of the
greatest Reputation, yet has no larger Portion than the ^^st. They marry Noble
with Ignoble, Young with Old, Master and Servant.

The Air of these Countries is somewhat gross and moist, yet nevertheless
wholesome, and fit for digestion, and very good for breeding all kind of Cattle.
The Summer is fair, pleasant, and delightsome, because the Sun is not over hot:
the Winter is commonly long, cold, and sharp. The welfare of the Netherlands
consists principally in their Navigation and Fishery; which, as two
inexhaustible Mines, keep and preserve them in a continual Trading, Riches, and
Prosperity; employing 300 fishing Ships and Vessels, which does employ near
9000 other Ships and Vessels, and 150000 people, that are employed on Sea and
Land in the management of that Trade; and do build yearly 1000 Ships, tho they
have not one Timber-stick growing in their own Country.

A Description of the Province of Haynault in particular; it being the present
Seat of Action, in the Investing of Mons by the French King's Forces in the
year 1691.
HAYNAVLT is so named of the River Hayne, which runs through it. It is bordered
on the North with Brabant and Flanders, on the South with Champaign and
Piccardy, on the East with the County of Namur, and on the West with the
Scheld, and part of Flanders Gallican. It is 20 Leagues long, and 16 broad; The
Air is wholesome and the Soil good, by reason that the Country is watered with
many Rivers, as the Scheld, the Sambre, the Tender, and many other small
Rivulets; there are also in it many Lakes, Marshes, Ponds, Pools, Fountains,
goodly Woods, and pleasant Forests. It abounds with fragrant and fair
Pastures and Meadows for all kind of Cattle, with good Fruits and profitable
Trees; and is replenished with great plenty of good Corn. In some part of it
are Iron Mines, Lead, and Quarries of Stone for all kind of Buildings, with
great store of White-lime and Cole.

In this Country are 24 Walled Towns; namely, Mons, Valenciennes, Bouchain,
Quesnoy, Conat, Landressy, Amesnes, Chimay, Mariembourg, Segny, Brain le
Compte, Eughien Halle, Lesme, Cheure, Ath, St. Guisline, and Leaze. There are
also 950 Villages, with many Castles and Signiories. Many of these Villages are
great and fair, and have Titles of Honor annexed to them; as, Pequicourt,
Fontayn, Laling, Montigny, Antonig, Barlamon, Barbanson, Aimeries, and many
others.

A Description of the City of MONS.
THE City of MONS, or Berghen, receives its Name from its situation, which
latter in their Language signifies a Mountain or Hill: but the rise of the
Earth is so gentle, as it cannot be said to be Mountainous. It is a Noble City
for Situation, Inhabitants and Buildings: It is a very strong place by Nature
and Art, and may be environed with Water at pleasure. The City-wall is very
strong, and is fortified with three large and deep Ditches, and with an ancient
Castle. The place is great and fair, and beautified with sumptuous Buildings,
both public and private, with rich Fountains, and with rich Citizens and
Artists. Here is great concourse of People for Commerce. The King of Spain's
Council used to sit here, which administrated Justice to all the Country: All
which Prerogatives gave it the Precedence over all other Cities in the Province
of Haynault. It commands large and spacious Fields round about it.

This City is stronger by its Natural Situation, than by Manual Industry: It
is cut through on the lower-side with a little Rivulet called Truita; which
(...) soon as it goes out of it, falls into another somewhat bigger than Haen.

To this City the French Forces being hastened from their Quarters, upon notice
of the ROYAL CONGRESS at the Hague, and the Powerful Army agreed on amongst the
Confederate Princes, in conjunction with His most Serene Majesty of Great
Britain, who are jointly agreed to pull down the aspiring Pride of France; the
French King resolved to attempt something early, that he might look big with
Pride once more before his fall: And on the fifteenth of March, 1690/1. New
Style, their Cavalry began to invest it in a formal manner, using all diligence
to streighten the passages; and soon after the arrival of the Infantry, the
Enemy formed the Siege with a considerable Body of Men, and proceeded hastily
to break ground, and work on their Lines of Circumvallation and
Contravallation, to push on the Siege before the Confederate Armies can be
embodied. But it is well hoped, that by reason of the City's being sufficiently
Garisoned with Old Soldiers, amounting to Six Thousand Foot and Seven Hundred
Horse, well disciplined, under experienced Commanders; of which there are six
Dutch Regiments, and two of Brandenburgers; the rest being Spaniards and
Walloons, Commanded by the Valiant Prince of Burgue, an experienced Soldier;
the City being plentifully furnished with all manner of Stores, Provisions and
Ammunition, the French King may lose his aim, in endeavoring by this hasty
attempt to undermine all the Councels of the Congress at the Hague. But let him
call to mind, and look back to the year 1678. where our present KING (then
Prince of Aurange) with the Assistance of the Duke of Monmouth, and other Noble
Heroes of the English Nation, raised the Siege of Mons, against all the Power
of the French King in that year, and relieved the City. And who knows but God
by his good Providence may do the same again, by the Prudent Conduct of our
Auspicious King WILLIAM? whom God long preserve; and let all the good People of
England say, Amen.

Victoriae Anglicanae: Being an historical Collection of all the memorable and
stupendous Victories obtained by the English against the French, hoth by Sea
and Land, since the Norman Conquest; Viz. The Battle, I. between King Henry II.
and Robert of Normandy. II at Morleis. III. at the Rescue of Calice. IV. at
Poicters. V. at Cressy. VI. at Agincourt. VII. at the mouth of the River Seine.
VIII. at Vernoil. IX. at Cravant. X. at the Relief of Orleance, with the great
Actions of the Lord Salisbury and Talbot. XI. of Spurrs. Dedicated to all the
Commissioned Officers of the Maritime and Land Forces. Sold by Ric. Baldwin.

Published by John Seller, and Sold by Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms-Inn
in Warwick Lane, London; and by the Author at the Hermitage in Wappin. M.DC.XCI.


