A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE True State OF THE CASE OF THE SUEDISH Merchant-Fleet,
Lately brought up, on their Voyage from France, by Admiral Rooke, and sent into
Plymouth.

LONDON, Printed; And are to be Sold by Eliz. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall,
1697.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE True State OF THE CASE OF THE SVEDISH Merchant-Fleet,
etc.

. I. WHereas the Suedish Merchant-Ships, lately taken as Prizes, upon their
Voyage from France, and sent into Plymouth by Admiral Rooke, give Occasion to
various Discourses and Judgments amongst Statesmen, as well as Merchants, it is
hoped, that it will be no less acceptable to the Curious, than satisfactory to
such as are well affected to Justice, to give an impartial and exact Account of
the true State of the Case, to the end the World may be acquainted with the
weighty and just Reasons for which the said Fleet was stopped, and since has
been judicially examined, and proceeded against; so that all who are not
unconcerned for the common Welfare, may be satisfied of the great and
irreparable Damage the Allies have sustained by those Self-Interested People,
that have been clandestinely aiding and assisting France in executing its Craft
and Cunning, by imposing upon others.

II. In order to which, the Perusal of the ensuing Account will make us
hereafter less sollicitous in enquiring the true Reason, why France has been
able to carry on so great and chargeable a War, against so powerful Enemies,
with so much Vigor as it has done hitherto, at a Time when their Outward Trade
(which ever has been accounted the Life of that Country, and the only
Improvement of its Wealth) was, as generally believed, either much lessened,
or, in respect to some Places, utterly lost.

. III. For, in as much as the Unquestionable and Impartial Proofs which were
brought to Light at the Trials of the said Suedish Merchant-Fleet, by the
several Suedish Merchants own Letters, and Original Writings, do (though almost
too late) make it evident, that France, in respect of its Trade, has been
lessened in the Number of Shipping, but not in the Sales of their Commodities,
and sending and conveying them to other Countries; whereby the Suedes have
supplied the Want of their Ships, by furnishing the French with their own: So
that the French have not so much left off the Sale and Transportation of their
Goods and Products, as changed the Way and Manner of it. All which did tend to
the Unretrievable Damage of all the Allies, but especially of the English.

. IV. France, indeed, could find no more proper Method for holding up its
Commerce to the East Countries, (where, by the Imperial Avocatorial Orders, all
the Hanse-Towns are forbidden, upon great Penalties, to entertain the same,)
than by engaging the Suedes to assist them therein, because the French Goods
might, by that Means, be safely conveyed in Suedish Ships; and under their
Passes, on pretext of being Suedish Effects, Imported into the said
Hanse-Towns, without the least Hindrance, or Molestation: Which did give no
less Encouragement to the covetous Owners of the Ships, who, under that Color
of being Suedes, could save the Customs payable in the Soundt, than an Immense
Advantage to the French Trade.

. V. In which Subtilty of the French, the Suedes have been the easier prevailed
with to assist them, because they were sure they could do it with more Gain,
and less Fear, than other Nations: Wherein, however, they were not satisfied to
carry on this unlawful Trade only in those Towns, which, being situated in the
Empire, belong to the Crown of Suedeland, as Stetin, Stade, Wismar, Stralsund,
etc. contrary to the Imperial Avocatories published against it; but they went
on farther in it, and engaged also with Merchants of the Free Imperial Towns,
viz. Lubeck; Hambourgh, Emden, and others; nay, (which is more particularly
against the Treaties and solemn Convention with England) with the French
themselves, to assist them in their Trade, not only in Trafficking with the
East-Land Countries, but also in France it self, by conveying their Goods from
one French Port to another, in Suedish Ships, and under the Favor of Suedish
Passes, sub and obreptitie obtained for that purpose.

. VI. And this foul and unlawful Practice has been, especially of late, managed
with so much Art, that it is become a difficult Matter to find out all the
Tricks used therein, by reason of the equal Covetousness wherein the Suede did
join with the other Merchant, his Correspondent, in improving their unlawful
Gain; no Oath being so sacred with them, nor prevailing enough, to discover the
Intrigue wherein they so closely adhered one to another; insomuch that the
Suede oftentimes made no Scruple to lend only his Name to the Ship* and under
that Color, did get the Passes for its secure Voyage.

VII. But to facilitate the obtaining of the said Passes, they used the
following Contrivance, viz. The Suede did build a Ship, of more or less Tuns,
on his own Account; whereupon, he could safely make Oath before the Magistrate,
that that same Ship was his own, and did really belong to him, and was built at
his proper Cost and Charges; and thereupon he obtained a Pass for the said
Ship, as being a Suedish* Ship, built in Suedeland, and belonging to one of
that King's Subjects. This being done, the Suede sold and transported the very
same Ship to a Dutch, Lubeck, or Hambourgh-Merchant; who, in Consideration of
the other's Service, did give him one Quarter, or Eighth Part, (as they could
best agree upon) in the said Ship, on Condition that the Suede should always
provide new Passes as often as there should be Occasion for them, and that the
said Ship should always go under the Suede's Name, and by that Means traffic
unmolested, to and with France: Which Practice, the Suede flattered himself,
that he might securely enough continue, without acting thereby against his
Conscience, or committing the least Perjury by so doing; there being no
Occasion, according to the Custom and Laws of that Country, to make Oath
a-fresh upon every other Voyage, for getting of new Passes, because the first
Oath will suffice for good and all: So that by this Mental Reservation, the
Suede could obtain as many Passes as he pleased; and for all that, his
Conscience not concerned in the least thereby. Nay, by the Proofs made against
the said Suedish Fleet, taken from their own Hand-writings, Books and Letters,
now under examination in the Court of Admiralty, it does manifestly appear,
that, to take off all Suspicion, and to obviate all Objections and Dangers that
might befall such a Ship, the Foreign Merchant ordered the Suede to make a Bill
of Sale of the Ship, in the Suede's own Name, though he had not the least Right
to the said Ship, nor did any Part therein belong to him.

. VIII. Another Artifice has also been used, the more easily to obtain the
Passes in Stockholm, viz. Some of those Foreign Merchants sent their Servants
thither, to be there made Burghers pro forma; and by those Means they procured
the Passes, although such Servant had neither Estate nor Money for himself, but
was supplied by his Master, who lived either in Holland, or Lubeck, or
Hamburgh, or elsewhere, upon whose Account this glorious Trade was carried on.

. IX. This being the very Case of the Suedish Merchant-Fleet, now in Debate, as
is manifest by examining the several Letters and Papers which have been found
on Board the said Ships, in great Numbers, there being above Four Hundred
material Letters and Papers to evidence the same, it is not credible that any
Body Papers to evidence the same, it is not credible that any Body should have
Confidence enough to contradict so evident a Truth, unless it were one, who,
together with his Conscience, has also lost all his Shame and Blushing.

. X. In the mean time, these few following. Authentic Extracts from some of
the abovesaid great Numbers of Letters and Papers, together with other
substantial Proofs, will be sufficient to justify a Sentence against this foul
and vile Practice, hitherto used with France.

Seqvuntur Epistolae sub finem additae.

Numb. 3.5.6.7.8.11.34.35.37.39.40.45.53. etc.

. XI. By such, and the like Solid and most convincing Proofs, which partly
appear by the foregoing Extracts of the Merchants Letters, written by their own
Hands; and partly may be drawn from the Translations of the Proceedings in
Doctors Commens, before the Court of Admiralty; all which here to insert, would
be too Voluminous, and even too Superfluous a Work: It is plain, and without
any Question, that the several Owners of the said Suedish Merchant-ships have
their Abode and Families, not in Suedeland, but in France, Holland, Lubeck,
Hambourgh, Emden, or Ostend; nay, even in Scotland; although they go under
Suedish Passes and Names; wherefore they have Double Bills of Lading, and their
Goods double marked, viz. On the Hogsheads of Wine or Brandy, etc. the one Mark
on the Bunghole of the Fatt, being pro forma, for the Merchant in Stockholm;
and the other on the Head of the same Fat, for the right Owner, either at
Lubeck, Hambourgh, Dunkirk, etc. By these undeniable Proofs, it appears
likewise, what Course was to be taken for Reclaiming such Ships, in case they
should have the Mischance to fall into the English Hands, and to be brought in
Question in England; namely, The Suedish Merchant did oblige himself to reclaim
these Ships and Goods, as being his own, and to stand to all Danger of being
made Prizes, on Condition his Correspondence, who were the right Owners
thereof, did allow him Two per Cent. to get the Ship and Goods clear under the
Suedish Name.

. XII. This having been the Intent and Practice to secure the Concerns of the
aforesaid Fleet, the only Customs whereof will bring in the King Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds, and more, any May of Sense may conclude from thence, of what
incredible Advantage this Way of Trading, under pretext of being Suedish Ships,
and that the Goods belonged to Sueden, must have been yearly to France; and
what irreparable Damage the Allies, on the other side, but chiefly England,
must have sustained during the War; since it may be made good, and proved, if
need be, that some Hundreds of Ships, yearly, have come from, or gone to
France, under Suedish Convoys, whereof oftentimes not Ten in an Hundred were
real Suedes, or did really belong to Suedish Subjects, or were actually to
unload in Suedeland, though they all had Suedish Passes; and yet their Goods
were to be carried to, and unladen in Places prohibited to entertain any such
Commerce.

. XIII. Hence it has frequently happened, that under such Practices, a Ship
being seized in England, and afterward reclaimed by Color of her Passes, the
cunning Contrivance whereof was not a thing so easy to be discovered hitherto,
was discharged; which, as abovesaid, did cost the real Owners at Lubeck,
Hambourgh, Stade, etc. no more than Two per Cent; whereas the same Ship might
have been a very good and lawful Prize here.

. XIV. But this pretended Suedish Fleet is like to pay the Piper, with their
Ships and Goods; to which the English seem to have more than a single Right and
Claim, because, besides the exquisite French Wines, Brandy, Molossus, Paper,
and other Commodities, which the said Ships are laden with, there are also
great Quantities of Indico, Tobacco, Sugar, and some Muslins, on Board them;
whereof, the last mentioned Goods have been, for the most part, taken, as
Prize, from the English, by the French; and do, by the Revolutions of Things,
now return to their former Owners again. There are also several other Goods,
which, under the Name of Merchandises, were delivered to the Masters of the
Ships, who took them in, not knowing what they were: Nor can that be discovered
before Search made, Trial and Condemnation.

. XV. This therefore is the true State of the Case of the pretended Suedish
Merchant-Fleet, lately brought to England, which gives Occasion to so many and
various Discourses at present, and for which the Suedish Party so grievously
complains of hard Usage: Whereof, that the Truth may be known, this short
Account will be sufficient for the Reader's Curiosity, and Impartial Judgment.

Fiat Justitia, and pereat Mundus.
APPENDIX OF THE Above mentioned LETTERS.
Numb. 3. A Letter from John Died-Doberik, (at Lubeck,) written to his Brother
John Conrad Doberik, (at present in London,) that he has sold One Eighth Part
of Henry Scult's Ship to Trescow and Dreyer, in Amsterdam; and One Eighth Part
to Messieurs Vanderhaguen and Rebault.

Numb. 5. A Letter from Monsieur Vanderhaguen, of Bourdeaux, dated the 2d of
August, 1696. to Conrad Doberik, that his Brother of Stockholm has written to
Monsieur Vanderhaguen, that he had bought a Ship of Two Decks, whereof the said
Monsieur Vanderhaguen of Bourdeaux has One Third Part.

Numb. 6. A Letter from Paulus Hunsburgh, from Stralsound, dated the 30th of
March, 1697. to John Conrad Doberik, in Bourdeaux, to buy Ten Pieces of Syrup,
with some Wine and Brandy, and insert his Name in the Bills of Lading, that in
case of any Miscarriage, the said Goods shall be demanded in the said
Hunsburg's Name, as being a Burgher of Stockholm.

Numb. 7. A Letter from Bourdeaux, from Monsieur Vanderhaguen, dated the 9th of
March, 1697. to Peter Sant, Master of the Three Sail-makers, at Rochelle; and
Order from his Owners, not to take in any Salt, but Freight; and to advise him
to take Freight rather at Bourdeaux, than at Rochelle: That Skipper Grobert
comes there, and has got him a Freight for Dantzick; and that Skipper Cnak is
there, and I offer him a Freight for Emden, of 30 Guilders, and believe he will
take it: Cornelius Wolfs goes to Emden for 30 Guilders; Conik, for Lubeck, for
25, 30, and 35 Guilders; the Deargarden, to Ostend.

Numb. 8. A Letter from Messieurs Berend and Schroder, dated at Lubeck, the
27th of February, 1697. to Monsieur John Conrad Doberick, at Bourdeaux: He
gives Orders to buy Ten Tuns of Wine, and to be loaded in a Suedish Ship, with
Convoy for the least Freight possible hither, and under your Brother Conrad's
Name and Mark, that if it should be taken in England, it might be claimed in
the Owner's Names. If Brandy be cheap, to buy him 10 Pieces. You must send
Double Letters, and Bills of Lading; one in your Brother Conrad's, and another
in my Name; and what it amounts to, draw upon me in Hambourgh.

Numb. 11. A Letter from Francis le Fever, dated at Lubeck, the 10th of
February, 1697. to Monsieur John Conrad Doberik, at Bourdeaux, That I have a
Letter from your Brother Conrad Doberik, that he has Part in 10 or 12 Ships
now with you; and promises to reclaim the Goods that shall be shipped in France
for me, if brought up, for Two per Cent. and stand to the Clearing of them in
England; and will have the said Goods shipped on Board 6 or 7 Ship.

Numb. 34. A Letter from John Daniel Klett and Michael Woeter, dated at Lubeck,
the 24th of February, 1697. to John Conrad Doberik, at Bourdeaux: He thanks
him, that he permits him to send Wine and Brandy in his Brother Conrad of
Stokholm's Name; and desires him to send it in a Suede 's Ship, and that his
Brother will reclaim it.

Numb. 35. A Letter from Conrad Hazentien, at Lubeck, the 4th of April, 1697.
to Monsieur John Conrad Doberik, at Bourdeaux; and thanks him that he will,
under his own Reclaimation, send him 4 or 5 Tuns of good Wine, and some Brandy;
and if it should be taken by any English Ship, etc. that he would reclaim it.

Numb. 37. A Letter from Gerhard Luder, dated at Lubeck, the 8th of November,
1696. to Monsieur John Conrad Doberik, that if Brandy comes to 60 or 70
Guilders per Piece, to buy him 20 Pieces; but if it keeps at 70 or 75 Guilders,
to buy him but 10; and if it cannot be sent this Winter, to keep it till the
Spring. But, Cousin, you must let it go in your Name, that in case it should be
taken, and brought into England, you might reclaim it: Let it be laden in good
Ships, Freight must be cheap.

Numb. 39. A Letter from John Died Doberik, dated at Lubeck, the 11th of
October, 1696. to John Conrad Doberik, at Bourdeaux; that if Monsieur
Vanderhaguen, and my Friends in Rochelle, do not take any Part in Hans Fink's
and John Stur's Ships, I cannot help them. I will also give them a Part in a
Ship of two Decks, which goes off the Stocks 8 Days hence, which is about 150
Lasts: If they will not do so, I must sell it. I am offered for Skipper Hans
Fink's Ship 10000 Mark Lubs, but I cannot take it, unless you will buy me 10
Tuns of Brandy, and draw on me for the Value.

Numb. 40. A Letter from John Died Doberik, dated at Lubeck, the 22th of
October, 1696. to John Conrad Doberik, at Bourdeaux; That he is glad he will
follow his Directions. First, I will send that Lading which is now in England,
in my Ship Pelican, from Riga, to St. Martin's, under your Directions.
Secondly, I have ordered that Hans Fink shall go upon the Owner's Account; and
John Groat shall load Clap-boards at Riga. I have ordered Skipper Dirrekson to
load Salt, and go to Dunkirk; and the second Voyage, to Bayonne, and load there.

Numb. 45. A Letter from Gerhard Luders, dated the 1st of April, 1697. to John
Conrad Doberik, and Bourdeaux: I am contented that if you buy 30 Pieces of good
Bourdeaux-Brandy, to take one half Part with you; it must be laden in two or
three Ships, and, if possible, your own, that if it should be taken, and
brought into England, it may be reclaimed by you.

Numb. 53. A Letter from Rouen, dated the 15th of June, 1696. from Monsieur
Vanderhaguen, to Monsieur John Conrad Doberik: I have received yours of the
9th, from Rochelle, with the Bills of Lading for Skipper Ockim Groat, for 1100
of Salt. who is to come to Havre de Grace.

Item Numb. 48. An Agreement, dated at Bourdeaux, the 18th of March, 1697.
whereby the Subscribers promise to lade for Stade, with a Convoy, on Board the
Sail-makers, Peter Sant Master; The Names whereof are these following French
Merchants; (1) Vanderhagven, (2) Ratiere, (3) Vander-Brander, (4) Dolfgave, (5)
Butille, (6) Cloyce, (7) Leuques, (8) Dupre, n^d (9) Videroy.

Numb. 99. A Letter, dated at Bourdeaux, the 3d. of August, 1696. from Gerhard
Vanderhaguen, to John Conrad Doberik, then at St. Sebastian; advising, that
Vanberg writes, that Gerhard Petersen and Van Coelen had received Orders from
Andrew Dirckesen's Owners to lade him, if he had taken a freight for Hambrough,
at 53 Mark Lubs: It would have been better, etc.

Numb. 116. A Letter from Peter Clerk, to John Conrad Doberik, dated at
Amsterdam, the 9th. of July, 1696, advising, That the Suedish Convoy (from
France) had passed the Chanel, and was safely arrived in the Soundt; and all
the Ships bound both to the Elbe, and other places, without any Disturbance
that he heard of; which is very happy.

Numb. 238. A Letter dated at Bourdeaux, the 26th. of July, 1696. to John
Conrad Doberik, then at St. Sebastian, advising, that all the Ships that sailed
under the Convoy, are safe arrived at Embden, Bremen, Hambourgh and Lubeck; and
not one missing. I see you will trust to my Paper for your Account, with which
I am satisfied. I thank you, that you will help Martin Franc^n. I have bought a
Fly-boat here, of 230 Tuns, for a good Friend; and would gladly let her sail
under your Name, on condition, that you should have a certain profit for it;
and assuring my self, that you will not refuse me, seeing it can be done
without prejudice to you. I have caused the Bill of Sale to be made in your
Name, viz. That I have bought the said Ship for your Account and Adventure: Now
I would fain have a Skipper come from Stockholm, who is a Burgher there, and I
judge it to be necessary: First, that a Notarial Bill of Sale be sent over.
2dly, That a Declaration be made before a Notary and Witnesses, that the said
Ship does belong to you. 3dly, That you write a Letter to the Magistrate of
Stockholm, to grant you a Pass; and 4thly, To write a Letter to Mr. Conrad, to
send such a Master with a Pass, with Order to follow my Direction, whilst you
are in Spain. When you come hither, we shall agree what you shall have for each
Pass that you shall send for her. The Declaration before a Notary I shall send
you to sign, and the Witnesses who subscribe, shall be Anke Willemson, Marcus
Begman, and the Broker, they not knowing otherwise, but that I bought the Ship
for your Account; in this manner of Pass can be denied, and when once a Pass is
taken out, one may always be had, etc.

A COPY of an Account, which being found amongst the other Ship-Papers and
Writings, shows, how Foreign Merchants have made use of the Suede's Name, for
which the Suede was paid Two per Cent.
The Parties concerned in the Ship St. Paul are to pay the the following
Charges, on Account of their Goods.
Rix-Dollars. FOR Charges expended in Stockholm, etc. according to the
Specification 575 0 0 The Ship did lie 10 Months waiting for the Goods, the
Payment whereof to the Ship's Crew, amounts to 1000 0 0 For Board-Wages, and
Victuals 750 0 0 Paid to Mr. Wisnish 520 0 0 Item, To Monsieur Grady 200 0 0
The Expenses of my Voyage from Stockholm amount to 500 0 0 Item, To return
thither. 500 0 0 For my Trouble 1000 0 0 In lieu of the Money, I have taken
5800 Neyens of Salt, a 1 Real 870 0 0 To make good the Damage done to the Ship,
for the space of 10 Months; as also, the Loss of the Freight within that Time
1000 0 0 6915 0 0 For our Agreement to let the Value of 16000 Rix-Dollars of
the Goods go under our Name, I reckon Two per Cent. 320 0 0 One Quarter Part
Freight 1000 0 0 Rix-Dollars 8235 0 0

Note.
THat there are five Brothers of the Doberiks, who were all born at Lubeck; the
first whereof, whose Christian Name is Conrad, did live, and lately died in
Stockholm; the second, John Conrad, has no fixed Abode, but has been these two
Years last past in France, at Bourdeaux, St. Martins, etc. The third John Died,
lives in Lubek; the fourth Paul, at Amsterdam; and the fifth, at Norimberg. The
Fraternel and unanimous Understanding of these five Brothers, living in several
remote places, fit for carrying on such a Trade, did engage and draw in a great
many Persons in the said unlawful Commerce.

FINIS.

