portrait of Henry VIII K HEN: THE VIII

portrait of Edward VI EDW THE VI

portrait of Queen Elizabeth I QUEEN ELIZAB

portrait of James I KING JAMES

portrait of Charles I K CHARLES I

portrait of Charles II K CHARLES II

portrait

Ecclesiastical HISTORY EPITOMIZED CONTAINING A Faithful Account of ye BIRTH
LIFE and DOCTRINE, CRUCIFIXION and ASCENSION of ye HOLY JESUS WITH

The Lives of ye APOSTLES EVANGELISTS and Primitive FATHERS and other Famous
men in ye Christian Church both Ancient and Modern who have courageously
confessed and suffered glorious Martyrdomes and Persecutions under several
Tyrannical Governors both Heathenish and Romish.

Faithfully continued to ye Reformation and since deduced to this present age
Carefully collected By: JS: Gent

In two Parts

LONDON Printed for W. Thackery in Ducklane T Passinger, on London Bridge 1682.

depiction of Jesus portrait of saint Peter (the disciple) St ^ETER
portrait of saint Paul St PAVL
portrait of saint Simon (the disciple) ^^MON
portrait of disciple St ^THIA
portrait of saint Bartholomew (the disciple) ^ARTHOLO^^^
portrait of saint James the Lesser (the disciple) St JAMES MINOR
portrait of saint James the Greater (the disciple) ^AMES MAYOR
portrait of saint Thomas (the disciple) (...) ^^HOM
portrait of saint Philip (the disciple) St PHILIP
portrait of saint Andrew (the disciple) St. ANDREW
portrait of saint John (the disciple) (...) JOHN
portrait of saint Matthew (the disciple) St MATTHEW


Ecclesiastical HISTORY EPITOMIZED.

CONTAINING A Faithful Account of the BIRTH, LIFE, and DOCTRINE; CRUCIFIXION
and ASCENSION of the HOLY JESUS.

WITH The LIVES of the APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS, and Primitive FATHERS, and other
Famous Men in the Christian Church, both Ancient and Modern, who have
Courageously Confessed, and Suffered Glorious Martyrdoms and Persecutions under
several Tyrannical Governors, both Heathenish and Romish.

Faithfully Continued to the REFORMATION, and since deduced to this Present AGE.

Faithfully Collected By J. S. Gent.

Part the First.

LONDON, Printed for W. Thackery in Duck-Lane, T. Passinger, and Charles
Passinger on London Bridge; 1682.

To the Christian READER.
Most Christian Reader.
IN this first Part of the Sacred Epitome of Ecclesiastical History, is
contained, First, An Introductory Discourse of the State of the Jewish Church
before the Coming of our Blessed Lord. And how in all Ages under the Promise
our Savior was represented by Types and Figurative Shadows, till his Blessed
Incarnation. Secondly, A brief Account of his Birth, Holy and Exemplary Life,
his bitter Death and Passion; as likewise his Glorious Resurrection and
Ascension. Thirdly, The Lives of the Glorious Apostles and Evangelists: In
which is contained their several Persecutions, their great Courage to promote
the Gospel in Barbarous Nations with all the chief place of their Abodes,
perilous Journies and Oppositions they met withal, what Tyrants they
contested with, and by what means they came to be Crowned with Martyrdom, and
so laying down their Lives became more than Conquerors; what multitudes they
converted by their Preaching and Patient Sufferings, baffling all the power and
malice of Hell. Fourthly, The Lives of the primitive Fathers and great Doctors
of the Church, who by their pious Endeavors carried on the great work of the
Gospel, where the Apostles and Evangelists left off, giving a Relation of their
Sufferings and Martyrdoms for near 1200 years after our Saviors Birth; their
Contests with Heathen Emperors, Tyrants, and Heretics; most of them resisting
even to Blood. Faithfully Collected out of Sacred Writ, the Voluminous
Histories of their lives, and such Ecclesiastical Histories as have been
approved of by the true primitive Church in all Ages, and in such a Method that
it is well hoped it will find Acceptance amongst all true Christians and that
they will make such use of the Contents, by striving to imitate and P^^^^^^ out
the Lives of these Holy Persons, as may redound to their Everlasting Happiness.
Which is the Hearty Wish of,

Christian Reader, Your beloved Brother in Christ, J. S. M. A.

THE INTRODUCTION, Or A Brief ACCOUNT Of the Life, Crucifixion, Glorious
Resurrection and Ascension of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.
NO sooner had our first Parents, by Eating the Forbidden Fruit, difrobed
themselves of that Innocence by which they held their State of Happiness, but
the Eternal and All-wise Creator out of the Abundance of his never failing
Mercy and Goodness found a means to rescue them and all their Posterity from
the Power and Malice of Satan, and gave them a Promise even when he was passing
Sentence, that the Seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
which was fulfilled in that our Blessed Lord and Savior.

The second Person in the Trinity was born of the Virgin Mary, and made Man;
whose Birth and Glorious Triumph over Death, the Grave, and Hell, the
Patriarchs and Prophets all along had foreseen. Nay, God was often pleased to
renew his Promise; as next to faithful Abraham: For to him was it directly
revealed, that out of his Loins the Messiah should proceed. After his Decease,
God made it known to Jacob out of what Tribe of the Jewish Nation he should
come; which that Blessed Patriarch revealed at his Death in these words, viz.
that the Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet till Shil^h came. Next Moses told the Children of Israel, that God would
raise up a Prophet of their Brethren like unto him, and that unto him should
they hearken. Nor were the Jewish Ceremonies from time to time any other than
Types and Figures of our Blessed Savior; as that of the Brazen Serpent, the
Escape Goat, and others, and as the time of his Birth grew nearer, the Prophets
had a more Lively and Divine Knowledge of what should happen during the time
that was Decreed for his purchasing our Redemption: For David absolutely
foretells his Sufferings and Powerful Resurrection; as for his Death, that it
should be by piercing his hands and feet: And in Psalm. 16. ver. 10. he gives an
undeniable Account of his Resurrection in these words, For thou will not leave
my soul in Hell, neither suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption; and of his
Ascending up into Heaven, Psalm. 68 ver. 18. Thou have ascended on High, thou
have led Captivity Captive, etc. As likewise the Prophet Isaiah, lively
describing the extraordinary Manner of his Birth, how that he was to be born of
a Virgin and his Name called Immanuel, of his Incomparable Graces, Sanctity,
and fit Qualification for the performance of his Office; of the Entertainment
he was like to meet with in the World; and of the Nature and Sign of those
Sufferings he was to undergo. The place of his Birth was foretold by Micah,
Chap. 5. ver. 2. viz. Bethlehem of Ephratah, the lest of the Cities of Juda,
but Honored above the rest by the Birth of a Prince who was to be Ruler in
Israel, whose goings forth had been from everlasting. Again the Prophet Daniel
fixes the Exact time, affirming that the Messiah should appear in the World,
and be cut off as a Sacrifice for the Expiation of the Sins of the People, at
the Expiration of 70 Prophetical weeks or 490 years, which accordingly came to
pass.

For that Date being expired, In the fullness of time God sent his Son made of a
woman made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law. And because
it was not fit so great a Person should come into the World, or be made public
without some extraordinary prodromos, not only the Angel told his Birth to the
Shepherds feeding their Flocks by Night, but likewise a Star hanging as it were
in the Air appeared to the Eastern Magi, and conducted them to the place where
he lay to pay Divine Adoration to the Sun of Righteousness, who was risen with
healing under his wings: Nor did our Blessed Lord want in any thing to fulfill
and comply with all the Ceremonies of the Law which was only a Type and Shadow
of his Coming, or as a pledge of the Sacred Promise made in Paradise, he being
that Blessed Seed of the Woman which was to break the Serpent's head, and by
that means to deliver us from the power of Satan, who so long had Tyrannized
over Mankind; bewitching the greatest part of the World to Worship him under
diverse and sundry Names; for as the Prophet has it, God himself declared that
only in Juda was his name known, and from thence the City of Jerusalem was
called the holy City by reason all the Tribes once a year at the Feast of the
Passover went up to Worship and that no other place for the General Assembly
was appointed.

Eight days after the Birth of our Blessed Lord and Savior, he so far
submitted himself to the Custom of the Jews, or rather to the fulfilling of the
Law, as to be Circumcised, and his was name called Jesus, as the Angel had
foretold at the time he brought the joyful Tidings to the Blessed Virgin, when
he declared unto her that she should Conceive by the Holy Ghost, and that the
Power of the Highest should over-shadow her. But long he had not been born
before the Powers of Darkness, foreseeing their Kingdoms fall, raised up a
Persecution against him, inspiring wicked Herod with Diabolick Rage to pursue
the Life of him from whom whatever was created had had its prime Original. And
although the Bloody Tyrant missed his Aim yet not knowing he was fled from
Bethlehem into Egypt, he commanded all the Males that were found not only in
the City, but in all that Coast from two years old and under to be put to
death, thinking, that in that General slaughter, He might fall whom he
understood was to be King of Israel: For as it is written in the 2d. of Matthew
the 6th. verse; And thou Bethlehem of the Land of Juda art not the least
amongst the Princes of Juda for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall
rule my people Israel; And in this the saying of the Prophet Jeremy was
fulfilled, In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great
mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because
they are not. When our Blessed Lord was twelve years old, at the Feast of the
Passover he went up to Jerusalem with his Parents, viz. Joseph and Mary, and
there in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors, he both heard them and
asked them such Questions that all who heard him stood amazed. The next
Conformity we find in him was, that after his Parents had found him out, he
went down with them and for a long time after continued with them being as St.
Luke says, Chap. 2. ver. 51. obedient or subject unto them, even according to
the Evangelists till the 30 year of his Age, it being upon the year of Jubilee
which was by the Jews held as the great Sabatical year; in which at the sound
of a Trumpet, all the Captives and Servants were set at Liberty, as likewise
Prisoners released, Debts discharged, and Mortgaged Estates reverted to their
proper Heirs; and how evidently this did shadow out the State of the Gospel and
our Lord's being sent to preach glad tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken
hearted, to preach liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to
them that are bound to proclaim the Acceptable year of the Lord, that they
might lift up their heads because their Redemption drew nigh (as we have it in
Isa. 61.1, 2. Luke 4.18.) I leave to the Judgment of all Judicious men. Now to
show that he was a Prince he sent his Herald before him to Proclaim him to the
World, viz. John the Baptist, who was as the Prophet declares, the voice of one
crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his path
strait; and lifting up his voice like a Trumpet, cried, repent ye for the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand. He told the Jews that the Messiah they had so
long expected was at hand, and his Kingdom ready to appear, and that the Son of
God was come down from Heaven, a Person as far beyond him in Dignity, as in
Time and Existence, to whom he was not worthy to Administer the meanest Offices
(for so the Jews accounted the unlosing their Shoe-Latchets) that he came to
introduce a new and better State of things, and by taking away the Vail to give
a full and clear prospect into the Holiest of Holiests, calling him the Lamb of
God that was to take away the Sins of the World, etc.

Now at the Great Baptism by John, after the the Feast of the Tabernacle, being
about the beginning of our November, our Blessed Lord amongst the rest came to
Jordan; and to fulfill another main Point of the Law, suffered himself to be
Baptized, when coming up out of the River, the Heavens opened, and the Holy
Ghost descended on him in Bodily Shape like a Dove, and at the same time a
Voice saying, this is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.16, 17.
Mark 1.10, 11. Luke 3.12, 22.

And now our Blessed Savior being fitly qualified and prepared to carry on the
great work of our Redemption: And, as Witnesses of his Glorious undertakings,
and for the more Ample Propagation of our Eternal welfare, he took unto him
the Blessed Apostles, of the History of whose Lives I shall afterward give the
Reader an Account.

The first Miracle that our Blessed Lord did, after his Incarnation, was at a
Marriage in Canaan of Galilee, where the great Admiration of all men at his
Command the water was turned into Wine, and after that, by the daily
repetitions of such Miracles as never Man did, the World stood amazed. A great
part of which the holy Evangelists have set down at large, to which I Refer the
Pious Reader, having always before my Eyes the Caution which St. John gives us
in his Revelations Chap. 22. ver. 19. and if any man shall take away from the
words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
Book of Life, etc. as likewise on the contrary the foregoing Verse of the same
Chapter threatens, that if any one shall add to those things all the Plagues
that are written in the Book shall be added unto him.

But to be brief, after our blessed Savior, that glorious Sun of Righteousness
had run his course, he undertook to satisfy his Fathers Justice by making a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of lost and undone man, and suffered
himself to be tempted, Betrayed, Scourged, Spit upon, Reviled, Crowned with
Thrones, and lastly submitting even unto the Death of the Cross, all which had
been exactly foretold by the prophets. Though it happened not after the common
manner, but was attended with such dismal darkness and terrible Earthquakes.
Insomuch that a Heathen Philosopher at that Instant declared, that either the
God of Nature suffered, or the world was at an end. But he could not long rest
under the power of the Grave, but as a Victorious Captain breaking the bonds of
Death, he lead Captivity Captive in spite of the Malice of his Enemies who set
a Guard upon him; for as we have it, Mat. Chap. 28. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In
the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week,
came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, to see the Sepulcher and behold there
was a great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and
came and rolled away the stone from the door and sat upon it his Countenance
was like Lightning, and his raiment white as Snow, and for fear of him the
keepers did tremble, and became as dead men, and the Angel answered and said
unto the women, fear ye not, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was Crucified,
he is not here, but is risen as he said, come se ye place where the Lord lay.

Nor is this the only warrant of his Blessed Resurrection, but we have it
confirmed by all the Evangelists and Apostles as being seen of them several
times afterward, nor will it be less than impious and Atheistical for any to
make the least doubt or scruple of it. But to proceed, after our blessed Lord
was Ascended up into Heaven he was not unmindful of the Promise he had made to
his Disciples while he was with them upon Earth, of sending the Comforter to
teach and guide them in the way of Truth: That Holy Spirit without whose Divine
Assistance all their Preaching had been vain, for although Paul may plant and
Apollos water, yet it is God that gives the increase. For as our Blessed Lord
had declared to his Disciples a little before he Ascended to take his place at
the right hand of his Father, God Blessed for evermore. When they were asking
him about Times and Seasons, he told them, it was not for them to know the
Times and Seasons, which God had put in his Power. But ye (said he) shall
receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judah, and in Samaria, and
unto the utmost Parts of the Earth; Acts chap. 1. ver. 7, 8. Nor did the Holy
Jesus delay to send the Holy Spirit, as he had promised: For as we have it,
Acts Chap. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3. and when the day of Pentecost (which with us is
called Whitsunday, being just 10 days after Ascension-day) was fully come, they
were all with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from
Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled all the house where they
were sitting, and there appeared unto them Cloven Tongues like as of Fire, and
it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
began to spoke with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. Thus
being prepared (as a Giant refreshed with Wine) to run the Glorious Race and
send their sounds unto the utmost Ends of the Earth, they spared not to Lift up
their Voices like a Trumpet, to make known the Will of the Lord, and preach the
glad Tidings of the Gospel which was so lately sealed with their great Master's
blood; and now they began to speak with diverse Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance to the Confounding and Amazing of all that heard them: Nor were their
words common words, or empty Air, but of such Power and Efficacy that they made
deep impressions in the hearts of most that heard them, so that they were in
doubt and amazed, saying to one another what means this, Acts Chap. 2. ver.
12. Such mighty operation has the Divine Spirit in the hearts of Men that at
that instant by the preaching of St. Peter 3000 were added to the Church, and
not only added, but continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and of Prayer, Acts Chap. 2. ver. 42.

And thus much for the Introduction, to show in what State our Blessed Lord
settled his Church which all Ages, Mauger the Malice of Men or Devils, has
Continued and will Continue unspoted and unpolluted even to the End of the
World, it being the Vine that his own right hand has planted, it will flourish
in spite of all the wild Boars of the Forest that strive to root her up, or
the little Foxes that would pluck off her tender Branches. Though superstition
or Atheism strive to trouble the streams the fountain will still be kept
clear and unpolluted.

And now since the great Harvest is begun I shall by the Assistance of God's
Divine Grace, give the Reader an Account of the faithful Laborers that have
labored therein, and all along carried the glorious work even from the Time of
our blessed Savior to these our days. And first to begin with the blessed
Apostles who, valiantly and courageously following the Example of their blessed
Master, sealed their Testimonies with their Blood, being basely and inhumanely
murdered, and massacred by such Tyrants and cruel Villains as the Powers of
Darkness could raise up.

The Life and Martyrdom of St. PETER the Apostle.
FIrst I shall begin with St. Peter, that great Apostle of the Circumcision,
who so long and earnestly labored for the Conversion of the Jews, whose
obstinacy had before drawn Tears from the Eyes of his Blessed Lord and Master,
when he wept over it with, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, had thou but known even in
this thy day the things that belonged unto thy peace, but now they are hidden
from thine eyes, etc.

But to begin first with the place of his Birth, which was Bethsaida in the
upper Galilee, anciently belonging to the Tribe of Nepthali, vulgarly called
Galilee of the Gentiles, which is now reduced (though formerly a famous City)
into certain small Cottages, and remains only famous to Posterity by reason it
was the Birthplace of this great Apostle.

The exact time of his Birth, notwithstanding the conjectures and guesses, that
have been made by diverse Learned Men, remains as yet undecided; or as we may
say altogether uncertain; by Reason what has been hitherto argued as to that
point, has been only conjectural, and not firmly grounded upon any warrantable
Authority. Most of the Fathers, that have written about the time of his Birth,
take their ground from the Birth of our Savior, by reason St. Peter, at what
time our Blessed Lord called him to be one of his Disciples, was not only
Married, but lived in a settled state: therefore they judge he could not be
less than 10 years elder than his Master; or according to Stenge, who builds
his Foundation upon Bellarmine, he was born in the Eighth year of Octavius
Augugustus, and in the 20 of King Herod which was about 17 years before the
Birth of our Savior.

His Father was Jonah of Bethsaida, and he being Circumcised according to the
Jewish Law, had the name of Simon or Simeon given him at his Circumcision; to
which our Savior added the name of Cephas, which in the Syriack Language, then
very much used among the Jews, signifies a Stone, or as the Greek renders it
(...), a Rock; which has occasioned many to believe that from that Inference
our Savior expressed himself, upon this Rock will I build my Church, that is,
upon Peter's Faith, Constancy, and the Gospel he was to Preach. And from the
Alteration of his name, or rather addition, at such time as he came to be our
Savior's Disciple, the Popes have taken occasion to alter their's at what time
they come to the Papacy. His Brother was Andrew the Apostle, nor is it known
which of them was the elder. He was a Man of small Education when he was chosen
by our Savior as a Disciple, but was soon after instructed by the Fountain of
all Wisdom and Learning, even the Holy Spirit.

Having proceeded thus far, I shall not think it amiss to give the Reader a
Description of the Person of this famous Apostle (passing over for the most
part such passages of his Life, as are found in Sacred Writ, to be more Brief
in this our purpose) according as he is described in Ecclesiastical History.
And first, as Nicephorus declares, he was somewhat slender, of a middle size,
but rather inclining to Tallness; his Complexion very pale and almost white;
the Hair of his Head curled and thick, but very short, though St. Hierom
informs us (as he has it out of Clemens his Periods) that he was exceeding
Bald, which might probably enough be, in his declining Age; his Eyes black,
unless some small specks of Red, which many of the Fathers have attributed to
his often weeping; his Eyebrows very thin; his Nose long, though at the end
broad or flat. And thus have I described the outside of this Admirable Man,
according as it has been derived down to Posterity by such as lived in his
time, and had often converse with him and now since the outside is described;
it will not be amiss to give a short description of his Temper, and the
Internal Faculties of his Soul. First then, He was Eager and Fierce, Witness
his encountering the Guard of Soldiers that came to apprehend his Lord, and at
that time cutting off the Ear of the High Priests Servant; his forwardness to
speak, and to return answers, though sometimes to the endangering his Life, yet
withal Courteous and Humble; for when Cornelius, being overjoyed with the
Vision of him, would have received him almost with Divine Adoration, he forbid
him, telling him he was but a man subject to the Passions as other men. With
how much Candor and Modesty did he treat the Inferior Rulers of the Church,
insomuch that he upon whom such Honors have been heaped in all Ages, styles
himself no greater than their Fellow Presbyter. How earnestly did he Labor to
win Souls to Christ? and with what Resolution and Bravery did he tell the
Sanhedri^ which had Sentenced and Condemned him, tha^ they and their Fellows
were Guilty of his Murder? and that they could not possibly be saved by any
other means than by the Blood of Jesus Christ whom they had Crucified? How do
we al^ along hear of his earnest Exhortations to such a^ were left to Rule and
Govern the Church in his absence, to be careful in their Charge as to the Cure
of Souls? Nor was this in his mean Capacity, but when he sat Bishop of Antioch
in which he continued the space of nine years, greatly propagating the Gospel;
as likewise in his Travels into the Western parts of the World, after many
tedious Journeys, he at last came to Rome, but we find not by any well grounded
Authority that he sat Bishop of that See 25 years, as the Doctors of that
Church would have it; nor indeed that ever he was Bishop Rome, though the Popes
have all along derived their Power or Succession from him: But that he was at
Rome, and suffered there under Nero, most of the Writers of Ecclesiastical
History Accord, as I shall more fully demonstrate hereafter.

That he was Married, we have St. Paul's word for it, he telling us, that one
Cephas (which was undoubtedly Peter) went about leading with him a Wife and a
Sister; and as it is recorded by several of the Fathers, a Daughter; and as
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, that when St. Peter beheld his Wife going to her
Martyrdom he exceedingly rejoiced, calling to her aloud, and charging her to be
mindful of our Lord. And thus much of his being Married.

When he was at Rome, he prophesied the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish
Nation by Vespasian: But about that time the Persecution growing hot against
the Christians, especially upon Nero's return from Achaia in great Pomp, he at
that time resolving to glut himself with Innocent Blood, caused several
thousands of the Christians to be shut up in Prisons, and amongst the rest St.
Peter, for whose preservation the Prayers of the Christians were still put up
to Heaven many of the chief of them who could gain Access persuading him
earnestly to make his escape, alleging that the preservation of his Life would
be greatly useful to the Church. The which (after many denials) he attempted by
getting over the Wall, which being effected, and he coming to the City Gate, is
there said to meet our Lord, who was just entering the City, when knowing him
he asked him Lord, whether art thou going? from whom he received this Answer, I
am come to Rome to be crucified a second time.

By which answer St. Peter apprehending himself to be reproved for endeavoring
to fly that Death which was allotted him, and that our Savior meant he was to
be Crucified in his Servant, he returned again to the Prison and delivered
himself into the hands of the Keeper, and so continued till the day of his
Execution, with great cheerfulness: When having saluted his Brethren, and
especially St. Paul, who was at that time his Fellow-Prisoner. He was led to
the top of the Vatican Mountain, near the River Tiber, about three Furlongs
without the City and there Crucified with his Head downwards; it being his own
desire so to dye, alleging that he was unworthy to suffer after the same
manner that his Lord and Master had suffered, and so having run the race that
was set before him, he (undoubtedly) obtained the reward laid up for him in
the Highest Heavens. And thus having briefly run over the Life of this great
Apostle, I shall proceed to St. Paul who fell by the Commandment of the same
bloody Tyrant, and if not on the self-same day yet within a very short time
after.

The Life and Martyrdom of St. PAUL the Apostle.
NOtwithstanding the Church does not reckon St. Paul amongst the twelve
Apostles, yet through the Assistance of Gods Holy Spirit after he was
Miraculously Converted, he so earnestly labored in preaching the Lord Jesus
and him crucified, both to the Jews and Gentiles (even to the Jeopardy of his
Life) that he is worthy of a name and place equal to any of them.

He was born at Tarsus, one of the Capital Cities of Cilicia, a place much
famed for Learning; Insomuch as Strabo tells us that Julius Casar made it a
Roman Municip, or Free Corporation all the Inhabitants thereof having the same
privileges as the Citizens of Rome, which were likewise confirmed to them by
Augustus Caesar who succeeded him in the Empire.

His Parents were Jews of the Seed of Abraham; which he expresses when he says,
he was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, that is, that all his Ancestors had lineally
descended of the Jewish Race, and not entered in by the way of Proselytisme;
and that he was of the Tribe of Benjamin, is affirmed by the several of the
Jewish Rabbis. As for his Calling, he was a Tent-maker, though, as himself
declares, instructed in all the Learning and Customs of the Jews, being brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel, a Learned Rabbin or Academick, who taught and
instructed Youths: the Hebrew word rendering it either at the feet or under his
Tuition.

His first Name was Saul, the which he continued till the time of his
Conversion in his way to Damascus.

In the beginning of his Life we find nothing memorable, but when he grew up to
manhood he became a great Persecutor of the Christians; and the first time he
is mentioned in Holy Writ, is when he held or looked to the Clothes of such as
Stoned the Blessed Proto-Martyr St. Stephen, after that he continuing to breath
out threatenings against the Church, procured Letters or a Commission, as the
Hebrew renders it, from the Sanhedrim or Jewish Council, in which the High
Priest was wont to fit Chief Judge, impowering him to bring such as he found
preaching in the name of Jesus, bound to Jerusalem. But Lord! whilst he was on
his Journey, in order to his prosecuting this wicked design, A light from
heaven shined round about him; insomuch that he fell to the Earth, and heard a
voice saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, etc. After the heavenly
Apparition was departed, he, in obedience to what he had been commanded by that
Sacred Oracle, Journeyed on toward Damascus: but so blind, that his Servants
were obliged to lead him. When he came there he prayed, till Ananias, a devout
Christian, came to him and restored his sight, at which all his thoughts were
changed: for whereas he some few days before had breathed out Persecution
against the Church, so now, on the contrary, he joined himself to it, and began
to preach boldly the Lord Jesus; at which the Jews, being exceedingly incensed,
sought to lay hands on him, and to destroy him: but God, who had made him a
chosen Vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles, delivered him out of their
hands. From Damascus he came to Jerusalem, and there essayed to join himself
with the Brethren: but they knowing what manner of man he had formerly been,
did not only fear to join with him, but in all likehood did what they could to
avoid him; until they were certified, by one of their fellow Apostles, that he
had seen the Lord Jesus in the way; and that he was not only Converted, but had
openly and boldly Preached the Gospel.

By this means, being received into their Fellowship, he in a short time became
their chief speaker: being a man of an exceeding ready Wit, as it appeared when
at sundry times he was brought before Felix the Governor, Festus his
Successor, and King Agrippa. There we see how he confounded the Orator, bafled
all his Accusers; Insomuch that they could charge him with nothing but his
Religion in General, as not daring to venture upon any particulars, least he
should have proved it out of the Law of Moses; as he did Christ to be the
Messia, foretold by all the Prophets; when from Morning till Night he disputed
about the verity of the Gospel which he Preached. But well perceiving that the
Governor was rather inclined to favor the People, than to do Justice, he
thought it most convenient to Appeal to Caesar, which was a usual Custom and
due Privilege to such as were either Romans or free of Rome. Whereupon he is
sent to Rome, when on the Coast of Melita, now Malta, in the Lybian Sea,
between Syracuse and Africa, the Ship suffered Wrack, yet God gave him not only
his Life, but the Lives of all that were with him in the Ship. When he came on
shore, he was kindly received by the Barbarians, who, when they had seen him
shake of the Viper, that fastened to his hand, and thereby receive no hurt;
they said amongst themselves, he was a God. Here he wrought many Miracles, by
which he Converted a great number of the Inhabitants to the Faith, and
especially Publius the Chief Officer, or Governor of that Island, whose Father
he had restored to health being at the point of Death; who afterward, as many
of the learned affirm, was Bishop of Athens, and suffered Martyrdom.

From this Island, after 3 months stay, he with the rest were put on board the
Castor and Pollux, a Ship of Alexandria, bound for Italy; which, putting in at
Syracuse, there stayed 3 days; from from thence they sailed to Rhegium, and so
to Puteoli, where St. Paul found many Christians staying amongst them, the
better to confirm them, for the space of Seven days; and from hence departed
for Rome.

At the news of St. Paul's Approach he was met by a Troop of Christians, above
50 Miles from the City, who still increasing, as he came nearer, they brought
him into Rome as it were in Triumph: where, when he came, he found such favor
at the hands of the Captain of the Guard, that he only confined him to his own
house, and set one Soldier to watch; who was appointed rather to wait upon
him, than to secure him.

He had not long continued there before he was brought before Nero, who then
sat Emperor; where he so well acquitted himself that he obtained his Liberty,
and lived free in a house of his own, for the space of 2 years, Preaching the
Gospel of Christ boldly in the City, and confirming many in the Faith:
Converting not only those of the meaner sort, but those of Rank and Quality. As
one Torpes a chief Officer in the Emperors Court, who afterward suffered
Martyrdom; as likewise Nero's Cup Bearer, and others: but above all Poppaea
Sabina an exceeding Beautiful Lady, and Concubine to Nero; which so enraged the
Brutish Emperor that he resolved the Apostle's death, which in a short time he
compassed: for as St. Chrysostom relates, when Nero found the Lady devoted to
a strict and chaste Life, and that she would by no means consent any farther to
his lude Desires, he sent for St. Paul, and calling him Villain, Impostor, and
wretched perverter, he caused him to be cast into Prison, whence he wrote to
the Lady to persuade her to continue steadfast in a Chaste and Virtuous Life; for
which the Tyrant commanded he should be put to death.

How long he continued in Prison, after Sentence, is uncertain; but the day of
his Execution soon came: but what his preparatory treatment was, whether he was
Scourged, as Malefactors were wont, in order to their Death, is not known. As a
Roman Citizen by the Valerian and Porcian Law he was exempted from any such
Ignominious and Infamous punishment, though by the Law of the 12 Tables
Notorious Malefactors, condemned by the Centuriate Assemblies, were first to be
scourged and then put to Death. And, as Baronius informs us, that in the
Church of St. Mary, beyond the Bridge in Rome, two Pillars are yet to be seen,
to which St. Peter and St. Paul were bound, and scourged, before their
Executions.

As our Apostle was lead to execution, he is said to have Converted 3 of the
Soldiers who guarded him thither; which the Emperor hearing commanded that
they should be put to death: St. Paul being come to the place appointed for his
Execution, which was near the Aquae Salviae 3 miles from Rome, after he had
exhorted such as came to see the Tragedy performed, to Repentance, and
recommended his Spirit into the hands of his blessed Lord and Master; he
kneeling down had his head stricken off with a Sword; which by the Romans was
counted the noblest death, and only allowed to such, as were either Citizens,
or free of the City.

St. Chrysostom declares, that his cheerful submitting to Death, and his
constant courage till the last, was a means not only to Convert his
Executioner, but several others who afterward suffered Martyrdom, for the
Faith of Christ. He was Executed, as far as can be gathered, in the 68 year of
his Age; and farther it is said, that when his head was stricken off, Milk
instead of Blood flowed from the Wound, and thus this great Apostle after he
had preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, and either in Person, or by his
Epistles visited most of the known World, and, as Theodoret tells us, in the
Isles of the Sea, (whereby he undoubtedly means Britain) he received first the
Crown of Martyrdom, and then the Palm and Crown of Glory.

He was buried in via Ostiensis, about two miles from Rome, over whose Grave,
about 318 years after Constantine the Great, at the request of Pope Sylvester,
built a stately Church, and endowed it with many rich Gifts and Privileges;
which afterward was plucked down by the Emperor Theodosius, and rebuilt more
stately than the former.

As for his Person, he was low of Stature, and somewhat stooping, his
Complexion fair, his Countenance grave, his Head small, his eyes carrying a
kind of Beauty in them, his Eyebrows a little hanging over, his Nose long,
but gracefully bending, his Beard thick, etc.

And thus having done with this blessed Apostle I shall proceed to the next,
viz. St. Andrew, who, after he had run the Glorious race that was set before
him, patiently submitted to the death of the Cross, following the Steps of his
Glorious Master; who went before to prepare a place for those, that love him,
and become obedient to such rules, and precepts, as he has set down for our
Instructions.

The Life of St. ANDREW the Apostle.
AS for the Place of this Apostle's Birth, as we find it in Holy Writ, it was
Bethsaida, a City of Galilee, standing near to the Lake of Genesareth, his
Father being a Fisherman, and he Brother to Simon Peter; but which was the
eldest remains as yet undetermined. He with his Brother laboring in that
Calling, till such time as our Savior took them to be his Disciples, and made
them Fishers of men. But at first he stayed not long with our Blessed Savior,
but returned home, and betook himself to his former Calling, until such time,
as our Savior found him and his Brother Fishing upon the Sea of Tiberius, and
convinced them of their Unbelief, by the exceeding draught of Fishes; whereupon
they left all and followed him: And therefore he is numbered amongst the twelve
that our Savior took, as his immediate Witnesses against the World, continuing
all along with him, till such time as he was Apprehended in the Garden; and
then, most probably, fled with the rest, according as had been foretold by the
Prophet, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered.

After our Blessed Lord was Ascended, and the Holy Ghost had, in its miraculous
Power, been plentifully shred upon the Apostles, he departed for Scythia, and
there Preached the everlasting Gospel, Converting many of those wild and
Barbarous People to the Faith, and true Belief of the Gospel; Preaching as he
went through Cappadocia, Galatia, Bithynia, and all along by the Euxine Sea,
gaining many Proselytes, notwithstanding the Savageness of those, who inhabited
those parts, who were formerly wont to Sacrifice Strangers, and drink out of
their Sculls: And passing on he came to Sinope, the Burial-place of King
Mithridates, where it is said he met St. Peter, and there they both taught the
People; (And further it is added, that the Chaires, wherein they were wont to
sit, being of white stone, are there extant to this day). But the Inhabitants
of the City being Jews for the greatest part did what they could to oppose the
Apostles Doctrine. So that setting upon the house wherein St. Andrew was, they
attempted to put fire to it, but, however they were deterred from that, they
caught the Apostle, and used him in a most Barbarous manner, till supposing him
dead they dragged him out of the City; But within a while he coming again to
himself Re-entered the said City, and by several Miracles so wrought upon them,
that then they began more steadfastly to hear him Preach, which he continued for
some time. But the Devil, that Enemy to the Progress of the Gospel, soon
stirred them up against him the second time, whereupon he departed to Amyson,
and thence to Trapezus, thence to Neo-Caesarea, thence to Samosata; where
having puzzled and confounded the Wisdom, of the Philosophers, he designed to
visit Jerusalem, which he effected, When returning thence, he traveled through
many Provinces Preaching the Gospel till such time as he came to Byzantium now
Constantinople; when he instructed them in the knowledge of Christ, and caused
a Church to be founded for Divine Worship, ordaining Stachys (whom St. Paul
calls his Beloved Stachys) for Bishop of that City, when leaving all things in
good Order, he took his Jouney through Thracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia,
and as some affirm Epirus; and having planted the Gospel in many places, he
came to Patrae, a City Achaia, where he sealed his Testimony with his blood.

For as it is mentioned by Philastrius, who lived Anno 380, he going thither at
what time Aegeas a wicked Pagan being Pro-Consul, he Converted a great number
to the Faith; which the Pro-Consul perceiving, waxed exceeding angry, and used
both Threats and fair means to stay the progress of the Gospel, though all in
vain; which increased his anger so far that he caused the Apostle to be brought
before him, demanding how he durst pervert (as he called it) the people from
their Ancient Worship? who with an undaunted Resolution told him, that he
taught them the right way to Everlasting Happiness; and that they having been
brought up in Superstition and Idolatry, it was now high time for them to
embrace saving Knowledge, and the Light of the Gospel. At which the Pro-Consul
derided the Apostle as an Innovator and Propagator of that Religion, whose
Author the Jews had infamously put to death upon a Cross. Whereupon the Apostle
began to declare the infinite Love of our Lord, that he would vouchsafe to come
down from Heaven, and by taking our Nature upon him, suffer Death for Lost and
undone Man, and that there was no other name under Heaven, by which any could
be saved but by the Name of the Lord Jesus. Upon this the Pro-Consul growing
more enraged, told him, that let who would believe it, as for his part he would
not, and that if he (meaning St. Andrew) would not do Sacrifice to the Heathen
Gods, he should dye upon that Cross, which he had preached, and so much
Extolled. To which he replied, that he did Sacrifice every day to God the
Creator of the world and all things therein, yet not with fiery Sacrifices or
bloody offerings, but in the Sacrifice of the Immaculate Lamb of God, who made
himself an Offering for the atonement of the sins of the World. Upon which the
Tyrant commanded him to Prison, which so troubled the People that had not the
Apostle persuaded them to Patience and Meekness they had Mutined.

The next day he was again brought into his Presence who then began by many
flattering Devices to persuade him not to destroy himself but live with him and
enjoy the Pleasures of Life. Upon which the Apostle told him, that if he would
Renounce his Idolatries and Embrace the offers of the Gospel, he should have
Eternal Life which was far exceeding what could be elsewhere expected; when as
the Pro-Consul told him plainly, that the reason why he urged him to Sacrifice
to the Gods was, that by his Example such as had fallen off might again return
to the Ancient worship, telling him that otherwise he should suffer the
exquisitest Tortures that could be invented and that he should be Instantly
Crucified. To which the Apostle replied, that now he saw it but in vain any
longer to discourse with or persuade him to Repentance, he being hardened in
his own folly and blindness; and that for this threats he had no regard to
them, nor did he fear the utmost Tortures that he could invent as knowing he
should find the better acceptance at the hands of his Lord and Master, the more
he suffered for his sake. Upon, which he was Condemned to be Crucified; and
that which the rather induced the Pro-Consul so to do, was, for that he had
Converted his Wife Maximilia and his Brother Stratocles to the Christian Faith,
upon his having cured them of several desperate Distempers, with which they
were afflicted.

When he was Condemned, the Pro-Consul ordered him to be Scourged; and as he
was going to be Crucified the People cried out, he was a good and just man; yet
he was fastened upon the Cross with Ropes, that he might be the longer dying,
the Cross being two beams set in the fashion of the Letter X. From this Cross,
after he was fastened to it, he Preached to the People for the space of two
days; and by his admirable Patience, Courage and Perseverance, Converted many
to the Faith. During his hanging there, great suit was made to the Pro-Consul
for his Life, but our Apostle desired them not to Interceed for him, for that
he was greatly desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Praying
earnestly to Heaven that he might at that time finish his Race, and be Crowned
with Martyrdom: And so it happened, for he there gave up the Ghost; his better
part Ascending to his Masters Joy. After which, his Body being taken down, was
Embalmed at the Command of Maximilia, whom he had Converted, and afterward
laid in a Stately Tomb prepared for that purpose; where it continued till the
time of Constantine the Great, and was at his Command brought to
Constantinople, and buried there in the Great Church which he had founded to
the Honor of the Apostles.

And thus much for St. Andrew, for whom the Scots for many Ages past have had
such Veneration, that they Styled him the Patron of their Country; bearing his
Cross in their Standard: and, during the time that Popery overspread that
Kingdom, paid Divine Adoration at his Shrine, and invoked his Aid upon all
Occasions.

The End of the LIFE of St. ANDREW.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. JAMES the Great Apostle.
ST. JAMES, surnamed the Great, either in respect of his Age, for the better
distinguishing the two Apostles of that name, or for some peculiar Favors our
Lord bestowed upon him above the rest. By Birth he was a Galilean, but of what
Town is uncertain; his Father was Zebedee, he being by Trade a Fisherman, being
nearly related to the Mother of our Lord: This was he who, together with his
Brother, left their Father in the Ship, and followed Jesus; not long after
which he was called from the Station of an Ordinary Disciple to the Apostolical
Office, and not that alone, but often honored with extraordinary and peculiar
Favors, above the rest; he being one of the 3 whom our Lord usually made
choice of to admit to the most private Transactions of his Life. As, with Peter
and his Brother John, he was taken by our Savior when he raised Jairus's
Daughter to Life, as likewise a Spectator of our Savior's Glorious
Transfiguration upon the Mount, and was with him in the Garden, at the time of
his Passion; as likewise all along upon any Extraordinary occasion. This was
one of the Brethren whose Mother asked, for them of our Savior, that one might
sit at his right hand, and the other at his left, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

After our Savior's Ascension, Sophronius tells us, he Preached to the
dispersed Jews; which can be meant of no other than such, as, for fear of the
Persecution, had separated themselves, that is the Christians, who upon the
Death of St. Stephen, fled from their Habitation, as in many places
Ecclesiastical History makes mention: But the Spanish Fathers allege, and
greatly contend, that he, after he had preached the Gospel in Judaea, and
Samaria, came into Spain, and other Western parts, and there continued
preaching for a long Season. Some will have it, that he came from thence into
Britain, Ireland and other Islands of the Sea; and after having appointed such
Disciples, as he thought most convenient to carry on the work he had begun, he
returned to Jerusalem.

Of this no Antienter Writers, than such as lived in the middle Age of the
Church, give us any Account; when as it is mentioned by Isidore, the Breviary of
Toledo, an Arabic Book of Anastasius Patriarch of Antioch, concerning the
Passion of the Martyrs, as likewise several others after them: But Baronius
himself, does not much credit what they have written, though he raised some
Arguments to make it plausible, the Apostle might take such a Journey, though
few believe, that the length of time, between his first departure from
Jerusalem to the time of his Martyrdom, could well permit it; but to leave that
to the Judgment of the Reader I shall proceed.

Herod Agrippa, Son to Aristobulus, and Grandchild to Herod the Great, having,
by his insinuating into the favor of Claudius, the new Emperor, Successor to
Caligula, obtained an Enlargement of his Dominions; he came from Rome to take
possession of the same, and being very zealous for the Jewish Religion, seldom
suffering any day to pass wherein he was not present at the Sacrifice, being
very desirous, at his Entry upon his additional Sovereignty, for the better
ingratiating himself into the Hearts of the People, he could see no readier way
to Effect it, than by persecuting the Christians: A sort of men whom he well
knew the Jews exceedingly hated, as professing a Novel and upstart Religion (as
they termed it) which was quite contrary to the Mosaic Institutions. Hereupon
he caused a great number of Christians to be Imprisoned, and Amongst the rest
our Apostle, who, Maugre all his Malice, when the Persecution raged most,
Taught and Confirmed such as were wavering.

A short time after his Imprisonment Sentence of Death was passed upon him; and
as he was led to the Place of Execution, according to Clemens Alexandrinus, the
Soldier or Officer who guarded him to the place of his Martyrdom; or as Suidas
will have it, his Accuser being Convinced, by the Courage and Bravery of the
Apostle, in his cheerfully going to his Death, came and fell down before him,
asking Pardon for what he had done; upon which the Blessed man raised him from
the ground, embraced, and kissed him, saying, Peace my Son, peace be to thee,
and a pardon of thy faults: Whereupon, before all the Assembly, he openly
Confessed his Conversion, declaring the Christian Faith to be the only means of
Salvation, declaring that he was ready to dye for the same: which accordingly
he did, they being both beheaded at the same time.

But as for the Tyrant, he lived not long after; for coming into the Theater,
in glorious Apparel, to make a Speech to the People, on Caesar's Birthday, they
shouted, and said, it was the voice of a God, and not of a man, which was soon
disproved; for, at that very moment, Divine Justice overtook him, and he was
eaten up with Worms.

As for the Body of our Apostle, it being Interred near Jerusalem, was from
thence brought into Spain, and there said to do many Miracles: but what Credit
is to be given to that, I leave to the Readers Judgment.

The Life of St. JOHN the Evangelist.
ST. JOHN was younger Brother to St. James, by Birth a Galilaean, Son to
Zebedee and Salome, by Trade a Fisher, as we find him noted in Holy Writ, being
called at the same time that his Brother was and is noted as youngest of all
the Disciples. To this Disciple it was that our Savior said, if I will that he
shall tarry till I come, etc. he also it was that leaned upon his Bosom, and
had the Honor to wait upon him in the Hall, when he was Condemned, as also at
the place where he suffered, and to whom our blessed Lord bequeathed the care
of his Mother. At the first News of our Savior's Resurrection from the dead
he, accompanied with St. Peter, ran to the Sepulcher, and he it was that first
gave notice of it to the rest of the Disciples.

A while after we find that as he and Peter were preaching, they were cast into
Prison, but being released by the Sanhedrim, they were chosen by all the
Apostles to go down to Samaria; where meeting Simon Magus, they confounded his
false Miracles; and not long after the Apostles dividing the Provinces amongst
them, Asia Minor fell to his Lot, whither (after the death of the Blessed
Virgin) he went and preached the Gospel in many Cities, as in Smyrna, Pergamus,
Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, and others; and now coming nearer to
Rome, and preaching the Gospel, he was accused to Domitian (that great
Persecutor of the Christians) that he was an eminent Assertor of Atheism, and
a public subverter of the Religion of the Empire, whereupon the Tyrant sent an
express Command to the Proconsul of Asia, to send him bound to Rome; which
being done accordingly he was doomed to be put into a Caldron of boiling Oil,
in which, when he was entered, he stood for many hours unconcerned, nor any
ways hurt, as Tortullian has it, which so amazed the Tyrant that he gave order
he should be taken out: but that Miracle not in the least prevailing with him
he banished him to the Isle of Patmos; a disconsolate Island in the
Archipelago, where he remained several years. There it was he wrote his
Apocalypse or Revelations, wherein by frequent Visions and Prophetical
representments, he had a clear prospect of the state and condition of the
Church through all Ages which certainly was not the least token of our
Savior's Love twards him: nor could it have been more suitable at any time;
for then he was in a Melancholy retirement, shut up from all Exercise or
Converse, it being rather a Prison than an Island not being able to boast of
any comfort but such as he received from heaven.

A Story there is, but as for the Truth of it I shall no way assert, that a
hand remains to this day in a Monastery of Greeks Monks in that Island, having
large Nails upon its Fingers, which as fast as they pare them grow again;
which, as Bellon in his Observations relates, is by some affirmed to be the
same hand with which St. John wrote his Revelations, and that the Turks will
have it to be the hand of one of their Prophets: But enough of this.

After the Death of Domitian, Cocceius Nerva succeeding him in the Empire he
revoked many of his wicked Edicts, recalling such as he had banished; of which
Indulgence St. John taking the advantage, left Patmos and returned again to
Asia his ancient charge, but chiefly his fixed seat at Ephesus, where he had
left Timothy as Bishop or President, who during his Absence had been Martyred
by the People for persuading them against their Heathenish Rites, Feasts and
Sports. St. John (as Nicephorus reports) being arrived, caused several small
Churches for Divine Worship to be erected, such as were consistent with the
poverty of the persecuted Christians, and that after he had settled the Affairs
of the Provinces at the request of the Bishop of Asia, he wrote his Gospel,
though some will have it that he wrote it in the Isle of Patmos during his
confinement there.

According to the best account that Sacred History gives us, he lived till
about the beginning of Trajans Reign, and then being about 98 or 99 years old
he died. Yet Chrysostom will have it, that he lived 120 years, and that being
100 when he wrote his Gospel he lived 20 years after; of the same Opinion is
Dorotheus, but this seems somewhat improbable; for according to this Account he
must have been 50 years of Age when he was called to be a Disciple, when all
that write of him affirm him to be the youngest of all the Apostles. He dyed
said the Arabian (as Kirsten has it in the Lives of the 4 Evangelists) in the
expectation of his blessedness, from which he infers that he dyed peaceably,
and not a violent Death; although Theophylact and others (but without any
warrant) do conceive that he died a Martyr, their opinion being only grounded
upon the words of our Savior when he told him and his Brother they should
indeed drink of the cup whereof he drank and be Baptized with the baptism
wherewith he was baptized, but etc. Yet St. Hierome will have it expounded
another way, which is that all though he did not suffer by Execution, yet he
being put into boiling Oil, Banished and Persecuted, he ought to be accounted a
Martyr, and that probably our Savior meant such like Calamity by the Cup, etc.

Many there are likewise who have cherished a fond Opinion that he never died,
but rather that he sleeps in his Grave; alluding to the words of our Savior
upon Peter's inquiry, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? John chap. 21. ver. 23. Others say, that having commanded his Grave to be
dug, he went into it, and ordered such as went with him to fasten down a great
stone upon the same, and come the next Morning and look into it, which they
did, and found nothing there but the Grave-cloaths, from which, as Nicephorus
relates they concluded he was Ascended, he having intimated some such thing
before his lying down. It is farther related that the dust upon his Grave
bubbles up, which some affirm is by reason of his Breathing; and that Manna or
sweet Perfume-like Flower is duly cast out. But these I suppose are only
Monkish Stories to amuse the Ignorant, and since we have no certainty of any
such thing from any warrantable Author, I shall not trouble the Reader any
farther in relating them.

The Life of St. PHILIP the Blessed Martyr.
ST. PHILIP was born at Bethsaida, a Town or City near the Sea of Tiberias, it
being likewise the Birthplace of Andrew and Peter, as is before recited. As to
his Calling and Parents Holy Writ is altogether Silent, that he was brought up
in Learning, and well skilled in the Mosaic Law, is not only the Opinion of
Theophrastus, but several others. That he was the first that actually as a
Disciple followed our Lord, is certain; for although Peter and Andrew were
first called, yet they returned again to their Trades, continuing at them, for
the space of a year before they entered themselves under his Banner: And now
the Prophetic time being expired, at the end of which the Messiah was to come,
he was looked for by most of the Jewish Rabbis; but they, through their
misunderstanding, being blinded, as supposing he should descend from heaven
attended with Hierarchies of Angels, did not imagine he could be shrouded under
the disguise of Flesh and Blood; wherefore that he might work out the
Redemption of Mankind, he rather chose the mean and poorer sort of Men than the
Rich and Mighty.

No sooner had Religion taken Possession in the Mind of this Apostle, but he
sought for others of his Friends, and especially Nathanael, a Person of great
Eminency, to whom he imparted the glad Tidings of his having found the Messiah,
and immediately conducted him to him.

After his Call to the Apostleship, no great matter is recorded of him in
Sacred Writ; only we read that he Converted the Eunuch belonging to the Queen
of Aethiopia, and that he was Miraculously taken up by the Holy Spirit and
carried (through the Air past doubt) to another place. To Philip it was that
our Savior propounded the Question, What they should do for so much bread in
the Wilderness, as would suffice so many thousands as were present? John chap.
6. ver. 5. It was with him that our Lord discoursed (before the Eating of the
last Paschal Lamb) in Relation to himself. To him it was that the Gentile
Proselytes, who were desirous to see our Savior, addressed themselves. It was
he likewise that desired our Savior to show him the Father, and was reproved
for his Ignorance in not understanding the foregoing words of his Lord and
Master, who told him that he was the Image of his father; and that what he did
was by his appointment, and that the Miracles that he had wrought were
sufficient to convince him, that he was sent by the Father.

When our Apostle came to have his Portion set apart wherein he should Preach,
the Gospel, Origin and others inform us that part of the upper Asia fell to his
Lot; and some affirmed that he preached in Scythia, but of the Latter there is
no certainty: But however in such places as he preached he confirmed the People
by several Miracles that he wrought, baptizing many into the Faith of Christ,
reproving Idolatry, and casting out Devils; insomuch that his: Fame spread
throughout all those Countries; and having for many years carried on the Great
work of the Gospel, he came at last to Hierapolis, a City in Phrygia, where the
People worshipped a Dragon for their God by the name of Jupiter Ammon; which
Blindness and Superstitious Idolatry, so moved the Apostle to pity them, that
he earnestly put up his Prayers to Heaven, that that deluding Deity might be
destroyed; which were soon Answered, and the Serpent and Fiend that continued
for a long time before in it to give Answers to such as came to enquire any
thing, vanished, at least the latter; and then he preached to them the way of
Saving Knowledge, alleging that God had sent his Son into the World to save
Sinners, and that through his Blood only they must be washed from their sins
declaring the Goodness and infinite Mercy of God in so doing. Which so abashed
many of the Idolaters, that they were utterly ashamed of the God they had
formerly worshipped, insomuch that a great number of them were Converted to the
Christian Faith. So powerful was the Operation of the Holy Spirit, which put in
with the preaching of that Apostle, to finish the work; upon which Satan
perceiving his Kingdom to decay used all endeavors to raise up a Persecution,
the which in the end God permitted, and by order of the Magistrates the Apostle
was seized and carried to Prison, and after his being Sentenced he was Cruelly
scourged, and after that hanged by the neck against a pillar; though some
would, have it, that he was Crucified, but however during the execution such a
terrible Earthquake happened that the Earth began to open so that the
affrighted People cried to Heaven for Mercy, upon which it instantly stayed.

The Apostle being dead his body was taken down by St. Barnabas his Companion
in the Ministry of the Gospel at that time and Mariamne St. Philip's Sister who
bore him Company in all his Travels after they had taken him down they decently
interred him, and when they had confirmed the People in the Faith of Christ,
they departed thence.

That St. Philip was Married is generally affirmed not only by Clemens of
Alexandria, but by diverse others, who reckon him amongst the number of the
married Apostles, Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus tells us that Philip the Apostle
suffered Martyrdom at Hierapolis with two of his Daughters, who persevered in
their Virginity, and that a third died at Ephesus and was buried there: but
some think he might be mistaken and take Philip the Deacon, who lived at
Caesarea; of whose Daughters we read in the History of the Apostles; but of
this no certainty: but it is observed by the Ancients, that he was one of the
Apostles that left no Sacred Writings behind him, the greater part of his Life
(as Eusebius observes) being taken up and Employed in the Ministry of the
Gospel, in Preaching and Instructing the Nations, having little time to write
any books; or if he did, perhaps they might be lost either at the time of his
Death, or afterward; and so failed of being transmitted to Posterity. Though
Epiphanius informs us that the Ghosticks in former times produced a Gospel
giving it the name of St. Philip's Gospel which they applied to the patronizing
of their pernicious Principles, and diabolick Practices; but the cheat was soon
discovered, and the specious Arguments they used to prove it his, were
overthrown and Silenced.

The Life of St. BARTHOLOMEW the Apostle and Martyr.
SAcred History fails not to Inform us, that St. Bartholomew was one of the
Twelve Apostles; but takes no farther notice of him than the bare mention of
his Name, probably by reason he lies concealed under some other name; insomuch
that the Ancients think him to be the same Person with Nathanael: and what the
rather induces them so to think, is by reason that in their first coming to
Christ, as in St. John, Philip and Nathanael are joined together, so in the
other Evangelists Philip and Bartholomew. So that it is not unlikely but a
mistake might happen, either in the Original or Translation, nor can it be
imagined it was otherwise.

But this difficulty being either cleared or laid aside, I shall proceed.
Numbered amongst the Apostles he was, and is said to be by Birth an Assyrian,
descended from the Ptolomies of Egypt: But it is more likely that he was a
Galilaean, and if he be the same Person with Nathanael, he must consequently be
so, it being plain that he was of Cana in Galilee. But of what Calling or Tribe
is not set down. He was brought to our Savior by Philip, and being confirmed
that he was the Messia, he followed him to the last; and having with the rest
received the Holy Ghost, he preached the Gospel powerfully and plainly to the
Jews and Gentiles, accompanying Philip for the most part, and as the
Ecclesiastical History makes mention, he went to the hither India, which most
imagine was that part of it that lies toward Asia, though Socrates tells us, it
was the India bordering upon Aethiopia; which then must be the Asian Aethiopia;
and Sophronius calls it the Happy India; and informs us, that he carried
thither St. Matthew's Gospel, which he there left behind him. But Eusebius
gives us a fuller Relation, that when Pantanus a famous Philosopher, but a
Christian, coming many years after into the Indies, he, amongst the Christians
that he there found, had a sight of St. Matthew's Gospel written in Hebrew
which was as they reported the Gospel St. Bartholomew left behind him, when he
planted the Gospel amongst them.

In the next place we find him at Hierapolis, a City in Phrygia, where he had
in all likelihood suffered with St. Philip, had not the Earthquake overawed
his Executioners, for certain it is he was at the same time bound to a Cross,
but when they saw that Divine Vengeance was ready to overtake them for their
impious Rage against the Apostles, they unbound him and set him at Liberty;
from whence, as some think he journeyed to Lycaonia, for there, as St.
Chrysostom affirms, he preached the Gospel, and Converted many to the Christian
Faith from whence he departed to Albanopolis in Armenia the Great, a place much
given to Idolatrous Worship, from which whilst he thought to reclaim them and
Convert them to the true Religion, the Governor of the City caused him to be
apprehended and Condemned for endeavoring (as he alleged) to draw the People
from their Obedience. His Sentence was to be Crucified; and when the day of
Execution came, he went cheerfully to embrace his Death Comforting and
Exhorting his Proselytes to keep steadfast in the Faith and Doctrine that they
had received, which was able to make them wise unto salvation: and so continued
to instruct them to the last moment of his Life. Several there are that affirm
he was Crucified with his head downwards, and that he was fleyed alive, which
cruel usuage as Plutarch relates was common in that Country.

After his Death, his Body was removed to Darus a City in the Borders of
Persia; from thence to Lisparis, one of the Aetolian Cities; from thence to
Benevent in Italy, and from thence to Rome. After his Death, a certain Sect of
Heretics produced a Fabulous Gospel under the Title of his name; but it was
soon descryed to be a Cheat, and not only rejected as Apocryphical, but also
laid aside even by those who had been the Forgers of the same.

The End of the LIFE of St. BARTHOLOMEW.
The Life of St. MATTHEW the Evangelist, together with his Martyrdom.
ST. Matthew otherwise called Levi, was born a^ Nazareth, a City belonging to
the Tribe o^ Zebulon, where our Savior was brought up. He was the Son of
Alpheus and Mary, Sister o^ Kinswoman to the blessed Virgin. His Employ was a
Tax-gatherer under the Roman Publicans an Office though detestable amongst the
Jews yet greatly esteemed amongst the Romans. Ou^ Savior first espied him near
to the Sea of Capernaum, where he sat at the receipt of Custom and had no
sooner called him, but he left his Wealth and followed him, and at that time
entertained our Savior and his Retinue at Dinner, whereupon the Pharisees
upbraided him, that he eat with Publicans and Sinners, when as he told them
that it was only those that were sick who needed a Physician.

After his Election to the Apostolate, he continued at Jerusalem till our
Lord's Ascension; the^ preached the Gospel in Judaea for several years, and at
his departure he wrote his Gospel and left it with the Christians whom he had
Converted. From thence he turned to the Gentiles, making (as is most likely)
his first Progress into Aethiopia, that being the Province assigned to him. But
Metaphrastus will have it, that he went into Parthia, and having planted
Christianity in those parts, he thence traveled into Aethiopia, where by his
Preaching and working Miracles he Converted many to the Christian Faith,
ordaining Spiritual Guides and Pastors to instruct them in the way of Truth:
When having continued a considerable time amongst them, Nicophorus in his
Ecclesiastical History tells us, That he went into a country of Canibals
constituting Plato, one of his followers, Bishop of Myrmena; and that our
Savior appearing to him in the form of a beautiful youth, gave him a wand,
which he pitching in the ground, it strait sprung up a tall Tree: and that by
his working Miracles he Converted the Prince of that Country. But as to the
Credit of those Reports, I must refer them to the Judgment of the Reader, by
reason they have been looked upon by some as Fabulous and groundless.

We find it in an Ancient Author, that he suffered Martyrdom at Naddabar, a
City of Aethiopia, but what kind of Death he died is not therein mentioned; and
as Dorotheus Reports, he was Buried at Hierapolis. During his Lifetime, he was
a great Assertor of the true Religion; a contemner of Worldly Treasure, which
is evident by his leaving so gainful a Calling to follow our Savior. As for
his Humility, he exceeded any of his Fellows which may well be observed in his
Writings, where he gives them the Pre-eminency. His Diet was very spare, he
feeding for the most part on Leaves and Roots. His Age at the of his Death is
not certainly known, though some are of Opinion he died in the 70 year, etc. He
having written his Gospel as is aforesaid, a Copy of it is said to be found
anno 485 in the Grave of St. Barnabas in Cyprus. Nor was free from having
counterfeits fathered upon him after his Death, but they like all the rest
vanished like Smoke, the true Word of God being only permanent.

The End of St. MATTHEW'S Life.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. THOMAS the Apostle.
SAcred Writ makes not either mention of the Birthplace or Parents of this
Apostle, but that he was a Jew is most certain. As for his Calling, if
Metaphrastus says right, he was a Fisherman, as indeed the greatest part of the
Apostles were; he having two Names, Thomas and Didymus, the latter we cannot
but suppose might upon some occasion be given him some time after his
Circumcision; the Jews not usually receiving any more than one name at the
performance of that Grand Ceremony. A man of Resolution and Zeal he was, as we
may Ghess, for when the rest of the Disciples endeavored to persuade our
Savior from going into Judaea, when he purposed to raise Lazarus from the
dead, objecting, that the Jews laid wait to stone him and putting him in mind,
how lately they had attempted it: But Thomas alone stood up, and admonished
them not to persuade him from it, but said, Let us also go that we may die with
him, John 11.16. All that can be charged upon him, is his unaptness of Belief,
and want of a quick Apprehension readily to understand our Savior's words,
which some of the Fathers have rather attributed to a sound Judgment and mature
Deliberation, in not being over hasty to give Credit till he had fully
understood and weighed what was said; and for that purpose they quote St. Paul,
who calls the Beraeans blessed because they searched the Scriptures to see if
those things that were taught by the Apostles were so or no. But of his
incredibility in not believing our Savior's Resurrection, after he had such
converse with him, and seen such Miracles few can excuse him. But in that point
he was soon convinced of his Error, crying out my Lord and my God.

The blessed Jesus being gone to Heaven to prepare the happy Mansions, he had
promised whilst on Earth, for those that love and serve him. And this Apostle
together with the rest having received the Holy Ghost, used double diligence to
obliterate what had been amiss, for as it is said, no sooner had he received the
powerful influence of the Divine Spirit, but he sent Thaddaeus, one of the 70
Disciples to Abgarus Toparch of Edessa (between whom and our Blessed Lord some
Letters had passed, as Eusebius has it) to tell him what glorious things had
happened and to admonish him to keep steadfast in the Faith he had received, he
having been Converted in our Savior's time upon the Cure of a Malignant
distemper.

The Province that was assigned him, as Origin informs us was Parthia; but
Sophronius tells us, that he preached the Gospel to the Persians, Medes,
Carmans, Hyrcanians, Bactrians, and several other Countries adjacent. And it is
recorded by an Ancient Writer, that in Persia he met the three Wise Men that
came to make their Offerings to our Savior at his Birth; and that after he had
baptized them, he took them with him as his Fellow Laborers in the Gospel; and
then as Chrysostom has it, he went to Aethiopia, which must be meant of the
Asian Aethiopia, and, as Nicephorus farther adds, he having Traveled through
those Countries came at last to the Indies, but was afraid at first to venture
himself amongst such Barbarous People, but being encouraged by a Vision that
gave full Assurance of the Divine Presence to be always with him, and to
preserve him from danger, he set forward and preached the Gospel, as far as
Taprobane, since called Sumatra: and as he went Converted many of those (in a
manner) wild and savage People. Such is the powerful Operation of the Holy
Spirit, that it can tame the Fiercest; and give Saving Knowledge to the most
Ignorant! There he showed them the Follies and Idolatries they had blindly
pursued; and that they instead of the true God, had worshipped Images inspired
by Demons, desiring them at last to lay aside their Idols, and embrace the
Truth of Christianity, by which means they should not only be blessed whilst
upon Earth, but have Eternal Happiness hereafter. By this and several
convincing Miracles, he brought many over to the Faith.

And now because that Ecclesiastic History affords us nothing further
Memorable of this Apostle, I shall not think it amiss to give the Reader a
sight of the Account the Portugals, upon their discovery of those Countries,
received from the Inhabitants, which is, that St. Thomas came first to
Soccotora, an Island in the Arabian Sea, and from thence he departed to
Cranganor, where having planted the Gospel he went to the Kingdom of Cormandel,
where preaching in several Towns and Villages, at last he came to Malipur the
chief City; and there, after having Converted many to the Faith, he went about
to Found a Church for the Establishing Divine Worship; but being forbidden by
Sagamo, Prince of that Country, it ceased for some time: but the Apostle by his
Miracles having Converted the Prince and a great part of his Nobility it was
builded. Which so enraged the Brachamans or Heathen Priests, that they sought
always to destroy the Apostle, as hoping by that means to extirpate his
Doctrine, which by being embraced on all hands had near spoiled their Trade. So
that one day when he was praying alone in a solitary place they came upon him
with Stones, Darts and Spears; and after having grievously wounded him, one of
them run him through the body with a Spear. After which his Body being taken up
by his well-willers, it was Buried with great Solemnity in the Church that he
had built, which was afterward greatly enlarged.

Gregory of Tours in his book of the Glory of Martyrdom tells us of many
Miracles that are done on the day of his Martyrdom; and one, if true, a
perpetual one, which is a Lamp that burns before his Tomb without the help of
Oil, or any other combustible matter, and no Wind nor other accident can
extinguish it. Certain it is, that the Portugals at their first coming thither
did find a sort of Christians in those Countries that went by the name of St.
Thomas his Christians; and that they had Churches of Divine Worship and lived
up to the very strictness of Religion; being governed by a Patriarch, and
differing very little in their manney of worship from us.

A Story there is, that whilst Don Alfons Sousa one of the first Viceroys in
the Indies under John third King of Portugal, continued in those parts a famous
Cross was found in St. Thomas's Chapel with an Inscription on it, which they
compelled a Learned Bramin to Interpret, who gave it thus, that in the time of
King Sagamo, one Thomas a Divine Person was sent by the Son of God into those
Countries to instruct the People in the Knowledge of the true God; that he
Builded a Church, and performed extraordinary Miracles, but at last, whilst he
was Kneeling at his Devotion he was by a Brachman thrust through with a Spear,
and that that Cross stained with his Blood had been left as a memorial of what
had happened. They farther add that another Bramin being called, interpreted it
after the same manner, and so I shall leave it to the consideration of the
Reader, as a thing no ways impossible to bear the face of Truth, the matter of
the Lamp excepted.

The End of St. THOMAS his Life.
The Life and Glorious Martyrdom of St. JAMES the Less, an Apostle.
SOme Scruple there has been made about this Apostle; whether he that St. Paul
calls our Lords Brother, was the same with him that sat Bishop of Jerusalem,
and was called James the Just. But seeing there is no mention of any James more
than two in Scripture, that were Apostles, it will not be amiss to take it for
granted that there were no other than James the Great and James the Less, and
that this Apostle was the same Person with James the Just, and then
consequently the same James that sat Bishop of Jerusalem; and that which
induces me the rather to believe it, is because all the Arguments that have
been used to disprove it, have not been admitted as reasonable by the Ancients.

Thus having opened the matter, I shall proceed ^o the History of his Life. He
was past doubt ^he Son of Joseph (who Espoused the Blessed Virgin) by a former
Wife, and thence called our Lord's Brother, for as the Jews objected against
^ur Savior, when he wrought such Miracles in (...) their sight as never man
did, Is not this the Car^^nters Son? is not his Mother called Mary, and his
^rethren James and Joses and Simon and Jude, and ^s Sisters are they not all
with us? whence then has ^it man these things Mat. 13.55, 56.

As for the certain place of his Birth, no mention is made, nor of his
Employment, before he was called to be a Disciple. In which Station he behaved
himself so prudently, that our Savior highly favored him during his
Continuance upon Earth, especially after his Resurrection, particularly
appearing unto him, as St. Paul has it in hi^ first Epistle to the Corinthians,
chap. 15. ver. 7. where he discoursing about our Lord's Appearance to 500
Brethren at once, he expressly says that afterward he was seen of James.

St. Hierom gives us an Account, that in the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazaren, this
passage is inserted, viz. that St. James having made a solem^ Protestation
after our Savior's last Supper, tha^ he would eat no Bread till he saw the
Lord rise^ from the Dead. Therefore when our Savio^^ was returned from the Arms
of the Grave, he a^peared to him and commanding Bread to be (...) before him,
he broke it, and gave it to him, saying, eat thy bread my brother, for the Son
of man (...) truly risen from among them that sleep. After the Ascension of our
Savior, though no particul^^ time is mentioned, he was by the unanimous
consent of the Apostles chosen Bishop of Jerusalem being preferred before the
rest in relation of (...) being a kin to our Lord.

A while after we find Paul upon his Conversi^^ making his address to him,
desiring his Conversa^^on, and giving him the right hand of Fellowshi^ And to
him it was that St. Peter, after his Mirac^lous delivery out of Prison by the
Angel, sent tell what had happened. He it was who was Pri^cipal in the Synod at
Jerusalem, when the mat^^^ in relation to the Gentile Converts, was in D^bate;
and there notwithstanding St. Peter and others were present, he stood up and
passed the Decretory Sentence, which rendered him greatly honored by all the
Apostles, who gave him precedence in such a weighty Affair; which had St. Peter
done, the Church of Rome would past doubt have Trumpeted it out as the main
Argument of his being the chief of all the Apostles.

In fine, he administered in his Province with Care and Diligence, omitting no
part that appertained to his Ministry, that by his uprightness and unwearied
endeavors he so calmed the stubborn Jews, that a great number not only of the
vulgar sort, but of those of most eminence amongst them adhered to his
Doctrine. Yet there wanted not some Sons of Belial amongst them to inveigh
against him, and stir up the Multitude as they saw fit opportunity, and these
were the Engines of the Scribes and Pharisees, even such notorious Villains as
they could hire, to promote mischief. These insinuated into the multitude that
the Apostle was a Perverter of the Law of Moses, and a stirer up to Rebellion;
and that, if such things were suffered, God would bring the Romans upon them to
take away their Country.

That having spread their Infection abroad though to little purpose, they
resolved to try an other way, whereupon the Scribes and Pharisees (those
Masters of mischievous invention, and chief dissemblers) came to the Apostle at
the Feast of the Passover telling, that since the People were unsettled in
their Opinions, they did not think it amiss that he should from a convenient
place stand over the Temple porch, and exhort them to a steadfast belief of
Christianity; telling him that for their parts they looked upon Jesus as the
true Messiah. To which the Apostle consenting, when he was conveniently placed,
they with a loud Voice made this following Address to him, Tell us, O Justus,
whom we have all the reason in the world to believe, That seeing the people are
so generally led away with the doctrine of Jesus that was crucified, tell us
what is the Institution of the crucified Jesus. Whereunto the Apostle made
answer with an audible Voice, saying, why do ye enquire of Jesus the son of
man, he sits in Heaven on the right hand of the Majesty on high, and will come
again in the Clouds of Heaven. Which the People that were below no sooner
heard, but with a Loud shout they Glorified the blessed Jesus, and proclaimed
him with Hosanna's. Whereupon the Scribes and Pharisees seeing their Policy
defeated, and that they had rather confirmed the People than any ways withdrawn
them, it so enraged them, that thereupon they resolved his death and crying out
that Justus himself was seduced and become an Impostor; then took him up by
force and threw him down from the Battlements: Notwithstanding which fall he
reared himself upon his Knees and prayed for them, the which whilst he was
doing, such Villains as they had appointed for that purpose fell upon him with
Clubs and Stone till one amongst the rest (notwithstanding the Entreaty of many
to save his Life) with a Fuller's Club beat out his Brains, and by that means
gave his Soul a passage to the Eternal Habitations of Bliss and Joy that fade
not away.

He dyed in the 94 year of his Age, and 24 after Christ's Ascension to the grief
of all good Men. Gregory Bishop of Tours informs us that he was buried upon
Mount Olivet, in a Tomb which he had caused to be erected during his Life. In
which he had buried old Simeon and Zacharias, though Hegesippus will have it
that he was buried near the Temple in the place where he was Martyred, and that
there being a Monument erected for him, it continued there for many years after.

The End of the LIFE of St. JAMES the Less.
The Life and Martyrdom of SIMON the Zelot, an Apostle.
THis Apostle, as most are apt to believe, was one of our Lord's Brothers; that
is, Son to Joseph, who Espoused the Blessed Virgin. Amongst the Apostles he is
styled Simon the Canaanite, whence some Conjecture that he was born at Cana in
Galilee; others take him to be the Bridegroom, at who is Wedding our Savior
turned water into wine. But this word has no Relation to his Country or Place,
from whence he took his being, but from his hot and fiery Zeal; the word
bearing such a signification in the Hebrew. Nor do we imagine that he took that
name from the ardent Affections he bore to his Master, but from some Sect that
he was of, before he came to be our Savior's Disciple.

For the better explaining of which, note, that as there were many Sects and
Divisions amongst the Jews so was there one called the Sect of the Zelots; a
more devout sort of men than the rest, and of this Sect it is to be supposed he
had that additional Name. These sort of men were indeed very troublesome to the
Jews, viz. the Sect of the Zelots, for as Josephus, and others, well notes,
they were the cause of the Dreadful Calamities that befell in the City of
Jerusalem, during its being Besieged by Titus, Vespatian's Son; but this is no
reflection upon the Apostle, no more than St. Paul's being a Pharisee, or St.
Matthew a Publican.

When he came to his Apostolical Office, no more mention is made of him in Holy
Writ, but that he continued with the Apostles, till they were dispersed by the
Persecution the Jews raised against them; he then, past doubt, applying himself
to the undertaking his charge: For as Nicephorus relates he departed for
Egypt; where having successfully preached the Gospel for some time, he
departed thence for Cyrene, thence into Africa; though Baronius will not allow
of that; making Peter the first Planter of Christianity in those Parts. But how
far his Negative in that point may be credited, let any consider that
understands. What he does in that case, is done to make his own Assertions good
in relation to St. Peter; for should he own that any other of the Apostles had
been there before Peter, he would confound himself.

But to let that pass, we will grant that it is most likely that this St. Simon
was not only in Africa, but in many other places, and that he having passed all
along the Coast, Sailed over into Britain, for so many of the Ancients have
affirmed, and that he preached the Gospel here successfully, instructing the
rude and barbarous People in the way to everlasting Life, and earnestly
endeavoring to turn them from their Idolatrous worship, working many Miracles,
insomuch that many embraced Christianity; till at last the Devil that great
Enemy of our Salvation stirred up the Multitude to persecute him: whose
barbarous rage in a short time after crowned him with Martyrdom, as not only
Dorotheus and Nicephorus affirm, but also expressed in the Menologies where we
are informed that St. Simon went at last into Britain, and having enlightened
the minds of many with the Doctrine of the Gospel, he at length was Crucified
by the Infidels, and buried there; but as to any particular place of his
Burial, no mention is made.

Some there are who tell us, that after he had Preached the Gospel in Egypt,
he went to Mesopotamia, where meeting with St. Jude, they journeyed together
into Persia, where having planted the Gospel, they were both Crowned with
Martyrdom. But this account is rejected by most of the Fathers, and Baronius is
forced to confess that it is founded only upon a Book called the Passion of the
Apostles; (an Author of no great Credit) and the reason of this variation is
supposed to be in the mistake that has arisen about the Person of St. Simon,
for some will have Symeon the Son of Cleophas, who was St. James's Successor in
the Sea of Jerusalem, the same with this Apostle who was crucified in the 112
year of his Age under Trajan the Roman Emperor, but that by reason of the
difference of years and the description of both their Persons under different
Characters in Ecclesiastical History, render it altogether a groundless surmise.

The End of the Life of St. SIMON.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. JUDE the Apostle.
THis Apostle goes under three several names as Jude, Thaddaeus, and Lebbaeus,
but according to the Opinions of such as have inquired into their
significations, they signify all one and the same thing. As for his Descent
and Parentage, he was one of the four that were called our Lord's Brothers, Son
to Joseph, and Brother to St. James Bishop of Jerusalem; that he was one of the
Twelve Apostles is certain, being often numbered with them by the Evangelists;
and especially in the 14 Chapter of St. John's Gospel, we find upon our
Savior's declaring to his Disciples what great things he and his Father would
do; and what glorious Manifestations he would make of his Power and Godhead,
after his Resurrection to such of his Disciples as persevered in their
Obedience. St. Jude (who looked for nothing less than a Temporal Kingdom of the
Messiah, not thinking how that mean condition in which our Savior continued in
upon Earth, could consist with the Pomp and Magnificence that was expected upon
that occasion) demanded of our Savior, why he would manifest himself to his
disciples and not to the world? to which our Lord replied, that the world was
not capable of such divine Manifestations as should be revealed unto them.

Eusebius tells us that a short time after the Ascension of our Lord St. Thomas
dispatched Thaddaeus the Apostle to Abgarus the Governor of Edessa, which
according to the Name is supposed to be this St. Jude, unless it might be
another of the same name; for as we have it in another place, this Thaddaeus
was one of the 70; and then it could not be St. Jude, for he was one of the 12
Apostles, as is before mentioned: but howsoever it is certain that at his first
setting out, he Preached the Gospel in Judaea, Samaria, Galilee, Idumea, and
the Cities of Arabia, and the Countries adjacent; from thence he went into
Syria and Mesopotamia. And Nicephorus tells us, that after all he came to
Edessa, where Abgarus was Governor, and where the other Thaddaeus who was one
of the 70 had been before him, and there perfected what was begun, and having
by his Preaching and Miracles established the Gospel, he died a Peaceable and
Quiet Death. But Dorotheus affirms that he was slain at Berytus, and Buried
there in a stately Tomb, although by the General consent of the Latin Church he
went Preaching the Gospel in Persia, where after he had brought many over to
the Faith, and established the Christian Religion there for many years, he at
last was, for his reproving and strongly opposing Idolatrous and diabolick
Devices of the Magi, by their procurement cruelly put to death.

That he was married and had Children appears by the sequel. Domitian the
bloody Emperor being jealous of his long continuance in the State of Empire,
upon notice had that there remained some Persons of the Line of David, he
ordered them to be brought before him, viz. two young men, who were the Grand
Sons of St. Jude, and Kinsmen to our Lord; when they were come into his
Presence, they confessed that they were of the Race and Posterity of David,
whereupon he asked them what possession they had? they told him, but a few
Acres of Land, which they manured and improved to maintain themselves; showing
him their hands, that thereby he might guess at their Labor. Then he asked
them about the Messiah, what his Kingdom was, and when to commence? to which
they answered, that it was not of this world, but in the highest heavens; and
that when he saw his good time, he would come in the Clouds of Heaven, attended
with Glory and Power to Judge the Quick and the Dead, and render to every man
according to his Deserts. At which the Emperor smiling dismissed them. And
thus much for St. Jude.

The End of the Life of St. JUDE.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. MATTHIAS the Apostle.
ALthough St. Matthias was not immediately called by our Lord as one of the
Disciples, yet it is supposed that he was all along an attendant upon the
Ministry, as being one of the 70; but a way being made for him by the Apostasy
of Judas Iscariot (that Son of Perdition) he was afterward numbered amongst
the 12, and called to be an Apostle. For upon Peter's acquainting the rest that
since Judas was fallen off, it was but necessary that another should supply his
place, whereupon they pitched upon Matthias, as a very fit Person for to
undertake so Sacred an Employment; which he as joyfully embraces, when the Lot
fell upon him.

Not long after which, he with the rest receiving the Holy Ghost, he betook
himself to the Province that was allotted him; and first Preaching the Gospel
in Judaea, where indeed most of the Apostles began to proclaim the glad tidings
of Salvation to Mankind. He then passed on to Macedonia, where it is reported,
but with what credit I know not, that the Gentiles, to try his Sanctity, gave
him a cup of intoxicated Wine, who in the Name of Jesus drank it off without
doing him the least harm, and that he cured about 50 Persons who had been
poisoned with the same intoxicated Potion, and by laying his hands on them
restored them to their sight; of which the operation of the Poison had deprived
them. Nicephorus tells us that he came into the first Aethiopia. But Sophronius
says the second, though perhaps they may be both mistaken for Cappadocia his
Principal place of abode being seated near to the Irruption of the River
Apsarus and the Haven Hus, both belonging to that Country, nor is any Aethiopia
nearer that place on the side he was said to return, but however the place
where he came was very Barbarous, as may appear by his usage, for happening
amongst people of a fierce, rough and untractable nature, passing all bounds of
Hospitality and common Civility, he was treated with all manner of Rudeness and
Inhumanity; from whom for all his Pains and Labor taken about saving their
immortal Soul, and directing them in the way to everlasting Life, he was at
last Martyred by them, Anno Christo 59. Or as others will have it, 64; but as
to the manner of his Death, it is uncertain, though Dorotheus Reports, he was
Martyred at Sebestople, near the Temple of the Sun (past doubt for reproving
their Idolatrous worship, in Adoring the Creature instead of the Creator) and
that he was buried there. Another account we have, that he was seized by the
Jews, as a Blasphemer; and after being stoned he was beheaded. When as the
Greek Offices seconded by several Breviaries, Relate that he was hanged upon a
Cross; and farther, it is said, that his Body was for a long time kept at
Jerusalem and conveyed thence to Rome by Helen the Mother to Constantine the
Great, where some Bones, said to be his, are showed with great Veneration to
this day, though others affirm that his remains are at Trier in Germany, about
which some disputes have been held, but to little purpose, for it is to be
supposed, they have him both alike. His Memory is Celebrated in the Greek
Church on the 9th. of August, unless lately laid aside by reason of the
overspreading of Paganism in those parts.

He was a man of great Courage, and well skilled in the Jewish or Mosaic Law,
being, as many ancients imagine, of a Noble Stock, etc. Amongst many Apocriphal
Writings attributed to the Apostles, there was a Gospel published under the
Patronage of his name, which is mentioned by Eusebius and others, and condemned
with the rest by Gelasius Bishop of Rome, it having been before rejected by
others. Under his Name also were published Traditions, cited by Clemens of
Alexandria, from whence, past doubt, the Nicolaitans borrowed that saying of
his, which they abused to so vile a purpose, under the Patronage of his Name.
Likewise the Marcionites and Valentinians defended many of their most absurd
and Heretical Opinions. But of this enough.

The End of the Life of St. MATTHIAS.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. MARK the Evangelist.
THis Evangelist bearing a Roman Name, is thought to receive it either upon the
Account of some Employment, or for that he assumed it when he traveled into
the Roman Provinces; which was usual with the Jews. Born he was past doubt of
Jewish Parents, originally descended of the Tribe of Levi, and is said by
Nicephorus to be Sister's Son to Peter: But in that it is agreed upon from all
hands, that he is mistaken; taking John surnamed Mark, the son of Mary, for
this St. Mark who is reckoned one of the Seventy, and was as most supposed,
Converted by St. Peter after the death of our Savior, whose Companion he was
for a considerable time, and went with him as an Interpreter or Expounder of
his Doctrine to the People. By St. Peter he was sent into Egypt, where he
preached the Gospel, and Converted many to the Faith; who for a long time
afterward kept up to the strictness of Christianity; but he did not long
confine himself to those parts, but removed to Libya, where he likewise
Converted many, and gained great applause by reason of the Miracles he wrought,
as he passed through the Countries of Marmarica and Pentapolis; when having
reclaimed them from their Idolatries, he returned to Alexandria in Egypt,
where he boldly preached the Doctrine of our Savior, and reproved the People
for bowing to Stocks and Stones, telling them plainly, that unless they turned
to God and repented with their whole hearts, they would be eternally miserable.
Upon which Satan fearing the overthrow of his Kingdom, bent all his Malice to
stir up the People to destroy the Evangelist: when it being the time of Easter,
at what time the great Solemnities of Serapis, one of their reputed gods
happening to be Celebrated: Whilst St. Mark was intent at Divine Worship, the
Barbarous Multitude broke in upon him, and fastening Cords about his Feet
dragged him through the Streets (...) a most inhumane manner, so that his Flesh
was torn off by the Craggyness of the way; when not satisfied with this, they
cast him into a Prison near the Sea, where he was comforted in hi^ Agony by a
Divine Apparition. The next morning they drew him forth again, till by the
extreme effusion of Blood his Spirits failed, and he gave up the Ghost, after
which as Me^aphrastus adds, they kindled a large Fire and burnt his Body; the
remains of which being preserved by such as he had Converted to the Christian
Faith, were deposited in the place were he was wont to preach and that such
part of him as remain was afterward carried to Venice, and there kept in (...)
Church built to the Honor of that Evangelist, being one of the stateliest
Piles now extant in Europe. He suffered in the Month Pharmuthi, or as it is
with us April, on the 25th. day of the said Month, and as several Ancient
Authors have it, in the 14 year of the Reign of Claudius the Roman Emperor;
though St. Hierom places it in the 8 of Nero. As likewise Nicephorus will have
it in the Reign of Tiberius, which is most unlikely of all others, by reason,
as St. Ireneus says, that he survived both St. Peter and St. Paul, who both
suffered under Nero.

It is said of him that he being at Rome with St. Peter, he there wrote his
Gospel at the earnest request of the Christians. As to the description of his
Person, he was of a middle size, his Nose long, his Eyebrows turning back, his
Eyes graceful and amiable, his Head, in his declining age, bald, his Gate
quick, and the Constitution of his Body strong and healthful; he being of a
very Courageous Mind, as appears by his boldly preaching the Gospel to the
Barbarous Nations, and reproving them of their Idolatry though at the cost of
his own Life. And thus much shall suffice in relation to this Holy Evangelist.

The End of St. MARK'S Life.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. LUKE the Evangelist.
ST. Luke was born at Antioch the Chief City of Syria, and there brought up in
all manner of Learning; that place being accounted the Academy or Chief place
of Humane Policies. Not did he only confine himself to that place, but as many
that write on him Affirm, he studied in most of the Schools of Greece and
Egypt. Skilful he was in Painting beyond any of his time; and it is confirmed
by many, that he drew the Picture of the blessed Virgin so exactly to the Life,
that it was wondered at by all that beheld it.

That he was a Jewish Proselyte is certain, being according to the report that
Epiphanius gives (...) him, one of the 70 Disciples; the inference from whence
he takes that belief, being the Evangelist own Confession, whereby he declares
that he wa^ not an Eyewitness and Minister of the word. After he had been
inspired by the Sacred Spirit of Truth he set forward to Preach the Doctrine of
o^ blessed Lord, and joined himself with St. Pa^^ though Nicephorus will have
it that he met St. Pa^^ at Thebes, the Metropolis of Boeotia; though (...)
Sacred Writ no mention is made, that ever St. Pa^^ was there, nor can we find
it in any writings b^ his own; which makes most Imagine it is ground^ upon his
bare Conjecture, but that he was with S^ Paul both at Jerusalem and Rome is
certain; n^ did he desert him in any of his troubles, but always proved a
steady and faithful Friend and Minister. He it was that wrote the Acts of the
Apostles and there we find him all along; when he is speaking of St. Paul's
Voyage to Rome, he speaks all of himself which could not be unless he was
present with him; nor is it at all to be questioned that he was with him at
Rome in his Confinement, nor that he carried Messages from the Apostle to the
Churches to strengthen and support them, most of the Fathers being of Opinion,
that it was meant of our Evangelist, when St. Paul mentions these words, the
Beloved brother whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches.

Nor is it in all likelihood probable that he left the Apostle, till Death made
a fatal (though in one sense happy) separation, by Crowning him with Martyrdom;
though Metaphrastus would have it, that he left St. Paul at Rome, and returned
to Preach the Gospel in Egypt, Lybia and other Eastern Countries, and that
there by working Miracles, and powerful Preaching, he Converted a great number
to the Faith; settling Religion under a set form and order by Instituting
Guides and Pastors to Instruct and Confirm the People in his Absence, and that
he himself was Bishop of Thebais. But on the Contrary, Epiphanius tells us that
he preached the Gospel in Dalmatia, Galatia and France; and that from thence he
went into Italy and Macedonia, where he run many great hazards of his Life, by
reason that in many places the inveterate Jews stirred up the People to stone
him, yet he undauntedly persevered in his teaching all men the way to Saving
Knowledge; until at last the Devil so far inspired several Barbarous Villains
with Malice and Revenge as to destroy the Holy Man; but as to the manner and
place of his death the contest amongst the Ancients is not fully decided to
this day, some affirming that he dyed in Egypt; Others in Greece and the Author
of the Roman Martyrology will have it in Bythinia. And Dorotheus contradicting
him, will have it at Ephesus; some again there are, that say he died a Natural
Death. But Nazianzen and Paulinus Bishop of Nola, with some others, positively
affirm that he received the Crown of Martyrdom.

Of which Nicephorus gives us this following Account, viz. that St. Luke coming
into Greece, successfully Preached the Gospel, Baptizing many Converts into the
Christian Faith, and working many Miracles; till at last a Party of Infidels
(encouraged by their Priests, whose Idolatrous Worship the Evangelist sharply
reproved) fell at unawares upon him, and forcibly dragged him to the Place of
Execution, where not having a Cross in readiness, they hanged him upon an Olive
Tree, in the Eightieth year of his Age, or as St. Hierom has it, in the Eighty
fourth.

Now contrary to this, Kirstenus having taken it from an Ancient Arabic
Author, tells us, that he suffered Martyrdom at Rome, which might perhaps be
after St. Paul's first imprisoment there, and his departure from that City,
when probably St. Luke was left behind as his Substitute or Deputy, to
strengthen and confirm the Brethren in his Absence, and so might suffer in the
General Persecution under Nero; and the main Reason that has induced many to
give more than ordinary Credit to this Relation, is, because he no longer
continued his History of the Acts of the Apostles: for had he outlived Paul or
Peter, he would, past doubt, have recorded so remarkable a Transaction as their
Martyrdoms, and have given a larger Account of the state of the Church. But
certain it is that he was put to Death. Nor are some wanting who affirm that
his Body was at the Command of Constantine the Great, or his Son Constantius,
brought to Constantinople and there solemnly interred in the Great Church,
Founded there to the Honor of the Apostles.

That he was not only a man of great Learning, but also, more than ordinary,
inspired by the Holy Spirit; his two Books, viz. his Gospel, and the Acts of
the Apostles testify: In the former he sets down the Life of our Savior, and
many of his glorious Works and Actions, from the time of his Birth, till the
time of his glorious Ascension; though, as many Believe, he never saw our
Savior, or at most had little or no Converse with him. As for his second Book,
we may imagine that he took great pains to Travel with the Apostles, especially
with St. Paul, as I have before recited, that by that means he might be the
better enabled to give a faithful Account of their Actions, that so he might
Record them for the benefit of the Church in all Ages. And thus much for the
Glorious Life and Death of this blessed Evangelist, whose praise is in the
Gospel, and his immortal Soul singing Halelujahs before the Throne of the Lamb,
who lives for ever and ever.

And thus I shall conclude the Holy Lives and Victorious Deaths of the Ever
blessed Apostles and Evangelists, who all of them (St. John excepted) sealed
their Testimonies with their Blood; following the Example of their great
Master, who went before to prepare them a Mansion, not built with hands, but in
the highest Heavens. Whose coming into the World, and laying down his Life for
the Redemption of Lost Man, and for the blessed Examples of those his constant
and courageous Servants and Followers, let us give all possible Praise and
Thanks to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three Persons,
and one God blessed for evermore, Amen.

The End of the Apostles Lives.
The Life and Martyrdom of St. IGNATIUS.
HAving run through the Lives of the Blessed Apostles and Evangelists, I shall
now proceed to give the Reader a view of such Worthies, who, next to them,
fought successfully under the Victorious Banner of our great Captain, the Lord
Jesus, and through him became more than Conquerors. And first I shall begin
with St. Ignatius; but lest any at first view should think him to be the Popish
Ignatius, which Founded the Order of the Jesuits, these are to satisfy, that
this Ignatius was Born, nay suffered Martyrdom several hundred years before
Popery was known, and above a thousand years e're the destructive Order of
Jesuits had Being. But to my purpose.

St. Ignatius, as himself testifies, was born 12 years before the Crucifixion
of our Savior, he having with his proper Eyes beheld him in the Flesh; he
being, as many think, one of those little ones that our Savior commanded his
Disciples to suffer for to come unto him, nay some go farther, and affirm, that
it was he whom our blessed Lord set in the midst of his Disciples, when they
contended one with another about Superiority, and Precedence. However he was
endued with a more than ordinary Portion of the Divine Spirit, and succeeded
St. Peter in the Pastorship or Government of the Church of Antioch, where he
labored diligently in the Ministry of the Gospel Converting and Confirming
many to and in the Christian Faith, being a great opposer of the Heresies or
Erroneous Opinions that had sprung up in the Church. But the Devil, that Enemy
of the Gospel soon plotted his destruction; for Trajan returning from the
Parthian War, commanded a Gratulatory Sacrifice to be offered to his gods in
every City, for the Victory he had obtained; and at his coming to Antioch,
Ignatius was required to be present and assisting at the Sacrifice, by such as
willed his destruction, they thinking they could not have a fairer opportunity
to work his Ruin. But he utterly refusing such a detestable wickedness, was
brought before the Emperor, where to his Face he did not only deny so to do,
but sharply reproved him for his Idolatry, worshipping false Gods, and Images
made with hands: Upon which the Emperor in a Rage commanded that a Guard of
Soudiers should carry him to Rome, and there to cast him in Prison till his
Arrival.

Whereupon he was carried by short Journies through Asia, but in his way he was
no whit unmindful of his Charge, for as he went, strictly Guarded, he Preached
the Apostles Doctrine, and Confirmed a great number that were wavering; as
likewise strictly charged them to beware of Heresy and endeavor to extirpate
it, which else like Tares would greatly annoy the Churches wheat: sending
several Epistles to the Churches, earnestly desiring them to continue steadfast
and put their trust in the Lord.

When he came to Smyrna, where Polycarp was Bishop, he wrote an Epistle to the
Church of Ephesus, directing it to Onesimus their Pastor, desiring him to have
a care of Christ's Flock, and like a good Shepherd diligently feed them with
the spiritual Food of the Everlasting Gospel, which is able to make men wise
unto Salvation; as also another to the Church of Magnesia, which he directed to
Dama their Bishop, another likewise he wrote to Polybius, Pastor of the Church
of Trallis; with which he sent an Exhortation, desiring him to be Courageous,
and not to decline the Crown of Martyrdom, if offered; putting him in mind of
the Sufferings of our blessed Lord and Savior, and of the Joy he was to
receive if he continued faithful to the end: telling them of his cruel usage in
his way to Rome, and how ready he was to suffer for Christ's sake; Concluding
with these words, Let Fire, Cross, breaking of Bones, quartering my Members,
crushing my Body, or all the torments that Men and Devils can invent, befall
me, so that I may but enjoy my Lord Jesus.

When he came to Rome he wrote to Policarp, a godly Pastor, to take into his
Care and Charge the Church of Antioch, whilst he could Elect a fit Person to be
Bishop in his Room; whereby he proved himself to be a just and sincere man, who
even in death was mindful of his Flock.

When the day of his Martyrdom came, he cheerfully said, I am God's Corn, when
the wild Beasts have ground me to powder with their teeth I shall be his white
bread. He suffered Martyrdom the 11th. year of Trajan, being, as many of the
Ancients affirm, Torn to pieces by wild Beasts in the Theater to make the
Tyrant sport. And thus ended the Life of this good Man, who upon many occasions
was wont to say, Amor meus Crucifixus est; My Love is Crucified, meaning either
Christ the Object of his Love, or that his darling Sins and Affections to the
World were Crucified; and in another place he declares that he beheld the Lord
after his Resurrection before he Ascended.

The Life and Martyrdom of POLYCARP, Bishop of Smyrna.
THis Polycarp was Disciple to St. John, when on a time going with St. John to
the Bath, and observing Cerinthus the Heretic therein, he cried out, Let us
speedily hence, for fear that the Bath, wherein our Lord's Adversary is, do
fall upon our heads.

After he had for many years taught his Flock, instructing and confirming them
in the way to Eternal Life, the wicked Jews that dwelt at Smyrna, went to the
Roman Proconsul and grievously complained that the Bishop went about to pervert
the People, and to raise up Innovation, which would prove destructive to the
Empire, if not in time restrained. Whereupon Order was given for the
apprehending him, when at the earnest entreaty of the Christians he retired to
an adjacent Village; but the Pursuers upon notice of his being their came after
him at full Cry, of which he being informed, removed thence to another Village,
some distance thence.

When the mad multitude having sought long in vain. In the first Village they
pursued him to the second, and there apprehending two Boys, they scourged them
so cruelly that one of them confessed where the Holy Man lay, and directed them
to his Lodging; from whence although he might have escaped their hands, he
refused, saying, the will of the Lord be fulfilled, when they had beset the
house he came down to them, and told them he was the man they sought, when
beholding his Gravity and Cheerful Countenance many repented that they had
employed themselves in so ill a work, wishing that they had never undertaken
it. After a while he invited them in, and ordered meat to be set before them,
only requesting the favor to have an hours time to Pray in private; the which
they granted: the fervency of whose Prayers being heard by many of his
Persecutors, they could not abstain from weeping, and were forced to confess he
was a good man.

Now the Night before the Morning he was apprehended, he had a Vision, and
therein he thought the Pillow that was under his head was consumed to Ashes,
with which he acquainted several of his Friends, and from thence Prognosticated
that his Life was almost at a period.

After he had prayed, he came to those that were to carry him before the
Proconsul, who set him upon an Ass, and so brought him to Smyrna; where he
arriving, (upon the solemn Feast day) was met by Herod and his father Nicetes,
who were Rulers under the Proconsul; the former of which greeting him kindly,
took him up into his Coach or Chariot, and began to commune with him after this
manner, What will it injure you, or what harm is it to say, Lord Caesar, or to
Sacrifice and be saved? To which he meekly replied, I will not, neither dare I
do according to your Counsel. From which, and several other Speeches of the
Holy Man, Herod gathering that he could not work upon him by fair means, he
began to threaten him, and at last tumbled him out of his Chariot; which he
took with exceeding Patience, when, as it is recorded in some of his Epistles,
a Voice was heard from Heaven, saying, Be of good cheer, O Polycarp, and play
the man.

When he came before the Proconsul, he demanded of him, whether he was that
Polycarp of which he had heard such complaints? but beckoned to him to deny
that he was the man; but when he saw he would not deny himself, he desired him
to tender his safety, and have regard unto his Age, saying, Swear by the
Fortune of Caesar, Repent of what is past, and say, Remove the wicked. Upon
which Polycarp, looking steadfastly upon his Accusers said, Remove these wicked.
But notwithstanding the Proconsul urged him again, saying, Swear and I will let
thee go; Blaspheme and defy Christ and thou shall be safe. To which the good
Man replied, fourscore and six years have I served Christ, neither has he ever
offended me at any time, and how then can I revile my King that has thus
preserved me. The Proconsul urged him again to swear by the Fortune of Caesar.
To which he replied, that the Christian Religion taught Obedience to all
Governors, but to swear by his Fortune out of vainglory he absolutely
refused. Upon which he threatened him with wild Beasts, Fire, and other
Torments; but he stood resolute in his Faith, saying, You threaten me with Fire
which shall last but an hour, and is quickly quenched, but you are ignorant of
the everlasting fire at the day of Judgment and of those endless torments which
are reserved for the wicked; but why delay you? appoint me to what death you
please. Which the Proconsul hearing was amazed at his Courage, and commanded
the Crier to Proclaim thrice in the midst of the Theater, that Polycarp was a
Christian. But this not at all appeased his Enemies, who thirsted after nothing
more than his Blood, and thereupon desired the Proconsul that he might be
thrown to the Beasts; but he alleging the time for the Game of Beasts was
past, they prayed that he might be exposed to the flames to which last he
consented; and thereupon the multitude led him away, Crying, this is that
Doctor of Asia, the Father of the Christians, the overthrower of our Gods, who
has taught many, that our Gods are not to be Adored. Every one of them
fetching wood from their Shops and Houses.

When the Pile was reared, the Holy Man put of his Apparel being assisted
therein by the Faithful Christians, that came to take their last Farewell all of
him, striving to touch his Body, as accounting it no small Honor. When he was
naked, the Infidels offered to nail him to the Stake; but he desired them to
forbear, saying, Suffer me even as I am, for he that has given me strength to
come to this Fire, will give me patience likewise to persevere therein, without
your fastening me with Nails. Upon which he put up his Prayers to Heaven, with
great Fervency giving all Laud and Praise to God, that he had been pleased to
bring him to such a glorious End, whereby he knew that he accounted him worthy
to suffer for his Names sake.

When he had ended his Prayer, the Tormentors kindled the Fire, the which
though raged fearfully to the Appearance of the Beholders, yet it bent
Archwise, and touched not his Body, which at that time sent forth a fragant
smell like Frankincense, when as the Cruel Persecutors perceiving he stood
uninjured by the Flame, their Rage increased, whereupon they called a
Tormentor, who with a Spear run him into the Body; out of which Wound issued
such a stream of Blood, that it quenched the Fire; to the great Amazement of
the Beholders. Yet the Malice of the Jews proceeded farther, for they, not
content with his death, stirred up Nicetes to move the Proconsul not to deliver
his Body to the Christians, least (said they) they should forsake the
worshipping of Jesus and worship him. Whereupon the Proconsul ordered it should
be Consumed to Ashes. And thus Ended this good Man, who died Anno Christi 170,
changing his Mortal for Immortal Life.

The Life and Martyrdom of Dionysius Areopagita.
Dionysius Areopagita was an Athenian by Birth, descended of Noble Progenitors;
and in his youth having attained to the Excellency of Learning in Philosophy,
Astronomy, and all other Humane Sciences. He lived in our Savior's time, and
he it was that at the Death of our blessed Lord, beholding the dreadful
darkness that then happened, said, that either the God of Nature suffered, or
that the frame of the world would be dissolved. And farther, that God unknown
in the Flesh did suffer, for whose cause the Universe was covered with thick
darkness. And yet at that time he was but a Heathen; yet being chief Judge of
the Court of the Areopagites, seated on the hill of Mars near Athens, he was
there Converted by St. Paul, at what time the People brought him before him, to
give Judgment against him for Preaching against their Gods, and despising their
Altars; as also his Wife was Converted at the same time, whereupon he not only
delivered the Apostle from the rage of the multitude, but kindly entreated him;
to requite which kindness, after he had openly professed Christianity, St. Paul
constituted him Pastor of the Church at Athens, where he used such diligence,
that by his Example many renounced their Idolatries, after he had continued
there a while he went to Ephesus there to visit St. Paul and St. John, at whose
Request, after having appointed Publius to Officiate in his Absence, he went to
Rome; and from thence was sent by Clemens into France, where he Converted many
to the Faith, not only of the meaner sort, but likewise the Noblest of that
Country; upon which the Heathen Priests used their utmost endeavors to oppose
him; and not only so, but hired certain Villains to make him away, who when
they beheld the man, such a Luster darted from his Face, that many of them
fled, trembling and amazed: and those that stayed, were so chilled with fear,
that they could not do him any harm, yet such was the Malice of his Enemies
that they prevailed with the Prefect to cause him to be apprehended together
with several of his followers, for despising and contemning the Worship of
their Gods, when coming before the Prefect, he admonished him to confess his
Error, that by his Recantation the People may see how they had been traduced,
and by that means return to their former Worship: but the holy Man replied,
that the gods which they worshipped were no gods; adding, that there was but
one only true God, as he had Preached, whereupon the Prefect enraged, caused
him to be beaten; and when he saw that prevailed nothing with him, he Condemned
him to be Beheaded; the which to put him the greater Torment, was done with a
blunted Sword, on the top of the Mount without the City, where kneeling he said
with an Audible Voice, O Lord God Almighty, thou only begotten Son, and Holy
Spirit; O Sacred Trinity, which art without beginning, and in whom there is no
division, receive the soul of thy Servant in peace, who is put to death for thy
Cause and Gospel. After which he submitted his head to the strokes of the
Executioner: Suffering Anno Christi 96, and of his Age 110.

The Life and Martyrdom of Justin Martyr.
JVstin Martyr was born at Neapolis, a City in the Country of Palestine, being
Son to Priscus Bachius; who during his Nonage caused him to be instructed in
learning who by his Acute Wit and ready understanding, attained to such
perfection, that he became a famous Philosopher: But not resting there, he
sought for something more Divine, and thereupon tried most of the Schools and
Learned Men of that Age. Insomuch that for his more than ordinary acquirements
he was esteemed by all that knew him; but when he grew up to perfect years, he
still contemplating upon the nature of Divine Beings; at last it pleased God to
put in with his Holy Spirit, and by the means of Saving Knowledge, to give a
right unstanding of what before he beheld but dimly.

The means that first brought him to embrace Christianity, was his beholding
the constant undaunted and Courageous suffering of such as laid down their
Lives for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus. He being thus grounded, one day as
he was walking upon the Seashore, he met an old man of Venerable Aspect; who
after some Discourse told him, That Philosophy could not direct him to Heaven,
for that it was a Science that was clouded from the true Knowledge of God, and
Eternal Life. And upon reasoning with him about the immortality of the Soul,
and a future state of Happiness, he so Confirmed him, that he from that time
was a strict Professor of Christianity and a great opposer of Heretics and
such a fomented divisions in the Church, by his Learning confounding their
Arguments in several Disputations not only at Ephesus, but in many other places.

He drew up an Apology in the Defense of the Christian Religion, showing the
unlawfulness and wickedness of Persecution, which he sent to the Emperor and
Senate of Rome, as also he sent a Letter to Vrbicius, Lieutenant of the City,
in defense of the Christians, and the Religion they professed, charging him,
that he put men to death only for their bare Profession, and that without any
due Examination which was contrary both to the Laws of God and Man; and, by
laying open the Holy Lives of the Christians, so far prevailed with the
Emperor, that he sent Letters to his Governors in Asia strictly charging them
not to put any to death for their Religion, unless there were some notorious
Crimes proved against them.

After his having painfully preached the Gospe^ in many Countries, at last he
came to Rome, where he had many Contests with the Philosophers and Sages; and
was at last by the procurement of on^ Crescens, Condemned and accordingly
Beheaded, Anno Christi 139; and as Epiphanius has it, under the Reign of Adrian
himself, having some tim^ before Prognosticated his own death. And so fe^^ this
Faithful Labourer in Christ's Vineyard.

The Life and Martyrdom of St. IRENEUS.
IReneus was born in Asia, though his Parents were Grecians; who, as some
think, fled thither to avoid the storm of Persecution. In his green years he
was under the Tutorage of Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, who as you have have heard
suffered for the Faith.

Growing up to Maturity, he went into France; where he was ordained a Minister
of the Church at Lions; and there taught and instructed his Flock even in the
most perilous times; not only by reason of the Persecutions that were raised by
the Heathen Emperors, but by the Troubles that happened by reason of the Sects
and Heresies that sprung up; yet he so wisely ordered his Affairs, that in a
short time he brought things into a peaceable condition: when, after the
Martyrdom of Photinus, he was by the General consent of the Brethren made
Bishop of Lions, where he continuing for the space of 23 years brought a number
over to the Faith of Christ, and confounded the Doctrine of the Heretics, as
Montanus, Theodosius, Alcibiades, Maximilian and others, who spread abroad
their Infection to corrupt Christianity: after which he sent Letters to
Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, to desire him to be diligent in keeping the
Church in perfect Unity. He wrote five Books against Heresy, wherein he
likewise set down the damnable Doctrine of the Heretics.

After he had sat Bishop for some, and dispensed with many difficulties, God
was pleased to give Peace to his Church, but it continued not long for after
the death of Commodus, Severus succeeding, he raised up the fifth Persecution;
during which, the Christians went to wreck on all sides, but especially at
Lions: Insomuch that by reason of the number that were slain, the Blood in
abundance ran down the Pavements; when, after some time, this Holy Man being
taken, with several of his Chief Friends, they were led to the top of a Hill,
on which were placed Crosses on one hand, and Idols on the other; and they put
to their Choices either to embrace the Idols, and live, or to be Crucified:
upon which they joyfully chose the latter, suffering Martyrdom Anno Christi
182, and of Ireneus his Age 60, or as some will have ^^90.

The Life of Tertullian.
TErtullian was by Birth a Carthaginian, descended of Noble Parentage, his
Father being a Centurion of the Proconsular Order; an Office in great esteem
amongst the Romans. He in his youth gave himself wholly to study and attained
to such Perfection, that he was admired by all men, his Praise being left upon
Record by many of our Modern Divines.

At his first entry upon Christianity he was made a Presbyter; in which state
he continued teaching and instructing such as he could, in the Principles of
Religion, till about the middle of his Age, being a great opposer of the Sects
of Heretics, which then began to swarm in most Countries where the Gospel had
been planted. He living in the Persecution under Severus, was a great defender
of the Christians from such as sought their Lives, not only by his Arguments
even to the Convincing of their Adversaries, but also by protecting them from
their Rage and Malice, and by his Godly persuasions so wrought upon the
Emperor, that he was contented to stay the Persecution for a time, during
which interview he wrote several excellent Books against the Heretics; some of
which are extant to this day, and especially that, De Corona Militis, which he
wrote upon the occasion of a Christian Soldier's refusing to wear a Laurel
Crown upon his head, in Token of Victory; alleging, that it did not become
Christians to wear Crowns in this Life. His manner was to pray thrice a day.

In his Writings about Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell, he tells us that when
he was a Heathen he scoffed at those things that he now preached, and that
therefore he did perceive that we were not born but made Christians.

His Conversion grew by Reading the Scriptures, and duly weighing them;
declaring that whatever was done was in them foretold; and after his Conversion
he was taken up Night and Day in Reading and Expounding them; getting them for
the most part by heart, yet notwithstanding his great Learning, he at last fell
into a Relapse by adhereing to the Doctrine of Montanus; which greatly Eclipsed
the Glory of his former Life. He died Anno Christi 202, and of his Age 63.

The Life of Origin.
Origin was Born of Christian Parents, Anno 189 being Son to Leonides who
trained him up in all good Literature, and so well instructed him in the
grounds of Christianity, that he in a short time was too hard for his Teacher;
at which his Father inwardly rejoiced, though he outwardly seemed displeased,
and would often whilst he was sleeping kiss his naked breast, as the Temple
wherein the Holy Ghost had chosen to dwell.

Whilst he was yet a youth the storm of Persecution grew loud against the
Church, by which his Father was taken from him and carried to Prison, whom he
would have followed at the peril of his own Life, had not his Mother, by hiding
his Clothes, restrained him; yet he writ to him earnestly admonishing him to
continue faithful unto the end, and not alter his opinion, as indeed he did,
being put to death for Christ's sake, and had all his Goods confiscated.
Whereupon his Mother being left to shift for him and his Brother, they for a
while suffered extreme penury; insomuch that he was obliged to maintain himself
by keeping a School, where he at leisure hours greatly improved his studies;
when a while after Providence so ordered it, that both he and his Mother,
together with his Brother, were entertained in the House of a rich Matron,
whereat his coming he found one Paulus a Heretic, who by his courteous demean
had gained great repute, not only with the Lady but with many others who
frequented his Lectures. Yet Origin all that in him lay shunned his Company,
and would never be persuaded to join with him in Prayer, his daily business at
spare times was to visit such as were imprisoned for the Faith, to Instruct,
Comfort, and Relieve them; and usually followed them to the place of Execution,
though he greatly endangered himself thereby: Being once carried in order to be
stoned to death, but God miraculously delivered him from the hands of the
Heathen multitude, and prevented their wicked purpose. Nay, so extremely was he
hated by the adversaries of the Church, that oftentimes a Guard of Soldiers
were obliged to watch the House where he was for his safety.

He along time continued at the beforementioned house, Preaching to, and
Exhorting those that came to him. A number daily resorting, not only of men,
but Women and Virgins; upon which to avoid Temptation he Gelded himself, as
misapplying the Text wherein it is said, There are some that make themselves
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, for which rash Act of his he was afterward
upbraided by his Fellows.

About this time the Church of Achaia, being much vexed by the Heretics,
Origin was sent thither by the Brethren, with Letters which empowered him to be
assisting to extirpate the Heresy, and make up the discord that was happened.
When in his Journey he was by the Bishop of Palestine made a Presbyter, when he
was arrived there he grew so famous, that not only the Christians, but the
Heathens came far and near to hear him Preach, which so much Eclipsed the fame
of Demetrius the Bishop, that he strove by all means to disgrace him; and
thereupon published several scandals of him to the World, and amongst the rest
that of gelding himself. Yet the Holy man like the Palm Tree, the more he was
oppressed the more he grew, continuing to Preach in Palestine, and Caesarea,
where Mammaea the Emperors Mother hearing of his fame, sent for him, and by
his Instructions was confirmed in the Faith. He it was that reclaimed St.
Ambrose from his Haeretical opinions.

Certain it is that he suffered many great afflictions during the Persecutions,
as Imprisonment, Racking with Iron bars, Confinement in Dungeons and the like;
with many terrible threats of death, when at last hearing that several
Christians were carried to the Temple of an Idol in Alexandria to burn Incense,
he ran thither and earnestly exhorted them rather to suffer death than consent
to such a wickedness; where he was no sooner arrived, but the multitude let go
those they had brought thither, and laying hold of him they haled him to the
Altar, and there proposed, that he would either offer Incense to the Idol, or
defile his Body with an ugly Black-more; whereupon being in a great straight
they forced the Censer into his hands, and whilst he trembling held it, they in
the like manner obliged him to cast the Incense into the fire; upon which they
all bawled out, Origin has Sacrificed, Origin has Sacrificed, upon which the
Church Excommunicated him, which so much grieved him, that had he not been
supported by the Divine Spirit he had fallen into despair. A long time he
mourned in silence and much lamented what he had done though unwillingly, many
of his Prayers and Lamentations being yet extant though too tedious to be here
inserted.

After he had continued thus penitent a long he was again received into favor
and whilst he continued at Alexandria, a Messenger came from the Governor of
Arabia with Letters to the Leiutenant of Egypt to hasten him thither, to
resolve the Governor in several particulars of which he stood much in doubt;
whether he was immediately dispatched, and so confirmed the Governor that he
gave him many rich presents, there likewise he Instructed many, Converting the
Infidels, and Confuting the Heretics, who taught that the Souls and Body dyed
together, and so at the last day would rise together. There likewise Theodorus
and Athenodorus became his Disciples, and gained so much under him, that
shortly after they were made Bishops. And now the Church began to have rest,
but her Capital Enemy was Idle, but ploting all ways imaginable to disturb her
peace, insomuch that Decius succeeding Philip in the Roman Empire, he raised up
another Persecution. In which amongst the rest, Origin suffered many great
afflictions, as Imprisonments, Rackings, Scourgings at Iron-stakes, dark
noisome Dungeons; and his feet for some days stretched two yards asunder in the
stocks, all which he patiently suffered for the sake of his Blessed Master, who
had shed his precious Blood to purchase his Redemption, that so he might follow
him to those eternal Mansions he went before to prepare, for all that
faithfully love and serve him, nor can it be imagined that this great Pillar of
the Church, came any whit short of his blessed expectation.

He died in the Reigns of Gallus and Volusianus Anno Christi 220. and of his
Age 69. leaving behind him many of his Sacred Works, which in all Ages of the
Church have been very profitable, but especially his Tomes upon the Gospel of
St. John, and those upon the Lamentations of Jeremiah, which he wrought during
his being Excommunicated.

The Life and Martyrdom of St. Cyprian.
CYprian was by Birth a Carthaginian, born of Heathen Parents, himself being
likewise trained up in Idolatrous Worship, till such time as God was pleased to
open his Eyes and show him into what hazard of Eternal woe he had plunged
himself. Learned he was in all the Arts and Sciences, that Age was capable off;
though they all shot wide of Saving Knowledge he greatly addicted himself to
the Study of Magic, that Diabolick Art; yet one day going to hear the Ministry
of Caecilius, a Godly Presbyter of Carthage, more out of curiosity than to
profit thereby, but God so effectually wrought that by that good Man's Preaching
out of the Prophet Jonas, our St. Cyprian was thoroughly converted to the
Christian Faith: When as the Carthagians perceiving that he was a true Convert,
and beheld his zeal for the Christian Religion, they prevailed with him to be
ordained a Presbyter, after which he continued amongst them Preaching the
Gospel and exhorting all to be steadfast to the end, and then they would not
fail to receive the promised Crown of Life.

By his constancy in opposing the Enemies of the Church, and his undaunted
Resolution, in carrying on the great work of the Gospel, he grew in a short
time famous amongst the Christians, insomuch that he was made Bishop of
Carthage, and had the governance of all the Churches in Africa; for nothing of
any moment was done without his Knowledge and Consent. Nay, often the Churches
of Spain, and other parts sent to him to have his advice in doubtful matters,
his business at all leisure times was to write to the Pastors of the Churches,
to Admonish them to be vigilant in looking to their Charge, least the Wolves in
Sheeps clothing should get into Gods fold, several of his Excellent Epistles
being yet extant.

He also could predict future events long before they came to pass. He was of a
Free, Courteous and Obliging temper, no ways given to Passion, he greatly
delighted in Reading, and would let no day pass wherein he did not consult some
of the Fathers works, but especially Tertullian; whom he called his Master,
endeavoring nothing more than to keep himself unspoted from the pollutions and
defilements of the flesh.

When a Persecution was raised against the Church by Aemilianus, President of
Egypt, and by Paternus and Galerius Maximus; in which many hundreds of
Christians fell, he wrote an Epistle to the afflicted Church, to tell them that
the true cause of their Persecution, sprung from the division and discords
amongst themselves, For how, says he, can you imagine, but your Enemies will
get advantage over you, when you neglect the Precepts of God, and run headlong
into grievous errors wounding each other by Schisms in the Churches, therefore
Repent from the bottom of your Hearts and God will Repent him of the evil he
intends to afflict you withal.

Long before this Persecution he had a Vision, wherein was represented a
miserable old Man with a careful Countenance, and on his right hand sat a young
man very sorrowful and heavy, and not far off one dancing with a Net out spread
in his hands, calling at several that stood some distance, at which whilst
Cyprian was wondering he seemed to hear a voice saying, Young man that thou
see sit on the right hand is sad and sorrowful, because his precepts are not
observed. But he on the left hand danceth and is merry for that occasion is
given him to get power from the ancient Father to afflict men.

He had likewise another Vision, wherein he was admonished to be sparing in
meats and drinks, least that his mind long given to Heavenly Meditation, might
be drawn away by worldly allurements.

In the beginning of the Persecution he went joyfully in to Banishment lest as
himself declared he should cause the Enemies to rage the more against his
Congregation, he also continued there very patiently till after the Death of
Decius the Emperor, when he again returned to his charge; but had scarce
visited his Friends, before Paternus again exiled him, after his death he came
back again, in hopes of rest but Galerius Maximus succeeding him, he caused
Cyprian to be apprehended, as he was walking in his Garden, giving order to the
Soldiers that they should carry him to the Idol Temple to Worship, and offer
Sacrifice, the which when he refused to do the Pro-Consul breaking out into a
great passion, said, Long have thou lived in a Sacrilegious mind, and have
gathered together men of a wicked Conspiracy, and have showed thy self an Enemy
to the Gods of the Romans, and their Holy Laws; neither could the Sacred
Emperors Valerianus and Galienus, revoke thee to the Sect of their Ceremonies
wherefore I condemn thee to have thy head cut off, to which with a joyful
Countenance Cyprian, replied, do what ever shall be in thy power, and thereupon
he putting of his Clothes delivered them to his Deacons, bidding them give his
Executioner five twenty pieces of Gold for the kindness he was to do him, and
thereby to express he freely forgave him. And then pulling a vail over his
Eyes, he kneeled down and had his head smitten off with a Sword, suffering
Martyrdom for the Testimony of his Lord and Master, Anno 259 and in the 70 year
of his Age, as some have it.

The Life of Eusebius.
EVsebius was Bishop of Caesarea, where he continued for a long time, disposing
and ordering the Affairs of the Church being a Man of great Learning, Mild and
Modest in his behavior. By his Study and Industry he got to be so Famous that
the Emperor Constantine the Great was wont to say of him, that he was not
worthy only to be Bishop of one City or Country, but of the whole Universe. St.
Basil says of him, that he is worthy to be credited for his great Experience;
and St. Hierom declares that Eusebius was a great Student of the Sacred
Scriptures, and together with Pamphilus the Martyr, a most diligent searcher of
the Divine Library. He it was that wrote a great part of the Ecclesiastical
History, and left behind him many famous works of his own Writing.

In his Time, Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, being deposed, as some Authors
report, for the Sabellian Heresy, which caused no small distraction in that
City; the People being divided into two parties, nay, even the Soldiers
themselves, one part standing up for the deposed Bishop, the other were for
bringing in Eusebius, who utterly refused to come to them, and therefore was
highly commended for his Modesty and Moderation by the Emperor, who sent his
Letters to the Governor strictly charging him to put an end to the Division,
or allay the Tumult; the which in a short time was effected, which otherwise
had proved the overthrow of that City.

Within a while after a Synod was assembled at Tire, where all the Bishops
Assembled to put an end to some differences that sprang up in the Church;
whither Eusebius at the request of the Emperor went, and was constituted chief
Judge; which moved the Envy of many against him, and especially Potalomon, who
had in the former Persecution been one of his Fellow Prisoners, and now
exclaimed that he took too much upon, by exalting himself above the rest of the
Clergy; but was soon overcome by the Grave and Mild Speeches of Eusebius.

Many Divines there are that do charge him with Arianism, as denying the Deity
of Christ; but Athanasius declares that he recanted in the Niceus Council. And
Hierom charges him as an open defender of the Arian Doctrine: but on the other
hand, Socrates out of Eusebius's own Writings endeavors to vindicate him from
that Aspersion. And Scultetus Reports thus, Arius, says he, denied the
Eternity and Co-equality of the Son of God; but Eusebius every where professes
his Eternity, though he never seriously believed his Co-equality with the
Father. Yet notwithstanding those Aspersions thrown upon him, the Church has
greatly profited by his Labors, he being a man of great Wisdom and Foresight,
as does appear by the many Books he wrote; some of which have been lost, but
many have been transmitted to Posterity even till now.

He lived to a good old Age, for the most part in Peace and Tranquillity; Dying
Anno Christi 340.

The Life of Lactantius.
HE was by Birth an Italian, when going to Rome, he became a Scholar under
Arnobius where he greatly profited in Sacred Learning, fixing his mind
altogether upon Divine things. Insomuch that with the assistance of God's Holy
Spirit, he in a short time grew famous; when having perfected his studies at
Rome, he departed thence for Bithynia, where he kept a School of Oratory under
the Reigns of Dioclesian and Constantine the Great, at what time he perceiving
that many had fled from their Charge, for to shelter from the Persecution which
raged under the former of these Emperors, he as a Champion stood up for the
defense of the Christian Religion; and both by his Preaching and Writings,
boldly maintained its Verity and Sanctity which may Appear by some of his Books
that are yet extant; notwithstanding which, the Persecution raged fearfully,
insomuch that a great number of the Christians Churches were demolished by
Fire, and the Fire again in some places quenched with their Blood, in which
time, many of his Books were lost, yet he rested secure till it pleased heaven
to allay the Tempest; in which fell no less, as some Authors of note reckon,
than 250000 Christians.

After which the Tyrant dying, Constantine the Great revoked his wicked
Decrees, and comfort^d the Christians; restoring them to their Chur^hes and
Lands. He also sent for Lactantius, and made him Tutor to his Son Crispus,
where when he had continued a considerable time, he departed this Life, dying
Anno Christi 308. He was a man of great parts, both Morally and Divinely Wise;
he was always Liberal, for whatsoever he received, he again distributed it to
such as were in want; Insomuch that notwithstanding the many rich presents he
received at the hands of the Emperor, he died very Poor.

The Life of Athanasius.
AThanasius was an Egyptian by Birth, being born in the City of Alexandria; and
wa^ in his youth taken by Alexander the Bisho^ of that place; who, for his good
liking to hi^ caused him to be instructed in the Knowledge (...) the Scriptures
making him a Deacon, and caus^ him to go with him to the Council of Nice
summoned by Constantine the Great against the Arian^ there, by his sharp
disputes, he confounded the Arguments and false Doctrine, though at the time he
was but a Youth. After the Counc^^ broke up, he returned with the Bishop into
Egy^^ and continued obedient to him. When a litt^^ before the Death of the said
Alexander it was re^vealed to him that Athanasius should succeed him the which
he remembering, when at the point (...) Death, called for him, but he having
notice what he intended, fled and hid himself as being loath to undertake so
great a Charge; and when those that sought him, could not find him, the dying
Bishop with his last breath said, O Athanasius, thou think that thou can
escape, yet shall thou not escape this Office.

The Bishop was no sooner dead, but Athanasius was found out; and though much
against his will made Bishop, at which the Arians and Heretics being greatly
grieved, sought all imaginable ways to entrap him; making many grievous
complaints against him to the Emperor, of all which he cleared himself: yet
ceased not the restless Malice of his Adversaries, but again insinuating
themselves into the Emperor's Favor, they told him that Athanasius was the
chief Cause and principal Contriver of all the Civil Discords that had happened
in the Church; upon which the Emperor summoned him to appear before him; which
he joyfully did, and there bafled all the Objections that were charged against
him, plainly discovering the Malice of his Enemies. Yet could he not rest
quiet, for Arius and his Faction daily sought his destruction; whereupon they
charged him for breaking the Chalice; and that one Arsenius being murdered, he
had cut off one of his Arms to practice Magic withal; and that he had lain
with a Woman by force. To try him for these pretended Crimes, a Council was
called at Tyrus; but upon the hearing of the matter, their Malice was again
bewrayed, the Person said to be murdered, being produced in Court alive; and
the Woman knew him not, but charged one Timothy a Presbyter with the Fact: yet
he fearing that in the Tumult his Adversaries had raised, he might be
Murdered, he by the Advice of his Friends departed secretly to Rome; when as
his Enemies perceiving they had missed of their Aim, they brought other false
Witnesses against him, and in his Absence passed Sentence upon him, and
deprived him of all his Dignities, at which the Emperor being much offended
sent for them to answer for what they had done; yet so far they prevailed with
him by the Assistance of Eusebius that they procured the Bishop's Banishment
into France: After which Arius and his Faction grew strong, and the better to
insinuate himself into the entire favor of the Emperor, he subscribed to the
Articles of the Nicene Council, though much like the Jesuits of our Age, by the
way of Mental Reservation; for having a Paper of his own Erroneous opinions in
his Bosom, When the Emperor asked him whether he did believe all from his
Heart? He said, he did believe all; meaning all that he had written. But not
long after Heavens Vengeance found him out, for he going into a Privy, there
voided his Bowels, and died in that miserable Condition.

After the death of Constantine, his Son Constantius succeeding him, the
Faction so far prevailed with him as to gain him to their Party, and then all
of the Orthodox Religion went to wrack. Great search was there after the
Bishop, and a Decree sent out to kill him wherever they found him. The Bishops
of the True Religion were Imprisoned, Deposed and Massacred; so that now all
places were again filled with Lamentation and Mourning, and Athanasius was
forced to fly from place to place to secure his Life: till at last it pleased
God to move the Emperor to take him into favor, and restore him to his
Bishopric; which fore grieved his Enemies, who again began to lay grievous
Accusations to his Charge, and offered to prove them, but being urged thereto
they could not do it.

When Julian came to be Emperor, at the instance of the Arians he sent to the
Governor of Egypt to Banish Athanasius; but he only hid him till the Death of
that wicked Emperor, maintaining him at his own Charge.

After him Jovianus and Valentinian Ruling the Eastern and the Western Empire,
he was Recalled and Established in his Bishopric; where after all the storms
that were raised up against him, he died in peace at Alexandria, Anno Christi
375; having been Bishop of that See 46 years, during which time he had been in
many great Perils and Hazards of his Life; for not only Bishops but Emperors
and Nations sought his Destruction: but God delivered him out of their hands,
to the Glory of his Name; for his only trust was in God alone, which caused him
often to say, though Armies should encamp about me, yet I would not fear.

He was a man of sound Judgment, of great Integrity and Uprightness; much
beloved of all good Christians, which was seen by the great rejoicing they made
at his Re-installment.

The Life of St. BASIL.
ST. Basil was born in Pontus, of Christian Parents; his Great Grandfather
suffering Martyrdom for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, under Galerius Maximus.
When this Holy Man was grown to years of discretion, he went to Caesarea, a
City in Cappadocia, where he profited much in Learning, excelling in a short
time all of his Age. When he had continued there for some time, he departed to
Constantinople, and from thence to Athens, and afterward to Antioch; in which
places he greatly Improved his Learning; often disputing and confounding the
Arians, who in his time greatly increased. His Fame being once spread abroad,
he was ordained Deacon by Meletius, Bishop of Antioch, and afterward Bishop of
Caesarea, by the Decease of Eusebius his Predecessor.

He had not long been settled in that See before the Emperor Valence, by the
persuasion of the Arians (whose Opinions he strictly Embraced) was prevailed
with to remove him, and put one of their Faction in his room, but when the
Emperor was on his way, news came that his only Son was even at the point
Death, which caused his stay: as likewise his Wife dissuaded him from going, by
telling him of several fearful Dreams, that had presented themselves to her
Fancy, saying all had happened through his persecuting the Christians.
Whereupon he sent for Basil, who coming into his Presence, he speaks to him
after this manner, If thy Faith and Opinion be true, pray that my Son dye not
of this disease. To which Basil replied, If thou will promise me to believe as
I do, and if thou will bring the Church into Unity and Concord, past doubt thy
child shall recover. But upon the Emperor's refusing to consent, he departed;
saying, Let God deal with the child as to him best seems and immediately
after he died.

During the persecution raised by this Emperor he put 80 Presbyters into a Ship
designing to set it on Fire upon the water; when meeting with Basil, he
persuaded him to embrace the Arian Doctrine, promising to promote him to great
dignity; but he undauntedly told him, that such fair Promises were fit only to
entice Children, but that he was taught and nourished by the Holy Scripture and
was ready rather to suffer a thousand deaths, than to suffer one syllable or
Iota of the Scriptures to be altered.

Whereupon the Emperor fell into a Rage, threatening to put him to Death and
Confiscate his goods: but he nothing daunted, replied, he feared not what he
could do to him for that if he put him do death it was only to set him at
Liberty. The Prefect standing by and hearing his resolution, told him he was
mad; to whom he replied, I wish I may be for ever thus mad. Whereupon he had a
nights time allowed him to resolve what was best to be done.

Next Morning, he Preaching in the Church, the Emperor came in with an intent
to disturb him; but beholding the Gravity of the man, and his modest Behavior,
he recanted his purpose, and would have presented him with a large Gift; but he
mildly refused it. A while after the Prefect sending for him, Commanded him to
comply with the will of the Emperor, or there was no way for him but death.
Yet gave him a longer time to consider, but in vain; for he grew yet more and
more confirmed, desiring rather to receive the Crown of Martyrdom, than to dye
a natural Death: which when the Emperor perceived he revoked his Sentence: Yet
at the Instance of the Arians, he consented to subscribe an Edict for his
Banishment; but when he came to write, the Ink would make no impression, though
often tried; as also at that time such a Trembling seized his right hand, that
being terrified he tore the Paper and cast it from him. So that notwithstanding
all the malice of his Enemies, Basil died at Casarea, when he had sat Bishop
there 8 years, departing this Life, Anno Christi 370.

The Life of St. Ambrose.
HE was Born in France his Father being a Roman Prefect, a little after his
Birth as he was lying in the Cradle, a swarm of Bees came and settled upon his
face, and again departed without doing him any harm, which caused his Father to
say, if he lived he would be something great.

After he came to maturity he Traveled to Rome, and there so closely plied his
study, that he in a short time attained to the Excellency of Knowledge in
Divine things. After a while he was appointed by the Emperor Valentinian, to
be Governor of Insubria, and Lieutenant of the City of Millain, about which
time by reason of the Death of the Bishop of that City there happened a great
contest about Electing a new Bishop. Insomuch that the City was like to be in
an uproar, whereupon St. Ambrose going to the great Church, to persuade them to
Peace and Unity, after he had made a short Oration, they all with one consent
cried out, Ambrose, Ambrose, every one now agreeing though greatly divided
before, that he should be their Bishop, which strange Alteration the Bishops
present perceiving, concluded it happened by the Divine Will of God, and
thereupon they confirmed the peoples choice, sending to acquaint the Emperor
with what had happened, who greatly rejoiced thereat, saying, That he thanked
God that he had so approved of his Choice, for that he whom he had set over
them to Govern their Bodies, God had now instituted a Governor of their Souls.

After he was settled in that See, all things became quiet and calm, the
Emperor highly approving of all he did, but after his Death his Wife Justina,
who was much infected with Arianisme, raised him up great trouble; she and her
Son coming to Millain for that purpose, where an Edict was signed for his
Banishment, but the People withstood it even with force, rescuing him from
those that were appointed to bear him thence, when in the mean time news came
that Maximus a Britain had Rebel'd, and that Gratian the Emperor was slain in
France, by Andragathius, and that he advanced with his Army toward Rome: This
news so quel'd the Spirits of the cruel Empress, that she left off what she
intended against this Holy Man, yet did she proceed to infuse the poison of
Arianism into Valentinian her Son, which she did so effectually that he
embraced it to the last; notwithstanding all the endeavors St. Ambrose used to
divert him from it, and to confirm him in the true Doctrine of Christ, which
his Mother perceiving stirred him up against St. Ambrose, whereupon he one day
went with an Army of Soldiers, and beset the Temple where he was Praying,
commanding him to come out, but he refused, saying, That he would not forsake
the Sheepfold of Christ to let the Wolves enter, but that he was ready to dye
where he was, which brave speech so daunted the Youngster, that he retired
without doing him any harm.

During Theodosius's Reign, in the Eastern Empire a great Sedition befell in
the City of Thessalonica which so enraged the Emperor, that at the instance of
one Ruffinus, he sent thither a great power who entering the City, slew many
thousands of the Inhabitants, not discerning between the Guilty and the
Innocent, which so grieved St. Ambrose that he Excommunicated the Emperor, and
would by no means absolve him, though all entreaties were used, till such time
as he had thoroughly Repented him of that rash deed; nor then till he had
established a Law, that all Sentences and Decrees passed in Anger should be
void, and that Thirty days should always pass between the passing of the
Sentence and the Executing the same, to which the good Emperor freely
consenting he was Absolved, and received again into the Communion of the Church.

On a certain time a Wizard sent his familiar Spirit to kill St. Ambrose, but
the Spirit returning told the Wizard that he was so fenced about, that he could
not hurt him. At another time one coming with a drawn Sword to his Bedside to
kill him, his hand on a sudden withered, so that he could not stir it till
upon his hearty Repentance, St. Ambrose prayed over it, and restored it as his
other.

When Eugenius was Emperor, Flavianus the Prefect desired leave of him to
build an Altar of victory in the City of Millain, the which St. Ambrose greatly
opposed, but perceiving he could not hinder it, he departed the City and
returned not till after the death of the Emperor, and his Prefect, who going
out to fight against Theodosius, where Eugenius upon his flight after the
overthrow was slain by his Soldiers and the other fell in the Battle.

After St. Ambrose had sat Bishop about Sixteen years, Death summoned him to
lay down this troublesome Life, for a Life more lasting; whereupon before his
Death, he resolved to provide a Shepherd for his Flock, and for that purpose
sent for one Simplicianus, and ordained him Bishop in his stead, and then after
having given many godly Exhortations to such as were about him, he gave up the
Ghost, Dying in the third Year of Theodorus, Anno Christi 397. To the great
grief of the Christians, whose Champion he had been in the greatest
Persecutions that Hell had raised up to Eclipse the luster of the Gospel.

The Life of St. Hierome.
ST. Hierom was Born at Seridon, a City in the Confines of Dalmatia, Anno
Christi 331. his Father was Eusebius, a Godly and Virtuous Christian. When he
was but a Youth, he was sent to Rome, where he greatly profited in Learning,
especially in the best of Knowledge, viz. The Understanding of the Scriptures,
which be there expounded to many that came to him. Skilled he was in most of
the known Tounges especially in such as were any ways useful to Learning.

Being thus expert he Traveled into France, where he acquainted himself with
the most Learned of that Country, and grew there so famous, that Bonosus would
needs Accompany him in his Travels, when having spent much time in viewing the
Libraries, and Writing out several worthy Books of the Fathers, he returned
into his own Country; where he had not rested long er'e (considering the great
wickedness that reigned in most Cities and Towns) he resolved upon a private
Life, endeavoring what in him lay to persuade some of his Companions to take
part therein with him, and especially Pammachius, but he would not consent.

Yet a while after St. Hierome having settled his affairs, went to Jerusalem to
take a view of all the memorable places; where by reason of the Contagion that
was engendered in the Air, he fell sick, but in a short time having recovered
his health he resolved upon putting his former resolves in practice, and
thereupon retired into a Desert or Wilderness between Syria and the Saracens,
where he continued into a Cave, not having other Company than wild Beasts and
Serpents, except the converse he had with Heaven, and his Books, and having in
his Youth time been somewhat extravagant he much bewailed himself of those
follies, shedding abundance of Tears, and begged of God not to remember the
sins of his Youth, he likewise divided his time into two parts, one for Prayer,
the other for Meditation. He slept very little, his Diet being only Roots,
Herbs, and Water. During his Solitude, he learned most of the Scripture by
Heart, and not only so but he made many excellent Expositions upon the
Prophets, and especially that of Obadiah, sometimes he would walk out of his
Cell to visit some of the Neighboring Monks, who had betaken themselves to a
retired Life, living there truly Religious, their Lives and Manners far
differing from any of our Age.

After he had continued in this state for some Years, he heard there were new
differences sprung up in the Church, whereupon he left his Cell and went to
Rome, where he was no sooner arrived; but all men judged St. Hierome the
fittest person to succeed Damasus the present Bishop. Yet some there wanted
not, who not long after began to Envy his Virtues, charging him for leaving
Rome and departing into Syria, and their living amongst Heathens: Yet he so
excused himself in many particulars, that his Enemies were at last ashamed of
their Accusations, so that he continued at Rome Teaching and Instructing many
in the Faith, and especially the noble Matrons, in the Houses of one of whom he
lived. By this time the Arrians being grown powerful, began to spread their
infection abroad, and at last were so bold as to endeavor the bringing over
St. Hierom to their Party, the reason they had to believe he would adhere to
them, was, because he read Origen's Works: But when he heard what they
intended, he utterly detested against them, and to avoid any scandal he left
Rome, and much Repented him that he had come thither, for now the Church
growing Rich, Christian simplicity, and sincere Religion began to be laid
aside, and Formalities, and Traditions heaped up in their stead.

Having passed through some Countries, and Visited many of his former
Acquaintance, he came again into Syria; and in his Journey he grew into
Familiar Acquaintance with that Worthy Man Gregory Nazianzen, whom he ever
after called his Master. Of him he Learned many things, a while after by the
persuasion of Apollinarius he went to Alexandria, and there completed his
Studies in Divinity by the help of Didymus, and a while after he went and
settled himself at Bethlehem, where he taught the Gospel, and Converted many. So
that growing famous, he wanted not Enemies: For the Arrians fearing he would
prove their Chief Opposer, endeavored by all possible means to blast his Fame,
and there set one Ruffinus to write against him, and to asperse the Truth with
falsehood, which so grieved the Holy Man, that he then resolved to be silent in
the matter no longer, but sharply rebuked the Heretic both by Words and
Writing, whereupon they charged him with many heinous Crimes, but he so managed
the matter that all men plainly discerned their malice.

Some there were that took his part and joined with him against the Heretics,
but he it was that always bore the brunt, being ever perplexed and molested;
nay, his Life put often in danger by these Sects. When after having past over
Thirty Years, as it were in a Sea of Trouble, what with Writing, sitting up
late, hard Studying, and long Journies, he was so spent, that Nature was no
longer able to subsist. Insomuch that we may well say, he Sacrificed himself
for the benefit of the Church, Dying Anno Christi 422. and of his Age 91. He
wrote many large volumns, being a man of singular Chastity, of great Wit, slow
to Anger, and in Learning exceeding most of his Time.

The Life of St. CHRYSOSTOM.
ST. Chrysostom was Born at Antioch, his Fathers Name was Secundus, and his
Mother's Authusa, being both descended of Noble extraction. When he came to
Years of discretion he was put under the Tutorage of Libanus the Philosopher,
where he applied himself to all the Studies of humane Learning, and greatly
reprehended such as lived loose and ungoverned lives, persuading them to
embrace the Doctrine of Christianity, when after a while he persuaded several
of his Companions to cast of the cares of the World, and apply their minds
wholly to the attaining Divine Sapience. He also associated himself with St.
Basil, by whose grave Instructions he greatly profited. A while after his fame
of Learning increasing, he by the Bishop of Jerusalem was made Reader of the
Church of Antioch. In which station he so discreetly behaved himself, that
still he increased in the good opinions of the People; when a while after the
Bishop of Constantinople Dying, he was by the unanimous consent of the Clergy
chose Bishop in his stead, the Emperor highly approving of the choice.

When he was settled in that See, he made it his whole Study to Reform the
Errors that were crept into the Church, as also the Lives of the Clergy, whom
he freely reproved for their faults. When at that time finding a great Schism,
between the Western and Eastern Churches; he labored diligently to unite their
Opinions, nor were his endeavors altogether frustrated.

He Converted many Pagans and Atheists, to the belief and veneration of the
true God. Insomuch that he grew famous throughout all the East, so that the
conflux of People that resorted to his Sermons were exceeding great, and when
he heard that the Bishops of the Churches of Asia, by reason of their wicked
Lives were altogether unworthy to Govern the Churches, He deposed Thirteen of
them, placing Pious and Learned men in their rooms, which aftewards created him
no small trouble: For those that were thus outed gathering their Friends
together, opposed him in many things, raising scandals, and lay grievous Crimes
to his Charge, and amongst the rest they stirred up Eutropius, one of the
Emperors Eunuchs, who was the Emperors especial Favorite. This man procured
of the Emperor that a Law should be made, that if any Malefactor took
Sanctuary, he might be dragged out of the Church to Execution, but to see the
just judgment of God, not long after this Eunuch being Accused for abusing the
Empress, he fled to the Church, and there lay under the Communion Table, when
as the Sunday following St. Chrysostom Preaching, took occasion to discourse
about the unstability of Greatness, and how wicked men though never so highly
exalted stood in slippery Places, when at that time the People carried the
Eunuch out of the Church, and according to the Law that himself had procured to
be Enacted, delivered him up to the Emperors Officers, who at the Emperors
Command beheaded him.

About this time the Arrians began to trouble the Church, by withdrawing many
from the Truth to embrace their Erroneous Opinions, as likewise a great
difference arose in Egypt, some affirming that God the Father had a Body in
humane shape, which others as strongly opposed, but Theophilus the Bishop of
Alexandria, holding with the formers Opinion many of the latter were obliged
for their better safety to fly to Constantinople, there to make their
complaints to the Emperor, as likewise to St. Chrysostom the Bishop who
received them into the Church, which so greived Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamine
in Cyprus, and Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, that they used their utmost
endeavors to stir up the Clergy against him. Whereupon they called a Counsel
of their party and condemned the Books of Origin, then Epiphanius, coming to
Constantinople, made many complaints against Chrysostom, and endeavored to
stir up the People against him, but finding his hopes frustrated, he returned
greatly displeased, and died in his way home.

A while after Theophilus came to Constantinople and there calling a Counsel by
the Command of the Emperor, he so far wrought that they deposed Chrysostom,
and he was thereupon sent into Exile, though much against the minds of the
People who Guarded his House three days to prevent his being carried thence.
But he had not been long absent, before the Emperor revoked his Edict of
Banishment, and he was again restored. But a while after the Empress causing
her Picture of Silver to be set up upon a Pillar near the Church, he sharply
inveighed against it as a means to introduce Images into the Christian
Churches, which so offended the Empress, that she caused another Council to be
summoned; who again deposed him, which was no sooner done but Cyrinus Bishop of
Calcedon, who had most exclaimed against him, had such grievous Sores fell in
his Legs, that they were forced to be cut off, and the same evening such mighty
Hall-stones fell, that the like was never known in that Country, and within
four days after the Empress dyed: Yet he was carried to Cucusus in Armenia,
where he was followed by such a number of People, who came to hear him Preach,
that his Enemies envying his Fame procured a second Edict, to remove him thence
far remote; but upon the way by reason of the extreme heat he fainted away, and
finished his course, receiving the glorious reward of his Labors, the year of
his death I find no where set down, but that he flourished in the Bishopric of
Constantinople, Anno Christi 400 is most certain.

The Life of AUGUSTINE.
AVgustin was born at Thagasta in Africa, of Christian Parents, his Fathers
name being Batrius, and his Mothers Monica, who brought him up to Learning; and
the rather by reason the found him of such a prompt and ready Wit, spending the
greatest part of their Estate to furnish him with such Literature as was
conducing to Saving Knowledge. Yet in his Youth, by keeping Lewd Company, his
Manners were somewhat Corrupted, and something he savoured of the Opinion of
Manichee the Arian.

When he came to Maturity, he kept a School in the City where he was born, and
a while after departing thence he went to Rome; having also taught Rhetoric in
Carthage. When he had stayed at Rome some time, Hearing and Disputing with the
Doctors of the Church, he went thence to Millain, where he grew so famous that
he was chosen Tutor to Valentinian the fifth Emperor where he also had
frequent Converse with Ambrose, Bishop of that See, who within a while
persuaded him from him Errors, and caused him to be baptized. After which he
began to be more studious about Divine things, and to detest against the
Doctrine of the Arians which greatly rejoiced his Mother, his Father being then
dead.

When he had continued at Millain some time, he returned into Africa; where
upon Knowledge of his thorough Conversion, and the strictness of his Godly
Life, he was Chosen Minister of Hippo; in which Station he had not long
continued, e're by his preaching and learned Disputes he grew so famous that
people came from all parts to hear him, when as Valerius the Bishop of that
place hearing they would elect him Bishop of some place and so he should loose
his Company, he caused him to retire for a while. Nor was his suspicions vain,
for he was soon after Elected, and diligently sought for, which when the old
man understood, he made it his request of the Assembly of the Clergy, that were
come thither with the Primate of Carthage, that seeing he was grown old,
Augustine might be his Coadjutor in the Bishopric, which was freely consented
to, to the great rejoicing of the Citizens. Though Augustine declined it
alleging, it was contrary to the Rules of their Church to meddle in the
Bishops affairs during his Life. But at last, by many convincing Arguments
they prevailed with him to take it upon him. After which he so faithfully
performed his Charge, that many admired his Wisdom and deep searching Policy,
by which he confounded the Devices of his Adversaries, the Arians and
Heretics, who now began to envy his Virtues.

A while after he was requested to dispute against the Donatists, who after
much entreaty prevailed with one Fortunatus to be their Champion. The Dispute
held two days in public, all which the Notaries writ down, but in the end
Fortunatus was Non-plus'd, that he could no longer dispute against the
Catholic Faith, nor find Arguments to defend his own Errors; insomuch that in
great shame and confusion, he left the City. St. Augustine likewise disputed of
Faith before all the African Bishops in the Convocation Assembly; and so
learnedly handled the matter, that he gained great applause; and after that
many of the Donatists forsaking their Erroneous Opinions came over to the
Church of Christ.

But whilst this good man was diligently Laboring in God's Vineyard, and to
establish Peace, the Devil was counterplotting him, by stirring up several
wicked Persons to raise Tumults, by beating and murdering such as would not
adhere to their Faction; Robbing the Ministers, and spoiling the Churches worse
than in the Heathen Persecutions: Yet it so pleased God, that by Augustins
powerful persuasions, both in his Sermons and Writings, the Churches in a short
time over-came their Enemies, and regained their primitive Luster especially
those in and near to Hippo.

After a while he caused some of his Books to be translated into Greek, and
sent them to the Eastern Churches, who embraced them as a Blessing, but by that
means his Enemies grew more enraged; insomuch that one time as he went to visit
his Churches, they lay in Ambush to have murdered him, but Providence so
ordered it, that he mistaking the Road went a by way to the place intended, and
so escaped their hands. But such good hap had not one of his Companions, who
was Bishop of Calamen for he falling into their hands as he was riding in his
Visitation of the Churches they took away his Horses, beat and wounded both him
and his Servants; for which the Proconsul fined Crispin their Bishop in two
pounds of Gold; but he pleaded he was no Heretic, but in his Disputation it
was plainly proved against Him; yet Augustine so far prevailed with the
Proconsul, that the fine was remitted.

A while after Honorius the Emperor caused a Council of Bishops to Assemble at
Carthage, where he sent a Tribune to represent his Person, when in this Council
at a general Disputation held, the Factious were worsted; and after that an
other Council being called at Caesarea, where Augustine Challenged Emeritas,
chief Bishop of the Donatists, to a Disputation in Public; but neither
Augustine, nor his Friends and chief Privadoes could persuade him to undertake
it. Notwithstanding others of the Sect disputed with him afterward, and were
overcome, though they falsely boasted that they had overcome him; which caused
him to write all the Arguments over and publish them, to the shame and
confusion of his Adversaries.

He lived in the time when the Barbarous Goths and Vandals broke in upon the
Roman Empire, and tore it to pieces, destroying all before them, like an
overflowing deluge, then the Churches were Fired, Robbed and Beaten down; the
Bishops Murdered, or put to extreme torment, the Ministers racked to death,
and all sorts of People slain on heaps, Virgins deflowered, Women Ravished,
Children pushed against the Pavements, and all manner of Barbarity Exercised;
then it was that the red horse was sent out to take peace from the Earth.

After they had ravaged Italy, they broke into Africa, destroying all before
them, which made many of the Bishops fly from their Charge; but Augustine
continued exhorting and persuading the People to continue firm in their Faith,
resolving rather to suffer the cruellest death, than leave his fold to the
Mercy of the Wolves, all the Cities that held out against the Infidels were but
Carthage, Circe and Hippo; the last enduring fourteen Months siege, being
manfully defended by Earl Boniface. During which time Augustine put up Prayers
daily to Heaven for the Church, and for their Deliverance; when according to
his own desire, God delivered him from the Misery that after happened to others
by taking him out of the World, to a better Life, at the end of three Months
Seige; he dying Anno Christi 430, of his Age 76, and of his Ministry 40. He was
a man of a charitable Disposition very sparing in Diet and a hearty Lover of
all good Men, a great Defender of the Church, and Opposer of Heretics.

The LIFE of Venerable BEDE.
Bid was born Anno Christi 671, at Wyrimunda, by Birth an English Saxon, being
left to shift for himself very young, by reason of the Death of his Parents; he
was by some of his Friends put into the Monastery of St. Peter's and St.
Paul's, under the Tutorage of the Abbot of the said Monastery, where he
Profited greatly in Learning in Philosophy, Astronomy, Music and Poetry, as
also well seen in Greek, Arithmetic, Rhetoric and History, but above all in
Divinity; applying the greatest part of his Study to Expound and rightly
understand the Scriptures.

At Nineteen years old he was made a Deacon, and at thirty a Presbyter; when he
so ordered his Affairs that he soon grew famous, insomuch that he was by the
English Clergy sent to Rome to be assisting to Pope Sergius in settling the
Affairs of the Church, where by his Prudence, Modesty and Mild Behavior he
got himself great Applause.

When the Business for which he went was over, he returned to his Charge, and
exhorted men every where to repent, least God's Judgments should overtake them;
and so far wrought upon many of the Heathen Saxons, that he Converted them to
the Faith; and upon many occasions was wont to say that there was so much work
to do in so little a time, that he would not loose any of it; and that as for
Pleasures, we must only touch them with the Tops of our Fingers as we do Honey,
for fear of surfeting on them.

He wrote of all the Liberal Arts in several excellent Treatises he was a
comely Person, Tall and of a grave Pace; clear Voice, and Eloquent Tongue; a
grave Countenance, a Courteous and Affable Behavior; insomuch that many of the
Nobility sent their Sons to be instructed by him. He wrote several Volumes, as
his Ecclesiastical History, the History of his Monastery, and the History of
the Kingdom; wherein he gives an ample Account of the grievous Calamity that
befell this Nation, during its being divided amongst the Saxon Kings.

In his sickness he was wont to encourage himself with the words of the
Apostle, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son
whom he receives; and when he beheld some of his Scholars weeping over him, he
comforted them with these words; The time is come if my Creator pleases, that
being freed from the Flesh, I shall go to him, who made me when I was not, out
of nothing: I have lived long, and the time of my dissolution is approaching:
and my Soul desires to see my Savior Christ in his Glory. And so gave up the
Ghost, Anno Christi 735, and of his Age 64. When one of his Scholars, desirous
to furnish him with an Epitaph, wrote after this manner, Hac sunt in fossa
Bedae sancti, Ossa; when the next Morning was found in his Tomb as follows,
Hac sunt in fossa Bedae venerabilis ossa; from which, as some think, he had his
name of Venerable, though others affirm that whilst he once was Preaching to
the Congregation, a loud Voice was heard (but from whence it came none could
tell) saying, well done venerable Bede. But so much for my Countryman.

The Life of John Damascene.
HE was born at Damascus, taking as some think his Name from the place of his
Birth, though with some alteration. His Parents were Christians, and carefully
brought him up in the worship of God; and gave him such Learning as was sitting
to complete him for the Studying of Divinity, so that when he came to Maturity
of years, he went to Jerusalem, where he continued for some time and profited
greatly in Learning; Insomuch that he grew famous, and had his Name spread into
most of the Eastern Countries.

Being made a Presbyter at Jerusalem, he preached the Gospel plainly and
powerfully Converting many Pagans to the Christian Faith; and by his Writings
greatly profited the Church, and opposed the Arians and Heretics to the utmost
of his power; by his great Learning Convincing many of their Errors, and
Confounding the obstinate in their own Arguments: But at last having finished
his Course, he yielded to death in certain hope of a glorious Crown of Life and
Immortality; Dying about the year 750. He wrote many Books, but especially his
3 Books of Parallels of the Holy Scriptures, and his 4 Books of the Orthodox
Faith.

The Life of Theophylact.
THeophylact being born in Constantinople, of Christian Parents, greatly
profited in Learning by reason of his prompt Wit and ready Apprehension, so
that applying himself to the Study of the Sacred Scriptures, he soon became a
famous Disputant against the Enemies of the Church. Insomuch that after the
Death of the Bishop of Constantinople, he was by the free consent of the people
with the Approbation of the Clergy, made Bishop of that great City; where he
continued to discharge his Duty, to the great content of all good Christians;
yet not so well, but that the Heretics sought to disturb him, but were always
worsted.

His Chief work was to reform the Churches, into which many Errors had crept
especially those in Bulgaria; so that continuing a faithful Pastor for about
three years, he then yielded up the Ghost and exchanged for a better Life. He
was a man of great Patience; Mild and Meek in all his Actions; exceeding most
of his time in Learning.

The Life of PROSPER.
PRosper had his Birth at Aquitain in Normandy, and by his Parents being put to
School, he so well profited in Learning, that all who knew him admired his
acute Wit and ready Understanding; and after he was qualified in inferior
Schools he became a Scholar under St. Augustine, who instructed him in the ways
of Saving Knowledge as well as Moral Virtue; and so labored with him, that in
a short time he became famous for Piety and Learning, Insomuch that he was made
Bishop of Rhegium, in which Station he continued many years disputing with and
confounding the Pelagian Heretics, who then spread their Pestilential Doctrine
throughout all Christendom. He likewise made Annotations upon the four
Evangelists and was much taken with reading the Scriptures that he was scarce
ever seen without a new Testament in his hand. Charitable he was beyond all
expression, most liberally distributing his Goods to the Poor. He loved to be
called the Peacemaker, as using his utmost diligence to reconcile differences;
and much addicted himself to Watching, Fasting and Prayer, and all things else
that became a Godly and Christian Bishop; and having (under Martian) continued
20 years in that Episcopal See, he fell sick, when as many of his friends
coming to visit him, and he perceiving them to weep bitterly, comforted them
with these words, the Life which I have enjoyed (said he) was but given me upon
condition to render it up again, not grutchingly, but joyfully; for me to have
stayed longer here might seem better for you, but for me it is better to be
dissolved. And so falling into fervent Prayer, he with great Alacrity resigned
up his Spirit into the hands of his Creator: Dying Anno Christi, 466.

He wrote many famous Books that are now Extant, and his usual saying was, that
it was his utmost endeavor to keep a Conscience void of offense both toward
God and man.

The Life of Fulgentius.
FVlgentius, Son to Claudius and Mariana, was Born in Carthage; at what time
Hunerick the Barbarous King of the Vandals, Tyrannized in Africa, his Father
being Imprisoned, and for some time having all his Inheritance taken from him
by the Device of the Arian Heretics, to whose opinions the aforesaid King
began to hearken; yet by the Intercession of his Friends, he obtained part of
his Patrimony, and then departed to Lepte, where he had not stayed long before
he fell sick, and after having settled his Affairs, leaving young Fulgentius to
the care of his Mother he gave up the Ghost.

And now this Godly Youth began more and more to apply himself to the Study of
Sacred things: Yet at last was prevailed with to take upon him a public
Employment, which was to gather the Kings Taxes; in which he used such Mildness
and Moderation, that he Generally obtained the love of the People. But such
business ill agreeing with his Temper, he grew impatient of such public
affairs, and resolved to betake himself to a more retired Course of Life,
having long considered by what means he might best acquire it, he at last
concluded to retire himself into a Monastery, (which in those days were Places
where Sincerity and true Religion flourished though since they have degenerated
into all manner of Superstition and Profaneness) and thereupon one day going
to veiw the place he intended to enter, and perceiving the Quietness, Love, and
friendly Converse that were amongst the Brethren, he broke forth into these
words.

Why travel I in the World which can yield me no future nor durable Felicity,
suitable to my Toil and Labor? Though it be better to weep well than joy ill,
yet if to Joy be our desire, how much excels their Joy who have a good
Conscience before God, who dread nothing but Sin, study to do nothing, but to
accomplish the Precepts of Christ? Now therefore let me change my Trade, and as
before I endeavored against my noble Friends to prove the more Noble, so now
let my care and employment be amongst the humble and poor Servants of God, to
become more humble and poor than they: and like the good Evangelist St.
Matthew, of a Publican let me become a Disciple.

When he had thus said, he resolved to enter himself one of the Society; and
thereupon began to accustom himself to Watching, Prayer and Fasting. Insomuch
that all who knew him, greatly wondered at the sudden alteration; and many
suspecting what he intended, endeavored to persuade him to the contrary, but
in vain, for this Arguments could not remove his fixed mind, but one day taking
his opportunity he went to Faustus a godly Bishop, and Governor of the
Monastery, being Banished from his Diocese by the Tyrant Hunerick; and to him
he disclosed his Intentions, whereat the good Man greatly rejoiced, yet withal
that he should not run upon any thing rashly and, and afterward repent. He
told him what hardship he must undergo relating all the Severity of a Monastic
Life; with which Fulgentius was very well content, and thereupon was entered in
the house which his mother had no sooner notice off, but she came and demanded
him of the Bishop; making many Exclamations, and charging him, that he had
traduced her Son, to the taking away of all her Comfort, and utter decay of her
Family. But he refused to return, although she used many persuasive Arguments
to induce him thereto. Yet did he render her all dutiful respect, earnestly
recommending her to the Protection of Heaven, and freely giving all his Goods
to her and his younger Brother, resolving for the sake of his great Master the
Lord Jesus, not only to leave the World, but to deny himself, and rather run
the hazard of displeasing all, than when he had put his hand to the Plough to
lock back, and thereupon betook him to his Exercise which he observed so truly
that by rigorous Fasting he much impaired his bodily health, yet he delayed not
his devout Studies, but exhorted his Elders to suffer all things for the sake
of Christ.

He had not continued in this state many years, before his Fame was spread
through all the Churches, which caused the Arian Heretics to envy him, and
therefore raising a persecution against such as sincerely served God, he
together with the Bishop Faustus and the rest, were forced to fly and procure
such places of residence as was most for their safety, when, as Fulgentius
coming to a little Monastery (of which a pious man, named Felix, was Governor)
he no sooner disclosed who he was, but Felix, having heard of his Fame, offered
to resign him his place, as counting him the most worthy to undertake so divine
a charge; but he refused it; yet at the Entreaty of the Society he was content
to become his fellow helper, and so continued to the good liking of all Pious
men for a long time; when by reason of the hot Persecution that still pursued
him; he with the rest departed into the Territories of Sicca, in the Wilds of
Africa, where he Preached and Instructed the People, turning many Souls to
Christ; but even here he was not safe, for his fame soon spreading, his Enemies
still pursued them with their Malice, and sought by all means to destroy him;
but God, in whom he trusted, still delivered him from Death, although they laid
ambushes both for him and Felix, and having taken them, they were carried
before an Arian Bishop, who caused them grievously to be beaten, which made
them rejoice that they were counted worthy to suffer for the sake of their
Blessed Master.

To avoid the Persecution, Fulgentius intended to sail into Egypt, but by
contrary Winds, was driven into the Haven of Syracuse, the chief City of
Sicily, and there being persuaded by the Bishop to stay all Winter, he the next
Spring traveled to Rome; and there beholding the glittering splendor of that
great City, he said, How beautiful may the Celestial Jerusalem be, when
Terrestrial Rome is so gorgeous. If such honors be given to lovers of vanity,
what Glory shall be imparted to the Saints who are lovers and followers of
truth. Having a while continued there, he returned again into Africa, to the
great joy of his Friends; but his old Enemies seeking many ways to destroy him,
he secretly departed to a little Monastery, seated amongst the Rocks on the Sea
shore, where he applied himself to his studies, he wrote several Books; but his
Disciples hearing where he was, came to him, and requested him to return, which
at the desire of Faustus he consenting to, was made a Presbyter; the Arian King
having commanded that no more Bishops should be made, and now every City strove
who should have him for their Pastor; But above all, the City of Ruspa so
earnestly solicited him, that partly with, and partly against his will, he was
made Bishop; which so incensed the King, that he not only banished him, but 60
others, most of them being Bishops; yet within a while after he sent for
Fulgentius, to reason with him about diverse matters, thereby to Entrap him, but
he argued so warily, and returned such answers, that he confirmed a great many
of his Hearers that were before staggering into Error; yet again was he
banished, but at his departure he said, He should shortly return again, and
that the Church should enjoy much peace and quiet within few years; Which
accordingly came to pass: For Tharsamund dying, Hildelick was crowned in his
stead, who revoked the many severe Edicts of his Predecessor, and calling home
the Bishops and Pastors, restored them to their dignities.

Within a while after, Fulgentius fell sick, during which sickness, he behaved
himself with wonderful patience and Humility; and when his Physicians told him
a Bath would do well for the recovery of his Health, he answered, What tell you
me of a bath, can any bath preserve the life of him who has run his natural
course, that he shall not dye, and why persuade you me, now I am at the point
of death to abate of that rigor which I all my life have used. When having
taken leave of those that came to visit, and distributed what money he had to
pious uses, he yielded up the Ghost, dying Anno Christi 529, and of his Age 65,
having sat Bishop 25 years, his death was greatly lamented of all the Pastors
of the Church, and indeed of all good Christians.

The Life of BERNARD.
BErnard was by Birth a Burgundian, born in a Town called Fontane, his Father
Tecelinus having for some years before been a Commander in the Wars, yet was he
Educated in Learning to the highest degree, by the care of his Mother who was a
pious and discreet Woman, having besides him five Sons and one Daughter, to
which she gave likewise good Education; but our Bernard profited above the
rest, and in a short time was sent to the University, where he employed his
Study in Divinity, and so well he profited therein, that he was admired of all
his fellows, affecting much a retired Life, shunning as much as in him lay the
Society of wild youths, who often importuned him to partake in their inordinate
pleasures, being modest by Nature, and of a kind temper.

One time being troubled with an extreme Headache, a Woman came to him, and
proffered to cure him by Enchantment, but he would not suffer her to stay in
his sight, saying, He had rather endure the hand of God, than be cured by the
power of the Devil, nor was his wish in vain, for he soon after was eased of
his pain, and thus he growing famous for Virtue and Learning, the Devil strove
by many temptations to damp his Zeal for the Gospel, and especially by laying
baits for his Eyes, to raise up in him lustful and inordinate desires, which
temptation he strove with all his power to resist, as finding himself weak on
that side, and when his youthful blood began to incite him to enterprise any
such wickedness, he would leap into cold water, and there continue till his
Lustful desires were abated, and at last considering with himself, that by the
multiplicity of converse he might be drawn away, he absolutely determined to
enter into the Monastery of the Cistercians, the strictest of all Orders, which
he did, notwithstanding all the Entreaties of his Brethren and Friends; nay, so
earnest was he with his Brethren, that he obtained the good will of four of
them to accompany him, and to enter into the same Order with him: When taking
leave of their younger Brother, who was but a Lad, One of them said, Farewell
Brother, we leave to you all our worldly possessions, to which he replied, To
leave me Earth, and take Heaven to your selves, is no equal division.

These Brethren having thus entered themselves under the tuition of the Abbot,
who was a devout man, Bernard profited above the rest, and made Prayer, Fasting
and Study his business, doing all things that became a good Christian; nor did
he refuse bodily labor, such as belonged to his Monastery, and in this state
he continued a long time, when as his Abbot caused the Monastery of Claraeval
to be built in the Territories of Lingones not far from the River Abba, he for
the great love he bore to Bernard, made him Abbot thereof, where he continued
till such time as he was made a Minister by the Bishop of Catalonia, and then
being desirous of nothing more than to save souls, he went about Preaching and
Instructing the People in the neighboring Villages; so that his fame spread
throughout those Countries, and many came from far to hear his Sermons, and
thus continued he with great applause, till the 63 year of his Age, when
retiring to his Monastery, he fell sick, and calling all his Disciples about
him; when he perceived them weep, he comforted them, saying, My fatherly love
moves me to pity you my Children, so as to desire to remain here, but on the
other side my desire to be with Christ, draws me to long to depart hence;
therefore be of good comfort, for I submit to the will of our heavenly Father,
to whose protection I leave you. And thereupon he resigned his Spirit into the
hands of his Redeemer, Dying Anno Christi 1153, and in the 68 year of his Age.

After his death one Adam a Cann^n Regular made this Epitaph on him.

Clara sunt valles, sed claris vallibus Abbas
Clarior, his Clarum, nomen in orb dedit.
Clari^ avis, clarus meritis, and clarus honor,
Claruit ingenio, at Religione magis.
Mars est clara, ciuis clarus, clarumque sepulchrum,
Clarior exultat spiritus ante Deum.
The Life of Peter Lumbard.
PEter Lumbard was born in the Kingdom of Navarr, of Godly Parents, and brought
up by them in all manner of Learning, and in the end, sent to the University of
Paris, where he greatly profited and Instructed such as came unto him, he gave
himself much to the study of Divine things; and as the chief of the Holy
Scriptures, upon many places of which he made Comments, Expounding what was any
ways difficult: He wrote a Book of Commentaries upon the Psalms of David; as
likewise collected the chief sentences out of the Works and Writings of the
Fathers, being a great lover of pious and learned men; and whilst he was at
Paris, he published many of his books.

His usual sayings were these, There can no good dwell in us that cannot will
good: nor can we perfect good that cannot desire good: there are in us evil
concupiscence, and vain desires, which are the Devils weapons bent against our
Souls, whereby when God forsakes us, he overthrows us with deadly wounds. God
condemns none before he sins, nor crowns any before he overcomes. Let none
glory in the gifts of Preachers. In that they edify more by them: for they are
not Authors of Grace, but Ministers. The Instruction of words is not so
powerful as the Exhortation of works; for if they that teach well, neglect to
do well, they shall hardly profit their hearers.

He dyed on the 13th of August, 1164, and lies buried at Paris, and has this
Inscription upon his Tomb.

Here lies Peter Lumbard, B. D. of Paris, who composed the Book of Sentences,
and the Glosses of the Psalms and Epistles. The Life of Bonaventure.
BOnaventure was an Italian by Birth, born in Etruria, of Noble Parentage, who
had a greater regard for his Soul, than his Body; and therefore although they
had great riches to leave him, yet they brought him up in Learning, and so well
he profited, that when he was 16 years of Age, he could speak the Greek as
fluent as his Native Language; all his delight being in reading the Scriptures,
and the works of the Fathers; and in his behaviors to all men, was so humble
and courteous, that he gained the love of those who only knew by the report of
fame, and as a memento lest he should be puffed up above himself: He caused to
be engraven in his Study VVindow, this sentence of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, Learn of me, for I am weak, etc. nor did he abstain from servile
labors, thereby to keep his mind in subjection. To the poor he was always
charitable, nor would he ever offend the rich.

When at any time he heard of Persons that were troubled in Mind, he would go
to them, and give them words of Consolation, laying before them the Promises of
our blessed Savior, and the infinite desire he has to save Sinners, Charging
them not to give way to despair, but lay hold on the Lord Jesus as the Rock of
Salvation, and by such means he drew many Souls out of the Paws of the Devil,
who like a Lion was ready to devour them.

He greatly gave himself to Meditation and Prayer. He likewise Preached after
the Example of St. Paul, both in and out of Season, and was so earnest in the
delivery of his Sermons, that his words seemed to have a more than ordinary
Power with them; which so affected the hearers that People came from all parts
to his Lectures.

He hated Idleness, and when he had nothing to do in public affairs, he
always kept to his Study, reading and well considering the works of the
Fathers; gathering out of them such Sentences as might be most powerful to win
Souls unto Christ, of which he compiled his famous Pharetra, and the better to
keep himself employed he wrote the Bible over with his own hand, and so well
used it, that he could readily Cite all the material Texts by heart.

After he had continued at the University of Paris for the space of three
years, he was chosen Divinity Reader, which he so well discharged, that all men
admired his Eloquence and Learning after this he was made Doctor of Divinity,
in which Station he continued for a considerable time doing all the deeds of
Charity that lay in his Power to perform, as likewise persuaded others to do
the Like; so that at last, spent with tedious Studies, nature decayed in him,
and he falling sick, after many pious Exhortations to his Friends to persevere
in the way to saving Knowledge, he gave up the Ghost, Dying Anno Christi 1274,
and of his Age 53, and was buried in a Stately Sepulcher in the Cathedral;
great Mourning being made for him by all Lovers of Piety and Learning.

The Life of Aquinas.
HE was by Birth an Italian Born in the Kingdom of Naples, Anno 1223, and was
brought up in the Cassine Monastery in all manner of Learning, especially in
the Knowledge of Divine things being very Zealous for the promotion of the
Faith of Christ, and when he was perfected in the Study of Divinity, he went to
Paris, where he became very profitable to the Church in Teaching and
Instructing Youths and Students in Divine Learning. He was always Studious, and
was seldom seen to laugh; but when others were at their Merriment he would be
Meditating, Insomuch that once Supping with King Lewis of France, he whilst the
rest were making merry, fell into a deep Meditation, and forgetting himself,
struck the Table, saying, That now the Manichees were foiled.

When any one offered him promotion he was wont to say, I had rather have
Chrysostom's Commentary upon the Gospel of St. Matthew. In all his Sermons, he
framed his Speech to the Peoples Capacities; and hated Vice in any, though he
loved their Persons never so well. He died as he was going to the Council
summoned at Lions, Anno Christi 1274.

FINIS.
portrait of Reformers The Reformation
BVLINGER

Dr. Bradford

Bp. CRANMER

ZVINGLE

Bp. LATIMER

BVCER

I. PRAGVE

PERKINS

P. MELANCHTON

LVTHER

I CALVIN

T. BEZA

BP. RIDLEY

I. TINDAL

WHICKLIF

The candle is lighted We cannot blow it out The Second Part.


AN EPITOMY OF Ecclesiastical History.

PART II.

CONTAINING The Exemplary Lives, Memorable Transactions, and Courageous
Sufferings of the first Reformers, Principal Martyrs, and great Doctors of the
Church, for 300 Years past.

THE Extirpation of Popery in England, its Restoration under Queen Mary, with
a particular Account of the Persecution during her Reign: The Lives and Reigns
of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James,
King Charles the First.

AS ALSO Of His present Majesty's, to this present Year, 1682. With an Account
of the blessed State of the Church under his happy and prosperous Reign.

London, Printed for William Thackerey at the Angel in Duck-Lane, and Thomas
Passinger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, 1683.

TO The Christian READER.
Christian Reader:
THis Second Part of Ecclesiastical History Epitomized, contains the Lives of
the first Reformers, and Famous Doctors of the Church for three hundred Years,
as well of other Nations as this our Native Country, showing the first
beginning of Reformation, and the Restoring of Gospel Purity, which had for
many Ages been overwhelmed and silenced by Idolatry and Popish Superstitions,
so that men wandered in Darkness, and as under the Jewish Law, instead of Real
Substances were forced to content themselves with Types and Shadows; these were
they that would neither enter themselves, nor permit others, but verified the
Old Proverb used by their Schoolmen, when they affirm that Ignorance is the
Mother of (blind) Devotion; yet such was the abundant goodness of that God, who
delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted
and live, that when it was least suspected, he brought Light out of Darkness,
and raised up such faithful Servants, as spared not to cry aloud, and lift up
their Voices like a Trumpet, etc. by whose faithful preaching and expounding
the Everlasting Gospel, and by the operation of the Holy Spirit, men's eyes were
opened, so that they plainly perceived what Mists of Ignorance they and their
Fathers had wandered in, and how they were turned aside from the Path that
leads to the Strait Gate, the Happy Mansions of Eternal Rest: Nor could all the
Malice of Hell and Rome hinder the Progress of the Blessed Reformation, though
all Cruelties that Humane Invention, or rather the Prince of Darkness could
devise, were inflicted, yet such was the Christian Bravery of these Soldiers,
who in a Spiritual Warfare fought under the Banner of their great Master the
Lord Jesus, that most of them resisted unto blood, falling by the merciless
hands of cruel Tyrants. But as an Ancient Father, rightly says, The Blood of
the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church: So it has in all Ages happened, for the
more they were destroyed the more sprung up, for by the constant sufferings and
triumphing of the Faithful, even in the Flames, many thousands were converted,
as in our late Marian Persecution was most evident; the Lives, suffering and
dying Speeches of all those Eminent Martyrs that suffered during her Bloody
Reign, being herein inserted, together with her Birth, Education, coming to the
Crown, Reign, and Death; as likewise the Life and Reign of her Father King
Henry the Eighth, and Brother King Edward the Sixth.

Lastly, The Virtuous Lives and Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, King
Charles the First, and hitherto of His present Majesty, whose Days may they be
as the Days of Heaven, and his Throne Established in Peace.

For in his Reign it is we are happy all, And those that wish him hurt, let them
first fall,

Which is the hearty wish of, Christian Reader, your Friend, J. SHURLEY.

THE INTRODUCTION, TO THE LIVES OE THE DOCTORS, And other Godly MEN, that were
CHIEF.
HAving briefly run over the Lives of the Fathers, at least such as were the
greatest Promoters of the Gospel, and Christian Doctrine, to advance the true
Church as it was left by Christ, and his Apostles; I shall now proceed to the
Modern Divines, and such as God raised up to oppose the Superstitions and
Idolatries that crept into it when it became subject to the Popes of Rome,
after the first 600 years, for then the Ancient way of Worship was laid aside,
and a Trade made of Religion, as it is by the Romish Clergy at this day; then
with the Gospel of our blessed Lord and Savior they mixed the Traditions of
men, the Popes frequently undertaking to dispense with Scripture, to Institute
Sacraments of their own Invention, set up Idols in Churches, pray for the Dead,
worship Saints, and the like; but as in all Ages God had a peculiar Church to
himself, and our Savior has promised, that the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against it: So I say, when the Public Church was so much degenerated
from its Primitive Worship, that it had almost lost the name of Christianity
for that of Paganism, by setting up their abominable Idols, though under other
Titles, God raised up his faithful Servants openly to oppose such monstrous
wickedness, only to teach the Ignorant, who had so long been led astray in the
dark mists of Error, the way to saving knowledge, and accordingly gave a
blessing to their Preaching and Doctrine, as we shall see in the Lives of the
great Doctors of the Reformed Church: And first I shall begin with John
Wicklif, our Country man, who durst to the hazard of his Life, oppose the
avarice and cruel dealing of the Bishop of Rome; in the Reign of King Edward
the Third, as hereafter will more plainly appear.

THE LIFE OF JOHN WICKLIF.
JOhn Wicklif was an English man by birth, being descended of godly and
virtuous Parents, who sent him to Morton College in Oxford, where continuing
for some time, he greatly profited in Learning, insomuch that he became the
Wonder of his Age; so that in a short time he was elected Divinity Reader in
the aforesaid University, which he so well performed, that he obtained a
general Applause from all his Auditors, he being a man of great Piety,
oftentimes bewailing in private the vicious Lives of the Clergy, and greatly
inveighing against the Idolatries and Superstitions that were crept into the
Church, insomuch that at last he resolved, though at the hazard of his life, to
endeavor some Reformation, by bringing in an Order of Worship, which might
come nearer to that which was used by the Primitive Christians, when Religion
was in its Purity unmixed and undefiled, whereupon by degrees he tried the
minds of men to find how they stood affected, by putting many Logical and
Metaphysical Questions to them, and then venturing a little farther, he last
came to argue about the Sacrament, which was then administered in the Church far
different from the Institution of our blessed Savior, and his holy Apostles,
by which he soon alarumed the Popish Clergy, who like Demetrius, when Saint
Paul preached down the Idols at Ephesus, knew that if such matters came once to
the test, they should lose a great part of their livelihood, as well knowing
that Ignorance was the Mother of the People's Devotion.

Upon his discovery of the Cheats of the Romish Clergy, the Monks and Friars
came swarming about him, threatening him with grievous punishments, if he did
not publicly recant all he had said; the which he refusing to do, the
Archbishop sent for him, and although he learnedly proved out of the Scriptures
and the Fathers what he had said, yet the Archbishop deprived him of his
Priestly Office, and would have proceeded to have condemned him for a Heretic,
had not God stirred up the King to favor him, as likewise, John Duke of
Lancaster, the King's Son, who did it the rather to oppose him against the
Bishop of Winchester in revenge of some Affronts he had put upon him, yet so
far the Bishops prevailed with the King, that they got leave to convene Wicklif
before them in Saint Paul's Church, upon which the Archbishop Simon Sudbury
sent out his Citation for him to appear at a day prefixed, when with him came
the Duke, the Lord Percy, Marshal of England, and others encouraging him not to
be afraid of his Adversary. When he came before the Bishops, the Lord Percy
commanded him to sit down, which the Bishop of London strongly opposed,
alleging it was both against Law and Reason, that one being cited to answer to
such things as were to be laid to his Charge, should sit before his Ordinary;
but the Duke seconding Percy, a great contest arose, insomuch that the
multitude without doors hearing of it, threatened the Duke, and the Lord Percy;
and certain it is, had they not made their escapes they had murdered them; so
that the Convocation was forced to dissolve.

For some time after Wicklif lived quietly, and by preaching his sound
Doctrine, opened the eyes of many, insomuch that he gained a number of
Proselytes; but after King Edward dyed, and Richard Son to the Black Prince was
Crowned King, the Bishop began to vex him afresh, having drawn up these
following Articles against him out of his Writings and Sermons.

The Articles against John Wicklif.
1. That he did affirm the Holy Eucharist after Consecration, is not the real
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, but Figuratively. 2. That the Church of Rome is
not the Head of all other Churches in the World, nor that Peter had any more
Power given him by Christ, than any of the other Apostles. 3. That the Pope of
Rome has no more Power of the Keys than any other Presbyter. 4. That the Lords
Temporal may lawfully take away the Temporalities of the Churchmen offending
habitualiter. 5. That the Gospel is of it self a sufficient Rule both of Faith
and Manners, without any other Rule. 6. That neither the Pope, nor any other
Prelate ought to have Prisons of their own, wherein to punish Offenders.
These with some others they sent to Pope Gregory, who not only condemned them
as Heretical, but sent over his Bull, which was carried by his Proctor to the
University of Oxford, forbidding all upon pain of damnation to hold any
Converse with Wicklif or his Followers; as likewise he sent his Letters to the
Bishops to apprehend and imprison Wicklif, commanding the King and Nobility not
to give any Countenance to his Doctrine.

Encouraged by these Letters, the Bishops were resolved to proceed against him,
come what would come; in order to which he was brought before them Assembled in
the Provincial Council; but in midst of their Expectation of Revenge, all their
Sport was spoiled by the coming of one Lewis Clifford, who charged them in the
King's Name not to proceed to any Definitive Sentence; whereupon when they had
charged him to preach no more to the People, they dismissed him, when not long
after the Archbishop, Wicklif's Capital Enemy was beheaded by the Multitude,
Anno 1382. Courtney being made Bishop in his room he called a Convocation in
Gray Friars, whither Wicklif was summoned, but in the midst of the Business
there happened such a terrible Earthquake, that many of the Suffragans were so
terrified, that they left the matter; yet the Archbishop stayed, and there
declared Wicklif's Doctrine Heretical, Erroneous, and Irreligious, and so far
prevailed with the King, as by his Letters Patents, to deliver him up wholly to
their mercy, as likewise to send his Letters to the Vice Chancellor of Oxford
to excommunicate him, and make diligent search there to apprehend him, and all
such as adhered to his Doctrine, of which he having notice, he retired in
secret, where he continued for foam time, and then returned to his Parsonage of
Lutterworth in Lancashire, where after all the Persecution and Malice of his
Enemies, he dyed in Peace, Anno Christi 1384. but after his Death many of his
famous Writings were burnt by the Popish Clergy.

The Life of JOHN HUSS.
JOhn Huss was a Bohemian by birth, being born in a Town called Hussinets, near
to Prague, when grown up, he was by his Parents sent to the University of
Prague, where he became famous for his Wit and Learning, when at last happ'ning
on some of Wicklif's Books that had escaped the Flames; he so far weighed the
Contents that he found them to concord with the Scriptures and Primitive
Fathers, upon which he began to detest against the Superstitions of Popery.

Anno 1393. being Commenced Bachelor of Arts, with the Approbation of the
whole University, he after that became Master of Arts, at which time two godly
Gentlemen of Prague, building the Church of Bethlehem, sometime after it was
finished, Mr. Huss was made Minister of the same, where he so plainly and
powerfully preached the Scriptures, that all that heard him greatly profited in
saving knowledge, continuing so to do for the space of Twelve years, which Pope
Alexander the Fifth hearing, and fearing that the knowledge of the Scriptures
would make the People abhor his Councils, Decrees, and other Trumpery, which
had been thrust into the Religious Worship of the Church, he sent his Citation
for Huss to appear before him at Rome, when as he went not himself, but sent
his Proctor, who answered to all the Objections that were laid against him, and
cleared his Innocence; yet the Pope was nothing contented, but condemned him
though absent for a Heretic, and pronounced his Bugbear of Excommunication
against him, which caused King Winceslaus to banish him; yet was he taken into
the Protection of the Lord of the Soil of Hussinets, and there by his preaching
he so displayed the wickedness of Popery, that he caused many to embrace his
Doctrine.

When he perceived it convenient, he would likewise repair to his Church at
Bethlehem, and there instructed his Flock, and exhort them to be steadfast in
the Truth, and not to suffer the poison of Popery to taint their Souls, telling
them, that only for their owning the Name of our blessed Lord and Savior, it
could not be distinguished from the Heathen Idolatries.

Now whilst these things were doing Pope Alexander dyed, upon which the
Cardinals went together by the ears ahout choosing another, insomuch that
dividing themselves into Factions, they chose three; so that by that means
their Church became a Triple headed C^rberus, to reconcile which, a Council was
called at Constance, whither all the Bishops resorting. Huss was summoned
before them, who upon Letters of the King's safe Conduct, freely went,
resolving to face his Enemies, and not doubting if he could fairly be heard,
but to put his Accusers to shame and confusion; with him went several of the
Bohemian Nobility, and by the way he set up several Public Writings signifying
his departure, and upon what occasion he went.

When he came to Noremberg, the Citizens having notice of his Arrival, came
flocking about him, and so far prevailed with him, as to instruct them, the
which he did from Noon till it was Evening, instructing some, and confounding
others in their own Arguments, that went about to oppose him; one thing by the
way is very observable, for as one Stavistaus Zonoma a Bohemian, who was his
greatest Accuser, was on his way to Constance, he was smote by the hand of God,
and dyed by the way of an Imposthume.

When he came to Constance, he was sent for to appear before the Council, to
give an account of his Doctrine, which he cheerfully did, telling them that he
came for no other end; but for as much as all the Council were not yet come, he
desired it might be deferred, but if they would oblige him to it then, he was
ready, not doubting but Christ would strengthen him to do it, nor did he fear
to suffer death for the sake of his Great Master; but in fine, after they had
examined him to some Particulars, and found how prompt he was to answer all
their Objections, they thought it not best to meddle further at that time, but
contrary to his Letter of safe Conduct, they sent him to a nasty Prison, by
reason of the noisomness of which he fell sick, and was in great danger of his
Life.

During the time he continued in Prison, they drew up some Articles of their
own Invention, and procured Villains to testify the same, which he hearing was
greatly grieved, and thereupon moved, that seeing he could not be there
himself, he might have an Advocate, but that was utterly denied him, and he
removed by order of the Bishop of Constance, to the other side the Rhine, and
put into a strong Castle.

The Bohemian Lords hearing of this hard usage toward Mr. Huss, were greatly
grieved, and thereupon petitioned the Council to have regard to the Honor of
their King, who had granted Huss his Letters of safe Conduct; for that if they
were so suffered to be broken it would redound greatly to the disgrace, not
only of the King, but the Noble Kingdom of Bohemia: Therefore they desired he
might be set at liberty, and suffered to plead for himself; but this nothing
prevailed with the proud Prelates, but rather increased their malice toward
him, for those that were appointed to be his Judges in his Absence, heard all
his Accusers, and sometimes prompted them when they were out; yet at last they
consented to bring him to his Trial, though had it not been for the Emperor,
they had proceeded to have passed Sentence without hearing him one word.

The day he was brought before them there happened such an Eclipse of the Sun
that the like had not been known in many Ages, when he was come into their
presence they fell to hissing and shouting so at times that his defense could
not be heard though he often prayed for silence, some of them all the while
railing at him, and reviling him on purpose that he might not be heard, and
when they perceived they could make nothing against him out of his Doctrine,
they brought false Witnesses against him that he should speak Treasonable Words
against the Emperor; but that was consisted by a Lord then present: yet they
resolved upon taking away his Life; which he perceiving, Appealed to the Pope,
and from him to Christ; for which they greatly derided him, not permitting him
to speak for himself, although he besought them with tears to show him what
Errors he maintained, for that if there were any thing in his Doctrine
disconsonant to the word of God he would willingly confess his Error: but
nothing less then his life would satisfy their bloody revenge, whereupon they
proceeded to degrade him, and afterward condemned him. Upon which he kneeling
down prayed to God to turn their hearts, saying, Lord Jesus Christ forgive my
Enemies, by whom thou know I am falsely accused; forgive them I beseech thee
for thy great mercy's sake. Yet in degrading him they were so cruel as to cut
the skin from off the crown of his head with Shears, and in that Council to
disanull the Emperors Letters of safe conduct they made a Decree that no faith
should be kept with Heretics.

After which they prepared for his Execution and put a cap upon his head,
painted with Devils, the which he joyfully put on, saying, that since his Lord
and Master wore for his sake a Crown of Thorns, he would not disdain for his
sake to wear that Cap; when he had put it upon his head a Bishop standing by,
said, Now we commit thy soul to the Devil, (a very uncharitable expression,)
but Huss lifting up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, said, Into thy hands Lord
Jesus I commend my Spirit which thou have redeemed with thy most precious
Blood. Then they burnt his Books at which he with a joyful Countenance said to
the People, Think not good People that I dye for any Heresy or Error, but
through the hatred and malice of mine Adversaries.

Now as he lifted up his face in prayer the Cap fell off, whereupon a Soldier
put it on again saying, he should burn with his masters the Devils whom he had
served. Then he rising up, said, Lord Jesus Assist and help me, that with a
constant and patient mind by thy most gracious help I may bear and suffer this
Ignominious death whereunto I am condemned for the preaching thy most holy
Gospel. Then as they were binding him to the Stake with a Chain he said with a
merry countenance that he would embrace that Chain for Christ's sake; who for
his sake had been bound with a far worse.

When the fire was kindled he began to sing with a loud voice, Jesus Christ the
Son of the Living God have mercy upon me, the which after he had repeated three
times, the flame stopped his breath, his heart being afterward found, they
roasted it upon a Stake, and gathering up his Ashes, they cast them into the
Rhine. He suffered Martyrdom, Anno Christi, 1415.

One thing more is very memorable, viz. he told them at his death, that within
a hundred years out of those Goose Ashes (his name in the Bohemian Language
signifying a Goose) should spring a Swan in Germany, whose singing would
afright all those Vulters, which was exactly verified in Luther; yet God
delayed not to revenge the death of this good man, for he soon after raised up
Ziska, who maintaining War against the Emperor Sigismund, destroyed a thousand
Popish Monasteries.

The Life of HIEROM of PRAGUE.
HIerom was by Birth a Bohemian, a man famous for Learning, and in his younger
years a great detester of Popish Superstitions, being admired of all men for
great Wisdom, which was evidently manifested in several Disputations. When he
heard that notwithstanding the Letters of safe Conduct, John Huss was burnt, he
was resolved the more openly to maintain the Cause of his Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, and thereupon he went to Constance whilst the Council was
sitting, from whence he retiring to Iberling, an Imperial City about a mile
from thence, sent to Sigismond for Letters of safe Conduct; but he refused to
grant his request, yet he was so far from being daunted that he wrote at Letter
and set it up upon the gate of the City, intimating that he would, if sent for,
come freely to Constance, and there before the Council make it appear that he
neither preached nor maintained any Error or Heresy, as it had been falsely
suggested by many Slanderers and scandalous Persons; but having no answer to
what he had written, he by the persuasion of his Friends returned toward
Bohemia, but by the way was apprehended and carried bound to Constance, where
being presented before the Bishops, they charged him with running away, being
cited, to which he answered, that it was because he could get no safe Conduct,
neither from the Emperor, nor them, nor did he know of any Citation, the which
had he done he would have appeared though he had been in his own Country.

Then they began to charge him with several Errors in his Doctrine, to which he
answered, that he was ready to answer, what ever could be objected against him,
and that he would justify what he had taught; whereupon they all cried out,
let him be burned, and thereupon the Officers were ordered to carry him to
Prison, where the Bishop of Rigen caused Chains to be put about his neck and
hands, and that he should hang in a great pair of Stocks by the hands and feet,
where he continued eleven days without touching the Ground, being only fed with
bread and water, nor would they take him thence notwithstanding his sickness,
till they had compelled him to subscribe that John Huss was justly put to
death, the which, to be somewhat eased of his Torments, he did, though with
great regret, much bewailing himself for it afterward.

Within a while they sent for him to examine him in private, but he refused to
answer, unless in Public, well knowing that they did it to ensnare him; to
which they consented, as well hoping he would confirm his recantation, in
relation to the death of Huss, but were therein greatly mistaken, for he not
only confounded the Testimony of such as they had subborned, but maintained the
Doctrine of John Huss to be according to the Word of God, and that whatever
Huss and Wicklif had written against the Enormities of the Church of Rome, was
true, and that he would firmly keep and defend their Opinions, to the last;
much lamenting that ever he consented to sign the Justness of Huss's death,
who, he said, dyed wrongfully, being basely murdered by the Enemies of Christ,
and his holy Gospel.

This so enraged the Popish Clergy, that they immediately passed Sentence upon
him, after which, they put a paper about him, painted with red Devils to make
him odious to the People; as likewise, a paper-Miter on his Head, which he took
very patiently, saying, Our Lord Jesus Christ, when he suffered death for me,
did wear a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, and for his I sake will wear this Cap.

As he went to the Place of Execution, he sung Psalms, and coming to the Place
where John Huss was burned, he upon his Knees put up his Prayers to Heaven;
after a while they bound him to the Image of John Huss carved in Wood, which
they had set up instead of a Stake, and there with admirable Patience he
sustained the fury of the flames, when at the giving up the Ghost, he with an
Audible Voice, said, Hanc Animam in flammis offero Christ Tibi.

Which may be Englished thus, though with some Addition for the Verses sake.

This Soul of mine in flames of fire set free,
O! Christ my Savior, now I offer thee.
The Life of MARTIN LUTHER.
MArtin Luther was born, Anno 1483. at a Town in the Earldom of Mansfield,
called Isleben, his Father being John Luther of the same place, descended of
honorable Parentage, his Mother's name before her Marriage was Margaret
Lindeman, who in his Infancy instructed him in the ways of Virtue, so far forth
as his tender years were capable to bear.

When he came to years of discretion, he was sent to Magdeburg, where in the
Free School he greatly profited in Learning, especially he there was taught to
expound the Apostles Creed, and make use of the Fathers, the reading of whose
Works he greatly affected, when he had stayed there a considerable time, he
went to the University of Erford, where in a short time he so profited in his
Studies, that the whole University admired his Wit and Learning.

At twenty years of Age he was made Master of Arts, and Professor of Physic,
after which he studied the Law; but none of these agreed with his temper, God
having designed him for a better Work, whereupon he rejecting the former, bent
his mind wholly upon studying Divine Things, and to be the more retire from
noise and worldly business, he entered into the College of the Augustine
Monks; and became one of their Order, there he continued some time very zealous
for the Romish Religion; but within a while he began to dislike the Errors that
had crept into that Church, as plainly perceiving that the Religion was for the
most part composed of Traditions, as the Ordinances of Councils and Decrees,
the which were altogether disconsonant to the Word of God, so that by excessive
grief for the Apostate state of the Romish Church, he fell sick and almost
despaired of recovery, when as an old Priest came to him, and bid him be of
good comfort for that his Disease was not mortal, but that God would raise him
up to be a comfort to many others; the same Priest also discoursed with him
concerning Justification by Faith, and explained to him the Articles of the
Creed; after the recovery of that sickness he was made Presbyter, and by the
persuasion of John Staupicius went to the University of Wintenber, where after
he had continued for the space of three years, and gained great commendation,
he was by his Convent sent to Rome, where beholding their dissolute manner of
living, and the wicked practices there used, he grew into a greater dislike of
that Religion, for there, as himself reports, he heard Strumpets at the
Communion Table boast of their wickedness, and that he had heard others
concerning the Bread and Wine, scoffingly say, that Bread thou art, and Bread
thou shall remain, and Wine thou art, and Wine thou shall remain, which made
him imagine that the Church stood in great need of Reformation, however he was
at his return there made Doctor of Divinity, and many times preached before the
Elector of Saxony, who heard him with great gladness, and much admired his
Eloquence and Learning.

A while after he began to explain the Epistle to the Romans, and many of the
Psalms of David, and began more and more to decline the Superstitions of the
Romish Church; so that when one John Tecelius coming from Rome, brought the
Pope's Indulgencies into Germany, persuading the People that they were of such
a sin-purging quality, that what ever sins they committed, if they could but
purchase one of them, they should have them all remitted; this wicked Impostor
so stirs the Zeal of Luther, that he wrote against his Indulgencies, laying
open the Cheat to the World, which so enraged the Indulgence Merchant, that he
bitterly exclaimed against him, and getting as many of his Books as he could,
he burned them; whereupon he yet once more wrought against his Trumpery, at
which time many of the Divines of the University took part with Luther in what
he did, and now he began to preach his Doctrine of Reformation openly,
defending it against the Augustin-Fryers at Hedleburg, he being honorably
entertained by them of Worstburg and Volfgang, the Count Palatine there; he
drew many to partake with him in his Opinion, of which the Emperor Maximilian
having notice, sent to advertise the Pope thereof, and to bid him take timely
care for the extirpating the New Opinions that were lately sprung up, and that
whatsoever measures he should take he would see them put in Execution
throughout the Empire.

Upon the receipt of the Emperor's Letters, Pope Leo then holding the Papacy
cited Luther to appear before the Council of Cardinals at Rome, and signified
as much to Cardinal Cajetan his Legate; whereupon the Cardinal going to
Auspurg, and finding Luther there, desired the Emperor to set a Guard upon
him, in order to carry him to Rome, unless he would speedily recant, but his
request was not at that time fulfilled.

The Pope likewise wrote a Letter to the Elector of Saxony to complain against
Luther, and to forbid him to entertain him within his Dukedom, and that if he
took him within his Jurisdiction, he should forthwith send him to Rome, there
to be condemned or acquitted; but the Elector gave little heed to the Pope's
Letter, though he threatened him therein, if he complied not with his will: But
when he perceived these Projects fail, he sent to the Master of the Augustine
Monks, to see if he could prevail with him to return to his former Obedience,
and renounce his later Opinion, but this proved also ineffectual.

Yet Luther desirous to justify his Doctrine, made earnest suit that he might
appear before competent Judges to be heard in his own Country, and not at Rome,
where he was assured to find his Judges his Enemies. In his behalf also the
^niversity of Wintenberg wrote to the Pope, giving him an Account of his great
Learning, Doctrine, and pious course of Life, desiring that he might be heard
in Germany; in fine Prince Frederick of Saxony so far prevailed with the Pope's
Legate, that he consented that Luther should be heard at Auspurg, at what time
the Bohemians sent a Book to ^im, which was written by John Huss, desiring him
to persevere in what he had begun.

A while after Erasmus was solicited to write against him, but he declined it,
although a Bishopric was proffered him for so doing, saying, He had learned
more out of one page of Luther 's Book, than of the large Volume of Thomas
Aquinas.

Luther being now cited to appear before the Pope's Legate at Auspurg, procured
the Emperor's Letters of safe Conduct, when coming into the Legates presence,
after some Questions asked and Objection made, he not only justified his
Doctrine, but offered to maintain the same by Disputation or Writing, but the
Cardinal being much offended at such his offer, would not permit him to be
brought before him any more; so that having waited six days, he departed home;
but the Cardinal wrote after him to the Duke of Saxony, that as he loved his
Honor and Safety, he would expel him his Dominions: This Letter the Duke sent
to Luther, who wrote back to the Legate, that rathen than he would any ways
endanger his Prince, he would retire into what Part soever of the World the
Lord would please to lead him; but the University of Wintenberg wrote to the
Duke, desiring him that he would take him into his Protection, and not suffer
Innocence to be oppressed by force, and that if Luther had preache^ or did
maintain any Error, he might be fairly convicted of the same, upon which the
Duke began to take his part more than formerly, and sent to the Cardinal, that
seeing he having come to Auspurg he had performed his Promise, and could do no
more in that Affair.

After the death of Maximilian, and the Coronation of Charles, the Pope sent to
the Duke of Saxony, requesting him to cause all Luther's Books to be burnt, and
that he would see Luther either executed in Saxony, or that he would send him
guarded to Rome, to which the Duke replied, that he was ready to yield
Obedience to the Pope, but that he could not send Luther to him before his
Cause was heard before the Emperor, and till he was convicted of some Error,
and then if he recanted not, he should find no favor at his hands.

A while after a Disputation was held between Luther and one Eccius at Lipsick,
wherein the former prevailed, and his Doctrine so spread it self, that the
Friars and Monks fearing to be unhived, sent to the Pope to charge him with
neglecting the Church Affairs, by giving himself up to Pleasures; in the mean
time suffering the Doctrine of Luther to spread even in the very heart of
Germany, upon which the Pope began to bestir himself, by sending his Bull
against him; in which he Excommunicated not only him, but all his Partakers,
commanding all men to apprehend him, and bring him to Rome, and that his Books
should be burnt, of which Luther hearing burnt the Pope's Bull lately sent out
against him, together with several Decrees and Councils.

Not long after the Emperor coming into Germany, the Duke of Saxony so far
prevailed with him, that he was content to hear him openly in the Diet, of
which Luther having notice, greatly rejoiced, though some of his Friends
persuaded him from going, saying, that the Public Faith would be broken, as it
was with John Huss; whereupon he told them, That such discouragements were cast
in his way by Satan, who knew that his Profession of the Truth in such a Noble
Place would be a means to shake his Kingdom, adding, that if he knew there were
as many Devils in Worms, as there were Tiles upon the Houses, yet he would go
thither.

He being arrived at Worms, some of the Popish Clergy went about to persuade
the Emperor to apprehend him, and commit him to Prison; but he would by no
means hearken to their wicked Counsel, alleging that the Public Faith ought
not to be broken; the next day after his coming he Presented himself before the
Council assembled for that purpose; the Emperor being there present, where one
Eccius a Lawyer, at the Command of the Emperor made a Speech, In which he
demanded of Luther, that he would retract his Works and Doctrine, telling him,
that it was the Emperor's Pleasure that he should so do, and if he refused it
he must expect his displeasure, to which he replied, As to my Books, some of
them tend to Faith, and to these my Adversaries give an ample Testimony, others
are against the Pope and his Doctrine, the which should I revoke I should
confirm his Tyranny, and some of them are against private men, who defend the
Popes Cause, against whom I must confess I have been somewhat too sharp, yet I
cannot revoke them, unless I will set open a Gap for the Impudence of many.

But this Answer nothing pleased the Emperor, who would be satisfied with
nothing less than Luther's Recantation, nor would he suffer him to defend his
Doctrine by Scripture and other warrantable Arguments, though he earnestly
desired it, telling the Emperor, That unless he could satisfy his Conscience
that his Doctrine was false, he could by no means recant the same; whereupon he
was ordered to depart the Council, and the next day the Emperor sent his
Letters to the Princes, to acquaint them that he was resolved to proscribe
Luther and all his Accomplices, upon which they were divided, the greatest
part, and those of the most Noble amongst them, alleging that Luther was not
rashly to be condemned, for that the Emperor was young, and in matters of
Religion altogether guided by the Popish Clergy.

The next day the Bishop of Trevers sent for Luther, and used many Arguments to
persuade him to a Recantation, telling him withal, that if he refused it was
the Emperor's purpose to banish him, to whom Luther replied, That he took it as
a favor, that so great a Prince would put himself to so much trouble for so
mean a Person as he was; after that one Vaeus a Lawyer came from the Emperor to
persuade him to recant, but he not consenting to his request, the Emperor sent
to him to depart home, and withal gave him twelve days so to do, after the end
of which he proscribed him; whereupon Prince Frederick appointed some of his
most trusty Nobles to convey him secretly to Wartsburg, where he continued ten
Months notwithstanding diligent search was made for him, and great sums of
money offered: nay, his Enemies employed Wizards and Witches to use their Art
to find out the place of his abode, but in vain; at the end of ten Months he
returned to Wintenber, where he was most joyfully received by the University,
from whence he sent Letters to Prince Frederick to excuse himself for leaving
Wartsburg without his knowledge, telling him, That it was God's Cause he
undertook, and that God would protect him from the rage of his Enemies.

A while after he printed the New Testament which he had translated into the
German Tongue at Wartsburg, which place he usually called his Patmos, which did
not a little displease King Henry the Eighth of England, and George Duke of
Saxony.

About this time one Thomas Muncer wrote a Fanatic Book against his Doctrine,
and persuaded the Boors to Rebel, who being persuaded by him to throw off all
Obedience to their Princes, took Arms in great numbers, against which unlawful
proceedings, Luther wrote several Treatises, persuading them to yield Obedience
to their Princes, showing them how disconsonant such practices were to the word
of God, but when this prevailed not the Princes drew out their Forces, and with
more Convincing Arguments taught them Obedience. For coming to a Battle about
five thousand four hundred of them were slain, and their seditious Ringleaders
Mauncer and Pestifer taken, the former being put upon the Rack to confess his
Accomplices, cried out grievously, when as Prince George of Saxony bid him
think upon the slaughter of the Poor wretches, who seduced by him fell in
battle the day before: Whereupon he laughing outright said, they would be
seduced; in fine he and his Companion with some others were beheaded; but so
ended not the War, which was called the War of the Clowns, for before the
Rebellion was suppressed about fifty thousand were slain.

A while after Luther married one Katharine a Boren against the Will of most of
his Friends, tho Melancthone greatly Commended him for so doing, saying there
was more then ordinary Causes that induced him so to do. But within a short
time Luther fell sick with a Congealing of Blood, but within a while after
recovered in his Sickness; it seemed to him that the noise of a tempestuous Sea
was beating at his Ears the which he said if it did not cease he should dye,
and no sooner did the noise come within his Head but he fell down as dead, but
means being used he came again to himself, and this he took as a Temptation of
Satan, and upon such occasions he was wont to repeat the words of our Savior:
Be of good Comfort for I have overcome the World. And would often say that a
man would go upon his Knees to Jerusalem to fetch such a Sentence.

In the year 1523. a Diet was held at Norinberg, where the Edict of Worms was
made void, upon which the Popes Legate complained grievously saying, That since
the Publication of the Edict neither Luther nor any of his Accomplices had been
punished. To which the Princes answered, That since the Pope and his Clergy had
neglected Reformation in the Church, Germany had been greatly enlightened by
the Sermons of Luther, and that if they should go about to Punish him, the
People would think they went about to extinguish the Light of the Gospel, the
better to obscure those manifest Vices that could be no longer hid; and that
such Proceedings would raise up great Tumults. The Romanists seeing this
resolved to bribe him into silence, but in vain: a while after Luther being
summoned to Auspurg, he there made a Confession of his Faith in seventeen
Articles, to the great Satisfaction of most that heard him.

In the year 1545. a notorious Lie was Printed in Italy about Luther's Death,
which was that when he saw he must dye, he requested that his Body might be
laid upon the Altar and worshipped; but when his Body was laid in the Grave,
such a terrible Earthquake happened as if the Foundation of the Earth was
loosened, when as the People looking up beheld the Host hovering in the Air,
the which they took and laid upon the Altar, when the night following a loud
noise and rattling was heard more terrible then the former, which terrified all
the City: and in the Morning his Sepulcher being opened, they found neither
Body Bones nor Clothes, but such a stink of Brimstone issued thence as overcame
all the standers by; and almost choked those that opened it. This Lie coming
Printed into Germany, Luther read it and subscribed it with his own hand;
showing the Malice and Folly of the Pope and his Agents: A while after he was
sent for by the Counts of Mansfield, to Compose a difference between them about
the Borders of their Countries, and Inheritances, when as not been accustomed
to such affairs, he took with him Melancthone and some others, and was by the
Counts received upon the Borders with a hundred Horse; where after he had
settled the Temporal affairs, he fell to Preaching and Exhorting the people, and
Administered the Sacrament to many whom he thought fit Persons to receive the
same.

Within a while he fell sick and grew exceeding weak, yet putting his trust in
God he supported himself to Comfort his Friends beyond measure; insomuch that
the day before his Death, he Dined and supped with Melancthone and the rest of
his Accomplices: but after Supper his Pain increasing he retired to pray, and
then went to Bed and there slept till Midnight, but then being awakened by the
Pain and perceiving his Life near at an end, he called his Friends about him,
and said, I pray God to preserve the Doctrine of the Gospel amongst us, for the
Pope and the Council of Trent have grievous things in hand. After which he made
his Prayers, and earnestly desired of God that he would defend his Church
against the Pope, and all his Adherents.

When it was expected that he was about to dye, Justus Jonas and Caelius bid
him be constant and Persevere in the Faith he had taught and held to the last,
to which he answered, yea; and soon after gave up the Ghost, dying Anno
Christi, 1546. he was a man of great Temperance and Abstinence; oftentimes had
the Papists hired Ruffians to kill him, but they had never the Power to do it;
the Devil one time appeared to him (as he was walking in his Garden) in the
shape of a huge Boar, but he so flouted him that he soon vanished. He was wont
to say, God would give Peace to Germany during his Life, but woe to them that
should Live after him: about four years after his Death his Wife falling out of
a Wagon into a Lake, so bruised her self, that she dyed within six days, to the
great Grief of all good People.

The end of the Life of Martin Luther.

The Life of ZUINGLIUS.
HVldericus Zuinglius was by birth a Switzer, being by his Parents educated in
Learning, and kept to the studying of sacred Books, profiting so much that at
ten years old he went to Basile, from whence after some time he departed to
Berne, where he was Instructed under the Tutorage of Henry Lupulus a famous
Divine. When after a while going to Vienna, he Commenced Master of Arts, where
he studied so hard that he got Valerius Maximus by heart; and gave his mind
much to the study of the Scriptures, insomuch that he could readily expound
many of the difficult Phrases therein contained, and then began he to think
upon the Doctrine of Reformation, which having well weighed he plainly
perceived, it agreed in all Points with the Holy Scriptures: Whereupon he
Preached against the Corruptness of the times, and the Licentious living of the
Romish Clergy, laying open their wicked Practices and Idolatrous worship,
withdrawing many from the Romish to the reformed Religion, so that within a
while he grew so Famous, that he was chosen Pastor of a Church, called our
Lords Hermitage, by Theobaldus Baron of that part of the Country where it
stands. There he Preached against the worship of Images, and other abominable
Ceremonies, in the Romish Church.

About a year after his Pastorship, one Sampson a Franciscan Friar being sent
by the Pope to sell Indulgences, came into those parts whom Zuinglius greatly
opposed, plainly proving him to be an Impostor and deceiver of the People,
insomuch that he persuaded the People to keep him out of Zurick: upon which the
Indulgence-Merchant trotted to Badena where he exposed his Trumpery to sail,
and often would fall into a fit of Bawling; Behold they fly, behold they fly,
meaning the Souls that were delivered out of Purgatory by his Indulgences.

Anno Christi 1520. the Senate of Zurick at the instance of Zuinglius,
commanded the reformed Ministers to Preach freely, and frame their Doctrine
according to Scripture; and not to teach any Traditions, at which the Bishop of
Constance was greatly troubled, and desired that the Faith might be continued
according to the Church of Rome, till such time as a Council could be called.
But Zuinglius defended them, and the Magistrates of Zurick called a Synod,
desiring the Bishop either to come in Person, or send his Doctors; Whereupon he
sent his Chaplain: but he not being able to prove any thing Erroneous, in the
Doctrine of Zuinglius, made an Exception against the Synod, and so departed. So
that the Senators at the request of Zuinglius, not only confirmed the Preaching
Minister, but also restrained the Monasteries, only allowing the Monks and
Friars a Competency; they employed the Overplus to Charitable uses, and
Commanded that all Images in Churches should be taken down, and burnt, which
was done accordingly, as likewise the Mass to be abolished, and the Lords
Supper to be Administered as it was wont in the primitive Churches; they also
forbid Procession and remove the Martyrs Tombs, to prevent the Peoples
worshipping them; whereupon a Notary belonging to the Council stood up, and
grievously Complained that they had taken away the Ancient worship of the
Romish Church, against all right; whereupon a great Dispute arose between him
and Zuinglius about the Administration of the Sacrament, and many Arguments
used on both sides, so that it was put off to a further hearing, during which
time Zuinglius dreamed that he being Non-plussed and sitting down a heavenly
Messenger stood by him, and said, O thou Sluggard why do thou not answer him
out of the 12. of Exodus? At which he awaking immediately started up, and
taking his Bible turned to the Proof, and there found, this is the Passover of
the Lord. The which text he afterward opposing against his Adversary, not only
confounded him, but highly satisfied the whole Assembly, insomuch that the next
Sacrament day most of the Inhabitants of Zurick were present.

A while after Eccius the Popish Lawgiver sent to Baden, to the Ambassador of
Zurick, to Complain against Zuinglius, which he understanding wrote an Apology
to the Ambassador, wherein he declared: That if Eccius could lay any thing of
Heresy to his Charge, as he pretended, he would at all times be ready to
Vindicate himself by the word of God, and that he would Dispute with him, by
writing or word of Mouth. To which Eccius writ a reply, desiring the Dispute,
and appointed the place, to be either at Lucerna or Baden; but Zuinglius
answered that he would not venture his Person at those places, by reason he had
been already condemned there as a Heretic, but if he would come to Zurick he
would freely Dispute with him; the Senators of Zurick sent to him likewise,
that he would come thither upon the public Faith; but he refused, accusing
Occolampadius also; but a while after, the twelve Cantons resolved that it was
necessary they should meet at Zurick, which Eccius and Occolampadius did
accordingly: Whereupon the Dispute was held between them, but it came to no
Perfection; so that nine of the Cantons concluded that Zuinglius and his
Accomplices should be Excommunicated, but they proceeded not to Sentence.

About a Twelvemonth after, another Dispute was held at Bern, the which the
Popish Cantons opposed, but it notwithstanding went on, after which it was
decreed that the Mass, Altars, Images, and other superstitious Trumpery should
be abolished, and that the Divine Service should be continued according to the
Word of God, and also they writ the day and year of their abolishing Popery,
upon a Pillar set up for that purpose, in Letters of Gold that it might remain
as a Memento to Posterity, the like Reformation was Effected at Basil.

About this time a Sect of Anti-Baptists began to spread their Erroneous
Opinions, and Preach against the Baptism of Infants, baptizing themselves anew;
against these Zuinglius opposed himself; wherefore they began to rail upon him,
and to asperse him with Lies and Calumnies, insomuch that the Senate taking
notice of it, some of them were imprisoned, and others Proscribed, of which
three or four were put to Death.

The Monks and Friars being cast out of their Cells and Monasteries, at the
Procurement of Zuinglius sought by all means to take his Life, laying
Ambushments for him, so that the Senators appointed him a Guard.

Anno Christi, 1531. they of Zurick and Bern, agreed to stop the coming of
Provision to the three Cities of the Popish Cantons, which caused them to take
Arms, and coming into the Territories of Zurick before they were expected, they
set upon a Garrison of one thousand men, who sent to the City for Aid, upon
which Forces were Levied, in the Head of which Zuinglius advanced, for fear any
should charge him with Cowardice, though he had been a great disswader from
cutting off the Provision, but the Zuricks coming to the top of the Hill, and
perceiving their men were fighting and in present Danger, they encouraged each
other, and ran down the Hill, at the bottom of which the Passage was so
straight, that they could go but two abrest, upon which being met before they
could range themselves in Battle, the Popish Cantoniers fell upon them that
were foremost and put them to the Rout, killing many of them; Zuinglius being
amongst those that advanced, he was thrice overthrown, and still got up again,
but being the fourth time run in with a Spear, he fell down upon his Knees and
said; Well, they can kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul.

When the Soldiers came to strip the slain, Zuinglius was found alive lying
upon his Back with his eyes up to Heaven, whereupon they asked him if he would
have a Priest to Confess him; to which he answered, no; they then bid him, call
upon the Virgin Mary, which he also refusing they thrust him in with a Sword,
and so he expired without fetching a Groan: and as soon as they knew it to be
him, they Cut his Body in four pieces and burnt it, when the next day his Heart
was found unperished by the Fire, tho the rest of his Body was Consumed.

Before this Battle a Comet appeared, which he said Prognosticated his Death;
and declared it openly in his Sermons, fourteen days before he fell in Battle:
He was a man of great Courage, full of Meekness, very Liberal to the Poor, and
Learned in all the studies that Age was capable of, he was slain in the manner
aforesaid, in the year 1531.

The Life of Sr. JOHN OLD-CASTLE, commonly called the LORD COBHAM.
JOhn Old-Castle came of very worthy Parents, being an Englishman by Birth,
and born in the Reign of Henry the fourth, at whose Court he was brought up;
and coming to man's Estate he was Knighted by the King, and for his honorable
great Service in the Wars, was honored with the Title of Lord Cobham; when
betaking himself to his Studies he became very zealous for the Gospel, and
often grieved that Antichrist was suffered to tread it under his feet,
insomuch that he openly reproved the Idolatrous and Superstitious worship of
the Church of Rome, and took the Parts of the reformed Ministers, especially
such as taught Wicklif's Doctrine; upon which the Papists began to hate him,
and endeavored many ways to ensnare him, resolving to Rid him out of the way;
whereupon they branded him with the name of Heretic, and made grievous
Complaints against him to the King, that he went about to innovate Religion,
and to stir up Rebellion; but the King being satisfied in his fidelity gave
little heed to the Accusations of his Adversaries, yet they so far prevailed
that they got his Consent to summon a Council, and then the Archbishop of
Canterbury addressed himself to the King with many grievous Complaints against
the Lord Cobham; hoping by such means to cast him out of the Kings favor, that
so they might the boldlier proceed against him; but the King told them, That he
being one of his Knights, and of an honorable Family, He would himself first
Commune with him about his Opinion, and persuade him to return to the Romish
Church.

The King having thus satisfied the Bishop for the present, he sent for the
Lord Cobham and desired him to be an obedient Son of the Church, and that he
would submit himself to his Bishop and Confess himself in an Error, to which he
mildly answered: You, most worthy Prince, I am always willing and ready to
obey, for as much as I know you to be the Minister of God; bearing the Sword
for the Punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; unto
you, next unto my Eternal God, I owe all Obedience, and submit all that I have
unto you, being ready at all times to do whatever you shall in the Lord command
me. But as touching the Pope and his Spirituality I owe them no Suit nor
Service, knowing him by the Scriptures, to be the Great Antichrist, the Son of
Perdition, the open Adversary of God, and the abomination standing in the Holy
place.

The King hearing this stout and Christian-like answer, he dismissed him with
an Admonition that he would become obedient to the Church, but he utterly
refusing, the King at the reiterated Importunity of the Arch Bishop, delivered
him up to be proceeded against as he saw fit; whereupon he consulting the other
Bishops, they resolved to cite the Lord Cobham to appear at a Council to be
holden for that purpose at London, there to answer to such Articles as should
be objected against him, but the Bishops Sumner coming with his Citation to his
Castle of Couling durst not enter the Gate, without my Lord Cobham's leave; the
which he not obtaining returned as wise as he went.

Then the Bishop hired one John Butler, Doorkeeper to the Kings Privy Chamber,
to go with his Sumner, which he accordingly did; and telling the Lord Cobham
that he had a message for him from the King, he got Admittance; when coming to
his Presence he told him: It was the Kings Pleasure he should obey that
Process, to which he answered; That he would in no Case consent to the devilish
Practices of the Popish Priests. Upon notice of which the Bishop being
thoroughly nettled, sent to fix the Citation upon the great Church in
Rochester, not far from his Castle; but it was soon torn down by some of the
Lord Cobham's Friends, the like being done three or four times; upon which he
Excommunicated him, but he laughed at such his Proceedings, which enraged him
yet the more; but at last the Lord finding the Malice of the Popish Clergy to
increase against him, he went Voluntarily to the King, and carried with him the
Articles of his Belief in writing, desiring his Majesty to suffer them to be
perused by the Learned men of either University: And if they could any ways
prove that they were disagreeing to the word of God, he would submit; or that
according to the Law of Arms, In the defense of his Faith he would fight with
any man Living, Christian or Heathen; the King, his Royal Progeny and the
Council excepted; and he would refuse no Correction, that should be inflicted
according to the Law of God.

Yet the King not daring to displease the Archbishop, permitted him Personally
to be summoned in his Privy Chamber; and upon his appealing from the
Archbishop caused him to be Arrested and carried to the Tower, where he caused
his Confession to be writ over again, during his Confinement.

A while after he being brought before the Archbishop and his Consistory, the
Archbishop proffered to absolve him, if he would require it; but he told the
whole Assembly, He needed it not, but was there ready to make a Confession of
his Faith, if so be they would Permit him. And thereupon he delivered it to
them in Writing, but they told him that although there were many good things
contained therein, yet they had no leisure to Examine them, but that he must
answer to the Articles, and then they began to ask him his Opinion about the
Sacrament of the Altar, and Penance, but he said, He had written his mind in
the Paper, and would not enter into Discourse about those things further?
Whereupon he was remanded to the Tower.

Not long after the Council set again, and he was sent for before them; when as
before the Bishop proffered to absolve him, but he told him: He had never
Trespassed against him, and therefore had no need of his Absolution, and when
they told him that unless he would recant, they would condemn him as a
Heretic, He bid them do as they thought best, for, said he, I am at a point,
that which I have written I will stand to it to the death; and afterward
falling upon his knees he lifted up his hands toward Heaven, and said, I
shrive me here unto thee, O Eternal and ever-living God, in my frail Youth I
offended thee, O Lord, by Pride, Covetousness, Wrath, Uncleanness, and many men
have I hurt in my anger, and committed many other horrible Sins, for which good
Lord I ask thee forgiveness; and so with tears in his eyes he stood up, and
turning to the People, said, Lo, good People, for breaking God's Laws and his
holy Commandments they never yet accused me, but for their own Laws and
Tradition they handle me most cruelly, and therefore they and their Laws by
God's promise should be utterly destroyed; after which they proceeded farther
to examine him, but he returned such Answers to all their Questions, as made
many wonder at his Wisdom, yet they proceeded to read the Bill of Condemnation
against him as a Heretic. After they had done, he lifting up his eyes toward
Heaven, said, Lord God Eternal, I beseech thee of thine infinite mercy to
forgive my Persecutors, after which he was sent with a strict Guard to the
Tower.

The cruel handling of this good Lord, much offended not only the Commons, but
many of the Nobility, upon which the Bishop drew up an Abjuration in his name,
and caused it to be rumoured, that he had recanted his Errors, and closed with
the Church; but that was soon contradicted by his own handwriting; he had not
been in the Tower above a Month after his Condemnation, but he made his Escape,
and fled into Wales, where he continued four years, even till the death of
Henry the Fourth; but then Henry the Fifth coming to the Crown, the Bishops fo
far solicited him, that he offered great sums of money to any that could
apprehend him; whereupon either for Lucre or Spite, the Lord Powis under
pretense of friendship basely betrayed him, so that being brought up to London,
the Parliament then sitting, he was carried before the House of Lords, who upon
ruminating the former proceedings against him, confirmed the Sentence of the
Bishops, That-like a Traitor he should be drawn through the Streets of London
to the Gallows, in Saint Giles in the Fields, and there hanged, and afterward
burnt upon the Gallows as he hung, which Sentence was accordingly put in
Execution; but the Judgment of God soon overtook Thomas Arundel Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, his Capital Enemy, who condemned him, for his Tongue swelling in
his mouth, he could not swallow any Food, and so was starved to death.

The Lord Cobham suffered Martyrdom, Anno 1417, he was a man of singular Piety,
descended of a Noble and Ancient Family, a man of such strength and courage,
that few durst encounter him, and greatly beloved by his Prince, for the
singular Services he had done him in the Wars, until such time as the Bishops
traduced him, and turned him out of favor.

The Life of JOHN FRITH.
JOhn Frith was born at Westrum in Kent, being brought up by his Parents to
Learning, he so profited, that he soon became excellently skilled in the Latin
and Greek Tongues, and then going to Cambridge, he met with William Tindal, of
whom he learned many things conducing to saving Knowledge; but by publishing
his Opinion, he fell into the displeasure of Cardinal Woolsey, who
notwithstanding his favoring him before, caused him with several others to be
put into a dark Prison or Cave, where salt-Fish was wont to be kept, the smell
of which so annoyed them, that some of them dyed; but in a short time after,
Frith making friends to the Cardinal, he was set at Liberty, and to avoid the
Storm that then threatened the Professors of the Gospel, he went beyond Sea,
where staying two years, he again returned to England, when coming to Reading,
he was taken up as a Vagabond, and there imprisoned and put in the Stocks till
such time as he sent for the Schoolmaster of the Town, who finding him to be a
man of great Learning, procured his Enlargement.

A while after, Sir Thomas Moore being Lord Chancellor, and hearing of his
return, offered a large sum of money to any one that could apprehend him, upon
which a Tailor, one of his former Acquaintance, betrayed him, under pretense of
concealing him in his House, when being apprehended he was committed Prisoner
to the Tower, where he was often visited by Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and
Sir Thomas Moor, who persuaded him to recant his Opinions, but he absolutely
refused, plainly showing them, that what he held or had preached, was according
to the word of God; he also disputed with Sir Thomas Moor, both by Writing, and
Word of Mouth, using such convincing Arguments, that he so far wrought upon
Archbishop Cranmer, that he afterward confessed that he took his first Light
of Reformation from Mr. Frith.

A while after at the Instigation of one of the King's Chaplains, set on by
Gardener, he was ordered to be heard before the Archbishop and the Lord
Cromwell, who very unwillingly undertook the charge, as being both favorers of
the Reformed Religion; but at last by the King's strict Order, the
Commissioners sat at Craydon, whither Mr. Frith was brought by one of the
Bishop's Gentlemen, and his Porter, who by the way counseled him to run away
from them, and they would willingly suffer it, but he refused, saying, That if
they went away and left him alone, he would come to Craydon himself, and appear
before the Bishop. So on they went, and he the next Morning was brought before
the Commissioners, where he so well defended his Opinions by Proofs out of the
Scriptures and Fathers, that all that heard him admired his quick Apprehension,
and so well he quoted Saint Augustine to his purpose, that Dr. Heath whispering
to the Archbishop, told him, that his Allegations out of Saint Augustine could
not be denied; yet was he after all delivered to Stoksly, Bishop of London, who
calling him before him into his Consistory, without any regard to the
Scriptures, Saint Augustine, or any other of the Fathers, condemned him, and
committed him to the Sheriffs of London; to be burnt as an Heretic.

When he came into Smithfield, the place appointed for his Martyrdom, he with
an undaunted courage went to the Stake, where he was no sooner fastened, but the
fire was kindled, in which he continued till the last with such Constancy and
Patience, that many were converted by his Death, and began to pray to God to
receive his Soul; but Dr. Cook forbid them, saying, They ought to pray for him
no more than they would for a Dog, which uncharitable expression made many
blame him.

He suffered Martyrdom for the sake of the Gospel, Anno Christi 1531. he wrote
many Learned Treatises, most of which were burnt during the Reigns of King
Henry the Eighth, and Queen Mary, and some of them were saved by Miracle, as I
may say, for on Midsummer Eve, Anno 1626. a Cod-fish being brought into
Cambridge Market, when it came to be cut up, these following Writings of John
Frith were found in its belly, wrapped up in Canvas, which were afterward
Printed to the rejoicing of all good Christians, viz.

A Preparation for Death.
A Preparation to the Cross.
The Treasure of Knowledge:
A Mirror to know your self.
A Brief Instruction to teach one willingly to dye, and not to fear Death.
Now had any such thing happened relating to the Papists, the Party that wrote
them had not only been canonized, but the Miracle been trumpeted throughout
Christendom.

The Life of WILLIAM TINDAL.
William Tindal was born in Wales, from whence (after he had received such
Learning as qualified him for higher Schools) he was sent to Oxford, where he
gave his mind wholly to the study of Divinity, and often took upon him to
instruct his Fellows in the Knowledge of the Scriptures, often expounding to
them the most difficult places.

After he had greatly profited in that University, and taken his Degree, he
departed thence for Cambridge, and having stayed there some time, he went into
Glocestershire, and there lived with one Mr. Welsh, and became Tutor to his
Children; to this Gentleman's house several of the Popish Doctors
frequently-resorted, with whom Mr. Tindal had many Disputes, and always worsted
them, which did not a little increase their hatred against him; during his
being there he translated a Book, called, Enchiridon Militis Christiani, the
which he presented to Mr. Welsh and his Lady, who reading, and duly weighing
what was therein contained, they began to slight the Popish Priests, and not to
entertain them so friendly as they were wont, the which the Priests attributed
to Mr. Tindal, and thereupon fell to railing against him, and used all their
endeavors to ensnare him; insomuch that they suborned several of their Novices
to accuse him to the Vice Chancellor, who upon their Accusations sent for him,
and after having railed at him the space of an hour, there being no proof of
any Crime that was laid to his charge, he dismissed him.

Within a while after Mr. Tindal chanced to happen into the Company of a Popish
Priest, who was reputed to be a man of great Learning, with whom he falling
into some Discourse, he at last so nonplussed him, by proving out of Scripture,
that the Pope's Laws were contrary for the most part to the Laws of God, that
the blasphemous Wretch bursting out into a great rage, said, We had better be
without God's Laws, than the Popes, to which Mr. Tindal (being fired with Zeal
for the honor of the Lord of Host) replied, I defy the Pope and all his
Laws, and will if God spares my Life, within these few years cause a Boy that
drives the Plough, to know more of the Scripture than you do, etc.

A while after the Papists so eagerly prosecuted him, that he was obliged,
though much against the will of Mr. Welsh, to leave his House, and then
endeavored to get into the Service of the Bishop of London, but failing
therein, he betook himself to a retired Life, and translated the New Testament
into English, but at last being noted by the Papists he thought good to depart
for Germany, the which he did by the Assistance of one Humphrey Mounmouth a
Merchant, where being arrived, he met with John Frith, and had afterward many
conferences with him, and conceiving that the greatest cause of Error in the
People, was by reason the Scriptures were in an unknown Tongue, and therefore
understood but by a few; he translated the five Books of Moses, with
Expositions to such Places as were doubtful, which he caused to be Printed
together with the New Testament, of which he sent as many as he could
conveniently into England, by reading of which the People plainly discerned the
Popish Errors that had been brought into the Church.

A while after he went into the Dukedom of Saxony, where he often conversed
with Luther, and his Associates, and then coming into Flanders, he resided at
Antwerp, where he wrote several Treatises of Faith; as also two Books, one
entitled, the wicked Mammon the other, the Practice of Prelates, together ^^th
some Expositions upon Scripture, and Answers to the Writings of Sir Thomas
Moor, which Works of his so enlightened the English Nation, that the Gospel
began to be taught in many places; another Book he wrote of the Declaration
against the Popish Sacrament, and against the Mass, these things greatly
exasperated the Popish Clergy; insomuch that when his New Testament came
abroad, some of them said, There were a thousand Heresies in it, others, that
it could not be properly translated into English, and telling their minds more
plain, said, It was not fit the Laity should have it in their Mother Tongue;
whereupon they so far prevailed with the King, that he published a
Proclamation, forbidding any Person under a great penalty, to buy one or suffer
one to be kept in his house, nor did their Malice stop there, but having
suborned one Henry Philips, they sent him to Antwerp with great sums of money,
with which he so bribed the Emperor's Attorney, that he sent two Ruffians to
apprehend Tindal, who was no sooner brought before him, but he sent him to the
Castle of Filford, eighteen miles from Antwerp, seizing upon all his Books and
Writings, and what ever they could find in his lodgings.

The English Merchants, that were at Antwerp, hearing of his Imprisonment,
became Suitors for his Deliverance, but in vain; for Philips, with his Money
prevailed beyond their Entreaties; so that he being at last brought to his
Answer, although they could lay nothing justly to his charge, yet the Attorney
proceeded to condemn him, and delivered him to the Magistrates, in order to
execute him.

When he was brought to the Stake, he cried with an audible voice, Lord, open
the Eyes of the King of England. And then being strangled by the Hangman, fire
was set to the Wood, and he con^^med to Ashes, suffering Martyrdom, anno
Christi, 1536. When within a short time after, the just Judgment of God
overtook Philips, who betrayed him, insomuch that he was eaten up with Lice.

The Life of PAUL FAGIUS.
PAul Fagius was born in the Dominions of the Prince Palatine of the Rhine,
whose Parents being but of mean condition, he was first educated under his
Father, who kept a School; and afterward sent to Heidelberg, where he greatly
profited in Learning: and from thence at eighteen years of age he went to
Strasburg, where he taught School, as likewise followed his studying Divinity;
so that growing famous, he at length associated himself with Capito, Hedio,
Bucer, Zellius, and other Learned and Godly Ministers of the Reformed Church:
and in a while after he married, and was called to the Ministry at Isna; but
the Study of the Tongues being most famous at Strasburg, by reason of the
resort of a number of exiled Ministers, he resolved to go thither, and there
continued to read Hebrew to those that would hear him: and at other times he
used to expound the Scriptures: but had not continued there long before he was
called to his Pastoral Charge of Isna; in which he officiated for the space of
five years, and there being assisted by Elias Levita, the famous Jew, whom he
sent for from Venice, he translated several Books out of Hebrew, and set up a
Press to Print the same; and so continued till the Plague broke out; nor then
did he fly from his Charge, but exhorted the rich to be liberal to the poor,
and distributed their Bounty with his own hands, as he saw occasion, going from
House to House to see who lacked, even when the Contagion raged highest; so
that it was counted by some miraculous, that he escaped.

In the Year 1542, the Pastorship of Wolfgang, at Strasburg, having, by reason
of his death, continued vacant for the space of a year, the Inhabitants sent
Messengers to desire him to come thither, and to take the place upon him, which
he accordingly did. First for two years and afterward being so in love with
his Doctrine, they by using their utmost endeavors, persuaded him to stay two
other years.

About the time when the War broke out in Germany, Prince Frederick, Elector of
the Palatinate, intending to reform the Churches within his Dominions, sent for
Fagius, as well knowing him to be a man, not only eloquent, but of great
Learning; where he was no sooner come, but had a place appointed him at
Heidleberg to preach, and instruct the people, where, during his residence, he
published many Books, which were very advantageous to such as studied the
Hebrew Tongue, by which he growing yet more famous, Bucer, Peter Martyr and
Hedio thought fit to entertain him as their companion in reading
Divinity-Lectures. But the War increasing, and the Emperor getting the upper
hand of the Protestant Princes, the progress of Religion was hindered, and an
Edict set forth for the banishing the Ministers of the Gospel, amongst whom
Fagius and Bucer went together, as partners in joy or sorrow; but before they
departed out of the Empire, a Messenger was sent out of England by Archbishop
Cranmer, to fetch them over, that they might be aiding in establishing the
Reformed Religion, King Edward the Sixth then reigning. Nor was their coming
fruitless, for they, by their unwearied Endeavors, confirmed many that were
wavering. In fine, Cranmer set them to translate the Old and New Testament
after the exactest manner, with brief Notes upon the hardest places, the which
they undertook: but ever it was finished, Fagius died of a Burning Fever; or as
some say, was poisoned by the Papists; so that anno 1550, he was intombed at
Cambridge, from whence, in the Reign of Queen Mary, the Papists (having
condemned him for a Heretic) took his Bones, and burnt them. A poor, but
malicious Revenge.

The Life of MARTIN BUCER.
MArtin Bucer was a German by birth, being born at Seles^ade in Alsatia, anno
1491, and was in his Nonage put into the Monastery of the Dominicans, where
having profited in Learning, he was by the Prior sent to Heidelberg, where he
studied Divinity, and perfected himself in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues; there
he read Luther and Erasmus's Works, upon which he began to disgust Popery. And
at that time an offer being made him by Prince Frederick, he became his
Chaplain, renouncing and detesting against Popish Idolatries: he likewise often
preached at Heidleberg.

Whilst he staid there, Luther came to that City, and preached several Sermons,
disputing against Popery, and also against Free Will; by which Bucer greatly
profited: and from that time forth he began to dispute openly against the
Popish Religion in every place where he came; insomuch that the Monks and
Friars (fearing that his Doctrine might stir the people up to turn them out of
their holes to work for their Livings, which above all things they most
abhorred) laid wait for his life several times; but God still preserved his
Servant. But he finding himself in danger, departed from that place, and after
some time to Strasburg; where he no sooner came, but he was appointed to preach
in a Church, and read in the Divinity-School: and a while after the Reformed
Ministers, viz. Capito, Hedio, Zellius, Niger, Pollio, Latomus, Firu, Hag and
Bucer published their Reasons, why they had changed the Mass into the Lord's
Supper; which Book they dedicated unto Prince Frederick, upon consideration of
which, the Magistrates of Strasburg banished Popery out of their City.

A while after, Bucer disputed with the Popish Doctors at Auspurg, and proved
their Religion false, out of the New Testament: so that his Fame spreading
wide, he was sent for by the Inhabitants of Vlm, to come and reform their
Churches; where he arriving, met with Occolampadius; they together so
instructed the people, and set things in so good order, that the Churches
flourished in the truth for many years after.

By this time his Enemies had spread abroad a false rumor, that he had forsaken
his New Doctrine, and made his Recantation: to clear which, he went to Zurick,
and there in the full Assembly he confessed his Faith and Doctrine. Not long
after, he went with some of his Brethren to Ratisbone, and there held a dispute
against Eccius, and several of the Popish Bishops, assembled there for that
purpose. A while after, the Emperor perceiving the Pope neglected to call a
Council, he assembled some of the moderatest of the Protestant Divines, as
Agricola, Melancthon, Brentius and others, and commanded them to draw up a set
form of Religion, which they did, but Bucer being sent for by the Elector of
Brandenburg, refused to sign the same, alleging that there were Popish
Doctrines contained in it. As likewise several others refused to sign it upon
the same account, which so enraged the Emperor, that he cast several of them
into prison; but Bucer escaped his hands, tho not without great peril. And in a
short time after was sent for into England by Archbishop Cranmer, who upon his
arrival provided a House for him at Cambridge, and allowed him two hundred
Crowns per annum; where he undertook with Fagius, as is aforesaid, the
Translation of the Bible; but by reason of the change of air and diet, he
within a year after his coming over, fell sick, continuing so for some months,
but in the end recovering, he taught in the Schools, and read Lectures in his
own House, but not taking care of himself, he fell again into a Relapse the
next day after he had commenced Doctor of Divinity.

During his sickness many Learned Men came to visit him, but especially Doctor
Bradford, who one day as he was taking leave of him to go preach, he told him
that he would remember him in his Prayers, whereupon Bucer with tears in his
eyes, said, Cast me not off, O Lord, now in my old age, when strength fails
me. And a while after he said, He has afflicted me sore; but he will never,
never cast me off. And being desired to arm himself with faith, and a steadfast
hope in God's Mercies against the Temptations of Satan, He said, I am wholly
Christ's, and the Devil has nothing to do with me; and God forbid that I should
not now have experience of the sweet consolation in Christ. And thereupon with
a smiling countenance he gave up the Ghost, and was interred very nobly by the
Commandment of the King. But in Queen Mary's time his Bowels being taken up,
they were burnt together with Fagius's. He died anno Christi, 1550.

The Life of JOHN ROGERS.
JOhn Rogers, an English Man by birth, and born of Protestant Parents. In his
youth he was educated at the University of Cambridge, where he learned the
Tongues, and grew very expert in Learning; and being well grounded in Divinity,
he was chosen by some Merchants to go with them, as their Chaplain, to Antwerp;
where he no sooner arrived, but he met Tindal, who was fled thither out of
England, where he likewise brought him acquainted with several Divines of the
Reformed Churches, with whom he had many Disputes, and was so enlightened by
their Doctrine, that he was ever after out of love with the Popish Religion,
joining with the Ministers in translating the Bible: he there likewise married
a Wife, and then went to Wintenberg, where he so perfectly learned the Dutch
Tongue, that he was chosen Teacher of a Congregation, where he faithfully
performed his Charge, till such time as King Edward the Sixth began his Reign;
and then he was sent for home by Doctor Ridley, Bishop of London, and by him
made a Prebend of Paul's, where he preached the Gospel till the beginning of
Bloody Queen Mary's Reign; yet in those dangerous times he did not spare to
exhort the people to adhere to the Gospel and Doctrine they had received, and
not to worship stocks and stones, as they had formerly done. And so went on to
lay open the wicked practices of the Popish Clergy, which so nettled them, that
they went and complained to the Council, whereupon he was the next day sent
for, where he no sooner came, but Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, (and then
Lord Chancellor of England) fell to railing at him, calling him Impostor,
Traitor and Heretic; and so charging him he should preach no more, he was
dismissed.

Within a while after, the Queen put out a Proclamation against preaching the
Gospel, after the wonted manner, she having again introduced Popery; but Doctor
Rogers fearing to disobey God more than man, could not be silent, but like a
true Shepherd fed his Flock with spiritual Food, by preaching as formerly; for
which he being again brought before the Council, Gardener sent him prisoner to
Winchester House; from whence, within a day or two he was sent for by the
Council the third time; but notwithstanding he begged, that he might speak for
himself, and justify his Doctrine, they would by no means permit him; but
after many abusive words given him, they remanded him to prison, where he wrote
a consolary Letter to his Friends; in which he exhorted them, To be steadfast,
and to fight courageously under the Banner of their great Captain, the Lord
Jesus, against their spiritual Enemies; and that now it was no time to be
faint-hearted, but freely to stand to the Profession of the Gospel, and seal it
with blood, which he was ready at all times to do. After which he admonished
them to be careful of his Wife and Children.

The next day he was brought again before the Council, as likewise the day
following, where he was treated with nothing but ill Language, which plainly
demonstrated they sought his Life; for upon his refusing to recant, without
suffering him to make his defense, Gardener read his Sentence, which was, That
he being a notorious Heretic, should be carried into Smithfield, and there
burnt. After which they proceeded to degrade him; and they delivered him up to
the Secular Power, in order to his Execution, declaring that he was under the
great Curse, and that it was a dangerous matter to eat or drink with him, or
give him any thing; for that as many as did so were liable to the effects of
the said Curse. To which Doctor Rogers with a smiling countenance said, Well,
my Lords, here I stand before God and you, and all this honorable Audience, and
take him to witness, that I never wittingly, nor willingly taught any false
Doctrine; and therefore have I a good Conscience before God and all good men. I
am sure that you and I (meaning Gardener) shall come before a righteous Judge,
before whom I shall be as good a Man as you; and I nothing doubt, but I shall
then be found a true Member of Jesus Christ, and be everlastingly saved; and as
for your false Church, you need not to have excommunicated me out of it; for I
have not lived in it these twenty years. The Lord be thanked for it.

After this, he desired that his Wife and Children might come to him, whilst he
lived. But Gardener would by no means consent to his request, so that he was
hurryed to Newgate; when on the fourth of February the Keeper came to him, and
told him, he must prepare for his Execution: at which he not being at all
concerned, tho he had no warning before; only said, Then if it be so, I need
not tie my Points. Yet before he went to the Flames, he was carried before
Bonner, Bishop of London, who earnestly persuaded him to recant, and live; but
he utterly refused life upon such conditions, exhorting such as stood about him
to repent and cleave fast to Christ. As he came out, his Wife, with nine small
Children about her, and one sucking at her breast, waited to see him, of which
he took his leave, bidding them trust in the Lord, and he would plentifully
provide for them; after which, he went courageously to the Stake, and with
admirable patience, embraced the Flames, being the first that sealed his
Testimony with his blood, during the Reign of that bloody Queen, suffering
Martyrdom, Anno Christi 1555. he was a man of singular Eloquence, Learning and
Wisdom, by nature charitable and pitiful, of a middle stature, moderate in
Diet, and powerful in Prayer.

The Life and Martyrdom of LAWRENCE SAUNDERS.
LAwrence Saunders by birth an English man, in his Youth he was put to Eaton
School, where he was educated till he was fit for the University, and then
entered in King's College in Cambridge, where being of an Acute Wit, he
out-stripped most of his fellow-Students in Learning; but his Father dying, his
Mother was greatly desirous to put him Apprentice to a Merchant, which though
much against his will, she did, viz. to Sir William Chesterfield of London, but
all his mind ran upon Divine Meditations, insomuch that when the other Servants
were at merry making, he would retire in private, and be either at his Book, or
at Prayers, the which his Master taking notice of, and being himself a godly
man, one day as he was bewailing his Condition in his Closet, his Master came
to him, and reasoned with him, and in fine found that he did no way affect a
Public life, but rather a studious and retired one; whereupon after he had
made his Mother acquainted with it, he delivered him his Indentures, and
discharged him of his Service, upon which he shortly after returned to
Cambridge, where having perfected his Study in Greek and Hebrew, he began more
earnestly to study the Holy Scriptures, and to expound such Places as were most
difficult, and where he found them too hard for him, he required the Assistance
of others.

In a short time after his coming thither, he commenced Master of Arts, and in
the beginning of King Edward's Reign, he was ordained a Minister, and began to
preach the Gospel to the great content of his Hearers; not long after he
married, and then by his favor with the Bishop he obtained the Ministry of
Lichfield, and by the strictness of his life and mild behavior got the good
report even of the Papists; after he had continued there with good success, by
God's blessing, upon his Ministry, he was removed to Langhton in
Leicestershire, where he soon got himself the like Applause, and then being
desirous to live in London, where he might have the better opportunity to
converse with learned men; he obtained the Vicarage of Alhollows in
Bread-street, keeping both that and his Country Cure, to the content of both
places, till such time as God permitted Queen Mary to come to the Crown, but
then being desirous to part with that in the Country, he rode thither on
purpose to resign it into the hands of the Donator, and by the way preaching at
Northampton, he persuaded the People to beware of relapsing into Popish Errors,
which are (said he) likely again to overrun this Nation, as a just punishment,
by reason that England, when the light of God's Candle shined upon her, had
such little regard to the Gospel, and true preaching of God's Word. At which
Sermon of his some Papists being present they bitterly complained against him
to Bishop Gardener, who was now become the Queen's Chief Privado, upon which he
was apprehended, and for some time kept in prison, but at the Intercession of
his Brethren, who were Officers in the Queens Army he was released.

When he perceived, that Anti-Christ's Reign over England was again at hand, he
like Moses resolved to stand in the Gap, although to the hazard of his life,
and thereupon concluded to part with neither of his Livings, but preached at
them both, as his time served him, but his Friends advised him to fly the Storm
of Persecution that was imminent, yet he refused it, resolving like the good
Shepherd, to live and die with his Sheep, and not leave them to the mercy of
the Popish Wolves, but being hindered to preach in the Country by the Papists,
who now began to domineer, he came for London, when about Barnet he being
overtaken by Mr. Mordant, one of Queen Mary's Privy Councillors, he asked him
whither he was going. I have, said Mr. Saunders, a Cure in London, whither I am
going to instruct my People according to the Word of God. If you would take my
Counsel, said Mordant, I would advise you to desist. How then, replied Mr.
Saunders, shall I discharge my conscience before God, if any be sick and
desirous of consolation, or if any want good Counsel and Instructions, or if
any should fall into Error and receive false Doctrine. Then Mordant asked him
if he did not preach such a time in Bread-street: Yes, Sir, said Mr. Saunders,
and to morrow you may hear me there again, where I will confirm by God's Word
all that I have taught. I would again, said Mordant, counsel you to forbear. To
which Mr. Saunders replied, If you will forbid me by lawful authority, then I
must forbear, but not till then. Nay, said Mordant, I will not forbid you, and
they parted; whereupon this spiteful wretch went instantly to Bishop Bonner,
and told him what had happened; yet Mr. Saunders according to his promise
preached in the Morning, his Text being this, I am jealous over you with a
godly Jealousy, for I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you
as a chaste Virgin to Christ; but I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his Subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.

In the Afternoon he came again, but then Bonner had sent his Officers to
hinder him, who accordingly took him out of the Church, and carried him before
their bloody Master, who charged him with Treason, Heresy, and many other
false Reproaches, telling him, he broke the Queen's Proclamation, and traduced
the Sacrament; as to the first, he answered, that he thought it was better to
obey God than Man; and to the second, he said he had done it, as it was wont in
the Primitive Church; but the Bishop desirous of his Blood, ordered him to
write his mind about Transubstantiation, which he did, saying, I know you seek
my blood, and you shall have it, and I pray God you may be so Baptized in it,
that you may hereafter loath blood-suckings; upon which Bonner sent him to
Gardener, where after long attendance he was admitted to his presence, who
asked him, how it happened that notwithstanding the Queen's Proclamation, he
had dared to preach, to which Mr. Saunders replied, That seeing such dangerous
times at hand, his conscience obliged him, and that he was bound in duty to
admonish his Parishioners to be steadfast in the Faith they had received, being
thoroughly persuaded in his conscience, that it was better to obey God than
Man; your Conscience (said Gardener) a goodly Conscience sure: This your
Conscience would make our Queen a Bastard, would it not?

We declare no such thing, said Mr. Saunders, but for that, let them take care
whose Writings are yet abroad to testify the same, not without great shame and
reproach to the Author. This he said, because that Gardener to please King
Henry the Eighth, had written a Treatise, and caused it to be printed, wherein
he declared Queen Mary Illegitimate, and then proceeding, he told the Bishop
that he had done no Injury, unless it were one to preach God's Word, according
to the purity and sincerity of the Gospel, and that although he and his
Brethren were forbidden to publish it with their Mouths, yet he doubted not but
that they were ready to seal it with their Blood; whereupon Gardener remanded
him to prison, for which he thanked him, saying, that now he had appointed him
a place to rest in.

During his Imprisonment he wrote to his Wife and Friends, after this manner; I
am merry, and I trust I shall be so, mauger the teeth of all the Devils in Hell
Riches I have none to bestow amongst you, but that Treasure of tasting how
sweet Christ is to hungry Consciences (whereof I thank my Savior I do feel
part) that I bequeath to you, and to the rest of my beloved in the Lord.

When he had continued in prison about a year, his Friends began to sue for his
release, the which when he heard of, he desired them to desist, for that it was
God's pleasure that he should bear witness to his Testimony even to the death:
A while after he was brought upon his Examination, where they offered to
release him, if he would recant, to which he replied, that he did confess Life
and Liberty were things desirable, but that he would not murder his Conscience
to save his Life, but by God's Grace, said he, I will abide the worst extremity
that man can do against me, rather than do any thing against my Conscience; and
when Gardener threatened him with death, he said, Welcome be it whatsoever the
will of the Lord be, either life or death, and I tell you truly I have learned
to dye, but I exhort you to beware of shedding innocent blood, for truly it
will cry aloud against you.

After they had examined him, they proceeded to pass Sentence against him, and
then degrading him, they delivered him up to the Sheriffs to execute him by
fire, when after a year and three Months imprisonment he was brought to the
Stake, the which he first embraced, and afterward kissing, said, Welcome Cross
of Christ, welcome everlasting life, the fire by the malice of his Enemies
being made of green wood, put him to exquisite torments, but he endured them
with a Christian patience, as being well assured when his fiery trial was at an
end, he should receive a Crown of Life that fades not away.

He was burnt at Coventry, Anno Christi 1555. one thing by the way I shall not
think amiss to insert, when the Nation was in suspense for fear of Queen Mary's
bringing in Popery, Mr Saunders being in company with Doctor Pedleton, and
seeming to be much dejected, Pedleton said, What man, there is much more cause
for me no fear, than for you, for as much as I have a big and fat Body, yet
will I see the utmost drop of this Grease of mine melted away, and this Flesh
consumed with fire, before I will forsake Jesus Christ and his Truth which I
have professed; yet when Queen Mary came to the Crown, he turned Apostate.

By which we may see how weak the resolves of men are, unless God's Holy Spirit
assist them to perform and enable them to bear Affliction.

The Life of JOHN HOOPER.
JOhn Hooper an English man by Birth, was brought up at the University of
Oxford, where he studied Divinity, and was so far transported with the love of
the Scriptures, that he would read them Night and Day, many Expositions he made
upon the doubtful places of the New Testament, and reconciled Texts which
seemingly disagreed.

Thus his Zeal for the Word of God got him hatred amongst the haters of the
Gospel, especially about the time when King Henry the Eighth caused the Six
Articles to be published, but especially Dr. Smith so persecuted him, that he
was obliged to leave the University, and betake himself to be Steward to Sir
Thomas Arundel, with whom he lived in good credit, till such time as the
Papists traduced him; yet Sir Thomas not willing to part with him, endeavored
to persuade him to turn Papist; but when himself could not prevail, he sent him
to the Bishop of Winchester with a Letter, wherein he desired the Bishop to try
if he could work upon him, but all in vain, for he returned such Learned
Answers, that he non-plussed the Bishop, for which he became his Enemy ever
after, and sought by sundry means to entrap him; whereupon he had notice sent
him by some of his Friends, that it was best for him to snift for his safety;
so that taking such necessaries as were convenient, he left the Kingdom, and
went to Paris, yet within a while he re^^^ed for England, but having
intelligence that his life was still sought for, he again crossed the Seas, and
went into Germany, where he was friendly entertained, especially by Mr.
Bullinger, there he learned the perfection of the Hebrew Tongue, and married a
Burgonian Gentlewoman, living there till the death of King Henry; but in the
beginning of King Edward's Reign, he with many others returned, and being ready
to depart, he took his leave of Mr. Bullinger and the rest, giving them many
thanks for their kindness toward him, telling them they should hear of him
from time to time; But as for the last News, said he, I shall not be able to
write it, for where I shall take most pains, there shall you hear of me to be
burnt to Ashes, which Prophecy exactly came to pass, as shall hereafter be
recited.

When he came to London he had a Benefice ordered him, where for the most part
he preached twice a day, at whose Sermons such crowds of People flocked, that
the Church could not contain them, when at length he preaching before the young
King, he so highly approved of him, that he first made him Bishop of Gloucester,
and afterward of Worcester, where he went from place to place, preaching
throughout his Diocese, insomuch that the People infinitely loved him, the
which they continued to the last.

In the beginning of Queen Mary's days, when the bloody cloud was just breaking
over the Nation, he was fetched up to London by a Pursivant, of whose coming
although he was advertized, and by his Friends advised to make his Escape, yet
he refused it, saying, that he was not ashamed of his Testimony, nor would he
abandon Christ's Cause; for said he, Once I must confess I did fly, but being
called to this Place and Vocation, I am resolved to stay, and live, and die with
my Sheep.

Being brought to London, there came Orders that he should be brought before
the Bishop of Winchester, who greatly exclaimed against him, giving him many
unbecoming words, which the good man bore with admirable patience, and after a
short Examination he was committed to the Fleet, where the Warden ordered him a
Bed of Straw, being so commanded (as it is supposed) by Gardener, and he
likewise lying in a noisome Chamber, within a short time fell sick, when
calling for some to come to him, the Warden said, Let him alone, if he die,
there will be a good riddance of him, such villainous hands was this good
Bishop fallen into. Of the hard usage he suffered there, himself wrote an
Epistle and sent it to his Friends.

A while after Dr. Hooper was brought before the Bishop of Winchester, and
charged as a Preacher of Sedition and Rebellion, as likewise of being guilty of
many Heresies and false Assertions, to which he made such a Learned Defense,
that all that heard him could not but confess that he was a man of great Parts,
yet by noise and tumult they often interrupted him, endeavoring to put him
out, but when they saw they could not prove any thing against him (yet
resolving to have his Life) they pronounced Sentence against him, and then
proceeded to degrade him and so delivered him to the Sheriff, who carried him
to the Counter-Prison in Southwark, from whence a while after he was removed to
Newgate, when in the way the Sheriff said, Dr. Hooper, why was you so rash as
to answer my Lord Chancellor so hastily, it might have happened better to you,
had you mollified him with mild Words. To which he answered, I spoke nothing
unbeseeming me, neither was I impatient, though I was earnest in my Master's
Cause, and it stands me in stead so to be, for it goes upon life and death,
not only in this World, but in the World to come.

After he had continued Six Days in Newgate, the Keeper brought him word, that
he was to be carried to Gloucester, there to suffer at the Stake; at which News
he greatly rejoiced, giving praise to God that he had so graciously disposed
his Enemies hearts, to carry him to a Place where he had so faithfully taught,
that there he might seal his Doctrine with his Blood. Then came to him several
of the Popish Sadduces, as Bonner, Harpsfield, and others, to entreat him to
accept of life, by renouncing his former Doctrine, and making his Public
Recantation, but he would by no means hearken unto them, saying, He would not
for cowardly fear forsake his Lord and Master, but be steadfast to the end, not
doubting but that he would send him patience and strength to withstand the
utmost torments their rage could invent.

Within a while after he was taken out of Newgate to be carried to Gloucester,
in order to his suffering, when as all the way he went he appeared very joyful,
and lying one Night by the way, he eat his Supper with a merry countenance, and
slept without the least trouble; for why, he was all peace within, as being
armed with a good Conscience, which is the only true happiness during this
mortal life; the next Morning Sir Anthony Kingston came to him and told him,
that he would advise him to submit himself to the Church by a free Recantation,
for, says he, Life is sweet. To which, he replied, But the death to come is
more bitter, and the life to come far sweeter, and I will rather dye than
renounce my Lord and Master.

Being come to the Verge of the County, he was received by the Sheriff, who
with a strong Guard conveyed him to the Place of Execution, being met by many
thousands of People, who much bewailed his condition, and sent up their Prayers
to Heaven, that he might be comforted and enabled to bear his sufferings
patiently, many of them weeping to see so Reverend a Person fallen into such
misery; but he comforted them, and told them, That he was unworthy who refused
to suffer reproach or death for the sake of the Lord Jesus, who refused not for
our sakes to suffer a shameful and ignominious death upon the Cross; and
hereupon he began to exhort them to be steadfast in their Faith, but the Popish
Varlets would not suffer him to proceed. Then he addressed himself to the
Sheriff, saying, Sir my request to you is, that I may have a quick fire, which
may soon dispatch me, and I will be as obedient as you would wish, I might have
had my life with great advancement, as to temporal things, but I am willing to
offer my life for the Testimony of the Truth, and trust to dye a faithful
Servant to God, and a true Subject to the Queen.

Then the Sheriff told him that he had strict Orders to hinder him from
speaking to the People, to which he said God's will be done, and then kneeling
down, he continued in fervent Prayer for the space of half an hour with an
exalted and joyful countenance, and then rising up, suffered them to fasten him
to the Stake, where such was the malice of his Enemies, that they had prepared
green wood, yet before the fire was kindled, a Pardon was offered, if he would
recant; but he cried out with a Christian Zeal, If you love my Soul, away with
it, and then three Iron Hoops being brought to fasten him to the Stake, he
said, If you had brought none of these, I would have stood patiently, and
thereupon he only took one of them, and put it about his middle. When the Reeds
were set up, he embraced and kissed them, putting them under his Arms, where he
had two Bags of Gunpowder, and the fire being kindled, he continued three
quarters of an hour in the fire, praying, and often crying out, O Jesus thou
Son of David, have mercy upon my Soul, and often between whiles he would desire
them to let the fire come at him, the which as is above mentioned, being made
of green Wood, consumed all his lower parts, when as the upper remained
untouched, yet he bore it patiently, not in the least complaining of his
Torments, as being past doubt supported by him that is able to make all things
tolerable; thus fell this blessed Martyr in the bloody Persecution under Queen
Mary, Anno Christi, 1555. Sealing the Doctrine he had so faithfully taught,
with his blood.

The Life and Martyrdom of ROLAND TAILOR.
ROwland Tailor being born of wealthy Parents, was brought up at Cambridge,
where he not only studied Divinity, but the Civil Law; so that in a short time
he grew so famous, that Archbishop Cranmer entertained him as his head
Chaplain, where he lived in great repute till the middle of King Edward the
sixth's Reign, when he was prefered to be Rector of Hadly in the County of
Suffolk, where by his Preaching and Charitable deeds, he gained the high Esteem
of all good Christians: Yet by strongly opposing the Popish Idolatries he
procured to himself the hatred of the Papists, who during King Edward's time,
hid their Malice as wanting Power to vent it, but when Queen Mary came to the
Crown, they began to show their Stings, and boldly spit their Poison against
the Preachers of the Gospel.

About the time that she put out a Proclamation for the restoring the Romish
Religion, one Foster a notorious Papist and others of his Gang, procured a
popish Priest to come and say Mass in the Church of Hadly, when upon the
tolling of the Bell Dr. Tailor (for so he had Commenced) went to the Church,
where he no sooner perceived the Priest dressed up in his Superstitious
Trinkets: And not being able to come at him, by reason he was surrounded with
drawn Swords, he called to him saying; Thou Devil incarnate, who made thee so
Audacious as to enter this Church, to defile and profane it with thy
abominable Idolatry? I command thee thou Popish Wolf in the name of God to
depart hence, and not to Presume thus to Poison the flock of Christ. Then said
Foster to Dr. Tailor: Thou Traitor, what makes you come hither, to let and
disturb the Queens Proceedings? To which he replied, I am no Traitor, but the
Shepherd which Christ has appointed to feed this his Flock, with spiritual
Food; and therefore I have good Authority to be here?

Then Foster in a great Rage said, Will thou, thou Traiterous Heretic raise a
Commotion to disturb and hinder the Queens Proceedings. And thereupon they
forced him out of the Church, and the Priest went on with his Tale. Within a
while after Foster sent to Gardener to rail upon, and grievously complain
against Dr. Tailor: So that he sent down his Letters to apprehend him, which
the Doctor having notice of, would by no means fly tho his Wife and nearest
Relation earnestly persuaded him thereto, saying; That he had done enough in
resisting the Priest, and that if he fell into the hands of his Enemies, he
must expect nothing but Imprisonment, or cruel Death. But he replied, I know my
Cause to be so Good and Righteous, and the Truth so strong on my side, that I
will by Gods Grace appear before them, and confirm the Doctrine I have
Preached; for I believe that I shall never be able to do God such good Service
as now, and that I shall never have so Glorious a Calling, nor so great a Mercy
of God proffered me as now: Wherefore pray for me, and I doubt not but God will
give me Strength, and his Holy Spirit that all my Adversaries shall be ashamed
of their doings.

And although they used many Arguments, and importuned him to fly, he would
not, saying farther, that he knew God would never leave his Church; although
for a time he suffer her to be afflicted, yet he would again restore her, and
raise up such a Ministry that all the Power of Hell and Rome should never be
able to put to Silence. Then having notice that the Messenger was come for him,
he took his leave of his Friends, and went with him to London: where being
admitted into the presence of Gardener, who then was not only Bishop of
Winchester, but likewise Chancellor of England: Gardener called him Knave,
Heretic, and Traitor; Demanding if he knew him not. Yes, said Dr. Tailor, I
know you and all your Greatness, yet you are but a Mortal man, and if I should
be afraid of your Lordly looks, why fear you not God, who is Lord of us all?
how dare you for Shame look any Christian man in the Face, seeing you have
forsaken the Truth, denied our Savior Christ and his Word, and Acted contrary
to your own Oath and Writing? with what Countenance can you appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ, and Answer for your Oath, first made to King Henry the
eighth, next to Edward the sixth, which you have now Violated and broken?

Tush, Tush, said the Bishop, those were Herod 's Oaths, better broken then
kept, and I tell thee that our Holy Father the Pope has dispensed with them,
and I am glad I am come home again, into the Bosom of Mother Church, and so I
would have thee do. Should I, said Dr. Tailor, forsake Christ by leaving that
Church, which he has founded by his Prophets and Apostles, to approve of those
Lies, Errors, Superstitions, and Idolatries, that are most Blasphemously
approved of by you? God forbid. Remember my Lord you once wrote truly against
the Pope, and were once sworn against him. I tell thee, said Gardener, that was
Herod's Oath, and I am discharged of it. But, said Dr. Tailor, you can never
without sincere Repentance be discharged of it before Christ. I see, replied
Gardener, thou art an Arrant Knave, and a very Fool, and so after he had railed
at him, as long as he thought it was Convenient, he Commanded his men to carry
him to the King's Bench, and there order his close Confinement: Whereupon Dr.
Tailor falling upon his Knees said; Good Lord I thank thee, and from the
Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his detestable Errors, Good Lord deliver
us.

When he came to the Prison, it so happened that he met Mr. Bradford there, at
which he did not a little rejoice; as likewise Mr. Bradford in his Company,
both rendering Praises to God, who had upon such an occasion suffered them so
happily to meet in Order to the Comforting and Supporting each other in their
Affliction, insomuch that when Dr. Tailor wrote to his Friends, he sent them
word that He thanked God for Providing so Graciously for him, in so ordering it
by his Providence, that he had been sent to a Prison, where he had met with an
Angel: For so he called pious Mr. Bradford.

During this Imprisonment he was often sent for, and Examined, touching his
Faith and Doctrine, of both which he gave such an ample Testimony grounded upon
Scripture, and the Writings of the Fathers, that his very Enemies could not but
Confess he was a man of great Learning, yet so Bloody was their Rage against
the servants of Christ, that they proceeded to Condemn him, when upon their
reading his Sentence he told them; That God the Righteous Judge of all the
Earth, would require his Blood at their hands, and that the most insolent
amongst them should repent, their receiving again of the Pope and his
Supremacy, and their Wolfish Tyranny against the flock of Christ.

A while after his Condemnation, Bishop Bonner came to degrade him, bringing
with him all the Massing Implements, and Commanded him to put them on; but he
told them he would not. Then said Bonner, If you will not I shall make you ere
I go. By Gods Grace, said Dr. Tailor, you shall not. Then Bonner charged him to
do it upon his obedience. But upon his absolute refusing to meddle with the
Superstitious Trumpery, Bonner Commanded his man to do it; who put them on
accordingly. Then Dr. Tailor setting his Arms to his sides walked a turn or
two, saying: Now my Lord were I in Cheapside, what a goodly Fool should I be
counted, would not the very Boys laugh at these Ridiculous Toys?

At which the Bishop being angry, went about to strike him, but his Chaplain
desired him not, saying, That he would surely strike again. Yes by my Faith,
said Dr. Tailor, would I, for the Cause is Christ's, and I were no good
Christian if I would not fight in my Masters quarrel. Then the Bishop not
daring to proceed farther Cursed him, and departed. To which Dr. Tailor
replied, Though you do Curse me, yet God does bless me.

The night before his being carried to Hadly to be burned, his Wife, Children,
and Servants were permitted to come to him, with whom he prayed very fervently,
and gave them all his Benediction.

The next Morning the Sheriff received him at the Prison, he going very
joyfully; and by the way he was greatly solicited by the Sheriff of Essex to
recant and embrace the Popish Religion. To which he only Answered, Well, I
perceive that I now have been deceived my self, and shall deceive many in Hadly
of their Expectations. At which the Sheriff told him it was a gracious saying,
and desired him to explain it, as well hoping he intended to recant. Why, said
Dr. Tailor, I did propose to my self once, that I should have been buried in
Hadly Church yard, in which I now see I shall be deceived, and as for my
deceiving of others of their Expectations, is, that I being a man of a
Corpulent body, might have fed many Worms, who now must be Content without me.

He being come within two miles of Hadly, a great number of People came
flocking to meet him, for the most part greatly lamenting the State into which
he was fallen; when as he Comforted them in the best manner, Saying, be
Patient, as for me, I thank God I am almost at home, and have not past two
miles more to go over, before I come to my Fathers house.

At the Towns end a poor Lame man with five small Children met him, and cried
out; Ah! dear Father, and good Shepherd Dr. Tailor, God help and Comfort thee,
as thou have many times succored and Comforted me, and my poor Children:
Whilst many others with weeping Eyes lamented his loss.

When he came to the Almshouses he called out the poor People by their names,
as he was at other times accustomed, and gave money to every one of them, who
Prayed to God to strengthen and Comfort him, greatly lamenting the loss of so
good a Benefactor as he was wont to be.

Coming to the place of Execution, the Sheriff commanded him that he should in
no wise speak to the people; which did not a little grieve him; that he was not
suffered to take his last farewell of those to whom he had so faithfully
Preached the Gospel: yet he was very Cheerful, when after he had Prayed a
while, he put off his Clothes and went to the Stake and kissed it, when through
the vehemence of the Zeal by which his Soul was agitated, he going about to
speak one thrust a Staff-into his mouth, and by that means hindered him;
another struck him over the Head; and a third threw a Faggot at him, which so
cut his Face that the Blood ran down in abundance; upon which he said, O
Friend, what needed this? I have harm enough already. And when he was saying
his Miserere in English, Sr. John Shelton struck him on the mouth, saying,
Knave I will make you speak Latin.

When the fire was kindled, he extended his Arms toward Heaven, and with a
voice as if he had been Ravished with Joy, continued saying, Most merciful
Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ my Saviors sake, receive my Soul into thy
Hands, till one with a Halbert beat out his Brains. And thus dyed this Blessed
Martyr, Anno, 1555.

The Life of JOHN BRADFORD Martyr.
JOhn Bradford was born of Virtuous Parents at Manchester in Lancashire, and
brought up in such Learning as the place was able to afford, and when he had
greatly profitted therein, he became Steward to Sr. John Harrington, with whom
he lived in much Credit for several years, yet his mind not being contented
with that manner of Life, but still fixed upon Divine matters, he left his
Master and went to Cambridge; where he so profited in the study of Divinity,
that within two years after his coming thither, he commenced Master of Arts,
and was chosen a fellow of Pembrook-Hall: Where he lived in good repute a
Considerable time, and there happened to come acquained with Martin Bucer (who
to avoid the storms of Persecution in Germany, was come over into England) and
by Conversing with him he greatly profited, insomuch that Dr. Ridley Bishop of
London hearing of his towardliness and holy manner of Life, preferred him to be
a Prebend of St. Paul's; where he continued faithfully to discharge his Trust,
till the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign: when as one Bourn Chaplain to Bonner,
and afterward made Bishop of Bath, Preaching at Paul's Cross so highly offended
the People in his Sermon, by inveighing against the reformed Religion, That not
only a Dagger was thrown at him, but likewise the People began so far to
Mutiny, that had not Mr. Bradford at his Earnest request stood up in his place
and quieted the People, they had pulled the Popish Wolf in pieces; but the
People no sooner perceiving Bradford but they gave a great shout, Crying,
Bradford, Bradford, God save thy Life Bradford? Yet Bourn not thinking himself
safe desired Mr. Bradford to convey him out of the Throng, which he did,
sheltring him with his own Body, and spreading his Gown over him, in his
retreat into St. Paul's School where he left him. Then cried the People, Ah!
Bradford thou have saved him, that will be the forwardest to burn thee. As
indeed he was.

On the same day in the Afternoon Mr. Bradford Preached at Bow Church, and in
his Sermon sharply reproved such tumultuous Proceedings; yet within three days
after he was sent for by the Council and charged as a stirrer up of Sedition;
and thereupon sent to the Tower, from whence he was removed to the King's Bench;
from thence he was brought several times before Bonner to be Examined, and ever
put the Bishop to a non plus; yet his Death being resolved upon, the bloody
Wretch proceeded to pass Sentence upon him, as likewise to degrade him, and
then Committed him to the Counter, where he continued a Considerable time,
before his Execution, Preaching to and Exhorting the Prisoners, in the way of
saving Knowledge, as likewise relieving their wants according to his Ability:
Nor was there a day passed wherein some Person or other of quality did not come
to him for Instructions, insomuch that his Chamber seemed rather a Chapel set
apart for Divine worship, then an imprisonment; for there he Preached twice
every Sabbath, and prayed with such as resorted thither every day, and as often
as he could have opportunity he administered the Sacrament in both kinds. He was
a man so just that the Keeper of the King's Bench would permit him upon his word
to go into London and visit his Friends, and he was ever so Faithful that he
rather returned before, then after the time he had set.

When his Friends demanded whether they should solicit his Delivery, and what
he would do if he had his Liberty, his Answer was; That he did not greatly Care
whether he was delivered or not, but if it so happened he would Marry and live
secretly in England. During his Imprisonment, many Spanish Friars came to tempt
him to renounce his Religion, but he used such powerful Arguments to confirm it
to be the true Religion, such as was established in the Primitive Church by
Christ and his Apostles, and so confounded them in their own Arguments, that
they were always obliged to betake themselves to their old shift, which was to
Rail and brand him with the name of Heretic.

He often had the opportunity to escape, but he would by no means attempt it;
the night before he was conveyed to Newgate, he had a dream wherein it was
signified to him, That he was to be burnt within two days, that Chains were
brought, and that the day following he was to go to Newgate; The which happened
accordingly, for he was scarce risen before the Keepers wife came to him, and
told him she had heavy news to inform him, which is, said she, that you must
presently go to Newgate, where your Chains are ready, in Order to your being
burnt in Smithfield, at which he taking off his Cap lifted up his Eyes toward
Heaven, and said, I thank God for it, I have looked for the day a long time: It
comes not now to me suddenly, but as a thing that I have waited for with
Patience, the Lord make me worthy to suffer for his Name. And thereupon he
prayed fervently for a good space, when as the Officers were come to fetch him,
at which time he called together the Prisoners, and Servants, giving them many
pious Exhortations, and distributed Moneys amongst them, bidding them persevere
in the Truth, And not be carried away with every Wind of Doctrine.

When he came to Newgate, several came to visit him, to whom he gave Ghostly
Consolation. And the next morning the Sheriff came for him, and conveyed him
together with a youth of about eighteen years of Age to Smithfield, where the
Stake was prepared. When he came at the Stake, he kissed it, as likewise a
Faggot that he took up, and then falling flat upon his Face, in token of
Humility, he prayed for a good space, till the Sheriff ordered him to rise;
they putting off his Raiment, he was together with the Youth fastened to the
Stake, when as he cried with a loud voice, Repent, O England, of thy sins,
beware of Idolatry, beware of false Antichrists, take heed they do not deceive
thee. Then turning to the young man, who was an Apprentice to a Merchant in
London, he said, Be of good Comfort Brother, for we shall have a merry Supper
with the Lord this Night. And then embracing the Reeds, he said, Straight is
the way, and narrow is the gate that leads unto everlasting life, and few
there be that find it.

The fire being kindled, he held his hands in the flames, and with a Christian
patience suffered the burning without so much as stirring the body, dying a
glorious Martyr, in the Bloody year, Anno 1555. He was a man so entirely
beloved for his holy life, that many who never saw him, greatly lamented his
death; nay, the very Papists themselves, in the midst of all their rage and
malice, were forced to confess that he was a man of great Learning, and many of
them heartily wished that he might have lived.

The Life of NICHOLAS RIDLEY Martyr.
NIcholas Ridley was Born at Newcastle, and there Educated in Learning by his
pious Parents, till he was fitted for the University, when as he was sent to
Cambridge, where he grew so famous by his Studies in Divinity, that by the
consent of the whole University he was chosen Master of Pembroke Hall, and
commenced Doctor in Divinity.

A while after Archbishop Cranmer hearing of his Fame, sent for him, and made
him Vicar of Hern in East Kent, where he so well discharged his Pastoral
Office, that he gained the general Applause of all the Places adjacent, who
neglecting their own Teacher, would for many miles circumference come to hear
his Sermons; so that in a while after he was constituted a Prebend of the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, but not greatly likeing those with whom he was
obliged to converse with, in that Station he left them, and traveled into
France, where after his having visited many Places, and greatly profited in his
Studies, he returned into England, where he was no sooner come, but King Henry
the Eighth sent for him, and ordained him one of His Chaplains; as likewise
within a while after made him Bishop of Rochester, in which Station he
continued till the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, who translated him to the Sea of London, where he continued preaching and instructing the People by
expounding the Scriptures, and persuading them unfeignedly to embrace the
Reformed Religion, by utterly renouncing Popish Superstitions and Idolatries,
and so by preaching from Church to Church throughout his Diocese. His Capital
Enemies, the Papists, were obliged to confess he was a man of a pious Life and
Conversation; never did he preach, but such multitudes of People came flocking
about him, that the Church could not contain them, and thus continued he in
great credit till the Reign of Queen Mary, in whose days all things Sacred were
tumbled down, and the Abomination of Desolation set up in the Holy Places.

This good Bishop was first converted to the true Religion, by reading
Bertram's Book of the Sacrament, and strongly confirmed in his opinion, by
conversing with Peter Martyr, and other Learned Divines of the Reformed Church;
when in the first year of Queen Mary's Reign, he was sent for before the
Council, and there accused of spreading Heretical Doctrine. To which
Accusation, although he answered with all Gravity, and opposed it with many
learned Arguments; yet was he sent to the Tower, and there continued till he,
Archbishop Cranmer, and Dr. Lattimer were sent to Oxford, there to dispute
against the Popish Doctors; after which Dispute they were all three committed
to Prison in that City, till at last Dr. Ridley was separated from the rest,
and sent to the house of one Mr. Irish, where he remained till the day he
suffered Martyrdom; yet he often conversed by Letters with the aforesaid holy
men, as likewise with Mr. Bradford, who was at the same time a Prisoner in the
King's Bench; when writing to Dr. Lattimer, he desires him that he would send
him continually some Spiritual Consolations; For, says he, unless the Lord
assist me in his Service, I shall but play the part of a Coward; but he can
make a Coward in his Cause fight like a courageous Soldier.

He confessed that upon hearing the resolute Confession and last Speech of Mr.
Rogers, who suffered Martyrdom, he was greatly encouraged, and felt all the
heaviness that before oppressed his Soul, quite removed, so that he was all Joy
and Peace within.

Not long after, he being brought into Saint Mary's Church, where by the
Queen's Appointment, he was to be tried (as they termed it, although his death
was resolved on before, right or wrong) by such Commissioners as were come
thither for that purpose, amongst whom one sat as representing the Pope; when
he was come they opened their Commission, and began to read it, to which he
gave heedful Attention, till such time as they came to mention the Pope and his
Supremacy, and then he put on his Hat, saying, I do not this in contempt to any
Person here, but to the Pope, whose usurped Supremacy I should make my self
guilty of owning, if I should with patience vail my Cap at the hearing it.

Upon this Speech, the Bishop of Lincoln chafed exceedingly, and commanded the
Beadle to take off his Cap, which he meekly suffered him to do, when after a
long Examination, but no Proof against him of any Erroneous Doctrine, as they
pretended, they proceeded to read his Sentence of Condemnation; and in a short
time after the Bishop of Worcester came to degrade him, bringing the Massing
Trinkets, which he would have had him put on, but he refused. Then the Bishop
with the help of his men put them on him, and so taking them off again,
pronounced him an Excommunicated and Accursed Person, declaring that it was
dangerous for any to converse with him. Yet Dr. Ridley laughed at the Bugbear
threats, remembering the words of the Apostle, who says, If our Conscience
accuse us not, God that is greater than our Conscience will not condemn us.

After the Degradation, he was delivered over to the Secular Power, in order to
his Execution, when at Supper-time his Keeper's Wife weeping to think he must
suffer the next day; he comforted her, saying, I pray you be patient and
cheerful, as I am, for by this grief you express, it is plain you love us not;
and thereupon he with a cheerful countenance invited them all to his Wedding,
saying, to morrow shall I be married, speaking mystically, as meaning his Soul
was to be espoused to Christ its Redeemer, and when his Brother-in-Law and
others offered to watch with him, he refused their kindness, saying, that he
should sleep as well that night as ever he did in his life.

When the Morning was come, the Sheriff, together with the Lord Williams of
Them, and others, came with a great Guard to convey him to the Place of
Execution; as also Dr. Lattimer, who was condemned with him, as in his life
will hereafter appear; when as Dr. Ridley dressed himself in his Episcopal
Garments, as many of them as were convenient, and shaved himself, as if he had
been going to an earthly Wedding, and as he was upon his way, he looking behind
him, espied Dr. Lattimer coming after, and called to him with a cheerful voice,
saying, O Brother, are you there? Yes, said Dr. Lattimore, have after you as
fast as I can. When they came to the Place of Execution, Dr. Cole being mounted
upon a Stool, set for that purpose, began to rail against them to the People,
telling them that they were Zuinglians, Occolampadians, and the worst of
Heretics. Upon which Dr. Ridley fell upon his Knees, and besought the Lord
Williams, for Christ Jesus sake that he might have liberty to answer him, and
clear himself of those Scandals before he dyed; but the Vice Chancellor and
others, run to him and stopped his mouth, saying, If he would recant he should
be heard, but not otherwise. Then, said Dr. Ridley, I will never deny my Lord
Jesus, and his known Truth, whilst I have breath in my body. Then turning to
Dr. Lattimer, he embraced him, and bid him be of good comfort; For, said he,
God will either assuage the heat of the fire, or give us strength to endure its
fury with patience, and so going to the Stake, he kissed it, and then kneeled
down, and prayed fervently for a good space. When rising up, and being about to
speak to the People, the Popish Locust run and stopped his mouth.

When he was stripped, and the Fagots were piling about him, he said, O
Heavenly Father, I give thee thanks for that thou have called me to be a
Professor of thee even unto death, I beseech thee, O Lord God, have mercy upon
this Realm of England, and deliver it from all its Enemies. And when the Smith
was knocking in the Staple that fastened the Chain, he said, I pray thee good
fellow drive it in fast, for the Flesh will have its course. Then did his
Brother-in-Law bring him a bag of Gunpowder, which he received joyfully, and
tied it about his Neck, so the fire being kindled, he stood in the flame a long
while before he dyed, by reason of the ill making of the fire, and then,
saying, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit, Lord receive my Soul, he
gave up the Ghost, suffering Martyrdom, Anno Christi 1555. He was a man of
singular Piety and Learning, just to all, giving no occasion of abuse to any.
Charitable he was even to a a Miracle, for he kept Bonners Mother at his own
Table, and when he came to dye, he said, Nothing troubled him, but that several
Poor men had taken Leases of him, and paid their Money whilst he sat Bishop of
London, which were now taken from them without any Recompense; and therefore he
desired the Lord Williams to be a means for them, to the Queen, that they might
not lose their Money. If ten thousand Pounds could have saved his Life, the Lord
Dacres offered as much; but his cruel Adversaries thirsted after nothing more
then his Blood; nor would Queen Mary hearken to any Supplication, that was made
for his Life, although he in King Edward the sixth's time, stood against most
of the Peers and Clergy, when they went to exclude her from the Succession; nor
would he for any Entreaty set his hand to it.

One thing is worthy of Note, and may be counted a Prophecy, which was this;
Dr. Ridley during his being Bishop of London, long before King Edwards Death:
As he was Crossing the Thames in a Boat, the Wind arose so high that all that
were with him were in fear of present drowning; but he Comforted them saying,
Fear not for this Boat carries a Bishop that must be burned, and not drowned.

And thus much for the Life of this Pious Martyr, who did not only oppose to
the utmost, the superstitions and Idolatries of the Church of Rome, by words
but also in Writing, and at last sealed his Testimony with his Blood.

The Life of HUGH LATIMER Martyr.
HVgh Latimer was born in Leicestershire, at a place called Thrikesson, where
in his younger years he was put to School, and profited so much in learning,
that within a while he was sent to Cambridge; where he gave himself wholly to
the Study of Divinity, and within two years after his coming thither, Commenced
Bachelor of Divinity; yet was he so zealous a Papist, till God opened his eyes
that he wrote many bitter Letters against Melancthone, and others of the
Reformed Church, using all the Idolatrous Ceremonies; counting it a great Crime
in him if he omitted any one part of the Romish Decrees, and Canons resolving
by any means to become a Friar, for he at that time verily believed that if he
were so he could not be Damned; so blinded was he with Superstition, and
plunged so far into Error; but God having made him, a chosen Vessel to bear his
Name, soon found means for his Conversion; for Mr. Biliney an orthodox Divine
taking notice of his great Zeal, in the way he then was in, and for the
Religion (though a false one) that he professed, he took such opportunities to
discourse with him in Private, that by his Convincing Arguments he so far
wrought upon him, as to give heedful Attention to his Doctrine, whereby he soon
became more Tractable, and much inclined to the reformed Church; and greatly
grieved for the abuses he had offered to the reformed Ministers, asking them
both by word of mouth, and Letters forgiveness for the offenses. And now his
Eyes being open he plainly perceived the deceits of the Romish Church, and
began to detest it, as much as he ever had admired it, so that he by that means
fell into the high Displeasure of some Romish Doctors, who before had styled
him their Champion.

When he was thus Converted and brought over to embrace the saving Knowledge of
the Gospel, he began to Preach and endeavor to Convert others, insomuch that
he converted many; but the Bishop of Ely sent strictly to forbid him; but upon
his refusing to desist the Bishop went himself, when as he found him Preaching,
which he continued so Authentickly and with such a Grace, that the Bishop
instead of reproving him, highly Commended him, and wished to God that himself
had the same Gift of preaching so plain and powerfully, yet shortly after a
complaint was made against him, to Cardinal Wolsey, who cited him before him;
but by the means of Dr. Butts the King's Physician, he was rather advanced then
any ways Discouraged; for it being about the time that the debate was held
about King Henry the Eight his Supremacy, the Cardinal upon finding a man of
great Learning, chose him to be one of those that sat about the deciding that
Affair; when within a while he grew into such favor with the Lord Cromwell,
that he preferred him to a Benefice in Wiltshire, where he faithfully
Officiated for many years, and then was removed from thence to the Bishopric
of Worcester, where he behaved himself so well, that he soon obtained the
Praise of all that were under his Cure. Unless some malicious Friars and Monks,
who greatly Envyed him as plainly perceiving, that his Doctrine tended to the
discovery of their abominable Errors; insomuch that they Exhibited many
grievous Complaints against him. How that he Preached false Doctrine, and
endeavored to stir up the people to Rebellion. But to this he so learnedly
returned Answer, that his Adversaries were ashamed of what they had done; then
continued he more diligent then ever, in Correcting and reforming such Abuses
as were crept into the several Churches under his jurisdiction, opposing, as
much as in him lay, the Cross absurdities of the popish Priests, Preaching
against Miracles and Transubstantiation, Adoration of Images, and the like,
which made the rigid Papists ever lay Snares for him, but in vain; during the
Life of the worthy Lord Cromwell, they prevailed not in any thing.

Upon New Years day, when the Bishops were wont to present the King with Gifts,
Dr. Latimer presented King Henry with a New Testament, in a Handkerchief, with
this Inscription on the Covers; Fornicatores, and Adulteros, Judicabit Dominus;
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, God will judge; so plain was he in reproving the
King, when none besides him durst Attempt it.

A while after by the prevalency of the popish Lords, they obtained a Bill to
pass in Parliament, containing the six bloody Articles, which obliged many a
good man, to lay down his Charge, and amongst the rest this good Bishop. When
he had puled of his Rocket before several of his Friends, he cut a Caper or
two, Saying; now I feel my self light, as being discharged of a heavy Burthon,
for indeed such a Charge is not a little ponderous and troublesome; If
according to the Institution of Bishops, they faithfully discharge their Trust.

When he had resigned his Bishopric, he retired himself to west Kingston near
Bristow, where he had a Personage, and there he Preached every Sunday,
Exhorting and instructing the People in the way to eternal Life. Yet here the
restless Papists would not suffer him to be at quiet, but made great Complaints
against his Doctrine, although they could prove nothing therein contrary to the
Word of God; upon which he repairing to Archbishop Cranmer to clear himself,
found such Favor at his Hands, that he prevailed with the King so far on his
behalf, that his Accusers were forced to draw in their Horns and shrink into
their shells again, as well knowing they could make out nothing Erroneous,
against either himself, or his Doctrine.

These were his Conflicts during the Reign of King Henry the Eight, but he
dying, and young King Edward coming to the Crown, the six Articles that had
caused such Bloodshed, were Rovoked, and then Dr. Latimer was restored to his
Bishopric, where he continued to Preach twice aday for the most part. And now
the Popes Chickens not having such shelter under the Wings of this good Prince;
as they had before, the Bishop lived in great quiet, and followed his Studies
so close, that he soon became such a Disputant that few durst encounter him.

One day as he was Preaching, he told his Auditory, that his Preaching the
Gospel would one day cost him his Life, and that Winchester was preserved in
the Tower for the same purpose; which in the Reign of Bloody Queen Mary fell
out accordingly, for she was no sooner seated in the Throne, but a Pursevant
was sent to fetch Dr. Latimer up to London. Of whose coming although he had six
days notice before hand, yet would he not avoid him, but having received the
Letters he brought from the Council, he promised to follow him, which he did
the next day, tho contrary to the Expectation of his Enemies, who wished that
he would fly, as well knowing his great Parts; but he taking leave of his
Friends, said, I now go as willing to give an Account of my Faith, as ever I
yet went to any place, doubting not, but that God who has made me worthy to
Preach his Word before two excellent Princes will enable me to bear Witness
before the third, either to her Eternal Comfort or Discomfort. In his way to
Court he Rid through Smithfield, where he said to such as accompanied him: That
Smithfield had groaned for him a long time. When he came before the Council,
they fell to abusing him after an unseemly manner, and without suffering him to
speak for himself, sent him Prisoner to the Tower, which they had resolved upon
before his coming.

Being in the Tower, God gave him not only a Christian patience, but endued him
with the Spirit of wisdom, beyond what he had formerly been capable of. There
he kept a whole Winter without fire, notwithstanding his age, and the extremity
of the Weather, which made him tell the Lieutenants man, Unless they looked
better after him, he should deceive them: Which words he repeating to his
Master, the Lieutenant charged Dr. Latimer as one intending to make his escape.
But he expounded the Words, saying, That unless you provide me fire and other
necessaries, instead of dying by heat (meaning by burning) I shall perish here,
through Cold and want.

After he had continued a considerable time Prisoner in the Tower, and had been
often tempted to Recant, he was sent to Oxford, together with Dr. Ridley Bishop
of London, and Archbishop Cranmer, there to Dispute against the Popish Doctors
about Transubstantiation, and other such like Erroneous Tenets in the Church of
Rome. Where Dr. Weston was appointed Prolocutor: The Place for the Dispute
being St. Mary's Church. And although these three Champions of Christ were
separated, not being allowed the use of Books, yet did they so Confound their
Adversaries by lively Texts out of the Scriptures, and Proofs out of the
Fathers, that they were obliged to fall to their old way of Railing. And so
overpow'ring them with Noise and Clamor, they gave out to the Rabble that they
had prevailed against the Heretics, but would by no means suffer the
Proceedings to be Published. Then was our good Bishop with the rest conveyed to
several Prisons, where he continued with admirable Patience, writing to his
Fellow Sufferers to Comfort and Strengthen them to bear their Cross: And often
in his Prayer, which was exceeding Fervent, he would beg of God to restore the
Light of the Gospel once more in England, and that he would preserve Queen
Elizabeth to be a Comfort to the People: And for himself, he desired to dye,
That he so might seal his Testimony with his dearest Blood. All which came
afterward to pass.

A while after he was brought to his Trial, where he so defended the Doctrine
he had Preached, that his Enemies were amazed at his prodigious Learning: Yet
his Death, being right or wrong, resolved upon, they proceeded to degrade, and
Sentence him: After which he was delivered up to the secular Power, in order to
his Execution, together with Dr. Ridley.

When he was brought to the Stake, he looked with a very cheerful Countenance,
as not being in the least Dismayed at the Approach of that Death which himself
so much desired, and the which he might have avoided, if he would have
Recanted. After he had prayed a while, he unstripp'd himself for the Fire, and
said to Bishop Ridley, Brother, be of good Comfort, and play the Man; for I
trust by God's Grace, we shall this Day light such a Candle in England as shall
never be put out: Adding that He knew God was Faithful, and would not suffer
him to be Tempted above what he was able to bear. Then Embracing Dr. Ridley, he
was bound to the Stake, and the Fire kindled to him, when as he cried with a
loud Voice; O Father of Heaven, receive my Soul: And then stroaking his Face
with his Hand, he gave up the Ghost; dying a Glorious Martyr at Oxford, Anno
Christi 1555.

Two things more are worthy of Note. The first is, That at his Death such
abundance of Blood gushed out, that it for a while damped the Fire: The second,
That Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, his mortal Enemy, having that Day
prepared a great Feast at Winchester-House in Southwark; notwithstanding his
having several Persons of Quality to Dine with him, would not go to Dinner till
such time as he received certain Intelligence of the Deaths of Latimer and
Ridley, which was not till about four in the Afternoon; when with a cheerful
Countenance he said, Come now my Lords sit down, the arch-Hereticks are
Dispatched. But he had not eat past three Bits before his Tongue began to swell
in his Mouth. So that being carried from the Table, as not being able to go
himself, he continued in a miserable Condition for fifteen Days, and then dyed,
being as some Report, Starved by reason he could not swallow any Sustenance.

The Life of THOMAS CRANMER, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Martyr.
THomas Cranmer was born of a very worshipful Family, at Arselacthon in
Notinghamshire, where he was Educated in such Learning as his tender Years were
capable to receive; and when he grew to more Perfection, he was sent to the
University of Cambridg, where he so profited in his Studies, that he was within
three Years after his coming thither, made a Fellow of Jesus College: But by
reason of his marrying a Wife, that Place was sequestered from him, and he
appointed Divinity Reader in Buckingham College, where he behaved himself so
well, that he got the good Will of the Heads of the University: So that his
Wife dying, he was Re-invested in his former Place; where he had not been long,
before he Commenced Dr. of Divinity.

Within a while after, Cardinal Woolsey having Founded a new College in Oxford,
sought for the most Learned Men in the Kingdom to replenish it, amongst whom
Cranmer was Chosen: But he foreseeing that Woolsey's Fall was at hand, would by
no Means embrace the Offer, but kept in his former Station.

About this time King Henry the Eight being desirous to be Divorced from
Katherine of Spain, who had been formerly Married to his elder Brother Prince
Arthur, had long labored in the Court of Rome to effect his Purpose; but after
great Trouble, and much Money spent, nothing was done therein; Insomuch that the
King was exceedingly troubled. When so it happened that Fox and Gardener, the
former being the King's Almoner, and the latter his Secretary, being at
Waltham, where the Court at that time resided: They one Day invited Cranmer to
Dine with them, who was come thither from Cambridge, for fear of the Plague,
which raged much in that University. When in the midst of their Feasting, they
demanded his Opinion touching the King's Affair, in Relation to the Divorce. To
whom he made this modest Answer.

I cannot say much on the sudden, in so weighty a Business, which requires
considerable Study and Consideration: But in my Opinion, seeing the King lies
under Pressure of Mind, and is in great Trouble of Conscience, nothing can be
more grievous than long Delays, and wandering in Romish Suits, in which,
whosoever are once Entangled, can hardly get out of the Snares: Wherefore I
think it better, that laying aside all Delays, and Court Suits, wherein the
King has been so long tossed with great Afflictions of Mind: The Judgment of
Divines both in our own, and foreign Nations, and Universities be searched out,
and required, which may be strengthened with the Law of God; and as they shall
by God's Word prove it, Lawful, or Unlawful, so let the King proceed, and by
that means have the Cause Determined in his own Country: Whereby he may live in
lawful Matrimony with a cheerful Mind, and quiet Conscience; which is much to
be desired by all his faithful Subjects.

When he had thus spoke his Mind, they highly Approved of what he said, wishing
the King had had his Advice before he sent to the Court of Rome. And the next
Day they coming to the King's Presence, and he demanding what was done in his
Affair, Fox recounted to him all that Cranmer had said, but Gardener would have
had the Praise of it himself; yet the King would not hear him, but turning to
Fox, he asked him whether Cranmer was yet in Waltham; and being given to
understand he was, he immediately sent for him: Saying, He Counsels right, had
I but known as much two Years since, I had not only saved infinite Expenses,
but had lived with a quieter Mind ere this time, then now I do.

When Cranmer was Introduced, the King demanded if he would stand to what he
had said. To which he replied, that he would: Whereupon the King commanded him
to write his Opinion, as likewise the Earl of Wiltshire to furnish him with
private Lodgings, Books, and whatever he required. When Cranmer had written as
he thought fit, he presented it to the King, who highly approved it, and asked
him if he would make it good before the Pope: The which he undertook to do, and
desired the King, that learned Men might be sent to other Universities to know
their Opinions; which was accorded to, and Cranmer with the Earl of Wiltshire,
sent as the King's Ambassadors to Rome, where the Pope holding forth his
pontifical Toe for them to kiss, an unmannerly Spaniel of the Earls, run and
caught it in his Mouth; after which the Ambassadors refused the Favor, and the
Pope pulled in his Foot again.

Cranmer having made his Business known, offered to Dispute with any that would
undertake to Defend against his Opinons: Saying he would prove it Jure Divino,
That a Brother ought not to Marry his Brothers Wife. But finding none that
would Argue in that Point; after the Pope had made him his Penitentiary he left
Rome, and went into Germany, where he put the Question to those of the chiefest
University, who confirmed what he had said; and he returned into England,
bringing with him the Opinions of above two hundred learned Men, who concurred
with him, that the Marriage was Unlawful.

About the same time those that the King sent into Italy, and other Parts
returned, bringing the Opinions of most Universities, which were coherent with
the other. When as the King having kept the Archbishopric of Canterbury
(which became Vacant by the Death of William Warham) by the Space of ten
Months, upon Cranmer's Return he bestowed it on him, though he much declined
it, having delayed his Business the longer, in hopes some one or other would
obtain it before his Arrival; for he well knew that he must not only take an
Oath to the Pope, but by such an Advancement incur the Envy of many, who gaped
for such a Promotion: But the King pressing it upon him, he could not refuse
it; yet he gave the Popes Bull into the King's Hand saying, That he would never
receive the chief Bishopric of England from any, but him who was Head of
England: Nor take an Oath that was derogatory to the King's Authority.

Being thus Invested Primate of England, he carried himself so Circumspect, and
was so Meek, and Merciful, that it grew to a Proverb, viz. Do my Lord of
Canterbury a shrewd Turn, and he will be your Friend as long as you live.

For several Years he had the whole weight of Reforming the Religion upon his
Shoulders, insomuch that by Reason of the continual Resort, his House seemed
rather a public Court, than a private House. But he continued not long in this
Dignity, before the Popish Serpents began to spit their Venom: Especially
Gardener, who used his utmost Diligence to bring him into Disgrace with the
King: And in order to effect his wicked Purpose, was the chiefest Promoter of
the six bloody Articles, which cost many a brave Man his Life. Nor was this
all, for they often suborned Ruffians to swear Treason and Heresy against him;
but God so ordered the matter, that what was objected, was but rarely Believed,
and the Undertakers so disencouraged, that they rather brought themselves into
Disgrace, than this good Bishop. Yet the King once, to try the Virtue and
Patience of Cranmer, made him believe he would deliver him up to the Will of
his Enemies: But when he perceived he was no ways feared to bring his Actions
to the Test, and by that discerned his Innocence: He gave him his Ring,
commanding him to Appeal to him, if they offered to use him Uncourteously.

Next Day he was sent for, to Appear in the Council Chamger, to make good
several Articles charged against him: But being come into the Lobby, they made
him wait almost an Hour amongst the Footmen; although himself at that time was
a Privy Councellor: Of which Disgrace Dr. Buts the Kings Physician, giving the
King to understand, he grew extreme angry: Saying, Ha, do my Counselors so
disgracefully use the Primate of England? and thereupon he sent to command his
Admittance.

When he was entered, the Council told him that it was laid to his Charge, that
all England was turned from the Catholic Faith, and infected with Heresy by
his means: For that by the Example of his private Devotion and Order in his
Family, most of the Churches had taken Example. Whereupon he desired to see his
Accusers, that he might see what Proof they could make of what they laid to his
Charge, that so he might return his present Answer to what they should object
against him, and thereby clear his Innocence: Saying, That it was not meet that
the Primate of England, and a Privy Councellor, whose Faith was never Bubled,
nor called in Question, should be Imprisoned before he was heard; and that he
believed what was said was only upon bare Suspicion: But when he perceived them
resolutely bent to send him Prisoner to the Tower, he told them that he was
very sorry they would oblige him to Appeal from themselves (who were his fellow
Counselors, and from whom he expected Justice) to the King, and thereupon he
delivered the King's Ring, citing them presently to appear before him, and in
the mean time to suspend their Decree: Whereupon they were all struck Blanck,
and the Lord Russel, who was afterward Earl of Bedford, Said, Did not I tell
you that the King would never suffer the Archbishop to be Imprisoned, unless
he were guilty of High Treason against his Majesty.

When they came into the Kings presence, he sharply reproved them for their so
using the Archbishop, saying, He expected better from them, then to let
Cranmer who was one of their fellow Counselors, stand amongst serving-men;
demanding whether any of them would not have taken it for a great Affront, had
they been so served, and thereupon striking himself on the Breast, he swore that
he was more beholden to Cranmer then to any man Living, and that upon Trial he
had found that no Prelate whatsoever could be more faithful to his King; and
therefore commanded that all that loved him, should hold Cranmer in high Esteem.

Upon this they stood Mute for a while; when as the Duke of Norfolk breaking
silence, said, May it please your Majesty, it was not our purpose to hurt the
Archbishop; but that he being kept in Custody during the Inquisition, his
Innocence might be the sooner cleared, and the Aspersion laid upon his
Reputation wholly obliterated. But the King Angerly replied, I will not have
Cranmer thus handled, nor any that are dear to me, but I perceive some
malicious Spirits amongst you, which I will (unless you be quiet) restrain by
interposing my Authority. And when he had said thus much, he departed in a
great Rage; upon which each Councellor taking Cranmer by the hand, desired to
be Friends with him, to which he easily Condescended, freely forgiving them,
and all others that had any ways injured him.

After this, by reason that Dr. Cox and others, that were sent to Canterbury to
inquire into the matter, neglected the same, and had done little or nothing
therein, as being bribed by Cranmer's Enemies. The King secretly sent Dr. Lee,
impowering him to search the houses of some eminent Papists, the which he did
at Midnight, and there surprised several Letters sent by Gardener, another to
give Directions in the Management of the design, and amongst the rest, two, one
from the Suffragan of Dover, and another Dr. Barber a Civilian man, whom he had
not only advanced, but greatly confided in.

When these Letters were brought to the King, he sent for Cranmer and delivered
them to him, bidding him now since he knew his Enemies to beware of them. When
he was gone from the Kings presence, he sent for the Suffragan and Dr. Barber,
telling them that he had been shamefully abused, by some whom he most trusted;
and that they had not only revealed his inmost Counsels, but likewise raised
many false Scandals of him. Therefore he had called them to give him their
advice, what was best to be done upon that occasion. Marry quoth Dr. Barber,
such Villains deserve hanging, nay, hanging is too good for them. Yea, said the
Suffragan, rather then they should want an Executioner, I my self would be he.
Upon this the Archbishop lifting up his Eyes toward Heaven, said, O Lord and
most merciful God, who may a man trust in these days, etc. and thereupon he
demanded whether they knew those Letters. When perceiving that their Villainies
were brought to Light, they fell upon their Knees, and begged his Pardon for
their offenses. Which he easily forgave, saying, God make you good men; I never
deserved this at your hands, but ask God forgiveness, whom you have so highly
offended.

And in such Conflicts continued he, against his Popish Adversaries, till the
Death of King Henry, but King Edward the sixth Reigning he had more quiet, and
greatly helped on the Reformation, by encouraging Godly men therein, not only
with his Doctrine and Authority, but with his Estate. But the good King dying,
his bloody Sister no sooner came to the Crown, but he was imprisoned in the
Tower, refusing to fly although he might have done it, saying, that had he been
accused of Theft, Murder, or any other notorious Crimes, he could safely have
done it: But being to Answer for his Religion, and the Allegiance he owed to
Heaven, and concerning the Truth of the holy Scriptures, against the great
opposers thereof; he would rather lose his Life in defense of the Truth, then
by flying out of the Kingdom, desert such a Cause.

He having continued a considerable time in the Tower, and there often Examined
and persuaded to recant, but utterly refusing to hearken thereunto, he was sent
to Oxford, and there after diverse Examinations and great Promises if he would
recant, he was brought before the Queens Commissioners and Popes Delegates; but
the Authority of the latter he would by no means own, yet they proceeded to
degrade and sentence him, although he appealed from the Pope, to the next general
Council.

After this they carried him back to Prison, at which he seemed not at all
dejected, but with a merry Countenance demanded meat, having eaten nothing the
day before, saying, I was much troubled but now I thank God my heart is at
quiet. After this the popish Doctors frequently visited him, and used all the
Arguments they could, to persuade him to a Recantation; but he absolutely
resolved for a Considerable time, but at last through Humane frailty and desire
of Life, he did subscribe to a Recantation, but so far were his Enemies from
fulfilling their Promise, that they hastened his Death; yet let him not know of
it, till the Morning he was to be Executed; when as they brought him out, and
set him upon a Stage for the People to gaze at, whilst Dr. Cole declared upon
what Account he was brought thither, laying open for what he was Condemned: But
above all told, them how he had recanted; yet his Life could not be Pardoned,
for the Deaths of Sr. Thomas Moor, and Dr. Fisher could no other ways be
attoned for. But the true Cause of it was, that Cardinal Pool gaped for the
Archbishopric, which he could not have during the Life of Cranmer. Then they
desired him publicly to Confess, what he had privately done. When as the good
Bishop being greatly Afflicted, and troubled in his Conscience, for what he had
done; burst out into a Flood of Tears, and after his Speech came to him; he
lifted up his hands toward Heaven, saying; O Lord forgive me this great Sin,
against thy holy Name; which through the Weakness of the Flesh. I have
unadvisedly Committed. And then addressing himself to the People, he desired
them for Jesus Christ sake, to pray for him; that God would pardon his Sins,
and Especially that of his Recantation, which lay most heavy on his Conscience;
for that he had done it contrary to the Truth that he conceived in his Heart;
and against the Light of his own understanding, Satan having induced him
thereto, by laying before him, the Terribleness of Death; but, said he, this
right hand that signed so wicked an Instrument, shall first perish in the
Flames. He would have proceeded, but the Popish Doctors who little expected he
would speak in such a Dialect, fell to Bawling so loud, and cursing him that he
could not be heard further; then they pulled him down, and hurried him away to
the Fire, which was made in the same place where Ridley and Latimer had
suffered, stopping his mouth lest he should any more speak to the People; who
were not a little grieved; to see the Primate of England cast down from all his
Honors, and in the end so barbarously mis-used.

When he came to the Stake, he fell down on his Knees and Prayed; but was
interrupted by the Papists, who followed him with his Recantation, saying, have
you not signed it, have you not signed it? Then he was tied to the Stake, his
clothes being first put off, and the Fire being kindled to him, some time
before it came at his Body; he stretched forth his right Hand, and held it in
the Flames till it fell off, without any more then once drawing it back. And
after having recommended his Spirit, into the hand of our merciful Redeemer the
Lord Jesus: he dyed like a Lamb, ending his Life with the same Meekness as he
had lived, suffering Martyrdom for the sake of the everlasting Gospel. Anno
Christi, 1556. and of his Age 72.

One thing more is worthy to be noted, and of all Admiration, which, that his
Body being Consumed to Ashes, his Heart was found unsinged, untouched, or in
the least sullied in the Flame: The like had it happened to any Catholic tho
dying for Treason, it had been blown over all Europe as a Miracle, and that
Miracle had been enough to Saint him.

His works were these, Chatechismum Doctrinae Christina: He Corrected the
English Translation of the English Bible; he wrote, Ordinationes Ecclesiae
Reformatae. De Ministris Ordinandis. De Eucharistia. Jura Ecclesiastica con^*
Gardineri Concionem contra Transubstantiationis Errorem. Quomodo Christus
Adsit, in Coena. De usu Coenae Dominicae. De Oblatione Christi Homilia
Christiana. A Confutation of unwritten Verities: Against the Popes Primacy:
Against Purgatory: About Justification: Together with several learned Epistles,
to exhort men to be steadfast in the Faith.

The Life of JOHN PHILPOT Martyr.
JOhn Philpot was born in Hampshire of Worshipful Parents, and after his being
fitted for the University, he was sent to New College in Oxford, and there
profited so much in his Studies, he was soon perfect in all the Tongues; and
then betook himself to the Study of the Civil Law, and after that Divinity;
being a Man of a most pregnant Wit. Yet showing his Opinion too openly in
Matters of Religion, during the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, he was often in
Danger by reason of the Malice of his Adversaries. Insomuch that to avoid them,
he Traveled to Italy, where he was not safe neither, for by reason of the
great Zeal he had for God's Holy Word, he could not forbear to speak against
the Idolatries and Superstitions of the Church of Rome: Yet through the
Protection of the Almighty, who reserved him as a chosen Vessel, to propagate
the Reformation in his own Country, He at the beginning of King Edward's Reign
arrived in England, and was shortly after his coming made Archdeacon of
Winchester. But when the Bloody Queen Mary came to mount the Throne he lost his
Place, yet continued his Title, when within a while after, a Convocation by the
Queen's Command was called in St. Paul's Church, where Dr. Weston being
Prolocutor, Mr. Philpot was likewise chosen by the Bishops and others of the
reformed Church, to oppose the Papists in the Disputation: Where he so
learnedly managed his Part, that he put his Adversaries to Silence; and when
they perceived that no Arguments would bear them out, they threatened him with
a Prison if he spoke any more; and so within a short time after, procured a
Mandate from the Queen to break up the Convocation. The Prolocutor who had all
along used such insolent Behavior, as should be far from one in his place:
Saying, That they were all well enough. For, says he, we have the Sword, and
you have the Word.

Within a while after there came an Order from Gardener to apprehend Mr.
Philpot, which was accordingly done, and he committed to Prison: And then being
sent for by Dr. Story, he first Examined him, and afterward sent him to
Bonner, who put him in his Cole-House, where he found one Smith a Minister of
Essex, who having been formerly there, at the Importunities of Bonner had made
his Recantation, and was dismissed: But finding such inward Torments in his
Conscience, that he could rest neither Day nor Night; he came to the Bishop's
Register, and desired to see his Recantation, upon pretense of adding something
more; but the Book was no sooner opened, but he tore it in pieces, and then
immediately found ease: Yet was he apprehended and carried before Bonner, who
not only railed at him, but beat him with his Fist, tore off his Hair, and used
many other Outrages, which he patiently endured, rejoicing at his outward
Sufferings, and enduring his Imprisonment better than his Enlargement.

Within a Day or two Mr. Philpot was sent for to appear before Bonner, who
a^^ed how he could be so Merry as to sing Psalms in such a Place, Rejoicing in
his Naughtiness. Not so my Lord, said Mr. Philpot, but according to the
Directions of St. Paul we rejoice in the Lord, singing together in Hymns and
Spiritual Songs; for we are in a dark and comfortless Place, and therefore we
comfort our selves as well as we can, lest as Solomon says, Sorrow should eat
up the Heart. Therefore seeing the Apostle says, If a Man be of an upright
Mind, let him sing Psalms; and we being so, I hope your Lordship will not be
Angry. Then Bonner demanded his Opinion about the Sacrament, but he replied in
the Words of St. Ambrose to the Emperor Valentinian, Toll Legem and fiat
certamen, Take away the Law and I will dispute. For should I now do it, I
should bring my self into a Snare; neither do I think myself bound to answer in
Private, but if I am called to answer in Public, as the Law shall require; I
shall not be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, nor the Testimony I have born of
it.

Then was he again carried to the Cole-House, where he professed he slept as
well upon Straw, as on a Bed of Down. Such is it to have a good Conscience,
which as the wise Man says, Is a continual Feast.

He being sent for again, found several Doctors and Bishops with Bonner, who
were come to Examine him; when as the Bishop of Worcester desired him to pray
to God to give him Grace, that so he might conceive the Truth: Whereupon Mr.
Philpot falling on his Knees, prayed earnestly with an audible Voice, desiring
God to strengthen him to defend his Cause, as also to better his Understanding
if he was deceived in ought: But Bonner was displeased with the Bishop for
bidding him Pray: For said he, This it is, in which they take a singular Pride,
and are like some Heretics that Pliny makes mention of, who were used to sing
Ante-Lucanas Hymans, To sing Praises before the dawning of the Day. Yes said
Mr. Philpot, I beseech God of his Mercy to make all that are here present such
Heretics, for they were Godly Christians, with whom the Tyrants of the World
were offended for their Christian Practices, and Godly Living.

After this, the Bishops demanded if he would Recant, but he told them he would
not, unless they could convince him of any Error by Scripture; but they would
not Dispute, and the Conference ended, and he was Remanded to the Cole-hole,
and there set in the Stocks; and within a short time after Condemned, Degraded,
and sent to Newgate: When by the Way he Exhorted the People to be Constant, and
Persevere in the Faith of Christ; and desired them to bless God for that Day
wherein he was to suffer.

When he came to Newgate, he was put into a disconsolate Place by himself, and
had Word brought him the next Morning, that he must Suffer that Day; when with
a cheerful Countenance he replied, I am ready, God grant me Strength, and a
joyful Resurrection. And after his having retired a while to Pray, he came
forth, and was Conveyed into Smithfield, where he no sooner came but he fell on
his Knees, and with a loud Voice cried, I will pay my Vows in thee O
Smithfield. Then rising up he Kissed and Embraced the Stake; saying, Shall I
disdain to suffer at this Stake, when my Lord and Savior refused not to Suffer
a most vile Death for me? And so after having pow'red out his Soul to God, he
suffered himself to be bound with the Chain; and when the Fire was kindled, he
commended his Spirit into the Hands of the Father of all Spirits, and patiently
gave up the Ghost. Suffering Martyrdom Anno Christi 1555. and of his Age about
forty nine.

The Life of PHILIP MELANCTHONE.
PHilip Melancthone was born in the lower Palatinate, at a Place called Bretta,
Anno Christi 1497, where by his Parents he was sent to School; from whence,
when he had much profited in Learning, he went to Hedleberg, where he became a
Tutor to Count Leonstius's Sons, and Commenced Bachelor of Arts when he was
but fourteen Years of Age. When he had studied there three Years, being denied
the Commencement of Master of Arts by reason of his Youth, he departed thence
to Tubinge Anno 1512, where he began to Study the Scriptures, and apply himself
to Expound several difficult Places; yet by the Persuasion of the Monks and
Friars, he was prevailed with, to consent to the Superstition of the Times, as
himself Confesses; when he says, I cannot but Tremble to think what blind
Devotion I paid to Images, whilst I was a Papist. Yet as it appears, he
continued not long in such Errors before God opened his Eyes, and Enlightened
his Understanding, that so he might walk in the Paths of Truth: For about the
Year 1518, Luther mightily opposing the Pope in Saxony, he went to the
University of Wintenberg, and there Conversing with some of the Ministers of
the Reformed Church, he soon shook off the Egyptian Bondage, and thereupon that
Darkness that had so long benighted his Soul was dispelled: When as he labored
so abundantly in Confuting Errors, and Preaching the Gospel; that Erasmus
writes thus of him. Philip Melancthone, says he, Is a most Excellent and
Learned Grecian; he is a Youth and Stripling if we consider his Age, but one of
us, if we look upon his Variety of Knowledge almost in all Books: I pray Christ
this young Man may live amongst us, etc.

He had not continued long there, before Frederick Duke of Saxony having
Knowledge of his great Learning and Virtue, greatly Extolled him, and gave him
such Encouragement as was convenient. The Year after his coming thither, he
accompanied Luther to Lipswich, where he Disputed with Eccius the Popish
Lawyer; who although he contemned him for his Youth, yet Philip so learnedly
Disputed against him, that he put him to Silence, Confuting him of many
palpable Errors in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

The Year following he betook him to Expound the Epistles of St. Paul to the
Romans, which Luther caused to be Printed without his Knowledge: And when the
Divines of Paris had Condemned Luther's Doctrine and Books, Philip wrote an
Apology in Luther's Behalf against their rash Decree.

In the Year 1522, he caused his common Places, and his Commentaries on both
the Epistles to the Corinthians to be Printed and Published: As likewise in the
Year following, his Annotations upon Genesis; together with some other useful
Treatises. He wrote an Epitomy of Ecclesiastic Doctrine, and turned the
Proverbs of Solomon into Latin, and wrote a Preface to the Psalms and
Lamentations; and in the Anabaptist war, commonly called the War with the
Clowns, he Confuted by many convincing Arguments the Unlawfulness of such
Proceedings; and wrote against their Articles, whereby they Endeavored to
Justify their Rebellious Practices.

Anno 1527, He was Employed in Visiting and Reforming the Churches in Saxony,
wherein he continued till the Year 1529, when as the Elector of Saxony took him
with him to the Convocation of Spire, where by the Consent of the Protestant
Princes, he drew up a Confession of Faith, which he did with great Pains and
Exactness: The which they presented to the Emperor Charles the First.

In the Year 1534. Henry the Eighth of England, having abolished the Popes
Supremacy, sent for Melancthone to establish the Church, according to the
Reformation that was then finished in the German Churches: But he refused it,
as appears by part of a Letter he wrote to Camerarius; which take as follows.

Perhaps (says he) many things are reported amongst you, concerning England,
that it now lies open for the Reception of the Religion, of the purer Doctrine;
but I have Intelligence from a good hand, that the King has a great Care of
the Affairs of the Church; only this good comes of it, his Rejecting the Popes
Authority, that for the Present, no Cruelty is used toward those that are
desirous of a better Doctrine.

About this time, by reason of Luther's Sickness, all the Care of the Church
lay upon him; the which he so well managed, that the true Light of saving
Knowledge, began to spread it is Rays into most of the Corners of Germany: He
being about to go to Hagenaw, he made his Will and left it with Mr. Cruciger,
at which time he foreseeing his Sickness, which in a short time after befell
him, he wrote this Verse.

Viximus in Synodis, and jam moriemur in Illis. Which may be Englished thus,
Employed in Synod, Living often were we,
And in a Synod, are we like to dye.


In this journey he fell extreme sick, but by Gods Providence, and the
endeavors of his Physicians he soon recovered, and proceeded to the place
intended; where he held a long Dispute with that Eccius, so often mentioned; in
which Eccius proposed so many subtle Arguments, that Melancthone either not
thinking it Convenient to Answer them at that time, or that he was not fitly
prepared on that occasion answered: Cras tibi respondebo, I will Answer you ^o
morrow. At which the Vainglorious Eccius replied, That it was little to his
Credit, that he could not Answer presently. But Melancthone being of a mild
Nature, replied, Sir, I seek not mine own Glory in this Business, but the
Truth; to morrow, God willing, you shall hear farther.

When the Wars brake out in Germany, he plainly foresaw in a Dream, the
Captivity of the Lantgrave of Hess, and Elector of Saxony, long time before
they were taken Prisoners, by the Imperialists: And the next day after he had
so dreamed, a Messenger came to Prince Maurice, to deliver him up; but the
Prince refused it, upon which the Emperor grew exceeding Angry; and for that,
and some other denials he had received, he resolved to invade Saxony. Which he
did accordingly with a puissant Army, this made Melancthone much bewail the
Calamity, occasioned by the furious Papists, who had sworn to Root out all the
Protestants. But Heaven prevented them, although they did much Mischief, and made
great slaughter.

After his Return to Wittenberg, the Plague broke out, upon which the
University removed to Torgaw, whither he came, and there received News of the
Death of his Wife, at which he only said; Farewell Kate, I shall follow thee ere
long. This by most was looked upon to proceed, from his wonderful Patience, for
he loved her above all Earthly things.

After his coming thither, he had many Disputes with the Popish party, both by
Words and Writing. The last Lecture that he read, he took his Text out of the
Prophet Isaiah, in these Words; Lord who has believed our Report? After which
he fore seeing his Death at hand, yet at that time he was in good Health, he
used often, and upon several Occasions to repeat these Words.

Sic Ego quotidie, de lecto surgo Precando,
Vt men's ad mortem, sit dulce laeta Deo.
Englished thus, So do I daily rise from Bed, to Pray.

A while after this, he was sent for by the Elector of Saxony to Lipsich: In
order, to Examine those that were maintained there by the Elector to study
Divinity. In which employment, he used great diligence for several years, and
after he had done what was Convenient, he returned to Winterberg; and there
fell sick of a Fever, of which he shortly after dyed.

During his Sickness, there was a dreadful Prodigy seen in the Air over the
City, which was five Rods bound together; two of which after half an Hours
Continuance Vanishing, but the other three continued turning their Branches
toward the North: Of which, when Melancthone was Informed, he break out into
these Word; What a gracious God have we, that rather chooses to give us Fatherly
Correction with Rods, than to destroy us with Swords; and I fear a Dearth will
follow.

Sickness daily increased, yet he so far strove against the Power of his
Disease, that he would often rise to his Study. Yet at last, Death which
Conquers all, Conquered this good man: The last Words that he spoke, were to
his Son-in-Law Dr. P^cer, who, when he asked him what he would have, he
replied; Nothing but Heaven, therefore trouble me no more with speaking to me:
After this he lying silent, whilst the Ministers prayed by him, he gave up the
Ghost, Anno Christi, 1560. and in the sixty third year of his Age, having been
a constant Preacher of the Gospel, for the space of forty two years: In which,
he converted by his Doctrine, and Writings, no less, from the Popish to the
Protestant Religion, then twelve Cities, and a hundred Villages. He wrote many
Books, some of which the Papists burnt, and the rest are as yet Extant. He was
a man of singular Learning, Temperance, and Piety; his Death being greatly
Lamented by all good Christians.

The Life of PETER MARTYR.
PEter Martyr, was by Birth a Florentine: Born at Vermile, Anno Christi, 1500.
of Honorable Parents. Who during his Minority trained him up in Learning, and
gave him such pious Instructions, as by his Improvement, completed him for the
Sacred study of the Holy Scripture: When he was grown up they put him to
School, to the best Masters that Age afforded; under whom, when he had profited
to Admiration, he began to consider the many Vanities of the World, and to be
more studious of his Eternal Welfare. Whereupon he resolved to withdraw
himself, from Humane Society; and to Live a more retired Life. Whereupon not
being above sixteen years of Age, he entered into a Monastery of regular
Cannons of St. Augustine, in Fessuala, a little Town not far distant from the
City of Florence: Although much against the will of his Parents.

Being thus entered, he applied himself duly to Study, making use of such Books
as the Library of that Monastry would afford; where in three Years he became
famous in the Knowledge of Divine Things, even to the Admiration of all his
Fellows.

A while after he went to Padua, where entering into a Monastry of the same
Order, he continued his Studies for almost the space of eight Years, greatly
Profiting in the Rules of Philosophy, to the Study of which he much addicted
himself, Translating some Books of Aristotle out of the Original Greek into
Latin.

When he was twenty six Years of Age, the Heads of the Monastery Elected him
one of the Preachers, in which Station he continued a considerable time, and
was so great a Proficient therein, that he soon grew Famous: So that having
Commenced Dr. of Divinity, he Traveled to Rome, Bononia, Frimum, Pisa, Venice,
Mantua, Bergamum, Mount-Ferrat, and other Cities of Italy; where he Preached
and Expounded the Ecclesiastical Ca^ons, getting himself by such means great
Esteem amongst the Learned.

At Bononia he learned the Hebrew Tongue, and Translated the New Testament out
of the Original: So that in a short time he was Created Abbot of Spoleta, where
he behaved himself so prudently, that he won the Love of all the People in that
City. He likewise put an end to the many Factions and Differences, that were
wont to happen not only there, but throughout all the Province, which was not a
little Joy to all good Men: By reason great Mischiefs had happened by Intestine
Cries that those Feuds had occasioned; and although many of his Predecessors had
undertaken to Reconcile the tempestuous Spirits, or Heads of the Factious,
their Labors proved Inefectual.

He also Rectified, and much Reformed the Errors of the Monks, and sharply
reproved them for their detestable Practices, insomuch that he reduced all
things to a happy State, during the time he continued there, which was but
three Years; at the end of which he was removed to Naples, and there
Constituted Governor of the great College, which is a place of much Esteem.

Here he having more Leisure than formerly, began seriously to Expound, and
Unridle the dark and mysterious Places of Scripture: Which by the more than
ordinary Assistance of the Divine Spirit, he did so effectually, that by that
Light he began to discern the Errors of the Romish Church; and having private
Access to some of the Reformed Ministers, he was so confirmed in his Opinion,
that he had been trained up in a false Religion; that he did not spare openly
to Dispute against many of the Popish Canons: Which procured him some Hatred
from such as feared the loss of their Incom's by the Removal of such
Ceremonies: And so far did he proceed, that at last he obtained the pure Light
and Knowledge of the Gospel, and secretly Converted many noble Persons to the
Reformed Religion, and openly wrote against the Tradition of Purgatory, which
the first Inventor grounded upon the Words of St. Paul, 1. Cor. 3.13, 14. Every
Man's Works shall be made Manifest, for the Day shall declare it, because it
shall be Revealed by Fire, etc. This Fire he proves to be no other than the
Operation of the Holy Spirit in the Conscience of Men, which as Fire tries the
Silver, so by that means shall Men's Deeds be tried, and the Dross separated
from the Ore. Yet this so enraged the Papists, that they procured him to be
Suspended, and his Lectures put down.

Whereupon he Appealed to the Pope, offering to prove his Doctrine to be
according to Scripture; and so prevailed by the Assistance of his Friends, that
he was again restored although to the great Grief of his Adversaries: But had not
long been Re-established before he fell Sick, so that many despaired of his
Recovery: Yet God who had Reserved him as a chosen Vessel to make his Church
Rejoice; delivered him from the Jaws of Death, to the great Comfort of his
Friends, and Grief of his Adversaries.

He was no sooner recovered, but he was made Visitor-General, and within a
short time after, Prior of the Monastery of Luca, where he so well behaved
himself, that he gained the good Will of all honest Men there. He greatly
encouraged Learning, and had a great number of learned Men as his Pensioners,
on whom he freely bestowed such things as were convenient, and encouraging them
all he could to promote the Knowledge of the Gospel.

Whilst he stayed at Luca, Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, Pope Paul
the Third, and Cardinal Contarene the Pope's Legate came thither, the latter
being entertained by Peter Martyr. When as the Pope understanding his
Inclination to the reformed Religion, he used all Endeavors to find some
occasion of Quarrel against him, the which he thought not fit to do, unless
upon good Grounds, because he knew he was greatly beloved of all the People,
both Noble, and Ignoble; and therefore to try how they stood affected, ere he
waded too far in their Displeasure, he caused a Friar belonging to the
Monastery of which Peter was Prior, to be arrested and cast in Prison, as being
a Favourer of the reformed Doctors; which the People took so hainously (as well
knowing he was an honester Man, and better Christian than the Pope) that they
broke open the Prison and took him thence, but he being afterward apprehended,
was sent to Rome, and there put to Death: And after that the Poplings used all
Diligence to bring Martyr into Disgrace, and many times laid wait to murder
him, insomuch that fearing he should one Day fall by the Malice of his Enemies,
he resolved to depart secretly; whereupon he called together several of his
trusty Friends, and told them what he intended, desiring them to send the best
part of his Library after him into Germany; which they promised, and
accordingly performed.

After he had made his Escape, he went to Visit the Universities of Germany,
and at last came to Strasburg, which some time before had embraced the reformed
Religion; and there he became a Greek Professor, Instructing and Training up
many Youths: He also wrote to the Senators of Luca, to persuade them to embrace
the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and not be any longer led in Ignorance, with
vain and superstitious Errors: Showing likewise the Cheats and wicked Practices
of such as pretended to strictness of Life in Monasteries, and such like Places.

And now having utterly renounced Popery, he joined himself to the Doctors of
the reformed Church, and wrote sharply against the Papists, which enraged them
the more. Whilst he continued at Strasbourg, which was for five Years, he held
a Divinity-Lecture, and expounded the Scriptures; being always very Charitable
to such as stood in need of his Assistance. Here also, by the Persuasion of his
Friends, he Married one Katherine Damp Mortin, a Virgin, descended of a noble
Family; who accompanying him into England, dyed after she had been eight Years
married. In the time of Queen Mary, her Body being dug up, was buried in a
Dunghill by the Command of Cardinal Pool, who alleged that she was Buried too
^^ar the Body of St. Frideswide, and that for such a Contempt, such Usage was
but Just. But in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth her Corpse were taken thence, and
that old fashioned St. buried in her Room.

In the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, at the earnest Request of the King, he
came into England, being nobly entertained by Archbishop C^anmer, the Duke of
Summerset then Lord Protector, and many others: So that after having assisted
in Settling Religion, he went to Oxford, and there became a Professor of
Divinity, and expounded the Scriptures to the People, so that his Fame soon
spread into the utmost Corners of the Land, which made the Papists greatly
Displeased, insomuch that several of the popish Doctors often provoked him to
Disputations; in which he always overcame them, as having the Truth on his Side.

But that sufficed not; for when they found that they could not overcome him by
Arguments, they endeavored it by Force, often raising Tumults, and thereby
endangering his Life; yet wanted he not such Friends as encouraged him to
proceed in the great Work of Reformation, being ever backed by Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, and Hooper, and so continued in England all the Reign of pious King
Edward. But when the Blood-thirsty Queen once got the Reins of Government, and
true Religion was suppressed, his Lectures ceased, and he Lived more retire
with his Friends, encouraging and strengthening them to persevere in the Faith,
and true Religion they had received: And amongst the rest Archbishop Cranmer,
who began somewhat to waver in his Opinion, ever after confessed that Martyr
had Confirmed him.

When several Godly Men were Imprisoned, and the Persecution grew hot; it was
debated in the Queen's Council, whether Martyr should be Imprisoned or not, by
reason he had done much harm by his Innovations, as they pretended; but it
appearing that he came over upon the public Faith, it was concluded that he
should be safely dismissed, and thereupon the Queen gave him her Letters of
safe Conduct, strictly commanding him to depart the Kingdom: To which he was
obedient. Yet such was the Malice of his Enemies, that they followed him to the
Ship, and held a Consult whether they should pull him out, and cast him into
Prison, or not. But God prevented their wicked Design, by sending a Wind, that
immediately bore away the Vessel to Antwerp; and he landing there, safely
Traveled through many Cities and Towns, till at last he came to Stratbourg,
where he was received with much Joy of his Friends, though there he wanted not
some Enemies who gave him many Disturbances all the time of his Stay there.

From thence he removed to Zurick, where he held firm Friendship with Mr.
Bullenger, which he continued till the day of his Death.

In this City, he so far gained the Love of all men, that he was made free of
the same; and now it being a Considerable time, since he buried his first Wife,
he bethought himself of taking another: Whereupon by the advice of his Friends,
he married one Catherine Marenda, a Virtuous Gentlewoman: Who for Religions
sake had fled the French Persecution, and was come to Live at Geneva.

About this time, he was called to the Pastor-ship of the Italian Church at
Geneva, but such was his Love to those of Zurick, that notwithstanding the many
Entreaties that were used to persuade him to embrace so great a Benefit, he
would not accept thereof; but chose rather to continue with his tried Friends,
then to adventure amongst Strangers, although, he was never backward in any thing
that might promote the true worship of God, as appears by his Voluntary going
into France. At the Disputation held between the Ministers of the reformed
Religion and the Leaguers; appointed to be held at Poitou, before the Kings of
France and Navar, the two Queens, the Prince of Conde, and Admiral of Cologne;
Where he and his Fellows, so managed the matter, that they obliged their
Adversaries to Confess, that they were in the Right; and to Consent to the
signing many Articles repugnant to the Church of Rome. Of which the popish
Bishops grievously Complained, saying; That their Disputants, had betrayed
their Trusts; and that they would by no means accord to what they had done.
Whereupon Martyr desired leave to depart, which he obtained, and so returned to
Zurick. Where he was received with great Joy, yet being worn out with Travel,
and daily Study he after a while fell sick, when calling together the Principal
Pastors of the Church, he made to them, an excellent Confession of his Faith,
Concluding, This is my Faith, and they that teach otherwise, to the withdrawing
men from God, God will destroy them. And so taking his Leave of all his
Friends, after having made his Will he gave up the Ghost, Anno Christi, 1562.
and of his Age sixty two, leaving behind him a lasting Fame, which Age can
never consume.

After his Death, his Friend Theodorus Beza, wrote this Epigram to his Praise.

Tusciate pepulit, Germania, and Anglia fovit,
Martyr: Quem Extinctum nunc tegit Helvetia.
Dicere quae si vera volent, re and nomine Dicent,
Hic fidus Christi (Credit) Martyr Erat.
Vtque istae taceant, satis hoc tua Scripta Loquuntur,
Plus satis hoc Italis, exprobrat Exilium.
The end of the Life of Peter Martyr.
The Life of JOHN CALVIN.
JOhn Calvin, was Born at Noviodune, a City of France, Anno 1509. His Fathers
name being Gerard, and his Mothers Joanna; both of Godly life, and Living in
great Esteem, amongst the Citizens their Neighbors.

So soon as our John was grown to be capable of Learning, he was sent to Paris
and there instructed. And such Literature as the Schools of that City could
afford: Insomuch that he greatly profited, being desirous of knowledge in
Sacred things, he applied himself to the Study of the Scriptures, although his
Father was more inclinable, to have him a Student of the Laws.

In a short time after, taking degree of Master of Arts, he was preferred to a
Benifice: Being constituted Rector of Bishops-bridge, near the City of
Noviodune. Where he taught according to the Traditions of the Church of Rome,
for several years still increasing in Learning; till at last falling into the
acquaintance of a reformed Minister, called Peter Robert Olivitian, he began by
the continual Conversation he had with this good man, to see into the Errors of
the Romish Church, by the pure light of the Gospel: Insomuch that plainly
perceiving most part of the Romish Traditions, and Superstitious Ceremonies,
repugnant to the Word of God, he began to bethink with himself, that seeing he
had so long lived in Error, it was now high time to embrace the Truth; and
thereupon more seriously consulting his Friend, he resolved to renounce the
Popish Religion, and join with the Ministers of the reformed Church: Whereupon
he secretly departed to Orleance, and there joining himself to Peter Stella,
who read a Lecture in that City, he in a short time grew famous, having many
that resorted to him for Sacred Consolation.

In this place, he wholly applied himself to the Study of the Scriptures, and
therein profited Exceedingly; and after having continued here for the space of
six Months, he departed for the University of Biturg, where he became a Greek
Professor, and Preached several Sermons, at an adjacent Town called Liveria.

After he had stayed a while at Bitury, and gotten great Applause, for his
singular Piety and Learning, he went to Paris; where he associated himself,
with the Professors of the reformed Religion. But he had not been here long,
before the Papists began to find an Alteration in his Life, and Conversation,
and thereby fearing (what indeed had happened) that he was fallen from the
Church of Rome, they more narrowly observed him, seeking all occasions of
Quarrel against him; yet he was not at all daunted, although some endeavored to
take his Life. But like a Palm Tree, the more they strove to depress him, the
more he grew in Reputation with all Good men. And having attained the
Perfection of humane Learning, he went to Paris, and there studied Divinity;
Accompanying himself, for the most part with Stephen Forgeus a Godly Christian;
who was afterward put to Death for his Religion, by the Papists.

About this time, Nicholas Cope, being Lector of the University of Paris, When
on All Saints day he made his Oration, he greatly insisted on the Purity of
Religion, when as the use was upon such occasions, to tell stories of the
Miracles, done by such and such Saints; and to Extol them, to the Wondering
Crowd. But this he did at the Instance of Calvin, which the Sorbonists having
notice of, were much displeased, and cited him to appear before them; But being
advised by his Well-wishers to the contrary, and finding by daily Experience,
that he laid Snares for him, he secretly left France, and went to Basil. Where
he had likewise fallen into Danger, had not the Queen of Navar delivered him,
and Dis-countenanced his Adversary; but he finding that place unsafe, departed
to Xanton: where at the request of several Godly Christians, his Friends, he
wrote several Heads of Christian Religion, most necessary to Salvation, and
caused them to be dispersed amongst the People; which gave many so clear a
Light, that with less Difficulty, they were able to perceive the Errors, they
had formerly Lived in, and to find the way that Leads to Life. Yet here he
rested not long, before the Malice of the Papists pursued him. But the good
Queen of Navar, who ever was his Friend, sent him with a Conduct to a Town,
that was under her Jurisdiction. Where he continued with great Applause for
many days, and afterward went to Paris; where he continued till the
Persecution arose, promoted by the Papists, wherein several were in Prison, and
starved to Death, many put to grievous Torments, and eight burnt alive, at a
solemn Procession: Wherein King Francis and his Children assisted, the King
swearing that he would not spare his dearest Child, if he found him infected
with damned Heresy, as he then called the true and sincere preaching of the
Gospel.

This Persecution, made Mr. Calvin have regard to the words of our blessed
Savior, when he said, if they Persecute you in one City, slay to another. And
therefore leaving Paris, he went to Orleance; where he published a Book, to
confute the Errors of those who had long since received a false Opinion, that
the Soul slept after it was separated from the Body. And then he journied to
Xanton, and within a while to Basil; when in the way his Servant who carried
his Money, being well mount^d, Rid away from him, and left him in great
necessity, till God raised him up Friends to relieve him.

Being come to Basil, he associated himself with the reformed Ministers he
found there, as the famous Grynaeus, Wolfgang, and Capito, men of excellent
Piety and Learning; here also he studied the Hebrew Tongue, and as much as in
him lay concealed himself; but upon the coming forth of his Institutions, the
Papists that remained there, began to guess who was the Author.

By this time the Protestant Princes of Germany, had heard of the Cruelty of
King Francis, and sent their Deputies to reprove him, for using such Cruelty
toward the People of God. But he excused himself in saying, that they were
only a few Headstrong Anabaptists, that sought to make Innovations in his
Kingdom. Whereupon Mr. Calvin wrote a Book, and dedicated it to the King;
wherein he declared, who were true Christians, and who were not; But whether
the King ever read it, or not, it is uncertain. When being desirous to visit
the Duchess of Ferrara, Daughter of Lewis, the twelfth King of France; a Woman
singular for the Love of Piety, and a great Encourager of Learned men: He went
into Italy, and was received by her with inexpressible Joy. And having
continued in her Court for some time, prevailed with her, to suffer him to
depart, which she consenting to, he departed for Geneva: Where he no sooner
arrived, but he was compelled to stay there by the Ministers of the Church; and
had offered him, either to Preach publicly to the People, or to be
Divinity-Professor: The latter of which he embraced. Whereupon he applied his
utmost diligence, to reform such things as were amiss, not by his own Opinions,
but of the Scriptures, to the general content of all good men, and such
remainders of popish Superstition, as were left unpurged, he by his great Pains
and Industry removed. He likewise opposed himself against the Ana-baptists,
that sought to hinder the Reformation, and to stir up the People to Mutiny, and
so well settled the Affairs of the Church by his Prudence, and Conduct, that he
overthrew the Devices of certain Heretics, who began to Poison the People with
their Erroneous Opinions; and by the Prayers of the Church against them; So
that their Ringleader was smitten by the hand of God, and dyed of many
grievous Ulcers.

About this time, there being many of the reformed Church in France, who yet
for fear went to hear popish Mass, conceiving an Opinion, that although they were
personally at that Worship, and yet retained their proper Religion in their
Hearts, it was no sin. But to these, Mr. Calvin wrote two Epistles, telling
them that by such means Satan had a great advantage over them, and that if they
were ashamed to own and profess Christ openly before men, he would not own them
before his Father, and the holy Angels, and by this means he so Animated many
of them, that they professing their Religion openly, and opposing the Popish
Idolatries, were Condemned, and sealed their Testimonies with their Blood.

After this, Mr. Calvin bent all his Endeavors to establish a set Form of
Religion, in the Genevan Church, and for that end he drew up certain Heads of
Religion: And so far prevailed with the Senate and People as to swear to them,
although some rigid Papists greatly opposed his Proceeding.

This was no sooner done, but the Ana-baptists began to stir up the Faction, as
likewise one Peter Caroli a Heretic, who by his Blasphemies and wicked
Doctrine, drew many into foul Errors, which caused the Synod at Berne to
Condemn him as a Deceiver of the People: Which caused him to depart to
Mediomatrice, and there used his utmost Endeavors to root out the Professors
of the Gospel: But failing of his Purpose, he went to Rome, where being
rejected, and becoming destitute of Friends; through Poverty and many noisome
Diseases he ended his wretched Life.

About this time, notwithstanding the Endeavors of Mr. Calvin, and many other
good Men, a Sedition sprung up in the City of Geneva; for several of the Chief,
envying each others Greatness, as being privately accended by the Popish
Priests in religious Guise, several Tumults happened in which many were hurt:
The which Mr. Calvin well perceived would tend to great Mischief, if it were
not in time alay'd; wherefore he and the rest of the Godly Ministers, opposed
themselves against the most Resolute, declaring that unless they ceased their
Feudes, and laid aside all Enmity between themselves, he did not think it meet
to Administer the Holy Sacrament to them; which made many of them contemn him
as a Man that sought the whole Power of the Ecclesiastical Affairs.

About this time a Difference happened between those of Geneva and Bern about
Administering the Sacrament; the former doing it with plain Bread, and the
latter with Wafers, the former abolished all Holydays, unless the Sabbath, when
as the other held it necessary to observe the several Tides; and thereupon Mr.
Calvin and the rest of the Ministers were Accused by the Factious as the
Causers of such Division; which they Understanding, desired to be heard, but
could not obtain their Requests: And it being urged that they had proudly
refused to Administer the Sacrament to such as required it, a Decree passed for
their Banishment, the which, when it came to the Hands of Mr. Calvin; he said,
Well if I had served Man I should have had but an ill Reward, but it is good
that I have served him, who does always perform to his Servants that which he
has once Promised.

Mr. Calvin being thus banished, goes to Zurick: But before his Departure, such
was his Fatherly Care, that he provided fit Pastors to feed the Genevan Flock,
lest in his Absence the Romish Wolves should break in and Destroy what he by
his Labor and Industry had Planted.

During his Absence, the rest of the Helvetian Churches, labored with the
Genevans for his Readmission, but they at present refusing it; he went to
Bazil, from thence to Strasbourg, where he met with Bucer, Hedio, and Capito,
all famous Preachers of the Gospel, who greatly rejoiced in his Company; and by
their means he was chosen Divinity Professor, and all the while took care of
his Flock at Geneva, by often writing to them to strengthen them, and vindicate
their Cause against such Popish Doctors as in his Absence sought to traduce
them. He being now somewhat at Leisure, wrote many Divine Tracts, which he sent
to the Churches, the better to Enable them to resist their Spiritual Enemies:
And when as Strode dyed, Mr. Calvin by the Consent of his Friends Married his
Widow, a most Virtuous and Chaste Woman; after which he went as an Assistant to
the Diets of Worms and Ratisbone Assembled by the Emperor Charles, the fifth
for composing Differences in Religion; and so continued, till those that had
procured the Decree of his Banishment from the City of Geneva, were dead; and
then the Citizens sent to Strasbourg to desire him and Mr. Farell to return,
expressing the earnest Desire they had to see them; but the Citizens of
Strasbourg were by no means willing to lose their Company, and Mr. Calvin
himself showed the like Unwillingness to leave them, seeing he had received
such great Kindnesses at their Hands: But in the end, the Genevans so far
prevailed, that upon the Senate's signing a Decree for their Return again to
Strasbourg, Bucer prevailed with the Citizens to let Calvin go thither; where
he was received with all imaginable Expressions of Joy: And such was their
desire of Detaining him, that they never left urging the Senate till they had
got the Decree of his Returning to Strasbourg reversed: And now being again
settled in pastoral Charge of Geneva, he continued to Confute Heretics,
Papists, and Stirrers up of Sedition; to heal Breaches and Division, being
Courageous even in the worst of times, and as an undaunted Champion of Christ
not to follow his Standard till Death, who Conquers all, Conquered him; for
having made his will, he received the Sacrament, and earnestly Prayed for the
Churches. He on the Seventh of May, Anno Christi 1562, yielded up his Spirit
into the Hands of his Maker, dying in the 55 Year of his Age: The loss of such
a Pillar of the Church causing no small Grief.

His Funeral Solemnities were performed at the Charge of the Senate, almost all
the City being present; he being Buried, as himself desired, in the Church
Yard, where a stately Tomb was Erected to his Memory.

The Life of JOHN JEWEL Bishop of Sarum.
JOhn Jewel was Born in Devonshire at the Town of Buden Anno Domini 1522, of
Eminent Parents, who desirous of his Promotion as to eternal Happiness, brought
him up in Learning to the highest Degree, and especially in the Knowledge of the
Scriptures, which are able to make us Wise unto Salvation.

When he was thirteen Years of Age, he was sent to Oxford, and there entered
into Merton College, where under the Tuition of Dr. Parkhurst he so well
Profited, that all admired his ready Wit and Promptitude. When not finding such
Conveniences for Study as were Requisite, he removed to Corpus Christi
College, and after a short Entrance (having Commenced Batchellor of Art) he was
Chosen Humanity Lecture Reader, which he so excellently managed, that his
aforesaid Tutor coming one Day to hear him, after he had made an end Saluted
him thus.

Olim Discipulus mihi chare Juelle fuisti,
Nunc ero Discipulus te rennente tuus.
Englished thus; Dear Jewel thou a Scholar was it of mine.
Hereafter though unwilling I Will be thine.


And thus continuing in the Reign of King Henry, during the Suppression of the
Popes, he Commenced Master of Arts, and then began more and more to discover
his Inclination to the Reformed Religion, insomuch that the Dean of his College
taking Occasion to Discourse with him, declared to him thus, I should Love thee
Jewel if thou were not a Zuinglian. I hold thee an Heretic; but surely in thy
Life thou art an Angel, for good and honest is thy Conversation, but yet thou
art a Lutheran.

When Queen Mary came to the Crown, he was Expelled the College by reason he
refused to be Conformable to the Superstitions of the Romish Church; yet such
was the Love of Learned Men toward him, that he was chosen Orator of the
University: Yet such was the Malice of his Popish Enemies; that they sought by
all Means to take his Life, and therefore pressed him to Subscribe to several
Articles, which he consenting to, afterward Recanted, and thereupon was forced
to fly the Kingdom, and wander Forlorn and Comfortless in foreign Parts,
enduring great Extremity, both of Hunger and Cold: But such was God's Goodness
toward this Pious Man, that at last Arriving at Frankfort he found kind
Entertainment, where being Admitted to Preach to a Congregation; he in these
Words Expressed his Sorrow, for his Subscribing to the Popish Articles. It was
my abject cowardly Mind, and faint Heart, that caused my weak Hand to Commit
this Wickedness: Which Confession of his moved Pity in the Hearers.

When he had continued at Frankfort a considerable time, he went to Strasbourg,
and from thence to Zurick, whither many of the English had fled from the M^rean
Persecution, whom he greatly Encouraged and Relieved according to his Ability,
and Incited others to do the like; and being accompanied with Peter Martyr, he
spent most of his Time during his Exile, in Reconciling Differences that
happened amongst the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, touching Points of
Religion; and his usual Consolation to his Countrymen was, Bear a while with
these Miseries, and ere long they will be over-past.

After the Death of Queen Mary, he returned into England, and Queen Elizabeth
Reigning, he was soon received under her Princely Protection, being appointed
one of the Disputants about Points of Religion; and that once past, he was sent
into the West to Visit the Churches, where he used his utmost Diligence to
Establish the true Religion, and so prevailed, that by the Grace of God he
Converted many hundreds to the way of Saving Knowledge: When upon his Return, he
Preached at Paul's Cross, taking his Text the 1. of Cor. 11.23. For I received
of the Lord that which also, I delivered unto you, etc. Out of which, he Proved
the Purity of the Reformed Religion, and the Errors of the Church of Rome,
insomuch that he gained upon several obstinate Papists to Embrace the
Protestant Religion. He was a Man very Charitable to the Poor, and spared no
Pains to do Good.

In his Family he kept such a strict Observance of Religion, that every Evening
at eight of the Clock, he was wont to call upon his Servants to perform their
Duty to Heaven, and then going to Bed, some one of his Chaplains were wont to
Read over part of the Lives of the Fathers, or some other Godly Author; which
ended, he would Recommend himself to the Protection of the Almighty, and so
Repose himself.

He was a Man of such a singular Memory, that he used to say, Had he once
premeditated any Oration, although a thousand Persons made never such a Clamor,
he could Repeat it, and not in the least be Interrupted with their Noise.

In his Sickness, going to Preach, he was desired by a Gentleman to return
home; the Gentleman alleging that one Sermon was better to be lost, than by
his Impairing his Health to lose so good a Pastor: But his Reply was, that it
best became a Bishop to dye Preaching in a Pulpit, that his great Master the
Lord Jesus's Words might be fulfilled, who says, Happy art thou my Servant, if
when I come I find thee so doing. And thus continued this good Man, till his
Sickness increasing, and Nature visibly decaying in him, he was obliged to take
his Bed; and so far was he from fearing Death, that he rather desired, as
longing to enter his Masters Joy, often repeating the Words of old Simeon:
Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation. When as one standing by prayed for his Recovery, which he hearing,
said, I have not so lived that I am ashamed to live longer, neither do I fear
to dye, because we have a merciful Lord; a Crown of Righteousness is laid up
for me, Christ is my Righteousness. Father, let thy Will be done, thy Will I
say, and not mine, which is Depraved and Imperfect; this Day let me quickly see
the Lord Jesus. And so in a certain and assured Hope of Everlasting Happiness,
he resigned his Spirit into the Hands of his Redeemer; Dying Anno Christi 1571.
and of his Age Fifty.

The Life of HENRY BULLINGER.
HEnry Bullinger was Born at a Town in Helvetia called Bremogart, Anno Christi
1504, coming of Honorable Parents, whose noble Progenitors had long flourished
in those Parts; and in his Childhood having escaped many eminent Dangers, he
was sent to Embrick, where under several Schoolmasters he greatly Profited in
Learning, especially in the Knowledge of the Scriptures, continuing his Studies
with great Eagerness: When being desirous to enter into a strict way of Living,
he was several times about to enter into a Monastery of Carthusians, yet first
he took time to debate on the Matter, and coming to Cologne, where he had
Access to the Library of the Predicants, he Read the Lives of the Fathers, and
Modern Divines: When finding all their Rules and Methods were taken from the
Scripture, he left the Stream to take a View of the Fountain; and by seriously
Considering those Holy Pages, he at last found that they were altogether
Repugnant to the Errors and Superstitions of the Romish Church; whereupon he
altered his Determination of turning Carthusian, and diligently applied himself
to the Reading one Stephen Malancthone's Book of common Places, and in a while
he Commenced Master of Arts; after which, at his Fathers Request, he returned
Home, and continued there for a good Space, yet neglected not his Studies; and
his Fame spreading amongst the Churches, he was ordained to read Lectures, and
to Instruct the Younger Sort in the Knowledge of the Tongues, which he performed
with great Diligence. When by the Abbot of Cappela he was Invested a Preacher,
he by his Sermons so far Prevailed, that he wrought a great Reformation, and
caused several Traditions to be Abolished.

Having continued in his former Station for some Years, he was called to the
Pastorship of Bremongart, where he by the Purity of his Doctrine so far
prevailed with the Magistrates, that they Abrogated Popery, and made many
severe Decrees against Popery, Adultery, and other such heinous Crimes; he also
Confuted the Anabaptists, who at that time greatly troubled the Peace of the
Church, denying the Payment of Tenths under the Gospel, the which by public
Disputation he proved Lawful.

But Satan Envying the Progress of the Gospel, stirred up the Papists to
Disturb the Churches: And such was the Tumult, that notwithstanding Mr.
Bullinger's Exhorting them to Peace, or to try which was in the Right by
Disputation, they would not harken to it, but raised Forces on both sides; and
it coming to a Battle, the Protestants were worsted; whereupon Mr. Bullinger
and his Father were forced to fly to Zurick, where the Former was kindly
Entertained by Leo Judel a Pious Man, and Promoted by the Consent of the
Citizens to Preach in the great Church, which he did for several Months, and
thereby gained great Applause, being chosen Pastor in the Stead of Zuinglius,
lately killed in a Battle between the Popish and Protestant Cantons. His
greatest Care was to maintain Peace and Unity.

And now being settled in his Vocation, he wrote a Confession of Faith, which
being highly approved of by the Senate, it was ordered that it should be Read
in all their Churches at certain times: He there caused a College to be Erected
at the public Charge, and took great care in Furnishing it with such
Necessaries as were Convenient.

About this time, one Schewenfield a Nobleman of Silesia, Taught that Christ's
Body being received into Heaven, was so far Deified that it no longer contains
its Humane Nature. To confute which Bullinger wrote a learned Treatise, proving
by Scripture that it was a dangerous Error.

When Luther Exclaimed against the Helvetian Churches, calling the Professors
Sacramentarians; Bullinger did all he could to persuade him to Unity, Peace,
and a good Opinion; but not being able to prevail, he wrote this Declaration in
the Defense of the Churches. We cannot, says he, with Luther Confess Bread to
be the Natural Body of Christ, and that Judas and other wicked Men received his
Body as well as Peter, and the rest of the Saints; yet are we ready, to
preserve Peace, so that it be not urged upon us, to yield to those things,
which neither our selves do Understand, nor can we teach them to others: In all
other things you shall find us willing to Comply, and to be peacible Men ready
to give an Account of our Faith, whenever it shall be required of us.

This Declaration satisfied many that before were displeased, by reason of his
Answering one of Luther's Books, whom they said had deserved so well of the
Church.

A while after the Protestant Prince wrote to the Protestant Cantons to send
them Aid against the Emperor; but Bullinger returned Answer, That they could
not do it without Prejudicing them, for, says he, both the Emperor and Pope
have written to the Popish Cantons our Neighbors, to Assist them, which they
have declined to do, upon no other Account than that we have not lent the
Protestants any Assistance, the which if we once do, assure your selves they
will raise all their Power to Assist the Popish Army: But we daily Pray for
your Success, and keep many Fasts on your Behalf.

After Mr. Bullinger had lived a while at Zurick, Mr. Hooper afterward Bishop
of Gloucester, came thither, and was kindly entertained by Mr. Bullinger; when
as the Emperor caused the Interim to be published in order to the Overthrowing
the Protestant Religion, which Calvin and Bucer Answered, but the Printer durst
not let it come abroad, yet the Banishment of many good Ministers Insued, to
the great Grief of the Churches.

When Francis the French King was dead, and Henry of Navar Succeeded, he sent
to the Helvetians to renew the former League with them; but Mr. Bullinger
persuaded them to the contrary; saying, It was neither Just nor Lawful for a
Man to be hired to shed another Man's Blood, who might be Innocent, and from
whom himself had never received any Injury, Whereupon the King missed of
obtaining his Design.

Anno 1550, he published his famous Decades Sermonum, and sent many of them
into England, which greatly furthered the Reformation under Pious King Edward
the Sixth: He also wrote against the Council of Trent, proving therein many
Erroneous Decrees Repugnant to the Word of God; he likewise used his utmost
Diligence to settle the Church of Geneva, there having some Difference Sprung
up by the Teaching of one Bolsecus and his Followers, and when in the
Persecution of the Protestants under Queen Mary many fled to Zurick, he
plentifully provided for them, and was very Zealous for the Defense of the
Protestant Religion, using his utmost Diligence to Expunge the Bludratian
Heresy, which beginning in Poland, had spread it self into many parts of
Helvetia; the Spreaders of it, Teaching that our Savior was not Man.

A while after, he had a Contest with Brentius, between whom many Books and
Writings passed, but at last they were Reconciled. The Popes Citations coming
out to Summon the Helvetian Ministers to come to the Council of Trent, they
refused it, alleging that it was not convenient (they being Protestants) for
them to be at a Popish Council.

And now Mr. Bullinger having spent himself with Labor and Study, fell Sick;
but upon the Prayers of the Churches, God was pleased to restore him at that
time, but his Wife and one of his Daughters dyed of the Pestilence; and the
next Year two more of his Children, himself being also grievously Afflicted
with the Stone, yet wrote he his Confession of Faith, and sent it to the
Churches: He also Confuted the Pope's Bull which he sent into England to
Deprive Queen Elizabeth of her Royal Estate, Proving it too Impious and
Heretical.

In the Year 1571, by reason of the Extremity of the Winter a Dearth Insued,
whereupon the Synod decreed public Prayers and Fasting throughout their
Territories, which was done with great Solemnity; and the next Year happened
the cruel Massacree in France, where by the Hands of the bloody Papists, fell
to the Number of 20000 Protestants, upon which Mr. Bullinger wrote his Book of
Persecution, and God's Judgment upon the Persecutors; Exhorting the Persecuted
to Patience and Constancy: And about that time a dreadful Commet appeared in
Cassiopeia.

In the Year 1574 Mr. Bullinger again fell Sick, and his Disease Increasing,
many Godly Ministers came to Visit him, but some Months after he Recovered and
Preached as formerly, but soon Relapsed; when finding his Vital Spirits wasted,
and Nature much decayed in him, he concluded his Death was at hand, and
thereupon said as follows.

If the Lord will make any further Use of me and my Ministry in his Church, I
will willingly obey him, but if he pleases (as I much desire) to take me out of
this miserable Life, I shall exceedingly Rejoice that he will be so pleased as
to take me out of this Miserable and Corrupt Age, to go to my Savior Christ.
Socrates (said he) was glad when his Death approached, because he thought he
should go to Hesiod, Homer, and other learned Men Deceased, and whom he
expected to meet in the other World: Then how much more do I Joy, who am sure
that I shall see my Savior Christ, the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and all Holy Men which have lived from the beginning of the World. These (I
say) I am sure to see, and to partake with them in Joy; why then should not I
be willing to Dye, to Enjoy their perpetual Society in Glory.

Then sending for all the Ministers of Zurick, he recommended to them the Care
of the Church, Admonished them to Unity and Concord, Persuaded them sharply to
reprehend Sin, and beware of Drunkenness, but above all to respect the Senate,
who had been such great Encouragers of the Protestant Religion, and from whom,
next Heaven, they must expect their Protection: And then with Tears told them,
That he was not unwilling to leave them for his own Sake, but for the Sake of
the Church. Then having written his Farewell to the Senate, and therein
Admonished them to take Care of the Churches and Schools, and by their
Permission Chosen one Ralph Gualter his Successor: He patiently Resigned up his
Spirit into the Hands of his Redeemer, dying Anno Christi 1575, and of his Age
71, to the great Grief of the Protestants, being a Man of singular Parts, a
sound Preacher, and an Establisher of the Helvetian Church. He wrote many
Books, and Commented largly upon the Scripture, being a great Opposer of the
Anabaptists, and an entire Lover of all good Men.

The Life of JOHN FOX.
JOhn Fox was Born in Lincolnshire at the Town of Boston Anno 1517, who was no
sooner brought up, but he was by his Parents sent to Oxford, and there entered
in Brazen-Nose College, where he associated himself with Dr. Nowell, and so
increased in Learning that he became the Wonder of his Age; so that within a
while he was chosen Fellow of Magdalen College, and won great Applause by the
many excellent Latin Themes he wrote; applying his Time chiefly to the Study of
Divine Things; and finding out the many Errors in the Popish Religion, he began
to affect the Reformed Doctrine; and still increasing in Learning and Wisdom,
he wrote against the Popes Supremacy, which caused the Papists greatly to
inveigh against him, using their utmost Diligence to find out an Occasion of
Quarrel against him; and at last prevailed so far, that he was examined about
the Points of Religion, and Commanded to give a Confession of his Faith, the
which he refused not to do, as also to prove it out of the Scripture: Yet that
was not prevalent with his Adversaries, for they Condemned him for an Heretic,
and Expelled him the College; whereupon he departed into Warwickshire, and
there was entertained by Sr. Thomas Lucie, and became a Tutor to his Children,
where he married a Wife and continued in great Reputation, till such time as
the Popish Inquisitors came into those Parts, for Fear of whom he was forced to
withdraw himself.

And now being destitute, he sent to his Father-in-Law, that had married his
Mother, to know if he would entertain him, but he having got his Estate, made
it a Pretense to Defraud him of it, that He was Convicted and a dangerous
Person, and that unless he would Renounce his Opinions, he durst not entertain
him; yet his Mother so far prevailed, that he found Reception, his Wife going
to her own Father, whither Mr. Fox came often to visit her: Yet could he not
long be sheltered from his Persecutors, for by their Spies they got Knowledge of
his Abode, which caused him to go for London, where he fell into extreme
Poverty; insomuch that half Starved as he was, he looked like a Skeliton, when
one day sitting in St. Paul's Church, a Person to him unknown, came to him, and
put a Sum of Money into his Hand, bidding him go and be Merry, and within a
short time expect Promotion. This he took as sent from Heaven, and returned all
Praise to God, for his Mercy and Goodness toward him.

Within three Days after the Duchess of Richmond sent for him, and appointed
him Tutor to the Earl of Purry's Children, who were then in her Charge, who so
much profited by his Diligence, that in Learning they Excelled all the Noble
Youth of the Kingdom; and he continued with good liking the Remainder of King
Henry's and all King Edward's Reign, being greatly Instrumental in Reforming
the Church, and Restoring it to its Primitive Purity in the Reign of the
latter, which got him more ill Will amongst the Papists. So that Queen Mary
coming to the Crown, and all things being turned topsi-turvy, Gardener Bishop
of Winchester, his professed Enemy, used his utmost Diligence to bring him into
a Snare; but he was defended against him a considerable time by the Duke of
Richmond, who when he desired to depart for fear of the Persecution, told him
That he had yet Wealth, Favor, and Friends, and the Fortune of his House: And
if any Mischance prevailed farther, that himself would partake of the Danger,
and make the Destruction mutual: That he remembered with what Instructions he
had Fortified his younger Years, neither had he with more Attention hearkened
thereto, then he would with Constancy put them in Practice.

Yet such was the Malice of his Enemies, that the Duke soon perceived his Power
too weak to Protect him, whereupon he provided him with such Necessaries as
were convenient, and sent him to a Farmers House, one of the Duke's Tenants,
near Ipswich, whither also his Wife went with him, resolving to attend him in
his Flight, although she was then great with Child.

After they had staid a while there, they resolved to pass the Seas, but had
scarce weighed Anchor when such a Tempest arose that all the Mariners began to
fear, and the Night being Dark, such prodigious Storms of Hail and Rain fell,
that they lost the use of their Compass; and after being tossed about forty
eight Hours, the Ship was forced back into the same Port from whence she first
set Sail; which many took for a Token of God's being Displeased at his Flight:
Yet Providence so ordered it, that whilst the Ship was tossing upon the Ocean,
he escaped a worse Danger on Land, for Gardener had sent a Pursevant with
Commission to bring him back, who having searched the Farm House, and
understanding that he was on Board, and that the Vessel had set Sail some
Hours, before, he returned to him that sent him, ere the Ship was driven into
the Port.

Mr. Fox being Landed took Horse, as if he intended to ride for London, but in
the Night he came on Board again, and the Ship hoising Sail, passed the
dangerous Seas safely arriving at Newport, where he Landed, and after having
refreshed himself, he together with his Wife and some others, went to Antwerp,
and so to Basile, which was then a Place of free Reception of poor distressed
Fugitives, who were forced to leave their Countries for the Sake of the Lord
Jesus, and his everlasting Gospel: And here he undertook to Correct the Press,
and at such leisure times as he could spare, he Wrote part of the Acts and
Monuments of the Church, a Work famous to all Posterity: And in this Station he
continued till the Death of Queen Mary, whose Death he had a little before
foretold, upon certain Notice of which, he with several Pious and Learned Men
returned into England, and were kindly received by Queen Elizabeth then
Reigning; where Mr. Fox prosecuted his Work begun at Basil, and so labored
therein that he soon brought it to a Period, which made the Papists yet more
inveigh against him, and endeavor what in them lay to disparage both him and
it; but he so fully Confuted them, that with Shame and Confusion of Face they
were forced to give over. He finishing this great Work in eleven Years space,
searching all the Records himself, and by his great Study and Travail therein
much weakened his Body; yet for the good of the Church he spared no Pains. So
that now his Fame being spread abroad, many who retained Doubts and Scruples of
Conscience, as well Nobles as Plebeians, resorted to him, to satisfy them, and
dissolve their Anxieties, the Concourse being daily very great: With some he
Prayed, to others he declared the Will of the Almighty out of the Holy
Scriptures, and so found Means to give them full Satisfaction, even drawing the
Souls of many, by the Assistance of God's Divine Grace, out of the Mouth of
Satan: Nor did he spare to Preach abroad, and use all Diligence to promote the
Gospel; and so fervent were his Prayers, that they had a more then common
Influence upon the Hearers, and he with David through the Sense of his Sin was
always wont to Water his Couch with Tears.

When any Rich Person sent him Presents either in Money or otherwise, he would
take it with one Hand, and with the other distribute it amongst such as he
thought had need, nor is it to be doubted that he had a singular Gift of
Prophecy, for he often foretold many things that came to pass.

One Day he going to Visit the Lady Henage, who being Sick of a Fever, and
given over by her Physicians, after he had Prayed by her, he told her She had
done well to prepare her self for Death, but indeed she should not dye of that
Sickness. Whereupon her Son in-Law said, He had not done well to disquiet her
with Hopes of Life, when she had been given over by the Learned Physicians: To
which Mr. Fox replied that He said no more then was Commanded him, for it
seemed good to God that she should Recover, which within a short time, she
accordingly did.

One Mrs. Honywood having layn Sick of a Consumption and deep Melancholy, for
the Space of twenty Years, sent for Mr. Fox to Pray with her, as being given up
by all the Physicians for Dead; the which when he had done, he told her she
should not only Recover, but live many Years; at which she earnestly looking on
him, and having a Glass in her Hand: Said, You might as well have told me, that
if I throw this Glass against the Wall it will not break, and with that she
threw it with all her Force: Yet although it hit against a Post, afterward
against a Chest, and then on the Floor, it neither broke, nor had so much as a
Flaw in it; and as Mr. Fox said, so it happened, for she soon recovered, and
lived twenty Years after, although she at that time was near seventy Years old.

One Day he having been to Visit the Earl of Arundel at the Duke of Norfolk's
House in the Strand, the Earl went with him to the back Stairs, where he was to
take Water, but the Thames being exceeding Rough, the Earl dissuaded him from
venturing. To which Mr. Fox replied, My Lord, so let these Waters deal with me,
as I have in Truth and Sincerity delivered unto you all that I have spoken:
Which done he entered the Boat, and immediately the winds ceased, and there was
a great Calm. The reason of his so saying to the Earl was, because he had
formerly been his Tutor, and had instructed him in the Principles of the
Protestant Religion.

He now growing in Years, and by reason of his former Hardships, his great
Study, Travail, and Labor, he was reduced to a very weak Condition, he laid
down the troublesome Cares of the World, to prepare himself for Death: And
foreseeing his End was at hand, lest his Sons should be troubled, he sent them
abroad, and then after many fervent Prayers for the Church, and the prevalency
of the Gospel, he resigned up his Spirit into the Hands of the Father of all
Spirits; dying Anno Christi 1587, and of his Age 70.

Some Passages of his are worthy of Note, he one Day going abroad, a poor Man
passing along, he friendly Embraced and Relieved him; when being demanded
whether he knew him or not, he said, Yes truly, I remember him well, and forget
Lords and Ladys to remember such.

An other time, as he was going through Cannon-Street, it being in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, he met a Woman of his Acquaintance, who after some Discourse,
pulled a Bible out of her Pocket, telling him she was going to Church. Truly
said Mr. Fox, If you will be Advised by me, I would have you go home again: Why
then, said the Woman, when must I go to Church? Indeed, said Mr. Fox, when you
tell no body of it.

The Life of EDMUND GRINDAL Archbishop of Canterbury.
EDmund Grindal was Born Anno Dom. 1519, at Beighs in Cumberland, of Godly
Parents, and there brought up in all the Learning the Schools in those Parts
were capable to furnish him withal, and then being fitted for the University,
he went to Cambridg, and was admitted into Pembrook Hall, and so closely
applied himself to his Study, that he outpassed most of his Fellows, insomuch
that he was within a few Years after his coming thither Chosen a Fellow, and
within a while after that, Master of the House.

When as Bishop Ridly coming to Visit the University, and taking Notice of his
singular Piety and Learning, he appointed him one of his Chaplains, and
afterward Recommended him to King Edward the sixth, who set greatly by him,
and was about to Prefer him to a Bishopric, but that he was prevented by Death.

This good Prince being Dead, and Queen Mary coming to the Crown, he amongst
the rest, was forced to fly for his Life, abiding in Germany, and there
instructing the People in the way to saving Knowledge till the Death of the
Queen, when returning into England, his Light could not be hid, insomuch that
Queen Elizabeth taking notice of his great Parts, advanced him to the
Bishopric of London, from which bloody Bonner had been Expelled; where he used
his utmost Diligence, both by Preaching and other Means, to establish the true
Religion under that blessed Queen; and so much deserved at her Hands, that the
Archbishopric of York being Vacant, he was Translated thither, and afterward
to the Sea of Canterbury, where he continued to execute his Charge with all
Diligence, notwithstanding the Malice of such as strove to Undermine his
greatness: But at last this good Man being Summoned by Death, to receive the
Crown that is laid up for the Righteous; dyed at Croidon in Surry Anno Christi
1583, and of his Age 64.

He was a Man of singular Learning and Piety, Charitable to the Poor, and
Courteous to all. At St. Beighs in Cumberland, the place of his Nativity, he
erected a Free School, and invested it with thirty Pounds per Annum: To
Pembrook Hall, he gave twenty two Pounds a Year for ever, for maintaining a
Greek Lecture, one Fellow, and two Scholars: To Magdalain College, he gave
Lands for the Maintenance of one Fellow from the School of St. Beighs
aforesaid; with many other charitable Deeds, too tedious to be Expressed: And
only can be wished that the Clergy of our Age would therein follow ^is Example.

The Lives of the Kings and Queens of England, who were Instrumental in
Carrying on the great Work of Reformation, to this very Day, And (although it may
be some Digression) The Life and bloody Reign of Queen MARY.
HAving thus run over in this second Part of Ecclesiastical History, the Lives
of the famous Reformers, glorious Martyrs, and great Doctors of the Church, I
shall now proceed to give the Reader an Account of the Lives of such English
Monarchs as have been Instrumental in Overthrowing the Romish Superstitions;
and by their unwearied Endeavors, Encouraged and Protected the Protestant
Religion as it is now Established in the Church of England.

And first to begin with HENRY the Eighth, who first Abolished the long Usurped
Supremacy of the Sea of Rome, Wounding the Head of the Beast, after whom all
the World wondered.
HEnry the Eighth was second Son to Henry the Seventh, and his Wife Elizabeth,
Daughter to Edward the Fourth, Born Anno Domini 1490, and was by the Prudent
King his Father, during his Minority, committed to the Tutorage of several
learned Men, and amongst the rest, Cardinal Wolsy's, which was the first Rise
of that great Cardinal. After he was about thirteen Years of Age, his Brother
Prince Arthur dyed, whereupon he was created Prince of Wales, and Married to
Catharine of Spain, his Brothers Wife; in which State he continued till Anno
1508, at what time his Father King Henry the Seventh dyed, and he the same Day
was Proclaimed King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland, in London and
other Places of this Kingdom, and within a while after was Crowned at
Westminster by William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury: And thus being seated
in the Throne of the Kingdom, the first remarkable thing he did, was upon the
grievous Complaint of several Persons, to deliver up to public Justice Empsom,
and Dudly, two Judges, whom King Henry the Seventh used as his Instruments to
Oppress the People by grievous Exactions; who being Convicted of many heinous
Crimes, were Executed on Tower Hill.

A while after, Pope Julius the Second, being displeased with the French King,
sent his Legate to Incite our King Henry to demand the Duchess of Normandy,
Guyen, Anjou, and Main, which he accordingly did, but was denied with some
Contempt; whereupon he joined with the Emperor Maximilian, and Ferdinand King
of Spain, against the French King, and equiping a gallant Fleet, he Landed an
Army in France, and took Terwin, and Tournay by Seige; and then making Wolsey
Bishop of Tournay, he returned into England, where he bestowed several other
Bishoprics upon him.

During the Kings being in France, the Scots Invaded England under their King,
James the Fourth, King of Scotland, upon Pretense of our Destroying one Andrew
Barton, a Scotch Pirate, who had done great Mischief at Sea. Against them, the
Lord Howard, Earl of Surry, and Lieutenant of the North, was sent; who gave the
Scots Battle at Foldon-Field, and put them to the Rout; Killing the King,
three Bishops, two Abbots, twelve Earls, about seventy Lords and Knights, and
near eight thousand common Soldiers, taking almost as many Prisoners.

The French King hearing of these Proceedings, sent his Ambassadors to Treat of
a Peace: Which was Concluded upon that King's Marrying the lady Mary, our Kings
second Sister; yet he Enjoyed her not long, for within three Months after the
Marriage he dyed; and then Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, being sent to
fetch her over, privately Married her at Calis, which had nigh caused him to
lose the King's Favor; She having for Dover, out of the Kingdom of France
thirty Thousand Crowns yearly during Life, and one hundred Thousand to be paid
for five Years, to the King her Brother.

Pope Julius being Dead, and Leo Succeeding him, he upon Cardinal Wolsey's
sending good store of Gold to Rome, sent him a Cardinal's Cap: And now
Strangers growing very Unruly in London, at the Instigation of one Lincoln, a
great Tumult happened on May Eve, who Plundered and Destroyed the Houses of
many Strangers in St. Martines Legrand, and other places; the Uprore continuing
for near two Days; whereupon a power being sent into the City, many of them
were Taken, and amongst the rest Lincoln and several others, who were Executed
on Gibbets set up in most Streets, and four Hundred Youth, and twelve Women,
went to Westminster with Halters about their Necks, and were at the Instance of
Wolsey Pardoned; and from that time, ever since, the Day of that Insurrection
is called Evil-May Day.

The King for the Sum of six hundred Thousand Crowns, and other Gratuities,
about this time delivered up Turnay to the French, although the Emperor Persuaded
him from it: But the French soon breaking Truce, the King soon prepared for
War, and joining with the Emperor and some other Princes; and then the Emperor
Coming into England, it was agreed that when the Lady Mary came of Years, the
Emperor should take her to Wife: And thereupon the Earl of Surry was sent with
a great Power into France, who took Morlois, and burnt several Towns and
Villages on the Sea Coast, and so returned into England with great Spoils; when
as the Earl of Shrewsbury was sent with a Puissant Army against the Duke of
Albany, then Regent of Scotland, but by the Mediation of the Nobility, a Truce
was concluded ere it could come to a Battle, yet a while after, the Earl of
Surry being made Lord Admiral of the North, entered that Kingdom, and did great
Harm, insomuch that a War was proclaimed: For the better Management of which, a
Parliament was called in England, and at the Instigation of Wolsey, the half of
all Spiritual Livings were granted to the King for five Years, and a Tenth of
all temporal Substance.

Christian, King of Denmark, being Expelled his Kingdom, by his rebellious
Subjects, came about this time into England, and was nobly entertained at the
King's Charge, for the space of three Weeks, and then he departed for Flanders:
And the French growing Insolent, the Duke of Suffolk was sent over with an
Army, who Fought the French, beat them, took many Towns, and returned with
great Booty: And now by the Mediation of Margret, Queen of Scots, and Sister to
King Henry; a firm Peace was Concluded between Scotland and England, of which
Wolsey taking the Advantage, as knowing when there was War, it was gainful to
him; he used such Diligence, that he withdrew the King from the Emperor's
Interest, as also caused him to decline the Payment of the Annual Pension to
the Duke of Burbon; whereupon he with his Army went to Rome, fought the French,
took their King, and entered the City with his Victorious Army, and Besieged
Pope Clement, and twenty three Cardinals in the strong Castle of Angelo, which
News coming to Wolsey, he solicited the King to send an Army, to deliver the
Pope out of that eminent Danger, but the King would only consent to grant a
considerable Sum of Money, to be employed in raising Italian Forces. But the
Pope notwithstanding his Bulls, Curses with Bell, Book, and Candle, found his
Gold most Powerful; for with that he purchased the Duke's Departure: and although
by the Popes Procurement he was Condemned of Treason, yet he maugered the
Malice of that proud Prelate, and laughed him to Scorn.

Things being at this Pass, the Earl of Tyrowen Rebelled in Ireland, against
whom the great Earl of Surry was sent, with a powerful Army, who soon caused
the Rebels to Vanish; whereupon the Earl of Ossery was made Deputy, but within
a short time displaced, and the Earl of Kilder placed in his Stead, against
whom Wolsey showed him an inveterate Enemy, and thereby lost much of the King's
Favor.

The Lady Mary, the King's eldest Daughter, being arrived at seven Years, the
King sent to put the Emperor in mind of his Promise, but he not greatly liking
her, by reason of her want of Beauty, and not knowing well, how to revoke his
Promise, he by his Ambassadors, began to question her Legitimacy, alleging
that she being Born of that Marriage which was Contracted with a Brothers Wife,
and that consequently not Lawful, she could not be Legitimate.

The King hearing these Objections, began to fall into a Dislike of that
Marriage, and thereupon calling many of the chief Clergy together, he
discovered his Resentments; whereupon they advised him to sue out a Divorce in
the Court of Rome, which he attempted with great Cost: But finding many wilful
Delays, he convened the Clergy of this Kingdom, but Cardinal Wolsey would not
meddle therein, unless a Cardinal was sent to join with him in Commission;
whereupon, at his Request, Cardinal Campejus was sent by the Pope, with Power
to erect a Court, there to hear the King's Objections, which was done
accordingly, at a vast Charge, and thither the King and Queen were Cited, and
many Debates held; so that at last all Men thinking it would have come to an
Issue, and nothing remained but the determinatory Sentence, for procuring a
Divorce, Campejus Adjorned the Proceeding to be heard in the Court of Rome,
referring the Sentence to the Determination of the Pope.

Upon these Proceedings of the two Cardinals, the King was highly Incensed;
Ordered Campejus to depart the Land, and for some Days after Wolsey was forbid
to come into his Presence; when as having consulted Cranmer about the Matter,
he sent him to Rome, who there so learnedly Disputed and Proved out of
Scripture, and the Writings of the Fathers, that it was not Lawful for a
Brother to Marry a Brothers Wife; that none would, or at least could, Argue
against the many Reasons he Propounded; and returning, then he went to all the
famous Universities of Italy, Germany, Spain, France, and Flanders, and desired
the Advice of the chief Doctors, who all concurred with him, in his Opinion: So
that returning Home with their Opinions in Writing, under the Seals of the
several Universities; the King was so highly pleased, that he Invested him in
the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and put away Queen Katherine, whereupon the
Pope sent out his Bull to declare the Marriage Lawful, but the King not
regarding it; not only Married the Lady Ann Bullin, Daughter to the Viscount
Rochford, but likewise in a Parliament he then called, abolished the Pope's
Supremacy, and by Act of Parliament, had his second Marriage Confirmed.

And now Cardinal Wolsey being arrived at the height of Greatness, for opposing
the King in these his proceedings; began more and more to fall into Disgrace;
and for a terrible Example, to deter others from Murmuring, Sr. Thomas More
Lord High Chancellor of England, and Bishop Fisher were Beheaded, for disowning
the Kings Supremacy in Spiritual Affairs; and several Articles drawn up against
the Cardinal, all his Dignities Sequestered, and his Person Arrested at Lawood,
about seven Miles from York, by the Earl of Northumberland, in order to his
being brought up to London, to Answer his Charge, but by the way, Lodging at
Leicester Abbey, he dyed, as it is thought, of excessive Grief; though some are
of Opinion, he poisoned himself, because he would not live to see the Disgrace
he must needs undergo: His last Words be, If I had served my God, so faithfully
as I have served my King, he would not at this time have cast me off.

He was a Man of a haughty Spirit, being at first raised, from being a poor
Schoolmaster, by King Henry the Seventh: He during the younger Years of King
Henry the Eighth, Ruled the Kingdom in Effect, and heaped up to him such
Infinite Treasure, that it is reported he sent twelve Barrels full of Gold and
Silver to Rome, and that for the building his two Colleges, he Suppressed
forty Monasteries, and in his Writings usually Subscribed, I and my King, and
upon most of the King's Money caused the Cardinal's Cap to be Stamped.

And now one Elizabeth Barton a Popish Implement, commonly called the Holy Maid
of Kent, pretended to have Revelations from Heaven; and thereupon declared that
it was Revealed to her, that if the King proceeded in his second Marriage, he
should not Reign a Month, whereupon she and seven of her Disciples being
Attainted of high Treason, were Executed at Tyburn.

And now the Pope growing Impatient at the loss of such a sweet Morsel, as the
Revenue of England, by his Agents endeavored to stir up the neighboring
Princes against our King Henry, and especially James the Fifth, King of Scots,
his Nephew, promising the Crown to those that could catch it; but his Attempts
proved Ineffectual.

And now so far prevail the Popelings, that they endeavored to wreck their
Revenge against all that had been for the Obliterating the Popes Supremacy,
bringing many into Disgrace.

About this time Queen Ann was delivered of the Princess Elizabeth, afterward
Queen of England, and the next Year of a Child Still Born: But this good Lady
favoring the Reformed Religion, the Court-Papists, and especially bloody
Gardener, so over bribed those that Attended her; whereupon they Accused her of
Committing Incest with her Brother the Lord Rochford, whereupon they together
with Noris, Weston, Brierton, and Marks, Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, were
sent to the Tower, and within a while after, all of them beheaded, as it is
supposed, to make way for a new Love, for the next Day the King was Married to
the Lady Jane Seymer.

And now the King being destitute of a Privado, whereto he might impart his
weighty Secrets, Advanced Thomas Cromwell, Son to a Blacksmith, born at Putny,
he having been formerly a Servant to Wolsey; first Knighting him, then created
him Lord Cromwell, Barron of Okeham, Master of his Jewel-House, Knight of the
Garter, Earl of Essex, Lord high Chamberlain, and lastly Vicar General: This
Man was God's Instrument in the Hand of the King, to Suppress Popery, and
Cherish the Reformed Religion, using his utmost Diligence to Suppress Images,
Idols, Popish Trinkets, and Monasteries; but the Devil Envying his Happiness,
for Opposing the Increase of his Kingdom, he stirred up Gardener against him,
with several Popish Bishops, who notwithstanding his Wariness, and upright
Dealing, so far prevailed against him, that they brought him into the King's
Displeasure, and then pushing on their Malicious Design, caused him to lose his
Head; of whose Death the King often Repented him, wishing many times, that he
had his Cromwell again.

The Friars and Monks being unhived, and wanting their Roastmeat, grew
Impatient, and thereupon stirred up the unthinking Mobile in Yorkshire and
Lincolnshire to take Arms, but upon Proclamation of free Pardon, they laid them
down without Bloodshed, but the Monks being Impatient, and finding the
Instability of the Plebeans, they dealt with those of Rank, whereupon an
Insurrection was Headed by the Lord Darcy, Lord Hussye, Sr: Robert Constable,
Sr. Thomas Percy, Sr. Frances Bigot, Sr. Stephen Hambleton, Sr. John Bulmer,
the Abbot of Fountains, the Abbot of Rivax, the Abbot of Gervaulks, and Prior
of Burlington, all of which being taken, were Executed in several Parts of
England.

About this time Queen Jane was brought to Bed of Prince Edward, afterward
King of England, but dying in Childbed, the King lamented her Death grievously,
whereupon he continued a Widdower for the space of two Years, and then was
affianced to the Lady Ann of Cleve, but upon her first Arrival the King took a
Dislike to her Person, and therefore never Bedded her; but within a short time
procured a Divorce to pass in Parliament, and was Married to the Lady Catharine
Howard, Daughter to Edward, Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk: But whether
True, or through the Malice of the Popish Party, is uncertain, after her six
Months Marriage she was Accused of Adultry, and thereupon, together with the
Lady Jane Rochford, and some other of the Privy-Chamber, was Beheaded within
the Tower.

The same Year the Lords Gray and Dacres, Margaret Countess of Salisbury and
others, were likewise Beheaded, and the King, who was now grown Old, began to
think him of an other Wife, and thereupon was Married to Katharine Par.

The Parliament again sitting, it was Enacted high Treason for any one to deny
the King's Supremacy, or to acknowledge the Pope: And by this Parliament, the
six bloody Articles were Confirmed, and it was made Heresy and Death to deny
any of them; the which were as follows: First, That after speaking the Words
of Consecration by the Priest, the real and natural Body and Blood of Christ,
as he was Conceived and Crucified, was in the Sacrament, and no other Substance.

Secondly, That the Communion in both Kinds, is not necessary to Salvation.

Thirdly, That Priests may not Marry.

Fourthly, That Vows of Chastity ought to be Observed.

Fifthly, That Private Mass ought to be continued.

Sixthly, That Auricular Confession is necessary, and requisite to be retained
in the Church of God.

These Articles having passed both Houses, and signed by the King, many good
Christians refused to shape their Consciences according to Tenor thereof, and
therefore not a few Suffered the Flames, and by other Means put to Death.

The Scots again Invading England, and their King having made one Oliver St.
Clear, an upstart Favorite, General, the Nobility so much disdeigned his
Command, that out of Hatred to him, they willingly lost the Battle, almost
without Fighting, which King James the Fifth, took so grievously, that he fell
into a Feavour and Dyed, and soon after a Peace for ten Years was Concluded,
upon Condition that the Lady Mary, King James's only Child, should be given in
Marriage to Edward, Heir to our King Henry: But by the Disswasion of the Pope
and French King, they kept not their Promise; whereupon the King prepared two
Armies, and Warred on both Nations: His Army in France taking Buloin, and
several other Places of Importance; and that in Scotland, Burnt the City of
Edenburg, and made great Havoc in the adjacent Countries.

Anno 1545, a Council was held at Trent, which by Adjornments was continued
till 1563, during the Popedoms of Paul the Third, Julian the Third, and Pius
the Fourth, and was the Eighteenth General Council.

The King having formerly wrote a Book against Luther, for which he had the
Title of Defender of the Faith, sent him by the Pope: Now Wrote a Book against
the Pope, laying open his Covetousness, Envy, Breach of League, Stirring up of
princes to War, and causing Subjects to Rebel against their lawful Prince.

And now the Monasteries, Fryeries, Pryeries, Colleges, etc. and Nunneries
went to wrack; there being Suppressed in England and Wales, Monasteries 313,
Pryories 290, Fryeries 122, Nunneries 142, Colleges 152, and Hospitals 129, in
all 1148. The Valuation thereof (although at half the Worth) as they were
presented to the King, by the Commissioner, at the time of their Suppression,
amounting to one hundred eighty three thousand seven hundred seven Pounds and
thirteen Shillings. Yet the Lands were so Imbezeled and Distributed amongst
Courtiers, and Annexed to Manors, that the King's Exchequer was not much
Increased thereby.

And now the King much decaying by reason of grievous Sickness, on Thursday the
28th. of January. Anno 1546, gave up the Ghost in the 56 Year of his Age, and
38 of his Reign, and was Buried in Windsor Chapel; although a stately Monument
was Contrived for him in Westminster Abbey, but through the Troubles that
afterward happened, it was left Unfinished.

The Life and Reign of EDWARD the Sixth, King of England, etc.
EDward Tuder, afterward King of England, by the Name of Edward the Sixth, was
born, Anno Christi 1537. and was the only Son of King Henry the Eighth, by his
third Wife Jane Daughter to Sir John Seymer, who lost her Life to give him
Birth; for being cast into a dead sleep, or her senses benumbed with powerful
Spirits, her Belly was opened, of which Incision within four days after she
dyed.

When he came to be six years of Age, he was committed to the Tutorage of Dr.
Cox and Mr. Cheek both learned and godly men; the first instructing him in
Divinity, the latter in the Languages; in both which (being of a most acute
Wit) he grew so perfect, that he became the wonder of his Age, for at ten years
old he spoke Latin, Greek, French, Italian and Spanish very readily; he was
likewise very skilful in Logic, Philosophy, Music and Astronomy.

When he was but nine years of Age, his Father King Henry dyed, and he was
proclaimed King in London, Westminster, and other Places, and in great State
conducted to the Tower of London, where his Uncle the Duke of Summerset being
Protector of the Kingdom (during his Minority) Knighted him, then the young
King taking the Sword from his Uncle Knighted the Lord Mayor, and several
others, and created his other Uncle, Sir Thomas Seymer, Lord of Sudly, and High
Admiral of England; and returning to Westminster he was crowned by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, all the Nobility attending, as is usual upon the like
occasion, and the same day he caused a General Pardon to pass the Broad Seal to
all Persons except six, who were named therein.

And now this Pious Prince being Established in the Throne of his Father, bent
his whole Study to the better settling Religion, and thereupon consulted with
many Godly Divines about Reforming the Church, by whose assistance he so
modeled the Ecclesiastical Affairs, that the Dregs of Popery were purged out,
and pious men every where commanded to teach according to the Word of God, all
Images, Massing Garments, and other Trumpery were seized and burnt, and now not
only the Pope's Supremacy, but the Popish Religion was abolished, and the
Doctors of the Reformed Churches invited over from Germany, and other Places,
of which many came, as Bucer, Fagius, Peter Martyr, and others; so that the
bright Rays of the Gospel began to shine into the darkest corner of Ignorance.

A Parliament being called, the six Bloody Articles (upon refusing to comply
with which about fifty Persons suffered the Flames in Henry the Eighth's days)
were revoked, and now the Parliament thought fit to prosecute the Marriage
agreed on in King Henry's Reign, between the Lady Mary Queen of Scotland, and
our King Edward; whereupon Ambassadors were sent to demand her, but the Regent
declared that the Contract was void, which so incensed the King and Parliament,
that the Duke of Summerset was sent with a great Army to Barwick; whereupon the
Regent caused fire to be carried a cross, and the Bells to be rung as is usual
amongst the Scots upon any Invasion; so that all the Kingdom rose in Arms, yet
the Lord Protector not fearing their prodigious number, gave them battle, in
which the Scots were overthrown, nine Dukes and Earls were slain, and about a
thousand of meaner rank; whereupon the Scottish Regent fearing that the
Nobility would deliver up the Queen, he sent her into France, there to be
married to the Dauphin, which so enraged the English, that they vowed the utter
Subversion of Scotland, destroying all before them with Fire and Sword in a
most fearful manner, but by reason of some Insurrections that happened in
England, the Duke was recalled.

In this Parliament likewise the Statutes of Richard the Second, and Henry the
Fifth, for suppressing the Scriptures in English, were repealed, and it was
Enacted that the Church Service should be read in English, and that the Blessed
Sacrament should be administered in both kinds, and that all Popish Ceremonies
should be abolished; and those that would not yield obedience to the Church, as
it was now established, to lose their Places, and be punished as Contemners of
the Laws of the Kingdom; whereupon several Popish Bishops complied, and rather
than they would leave their Bishoprics chose to swallow down any Oath that
could be imposed on them; others indeed went off, and made it their business to
stir up the People to Rebellion, which they and their Agents effected in
Devonshire and Cornwel, where great Tumults arose, there being at least thirty
thousand in Arms at once, who did great Mischief, beseiging the City of Exeter,
which held out against them; whereupon the Lord Russel was sent down with an
Army, as likewise the King's Pardon, which he first proclaimed by a Herald
upon condition they would lay down their Arms and depart peaceably to their
respective homes, which they refusing, he gave them battle, and after four
several overthrows took their Ringleader, who being executed, the rest
submitted.

No sooner were the Tumults of Cornwall and Devonshire suppressed, but one
Robert Ket drew about twenty thousand of the Commons of Norfolk, to take up
Arms against the King, and breaking into the City of Norwich, did great hurt,
but the Lord Dudly being sent against them with an Army, gave them battle, and
putting them to the rout, took Ket their Ringleader, whom together with sixty
nine others he caused to be executed.

These Rebels were scarcely suppressed, when News came that the Commons of
Yorkshire were up in Arms under the leading of one William Ombler a Farmer,
Thomas Dale a Parish Clark, and one Stephenson a Postmaster, but the King
sending down his pardon to all but the three before mentioned, these that they
had seduced seeing their Folly, embraced the offered Mercy; so that their
Ringleaders being delivered up to Justice, they were carried to York, and there
Executed.

But now what was more grievous, the Nobility began to fall out amongst
themselves, and especially the King's Unkles, the first quarrel between them
being about their Wives taking the upper hand, which grew to that height,
notwithstanding the Mediation of the young King, that the Lord Protector
procured Articles to be drawn up against his Brother, and getting them passed
in Parliament, he caused him to be Attainted of High Treason, and got the King
to sign a Warrant for his Death, whereupon he was beheaded on Tower Hill; but
the Protector by this means having untwisted the Cable; he was too weak to hold
the Ship of Government in so tempestuous a Sea, for by this Act having chalked
out a Path to those that envied his Greatness, they Articled against him, when
upon his Trial, he being aquitted of Treason, he was Attainted of Felony, and
for that he headed, for which had not he been Infatigated, he might have had
the Benefit of his Clergy.

During these Intestine Dissentions, the English were driven out of Scotland,
and the French attempted the recovery of Bullogne, and at the same time Invade
the Isle of Garnsey, but were beaten off from either with considerable loss.

And now these Great Peers being removed, the Duke of Northumberland ruled all
at Court, and every one moved according to his Dictates, few daring to control
his Will, and the King fell into desperate Melancholy through immoderate Grief
for the Deaths of his Unkles, to which he had been over-perswaded to consent,
which made him bemoan this Misfortune, in this manner. Ah, said he, where was
the good Nature of a Nephew? where was the Clemency of a Prince? Ah, how
unfortunate have I been to those of my Blood? my Mother I slew at my Birth, and
since have made away two of her Brothers, and unhappily to make way for the
purposes of others, against my self. Alas, how falsely have I been abused, how
weakly carried, and how little was I Master of my own Judgment?

And indeed this latter part of his Speech proved Prophetic; for
Northumberland having got the Power, prevailed upon the weak King, to will the
Kingdom to the Lady Jane, Daughter to the Earl of Suffolk, to whom he had
married his fourth Son, the Lord Guilford Dudley on purpose to translate the
Soverainty to his House, which the King consented too, and then Northumberland
removing all the King's Surgeons and Physicians, delivered him into the
hands of a Woman, who undertaking to cure him, bereaved him of Life by Poison,
or her unskilfulness, who a little before his Death was heard to pray, as
follows.

Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life, and take me
amongst thy chosen. Howbeit, not my Will, but thy Will be done. Lord, I commit
my Spirit to thee. O Lord, thou know how happy it were for me to be with
thee, yet for thy Chosen's sake send me life and health, that I may truly serve
thee. O my Lord God, bless thy People, and save thine Inheritance. O Lord God,
save thy chosen People of England. O my Lord God, defend the Realm from
Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy
Holy Name for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake; and then looking about him, he
perceived several Bishops standing at a distance, to whom he said, I did not
think you had been so nigh.

And within a while after, he said, I am faint, Lord, have mercy upon me, and
receive my Spirit, and so gave up the Ghost, dying on the Twenty eighth of
January, Anno 1553. and in the sixteenth Year of his Age, having Reigned six
Years, five Months, and eight Days, and was buried in Westminster Abbey, being
the 41 sole Monarch.

He was a Prince so accomplished for Piety, Wisdom and Learning, that
considering his Age, he was the Wonder of the World, his Charity was
extraordinary, as Christ's Hospital, Saint Bartholomews, Saint Thomas's,
Bridewel, and Bethlem Hospitals can witness, which he freely gave likewise with
a yearly Revenue out of the Crown Lands, as many other Structures for
Charitable Uses.

The Life and Bloody Reign of Queen MARY.
QUeen Mary was Eldest Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by his Wife Queen
Katherine of Spain, first married to Prince Arthur his Eldest Brother, and in
her Infancy trained up in Popish Superstitions, being a great hearkner to the
Instructions of Gardener Bishop of Winchester; all King Edward's time she
rarely came to Court, by reason that good King disli^ed her for her Religion,
and when the Emperor's Ambassador made Suit that she might have private Mass
said in her House, the King would by no means consent to it.

At the time of the King's Death she remained at her Castle of Fremingham, as a
private Woman, when hearing of the advancement of her Cozen Jane, a virtuous
and truly pious Lady, she sent her Letters to the Council, advising them to
proclaim her Queen, as was her Right, but they refusing, she by many fair
promises allured the Suffolk men to take her part, promising them to confirm
the Established Religion, but failed them when she came to the Crown.

Having got together about Four thousand Horse and Foot headed by some of the
Nobility that resorted to her; she came forwards by slow Journeys, and still
increasing her number, the Earl of Northumberland was sent out against her; but
when he came to Cambridge, the Council revolted from the Lady Jane, whom they
had Crowned Queen, and sworn to stand by with their Lives and Fortunes, and
proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen in London, which Northumberland understanding,
he caused her to be proclaimed in Cambridge, and threw up his Cap out of a
seeming Joy, and thereupon dismissed his Soldiers; yet was he within a short
time after arrested by the Earl of Arundel, who had sworn to stand by him, and
although he turned Apostate, renouncing his Religion, yet was he beheaded on
Tower Hill, as likewise Sir John Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer, who commanded
under him; and after the Queens Coronation, the Wonder of her Sex, the pious
and famed Lady Jane, together with her Husband being tried in Guild Hall, were
attainted of High Treason, and afterward beheaded, to the great grief of all
the Lovers of Truth, and the Duke of Suffolk after his release practicing
Rebellion in the North, was betrayed by one of his Servants, and together with
his Brother the Lord Thomas Gray brought Prisoners to the Tower of London, and
being Attainted by the Queens Commissioners they both lost their Heads.

One thing is remarkable, Judge Morgan, who gave Sentence upon the Lady Jane,
presently after her death fell mad, and in his raving was wont to cry out, Take
away the Lady Jane.

And now the Queen having got the Reins of Government in her own hand, called a
Parliament (at which time Cardinal Pool coming into England) by his Persuasions
they made an Act to restore the Popish Religion, and from him the Lords and
Commons received an Absolution, which was no sooner done, but the good Bishops
of the Reformed Church were Deposed, Imprisoned, and Murdered, when as many
Popish Wolves crept from their secret Coverts, and were highly advanced, who so
far Incensed the Queen against the true Servants of God, that they had it in
their power to deal with them as they list, and they according to the
Scriptures, found the Mercies of the wicked cruel, for there were few Towns of
note in England, where some or other of them were not exposed to the Flames, by
whose courageous sufferings, contrary to the expectation of the Adversary, the
Professors of the Gospel were greatly increased.

About this time the Queen being desirous to Marry, declared her Intentions to
the Parliament, who approved of it, and there were proposed Philip King of
Spain, and Son to the Emperor, Cardinal Pool, and the Lord Courtney, of which
she seemed rather Inclinable to the former; whereupon the Matter was so ordered
that the Marriage was concluded with many advantageous Articles, and within a
while after King Philip landing with a great Train of Nobility, and the Nuptial
Rites were solemnized.

Although to prevent it, Sir Thomas Wyat had raised the Commons of Kent,
thinking to have seized upon the Queen in the Tower of London; for which he and
seventy three of his Partakers were Executed, of which Insurrection the
Poplings persuaded the Queen, that the Lady Elizabeth her Sister was the Cause;
whereupon she being brought from her Manor of Ashbrig, in a very sickly
condition was committed to the Tower, and from thence removed to Woodstock,
where she was often put in danger of her Life, as in the Account of her Life
and happy Reign, will be more fully demonstrated.

The Pope's Supremacy being now restored, many good men were forced to fly
beyond the Seas to avoid the Flames, and amongst the rest Mr. Bertie and his
Wife, the Duchess of Suffolk, who in strange Countries under-went many Perils,
till such time as they arrived in Poland, where they lived in safety till the
Death of the Queen; for in this persecution at the Instigation of Bonner,
Bishop of London, and Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, those Instruments of
Cruelty, during this Queens Reign, there suffered by Fire, and received the
Glorious Crowns of Martyrdom, five Bishops, twenty one Divines, eighteen
Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen, Servants, and
Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two Youths, and two
Infants, whose blood, as a Worthy Father has it, was the Seed of the Church;
For the more they were destroyed the more they increased; nor were these all,
for twenty more perished in prison for want, and seven scourged to death by
Bonner and his Associates.

The Queen having been married about half a year, it was rumoured that she was
with Child; whereupon Rockers were provided, and all things necessary, and so
much credit did the report gain, that it went current within some Months after,
that she was delivered of a Son; so that the English Merchants at Antwerp made
Bonsiers for Joy, and discharged their Ordinance; nay, the Popish Priests
prayed in the Pulpit, that she might have an easy Delivery, and that it might
prove a Son; but at last, Truth, which will not be always hid, came to Light,
and it was known that she never was with Child, but had been deceived by a
Timpany, which so much displeased King Philip, that he left her, and went to
assist the Emperor his Father in his Wars against the French, and returned not
in sixteen Months, and although it was agreed in the Articles of Marriage, that
the English should not intermeddie in those Wars, yet the Queen sent over an
Army to assist her Husband, which landing in France, marched to Saint
Quintines, where Philip's Camp lay, and by their sole courage took that Place,
to revenge which, the Duke of Guise flew with his Army to Callais, the
Governor then not suspecting any such matter, and after having battered it for
several days, he entered the base Town, but was twice beaten out by the English
with great slaughter, but the Garrison being but few, at last they were forced
to surrender, having long in vain expected Succors from England; for at that
time, notwithstanding News was brought to the Queen, what danger Calais was in,
and great preparations made; yet the Sea was so tempestuous, that no Ship durst
venture over, which some attributed to the just Judgment of God for the Breach
of League on the part of the Queen in assisting King Philip her Husband.

Upon notice that this Important Place was lost, which had been kept by the
English two hundred and eleven years; the Queen was greatly troubled, insomuch
that all that could be done was not of force to divert her from it; and when
her Ladies heard her fetch deep sighs they supposed the Kings absence, and his
slighting her, might occasion it; but, she told them, That that indeed was one
Cause, but ^^re was a greater still, for when she was dead, if they effected
her Body, they might find Calais written upon (...) Heart; and in a short time
after, she falling into (...) burning Feavour, dyed on the seventeenth day of
November 1558. being the Sixth year of her Reign, and Fortieth of her Age, and
was Interred at West-^^nster, and was the forty second sole Monarch of England.

The Life and Glorious Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.
THe Lady Elizabeth afterward Queen of England, France, and Ireland, was
Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by his second Wife, the Lady Ann Bullen, Daughter
to the Lord Rochford, and was born the Seventh of September, Anno Christi ^533.
and at her Baptism had for her Godfather Archbishop Cranmer, and for her
God-Mother the Duchess of Norfolk, and the Marchioness of Dorset, being from
her Childhood brought up in the true Religion, her Mother being a Lutheran,
which ^aused the Popish Bishops to undermine her Inno^ence, and by suborning
false Accusers bereive her ^f her Life.

The Lady Elizabeth had for her Tutor Mr. As^^han, a pious and learned man, who
Instructed her ^oth in divine and humane Learning; so that she was perfect in
most of the Europian Languages a^ fourteen years of Age.

After the Death of King Henry her Father, she lived in great repute under the
Reign of her Brother, who entirely loved her for her Piety, and was wont to
call her his virtuous Sister; but he likewise dying, and Queen Mary coming to
the Crown, the Poplings fearing that if she succeeded, their Babe^ would again
be tumbled down, and therefore sought many ways to find occasion against her to
take her Life, but could not find any pretense till Wyat's Rebellion, the which
( Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and her Mortal Enemy, persuaded her Sister
Queen Mary) was done in favor of her and the Lord Courtney, who was to marry
her as soon as the Queen was Deposed; whereupon two Lords of the Council were
sent with two hundred Horse to fetch her from her Manor of Ashbrig in bed very
sick and weak, but that prevailed not with them to commiserate her condition,
for they told her she must go with them to London, their commission being to
bring her, in what condition soever she was, to which she answered, Truly there
was no Creature more willing to wait upon her Majesty than she was, but that
her sickness was such as they themselves might testify that she was not in a
condition to do it; but this availed not, for they immediately sending for two
Physicians, demanded of them whether she might be removed without danger of
Life, to which they answered, that in their opinions she might; whereupon the
next Morning they put her into the Queens Horse litter, brought for that
purpose, and so with a strong Guard conducted her to White Hall, where when she
was come, Orders were given to shut her up close Prisoner; and after a
fortnights continuance in that state, Gardener, and several other Privy
Councillors, came to Examine her, especially Charging her with the Contrivance
of Wyat's Rebellion, telling her (notwithstanding her many Protestations of
Innocence) that it was the Queens Pleasure she should go to the Tower, to which
she Answered, that She trusted the Queen would be more Gracious to her, and
thereupon entreated them to be a Means to her Majesty for her; but they told
her that the Queen had fully Resolved that she must be carried thither,
whereupon all her Servants were Removed, a Guard of Northern Soldiers set to
watch in the Garden, and several of the Queens Women to Attend her, with a
strict Charge that none should have Access to her Presence, unless such as
brought her Necessaries. When four Days after, two Lords of the Privy Council
came to her, and told her that the Barge was ready, and the Tide served,
therefore she must instantly go to the Tower; whereupon she Entreated them that
she might stay till the next Tide, but one of the Lords roughly Answered, that
Time and Tide stayed for none, and therefore she must instantly go: Then she
Requested that she might Write to the Queen, but one of them told her, he durst
not permit it, but the other, being the Earl of Sussex kneeling down said, She
should Write, and that as he was a true Man, he would both deliver her Letter,
and bring her an Answer.

The next Tide falling out at Midnight, they durst not carry her, for fear she
should be Rescued, and therefore staying till Daylight, the waterfall was so
low at shooting the Bridge, that the Head of the Barge struck against the
Ground; but God preserved her, to make her an Instrument of his Glory.

When she came to Land, she refused to Land at Traitor's Bridge, but one of the
Lords said she should do it, and thereupon was forced to Land, although the Tide
was fallen so low, that she was forced to waid to the Stairs, by reason the
Barge could not be haled close; when being on the Shore, She said, Here lands
as true a Subject, being a Prisoner, as ever landed at these Stairs, before
thee O God I speak it, having no Friends but thee alone. When she came into the
Tower she sat down upon a Stone, to rest her; whereupon the Lieutenant said,
Madam, You sit Vnwholesom, it is better for you to come out of the Rain, to
which she replied, I had better sit here, than in a worse Place, for God
knows whither you will bring me; at the hearing of which, her Gentleman Usher
Wept, for which she reproved him, saying, What mean you to use me thus, I took
you for my Comfort, not thus to dismay me, seeing I know my Truth to be such,
that none shall have Cause to weep for me: And so going into a Chamber
appointed for her, she was locked in, and none permitted to be with her, which
greatly grieved her.

Two Days after her Committment to the Tower, it was Commanded that she should
have Mass said in her Chamber; and in the mean time several Persons were
Racked, and straightly Sifted, to see if peradventure they could find any thing
against her by their Confessions, whereby to take away her Life; and within a
while after, Gardener and others came to Examine her, to whom she replied, My
Lords, you Sift me very narrowly, but well I am Assured, you shall not do more
to me than God has Determined, and so God Forgive you all.

Her Servants having provided her Diet, the Soldiers took it from them at the
Gate, and delivered it, which greatly displeased them, as fearing such
dangerous Ruffians, by such means, might be tempted to Poison her, whereupon
they Complained to the Lieutenant, but all the Answer they could get, was, That
she was a Prisoner, and should be served like other Prisoners; and said with an
Oath, if any of them Shrug'd or Frowned, he would put them where they should
see neither Sun nor Moon.

She being Indisposed by reason of her close Restraint. desired to walk into
the Queens Lodgings, but could not be permitted; whereupon she said, Well if
they be so Strict, the Lord Comfort me.

But the next Day, the Lord Shandois came to her, and told her, he had obtained
her that Liberty, and within a while after she had Leave to walk into a little
Garden, all the Doors being shut, and the Prisoners on that Side commanded not
to look out, during her being there.

Within a while after, Sr. Henry Benefield, with a Guard of Northern Soldiers,
took her into his Charge, the Constable of the Tower being discharged of his
Office; and although the former was bad, this proved worse, insomuch that she one
Day demanded, whether the Lady Janes Scaffold was taken away, and farther, that
if her private Murder was Committed to Benefield; He was a Man of that
Conscience to see it done: To which her Servants Answered, they knew not what
he was, but were fully persuaded God would not suffer so great a Wickedness.
Well said she, God grant it, for thou O God can mollify such Tyrannous
Hearts, and disappoint all such cruel Purposes; and I beseech thee to hear me,
thy Creature, which am thy Servant, and at thy Command, trusting by God's Grace
ever so to remain.

Within a while after, the Lord Shandois told her Grace, that she must be
removed under the Conduct of Benefield and his Men, but whether he knew not,
unless to Woodstock; and on the Sunday following she was removed accordingly,
the Lord Tame being joined in Commission with the former, who Conducted her to
Richmond, removed all her Servants, and placed Soldiers at her Chamber Door,
which made her suspect they had a Design to make her away; and thereupon she
calling her Gentleman Usher, bid him with the rest of her Servants, Pray for
her; for said she, this Night I think to die; Whereupon in great Heaviness he
went to the Lord Tame, who was walking in the Court with Benefield, and taking
him aside, desired him for God's Sake to deal Faithfully with him, and tell him
whether any Mischief was designed to his Lady that Night, That if so, he and
his Fellows might take such Part as it should please God to appoint them, for
(said he) we will rather dye, than she being Innocent, should secretly
Miscarry. Marry God forbid, said the Lord Tame, rather than such a Wickedness
should be done, I and my Men are ready to die at her Feet.

From Richmond she was removed to Windsor, from thence to the Lord Tame's
House, where she was Royally Entertained, tho contrary to the Will of
Benefield, and from thence, the next Day, to Woodstock, where she was kept
close Prisoner, and guarded by Soldiers, so that one Day hearing a Milkmaid
Singing in the Park, she wished herself in her Condition.

A long while it was ere Benefield (whom she called her Jailer) would suffer
her to Write to the Queen, although the Council had allowed her so to do; and
would not suffer her Letters to be sent, when writ, till he had Perused them:
And now she being Sick, by reason of her close Confinement, the Queen sent two
of her Physicians to Visit her, who after they had used such Means as were
convenient for the Recovery of her Health, they returned, reporting her
Humbleness, and Respect toward the Queen; yet was it Debated in Council how
she should be Disposed of, and an English Lord said, It would never be well for
England, till (...) Head was stricken off: For which, some of the Spanish
Nobility sharply Reproved him, saying, God forbid, that the King their Master
should Consent (...) such a Wickedness, and from that time forward, labored
with King Philip for her Delivery, so that after many Trials made to procure
her to Confess herself Guilty, she was sent for up to London, and admitted into
the Queen's Presence, whom in two Years before she had not seen; where she
kneeling ^own, Prayed to God to Bless her Majesty, Desiring her, To Esteem of
her, as of her true Subject, which she should ever find her to be. Then said
the Queen, You will not Confess your Offense, but stand ^outly to your Truth, I
pray God it may so fall out: ^f it does not, said the Lady Elizabeth, I desire
neither ^avour nor Pardon. After these, and some other ^peeches had passed
between them, she was Re^anded to the Custody of Benefield: But King Philip, as
it is supposed, standing behind the Cur^ain, and hearing what passed, so ordered
the Mat^er, that within a Week she was released from her ^oaler, as she called
him, and obtained Leave to Refresh herself in the Country; yet had to Attend
(...) Sr. Thomas Pope, one of the Council, who kept (...) Eye upon her all Qeen
Mary's Days.

During her being in Woodstock Castle, her Life was often in Danger. First, By
a Fire kindled under the Boards. Secondly, By a Ruffainely Soldier, who was
hired to kill her. Thirdly, By a Villain sent by Gardener to dispatch her, who
past Doubt had done it, had not Benefield been then at London, and left strict
Order with his Brother, that none should see her till his Return, although they
came from the Council. Whilst she was in the Tower, Gardener Signed a Warrant
in the Queen's Name for her Execution; but the Lieutenant doubting the Truth of
it, went to the Court for farther Instructions, and so the Malice of that
bloody Villain was by God's Mercy Prevented. Whilst she was in the Castle at
Woodstock, she wrote with a Diamond in the Window, Much Suspected of me.
Nothing Proved can be,
Quoth Elizabeth, Prisoner.


And under such Perplexities continued this good Princess, till the Death of
Queen Mary, at what time she was by the free Consent of the Lords and Commons
then Assembled in Parliament, Proclaimed Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
and within a while after Crowned at Westminster, by one Oglethorp Bishop of
Carlisle; Pool Archbishop of Canterbury dying the same Day as Queen Mary.

And now King Philip being in Flanders, and hearing of the Death of his Wife,
sent his Ambassadors to Treat a Marriage with Queen Elizabeth, promising to get
a Dispensation of the Pope; which hastened her the sooner to declare for the
Protestant Religion, thereby to break off his Suit.

So that the former Parliament being Dissolved, and an other Called, many of
the late Queens Acts were Repealed, Popery Abolished, and the Supremacy
restored to the Queen, good Men Encouraged, and the Gospel freely Preached.

Religion beginning now to to flourish, the Parliament to Requite this good
Queen, and for the better Settlement of Affairs, desired her to Marry, but she
absolutely refused it, saying, That she by (...) Ring she received upon her
Coronation Day, was ^olemnly Married to the Nation, and that all true English
Men and Women were her Children; and that it should be her greatest Glory, to
have this Motto fixed ^^on her Tomb: Here lies Elizabeth, who lived, and
^^^yed a Virgin. And although she was afterward Courted by Maximilian the
Emperor, Ericus Son to the King of Sweden, the Archduke of Austria, and the
Duke of Anjou, Brother to the French King; yet such was the Chastity of that
Unparellelled Queen, that she would not Consent to any of them.

By the Example of the English, the Scots began ^o seek after Reformation,
whereupon the Popish ^^rty being Assisted by the French King, the Protestants
were greatly Oppressed; which made them ^e to our Queen for Aid, who sent an
Army un^er the Lord Gray, which so amazed the French, that upon the Death of
the Queen Mother they ^eft that Kingdom, having first made Peace for two Years.

About this time Francis King of France dying, ^^d Charles the Ninth
Succeeding, he greatly Op^ressed the Protestants, who in great Numbers
^^habited his Kingdom; whose Peace, when the Queen could not procure by
Entreaties, she sent over an Army under the Leading of the Lord Ambrose Dudly
Earl of Warwick, which landed at New Haven in Normandy, and took it, but were
forced to quit it ere long, by reason of a grievous Pestilence that raged in
those Parts; which Infection they bringing with them into England, Infected
many parts of the Nation, insomuch that in eight Months Space 23660 Persons
dyed.

In the Year 1563, Shan-O-Neale raised a Rebellion in Ireland, doing great
Mischief; but the Queen sending over an Army, he Submitted, but continued not
long quiet, for again he Rebelled, and Raised greater Forces than before; but
Heaven justly Punished his Perjury and Disobedience, for in the midst of his
Army he was killed by his Brother.

Anno 1566, the Royal Exchange was Built by Sr. John Gresham, a worthy Citizen,
the Merchants before meeting in Lumbard Street; and within two Years after the
perfidious Scots Murdered their King, and Mary Queen of Scots fled into
England, and was most Honorably Entertained by Queen Elizabeth; but the
Papists afterward Attempting the Murder of our Queen, to Advance her to the
Throne, she was Beheaded, although, as many Imagine, she knew not of the Jesuits
wicked Design.

In the Year 1569, The Earls Westmerland, Cumberland, Lords Dacres and Nevils,
with many others, Rebelled in the North, but the Earl of Sussex being sent
against them, they fled; when as an Alderman of Durham, a Popish Priest, and
sixty six Constables, were Executed in most Towns between New Castle and
Weatherly, but the two Earls escaped, the former into Flanders, and the latter
into Scotland, from whence he was sent prisoner to London, and being Attainted
of High Treason lost his Head.

And now Peace being concluded with France, and the Queen of Navar a Protestant
coming to Paris to solemnize her Sons Marriage with the French King's Sister;
she was supposed to be poisoned with a pair of perfumed Gloves that were sent
her, and after her the Admiral of France was cruelly murdered, and by the
Command of Charles the Ninth, thirty thousand Protestants Massacred in the
several Cities of that Kingdom. This Cruelty much grieved our good Queen;
whereupon according to the Articles of Peace agreed on, she sent to demand the
Delivery of Calais, which after many delays was flatly denied, and at the same
time the Pope sent his Bull into England, whereby he pretended to deprive the
Queen of all her Princely Dignity, which the Bull-bearer fixed upon the Bishop
of London's Palace Gate, but being taken was fairly hanged for his pains.

The Scots breaking out again into a tumultuous Rebellion, murdered their
Regent, and after him the Earl of Lenox, who was appointed to succeed him, all
which mischief was effected by dispersing the Pope's Bulls in that Kingdom, and
about the same time the Duke of Norfolk lost his Head for favoring the Scots,
and some other Capital Crimes alleged against him.

And now a new Regent being chosen, he sent his Deputies to Queen Elizabeth,
desiring her to assist him in suppressing the Rebellions on foot; whereupon she
sent fifteen hundred Horse and Foot under ^he Command of Sir William Drury,
upon whose Approach Edenburg was surrendered.

Anno 1580. The renowned English Navigator, Sir Francis Drake, returned from
Incompassing the Earth: So that having made many famous Discoveries, our
Merchants began to trade in strange Countries, before not known, and the Trade
with the Muscovit and Turk was greatly increased; this year appeared a terrible
Comet, and an Earthquake happened, being attended with such a terrible Tempest
that it overthrew many Churches, and killed a great number of People.

Anno 1583. Tobacco was first brought into England.

And now the Irish being stirred up by the Pope's Agents, broke out into
another Rebellion, and procured Forces from Spain to assist them; but the Lord
Gray being sent over by the Queen with an Army, he soon made them repent their
coming, killing many of them and taking others Prisoners, so that the remainder
capitulated, and had leave to depart upon paying a considerable sum of money
for their ransom.

Anno 1585. Virginia was made an English Colony.

The same year the Assizes being holden at Exceter in the County of Devon, such
a Contagion suddenly happened, that about fifty eight Persons dyed, who came
thither about their occasions, and out of one Jury eleven deceased; the like
happened at an Assizes holden at Oxford about ten years before.

The Pope being yet restless, as envying the progress of the Gospel, he stirred
up the King of Spain to persecute the Protestants in the Netherlands, whither
he sent the Duke of Alva, who by several cruelties put eighteen thousand to
death; whereupon many of them making their escape fled into England, and were
kindly entertained, and the Flemings Petitioned the Queen to be their
Protector, which for the Cause of Religion she at last undertook, and sent over
the Renowned Sir John Norrice with a thousand Horse, and five thousand Foot,
and shortly after the great Earl of Leicester went over as the Queens Deputy,
but no considerable Matters happ'ning, and a difference arising between his
Soldiers, and the Netherlanders, he was recalled, and ordered to resign up his
Government.

And now the King of Spain concluding a Truce with the Prince of Orange, whilst
his Ambassadors were in the Queens Court treating a Peace, the Great Armado
which the Spaniards named Invincible, was fitted out; upon notice of which the
Queen Assembled her Councillors and Chief Nobility to consult what was best to
be done, where it was agreed that all Imaginable Preparations should be made,
and thereupon a general Muster was taken of all the Land Forces, and one
thousand five hundred Horse, and twenty two thousand Foot were ordered to
repair to Tilbury in Essex, whither also the the Queen went attended with her
Guard, consisting of two thousand three hundred fifty two Horse, and thirty
thousand fifty Foot, and immediately the Ships of War were fitted out, several
being victualled and manned at the charge of private Persons; the Lord Howard
being appointed Admiral, and Sir Francis Drake. Vice Admiral, who after some
time met, and fought with the dreadful Navy, which besides the Pope's Blessing,
came armed with all manner of Weapons fit for destruction, it consisting of
seventy two Galliassers and Gallions, forty seven great Ships and Hulks, eleven
Pinaces and Carvals, and was furnished with two thousand eight hundred forty
three great Ordnance, eight thousand ninety four Saylors, eighteen thousand six
hundred thirty eight Soldiers, twenty one thousand eighty eight Gally-Slaves,
two hundred twenty two thousand Great Shot, four hundred seventy thousand four
hundred pounds of Powder; for Bullets one hundred twelve thousand pounds of
Lead, one hundred thirty four thousand four hundred pounds of Match, seven
thousand Muskets and Calivers, ten thousand Partisans and Halberts; with
Biskets, Flesh, Cheese, and other Provisions suitable for six Months; but in the
first Encounter this terror of the World was infinitely worsted, and at last
broke and scattered over all the Ocean, for so God ordered it by his special
Providence, that both the Wind and Seas fought for his Anointed.

The Spaniards having lost eighty one of their Vessels, and near seventeen
thousand men, with the residue returned home; and such was the destruction,
that there was not a Noble Family in Spain, but lost either a Son, a Brother,
Nephew or Kinsman, who had been drawn to Imbarque in hopes of getting
Possessions in England, for the Pope had before hand told them they should be
certainly victorious, but the Event proved him a lying Prophet.

Anno 1588. The Enemies being dispersed, the Queen proclaimed a Public
Thanksgiving, and came her self to Saint Paul's Church, where she no sooner
entered, but kneeling down, she returned Thanks to the Almighty for so great a
Deliverance, and caused the Banners and Streamers taken, together with the King
of Spain's Standard to be hung upon the Roof of the said Church.

And now the Queen intending to requite this Treachery of the Spaniards, sent
eleven thousand Soldiers, and two thousand five hundred Mariners under the
Command of the Earl of Essex, Sir John Noris and others to assist Don Antonio
King of Portugal, who had been expulsed by Philip; the Army consisting of
eleven thousand Soldiers, and two thousand five hundred Mariners commanded by
Sir John Noris, Sir Francis Drake, and others, who won the Groine, although at
that time an Army of Spaniards came to rescue it; but they being fought with by
the English, were infinitely worsted; the Spanish King's Standard being taken,
and about three thousand slain, when having set fire to the Town and burnt the
Villages for three miles round, they Imbarqued again, having got great booty
and sailing toward Lisbon, the Chief City of Portugal, the Earl of Essex with
several Ships of War joined them; so that landing they assailed that great
City, but without success; yet they took the Castle of Cassais and Penith,
together with sixty Spanish Ships richly laden; and by reason many Soldiers
died by drinking of Impoysoned Wells, and that the Plague raged in many Parts
of that Country, they returned without attempting any thing farther, and many
of the Soldiers were sent to assist Henry of Navar to maintain War against the
Leaguers; but he finding it very difficult to attain the Crown without altering
his Religion, turned Papist, to the great grief of our Queen.

Anno 1591. Several Persons were employed by the Pope and his Agents to poison
the Queen, who being miraculously discovered, were most of them Executed, and
amongst the rest Doctor Lopez.

In the year 1596. Likewise another Fleet was set out to indamage the Spaniard,
who won Cadiz, and obliged the Citizens to pay twenty thousand Ducates for
their ransoms, they likewise forced the Spanish Fleet on ground. Twenty five
Million Ducates was offered for their ransom, but that not being presently
accepted, the Duke D' Medina Sidonia caused them to be burnt as they lay, to
prevent their falling into the hands of the English, they being esteemed worth
twelve Millions of Ducates; yet the English in their return home took three
Vessels of the Spaniards worth four hundred thousand Ducates; whereupon finding
themselves infinitely worsted every where, and that many of their Merchants
were undone by reason of the great Losses they had sustained, they procured the
Kings of Poland and Denmark to mediate a Peace with the Queen in their behalf,
as likewise with the Crown of France, but they prevailed not.

And now Tirrowen the Arch Rebel having gathered Forces in Ireland, broke out
into open Rebellion; whereupon the Earl of Essex was sent thither with an Army,
having the Title of Deputy Governor conferred upon him, and after many
Skirmishes, the Rebels keeping themselves within the Bogs and Woods, he was
obliged to make a Truce with Tirrowen, from six Months to six Months; whereupon
some of the Nobility that envied his Greatness, accused him of neglect, and at
last proceed to Article against him in Parliament, to which the Queen would not
pass, but recalled the Earl; yet such was the Implacable Malice of his
Adversaries, that they brought him into some disgrace with the Queen, which
prompted him to attempt the seizing of the City of London, for which, and some
other Misdemeanors, he together with the Earl of Southampton was Attainted,
and without the Knowledge of the Queen, as most believed, Executed, the which
she no sooner understood, but she wept bitterly, and in her rage bid the Plague
of God take all those that were instrumental in his Death, and in a short time
after a Plague happened, which in the City and Suburbs consumed thirty thousand
five hundred seventy eight.

And now this Bright Star being set, the Queen continued Melancholy, and by
degrees pined into sickness upon the Grief she conceived at the untimely Death
of so brave a Soldier; so that perceiving the time of her Dissolution at hand,
she was careful of nothing more than to settle Religion, and therefore
appointed James King of Scots, great Grandchild to the Lady Margret Eldest
Daughter to Henry the Seventh, to succeed her, and after having commended her
Spirit into the hands of her Redeemer, she gave up the Ghost, dying the twelfth
of March, Anno Christi 1602. being the sixty ninth year of her Age, and of her
Reign forty fifth, and was Buried at Westminster, and in her Praise these
Verses were written by a worthy Prelate.

None like Elizabeth was found in Learning so Divine,
She had the perfect skilful art of all the Muses nine.
In Latin, Greek and Hebrew, she most skilfully was known;
To Foreign King's Ambassadors the same was daily shown.
The Italian, French and Spanish Tongue she well could speak and read,
The Turkish and Arabian Speech grew perfect at her need.
And thus much for this glorious Queen, in whom ended the Name of the Tuders to
give place to that of the Stuarts, the which may it continue till Time shall be
no more.

The Life and happy Reign of JAMES King of great Britain, France, and Ireland.
KIng James was Son to Henry Steward Lord Darly, who was Grandchild to Queen
Margaret, Eldest Daughter to Henry the Seventh by her second Husband, and his
Mother was Mary Queen of Scots, great Grandchild likewise to Queen Margaret,
by her first Husband James the fourth King of Scots.

During the Minority of this good King, his Mother was forced to fly her
Country, and great Troubles Insued, several Regents, being Murdered after the
Death of his Father, and he often put in Danger of his Life, but God still
preserved him to be a Comfort to his People.

Upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, by the General Consent of the Nobility,
Gentry and Commonalty, he was Proclaimed King of England, by the Name of James
the First.

And on the 5th. of April Anno 1603, he began his Journey out of Scotland, and
was magnificently Entertained at Hinchinbrook near Huntingtoun, whither the
Cambridg Doctors repaired to wait upon his Majesty, and from thence Attended by
a great Train of Nobility, he came to London, and was Royally Entertained at
the Charterhouse, and on the 25th. of July following, his Majesty, together
with his Royal Consort Queen Ann, was Crowned at Westminster by Dr. Whitgift
Arch Bishop of Canterbury.

Being thus Established in his Throne, his first Care was to settle Religion,
and the better to Effect it, he caused the Bible to be exactly Translated into
English, out of the Original Tongue, which stirred up the Popelings (who hoped
upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, to bring all things to their Purpose)
greatly to Malign this good King, and used their utmost Diligence to Overthrow
the Protestant Religion: But God discovered their Plots, which had they took
Effect, were to Destroy the King and Prince Henry, for which several of the
chief Contrivers were put to Death, and others Condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment.

In the third Year of his Reign, that damnable Design of Blowing up the
Parliament House was Miraculously Discovered, by the Mistake of a Letter
delivered by an unknown Hand, to a Servant of the Lord Monteagle, Son to the
Lord Morley, wherein he was wished by any Means, not to be present at the
Opening of the Parliament, forasmuch as they should receive a great Blow, but
not know who hurt them. Upon the Perusing of this Letter, the said Lord
Communicated it to others, and they to the King; who as it were, by Divine
Inspiration, said, That the mention of a Blow, must needs be Interpreted of
some Villain in a Corner, designing Mischief by a Blast of Powder, and
therefore willed them, as they tendered their Safeties, to Search well the
Sellers and other Places; where in fine, under a heap of Faggots, they found
twenty six Barrells of Gunpowder, with Iron Bars laid cross them, and Guy Faux
with a Dark-Lanthorn under his Coat, ready Booted and Spurred, to have rid away
as soon as he had laid the Match to the Train.

Upon this Discovery, most of the Conspirators Fled, but being Pursued, were
either Killed or Apprehended, Catesby and Peircy, the chief Instruments of this
Hellish Contrivance, being shot through as they were Fighting Back to Back, and
Sr. Everard Digby, John, and Christopher Wright, Sudio Fawkes, Father Garnet,
Thomas Winter, Baits, and Keeys, were Condemned, and afterward as Traitors,
Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered.

For this signal Deliverance, the Lords and Commons then Assembled in
Parliament, made an Act for Constituting a Day of public Thanksgiving, to be
kept Annually for ever on the 5th. of November, which his Majesty was pleased
to pass with many Expressions of Joy.

Within a while after Fines and Rynolds, Induced the Commons of
Northhamptonshire, and Warwickshire to rise; but upon the Kings sending down
his Pardon, they soon dispersed themselves.

About this time the Lady Elizabeth, the King's Daughter, was Married to
Frederick Count Elector Palatine of the Rhine, whose Nuptials were Solemnized
with great Joy; but it lasted not long, by reason of the Death of Prince Henry,
who Dyed Anno 1611. whereupon Charles the King's second Son was made Prince of
Wales.

And now Sr. Walter Rawleigh, that famous Navigator, being Released from his
Imprisonment, Imbarqued with several Gentlemen and others, in order to his
making new Discoveries, when Landing at St. Thomes, he and his Company set it
on Fire, of which, Complaint being made to Gundiber, the King of Spain's
Ambassador, Residing in the English Court, he pressed the King continually for
Reparation, insomuch, that when Sr. Walter Rawleigh returning with great Spoil,
Landed at Plymouth, he was Arrested by an Order from the King, and brought
Prisoner to London; when coming to his Trial before the Judges of the
King-Bench, he was found Guilty, and the Morning after his Trial Beheaded.

The Air being much Infected about this time, the King and Queen fell sick,
whereof the good Queen dyed, to the great Grief of the King, which had nigh
made him Relaps after his Recovery: And now he began to take more than ordinary
Care for the thorough Setlement of Religion, by bestowing great Revenues upon
Colleges, and other Seminaries of Learning; as likewise utterly Abolished all
the Fragments of Popery, which again began to creep into the Church; which made
the Papists Contrive many Ways to Destroy him, but all their Plots, and Hellish
Contrivances, through Gods Infinite Mercy were Frustrated, and came to nothing.

About this time the King made a Motion of Marriage for his Son Prince Charles,
with the Infanta of Spain, purposing thereby to strengthen his Alliance, in
order to assist his Brother-in-Law, who by the German Princes was chosen King
of Bohemia, but had been driven out of Germany by the Emperor, and deprived of
his Principalities, and at that time remained at Amsterdam.

To Effect this Marriage, the Prince accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham
and several other Noble Personages, went to the Spanish Court, but finding many
Delays, they returned much dissatisfied: And now the King having settled the
Ecclesiastic and Temporal Affairs of the Kingdom, fell sick, and his Sickness
still increasing, he on the 27 Day of March Anno 1625, dyed, it being the 23d.
Year of his Reign, and of his Age 59: He was Buried at Westminster, being the
44 sole Monarch of England.

The Life and Reign of CHARLES the First.
KIng Charles the first was Born at Dumferling in Scotland on the 19th. of
November Anno 1600, being second Son to King James, and his Wife Queen Ann,
Sister to the King of Denmark: In his younger Years he was brought up in all
manner of Learning fit for so Pious a Prince, Devoting himself to Study, rather
then to delight in the Gallantries of the Court, so that he for Piety and
Learning was the Wonder of his Age.

When the Nobility of Scotland came to take their Leaves of King James, upon
his Departure for England, an old Lord amongst the rest, after he had made his
Complements to the King, turned to Duke Charles and Saluted him, without any
Respect to Prince Henry, who was present; at which the King Marvelling, asked
him the Reason, to whom the Lord Answered, That this was he that should
Transmit his Name to Posterity.

When his Brother, Prince Henry dyed; he was chief Mourner, and within a while
after was made Prince of Wales, and continued to behave himself Humble and
Courteous toward all sorts and conditions of Men: Sometime before the Death of
King James, he went into Spain, to prosecute a Marriage between himself and the
Lady Maria, the Infanta of Spain, when by the way, continuing in the French
Court, he there held some Converse with the Illustrious Princess Henrietta
Maria, Daughter to King Henry the Fourth, and Sister to the then Reigning King,
on whom he so far settled his Affections, that he had no great regard to the
Match with Spain, and after the Death of his Royal Father, he was no sooner
Crowned, but he sent over his Ambassador to Treat of Marriage, which was agreed
accordingly, and the Princess Landed at Dover Attended with the chief Nobility
of France, where the King with a very splendid Train met her, and soon after
the Nuptials were Celebrated with all Joy and Splendour Imaginable.

This good Prince being thus settled in his Throne, began to call to mind some
Indignities that had been offered during his stay in the Spanish Court,
whereupon a Fleet was put to Sea, which greatly Indamaged the Spaniards, taking
many rich Prizes, which they brought into the several Harbors of this Kingdom;
after which a Parliament was called, and Subsidy demanded, but it was denied,
although the Treasures were Exhausted, and the War undertaken against the
Spaniard, Just and Honorable: Whereupon the King was forced to take other
Measures for procuring Money to defray the Expense; and joining in Amity with
the States General of the United Provinces, he again put a gallant Navy to Sea,
which indamaged the Spaniard more than the former, and amongst the rest some
French Ships were taken by the English, which caused an Imbargo to be laid upon
the Ships and Goods of several English Merchants then trading in that Kingdom,
whereupon all Frenchmen were commanded to leave England, but at the Entreaty of
Monsieur Basempiere that Decree was Revoaked, but all Commerce was strictly
forbidden with that Nation.

About this time the Rochellers (being Protestants) were sore Oppressed, and
besought our King to take them into his Protection, whereupon an Army was
raised and sent under the Command of the Duke of Buckingham, but effected no
great matter; whereupon some of the Officers were Imprisoned for their Neglect
and Disobedience.

And now several Complaints being exhibited upon this Account by the
Parliament; the King Dissolved them, and new Forces were Raised for the Relief
of Rochel, but all was prevented by the Death of the Duke of Buckingham, who
was Traitorously and basely Stabbed by one John Felton, who had Served under
him in the late Expedition; for which he was deservedly Hanged in Chains near
Portsmouth.

And now the Rochellers being tired with a tedious Seige, and a worse Famine
(in which all manner of Filth was eaten, and accounted dainty Food) yielded to
their merciless Enemies.

About this time the King called another Parliament, and desired of them a
grant of Tunnage, but they refusing to comply with his Demands were Dissolved,
upon which some Contests arose, the King commanding the Merchants to pay their
Customs, and the Parliament, when sitting, to the contrary, insomuch that Sr.
John Elliot and others were Imprisoned.

On the 29th. of May Anno 1630, the Queen was brought to Bed of Prince Charles
(now our gracious Sovereign) and some time after Ship-Mony was devised by
Attorny-General Noy, and Mr. Hambden Imprisoned for refusing to Pay it, and
Sentence passed against him by ten of the Judges, Judge Hutton, and Judge Crook
only dissenting.

The Book of Liturgy being sent into Scotland, with a Command to read it in all
Churches, caused great Disturbances in Edenburg and other Places, which being
fomented by several Factious Spirits, soon broke out into a Rebellion,
whereupon the King raised an Army and Marched into Scotland, but the Scots
laying down their Arms, upon their Submission were Pardoned, and a Peace
Concluded, but new Stirs arising after the King's Departure, he made his second
Expedition, but nothing of Moment was done.

Within a while after, the Covenant, that Bond of Iniquity, was taken by many
thousands of that Kingdom; so that the King being Apprehensive of the Mischief
that was like to attend it, Summoned a third Parliament to sit at Westminster,
and demanded a Supply of Money for his present Occasions, but they denied to
grant it.

And now the Irish Rebellion breaking out (wherein were committed many horrible
Outrages) the Long Parliament (for so it was called, by reason they had
prevailed with the King to sign a Bill for their Sitting during their Pleasure)
used many Endeavors to Suppress the same; but whilst they endeavored to
Suppress remote Troubles, they Fomented worse nearer Home, by proposing an
Alteration in the Divine Worship, under a Pretense of Reducing Religion to what
it was in Queen Elizabeth's Days, when indeed there was no Derogation from it
in Fundamentals: The next Design they undertook to Provoke the best of Kings,
was, to Impeach such Favorites as were dearest to him, of High Treason, as the
Earl of Strafford, William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop Wren, who
were sent to the Tower, as likewise most of the Judges that had Declared for
Ship-Mony were Voted Delinquents, Judge Berkly being Arrested by the Usher of
the black Rod for High Treason, as he was sitting in the Court of King's Bench;
seven Romish Priests were likewise Imprisoned, whose Pardon was granted by the
Parliament, at the Request of the French Ambassador, and the King to comply
with what the Parliament had done, Released them out of Prison, which the
Parliament, by reason they were not first made acquainted with it, took in such
evil Part, that they resolved to Thwart the King and his Proceedings; whereupon
they changed their Decree, and caused two of the Priests to be put to Death,
which much displeased the King (as indeed it could no less) insomuch that he
complained of the Insolences of the lower House, to the House of Peers, and
within a while after proceeded to Displace some Officers of State, as likewise
the Lieutenant of the Tower, putting another in his stead; which was no sooner
done, but the Commons Articled against the new Lieutenant to the Peers, who
refused to meddle therein, as being the Kings Prerogative, in such Cases to
Place and Displace at his Pleasure.

The Factious being herein Frustrated, dealt underhand with the Mobile, and by
dispersing their Agents into several Cabals and public Assemblies, to Breath
into them the Poison of Rebellion, they caused the giddy-headed Multitude so
far to forget their Loyalty and Obedience, that a confused Rabble of Apprentices
and others headed by Jesuits and Phanaticks, came to Whitehall, crying, that
they would have the new Lieutenant removed, or else they would turn all things
into Confusion; although few of them knew the Man or his Principles, any farther
then they had taken it on Trust: They likewise Demanded, according to the
Instructions of their Ringleaders, that the Bishops should be Excluded the
Parliament House; and to show their foolish Malice, they entered Westminster
Abbey and there fell to pulling down the Organs, tearing the Bibles and
Common-Prayer-Books, defacing the Monuments of the Dead and the like, and then
retreating; the second time Assaulted Whitehall, uttering many oprobrious
Speeches against his Majesty.

Upon these Commotions the King began to think it high time to Fortify himself,
and thereupon ordered a Guard to watch the Court, for the better Preservation
of his Royal Person.

And now the Parliament having brought things to this Pass, they resolved to
prosecute their Rebellious Purposes, and thereupon feigning a Fear, they placed
a Guard, far exceeding the Kings, about the Parliament House, Constituting the
Earl of Essex Captain thereof; and without the Kings Knowledge or Consent,
caused an extraordinary Assembly to meet in the City of London, and the better
to Ingratiate themselves with the rigid Presbiterians, Anabaptists,
Independants, Quakers, and the like, they cast twelve Bishops into Prison,
which did not a little trouble the King.

Anno 1641, the noble Earl of Strafford was Beheaded, and within two Years
after, the truly Pious, and great Pillar of the Church, William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, who died Sacrifices to popular Fury, and Martyrs for
their Country and Kingly Government, to satisfy the Malice of those that had
undertaken the Downfall of Monarchy, supposing there was no easier way to
atchieve their wicked Purposes, than to remove those wise Statesmen and loyal
Subjects.

And now the King growing Impatient at such Insolences, proceeded to Accuse
one Member of the House of Lords and five of the Commons of high Treason; but
demanding them to be delivered up, they were denied, whereupon he went in
Person with five hundred Gentlemen, and alone entered the House: But not seeing
the Persons he came to look for, he declared his good Intentions to the
Parliament, and so returned, and the next Day went again, but they having
Notice, made their Escapes. Hereupon the Parliament put the City in Arms, and
Adjourned their Sitting for the space of five Days, forbidding the Citizens to
Assist the Kings Officers in finding out those Members that were Accused; which
Order they Obeyed, and when the Parliament Sat again, the armed Rabble brought
them, and placed them in the House in despite of the King; and so being backed
by the Multitude, they proceeded daily to lessen the Royal Authority, sending
Letters into the adjacent Countries, commanding them to draw up in Arms, so
that on that Occasion above twenty thousand Men were in a readiness.

Upon these harsh Proceedings of the Parliament, the King hasted to Hampton
Court, and now the Parliament daily Increasing in Power, they Adjourned their
Sitting to Guildhall in London, the better to Ingratiate themselves with the
Citizens; and from thence sent their Mandates to the respective Governors of
the Seaport-Towns, forbidding them to yield Obedience to the Kings Orders,
unless they had Confirmed them: And in this they more prejudiced his Affairs
then they had formerly done, for had the King put Garrisons in those Towns, he
might have secured the Maritine part of Power, and by that means have
Distressed the City of London, who once finding a faleur in Traffic, would
soon have been weary of their Guest, whose Perverseness occasioned it. But the
Parliament taking the Advantage, secured them first, by putting strong Garrisons
into most of them: So that the King being in Yorkshire, was denied Entrance
into his Town of Hull by Sr. John Hotham, whereupon returning to Windsor, he
wrote to the Parliament, declaring his good meaning toward them, protesting
himself Innocent of such things as had been Objected against him, whereupon
they sent Messengers to desire his Return to London; but his Majesty did not at
such a Juncture think it convenient; upon which the Lower House drew up a
Remonstrance, wherein their Propositions were so unreasonable, that the House
of Peers would by no means Accord with them therein, till they perceived the
Commons were uniting themselves against them, and so through Fear were
compelled to a Compliance; and then the said Remonstrance was sent to the King,
who with some Reservation yielded to one part of it, and rejected the other;
but this would not satisfy those unreasonable Men, but they petitioned the
King, that the accused Members might be free and clear from all Guilt; to which
the good King out of his princely Lenity consented.

Things being at this Pass, many who favored the Kings Cause, foreseeing the
dismal Effects, some of them left England, and others repaired home, not
leaving above twenty five in the upper House, and scarce eighty in the Lower;
and those most, if not all of them, such as were strong Opposers of the Kings
Proceedings, and those that they did in the least suspect to be loyally
Affected, by one means or other they got them turned out, till at last there
was not above sixteen in the Lords House.

About this time the Queen left England to Accompany her Daughter to the Prince
of Orange, to whom she was Espoused; and by reason the Parliament, or Rump,
(for now it was no other) pretended that the Nation was in danger to be overrun
with Popery, and thereby set the giddy headed Multitude a madding, (who saw not
at what those Foxes aimed) the King put forth his Proclamation, commanding all
Popish Priests to avoid the Realm upon Pain of Death, as likewise to put the
Laws in Execution against Papists, but nothing would please those whose Aim was
to Ingross the Sovereign Power into their own Hands; for now they began to
appear more barefaced, and contrary to their own Belief, Accused the King of
hearkening to a Change of Religion; and that he was the Occasion of the Irish
Rebellion; and proceeded to blacken all those that had any spark of Loyalty,
nay after they had vented their Malice against his Favorites, they proved so
monstrously wicked as to Asperse the Queen, which the King (who tendered her as
his Life) took in such grievous Part, that he Published his Declaration,
declaring his Innocence, and how that the Parliament sought all Occasion of
Quarrel against him, and to prosecute their own evil Purposes, spread false
Rumors amongst his Subjects.

But this not having the wished Effects, and things growing daily worse and
worse, the King was resolved to oppose Force with Force, and thereupon taking
with him his Son Prince Charles, the Palsgrave, Duke of Richmond, and others of
the chief Nobility, he took his Journey for York, and from thence wrote to the
Parliament, but finding them as Obstinate as ever, he Summoned all the Knights
of the Garter, and such as held of the Crown, to repair to him; when on the
contrary, the Parliament made it Death for any to go, but therein few obeyed
them, for the Nobility from all parts came thither, as likewise many of the
Members of the lower House who had retired themselves.

And now Preparation for War being made on all Hands, the Kentish Men
Petitioned the Parliament on the Behalf of the King, That nothing might be done
without his Consent, That the Liturgy might not be altered, but that Divine
Worship might continue as by Law Established, That the Bishops might be
restored, whom they had Excluded the Lords House, that they would not suffer
the fundamental Laws to be altered without the Kings Permission, nor Arms to be
taken up without the Kings Command, and that some speedy means might be found
out for an Amicable Reconciliation.

But although they had formerly encouraged Petitions when they served for their
Purpose, yet this Petition was taken in evil Part, and those who brought it,
together with the Earl of Bristol who received it at their Hands Imprisoned;
and the Summersetshire Men afterward preferring their Petition upon the same
Occasion, the Parliament caused it to be burnt by the common Hangman, which
showed how little they were desirous of Peace, but rather sought Contention to
bring their wicked Purposes about.

The King being at York, and finding no hopes of Reconciliation, Commanded all
the Yorkshire Men to attend him at a Day prefixed on Howard More, which they
accordingly did to the Number of sixty Thousand, where his Majesty, the Prince,
and several Nobles accompanied with six hundred Horse met them, and after
having Admonished them to Loyalty, Peace, and a right Understanding of things,
he dismissed them, yet twenty Thousand of them would accompany him back to the
City of York, and then Expressing their Loyalty, and ready Obedience, they
departed to their respective Habitations.

This great Assembly put the Parliament in some Fear, whereupon they borrowed a
considerable Sum of Money of the Londoners upon the public Faith, and therewith
raised an Army of two thousand Horse and ten thousand Foot, when in the mean
while the King having drawn together considerable Forces, endeavored the
taking of Hull, and again sent to the Parliament, to desire that matters might
be amicably Reconciled (so desirous of Peace was this good King) promising
forthwith to repair to them if they would leave London and sit in some other
place, but according to their old Obstinacy they refused; whereupon the King
proceeded to Proclaim all men guilty of Treason that should Assist them with
Money or other Necessaries; threatening the Londoners with the taking away their
Liberties if they offended herein, and caused Newark, and Barwick to be
Fortified, and again sought the taking of Hull, but in vain, that place by
reason of the Waters that almost Incompass it, being impregnible.

The Parliament having by this time drawn out their Forces, Proclaimed open
War, declaring themselves necessitated to take up Arms; but how true that was,
I leave to the Judgment of all good Men: And now the Earl of Essex, who was
before the Captain of their Guard, is made General.

The King having Notice of these Proceedings, Marched to Notingham and there
set up his Standard, and thither repaired to him a great number of Nobility:
And now it being come to open Wars, the Victory continued for a long time
doubtful, sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on the other, with no small
effusion of Blood, and the Lives of brave Men lost, there not being less then
eighty Thousand killed on both sides during that unhappy War.

All things being in a Flame, the Prince took Shiping for the Scillyes, from
whence he was Invited by the Parliament, to Return to London, but not thinking
it safe to trust his Person in the Hands of such Men who had broken their Oaths
of Allegiance, canceled their Loyalty, and devoted themselves to the Service of
the Prince of Darkness, he Sailed for Holland, and there continued at the Hague
till the sad News of his Royal Fathers Murder was brought thither.

The Kings Affairs being now grown Desperate, most places of Strength being in
the Hands of the Parliament, and his Army wasted, he came with the remainder of
his Forces to Oxford; but a strait Siege being laid to it, and more Forces
daily expected out of all Parts, he despaired of its long holding out; and
therefore by the Advice of several of the Nobility, he rode in Disguise to the
Scotch Army, who then lay Encamped near Southwel, casting himself upon them for
Protection, who at first made many fair Promises, and seemed a while sharply to
contend with the Parliament, when they demanded them to deliver the King into
their Hands; but having great Arrears due for their late Service, they feared
to lose that if they refused to Comply, and thereupon, like perfidious Wretches
delivered him into the Hands of his merciless Enemies for the Sum of two
hundred thousand Pounds; but it may somewhat abate our Wonder, when we consider
that Judas, whose Example they followed, sold the King of Kings for thirty
Pieces of Silver.

The Scots having got their Money, Marched into Scotland, leaving their King to
be carried Prisoner to Holmby, and afterward to the Isle of Wight, where he
was guarded by Colonel Hammond; and during his Solitude there, he wrote his
excellent Book called Icon Basilice.

Things being brought to this pass, a Treaty was held, and Commissioners
accordingly appointed to receive the Kings Concessions, which were so ample
that the Parliament Voted them Satisfactory; after which those that sought his
Life, having no Cloak for their Villainy, they began to appear in their proper
Colors, turning out all such Members of Parliament, as they thought would
refuse to Comply with their wicked purposes, and removed the King to Hurst
Castle, and from thence to Windsor, during which many Skirmishes passed between
the Loyalists and Rebels, as at Maidstone, Pomfract, Bow, Stratford, Kingston,
and Preston where the Scotch Army were overthrown, and lastly at Colchester,
which was defended by the Renowned Worthies Sr. Charles Lucas, and Sr. George
Lisle, who upon the Surrender of that Town (caused through extreme Famine
(notwithstanding they had their Lives granted, yet in cold Blood) they were
shot to Death contrary to the Law of Arms.

And now the Army, Officers, and those Members that were left in the House,
Erected a new and unheard of Tribunal, falsely called a High Court of Justice;
For indeed Justice was turned into Wormwood in those Days; and of this Court
Sergeant Bradshaw was made President, and the King being called before the new
Erected and pretended Authority, had several Crimes laid to his Charge, as that
he gave cause of the cruel Bloodshed in Ireland, That he had born Arms against
the Parliament, That he had given Commission to his Son, and others to wage
War, and therefore he was pronounced a Traitor, a Tyrant, and an Enemy to the
Kingdom, by Bradshaw, the worst of Traitors that ever England bred.

But the King disowned the Power of that Court, and therefore refused to Answer
to the Charge, although he was several times brought thither and urged thereto:
But these Hellhounds thirsting after Royal Blood, only set up this Court for
Formalities Sake, the better to color their Villainy, they having beforehand,
past Doubt, resolved his Death.

The King having absolutely refused to Answer to their Charge, on the 17th. of
April Anno 1648. Bradshaw, to his immortal Shame, proceeded to pronounce
Sentence on the best of Kings: Which was to this Effect, That He the said
Charles Stewart, was fallen from all Dignity, was guilty of high Treason, and
was to be put to Death by the severing his Head from his Body, for being a
Tyrant, a Murderer, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth: In Confirmation of this
Sentence the Court stood up, thereby signifying that they all Consented to the
Wickedness, and the King offering to speak, Bradshaw would not permit him, but
ordered the Officers to take him away, and carry him to Whitehall.

And now this wicked Sentence being thus Passed, few imagined that they would
be such Villains as to have dared the putting it in Execution; yet
notwithstanding the Intercessions of the Dutch Ambassadors and many of the
Nobility, on the 30th. of January, at the Command of Oliver Cromwell, a Scaffold
was Erected before Whitehall, and covered with Black, which made many aching
Hearts, and caused such as durst of the Nobility, to Address themselves to the
Tyrants for the Kings Life; and the Lord Fairfax declared that rather then such
a Wickedness should be acted, if none other would Assist him, himself with his
Regiment would force the Guards and attempt the Hindering it; but Cromwell and
some of the Principal Rumpers got him to Prayers (as they termed it) to seek of
God what was best to be done, but indeed to Consult the Devil, who (past doubt
(had all along been their Councellor) and in the mean while the fatal Blow was
given: For the King being brought out of the Banqueting House, upon a Bridge of
Boards that was laid from the Window to the Scaffold, attended by Dr Juxon, he
in a Learned and Pious Speech Addressed himself to the People, declaring his
Innocence; and then desiring of God to Forgive his Adversaries, he gave his
George to Dr. Juxon and bid him Remember, which was, as it is supposed, to
deliver it to the Prince, and then laying down his Royal Head, after he had
Recommended his Spirit into the Hands of his Redeemer, he had it stricken off
at a Blow by an Executioner in Disguise.

Shroud here bright Sun in Sable Clouds thy Face,
And Blush to see such monstrous Wickedness:
Such as on Earth no barbarous Villains did,
Since thou the naked Lord of Glory Hid.
This Murder in the superlative Degree acted by rebellious Subjects upon their
lawful Prince without Precedent, did not a little Astonish the neighboring
Nations, and drew Tears not only from his Friends, but his Enemies; nay from
Strangers, who had only heard of the Virtues of this good King, which were
indeed so many, that should I go about to recite them, it would prove too hard
a Task, and might fill up a larger Volume.

His Body was put in a Coffin covered with black Velvet, and carried to St.
James's, and there wraped in Lead, when about seven Days after it was delivered
to two of his Servants, to be Disposed of as they thought fit; upon Notice of
which the Duke of Richmond, Marquess of Hartford, the Earls of Lindsy and
Southampton, together with Dr. Juxon, came and putting it in a Hearse Conveyed
it to Windsor, and Interred it in St. Georg's Chapel, weeping in private the
Requiems of so great a King, and for a Memorial, fixed a piece of Lead about
two Foot long, on the Breast of the Corpse, Inscribed King Charles, 1648.

This good King began his Reign Anno 1625, and Reigned twenty three Years ten
Months and three Days, and was the forty fifth sole Monarch of England, being
untimely cut off by Rebellious Subjects in the forty ninth Year of his Age.

The Birth, Sufferings, and Miraculous Deliverances, happy Restoration, and
Prosperous Reign of our now Reigning Sovereign CHARLES the Second, by the Grace
of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, etc.
OUr Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, first Son to King Charles the
First, of ever blessed Memory, by his Queen Henrietta Maria, Daughter to Henry
the fourth King of France and Navar, was Born the 29th. of May Anno Christi
1630. and brought up in his Royal Fathers Court in all Piety and Learning, till
through the Blessing of Heaven he Arrived at those Perfections that fitly
qualified him to bear patiently the severest Frowns of adverse Fortune; and
when God was pleased to restore him to his Right (long Usurped and long
Detained from him by the worst of Tyrants) sufficient to make his Reign Happy
and Prosperous, over so great a People Committed to his Charge.

His Majesty's younger Years were for the most part spent in Camps, even till
(the Scale of Fortune turning against his Royal Father) he was forced to leave
the Land, to avoid falling into the Hands of such as made their Tyranny the
sole Foundation of their usurped Power. When the fatal Blow was given, which
made the Nations Weep, his Majesty was with his Sister at the Hague, and there
Received the dismal and amazing News of his great Fathers Fall, which caused
such Royal Grief as my weak Genius cannot here Portray, and therefore thinks it
fit to pass it over in Silence; after which, he as it was, and is his undoubted
Right, began his Reign over these three Kingdoms, and all other his Majesty's
Countries and Dominions, even from that fatal 30th. of January, on which the
Blessed Martyr made his way to Heaven: And after him such Nobles were put to
Death as tood in the Tyrants Way to hinder him from ^ounting on the Throne; and
after that, think^ng to Exclude his Sacred Majesty, Cromwell procu^ed the Rump
to pass an Act to Disinable (as they ^retended) the Royal Line of King James
from In^riting the Imperial Crown of England, Scotland, ^^d Ireland, and to
show their Malice, caused the ^^ngs Arms to be pulled down every where, and
(...) their stead placed the States Arms, as they called them, viz. the Cross
and Harp; and the better to Express their Antichristian Rage, defaced his late
Majesty's Picture in the Royal Exchange, and behind the Head wrote in Letters
of Gold: Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis Angliae restitutae primo,
Anno 1648. January 30.

When indeed it was the very Moment when our Slavery under the Name of Liberty
began, for neither Romans, Saxons, Danes, nor Normans, in the height of all
their Cruelty proceeded to such barbarous and inhumane Acts as these Native
Rebels, who made Murder their Pastime; and it was enough in those times to
endanger the Life and Estate of any Man, if some notorious Ruffian or other
would but Accuse him of being Loyal to his Lawful Prince.

The Rebels likewise caused the Titles of all Process at Law to be altered, and
instead of Carolus Dei Gratia, etc. they put Custodes Libertatis Angliae, and
Caused the Kings Bench to be called by the Name of the Upper Bench. They
likewise made a new Stamp for Money, with the Cross on the one side thereof, and
the Cross and Harp on the other, which at this Day is called Breeches Money, the
Inscription on one side being, God with us, and on the other, The Commonwealth
of England; a great Seal likewise was prepared.

And now the Lord Fairfax having laid down his Commission, as not being able to
square his Conscience according to the Dictates of the Parliament Oliver
Cromwell was Constituted General, whose Wickedness and many Inhumane Murders,
renders him justly Odious to Posterity.

And now the King being in France, endeavoring to get Aid, in order to Recover
his Lawful Right, was there Disappointed; yet his Well-Wishers in England
Proclaimed him King, as likewise did the Duke of Ormond, and Earl of Leicester
in Ireland, whereupon the Rump, as the People then called it, proceeded to sell
the Kings and Queens Land, Whitehall, and Summerset House being Voted to Sale,
as likewise the Bishops, with Deans and Chapiters Lands, which being prized
greatly under the true Value, wanted not purchasers, and this under the
specious Pretense of working a thorough Reformation.

About this time Orders were given for the Demolishing most of the principal
Castles and places of Strength throughout England, and all Persons were Deposed
from their Offices either in Church or State, who refused to Comply with the
present Government as by them Established; yet was his Majesty Proclaimed King
in Scotland, and after some Debates held there on that Occasion, it was Agreed
that several Proposals should be sent to his Majesty, who at that time was
Landed in the Isle of Jersy, to Tender which the Lord Libberton, and Mr.
Winderam were appointed, the Heads of which were; I. That his Majesty should
sign the Solemn League and Covenant. II. That he should pass diverse Acts of
Parliament which were Concluded on in the two last Sessions of Parliament in
Scotland. III. That he would be pleased to Recall the late Commission given to
the Marquess of Montross. IV. That he should put away all Papists from him. V.
That he would appoint some place about Holland to Treat with their
Commissioners. VI. That he would be graciously Pleased to give a speedy Answer
to their Request.


These Propositions being Perused, duly Weighed and Considered, Sr. William
Fleming was sent again to the Committee of Estates then Assembled in Scotland,
till such time as the Lord Libberton could be Dispatched, who shortly after
followed with a Letter, and ample Instructions by Word of Mouth; and Breda in
Holland was appointed the place of Treaty, whereupon great Debates were held by
the Committee of Estates, and those for the Kirk of Scotland; when in the end,
it was concluded that the Earl of Cassiles, the Lords Lothian, Burly, and
Libberton, Sr. John Smith, and Mr. Jefferyes should be Deputed Commissioners
for the Estates, and Mr. Brocly, Lauson, and Wood for the Kirk; who having
received their Commissions, met his Majesty at Breda, where after their making
known to what Intent they were come, they delivered their Propositions, much to
the same Effect as those before mentioned; of which the King was pleased to
take some time to Consider.

During this Treaty, the Renowned Marquess of Montross was taken in Scotland,
after his Atcheiveing such Valorous Exploits and Victories with a handful of
Men against great Armies, that Ages to come, upon hearing them Repeated, past
doubt may term them Fabulous.

This brave Soldier falling into the Hands of his merciless Enemies, they used
him not as a Peer and Loyal Subject who Fought by Commission from his and their
Lawful Prince, but with all the Severity imaginable, and in the end Executed
him upon a Gibbet of extraordinary height, and then severing his Head from his
Body, as likewise dividing his Body into Quarters, they set them up to the
Murderers eternal Infamy, upon the Gates of several Cities of that Kingdom;
which unexpected News coming to Breda, caused a general Sorrow, and had gone
near to have broke off the Treaty, but at length his Majesty condescending to
some of the Propositions, and rejecting others; the part concluded on were
carried to Edenburg, and it was there Resolved that a Messenger should be sent
in the Names of the Committee of Estates and Kirk, to Invite his Majesty into
Scotland.

The Rump Parliament having Notice of these Proceedings, and fearing their
Downfall would soon ensue if his Majesty was once Established in his Ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, they therefore prepared an Army to Invade the Scots, under
the ^eading of the Arch-Traytor Oliver Cromwell: And about this time, for the
better Understanding of their Ignoramusses (most of the eminent Lawyers being
Suspended) they passed an Act for the Reducing all Proceedings at Law into
English, and to be Written in Secretary Hand, But what was most Prejudicial to
his Majesty's Affairs, was that Blake meeting with part of Prince Rupert's
Fleet, had burnt and sunk many of the best Ships.

During these Passages, his Majesty Prosecuted his Voyage for Scotland, and
Arriving at Spey, several Lords came to Welcome him, as likewise to Accompany
him to Edenburg, when as all the way he Passed, great was the Joy of the
People; at A^erden his Majesty was Presented with fifteen hundred Pounds, which
the Committee of Estates and Kirk took in great dudgeon, and sent to the
several Towns through which his Majesty was to Pass, strictly forbidding them
to do the like.

The King being now come to Edenburg, he was there Proclaimed King on the 15th.
of July Anno 1650, but his Coronation was Deferred by reason of the Troubles
that were then arisen; for the English Army under the Command of Cromwell, was
by this time entered the Frontiers; whereupon great Forces were Raised to
Oppose them under the Leading of Montgomery; who gave the English Battle at
Dunbarr, but were worsted: And now, notwithstanding the English Army was
Victorious even in the Heart of Scotland, yet such was the ill Hap, that the
Scots themselves were at Strife, being Divided into three Parties, so that they
could expect no other then to be worsted. To heal these Breaches his Majesty
earnestly Labored, insomuch that through his Princely Wisdom, he at last
procured a Reconciliation, whereupon all the Estates unanimously resolved to
Crown his Majesty, thereby the more to Abash the Rebels, which on the first Day
of January Anno 1650 was Performed accordingly at Scoon in Scotland.

And now the King set up his Standard at Aberdeen, Reserving to himself the
Title of Generalissimo of the Scotch Army, when as News came that Sr. Henry
Hide, and Captain Bushel had been Beheaded at London by the Rebels for their
Loyalty. The English Army still Approaching, the King fortified Sterling, and
leaving St. Johnstown, went thither with his whole Court, but was no sooner
Arrived there, but News was brought of the Surprise of the Earl of Eglington
and his Son.

Whilst things were at this pass in Scotland, the Rump who had still their
Spies abroad, discovered a new Plot against themselves, carried on by the
Presbyterians, for which Mr. Gibons, and Dr. Love were Beheaded, Cromwell
seeing he could not Oblige the Scots to a Field-Battel, for that they had
Encamped in Fife, he therefore Transported sixteen hundred Foot, and four
Troops of Horse over the River, who joining with Lambert and Okeys Forces,
Routed Sr. John Brown, and although he made a brave Resistance, yet he was taken
Prisoner, and with him several Persons of Quality, as likewise a hundred common
Soldiers, and two thousand were killed upon the Place.

Fortune being thus averse to his Majesty's Affairs, he resolved to try an
other way, by leaving Scotland and making England the Seat of War, whereupon on
the 30th. of July Anno 1651, he Marched his Army into England, of which
Cromwell had no sooner Notice, but he sent Lambert after with a Party of Horse
to fall upon the Rear of the Kings Army, himself, with such other Forces as
could be spared, Marching to second him; the Rump likewise hearing of his
Majesty's Approach, sent their Mandates into all Counties, that none should be
so hardy as to Assist him with Men or Money, under the Penalty of High Treason
(when indeed themselves were the worst of Traitors) as likewise caused Forces
to be Raised in each County to Oppose him.

The King having entered England, Commanded it to be Proclaimed, That no
Soldier should Offer Violence to the Persons or Houses of any of his English
Subjects, which was Obeyed with due Observance, yet such was the Peoples Fear
of the Rump, that few (or none) came to the Assistance of their King, except
the Lord Howard of Eskrich's Son with a Troop of Horse.

By this time Lambert being guided over the Moors and Dales in Yorkshire, was
got before the Kings Army, and thought to have stoped them at Warrington Bridge,
but after a hot Dispute, and the loss of several Men on either Side, the Pass
was gained, and the King Marching with his Army to Tong-Norton, sent a Trumpet
to Colonel Humphry Mackworth, Governor of Shrewsbury, to Summon him to
deliver up the Town, but he Refused, and was so Insolent, as not to own his
Majesty by any other Title than Commander in Chief of the Scotch Army, as
appeared by the Superscription of a Letter he sent back: From hence his Majesty
Marched to Worcester, and was joyfully Welcomed by several truly Loyal
Gentlemen.

The Earl of Darby having brought his Majesty a Supply of two hundred and fifty
Foot, and sixty Horse, Raised in the Isle of Man, and in hopes to procure more,
he went into Lancashire, where he was set upon by Lilborn, and had most of his
Commanders Slain, as the Lord Witherington, Sr. Thomas Tilsby, Colonel
Trollop, Colonel Bointon and others, although they behaved themselves with all
immaginable Bravery, performing as much as Men could do. This Misfortune
happened to the Earl, upon the Disappointment he met with in those Parts, his
Lordship upon his Repair thither having been assured that the Presbiterians
would come in to his Assistance, in order to his Majesty's Restoration; but on
the contrary, they did all they could to hinder his Success, unless he would
have taken the Covenant, which he refused to do: This Engagement happened in
Wiggon Lane.

During these Proceedings in Lancashire his Majesty gave necessary Orders for
the Fortifying of Worcester, to which Lambert made his Approaches, and gained
the Pass at Vpton, where the Bridge was cut down, by causing his Troopers to
swim their Horses over the River, in order to Rescue about fifty desperate
Fellows that had got over upon a Pole, and were driven by Major General Massy's
Men into a Church and there Besieged, but the Troopers Landing, and those fifty
Sallying out of the Church, the Majors Men were forced to Retreat, whereupon a
Bridge of Boats was laid over the River; and now Cromwell joining Lambert, the
Loyalists were beat out of the Town, and so Retreated to Worcester, whether now
the Rebels made their Approaches, and Encamped upon Red-hill, where they had
been Surprised by the Royalists, had not a Rascally Tailor discovered the
Design, so that it came to a fair Battle, and his Majesty on the third of
September 1651, Sallying out of the Town at the Head of his Forces with Kingly
Bravery, and an undaunted Resolution, Charged Cromwell's Lifeguard, and forced
them to Retire, leaving many of their Fellows dead upon the place; but the
Enemy being three to one in Number, were still Recruited with fresh Supplies,
so that after the Fight had remained Bloody and Doubtful for some Hours, when
as the King bravely Fighting, having had two Horses Shot under him, and many of
his chief Commanders Slain, the Scale of War turned, and the Royal Party were
forced to Retreat into the Town, which they did with much Difficulty, by reason
a loaded Cart was overthrown in the Gateway, supposed to be done on purpose,
which so obstructed the Entrance of the Horse that the Enemy had time to come
up, who entered pell mell with the Royalists, when as the Cry went, Save the
King, Save the King.

His Majesty now Perceiving all to be lost, with some of his most trusty
Followers made his Escape out of Worcester, although not without great Difficulty,
and coming to a Farm House on the Borders of Staffordshire, his Majesty there
Refreshed himself, and the better to prevent Discovery, cut off his Hair, and
changed his Aparrel; yet was pursued so close that at Boscobel House the
Troopers entered the fore Door, and his Majesty went out at the Back, and
coming into a Wood, made an Oak his Palace whilst the Bloodhounds had left
Pursuing him in those Parts; and afterward by the Assistance of the Pendrills
and Mrs. Lane, having escaped through miraculous Providence many Dangers, he
found means to pass the Seas, and landed safe at New Haven in France; and in
this Gods Goodness was evidently Demonstrated, for although his Majesty was in the
Hands of Men of mean Fortune, who might have made their own Price with the
Rebels to betray him (one thousand Pounds being the first Penny the Rump had
set upon his Head) as likewise his Life lay in the Hands of Women, whose Breasts
rarely Contain so weighty a Secret long; yet no Temptation could prevail with
them to prove Perfidious to the best of Kings.

In the Battle of Worcester about three thousand were Slain, and seven hundred
taken Prisoners, upon News of which the Rump caused public Days of
Thanksgiving to be kept, and caused the Scoth Colors taken in the Fight to be
hung up in Westminster Hall: And now the Earl of Darby endeavoring to make his
Escape, fell into the Hands of the Rebels, who without any due Process of Law
Beheaded him at Bolton in Lancashire.

From New Haven the King went to Paris, and having stayed there a while, he
went to St. Germans, there to Confer with the Duke of Lorraine about the
Recovery of his Kingdom of Ireland, but it came to no Result. During his
Majesty's Abode there, the Duke of Gloucester, who had a long time been detained
by the Parliament in the Isle of Wight, came to him from the Hague, Accompanied
with Sr. Richard Greenvil, and Sr. Marmaduke Langdale, and not long after Mrs.
Lane, who had been Instrumental in his Majesty's making his Escape out of
England, for which she was now kindly Received, and had many Thanks given her
by his Majesty for her Care and good Will toward him.

About this time Cromwell intending to assume to himself an absolute Power,
Dissolved the Rump Parliament, which had sat twelve Years six Months and
seventeen Days, and after that they were cried about the Streets in Derision,
four Parliament men for a Penny, so Odious and Hateful were they now grown
amongst the People, and within a while after War was Proclaimed with the Dutch,
in which happened five bloody Engagements, and the English got the better; the
Dutch having lost most of their great Ships, were forced to sue for Peace,
which with much Difficulty they obtained; and now Cromwell perceiving the
People began to be displeased with his usurped Authority, he called another
fagend of a Parliament, Composed for the most part of Mechanics, who not
knowing how to manage the Affairs of State, within a while after resigned up
their Power to old Noll, from whom they received it, and departed to mind the
Business they better understood, upon which, viz. the 16th. of December 1653,
Cromwell by the Procurement of his own Creatures was Sworn Lord Protector of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; and by that means the Democracy for which the
Rebels had long contended was dissolved by a Creature of their own making, whom
yet the boldest of them durst not Oppose.

The King during these Proceedings being in France, sought to make Peace
between that Crown and the Crown of Spain; and hoping yet to further his
Interest he departed for Germany, Accompanied with Prince Rupert and such
Nobility as then attended him, and Arriving at the Spaw, his Royal Sister the
Princess of Orange came to Visit him, and there his Majesty diverted himself
for some time, during which Cromwell was busy in settling his Greatness upon as
sure a Foundation as he could, by putting such to Death (under pretense of their
Conspiring against the Government) whom he thought were most likely to Oppose
his Tyranny: And about this time Colonel Gerrard, and Mr. Wowel were put to
Death, for he had his Agents in all parts of England secretly to pry into men's
Actions, and to see how they stood Affected (For Tyranny is always attended
with Mestrust and Fear) and these Rakehells were wont to trapan Gentlemen, to
declare themselves for the King, pretending themselves at the same time great
Royalists, and railing against the Usurper, till such time they had procured
their Ends, and then upon their Informing against them, their Estates and Lives
were at the Usurpers Mercy, none of his Judges daring to Aquit a Person (tho
never so Innocent) that Cromwell would have Condemned; for his Motto might well
be the same that is written over the Palace Gate of the Grand Signeour.

Sic Volo sic Jubeo, stat pro ratione Voluntas.
This do I bid, and so I do Command,
And for a Law my Will shall firmly stand.
For indeed never was any People under pretense of Liberty brought into such
Slavery, and yet it was Death to complain, or so much as murmur against the
Protectors Proceedings.

About this time the Scots Rising under the Leading of the Earl of Glencairn,
Monro, and Middleton, resolved to prosecute the Kings Cause, but being Routed
by General Monk, all came to nothing. The King having left the Spaw, was now
arrived at Cologne, and there himself and the Princess of Orange were Royally
Entertained, and shortly after they were Invited by the Duke of Newburg to his
Palace of Dunsel-Dorf, where they met with the like Entertainment; and here it
was that the King and his Sister parted, the former returning to Cullen, and
the latter to Holland.

During these Passages the Usurper discovered another Plot by means of his
Agents, which was to have been a general Rising all over England, whereupon
several worthy Persons were Executed, and some hundreds sent beyond Sea, and
sold for Slaves.

And now the King with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and his Sister the
Princess of Orange, attended by a great Train of Nobility, went to Frankfort,
and at Coningstem near Frankfort, Christina Queen of Sweeden gave the King a
Visit, after which he returned again to Collen, and from thence into the
Low Countries, being Invited thither by Don John d' Austria Governor thereof
under the King of Spain, whither his Royal Highness the Duke of York came to
him.

The War continuing between France and Spain, Cromwell according to a Treaty
with the French sent over six thousand Foot Soldiers to Assist that King in his
Wars against Flanders, and in Lieu thereof he was to have Dunkirk delivered
into his Possession, which being afterward taken with great Difficulty, was
accordingly put into the Possession of the English: And now the Protector
desirous of a higher Advancement, called an Assembly of his own Creatures, who
durst not move but by his Dictates, of which Sr. Thomas Witherington being
Speaker, it was by them Ordained that the Protector should be Clothed in
Purple Robes and Installed in Westminster Hall, after which he Established a
Pajeant House of Lords of his own Creation, as John Lord Hewson the Qondam
Cobbler, the Lord Clapole, Lord Ireton, and the like; when wanting Treasure to
support his upstart Greatness, he sent his Scouts upon the Discovery, who
brought him News of an other pregnant Plot, which was just about to Teem,
whereupon Sr. Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Hewet were Executed, and Mr. Aston, Mr.
Betly, and Mr. Stacy Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, and their Estates seized and
Sold by the Protector (a Politic, tho a wicked Invention to get Money.)

And now the Pomp of this blustering Tyrant being at its highest Pitch, he made
his Son Henry Lord Deputy of Ireland, and appointed Commissioners in most Parts
of England for the Approbation of Ministers and Schoolmasters, with ample
Commission to Eject such as were Ignorant, under Pretense of which all the well
Affected and Learned Men were turned out, and any Blockheads placed in their
steads that could but raise any considerable Sum of Money: Hugh Peter's was kept
by Cromwell in the nature of his Jester; it was also Enacted by one of Nols
mechanic Parliaments, that no Person should be Married but by a Justice of
Peace, and first to be Asked in the Church, or Proclaimed in the Market. And
now the Tyrants Power began to Decline, the People every where Inveighing
against him in Private, although they durst not do it openly: And now their Eyes
being open, they plainly discerned in what Miseries their mad Folly had
Involved them, and would willingly have shook off the Tyrants Yoke, but found
it stick too fast.

In September Anno 1658, Cromwell began to setle his Affairs, and make a more
narrow Inspection into matters, as finding a Decay of his bodily Health, and
was very desirous to settle his Son Richard in the Kingdom, if he should at
that time Decease, for on the first Day of the Month aforesaid, he was sensible
of Change, and therefore sent for those whom he had raised from a low Estate to
great Honors, and consulted them about the matter, who promised to stand by
his Son Richard; so that his Sickness still increasing, on the third of
September, in Year aforesaid, he yielded to Death, who following his own
Example, admitted neither of Bail nor Mainprise. The Day whereon he dyed (as it
was observed) the like Storm had not happened in many Ages past, for by the
Violence thereof Trees, Houses, Barns, Church-Steeples, Stacks of Hay and Corn
were overthrown.

After his Death he was Conveyed to Summerset House and there laid in State,
where he continued till the 23d. of November following, and then was carried to
Westminster Abbey with all Magnificence and Splendour imaginable, and Interred
near the Kings of England formerly buried there.

The old Tyrant being removed, his Son Richard was Invested with his Power, but
his Head being too light, and his Shoulders too weak to Support the ponderous
Weight of Government; he after his having called a Parliament was decently laid
aside as a useless Tool, not fit to finish the Reformation, or rather unreform,
and overthrow the Established Laws of the Kingdom.

And now Fleetwood and Lambert the chief Instruments in outing Richard, called
the Rump Parliament that had been turned out by Cromwell, who not a little
Rejoiced that it was put into their Power again to Lord it over their Betters,
and add yet more Sin to the former. But whilst they were busy in settling
themselves Anno 1659, the Gentlemen in Cheshire and Lancashire Rose under the
Leading of Sr. George Booth in Defense of their Liberties and Privileges and
to maintain the Kings Cause; against whom Lambert Advanced, and by him those
Loyal Gentlemen had the Misfortune to be Routed, and the Renouned Sr. George
Booth now Lord De-la-Mere, shortly after taken and sent Prisoner to the Tower,
and Lambert upon his Return was gratified with a thousand Pounds by the Rump
for his Service.

And now Lambert began to harbor some Conceptions of Monopolizing the
Government, by assuming to himself the Power of Oliver, and thereupon he turned
out the Rump and Erected a pretended Committee of Safety, all of his own
Creatures, who were to inspect into the Affair of the three Kingdoms.

General Monk being in Scotland, and having notice of these Proceedings,
concluded that now was the time to deliver his Country out of Slavery;
whereupon he passed the Tweed with his Army, and encamped at Cold Stream, there
expecting the coming of Lambert, who advanced toward him, intending to give
him battle, thinking that if he could but overthrow him, he should not fail to
sit in Oliver's Chair. But whilst he Encamped at New Castle, the Rump had got
together again, and had dissolved his Committee of Safety, and so dealt with
the Officers of his Army, that first showing the small disposition they had to
fight General Monk, they afterward left him to shift for himself, as likewise
all his Soldiers; after which the Rump sent their Commissioners to General Monk
to desire him to March for London, which he accordingly did, and was petitioned
by all the Counties he passed through, if not by all the Counties of England,
for a Free Parliament.

He was no sooner arrived at London, but the Rump to revenge some Indignities
the Citizens had put upon them, set him to pull up their Posts and Chains, as
likewise to throw down their Gates, which made many that hoped well of him,
doubt the Event; but as soon as he saw it convenient, he began to declare
himself openly for a Free Parliament, drawing his Troops into the City, who
were now welcomed with great expressions of Joy.

The first thing he put in practice, was, to restore the Secluded Members to
their Places in the House of Commons, upon which the Assembly dissolved it
self, and Writs were Issued out to the several Cities, Counties, Buroughs, and
Towns Corporate, for calling a New Parliament, which was called the healing
Parliament, as indeed it was, for as soon as the Members had settled themselves
in the House, they began to Vote for the King's Return to his People, which
after a long Dehate was carried in the Affirmative; whereupon the States Arms
were every where pulled down, and the King's Arms set up in their Places, and
on Tuesday the Eighth of May, 1660. the King was Proclaimed at White Hall Gate,
according to the usual manner, to the great Joy of his Loving Subjects, who had
long groaned under Tyranny and Oppression, and immediately after Commissioners
were sent to the King to invite him and his Royal Brethren, the Dukes of York
and Gloucester (who then resided at Breda) over into England; whereupon His
Majesty sent Sir John Greenvill, and others before, to sound the Hearts of the
People, by whom he receiving assurance of the longing Expectations of his
Subjects for his Return, He with his Royal Brothers, and a great Train of
Nobility landed at Dover, where he was met by the General, and greatest part of
the Nobility of England, and there his Majesty to express his Gratitude,
dignified General Monk with the Honor of Knight of the Garter, himself putting
the George about his Neck, his Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the
mean while tying on the Garter, and when the General offered to kneel, the King
took him up in his Arms and Embraced him, and so with a Splendid Train, his
Majesty marched toward London, whilst great were the Expressions of Joy the
People every where showed for his Happy Restoration.

On Black Heath the General's Army was drawn up, as likewise a great number of
Nobility, together with the Lord Mayor of London, and Aldermen in Scarlet, and
some hundreds of Citizens lead by Sir John Robinson in Velvet Coats, who with
loud Shouts and Acclamations of Joy, welcomed his Majesty's Return; when the
King had passed them, they fell into his Rear, and after them the General's
Soldiers in Armor with their drawn Swords, and so with a Train that reached two
miles in length; his Majesty was conducted through London to White Hall, whilst
the Citizens the better to express their Joy had reared many stately Pageants,
and caused the Conduits to run Wine, and the Night by the Light of the Fires
that were every where kindled, seemed another Day.

At White Hall Gate was the Effigies of Oliver Cromwell set upon a Pole, and the
Commonwealths Arms about his Neck, which after it had been a long time the
Sport of the People, was thrown into the Fire prepared for that purpose, and
thus ended the Triumph of the Happy Twenty ninth of May, which was doubly
blessed, in being the Day of his Majesty's Birth and Restoration.

And now the Parliament being exceedingly satisfied with the King's Return to
his People, Ordered, that a Bill should be prepared for keeping a perpetual
Anniversary, or day of Thanksgiving to return Praise to God for his Infinite
Goodness in Restoring His Majesty to be a Blessing to his People, which Twenty
ninth of May is still kept Sacred by all Loyal and well affected Persons.

The King being by Heavens Providence settled in his Royal Throne, the
Parliament began to call such to an account, as had been concerned in the late
King's Murder, of which Twenty six were Convicted, and Nine of the Principal
Executed, viz. Adrian Scroop, John Carew, Thomas Harison, John Joanes, Gregory
Clement, Thomas Scot, John Cook, Hugh Peter's, and Daniel Axtel, all of them
suffering for High Treason, as they most justly deserved; for although Divine
Justice may delay for a season, yet at last it will strike home: And now his
Majesty being mindful of his Vows to Heaven, used great Diligence to settle
Religion, that dearest part of Government, by restoring the Church to its
Purity of Worship, and settling those Bishops and Pastors that had been expelled
by the Rebels, in their Diocesses and Cures; the Common Prayer was again read
in Churches to the content of all good Christians.

About this time the Pious Princess of Orange coming over to visit his Majesty,
fell sick of the Small Pox, of which Distemper she died, to the great grief of
his Majesty, and all his Subjects. And now the Devil envying the happy state of
this Kingdom, began again to stir up his Agents to molest our happy Peace; for
in January after his Majesty's Restoration, one Venner a Wine Cooper, with his
Phanatick Proselytes Rebelled, and declaring themselves for King Jesus, and the
Fifth Monarchy, ranged about the City like Madmen, killing first a man in
Paul's Church Yard, and then another in Beach Lane, without the least
provocation on the part of the deceased, and then making their Escapes into
Cane-Wood; the third day after they entered London at several Gates (and past
doubt imagining that more of the same Gange would have come to their
Assistance, they fell to knocking down, and killing all they met with; so that
the Trained Bands and part of the King's Lifeguard opposing them, there was
above Forty Persons slain on both sides; but at last the remainder were taken,
and being condemned as Rebels and Traitors, they were Executed in several Parts
of the City, dying obstinate and justifying themselves to the last.

Upon the Thirtieth of January, 1660. the odious Trunks of Oliver Cromwell, John
Bradshaw, and Henry Ireton, were taken up and carried to Tyburn, where they
were hanged at each Angle of the Triple Tree till Sunset, and then their
Bodies cast into a Pit under the Gallows, and their Heads fixed on Poles, and
set upon Westminster Hall.

During these Proceedings the Pious Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, left this
Life for that more durable, and on the Twenty third of April, 1661. his Majesty
was Crowned at Westminster, having the day before passed in great Splendor,
from the Tower to Westminster.

And thus notwithstanding all the Popish and Fanatical Plots and Designs, has
the best of Kings been preserved to this day, God having at sundry times
frustrated and brought to naught all the pernicious devices of wicked men, and
caused the mischief they intended to others, to fall upon their own heads, as
has been seen in the miraculous discovery of the late damnable Popish Plots,
and frustrating the Designs of the late Rebels in Scotland, and likewise the
subtle underhand contrivances of the disaffected, whilst under his prosperous
Reign we enjoy all that Subjects can lawfully expect, or is convenient to be
enjoyed; therefore let every good Subject make it his daily Prayer to the
Almighty, That His Reign may be long and prosperous over us.

And they that will not, may they Traitors dye,
To shame themselves, and their Posterity.
FINIS.
Books Sold by Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
KErsey's Algebra in four Books, Folio. Bishop Sanderson's Thirty five Sermons,
fol. Heylin's Cosinography in four Book, fol. Cambridge Concordance, fol. The
Complete Clerk, being a Book of Choice Presidents, quarto. Mr. Henry Smith's
Sermons, quarto. Markham's Masterpiece Revived, quarto. The Mariners New
Calendar, quarto. The Famous History of Parismus, quarto, The Destruction of
Troy, in three Books, quarto. The History of Valentine and Orson, quarto. The
Seaman's Calendar, quarto. -- His Practice, quarto. Norwood's Doctrine of
Triangles, quarto. -- His Practice, octavo. The New London Dispensatory, in
four Books, by William Salmon, octavo. De Jure Maritimo and Navali, by Chapter
Mollay, oct. The Young Clerk's Guide, in four Books, oct. Lithgow's Nineteen
Years Travels, oct. Gellibrand's Epitomy, oct. A Book of Knowledge in three
Books, oct. Dr. Newton's Cosmographia, oct. -- His Introduction to the Art of
Logic, twelves. -- His Introduction to the Art of Rhetoric, Twelves. Cocker's
Arithmetic, Twelves. The Exact Constable, Twelves. David's Repentance,
Twelves. -- His Blessed Man, Twelves. The Great Assize, or Day of Jubilee,
Twelves. The Wits Academy, being the Newest Academy of Complements, Twelves.
The Complete Servant Maid, or the Young Maidens Tutor, Twelves. Christian
Devotion, or a Manual of Prayer, Twelves.
These Books following Printed for and Sold by William Thackeray, at the Angel
in Duck-Lane.
THe deplorable History of the latter Times of the Jews, by Josephus
Ben-Gorion, octavo.

The Country man's Jewel, or the Government of Cattle, by Leonard Mascal, oct.

A Divine Message to the Elect Soul, delivered in Eight Sermons upon seven
several Texts, by William Fenner, B. D. oct.

The Disease of London, or a new Discovery of the Scurvy, comprising the
Nature, Differences, Causes, and Signs, and Method of Curing the said Disease,
by Gideon Harvey, M. D. oct.

A Theoretical and chiefly Practical Treatise of Fevers, by G. Harvey, oct.

The Second Part of the Visions of Don Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, oct.

Cosmo Meros, the Worldly Portion, or the best Portion of the wicked, their
misery in the Enjoyment of it, delivered in several Sermons, by Seth Bushel, D.
D. Twelves.

Christian Devotion, or the Pious Soul's daily Supplication, containing
Prayers, and Praises for every day of the Week, Illustrated with Sculptures and
Prayers fitted for all occasions, Twelves.

A Brief Instruction concerning the Holy Sacrament, for their use who prepare
themselves to receive the Lord's Supper, together with Prayers before and after
receiving, Twelves.

FINIS.

