THIS Following Treatise [A short Account of the Proceedings of the College of
Physicians, etc.] having been considered and examined by the Committee of the
said College, they thought fit to recommend it to the President and Censors to
be published.

IMPRIMATUR.

Datum ex Aedibus Collegii nostri in Comitiis Censoriis Junii 11. 1697. Tho.
Millington, Praeses. Tho. Burwell, Rich. Torless, W. Dawes, Tho. Gill,
Censors.


A Short Account OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE College of Physicians, London, In
relation to the SICK POOR Of the said CITY and SUBURBS thereof, With the
Reasons which have induced the College to make Medicines for them at the
Intrinsic Value.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1697.

A Short Account OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE College of Physicians, London, In
relation to the Sick Poor, etc.
SINCE it has been the fate of many good Undertakings though in themselves
highly beneficial to the Public, to miscarry and come to nothing, not so much
by the open opposition of interessed and designing Persons, as by their private
insinuations and misrepresentations, whereby they prepossess the People to
their own great hurt and damage: That the like misfortune may not befall the
charitable Design now set on foot by the College of Physicians, LONDON, for the
Relief of the Poor Sick in and about this great City and Suburbs, We have
thought it necessary to give a short historical account of the Rise and
Progress of this matter, whereby we hope it will appear, That this Undertaking,
as it was several years since begun (before there were any differences or
misunderstandings either amongst our selves, or with the Apothecaries) upon no
other ground but the commiseration of the deplorable condition of the Poor
Sick, (especially poor Housekeepers) not usually taken care of by the
Parishes; so also that the same has been ever since carried on with the same
honest intention: And we doubt not but a work so advantageous to the Sick Poor,
and so honorable to this City, will in the same manner be shortly finished and
brought to its utmost perfection.

To omit therefore what has in former times been attempted of this nature by
our Predecessors (of whose early Charity we have several Instances recorded in
our Annals) the first step we find tending directly to this purpose is a Vote
of the College in their public Meeting, July 28. 1687. to this effect: It was
this day appointed and ordained by the Unanimous Vote of the College, That all
the Members thereof, whether Fellows, Candidates, or Licentiates of the said
College, shall give their advice gratis to all their sick neighboring Poor,
when desired, within the City of London, or seven miles round.

This Order being carried by several of the Members of the College to the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, They ( Aug. 23. 1687.) did by Dr. Betts, one of
our Elects, return the College Thanks for this their charitable Order; with
this further request to the College, That they would explain themselves, as to
whom they meant by Poor? which they did, by declaring, That all those should be
esteemed Poor, that brought Certificates under the hand of the Rector, Vicar or
Curate of the Parish wherein they dwelt, of their being such.

An account of this was by the respective Aldermen sent to each Ward. But
partly by the industry of some Persons, with whose private Gain it was not so
consistent, and especially by reason of the high Prices of Medicines above the
purchase of Poor Housekeepers, it was for that time stifled. Which the College
perceiving, and desirous that so good an Intention to so many poor People might
not be frustrated, several methods for the removing this obstruction were
proposed at their general Meetings, as, The expending all the Fines of the
College in providing Physic for the Poor, and the like: And at last they came
to this Resolution, (which was past into an Order, Aug. 13. 1688.) viz.

The College having considered that the Charitable Vote which formerly passed
for prescribing to the Poor gratis, has not had the effect intended, by reason
of the great Prices they are obliged to pay for their Medicines, have this day
unanimously voted, That the Laboratory of the College be forthwith fitted up
for preparing Medicines for the Poor, and also the room adjoining for a
Repository. And the College further gave a power to those Members who would
subscribe to this Charitable Work, to choose a Committee from among themselves
who should order what Compositions and Simples should be kept at the College
for the benefit of the Poor, and manage the whole affair as they thought fit.

It was expected that upon this Order the Apothecaries (rather than the College
should make Medicines themselves) would have so far concurred in this
Charitable Work, as to have born their part therein: And that as we had freely
offered our pains to prescribe for the Poor for nothing, so they would have
given them their pains also, in furnishing them with necessary Medicines at the
Intrinsic Value, or at least for some small Profit. But instead of that,
several amongst them set themselves by all the art and industry they were
capable of, to frustrate the whole design; and finding no method so promising
as to stir up a party among our selves to oppose our proceedings, they fell to
intrigueing with several of our own Members, who were too easily lured off to
serve the Apothecaries interest, for their own private advantage. And from this
cause, as we have too much reason to believe, have chiefly sprung the unhappy
Differences that are still fomented among us.

But notwithstanding all the discouragements we met with from those of our own
Members, who contrary to all the Obligations of Honor and Conscience,
constantly discovered to our Adversaries whatsoever passed in the College
relating to this design, and exposed to them the Names of such as were
Promoters thereof, that they might be kept out, as far as in them lay, from all
Patients where they should be proposed, and themselves brought in; These and
several other difficulties were (though after a considerable time intervening)
at last broke through, and the College proceeded to enforce their former Order
by another of the 18th. March 1694. to this effect: Whereas in the year 1687.
there was an Order made by the unanimous consent of the College, obliging every
Member thereof to give his Advice gratis in their respective Parishes in the
Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs thereof, to all Poor Sick, as
should be recommended to them for such by the Rector, Vicar or Curate of the
said Parishes by Certificate under their Hands; which said Order was presented
to the City: Now we judge it necessary that the said Order be again presented
to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council, and do hereby again
require strict Obedience from all our Members to the aforesaid Order. And a
Committee was then chosen by the College to take care of the managing this
matter to the best advantage of the designed Charity (consisting of the Elects,
Censors and 8. Fellows, whereof 5. to be a Committee.

This Order was accordingly presented to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and
Common Council, June 18. 1695. Upon which the Common Council did nominate,
appoint and choose Sir John Moor, Sir William Hedges and Sir Jos. Smart,
Aldermen; Mr. Dorvile, Mr. Ballow, Mr. Egglestone, Sir Edmund Wiseman, Mr.
Richer, and Mr. Palfreman, Commoners, (whereof any one of the said Aldermen,
and two of the said Commoners, to be a Committee) to return the Thanks of that
Court to the College of Physicians for such their Order, and with them to
consult how to improve the advantage proposed by the said College for the
relief of the said poor Inhabitants.

July 24th. The Committee of the City and College met, where the Thanks of the
Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council, was returned to the College
of Physicians for their Charitable Order.

The Committee of the College delivered in a List of the Names of all their
Members, with the places where they lived, which was desired by the City to be
printed.

Then the Committee of the City made several Proposals or Queries; as First,
Who should be recommended as fitting objects of this Charity? Secondly, Who
should be the Persons, that should make up the Physicians Prescriptions, in the
several Wards and Parishes of the City? Thirdly, Who should price the Medicines
prescribed by the Physicians Bills?

After which they with the College-Committee, passing over the first Proposal
(which was sufficiently answered by the College's Order) proceeded to debate
the second and third, and came to this Resolution, That some Apothecaries
should be found out who should supply the Poor with Medicines at such Rates as
should be adjudged reasonable by the Physicians, in or near the several
Parishes; which the Committee of the City earnestly recommended to the
Physicians to take care of, and promised that they would do the same on their
part.

Upon this the Committee of the College applied themselves with great diligence
to answer the said desire of the City-Committee, and after some time found out
several honest and charitable Apothecaries, who very cheerfully and readily
embraced the offer, and at the solicitation of the Physicians, entered into this
following Subscription: We whose names are here underwritten are willing to
furnish the Poor, within our respective Parishes, with Medicines at such Rates
as the Committee of Physicians shall judge reasonable. Witness our hands. Which
subscription we have now by us, but for the Subscribers sakes, do not divulge
their Names.

When the Committee of the College had got a sufficient number of Apothecaries,
to furnish all the Wards of London, they acquainted the Committee of the City
therewith, requesting them at the same time, that they would for their
Encouragement, endeavor to have an Act passed in the Common Council, to excuse
these Charitable Apothecaries from any troublesome Office.

Then the Committee of the City did desire the College-Committee to get a
further Addition to their former Order, whereby the Churchwardens and Overseers
of the Poor, or any of them, might as well as the Ministers, recommend by
Certificate, fit Objects of Charity, as also that all hired Servants, and
Apprentices to Handicrafts men, should be reckoned as Objects of Charity; which
the Committee of the College promised to endeavor.

Now the College thought they had surmounted all Difficulties, and had attained
their end: But the Apothecaries Company having got knowledge of our Meeting
with a Committee of the City, did not only draw up and present a Paper to the
Committee of the City tending wholly to frustrate the charitable ends of our
design, which was sufficiently answered Article by Article, by the Committee of
the College, Copies of both which are hereafter inserted; but also hearing that
the Committee of Physicians had gotten Apothecaries enough to supply this
Charity, they were extremely alarmed, and presently called a Hall, wherein
partly by threatening to impose upon them the most troublesome and expensive
Offices of their Company, and partly by charging them upon this compliance with
the Physicians, with breach of their Oaths to their Company, they affrighted
most of these Apothecaries from this undertaking, as if their Oath obliged
them, Not to do any thing charitably.

September the 4th. 1695. The College made such addition to their Order as the
City-Committee had desired. At which Meeting the College did likewise approve
and confirm all that had been done by their Committee, giving them thanks for
the care and trouble they had already taken, and desiring them to proceed and
perfect this charitable Work: owning and declaring all that the Committee had
done to be the Act of the College, and not the Act of Six or Seven men, as some
had industriously though falsely given out, and that the College would
accordingly stand by their Committee in what they had done.

At the next Meeting of the Committees, the addition by the College to their
former Order desired by the City-Committee, was delivered to them, who were
much pleased therewith. Then they proceeded to consider who should price the
Medicines. And the College-Committee was content (because they would avoid
every thing that might obstruct this designed Charity) that the Master and
Wardens of the Apothecaries Company should do it every Year, and afterward
bring it to the President and Censors of the College for their Approbation: but
even this was also opposed by the Apothecaries Company.

Thus it appearing that the Apothecaries were resolved to obstruct this Charity
in every particular, the City-Committee asked the Physicians then present,
Whether their College would provide Medicines for the Poor at reasonable Rates,
if the Apothecaries should continue to refuse so to do? To which they answered,
That they believed, rather than so Charitable a design should fail, the College
would undertake it; and promised that they would propose it at their next
public College-meeting.

Hereupon the City-Committee being fully satisfied with the Physicians Answers
to their Proposals, and with their sincerity in transacting this whole affair
with them, as also that the methods offered by them were the most proper for
obtaining the end proposed, drew up a Report accordingly, of the whole matter,
which the Chairman Sir William Hedges offered to read at the next Common
Council: but some affair that required a quicker dispatch intervening, it was
put off for that time; and this happening at the latter end of the year, the
Common Council was not long after of course dissolved, and another chosen, in
which several of the then Committee were left out; which probably was the cause
that this Report was never after called for.

The matter resting thus, and the College being in expectation to hear from the
City, they did nothing further in it till December. 22. 1696. when a Proposition
was made in the public College for a Subscription by the Fellows, Candidates
and Licentiates, for carrying on this Charity, which being therein approved,
(about nine or ten only dissenting) a Subscription to the effect following was
immediately made.

WHereas the several Orders of the College of Physicians London, for
prescribing Medicines gratis to the Poor Sick of the Cities of London and
Westminster, and parts adjacent, as also the Proposals made by the said College
to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council of London, in pursuance
thereof, have hitherto been ineffectual, for that no method has been taken to
furnish the Poor with Medicines for their Cure at low and reasonable rates: We
therefore whose names are here underwritten, Fellows or Members of the said
College, being willing effectually to promote so great a Charity, by the
Counsel and good liking of the President and College declared in their Comitia,
hereby (to wit, each of us severally and apart, and not the one for the other
of us) do oblige our selves to pay to Dr. Thomas Burwel, Fellow and Elect of
the said College, the sum of Ten Pounds apiece of Lawful Money of England, by
such proportions, and at such times as to the major part of the Subscribers
hereto shall seem most convenient: Which Money when received by the said Dr.
Thomas Burwel, is to be by him expended in preparing and delivering Medicines to
the Poor at their intrinsic Value, in such manner, and at such Times, and by
such Orders and Directions, as by the major part of the Subscribers hereto,
shall in Writing be hereafter appointed and directed for that purpose.

In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and Seals this Twenty Second
Day of December, 1696. Tho. Millington, Praeses. Tho. Burwell, Elect and
Censor. Sam. Collins, Elect. Edw. Brown, Elect. Rich. Torless, Elect and
Censor. Edw. Hulse, Elect. Tho. Gill, Censor. Will. Dawes, Censor. Jo. Hutton.
Rob. Brady. Hans Sloane. Rich. Morton. John Hawys. Chapter Harel. Rich. Robinson.
Joh. Bateman. Walter Mills. Dan. Coxe. Henry Sampson. Thomas Gibson. Charles
Goodall. Edm. King. Sam. Garth. Barnh. Soame. Denton Nicholas. Joseph Gaylard.
John Woollaston. Steph. Hunt. Oliver Horseman. Rich. Morton, Jun. David
Hamilton. Hen. Morelli. Walter Harris. William Briggs. Th. Colladon. Martin
Lister. Jo. Colbatch. Bernard Connor. W. Cockburn. J. le Feure. P. Sylvestre.
Cha. Morton.


THIS Instrument being thus subscribed by the President, the Censors, all the
Elects, but two, most of the Senior Fellows, and several of the Candidates and
Licentiates; a College was called, That a Grant might be forthwith made by way
of Lease to the Subscribers, of the Laboratory, and other Rooms and
conveniences necessary for executing the intended charitable design. Which,
notwithstanding the opposition of some few, was by a very great majority
granted, and afterward sealed in open College. And now the Laboratory,
Repository, etc. are preparing with all imaginable expedition, that so the
benefit of the present season for making all sorts of necessary Medicines for
the use of the Sick Poor may not be lost, but that we may be in a condition
shortly to receive, make up, and distribute, all such Bills and Prescriptions
as shall be directed to the Repository by such Physicians as have been so
charitable as to subscribe to this Undertaking for the benefit of their Poor
Sick Neighbors.

Here follow the ANSWERS offered by the Apothecaries to the Proposals of the
City-Committee, with the Physicians Reply thereunto.

ANSWERS humbly offered by the Society of Apothecaries, to the Proposals made
by the Worshipful the Committee appointed by Common Council to treat with the
Physicians in relation to the Poor.
THAT in pursuance of your Worships Directions, We the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of the said Society have maturely considered the Proposals to us
made. And in the first place crave leave to return our Thanks and due
acknowledgment to this Committee, for communicating the said matters and
Proposals of the Physicians to us, and do most willingly take this opportunity
to declare, That as we esteem it our principal Glory to be Members of this
great and honorable City, so we shall be ever ready to contribute to the
utmost of our Power to the Honor and Welfare thereof, or any the Members
depending thereon. And to that end,

To the First Proposal, Who may be fittest persons to recommend the Objects of
Charity?
WE take it, That the Minister, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor in
each Parish are the most fit, as best knowing the Poor and their necessity.

To the Second, Who shall administer the Physic, etc?
WE do with submission think it most convenient, That it be left to every
Parish from time to time to make use of what Apothecary they please, being a
Freeman, within their own Parish, either one or more, according to the smalness
or largeness thereof. And in case any Parish be without an Apothecary, then to
take any neighboring Freeman as they shall think fit.

To the Third, Who shall price the Medicines delivered for the use of the Poor?
WE are humbly of opinion, That every man in his own way is best able to make
his own Bill, and hope it will be sufficient satisfaction in this point, that
we undertake, That all our Members shall use the greatest moderation possible;
and in case any dispute arise, That then as to all Medicines delivered to the
use of such Poor for whom the Churchwardens of each Parish shall be obliged to
pay, the price shall be regulated to the intrinsic value of every Medicine by
the Master and Wardens for the time being.

And for the better promoting so good a work, the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of this Company do further offer, not only from time to time, to
sell such Poor their Medicines when prescribed by a Physician at their
intrinsic value, but (if it may be acceptable and approved of by an Order of
this Honorable Court) They will being thereto summoned by the Churchwardens or
Overseers of any Parish in the absence of a Physician, and until one can be
called in, give them all the assistance they are capable of, by administering
such Remedies as may be necessary, and that without reward or payment either
for Pains or Medicines.

The Opinion of the Committee of the College of Physicians concerning the
Answer of the Apothecaries to the Proposals made to them by the Worshipful the
Committee appointed by common Council to treat with the Physicians in relation
to the Poor.
TO the First Proposal we agree, viz. That the Ministers, Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor of each Parish do recommend to the Physicians such as
they shall judge Objects of Charity.

To the Second, We think it most proper that the Common Council should choose
and appoint one or more Apothecaries, being Freemen, in each Parish or Ward, or
any Neighboring Apothecaries, if the Parish or Ward be without one; and that
the Shops of such Apothecaries be distinguished by some Inscription, or other
Mark, whereby they may be publicly known to the Physicians and Poor. Provided
that no Apothecary be so appointed, nor continued in that employ, who has done,
or shall do any thing to prejudice or affront the City, or College of
Physicians.

To the Third, We humbly conceive the Answer of the Apothecaries to be
unsatisfactory, both in relation to the Almes-poor, and the Poor Inhabitants.
Because First, For the Alms-poor it sets no certain price upon their Medicines,
but only allows, That if the Parish be dissatisfied with the Rates of any
Medicines, then upon application made to the Master and Wardens for the time
being, those Medicines for that time shall by them be rated at the intrinsic
value, and so toties quoties. Now we judge this Branch of their Proposal
inconvenient to the Parishes for these Reasons.

1. Because the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor being supposed to have
no skill in the prices of Druggs and Medicines, cannot tell when they are well,
or ill used therein, and consequently know not when to complain. 2. Because, If
they did know, that yet such frequent Applications (as it is possible there may
be occasion for) will be burdensome to them; besides that they may be
unwilling to disoblige their Neighbor Apothecaries by complaining of them. 3.
Because the Parishes cannot judge of the charge they are likely to be at upon
the account of any Alms-Poor; But if either a certain Intrinsic Rate, or a
moderate Profit be put upon Medicines, then all these inconveniences will be
prevented.
But then Secondly, as for the Poor Inhabitants; it seems to us yet more
necessary, that a certain moderate Price be from time to time (as Druggs shall
considerably rise or fall) put upon the Medicines, for these Reasons.

1. Because then such Poor Patients may certainly know from the Physician the
Price of any Medicines prescribed for them, and so may be encouraged to take
them. Whereas, if when they have a Bill from the Physician, they be still left
to the discretion of the Apothecary, the Price may prove too high for their
Purses, and they by this means be defeated of their Health, and the Charity
intended. 2. Because Poor Patients ignorant of the Price of the Medicines
ordered for them, cannot tell when they are charitably used, or otherwise; and
consequently cannot complain of such Apothecaries as shall exact upon them. 3.
Because the Apothecaries cannot then clash amongst themselves, nor be censured
by the Patients, upon the account that one fells his Medicines dearer, and
another cheaper; nor on the other hand can they agree together to raise their
Medicines above the purchase of ordinary Poor Persons, which they may otherwise
insensibly do, and so make this public Charity ineffectual by degrees. 4. We
conceive this to be the best, if not the only way for the Apothecaries to
demonstrate to this City, That they are in earnest (as no question diverse good
men among them are) when they offer so freely to concur in this public
Charity. For whilst they are left to their own Prices, it cannot be certain and
clear, whether they are Charitable therein or no; but when the moderateness of
their Rates is once fixed and certainly known to be so, their Charity will then
be beyond suspicion and contradiction.
In the mean time we are much misrepresented, if we be thought desirous
arbitrarily to fix the Prices of the Medicines: We are very willing the
Apothecaries should do it themselves: Only we think it highly necessary, both
for their Credit, and the Service, as well as satisfaction of the City, That a
Committee of the College (whom the like service done the Public both in the
Armies and Navies demonstrate to be competent Judges in this matter) should
agree to, and approve of those Rates as moderate and charitable.

Wherefore we cannot but here express our selves doubtful of the Apothecaries
Sincerity in this matter, not only because when this Proposal was Seven Years
ago offered to this City, they then made not the least step to comply
therewith: but also because at this time when several charitably disposed
Members of their Body offered to concur with the College of Physicians in this
good work, they did publicly in their Common Hall, threaten and intimidate
them, pretending that any compliance herein with the Physicians in agreeing to
the Rates of Medicines, would be against their Oaths. Whereas indeed it is so
far from being so, that diverse eminent persons amongst them, have for their
profit in making Medicines for the Armies and Navies, several times, freely and
without scruple consented thereto. And we doubt not but if this City will so
far influence the Apothecaries as to take off the terror they are now under,
that there will appear a sufficient number of charitable persons amongst them,
very ready to serve in this Charity.

As to the Offer they make in prescribing Medicines to the Poor in the absence
of a Physician gratis, if it may be approved by an Order of this Court: We are
sorry to meet with so clear a proof of their great Ambition to meddle with what
belongs not to them, to set themselves up for Physicians, and run themselves
into practice upon pretense of Charity to the Poor; for otherwise in the
absence of one Physician, there is no need of running to an Apothecary, since
another in that case may be called: nor can we imagine why they should be
willing to give their Medicines gratis, whilst they practice themselves, and
not so after a Physician is called in, if they did not intend practice thereby,
and to hinder a Physicians being sent for: this seems to be something else than
mere Charity. And for any Order of this Court to authorize them to practice
upon the Poor, we conceive it wholly improper: for in Cases of great and urgent
necessity, not only any Apothecary, but any person that thinks he can do his
poor sick Neighbor good, may do it safely without any such Order; and for
giving License to practice in other Cases, the Laws of the Land have settled
that wholly in the College of Physicians. And therefore we desire that all
Certificates for the Poor, be immediately directed and sent to the Physicians
from the Officers of the Parishes, so that if any Physician shall find that an
Apothecary without urgent necessity (as that Physician conceives,) has
prescribed to the Poor Patient, he shall not be obliged to take care of that
Patient.

Therefore upon the whole we humbly offer this as our opinion to this
worshipful Committee, That the only way to make this public Charity effectual
is, That the Minister, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, do recommend
all charitable Objects immediately to the Physicians; That the Common Council
do respectively choose fitting persons in each Parish to be the known
Apothecaries for the Poor; And that moderate and charitable Rates be fixed upon
all Simples and compounded Medicines of the London Dispensatory by the
Apothecaries (if they like it best) to be agreed to, and approved by a
Committee of the Physicians, and known only to the Physicians, and themselves,
and that only for the Public benefit of the Poor of the City.

Lastly, we judge this proposal of fixing a certain Rate upon the
Dispensatory-Medicines both so reasonable, and so absolutely necessary for the
attaining the end designed in this public Charity, that if the Apothecaries do
refuse to agree thereto, rather than it should fail, we make no question but
that the College of Physicians will undertake it themselves, and Print the Rate
of their Medicines for the satisfaction of the Public.

These two foregoing Papers were respectively delivered to the Committee of the
City during the Treaty between them and the College in the year 1695.

And now we desire leave from the foregoing History and Papers to make these
following Observations.

1. That this great Charity was long ago set on foot, before any differences
were arisen either amongst our Selves or with the Apothecaries as to these
matters; and therefore is neither a rash nor hasty undertaking, nor entered upon
with any intention to injure any body, or with any other sinister design, but
out of mere Charity. 2. That it was at first unanimously undertaken, and the
same reasons for it still continuing that at first moved us to it, those that
now oppose it amongst our selves must necessarily do so for their private
advantage, and the benefit of such as they are pleased to favor. 3. That all
that was at first and for a great while after thought of in this Undertaking,
was only to do our parts to the Sick Poor in prescribing to them gratis, not
doubting then but the Apothecaries would do theirs, in concurring with us to
afford them their Medicines at low and moderate Rates. 4. That to encourage
them to do so, the Committee not only consented that the Master and Wardens
themselves should price the Medicines (with the approbation of the College) but
that such prices should be kept private, lest (as we supposed they chiefly
feared) the rich coming thereby to understand at what Rates their Medicines
might be afforded, should see clearly into their unreasonable Gains, and so
bring down the excessive Rates of their Bills. 5. That the reasons which have
induced the College to undertake the making up of Medicines for the Sick Poor,
themselves, are as well their willingness to comply with the proposal hereof
made by the City-Committee, as the necessity put upon them by the Apothecaries,
who (as appears in the foregoing History) would not consent to any reasonable
and satisfactory way of their own doing it. Besides that in their Answers to
the City they did not take notice of any, but the mere Alms-Poor; whereas one
main design of the College was to provide for Poor Housekeepers, and their
Families that did not receive Alms. 6. And therefore if the Apothecaries come
to any prejudice thereby at present, or in times to come, they must wholly
blame themselves for it, and not the College, who were very far from intending
them any harm by their Charity to others: But it is not reasonable that a work
so highly commendable in it self, and so beneficial to the Poor Sick of this
City and Suburbs, should miscarry, only to gratify their humor and private
interest. 7. However we hope this Undertaking will do the honest charitable
Apothecaries no real injury, since we intend not to retail single Medicines,
but to write prescriptions for the Sick Poor, to which every Physician so
prescribing shall underwrite the price of the Medicine, and the Patient to be
at liberty to go either to any honest Apothecary that will faithfully make it
up at that Rate, or to the College Repository, where it will be so afforded.
And certainly it will be no small comfort to a Poor Patient to know presently
what his Physic will cost him, and thereby to be freed from the dreadful
apprehensions of a chargeable and costly Bill, to be brought him afterward by
the Apothecary. 8. Upon the whole, As the Subscribers being conscious to
themselves of their Sincerity and Integrity in this Undertaking, rest assured
of the favor and applause of all good men: so if any of their Enemies shall be
so void not only of Charity, but even of all Modesty, as to continue their
opposition against it, they are confident that a design so apparently
beneficial to the Public good, will not want the Encouragement and Protection
of those in whose Power it is to give it.
FINIS.

