A Short Answer to a Large Paper, ENTITLED, A Continuation of Brief and Modest
Reflections, etc.
OUR busy Author, having got the good happ of 3 or 4 hours time to write, upon
the 29 of May, the day after the Parliament had entered into a most happy
Revolution-Resolve, comprehending the Security of Religion and Liberty; he
retires, laboring under an overflow of the Gall, and mingling Choler with his
Ink, squirts it at random upon this larger Paper, called, A Continuation of his
Reflections for Indulgence, etc. Wherein he makes many a sad Blot and Blunder,
too many to be here mentioned, but which every Reader must see and be amazed at
upon the first reading; so that the best Answer is, to propagate a Paper that
fully answers and exposes it self: For if a Madman will spit against the Sky,
the drivel must fall back upon his own Face.

He begins with his former Plan of the State of the Nation, wherein every thing
is most grossly mistated. His 400 Subscriptions in Glasgow is answered by a
Defiance to name above 3 or 4 Families in the whole Town, that absented from
Church upon Episcopal Principles: And his prime Inhabitants so affected, are
known to be the very profligat Scum of that Town, a very few excepted. And as
for the Towns and Shires of the North, how often shall this incontestable Truth
be told him, That the People in the North were in profound quiet; That they did
and do generally join with the established Worship; That they seek no
Toleration; That nothing has produced a show of Disaffection or
Dissatisfaction among them, but the late factious Traffiqueing of some Men, who
manifestly drive at further Designs.

Next he comes to Tenets, That the Presbyterians begged and preached up
Indulgence, which is false; and so all that is built upon it, throw the Paper,
falls to the Ground. It was granted unsought, though never by an Act of
Parliament, and some of the Psesbyterians thought they had reason to improve
it: As he who has a good Title to an Estate, takes a Pension without renouncing
his Right to the whole: But it is well known, that Toleration was never begged
nor preached up by Presbyterians in the hardest Times.

The Author, mild Man, justifies not the Severities of those Times, no, he
condemns them, he owns them not, page 4. yet he discovers a mighty liquorish
Tooth toward them. For, says he, produce me one Sentence, where one person was
condemned, but on what was Treason and Lose Majesty by Law, and by Law now as
well as then; and I shall pay the Clerk and 40 lib. besides. Now, thought I, if
he be a Gentleman who writes this, it is a Loss he has not affixed his Name,
for then should I, saving him Clerks Fees, have gained some Hundreds of 40
Pounds, by laying before him the 18. Act of the 2d Sess. of K. W's Parl. 4 July
1690.

But then I began to consider, that I should lose my Pains; for this Writer is
certainly some antiquated Politician, that had wont oraculously to dictate, who
has been many Years asleep, and now being awak'ned and his Head giddy by reason
of some elevation, would turn Frappish and take it mightily in Dudgeon, if his
Maggots be not entertained just as he vents them. And therefore it is e'ne best
to let him alone to risk the Reputation of his Brain by the angry Nonsense of
page 5, and to endanger the safety of his Head by impeaching the Claim of Right
page 9. as if the several Articles thereof were not of equal force, and such of
them as do not please our Author, may be not only touched but cut off. Which,
if true, and if the one half of the Nation be Episcopal as he rec^^^ns, then
the other half (and perhaps a good part of the Episcopal half too) are yet
under the Condemnation of the Law, according to his Position, That what was
Treason by Law then, is so by Law now. I doubt not but the Parliament will so
far advert to their own and the Nation's Security (I say not to call this
Author to account, tho they knew him but) to declare it Treason to impugn the
Revolution or Claim of Right, and to consider how well Men of these Principles
do merit a Toleration, and in what the granting of it to them must issue.
Especially considering, that these of the National established Government and
Worship are still in their Style a certain Sect and Set of People, page 12.
and the late Prelate Paterson, notwithstanding the Laws abolishing Prelacy, is
still with them, the present Archbishop of Glasgow, page 11.

Our Author's Invention being drained of Balmy Anodine Arguments, he falls a
nibbling at some Prints against Toleration, the Writers of which, if they have
leisure, may soon give him a rapp over the Fingers or his pains; yea most of
what he says or hints, is solidly answered already, in the Appendix to the
second Edition of the Gentleman's Letter, in Answer to The Case, etc. But he
has cast his Thoughts (if he had any at all, beside Sallles of impotent
Passion) so aukwardly and illogically into Quaere's, Ergo's and Confirmatur's,
that a Man must be very idle to spend time in diverting himself with such
stuff. I only notice tho strange Ground he lays for a Toleration, page 6. at
the close. Some Men desire a Toleration; Ergo they should have it. If I hit not
his Meaning, I crave his pardon; for I can find no other Meaning in what he
says: Now I ever thought, Toleration had been the Gentle Balm and Anodine of
tender Consciences, and not the Gratification of irregular Desires, to increase
their Irregularity. And I was ever persuaded (and I hope the Parliament is so)
that no wise State ever thought it Prudence to give a Toleration to these who
can, without hurting their Consciences, comply and join with the National
Establishment; of which the Episcopalians have given such practical and
professional Demonstration, that it might make the Man who laughed but once,
laugh again, to see how they wriggle and mumble upon this point. I shall be far
from saying, That the Presbyterians are all Saints, or the Episcopalians all
Devils, there are good and bad on both sides: But I Am confident he who says, a
Scots Episcopal Conscience is straightened in joining with Presbyterian Worship,
or that Prelatists can desire Toleration for any other end, but either to
weaken and o'return the Establishment by the Revolution, or to give loose Reins
to all manner of Licentiousness, may after that, say or unsay what he will.

As our Author does every where mistake and misrepresent the Case, which has
nothing to do with the abstract Question about Toleration to truly tender
Consciences: And as for the Ministers, they are under ^o manner of Penalty (
page 6.) but the lucrum cessans of wanting their Stipends, which our Author (as
was hinted in the Short Answer) if he be a Man of Influence, may remeid or
compensate, by procuring just Maintenance for them, at a cheaper rate than that
of imbroiling a Nation. So he does most disingenuously insinuat, page 9. That
to oppose a Toleration is to quarrel the Queens maintaining of any in what they
enjoy according to Law, and what is enacted by the Parliament Anno 1695. Is not
the Protection of that Act given in favors of these who are duly qualified,
and who are in possession? and who does molest them? But what is this to the
Toleration craved for these who are not in possession, and that without any
Qualification at all?

The Draught now presented to the Parliament, differs little from the Printed
Draught, with Remarks to which I refer. I shall only observe upon it,

1. It pretends Ease to Protestant Subjects, as if we had as many Sects and
Parties of them, as England or Holland; whereas it is manifest, the Prelatists
only, and such of them as are Jacobites, are intended, to undermine the
Revolution, and be a Reserve for the happy Days in prospect.

2. They are to give no Test either of Orthodoxy or Loyalty; and how shall it
be known that they are Protestants and not Incendiaries? Or does any State on
Earth Tolerat People, whose Principles they know not, and who do not Qualify
themselves to the Civil Government?

3. It shall be lawful for them to assemble with their Ministers for Divine
Worship, in any Houses they shall appoint for these Religious Exercises in all
Towns and Parishes in this Kingdom. Now I suppose the Quakers, who call
themselves Protestants and have their Ministers too, should come to be the
majority of a Parish, and that Parish fall vacant, and William Penn their
Advocat, might he not by this Act tell them, Dear Friends, The Church is but a
Steeple-house, and now it is empty, let us enter and take possession in behalf
of Friends, to keep out Hirelings and Baal's Priests; for here is a Law
authorizing us so to do. And may not an Episcopal Heretor or two, wisely make
the same Improvement, in any Town or Parish, of such a Toleration

4. All Disturbers of their Persons, or the full exercise of their Ministerial
Function, and Meetings, are to be Punished by the Privy Council, and other
Judges competent. What Work must this make in some places? But the Seditious
and disturbing Doctrines of the Tolerated, are to be Punished by the Privy
Council only. To which I shall only say, that if Her Majesty and the Council,
were as much Presbyterian now as K. Charles and his Council were Episcopal,
both the Toleration and the Terms of it might be offered with a better Grace.

To conclude, I cannot but notice a Learned Reply given by our hasty angry
Author page 6. in these Words, The 2d there; is answered by NO. And whereas he
promises more, page 10, by the next occasion. I must take leave to tell him,
That unless what he further says give a fairer state of the Case, and be
supported by better, at least more intelligible, Arguments, all the raw
Nonsensical Stuff he can further Print, shall be answered after the shortest
manner, by NO. As we can have no fear but that the high Court of Parliament,
will answer all the Models of his Toleration, let him turn it into as many
Proteus-shapes as he will, by a Wise, Safe and true Protestant NO

FINIS.

