A SHORT ANSWER To His GRACE the D. of Buckingham's PAPER, CONCERNING RELIGION,
TOLERATION, AND Liberty of Conscience.

LONDON: Printed for S. G. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1685.

To the READER.
THat I have written this Pamphlet, is plain; and the Reason of it as plain, in
Answer to one Printed with His Grace the Duke of Buckingham's Name, wherein I
think he has not rightly informed himself, or his Readers. I have no Apology
to make for the Printing of it, but only that I think a Sore always wants a
Plaster till it has got one. Of how dangerous Consequence to Religion, and
the Peace of the State, such Arguments may prove, I hope his Grace did not give
himself leave to consider. And should he take the pains to do it, it is not to
be expected he should draw both Bill and Answer, and act for the Plaintiff and
Defendant successively one after another.

How pernicious an Animal this Mountain and Wild Conscience has been to
England, is too well known; and how fatal Toleration would be, I hope in a few
words to make evident in the ensuing Papers. And the Nation being in a fair way
of Composure, the stirring of this extravagant Ferment, which has run us into
so many Fevers of State, seems very unseasonable at this time, and requires
something to precipitate the Lees of Sedition, and keeping them from rising
again, and turning the Wine of our Hopes into the Vinegar of Despair.

My Opinion in these points having ever been diametrically opposite to those of
his Grace's Paper; and having been long convinced, that nothing could more
effectually contribute to the Ruin of this Monarchy, Church and State, than
Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, I have prevailed upon my self to expose
my thoughts to the public View and Censure upon this Subject and Occasion, as
being thoroughly persuaded I am in the Right, as to the main, and not much
solicitous for the fate of a five or six hours Paper, which the Ingenuous will
pardon, if it be not exact; and the Rigorous would condemn, tho an Angel had
writ it.

That I do not affix my Name to it, is because I do not design to be known. And
tho I am not ashamed to have writ it, or think it will do me any disreputation,
yet I am unwilling to seem arrogant in attempting to answer a Person of so
Great a Character, and so Celebrated a Name; to whom I desire to be known under
no other Name than that of,

His Grace's most Humble Servant, And a most True Friend to the Interest of
ENGLAND.

A SHORT ANSWER To His GRACE the D. of BVCKINGHAM's Paper, Concerning Religion,
Toleration, etc.
IT is a pretty odd Adventure, to see a Person of His Grace's High Character
and Parts, enter the Lists, and advance himself the Champion of some things so
much out of Countenance and Reputation, that even those who formerly owned
them, would take it unkindly not to be thought wholly to have forsaken and
abandoned them. And in truth, Whiggism in both its dresses of Toleration and
Persecution, which made her so amiable to the Noble Peer, and others, in the
days of Association, is now with sorrow become so abominably superannuated,
that she looks like a Cast Mistress, scorned and contemned even by the Porters
and Footmen: and it can be nothing but pure compassion and pity, sure, that
procures her such a Glorious Protector.

But is it not as odd an Adventure, to see any person so bold, as to think upon
such great disadvantages, of coping with so disproportionate a Combatant, as a
Peer of the highest Rate of England, whereby he must render himself liable not
only to all the force of Wit and Sense, but if he does not well guard himself
with all Decency and Discretion, to the fatal and murdering blow of Scandalum
Magnatum. And in truth, if I had not put on the Armor of Conscience, I durst
never have taken up his Grace's Gantlet: But I esteem my self invulnerable
under that Mail, and dare confidently believe my Lord would not for an unwary
slip prove himself an Antichristian, by persecuting an innocent person, purely
for what he believes his Religion exacts from him; especially considering, that
his Grace's Maxim is infallible, which assures us, That no man believes,
because he has a mind to do so, but because his Judgment being convinced, he
cannot choose but believe it, whether he will or not. Nor do I believe, should I
be criminal in point of Deference or Good Manners toward his Grace, that he
would by animadverting severely upon me, undo what he has so publicly owned,
as an Opinion of which he has been long convinced; and to confute the labor
of his brain by any action diametrically opposite to his Hypothesis. But for
fear of the worst, neither my Nature or Education inclining me to any thing
disobliging, much less rude, I will take care of my self: And tho I cannot, in
approaching so near his Grace, be procul a Jove, yet I will be sure to keep my
self procul a fulmine: And I should be very angry with my felf, if I should say
any thing, which even his Grace may think beneath the Dignity of his High
Character, for which I profess a most profound Veneration and Respect.

And my Lord being the Agressor, I know he will not be displeased, since we
differ mightily in Opinion about Religion, if I endeavor to defend my Belief,
which I cannot help, very warmly, and with some Opinionatre: And should I
chance to pretend to be Comical and Pleasant now and then, (a Contagion no man
can almost escape that comes but near his Grace's Pen, which even in this
serious matter, is very facetious); I hope he will look upon it but as my being
stung with the Tarantula of his Paper, which may make me dance and caper, even
contrary to my Nature and Inclination, by the secret sympathy that is in the
unaccountable poison of being Witty.

I confess, my Lord writes with that taking air and pleasantness, that it is
impossible not to be delighted with it. But not to flatter his Grace, it is too
much of that nimble Contexture, and seems to want not only the temperamentum ad
pondus, but the pondus it self; and to make it in any measure current, must
have many Grains not only of Salt, but of Allowance too. And in truth, I cannot
wonder to see a Peer write of Religion, en Cavalier; but do as much wonder to
see a Noble Cavalier writing of Religion, as I should to see a
Blew-Apron-Knight correcting Euclids Elements, or a Countrey-Clown drawing up
Maxims of Politics or Navigation. I cannot be induced to believe our Noble
Author has made Polemical Divinity, or the abstruse Notions of the Schools any
one Scene of his diversion; and therefore his Reasonings are witty and
pleasant, but not at all concluding; his Notions are very fine, and many of
them very natural and true, but not too Logical. His Grace seems only to have
done it as an Essay for his own diversion; and therefore has not attended the
Consequences which will necessarily and inevitably follow from his Conceptions,
to the great disadvantage not only of Religion, which he would support, but
even the Politic Frame, and Constitution, and Government of the World. I was
onee acquainted with an airy Gentleman, who would discourse mighty agreeably,
and loved to maintain diverse odd Opinions: and if at any time he was run
a-ground by Consequences drawn from his Positions, he would cry, a Pox upon
Consequences; I hate these Consequences: But I have more Honor for his Grace,
than to believe him to be of that Gentleman's humor.

I do not design to read an Anatomical Lecture upon his Grace's Paper, or
curiously to defect each Nerve and Muscle. I hate hashing of Books, and serving
them up with Limon and Anchovies, and shall content my self without distorting
his Sense, or weighing every Period, and scanning every Line, to deliver my
thoughts of it in the Lump; and shall for the sake of method, offer these
things, as being the main matters wherein I take the Liberty to differ from his
Grace's Sentiments.

First, I presume to say, That his Grace has taken a very improper Method in
the whole, to confute the witty Atheist, or to establish Religion.

Secondly, That his Maxim concerning Antichristianism, and the Nature of
Persecution for differences in Opinion, is built upon an evident mistake of the
Nature, Reason, Intention, and Necessity of those humane Laws, which punish
Dissenters, and which they and his Grace call Persecution.

And Thirdly, That the Toleration of several Opinions, which in his three
Queries, he seems to press as necessary, both upon a Religious and Civil
account, is utterly inconsistent with both those ends.

For the first, in which the whole body of the Book consists, that I may answer
concisely after my Lords method of writing; The Position upon which his Grace
goes of proving a Deity, and every man carving out the measure of his own
Worship, is too short in matter of Argument, and too long in point of
Allowance. The changeableness of the World falls as much short of disproving
its Eternity, as the several mutations of his Grace's Body from his Infancy to
this Age, does of proving, that he is not the same George Duke of Bucks, that
he was forty years ago; nor if he takes notice of the whole System of the
Universe, of which this Sublunary Body wherein we are, is but an inconsiderable
point, he will find no such great Alterations, but that a witty Atheist may say
with St. Peter's scoffers, All things continue as they were; and it may as well
have been always so, and continue always so as we see it does, notwithstanding
that changeableness. Now if I were to discourse an Atheist about the Worlds
Eternity, I would urge him with this Argument; If the World be Eternal, then it
must of necessity be the Supreme and Ultimate Being and Cause of its own
Existence: for if we suppose another Being before it, it is not Eternal. Now if
it be the Supreme Being, it must not only have all the Attributes, which
necessarily fall in with the Conception and Natural Idea of such a Noble and
Glorious Essence, but many more than we can imagine or conceive, and not only
so, but every part of it must have all these perfections in the highest
measure, and even beyond the furthest flights of Reason, Fancy, and
Imagination; such as are Invisibility, Impassibility, Justice, Power, Mercy,
and Goodness, and a thousand others which, no Atheist can be so lost to Sense
as to believe the World either in the whole, or in part, can be possessed of.
Can the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Earth, or any of them reward or punish?
Are they not all separately and conjunctly Insensible and Inanimate? Nor will
the little Story of the Anima Mundi come in at a dead life, to help the grosser
matter. And he who supposes such a Being, separate and distinct from the Heavy
Matter, grants what he denies, and supposes a Superior Being to the World
which Acts, Regulates, and Governs it in all its Actions; and then the
difficulty will return of the two Eternals, which shall have the upper hand?
Whether they Act freely or necessarily? If necessarily, they must have still
some Superior to impose that necessity, and then all is lost; if voluntarily,
in coordinate Powers, one may refuse to Act and then what becomes of the other?
They must both of necessity cease to be; And a thousand other inextricable
difficulties and impossibilities will follow, too long to be here trifled upon.

So that to me, the plain want of that absolute perfection which must be in the
Supreme Being, and which is plainly visible is not in the World, is a certain
Argument, that it is not the Supreme Being; and if it must have a Superior, it
must fall short of that Superior Being in the essential point of Perfection,
Eternity. For the mind of Man can by no Art be persuaded to believe the foolish
imagination of an infinite Series of Causes, one hangging like Links in a Chain
upon another; but must at last come to a point, That there must be one
Ultimate, Supreme, and Absolutely Perfect Cause of all Things; which since
neither the World, nor the Anima Mundi are capable of, or really possessed of
those perfections, it must be somewhat Superior to them in all Things, and in
this of Priority of Existence, which the whole World, with an Universal consent
has owned to be the Divinity.

But his Grace having I hope to the great disappointment of our witty Atheists,
found out a GOD by his way of Reasoning; which I do not intend to disturb, but
to improve: I can by no means be induced to be of his Opinion in his
Deductions, concerning the Adoration and Worship of this Blessed Being. For in
truth if his Argumentation be allowed solid and concluding, here is as fair a
Plea for the Alchoran as the New Testament, for Pythagoras his Golden Verses,
to be as good Divinity as Saint Paul's Epistles. For if I be not mistaken in
what his Grace calls that part of us which is nearest a kin to the Nature of
God and the Instinct of a Diety, which is to be our Guide and Director in
choosing the best way for our Religious Worship of God; which immediately after
he tells us, highly concerns every man to examine seriously which is the best
way of Worshipping and Serving of God; that is, which is the best Religion:
This must be Humane Reason, and not Humane Reason as regulated by any Public
and Political Reason of a Community, but according as every private persons
Reason shall dictate to him; and then his consequence is, That it is one of the
greatest Crimes a man can be guilty of, to force us to Act or Sin against that
Instinct of Religion; and something a kin to the Sin against the Holy Ghost.
Now did I not believe that his Grace is out of his Minority, I should suspect
the Pensilvanian had Tutored him with this Quakeristical Divinity. But whether
it be so or not, here are these inevitable Consequences will follow from this
Position: First, that Reason is the sole Guide of every man's Religion.
Secondly, that Divine Revelation is not necessary to Salvation. Thirdly, that
it is a most horrid Sin to lead men out of the Errors to which Natural
Religion and bare Reason must of necessity lead men, since its depravation.
Fourthly, That men who believe a God, and follow the dictates of Reason in his
Worship, may be saved in any, in all Religions, provided they know not a
better: For Reason will never, can never lead us to the knowledge of the belief
of a Trinity, the Incarnation; Death, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, or
Divinity of the Son of God, the Savior of the World. And how prolifick a
Parent of Idolatry, Superstition, Willworship, and a thousand absurdities in
Religion Humane Reason is, all times, all places, all ages of the World
convince us in Fact, beyond the possibility of a Denial.

Now had I been to follow his Graces blow, upon the gaining of the Postulatum
of the Being of a Supreme and Perfect Power, and his Justice, Goodness, and
Mercy, being such superlative Attributes of his Essence, I should have sent my
Enquirer another Road. And first upon his granting a God his perfections and
the obligations of Humane Nature to him, I should have told him, that he could
not but grant by the strength of his own Reason, that this excellent Supreme
Being ought to be worshipped and Adored, as the greatest Benefactor to Mankind;
that his Favor was to be had at any Rate, as the most Supreme degree of
Happiness and Satisfaction: From his Justice I should have argued, that so
great Goodness and Justice, the Rewarder of Virtue and Punisher of Vice, who
loves those that love him, and therefore serve him, could not possibly leave
that Noble Creature Man, to whom he had communicated something so near a kin to
his own Nature, without some manifestation of his will and pleasure, and how he
might be served acceptably. I should have sent him to inquire if any such thing
were to be found, and among all the variety, recommended those writings which
have Antiquity, and the greatest agreeableness to the Divine Nature, as the
Genuine Results of the benignity of that just and merciful God. I mean the Holy
Writings of the Inspired Penmen, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists, who give such illuminations to the Soul, and such advances to
Reason, such Rules of Piety and Devotion, as are no where else to be found, and
which suit so exactly with the Idea of a Pure and Perfect Being. And in regard
there may be some things difficult to be understood, I would for the sense and
meaning of those places, have directed him to the Opinion of that Society of
Men called Christians, their universal sense and practice, and to the Golden
Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, Quod ubique quod semper quod ab omnibus, id vere
quidem Catholicum est: This would have showed him a thousand Errors of times
past, and as many of the present, in deviating either from the Letter or
Public Interpretation of the Revealed Will of God. This would have taught him
to avoid the Errors of Rome, in transgressing an Apostolical Canon, by praying
publicly in an unknown Tongue, locking the door of Knowledge from the People,
forbidding Religious Orders to Marry, which is honorable in all men; denying
the Cup to the Laiety, against the Institution and practice of the first and
best Ages of Religion, and the very Letters of the Command, Drink ye all of
this, and a many more which I shall not insist upon. This would have taught him
to avoid the Cruel and Inhumane Divinity of Calvinists, which his Grace lashes
with so much Truth and Justice; and the barbarous Principles, and horrid
Practices of Rebelling, Covenanting, Associating, Excluding, Pretended
Protestants, who act so directly contrary to the Innocent Religion of those who
are Christ's Sheep, that they are only a Herd of Wolves and Foxes, Bears and
Lions, and the most Savage Animals in Protestant Skins. And it may be it would
have led him into the Communion of the Church of England, the most Catholic
Society of Men in the world, both in Doctrine and Practice, the best
Christians, and the best Subjects that the Sun sees in all his Travails round
the Universe; and here would I leave my Inquirer as in safe hands, wishing all
Mankind in the same condition and capacity of attaining Salvation, and the
fruition of the God of love.

Whereas a Jew, a Turk, a Pagan, may all according to my Lords Hypothesis be
safe, so long as they believe in their own either weak or obstinate Reason,
which must not be imposed upon, for fear of Antichristianism, that they, are in
the Right, and Worship God; and with his Graces pardon, even Mahomet himself,
will lay as good a claim to Heaven, at this rate of arguing, as St. Peter and
St. Paul; and therefore I will leave this matter to his second and his better
thoughts.

In the next place, I think the Maxim concerning Persecution for Differences
in Opinion concerning Religion, and the fixing the Character of
Antichristianism upon all such Prosecutions of Dissenters, is built upon a
mistake of the Reason, Nature, and Necessity of those Humane Laws which
Dissenters call Persecuting.

Now first I take it to be true, That punishing the Professors and Practicers
of a True Religion purely for that Religion, whilst they continue such, by
living innocently and inoffensively in all things to the Civil Government, is
real Persecution, and truly Antichristian, as being directly opposite to the
Spirit of that Religion, and impossible to be done by any but such as are
Enemies to that Religion: and thus the Heathen Emperors of Rome, and their
subordinate Officers, were truly Persecutors, and the Primitive Christians
truly Persecuted.

But secondly, I take it also to be as true, that the punishing of Offenders,
whose Religion is false or seigned, and who only make a color or show of it,
to carry on other Designs, is not only Lawful, but just and necessary. May
not a Christian Government endeavor by Penalties to hinder Mahometanisme or
Paganism from rooting out Christianity, without being Antichristian for so
doing? Certainly this is a very illogical Principle, and so far from
overthrowing Atheism, that it is the high Road to establish it: And if
Magistrates are to take care by virtue of their Office to support the
Government of the World, the Peace and Happiness of their People; they must do
it by Rewards and Punishments, the Methods of Heaven; better than which his
Grace would do well if he would oblige us in showing us others, and what and
wherein they consist. Now if Men will set up Religions destructive of Peace,
Charity, Order, Government, Obedience, and the Happiness of Humane Society, not
only all Religion, but Society is come to its Conclamatum est, unless the
Magistrate who is Virtute Officii Gods Vicegerent in rewarding the Good and
punishing the Evil, interpose and show himself really a Terror to Evil doers,
and a Rewarder and Encourager of such as do well.

Thirdly, I take it also for an undoubted truth, that by our English Laws, no
person is punished, or as his Grace and the Discenters call it Persecuted,
purely for that which he calls his Religion, which is his private Opinion. And
it raises my admiration to wonder, how his Grace, who has had his share in the
preparation of those Laws for the Royal Assent, should be so far mistaken in
the nature and necessity of them. All the Laws of the Land showing the Reason
of their Penal Nature, to be purely Political, and not Spiritual; and it is the
Overt Acts of Treason, Sedition, and Rebellion, and the fatal Consequences of
pretended Religion, which the Laws endeavor by Penalties to obviate or
prevent, and to punish, if men be so wicked or so foolish not to take the fair
Caution that is given them. A man may be to himself of any Religion; nay, so
great Indulgence does our Law give, that they may privately exercise it,
provided they exceed not such a number besides their Family; by which it is
most evident, that the Quarrel is not immediately at the Opinion, which is
pitied because False, and indulged because the Assertors are obstinately
Foolish, but at the practical Consequences, which by terrible Experience have
been found to be fatal to the Prince and People, to the Peace and Prosperity of
the Community: even that dreadful 35th of Eliz. tells us in the Title, that it
is An Act to retain the Queens Subjects in their due Obedience.

If there be severe Laws against Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, the reason of
them was for their Turbulency, and continual Unchristian Machinations against
the Life of the Prince, and the Peace of the Nation, for their Doctrines of the
Lawfulness of Excommunicating, Deposing, and even Murdering Sovereign Princes,
and disposing of their Realms and Dominions for pretended Heresy or
Incapacity: Doctrines able to ruin the whole Earth, and lay the Foundations of
Eternal Mischiefs to mankind. And if the Dissenters, on the other hand,
complain of the severity of Penal Statutes, or suffer by them, it is because
they have actually been guilty of the most horrible Crimes of Rebellion, and
the most consummated Wickedness, in Murdering the Best of Princes, and
overturning the Best of Governments; it is because the lewd Principles of
Democracy are inconsistent with Monarchy, and contain in them the Seeds of
Sedition, Rebellion, Anarchy, and Confusion: And though in Charity we may
conclude, that all Dissenters of different Persuasions, are not so tainted with
the worst of Principles, as to become Rebels and Regicides; yet there being an
absolute impossibility to distinguish the Innocent from the Criminal, since
none will acknowledge themselves such, the Innocent must be content to suffer
with the Criminal, and partake of their Punishments, unless they can make us
Momus his Windows, to see into their Hearts and Souls, not only what they are,
but what they will or may be. And to conclude this particular, I dare
confidently aver, That neither the Intention of the Laws was to punish men for
their different Opinions, or that any have been punished by virtue of any Penal
or Capital Law, but upon the account of the Political, not Religious necessity,
to secure the Peace and Safety of the Government. And if a Political punishing
the Disturbers of public Peace, Order, and Government, be so great a Crime, as
in his Graces Opinion, to be near a kin to the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and
to render men Persecutors and Antichristian; the whole World, and all Ages,
Places, Times, Governments, and Governors, must have been, are, and will be
Antichristian and Persecuting to the World end; even David and Solomon not
excepted, the one the Wisest, and the other the Best King, being a man after
Gods own Heart. And how his Grace will escape the lash of his own Censure, I
cannot imagine, who has, I presume, often given his Consent to penal Bills,
and may yet to others, for the securing the Person of his Prince, and the Peace
of his Country from Religious Rumbalds, and Conventicling Blunderbusses, as he
is in duty bound, as well as from any other Irreligious Rebels. And upon the
whole, if all those who prosecute Dissenters are Persecutors, and all
Persecutors Antichristian; his Grace will be at a great loss where to find any
sort of People in the World that call themselves Christians, who by this Logic
may not be proved Antichristian. And certainly this is a notable way of Arguing
Men and Athiests into Religion, to lay that down as a Fundamental Maxim, which
if admitted for Truth, will infallibly prove there never was any true Religion
in the World; since it is impossible to find any Society or Government, which
has not endeavored to preserve it self by Rewards and Punishments, by Penal
and Capital Laws, against Usurpers, Rebels, and Seditious Persons and
Principles, though never so fairly gilded over with fine and glittering Titles
of Holy Leagues, Holy Covenants, Gods People, and Saints; Vizors, with which
ill men have endeavored to conceal the most Flagitious Crimes.

Having thus shortly run over the two main things, I hope we shall with more
ease surmount the third, which seems, by being put as the Sting in the Tail, to
have been the efficient Cause of the Book, which Logicians tell us, is always
first in Intention, though last in the Execution; and that is, the necessity of
a Toleration. For in truth, if Persecution be really Antichristian, and no Man
ought to be forced in Religious Matters, then Toleration is absolutely
necessary in order to the very Essence of being a Christian, a good Man, and
able Politician.

Now if I be able to show, that Toleration of all Religions, is neither good
Politics nor Divinity in a Monarchy, I think I shall have done with his Graces
Paper; and this I belive to unprejudiced or undesigning Persons will not appear
either difficult, or impossible to be proved.

First, therefore, It is ill Divinity, unless my Lords new Scheme of the
Possibility of being saved by the conduct of Humane Reason in any Religion
which acknowledges a God, and teaches Morality, be granted for a Truth. And if
it should, I cannot see any manner of necessity of Faith, or Christian
Religion, nor, according to this Divinity, was the Incarnation of the Son of
God so great a kindness to the World, as all Pious Men believe, if Men might go
to Heaven before this Stupendous Mercy was known to them, or may so still by
the help of that Instinct which his Grace tells us is so near akin to God; and
we must now after almost 1700 Years come to question the truth of Canonical
Scripture, which assures us, there is no other Name under Heaven by which
Salvation is to be obtained, but the glorious and the blessed Name of Jesus,
the Savior of the World.

Again, It is most certain, that as there is but one God, so there is but one
Faith, and one Truth. Whereas there are many Errors, and Doctrines of Devils
in all dresses, even that of Christian Religion. Now these will all plead as
strongly for Toleration and Liberty of Conscience as the true Religion, and
upon my Lords Hypothesis will have as undoubted a Right to it. So that the
whole World must be suffered to continue in damnable Errors and Heresies,
which they call Religion; and no Person under Penalty of being guilty of one of
the greatest Crimes, and being Antichristian, must punish them for their
blasphemous Tenants, or charitably endeavor by the fear and terror of Humane
Laws and Penalties, as well as by Reasons and Arguments, to oblige them to
procure a better information of their Understanding, and a clearer Notion of
these necessary Truths wherein they have been, by their folly and obstinacy,
mightily, and it may be long mistaken, for want of the Rod of Correction to
cure them of that folly which is naturally bound up in the Hearts of the
Children of Men.

Now if it be true as it must, if we believe every Word of God is true, That no
Man can be saved, but by coming to the knowledge of the Truth by Supernatural
Revelation, and that they must all be damned who believe a lie; that there is
but one Name to give Salvation, and one Truth to be believed: Is it not a very
fine way of leading Men to that glorious Truth and Light, to tell them, all who
pretend to it have it, how far remote from it soever; and to render it almost
morally impossible, among so many authorized Counterfeits, to find the real
Truth! And is it not a charitable Doctrine to give Men Liberty of Conscience to
go headlong to the Devil for God's sake, without endeavoring to stop their
Carreer, when we see them mounted upon the blackest and most furious Steeds of
damnable Errors and Heresies? Will his Grace think it convenient to Tolerate
the Conscience of a Calvinist, who rides Whip and Spur upon the Pegasus of his
Sanguinary Divinity, and has the blasphemous impudence to compare Almighty
Mercy, which he says Gods Revealed Will seems to offer to all, to be only like
the Artifice of a little Vermin-catcher, who baits his Trap with it, only that
by their refusal, to which they are precondemned, by his secret Will, he may
have something to say against them? And were I at leisure to write, or his
Grace to read, I could furnish him with a Bill of Items of this Nature, in the
Opinions of our several Dissenters, longer then a Tailor of the greatest Faith
ever trusted a promising Courtier for. But let this pass only with this Remark,
that if it were for my life, that I endeavored either to make a witty Man an
Atheist, or to propagate Atheism in the World, I would desire no other Favor
or Foundation but a Toleration of all Opinions, and Liberty of Conscience to
effect it.

Nor is Toleration worse Divinity then Politics. I cannot say how it may stand
with the Nature of a Commonwealth, though, because our Republicans are so fond
of it, one would think it calculated for their Meridian; but certainly, not
only Reason, but dreadful Experience have assured us, it is inconsistent with
Monarchy. Nothing can make a Monarchy Great and August, but the Love and Union
of the People; and if his Grace will enquire of Lewis the Fourteenth, he will
inform him, that is his Opinion; and indeed, nothing begets greater Divisions
and Animosities in a Kingdom, then Religious Feuds, which weaken its Power at
home, and Reputation abroad; but where these diversities in Opinion about
Religion, all meet as in a Center, in the Point of the Lawfulness for the Sake,
or Name, or Cause of Religion; for Subjects to take up Arms, to Dethrone and
Assassinate privately, or publicly to Murder their Prince, and subvert the
Government, as the Principles of all Covenanters, Associators, and Excluders
do, I appeal to all Crowned Heads, to all Persons who have any share in
Government, to all Ministers of State and Politicians, nay, even to his Grace
himself, whether such dangerous Principles, and Persons Poisoned with them, are
not so far from deserving Toleration, as to be most pernicious and intolerable
in any Monarchy, that desires, or expects to be safe.

But what need we to argue from Reason, when Fact is so evident? Has not
Indulgence, Toleration, and Liberty of Conscience murdered one King, set up a
thousand Usurpers, made England suffer a thousand miseries, and cost this
Nation many thousand Lives, many Millions of Treasure! His Grace had a share,
and a large one, in the effects of that Liberty of Conscience: It was a
Conscientious Felton that robbed him of a Noble Father, and the World of a most
Illustrious Life; it was a Conscientious Rebel that slew his Brother; it was
Conscientious Rebels that Sequestered his Estate, Imprisoned his Person, and
would have taken away his Life; and if he has a mind to run the Gantlet again
through all those Risques of Fortune, I would recommend him to a Toleration,
and Liberty of Conscience, to gratify his desires; for I dare assure him, a
Ducal Coronet is no more a Protection against Conscience, when once it takes
the Field, then an Imperial Crown, or a much hated, though Innocent, Mitre.

Were that late Rebellion only the single dismal Extravagance of Conscience
grown Frantic by Indulgence, or wantonly Cruel by too much Liberty, something
might be alleged in mitigation of its Crimes: But it is a Wild Creature in
Dissenters, whose Chain is no sooner loose, but it flies at the Throat of its
Keeper. And no Man can doubt of this, who reflects upon the Troubles and
Dangers which have befallen our late Sovereign, and His Illustrious Brother our
most Gracious King, which must date their Era from the last Indulgence; for no
sooner had the Dissenters gained that Point, but they threw at all; and the
good and loyal Subjects of the Church of England, the best Supporters of the
Crown, being discouraged, the Faction grew Rampant to the highest Degrees of
Insolence imaginable, and wanted but little of pushing on a more dreadful
Revolution than that of Forty one; For who were the Petitioners, the
Addressers, the Life and Fortune Men, the Associators, the Exclusioners, the
Rye-house Conspirators, but the great Friends to the Dissenters, to Liberty of
Conscience and Toleration? And who were to assist these mighty Undertakers, but
the Dissenters, the Band of Pensioners to this pretended Conscience? And
whoever Indulges those who plead Conscience, opens, a secret Sally-port to let
in Traitors disguised under the Name of Tender Conscience, betrays a Principal
Gate of the Government to his Enemies, and for one Conscience really Tender,
will find a thousand as hard as Iron, and as sharp as Steel, and as mortal too,
in a Dissenters Hand. And I cannot but infinitely admire at that Passage in the
Epistle, where his Grace hopes a Consideration of the Present State of this
Kingdon, if it could sink deep enough into Men's Hearts to make them endeavor,
now, to promote a true Liberty of Conscience, would make the Nation happy; or
at his foreseeing, without pretending to Prophecy, that the contrary will
terminate in a general Discontent, the dispeopling of our Country, and the
exposing us to the Conquest of a Foreign Nation. Whereas in Fact, as well as
plain Reason, the direct contrary is most evident. Division has generally been
the Forerunner of the Fate of States and Kingdoms, and to give Men leave to
divide and sub-divide into ten thousand Fractions, is the ready way to sow the
Seeds of Discords, Animosities, and everlasting intestine Quarrels; to expose
us perpetually to the dangerous Conspiracies of Ambitious, Turbulent, and
Factious Republicans, and to put us into the next disposition to become a Prey
either to Foreign Invaders, or Domestic Usurpers. It is the most undoubted way
to ruin all Religion, and put us out of the Protection of the Divine Mercy and
Goodness; It is the most compendious way to ruin the Church of England, of
whose steadfast Loyalty, and of whose ability to support the Crown, how
despicable or inconsiderable the Faction have endeavored to render it, both
his late Majesty, and our present Gracious King have had, and have owned too
great Experience of, to be doubted or disputed; and should that Pillar be taken
from the Throne by Toleration, a man shall not need to Prophesy what the
Commonwealth-Conscience-men would do with the Monarch, and with the Monarchy;
nay, should the Church of England be discountenanced and discouraged by
Toleration, so as to recede from its active Loyalty in opposing the Dissenting
Faction, no knowing or observing man but must dread the terrible and
unavoidable Consequences of their betaking themselves to a passive Loyalty; and
it is easy to guess how deplorable a misfortune it would be to the King and
Nation to be at the Discretion and Mercy of the Conscience of the Faction. But
God be praised, who has conducted his Majesty to the Royal Throne, through the
Tempestuous Sea of Assotiating, Assassinating, and Excluding Consciences, which
has given him a sufficient Experience how far he may trust them, and be safe.
And God be praised, we have his Royal word, which we esteem as sacred and
inviolable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, for our comfort and
protection; nor is there any person, who has the least sparks of Generosity
himself, or is even at the remotest distance acquainted with that glorious
Character, which has rendered him so conspicuous to the whole Earth, as a
Prince of the most generous Constancy and Firmness to his word, but will
believe it with as much Confidence as humane certainty is capable of.

I have but three or four Words more to add to his Graces Questions, and I
shall herein follow his Method.

First, Whether Jesus Christ, who himself taught and practiced Subjection to
Government, did not believe Sovereign Power had Authority to maintain the Order
of Society by Rewards and Punishmets? and whether my Lord has considered, that
spiritual Punishments are far more Rigorous than Temporal; the Chains of
Darkness, than humane Imprisonments; eternal Damnation, than pecuniary
Penalties; Banishment from Heaven, than Exile upon Earth; Excommunication, than
a petty Fine? And that therefore, whether he who would have men compelled by
the greatest punishments, and the Terrors of them, to become Christians, has
not done more to force men to be Religious, than all the Powers of the Earth
ever have done, or ever can do? And lastly, whether by his Graces Maxim, he
may not incur the horrid Consequence of proving even the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, who teach this Doctrine, to be Antichristian, and another not fit to be
named. For his Grace is to know, that the nature of, neither any Spiritual or
Temporal Law, is purely Penal, but intended primarily to prevent the danger it
prohibits, and to punish only secondarily, where it meets not with that first
effect; and yet the dread of Punishment is the only force that can affect
humane Nature; nor do humane Laws pretend to enforce any other way, than
according to the Methods prescribed and practiced by the most Wise God; and
even yet, this force is also the highest Reason.

Secondly, Whether there being a hundred Monarchies happy without Toleration
and Liberty of Conscience, to one Republic that allows it with Restriction,
and whose future Fate we are ignorant of, and whether that may not in time
prove its ruin; it be not a hundred to one, that a Monarchy shall be more
flourishing, safe and lasting without Toleration and Liberty of Conscience than
with them?

Thirdly, Whether it be not Cross and Pile, whether a man who may be of any and
of all Religions, will be of any, or of none at all?

And to conclude with my Friendly advice, Let all men cherish, promote and
propagate that Religion, which renders them the best Subjects to God and the
King; and endeavor to convince as many as they can by their Reason and their
Virtue, and by all lawful ways to discourage all Rebellion and Sedition,
Disloyalty and Faction, let their Clamours be never so loud against
Persecution, and for Toleration and Liberty of Conscience under pretense of
Religion. For assuredly this Nation shall never be happy so long as those,
whose Principles lead them to cutting of Throats for Conscience Sake, make such
a stir for the Liberty of Conscience. Nor will any thing contribute more to our
Peace and Safety, than taking the Wise man's counsel, My son, fear thou the Lord
and the King, and meddle not with those who are given to change: for their
calamity shall come suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

FINIS.

