DON CARLOS: OR, AN HISTORICAL RELATION OF The Unfortunate Life, and Tragical
Death of that Prince of SPAIN, Son to PHILIP the IId.

Written in French, Anno 1672. and newly Englished by H. I.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Hen. Herringman, at the Blew Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange; and John Crump at the Three Bibles in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1674.

TO THE LADY ELLIS, Wife to the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir WILLIAM ELLIS Baronet.
Madam;
BEing lately necessitated to pass some days in a place, where I had but
little Company, and less Diversion, I resolved to spend my idle hours in
Translating this Relation of the Misfortunes of poor Don Carlos.

It was Written by a Person of Honor, and one, that pretends to have a
particular insight into the Spanish History.

Yet, least his Authority should not seem sufficient in some dubious passages,
he backs it with that of the most Famous Writers of the last Age.

His Design (as you may see by his own Advertisement) was chiefly to Vindicate
the Queen of Spaine's Virtue, from the Aspersions, that had been cast upon it
by some Malicious Pens; and mine is no other, then to divert you, and by this
small testimony of my Affection, to Assure You, that I am,

MADAM, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, H. J.

Advertisement of the AUTHOR.
ALl Historians of the last Age, that make mention of the unfortunate Prince of
Spain, who is the subject of this Treatise, do also speak of his Love for his
Mother-in-Law; and as people are always apt to put an evil interpretation upon
things of that nature, his Passion has done some wrong to the reputation of
that virtuous Queen. The Author of this Book having found in diverse places the
particularities of their History, thought himself obliged to communicate them
to the Public, because they justify the memory of that Princess, and make it
appear, that there was nothing, but what was very innocent on her side. Though
she had done nothing else, but discover the Conspiracy, whereof you shall see
the recital, she had well deserved to have some care taken of her glory,
because it is certainly true, that without her, the Prince of Navarre had never
come to be the greatest King in the world; and (to say something more to his
honor) Grandfather to Lewis the Fourteenth.

This History is taken out of all the Authors, Spanish, French, Italian, and
Dutch, which have written of those times in which it happened. The principal are,
Thuanus, Monsieur Aubigne, Brantome, Cabrera, Campana, Adriani, Natalis Comes,
Dupleix, Mathieu, Mayerne, Mezerai, le Laboureur Sur Castelnau, Strada,
Meteren, The History of Don John of Austria, the Elogies of F. Hilarion de
Cost. The Spanish Book of the Deeds and Sayings of Philip the Second. A
Relation of the Death and Obsequies of his Son, etc. It is likewise collected
out of several Pieces pertaining to History, as well Manuscripts as Printed,
and amongst the rest, out of a little Book, entitled, Diogenes, which treats
largely of this matter; and a Manuscript written by Monsieur de Peresese,
expressly upon that subject. However, for the Reader's farther satisfaction, I
have set down in the Margent, of the most particular and extraordinary places,
the principal Authors out of which they were taken.

DON CARLOS: Or, An Historical Relation of the Unfortunate Life, and Tragical
Death of that Prince of Spain, Son to Philip the Second.
WHen the Emperor Charles the Fifth resolved to quit the Government of the
Empire, and to retire himself into a solitary way of living; fearing to leave
his Son exposed to the good fortune of Henry the Second, of which himself had
already felt the effects, he concluded with that Prince a Truce for the five
first years of his Son's Reign. Amongst other Propositions for a Peace between
the two Crowns, which were made during this Truce, was proposed the Marriage of
Don Carlos Prince of Spain, and only Son of Philip the Second, and Mary of
Portugal his first Wife, with Madam Elizabeth the Eldest Daughter of France.
This Princess was very young, but wonderfully accomplished for a person of her
age: And as this Marriage was resolved upon with great joy on both sides, as
soon as it was proposed, she could not choose but conceive a very great esteem
for him that was destined to be her Husband; her young heart finding in that
occasion a suitable object to fix it self upon, did much please it self in the
thoughts of it; and she did by degrees insensibly engage her self in an
inclination, which, though altogether innocent, did afterward prove more
troublesome blesome to her virtue, then ever she thought it would. The Prince
of Spain was no less contented then she with his hoped for happiness; and as
all that people said to him concerning Madam, gave him a very lovely Idea of
her person, he abandoned himself with pleasure to all those thoughts of love
and desire, which that Idea inspired him withal. The Princess's Picture,
which, according to the custom, was sent him by the King of France, finished
that conquest in him, which the reputation of her beauty had already begun.
Those that brought it, said, it was extremely like her; and Don Carlos easily
believed them in a thing he so much desired might be true. When he considered
this Picture, there was no way that he would not willingly have tried, to let
Madam know the thoughts he had of her. He could by no means endure that she
should be ignorant of the joy, which the hopes of possessing her filled him
with. Sometimes he was even ashamed of the excess of his good fortune, and
could almost have been contented to allow himself the time of winning the
Princess's heart by his merits and services, rather then to obtain her by the
common ways; but knowing that to be an impossible thing, he thought he should
be well enough satisfied, if he could but at least acquaint her with the
diversity of his thoughts.

In the mean time, the face of affairs was wholly changed, by a sudden and
unexpected breach of the Five years Truce, the Princes of the House of Lorrain,
or those that at the solicitation of Paul the Fourth, brought about this
rupture. The Pope's aim was, by raising troubles in Flanders, to free himself
from the Duke D' Alva, who had the command of a Spanish Army, and had for some
time kept him, as it were, blocked up within the Walls of Rome. One part of his
design, which was the diversion of the Spanish Arms, succeeded according to his
desire; but in Flanders he found more opposition, where the French lost two
Battles, in which the greatest part of their most valiant men were either
killed or taken prisoners; and, which reduced their affairs to so ill a a
condition, that they resolved speedily to buy a Peace at what price soever.
This Peace was the work of the Duke of Savoy, General of the Spanish Army, and
of the Constable of Montmorency his Prisoner. The Constable represented to the
Duke, That he could never hope to find a fairer occasion of recovering the
possession of his Estates, from which his Father had been driven by Francis the
First; and the Duke on his side prevailed so far with Philip the Second, that
the Treaty was concluded a little while after, at Chateau-Cambresis. It is
easy to judge of the grief of Don Carlos at the breaking of the Truce, and how
great his joy was when the Negotiation of a Peace was reassumed; and yet this
Peace, which seemingly gave such seasonable grounds for his hopes, was that
which at last proved their utter destruction.

During the time of the Negotiation, Philip the Second was made a Widower, by
the death of Mary Queen of England, his Second Wife; and being obliged by
several weighty considerations to a Third Marriage, he demanded for himself the
Princess, that had before been promised to his Son. The French would doubtless
much rather have given her to the Heir of the Crown, who was much of the same
age with her, then to a Prince old enough to have been her Father, and by whom
she could have none but younger Children, and by consequence incapable of
inheriting the Crown: but, all things considered, he could not handsomely be
refused. Though this news was like the stroke of a Thunderbolt to poor Don
Carlos, who was told it at first before a great deal of company, yet he was
enough Master of himself, to hinder any body from taking notice of the grief it
caused in him; but the violence he did himself, cost him dear, when he was
alone. All his thoughts were nothing, but the continual inspirations of Love
and Rage. But the trouble he was in not permitting him to resolve upon, nor the
present state of his fortune to undertake any thing that might ease his mind,
his Despair was insensibly turned into Melancholy; and from thence proceeded
that reserved way of living, which rendered him so odious to the King his
Father, who never once dreaming of the true cause of his discontent, and
judging of his Son by himself, did attribute it to the impatience he thought
this young Prince might have of Reigning.

As for Madam, though what she felt in her self for Don Carlos, was rather a
disposition to love him, then a true and well established passion, yet the fear
she had that there was something more in it then as yet she apprehended, made
her have an unspeakable distrust of her self* Till then she had an extreme
curiosity to know the effect her Picture had produced upon the Prince; nay, and
she had desired sometimes, that his heart, if it were possible, might in that
respect enjoy less quiet then her own: But as soon as she knew the change that
was happened in their fortune, she feared nothing in the world so much as to be
loved by him. What pleasure soever there be to be thought handsome, she wished
that what all people said of her charms had been false. In this difference of
thoughts, her mind not having all the tranquillity necessary to bring her
handsomely off, in an Action so hard for a person in her circumstances, as her
first arrival at the Court of Spain was, she stopped her journey as long as she
could have the least appearance of an excuse; and though the Duke D' Alva had
married her in his Masters name, in the month of June, she did not leave Paris
till the end of November. She staid to see all the fine Houses that were in her
way, and did not come into the Province of Aquitane, till the year was ready to
expire, as if those delays could have done that in her heart, that her own
reason was not capable of doing. When she was at the Pyrenaean Mountains,
Fortune, that sometimes pleases her self in bestowing her favors upon those
that least expect them, helped her to one stop more, then ever she had hoped
for.

Anthony of Bourbon, King of Navar was charged with the conduct of the Princess
into Spain, and he was to remit her upon the Frontier into the hands of the
Cardinal of Burgos, and the Duke De l' Infantado. This King possessed only the
lower Navar, because the Upper had been usurped from his Wives Great
Grandfather by the Spaniards; but yet, not to prejudice the right he pretended
to upon them both, he would not acknowledge the place that at that time
separated his Dominions from those of the King of Spain for the true Spanish
Frontier, but he required a declaration from the Deputies, that the Delivery he
should make of the Princess in that place, should in no way hurt his
pretensions. The Declaration was of too great consequence to be accorded
without express order, and therefore they were forced to write to Madrid, and
expect His Majesty's answer in the place where they were. Philip would have
been glad to have been spared this trouble by the Court of France, and that
this Commission had been given to some body else, rather than to the King of
Navar: But the Princes of the House of Guise, at that time the new and absolute
Masters of all Affairs, had their particular reasons, for keeping the Princes
of the Blood, as much as they could, from approaching the Court or the King's
Person, and their design being only to seek out fair pretensions so to do,
they were ravished to find so plausible an one, of delivering themselves from
him that troubled them the most. In short, the King of Spain saw himself
obliged, either quickly to satisfy the King of Navar'^ demand, or else to
bring the business to a Negotiation, to obtain of the Court of France that he
might be called back, and another sent in his place. This last way seemed to be
of an insupportable length for a Prince, that was in expectation of the most
lovely person in the world for his Wife: Wherefore this great Politician
satisfied, for that time, his amorous impatience to the prejudice of his
Interests, and wrote to his Deputies to grant the King of Navar his demand.
Presently after the Queen began her Journey to Madrid, and was met upon the way
by Don Carlos, who was accompanied, besides many other considerable persons, by
his Cousin Alexander Farnese the young Prince of Parma, and by Rui Gomez de
Silva, Prince of Eboli, his Governor, and the King's great The Father
Hila^rois of Coss. Min. in his Elogy of this Queen.
Favorite. At the first news the Queen had of the Prince's coming, such
opposite sentiments did raise themselves in her mind, and did agitate her with
so much violence, that she fell into a (...) in her Women's arms, and could not
be brought to her self, till Don Carlos was ready to ask leave to salute her.
After the first civilities, these two illustrious Persons, taken up with the
mutual consideration of each other, left off speaking, and the rest of the
company holding their peace out of respect, there was for some time a silence
extraordinary enough in such an occasion. Brantome in his Philip the 2 d.
Don Carlos was not shaped according to the exactest rules of Symmetry; but
besides the excellency of his complexion, and one of the finest heads in the
world, his eyes were so full of fire and life, and his Mien was so softy and
martial, that he could not with reason be thought any ways unpleasing. At
first, the wonderful beauty of the Queen did even dazzle his eyes; but the
consideration of what he had lost in losing her, quickly changed his admiration
into sorrow; and foreseeing what he was like to suffer for her, he came by
degrees to look upon her with some kind of fear. In the mean time the Duke De
l' Infantado thought, that the Queen staid out of civility, to know when it was
Don Carlos pleasure to go, and that the Prince out of respect staid for the
same reason. This made him put the Queen in mind, that it was time to be going;
and by that means he drew them both out of a greater perplexity then perhaps he
was aware of. The Prince having taken his place in the Queens Coach, never
lifted his eyes from off her all the way; and he had all the convenience he
could desire to consider her, and undo himself. The Queen soon observed it; and
a secret Sentiment, of which she was not the Mistress, made her find some kind
of sweetness in seeing the disorder Don Carlos was in. Yet she durst not at
first seem to observe him too exactly, and he could not look upon her without
trembling: But at last their eyes, after having avoided one another's
rencounter for some time, not able to do themselves any farther violence, and
meeting one another by chance, had not the force to withdraw themselves from
the contemplations of so tempting objects. It was by these faithful
Interpreters, that Don Carlos told the Queen all he had to say to her. He
prepared her by a thousand sad and passionate looks to suffer all the obstinacy
and greatness of his passion. The heatt of this Prince, burdened by its own
secret, and pressed with the grief of its misfortune, could no longer defer to
ease it self; and the opinions he conceived by the troubled and discomposed
carriage of the Queen, that she was not ignorant of his meaning, gave him so
sensible a joy, that it made him forget, for some moments, both the good
Fortune of his Father, and his own unhappiness. This little satisfaction gave
him a liberty of mind at the first meeting of the King and Queen, which
otherwise he could not have hoped for; but the Princess was so intent upon her
melancholy thoughts, that the presence of her Husband could not draw her out
of them. When they were arrived at Madrid, and that the King had received her
at her coming out of the Coach; after the first Ceremonies practiced in those
occasions, she set her self to look fixedly upon him, without thinking on what
she did, as if she had observed whether or no he took notice of the trouble she
was in. Brantome in his Discourse of this Queen.
The King, far enough from suspecting the true cause of her disturbance, asked
her roughly enough, Whether she were displeased to see that his head was
already full of gray haires^ These words were taken for an ill omen by those
that stood by, and some judged from that very time that the union between two
persons so different in that, as well as upon several other accounts, could
never be happy.

The Court of Spain that had hearkened to the wonders that were commonly
reported of the Queens Beauty, as to the ordinary exaggerations given to the
good qualities of Princesses, was infinitely astonished when it saw that all
that had been reported of her came short of the truth.

This Princess was born into the World with all the advantages Nature could
bestow upon her, and she was then in that flourishing Age which is requisite to
make a perfect Beauty. All beautiful persons do not touch all sorts of hearts;
but the Queen was equally adored by the People, and in the Court. As often as
she showed her self in public, so often she triumphed over the hearts of all
those that saw her. It was so hard to see her without loving her, that it is to
this day a Tradition in the Court of Spain, Brantome, in her Elogy.
That no wise man would venture to look her long in the Face. In fine, if it be
true, that beauty is a kind of Natural Royalty, one may say, That never Queen
was more properly Queen then she: It had been hard that her happy husband,
possessor of so many perfections, should not have been charmed by them. The
smallest actions and gestures of this Princess appeared to him extremely
taking. He found always in her an attracting sweetness, equally different from
the coy severity of the Spanish Women in Public, and the too extravagant
Sallies of their passion when in private. Sometimes in making reflection upon
these things, he admired his own happiness, but it was only in himself; for he
did not think it becoming his Grandeur to let so young a person know the
weakness she was the cause of in him. And if she suspected any thing of it, she
had quickly lost that thought, by considering the little trust he seemed to put
in her, his severe carriage toward her, and his regularity to shut all his
caresses within the bounds of the night, as if he had been afraid lest she
should have seen him in some posture less grave then that in which he was
usually seen by other People. This way of proceeding, so little obliging in
appearance, and so differing from that agreeable unruliness of the passions,
that ordinarily accompanies the happy condition of satisfied Lovers, did in no
wise answer the Idea the Queen had formed of the life that two Married People,
happy enough to love one another, ought to lead. So that she looked upon her
Husband as a Man of whom she possessed nothing but the Body, and whose mind was
wholly filled with Politic thoughts and ambitious designs. In the mean time,
she was so extremely loved by him, that the enjoyment of her, far from
diminishing his passion, did but augment it: whether it were that the
possession of the object loved, which satisfies so fully the desires of most
Husbands, served only to increase his, by discovering to him every day new
hidden beauties, or that the secret he made to her of his love redoubled it is
violence.

In the mean time Don Carlos was marvellously unquiet to know what thoughts the
Queen had of him. And though every time she looked upon him, he thought he
discovered in her eyes a secret and passionate languishing, which appeared not
there at other times, yet he durst not believe even what he saw: whatsoever
impatience he had, to have a clearer knowledge in this point, she being but
very seldom alone, during the public divertisements that were made in honor
of her Wedding, he was a great while without being able to entertain her in
private: but at last, fortune, which pleases her self, in furthering those
designs, that can have no other then unhappy events, offered him an occasion
of so doing, when he the least expected it. The King being come into Spain but
a little while before the Queen, had not as yet paid the last honors due to the
Body of the Emperor, who then lay in State some days journeys from Madrid, in
the Monastery of the Hieronimites, where He had ended his days. The Queen was
well pleased to accompany her Husband in this Voyage, to see a Country that
was reported to be the most beautiful part in all Spain. The Convent of the
Hieronimites of St. Justus is situate in a Valley at the entrance of
Extramadura, which stretches it self along the Banks of the River Guadiana,
from the Frontiers of Castilia to that of Portugal.

This Valley is encompassed with hills of an extraordinary height, the least
fruitful places of which are covered with those eternally-green Trees, which
are not to be found but in those hot Countries. A thousand little Brooks, that
have their Springs among these Woods, after many curious turnings and windings
cast themselves into the River that crosses the Plain; and the Soil that is
made fertile by this great quantity of running water, has always brought
forth an infinite number of Orange Trees, Lemmon-Trees, and other such like
plants that grow under this happy Climate. These Brooks in the hottest days
of Summer do maintain in the shady walks of this Desert, a cooleness, which by
all the Artifice of Man cannot be produced in another place, and the Greens
which always grow upon their Banks have so lively a luster, that the pencil
of the skilfullest Painter could never compose one so beautiful. The Court
being arrived unto this solitude, which Charles the Fifth had rendered so famous
by his retreat, the King after having performed the first duties of Piety,
would needs see a young Religious Man that his Father had much loved; and among
other things he was curious to know the original of this Friendship: he was
told, That the Emperor going one morning, when it came to his turn, to wake the
other Religious, found this young Man, who was then a Novice, buried in so
profound a sleep, that he had much ado to make him rise; that the Novice at
last getting up with much discontent, and at best not above half awake, could
not keep himself from saying to him, That he might well enough be contented to
have troubled the quiet of the World, so long as he had lived in it, without
coming to disturb the repose of those that had forsaken it; and that this
answer had so taken the Emperor, that he had testified a particular inclination
to him ever after. After some other discourses, all the Company separated
themselves to take a Walk in this agreeable Wilderness, so that the Queen, who
was wearyed with the journey, was left almost alone with Don Carlos. And as
those that stayed with them were not of a quality to interest themselves in
their conversation; Don Carlos ravished to find such an opportunity, proposed
to her to go and rest her self in a little Wood of Orange Trees that was behind
the Apartment of the Emperor; thither they went, and the Prince who was afraid
of being interrupted, presently began the discourse with a liberty made the
Queen lose the suspicion she had of his design. At first he conjured her not to
disquiet her self for the things he had to say to her, and to believe, that he
would never give her any other trouble then that of hearing him. Afterward he
beseeched her to remember the time, when they were destined for each other, and
to consider what impression so charming a hope must needs have made upon his
heart. You may easily believe, Madam (continued he) that the sight of you, has
not defaced this impression; and I feel but too well, that it will never be
defaced in me. The Queen at first could not keep her self from taking pleasure
to see a man have so passionate sentiments for her, and such as no body ever
yet durst testify to her. But afterward making reflection on the words of Don
Carlos, she comprehended so well their force, and they gave her so sad an Idea
of the state of that Prince's mind, that they made her conceive a great deal of
pity for him. She confessed to him, That the esteem she had heretofore had for
his person, at the time she was designed to be his Wife, did not permit her to
see his suffering without grief, nor to deny him those consolations which she
could give him without offending her duty. The Prince answered her, That he
pretended to no other consolation, then that of seeing her, and speaking to
her: But the Queen, who perhaps was afraid of saying more then she had a mind
to, rose up at these words, and walking toward the Prince of Parma and Rui
Gomez, whom she saw coming toward her, she only told Don Carlos, That if he
were wise, and loved her truly, far from seeking her company, he would do what
he could to avoid it. Don Carlos was extremely satisfied with the Declaration
he had made to her of his passion, and his carriage afterward was as free, as
before it seemed to be constrained. The Qneen was one of the first that took
notice of this change: and, as there is no form under which love may not be
disguised to insinuate it self into a heart, no not so much as that of reason
and virtue it self, she thought her self obliged both out of prudence and
generosity, to keep secret the passion of this Prince. In this thought she
could not hinder her self from letting him know, that she looked upon the change
of his humor as an effect of his discretion. Don Carlos, the first time he
could find an opportunity of speaking to her in private, after the return of
the Court to Madrid, took the liberty to put her in mind of it; and he assured
her, with a great deal of pleasure, that there was no sort of humor, nor manner
of life so contrary to his natural inclination, but his passion could make him
undertake for her sake. After this, they made one another Confidents of as many
particularities of their lives as were fit to be related. Don Carlos told the
Queen all that had passed in his heart and mind, ever since the first time he
had heard her spoken of. And she (when he had done speaking) made him the
History of her Infancy, with a thousand little circumstances, which employed as
agreeably his intention, as they would have seemed tedious to an indifferent
person. Only when she came to that part of her Discourse that touched the
resolution of their Marriage, she did not enlarge her self upon the Sentiments
she had had on that occasion, with so much liberty as the Prince had done upon
his; but the violence he saw she did her self to hide them; told him more then
she concealed. In such pleasing Entertainments it was that these two
illustrious Persons spent the time they could have to be together; when
fortune, already weary of favoring so innocent a commerce, engaged Don Carlos
in an adventure, that was the foundation of all his misfortunes.

Of all the Ladies, in whom the Queens beauty caused envy and jealousy, there
was none that had greater reason to hate her upon that account, then the
Princess of Eboli; in wit and beauty she surpassed all the Court, and for this
reason, as well as because of the great favor her Husband was in with the
King, she held the first rank among the Ladies. She had an equal Love for
magnificence and pleasure, and, as she thought, nothing capable of resisting
the charms of her person and wit, she had at first formed a design upon the
Kings heart: but the Queens beauty having rendered her project fruitless, she
attempted to make Don Carlos in Love with her, not thinking to find in the
heart of the Son, the same obstacle that had hindered her success with the
Father. Rui Gomez, in quality of the Prince's Governor, was lodged in the same
Apartment with him; the Princess of Eboli his Wife, besides the convenience of
seeing Don Carlos, had often occasion of obliging him, in reconciling him with
her husband, with whom he had some little Quarrels every day. Don Carlos who
was very generous, and who saw with what zeal she employed her self for him,
was not wanting in gratitude to her for it, and lived very civilly with her.

These favorable dispositions giving the Princess good hopes concerning her
enterprise, she quickly found out the means to bring him to the point she
desired. The admiration he had for the Queen, caused in him a certain contempt
of all other Women. Besides, it is well known, that most young people of that
quality love naturally to divert themselves to the cost of others, and the
flattery of those that praise them, accustomes them to those sorts of
disobliging Jests, in stead of reproving them for it. Don Carlos, who was not
exempt from all the faults of his Age and quality, and the Prince of Parma, yet
younger, and more hotheaded then he, having one day played one of their
ordinary tricks to some women of the first Quality, who complained of them, the
Princess of Eboli had much ado to obtain of Rui Gomez not to speak of it to the
King. That very night this Woman being alone in her Closet with Don Carlos, she
began to reproach him with the little consideration he had for the Ladies, and
after having made him a thousand Railleries upon that Subject; she concluded,
that the friendship she had for him must needs be very strong, to make her
pardon those kind of things. The Prince who perceived not her design, and who
was obliged in gratitude to profess much affection to her, answered her,
laughing; That she had more reason to employ her self for him, then perhaps she
thought; because, the little consideration he had for all other Women, came
from the Monopoly she had made of all the esteem he was capable of for that
Sex. The Princess charmed with those words, which she took for a declaration of
Love, answered him in a manner that opened his eyes, and made him perceive his
good fortune; At first he was of the mind to make use of it, and, it seemed to
him, that never Infidelity was more excusable then that he was going to commit.

This Princess was of those Women, who, without having all their Features
exactly proportioned, have something that touches more then the most regular
Beauties. But, how dangerous soever she were, Don Carlos was yet full of the
passion he had for the Queen, his imagination represented her to him at that
instant, with those graces and that sweetness, that made all other Beauties
appear rude and insipid in comparison of hers; and, the force of this Idea made
him all on a sudden look upon the Princess with a disdain, which she had no
reason to expect from him. Yet he answered her Compliment in the most obliging
manner he could, without satisfying her desire: but, she saw well enough that
he pretended an affection which really he had not. A Woman, that has seen her
self in this condition, never forgets it, and remembers it with rage, if she
has not cause to remember it with pleasure. We shall see the effects this rage
produced in the heart of the Princess of Eboli; in the mean time, Love, that
had pity of her Adventure, brought a new Personage upon the Stage of this
Court, to repair the fault of Don Carlos.

It was Don John of Austria, Natural Son of Charles the Fifth, that the King
took about that time out of the hands of a Spanish Nobleman, who had brought
him up as his own Son; and, though this young Prince had always thought
himself to be so, he was as fierce and as ambitious as if he had known his true
birth. When this Spaniard who passed for his Father, came to cast himself at
his feet, before he presented him to the King, Don John looked upon him in that
posture with as much tranquillity, as if he had a long while expected this
change. Seeing nothing in the New Rank he was entered into above his courage, he
was not at all dazzled with it, and all the Court saw with admiration the Son of
Don Lewis Quisciada accustom himself in less than half an hours time to act
the Son of an Emperor.

This new Prince not being of an humor to make use of all precautions necessary
to defend his heart against the charms of the Queen, fell in Love with her as
soon as he saw her. And whether it were that his passion flattered his vanity,
or that he hoped to make it serve to the establishment of his fortune, when he
perceived it, he made no attempt to cure himself of it; and as he was naturally
a dissembler, it was easy for him to hide the assiduity he manifested about
the Queens Person, under the pretext of the necessi y of his appearance at
Court. His overcarefulness soon displeased Don Carlos; and though this Princess
would have persuaded him that she was glad of that obstacle, to hinder the
freedom of their conversation, that so she might be less exposed to suffer the
expressions of his Love, yet she conceived an aversion for Don John, of which
she would not examine the reason.

There is no rencounter in the life of Man where dissimulation is of so great
use, as in love, nor any in which it is harder to dissemble. The Prince could
not always be so absolutely Master of his passion, when the presence of Don
John was troublesome to him, as that this latter did not at length perceive
something thereof; And as there is nothing so penetrating as the eyes of a
Rival, he had quickly deceived the reason of it. This knowledge gave him an
extreme curiosity, to know, whether the Prince's Passion were known to the
person that caused it, and whether she answered it or no. To be the better
informed of this, he resolved to counterfeit being in Love with a Frenchwoman
that waited upon the Queen, who was handsome enough to render this counterfeit
probable, and who appeared to be more in her favor then any of her other
women. He spared nothing of all he could employ to corrupt her; but it was
impossible he could draw from her the secret of her Mistress, because she knew
it not; for, the Queen, far from acquainting any body else with it, would have
been glad, if she could, to have hid it from her self. He took pretense of
talking to this Lady, that so he might leave Don Carlos alone with the Queen,
and he became insensibly as commode as till then he had been troublesome. He
thought, that if they were of intelligence with each other, he should know
nothing of it, by interesting himself in their conversations, because they
would then take heed of him, and that his assiduity would but make them hate
him the worse, and keep him the more out of their privacy, into which he
desired passionately to be admitted. The Queen appeared so reserved, that he
despaired of entering into hers: He attempted then to get that of the Prince,
whose free and ingenuous nature promised him a greater facility; in this design
he changed wholly his carriage toward him; He used no more that familiarity
which the quality of an Uncle gave him, and he became the most respectful of
his Courtiers. He managed so dexterously the occasions of making People take
notice of Don Carlos's good qualities, that this Prince, who suspected not his
esteem of flattery, because he knew that he deserved it, came by degrees to
think that his Uncle loved him. Don Carlos did in the end, even put a great
deal of confidence in him, but as that of a truly generous Man, and who loves
really, never extends it self to the secret of his love when he is well used:
The Prince at length entrusted all things to his Uncles knowledge, besides that
one he desired to know.

Don John growing desperate, with not being able to discover any thing,
resolved to take Counsel of some body that had more experience than himself in
those matters. As he was the handsomest and best proportioned Prince in Europe,
he had at first mightily pleased the Princess of Eboli, who knew not that the
Queen was to be fatal to all her designs; Yet, she did not wholly spoil this
last, as she had done the others. Don John was one of those happy complexions,
that are never sensible to beauty, but in view of the pleasures it can give;
and that of the Princess of Eboli promising much, touched at least his senses,
if it did not reach his heart, as the Queens had done. On the other side, he
considered the Princess as a person whose Counsels might serve him very
considerably, in a Court, where all things were new to him. He prevented by his
officiousness the testimonies of good will which she sought to give him; and
appeared so transported with joy at the first Marks he saw of it in her, that
she well judged he would answer to greater with much ardour. So that they had
soon established a Commerce, by so much the more agreeable, as their hearts
were not enough concerned in it to trouble their pleasures by jealousies, and
those other too delicate scrupulosities, that great passions use to inspire.

Don John living in this manner with the Princess of Eboli, resolved fully to
acquaint her with all he knew concerning the love of Don Carlos. It is easy to
judge of the joy she had at the hearing of this news: she was so taken up with
it, that she made no reflection upon the interest Don John took in the Queens
heart: Only she counseled him, continually to observe all things, because how
circumspect soever one be, it is impossible not to forget one's self sometimes,
when one is truly in love. And as she examined not the interest he seemed to
take in this matter, so he was not too curious in searching out the reason of
that zeal, with which she promised him to employ her self in it. He thought,
without deeper examination, that it was an effect of the complaisance she had
for him, and of the curiosity ordinary to those of her sex. It is probable,
that two so clear-sighted persons would soon have discovered, what they had so
much interest to know, if it had not been for an accident which broke all their
measures, in absenting Don Carlos from the Court, and which cannot well be
understood, without following the Story to its first source.

Mr. de Thou, Aubigne Etr.
Among the reports that had run about in the world concerning the Emperor's
retirement; the most strange of all was, that the continual negotiations he had
had with the Protestants of Germany, had bred in him some inclinations for
their opinions, and that he had hid himself in that solitude, only to have the
greater liberty of ending his days in those exercises of piety, that were most
conformable to his secret disposition. It was said, he could not pardon himself
the ill treatment he had made to those brave Princes of that party, that the
chance of War had brought into his power. Their virtue, which in the midst of
their misfortune shamed his prosperity, had bred in him by degrees some sort of
esteem for their opinions. He durst not any longer condemn a Religion, to which
so many great persons made it their glory, to sacrifice all that men can have
most precious in the world. This esteem appeared by the choice he made of
persons, strongly suspected of Heresy, for his Spiritual conduct, as of the
Doctor Cacalla his ordinary Preacher; of the Archbishop of Toledo, and above
all, of Constantine Pontius Bishop of Drossa, and the Director of his
Conscience. It has been known since, that the Cell where he died at St.
Justus, was filled on all sides with little Papers, written with his own hand,
concerning Justification and Free Grace, which was not very far from the
Doctrine of the Innovators. But nothing confirmed this opinion so much as his
Will, there was almost no pious Legacies in it, nor any foundations for Prayers
for his Soul; and it was made in a manner so different from those of all
zealous Catholics, that the Inquisition of Spain thought it had right to take
notice of it, yet it durst not make any noise before the King's arrival. But
this Prince having signalized his entry into that Country, by the exemplary
punishment of all that were adherents to the new opinion; the Inquisition
growing bolder by his example, attacked first the Archbishop of Toledo,
afterward the Emperor's ordinary Preacher, and last of all Constantine
Pontius. The King having suffered them to be imprisoned all three, the people
looked upon his patience as a Masterpiece of his zeal for the true Religion;
but all the rest of Europe saw with horror the Confessor of the Emperor
Charles (in whose arms that Prince expired, and who had, as it were, received
into his bosom his great Soul) delivered to the most cruel and most shameful
of all punishments, and that too by the hands of the King his Son. In effect,
the Inquisition thinking fit in the prosecution of their Process, to accuse
these three persons of having an hand in making the Emperor's Will, had the
boldness to condemn them to be burnt with the Will. The King awakened himself
at this Sentence as at a clap of Thunder: At first the jealousy he had of his
Father's glory, made him find some pleasure in seeing his memory exposed to
this affront; but afterward having considered the consequences of this
attempt, he hindered its effect by the most gentle and secret ways he could
choose, thereby to save the honor of the holy Office, and make no breach upon
the Authority of that Tribunal. As for Don Carlos, at the first news he
received of this business, he talked of it only as a matter fit for raillery;
but seeing that the Inquisition continued in good earnest its pursuit, he
conceived an indignation proportionable to what he owed to the memory of the
Emperor. To comprehend the reason of the particular interest he took in that
business, we must know, that this great Personage, who, amongst other heroic
qualities, did sovereignly possess that of understanding himself in men, had
conceived extraordinary hopes of his Grandson. When he retired himself into
Spain, he would needs have him along with him: And it was in that excellent
School of Wisdom and Magnanimity, that Don Carlos had confirmed himself in his
natuaal love for glory, and for all Princely virtues. The desire he had to
answer worthily the pains of so illustrious a Preceptor, had in some sort
ripened his Wit before the time, and made it bring forth fruits, that were not
to be hoped for in so early a season. The Emperor knew how to manage the fiery
and violent nature of the Prince with so much artifice and dexterity, that he
had visibly moderated it in a short time. But it being to be feared, lest this
great ardour of mind should incline him to evil courses, if he had endeavored
utterly to have suppressed it, he gave it all the liberty necessary, by
encouraging him in the pursuit of glory, of which one may say, That this wise
Governor abandoned all the Beauties to the violence of his Pupil's desires. It
is easy to imagine, that this education had imprinted in Don Carlos an
extraordinary respect for the Emperor his Grandfather, and that the
endeavoring to blot the memory of that illustrious Deceased, was an offense to
him in the most sensible part of his Soul. Don John and the Prince of Parma,
interressed in this glorious memory as well as he, were not less provoked with
the affront. They blamed all three the King's weakness, who did not resist this
insolence with all the violence they could have wished, and they conceived for
him a contempt, that never ended but with their lives. And as they were yet too
young to comprehend, that the most absolute Kings have no rights so sacred in
the minds of their people, as those that are taken from the pretense of
Religion, they spoke publicly of the attempt of the Inquisition with as great
transports of passion, as people of their quality were capable of having, upon
so justifiable a subject; nay* and they went so far as to threaten, that they
would utterly destroy the holy Office, and all its supports. The people, who
learned these passages no otherwise, then as the Inquisitors, or those who were
employed by them, were pleased to relate them, did testify, how extremely they
resented such proceedings. The King fore saw at the very first, the ill
consequences that might follow unto the Princes from their indignation, but
knowing that they had so far forgot themselves, as to blame some of his own
actions, he would not speak to them of it himself, for fear of drawing upon him
some disrespectful answer. Rui Gomez, whom he charged with this Commission,
acquitted himself of it with all the earnestness, that the importance of the
matter seemed to require. Don John and the Prince of Parma, who had naturally
more the mastery of themselves then Don Carlos, rendered themselves to his
reasons; and Ambition being their predominant passion, they had all the sorrow
imaginable, to have put so considerable an obsticle to their fortune, as the
hatred of the Inquisitors, which by this means they had brought upon
themselves, and by consequence that of the People. The Prince on the contrary,
whose nature was to be the more irritated by opposition, could never be brought
to confess that he was in the wrong. In the mean time, the Doctor Cacalla was
burnt alive, with an Effigies that represented Constantine Pontius, who was
dead some days before in the Prison. The King was forced to suffer this
Execution, that so he might oblige the holy Office to suffer the Archbishop of
Toledo to appeal to Rome, and that the Emperor's Will might be no more spoken
of.

This accommodation of affairs appeased Don Carlos, but it did by no means
please the Inquisitors; and that being a sort of people incapable of pardoning,
they raised so great murmurings among the people, that what care soever the
King could take, there was no way of making the noise cease, but by absenting
the Prince from the Court for some time.

Alcala was then in its greatest luster, and all the considerable persons that
went into Spain* failed not to visit so famous an University. The King
pretended, that the Princes had the same curiosity; and his pretense to hasten
their voyage the more, was, that the Prince of Parma was shortly to leave them,
and to go under the conduct of the Count of Egmont into Flanders, where he was
to be married. When Don Carlos knew this resolution, and that now he must
necessarily leave the Queen, he began to see the precipice into which he had
thrown himself, and the interest of his love forced from his mind a repentance
of his past carriage, which was more then the interest of his safety and
greatness could ever have done. The King, who could by no means endure to be
separated from Rui Gomez, obliged the Count of Egmont to take this Favorites
place about the Princes during the voyage of Alcala. This Count was one of the
most accomplished Captains of of his age, and was covered with the glory he had
gotten in the last War at the Battles of St. Quintin and Gravelin, and of so
many great men that had been formed in Charles the Fifth's School, no one had
ever had a greater share then he in the esteem of that Emperor. The Duchess
of Parma well foresaw the storm, that since that time was raised in the
Provinces, which the King her Brother had entrusted her with, and she judged it
convenient to represent to him the inconveniences that were to be feared from
those novelties he had a mind to introduce. This Commission demanded a man of
the quality and profession of the Count Egmont, and one accustomed to speak to
Princes with that noble liberty, which is so useful to them, and of which so
few of those about them are capable* Don Carlos, who naturally loved all
extraordinary men, engaged the Count to entertain him* as they rode along* with
a description of the last Battle, in which he had commanded. The Count, who was
charmed with his curiosity, satisfied it fully; and Don Carlos made appear an
extreme impatiency of seeing himself in a condition to do something like that
he heard related; he assured the Count of Egmont, that if ever the troubles in
Flanders came to break out in an open War, as the Governess seemed to apprehend
they would, nothing should hinder h m from coming into those Provinces, there
to learn under him his Apprentiship of War.

The voyage of the Princes was not long, the Town of Alcala presented Don
Carlos with a Horse of great price, but as furious as he was handsome. The
Prince having desired to see him mounted, was ill satisfied with all those that
rode him, and would needs try how he could ride him himself: The Horse, whose
mouth was already very much heated, as soon as the Prince began to prick him,
took a fright, and ran away with him with so much violence, that Don Carlos
thought it his best way to throw himself off; but he did it so unfortunately,
that he was left for dead upon the place; and though he came to himself some
hours after, yet when the Surgeons had examined the wound he had received in
his head, they all despaired of his life. In this extremity, he sent the
Marquis of Posa, his Favorite, to carry his last Adieu to the Queen. The
Princess of Eboli went to him, at the first report she heard of this accident,
to see after what manner he would receive her. The dissimulation of the Queen,
who was not prepared for so rude a trial, abandoned her at this news; and
though her mouth, accustomed to be silent, did not permit her grief to declare
it self by complaints, her silence, and the disorder she was in, discovered
more of her thoughts, then all the words in the world could have done. Yet how
great soever her affliction seemed to be, there had been always so much
friendship seen between her and Don Carlos, that no body was surprised
therewith. But the Princess of Eboli, that was a great proficient in the
mysterious Sciences of Love, could not comprehend, how so violent a despair in
the Queen, should be nothing but an effect of friendship. In the mean time the
people, inspired by the Inquisitors, did not seem to discover any great sorrow
for this misfortune, but looked upon it as a manifest punishment of God upon
Don Carlos for his impiety. The Queen, who thought she had now nothing more to
housewife, could not refuse her self the sad consolation of letting the Prince
know, the pitiful condition in which he left her. She wrote to him all that
love and despair can suggest most tender and most affecting; and she made the
Marquis of Posa go back to him, with order presently to bring back her Letter,
in case he should not arrive at Alcala till after the death of Don Carlos.

The joy with which the Prince's soul was filled at the receipt of this Letter
was so great, that it restored him his life. As soon as he was out of danger,
the King made him be brought back to Madrid, thinking that the animosity of the
people would in part be appeased by this cruel adventure. The first time the
Queen saw Don Carlos, she asked him for her Letter; but how earnest soever she
were to have it back, the Prince, to whom this testimony of her affection was
dearer, then the life it had rendered him, persisted always in his resolution to
keep it, not thinking that this Letter was once more to decide his destiny. At
his return, he found the Princess great with child, and her greatness did
provoke his jealousy to a degree, that made him make so odd and unreasonable*
complaints to her, that any body but she would have thought that he had lost
his wits. Whilst his Cure was finishing, she lay in, of the Illustrious
Arch-Dutchess of Flanders, who was afterward Heiress of her Beauty and Wit, as
well as of her Name. A little while after she fell dangerously fick of the
Small Pox; but the prayers of the people for her were so effectual, that she
recovered, not only with a greater degree of health, but also Brantome in his
Discourses upon this Queen.
much more beautiful then before. Don Carlos had hardly had the time to testify
his joy to her for her recovery, when she was forced to go to Bayonne, whither
the Court of France was come to meet her, and where the charms of her
conversation, and her prudent and modest carriage did not cause less admiration
of her in peoples minds, then her beauty caused disturbance in their hearts.
Don Carlos saw with all the discontent imaginable these diverse hindrances,
which Fortune raised up one after another to interrupt his commerce with the
Queen, when this last Voyage, after which he thought he should have nothing
more to fear, drew upon them an affair, which embittered the sweetness of their
life by some obstacles, that never had an end.

Mr. de Thou.
Jeanne de Albret Queen of Navarre, and Widow of the late King Anthony, had a
pretty while before this time declared her self of the New Religion; and she
was a Princess that governed her Subjects with a Piety, that might well be an
example to all her Sect; and with a Justice, whose equal perhaps had never been
seen in the Court of any King. Her Son, whom she brought up in the same belief,
was looked upon from that very time by the Religionaries of France as their
Protector. The Spaniards seeing that the pretensions of that House upon the
upper Navarre, fell into the hands of this Child, brought up in an hereditary
hatred against them, that was sharpened by the difference of their Religion, and
upheld by a party so redoutable, as was that of the Hugonots at that time, to
deliver themselves from all these fears, resolved forcibly to take away this
young Prince, with the Queen his Mother, and the Princess his Sister, out of
the heart of their Dominions, and to carry them into Spain* and put them into
the hands of the Inquisition. The chief of the Catholic party in France, being
of intelligence with the Duke D' Alva, to deprive the Hugonots of so
considerable a support, as was that of the House of Navarre, engaged themselves
with joy to contribute whatsoever depended on them, for the happy success of
this enterprise. An infamous Villain called Captain Dominick, born in the
Country of Bearn, was charged with the execution of the business, by reason of
the perfect knowledge he had of the Country. Part of the Troops that waited
then at Barcellona for a favorable wind to pass into Barbary, were appointed
to advance themselves as far as Tarragona. From this Town it was easy secretly
to lead a considerable Body of Horse through the Mountains, and so to surprise
the Queen and her Children at Pau in Bearn, where they made their residence,
and where they had almost no other Guard then the hearts of their Subjects. But
though their design were wonderfully well laid, the great Destiny of the young
Prince rendered it vain: It preserved him to be one day the Restorer of France
to its ancient splendour, and the terror of the Spaniards. A little while
before the voyage of Bayonne, Captain Dominick, assisted by some Governors of
the French Frontier, that depended upon those who made him act, had disposed
all things necessary upon the places appointed for his attempt. After that he
was gone into Spain, where he went to receive the Orders of the Duke D' Alva,
for the advancement of the Troops destined for its execution. The Duke, who was
then at Alva, after some conference with him, sent him back to the King, who
held the States of the Kingdom at Mouzon. The Captain fell dangerously sick in
going thither, and was forced to stay at Madrid, where he was necessarily to
pass. During his illness he was assisted in all things by a French man a
servant to the Queen, and who was his Countryman; Not knowing how to testify
his gratitude, he chanced one day to say to him, That his life was of greater
importance then perhaps he thought, and that the care which was taken of him
should be one day magnificently rewarded. These words were pronounced after a
manner that might make one judge, they had some extraordinary foundation, and
they caused in his Friend the curiosity of penetrating the Mystery they seemed
to contain. The Captain could refuse nothing to a Man, to whom he thought he
owed his life: And whether it were that the fear of death had inspired him with
some repentance of his crime, or that the Disease had disturbed his brain, he
paid with this secret the services he had received. This Friend told it the
same day to the Queen his Mistress, who was then at Madrid, and who lived in a
strait friendship with the Queen of Navarr.

At the recital of this horrible Plot she could not withold her tears; and
whilst the Captain was curing, and ordering all things with the King that
concerned his Enterprise, she made notice of it be given in Bearn, and at
Bourdeaux, where the Queen her Mother was at that time. The Attempt having
failed in this manner, the Queen, conducted by the Duke d' Alva, went to meet
the Court of France at Bayonne: This Court was divided into two Factions,
almost as great enemies, one of the other, as they were both one and the other
of the Hugonots their common enemies. Although they were both Catholics, one
of them did more especially attribute to themselves this quality: It was that
which was headed by the Friends of the Duke d' Alva, the first Authors of the
Bearnish Conspiracy. And as they were already laying the foundations of the
League, that appeared ten years afterward, they lived in a perfect
intelligence with the Spaniards, but it was not so with the other Faction,
which was that of the King, and of which Catherine de Medicis was the chief;
Arbitraryness, and Independency were the only end of all this Woman's Actions;
she knew, that all inward commerce with the Spaniard was but so much slavery,
and she put no other trust in the King her Son-in-law, and his Ministers, then
that to which she was obliged by necessity, and her Relation to them.

In the mean time, how reserved soever she were, the Accomplices of the Duke d'
Alva having a familiar intercourse with her upon account of some other
intrigues, turned so many Stones, and set so many Spies about her at this
Interview at Bayonne, that at last they knew of a certainty that it was the
Queen of Spain that had ruined their enterprise; but, they could never
comprehend how this enterprise should come to her knowledge.

The Duke d' Alva could not believe that so young a Woman was capable of
venturing upon so bold and delicate an action.

The familiarity of this Princess with Don Carlos had always been suspected by
him, because he knew that Don Carlos naturally hated him.

He thought she had done nothing without advising with the Prince; and, as
there are but few g iefs so sensible, as that one feels for having done a
wicked Action to no purpose; He took so strong a Resolution to Revenge himself
on them, that at last he brought it about. Yet Don Carlos knew nothing of this
Conspiracy before the voyage of Bayonne; but, the thing being afterward
divulged, the Queen confessed the truth to him.

The Prince amazed at the horribleness of this villainous attempt, could not
hinder himself from saying, in the presence of Don John and the Princess of
Eboli, That he would one day cruelly punish those that gave such base Counsel
to the King his Father.

Mayerne Thurquets history of Spain.
The Duke d' Alva was known by all the World to be the Author of the Plot, and
the King did nothing without the advice of Rui Gomez, so that this threat could
regard none but those two Ministers; and, the Princess of Eboli having told it
to Rui Gomez her Husband, this favorite judged it was high time to begin to
fortify himself against the Authority which the Prince's age began now to give
him.

These two Ministers did equally share the favor of the Court, only with this
difference, that one might say, That the Duke d' Alva was the Kings Favorite,
and Rui Gomez the Favorite of Philip.

This concurrence had sometimes bred some difference between them, but their
common interest reunited them upon this occasion. The Duke d' Alva, who did
Soveraignly govern all Military Affairs, knowing the warlike inclinations of
his Prince, feared he would lessen his Authority upon the first beginnings of
any War, by taking the management of it into his own hands. And he was
persuaded that Don Carlos would never pardon him a business that was past
between them some years before.

Cabreras History of Philip the 2d.
The King had Assembled the States of Arragon, there to make his Son be
acknowledged lawful Successor to him in the Government of the Spaines.

In this Ceremony it being come to the Duke d' Alvas turn to swear Fidelity,
the Herald called him by his Name three times in vain. A moment afterward he
came out of his rank to acquit himself of his duty, and Don Carlos turned him
back very disdainfully, but the Duke excusing himself upon the multitude of
busiuess he was engaged in that day, by reason of his Office of Great Master;
the King obliged the Prince to accept his Submission. As for Rui Gomez, who
disposed absolutely of the Justice, and of the Kings Exchequer, he was afraid
least the Prince, who naturally loved to give, should himself meddle with
bestowing Favors, of which nothing should remain to others, but the merit of
executing them. He had been Governor to Don Carlos, and he could never satisfy
the King (to whose will he was wholly devoted in this employment) without using
the Prince with the same rigor, with which he himself used him. And, as this
austere carriage was the true cause of Don Carlos his antipathy to his Father,
it is necessary here to relate some particularities thereof, though perhaps a
little mean and childish Hugo Blasius, Dutchman, in his Acroma.
Don Carlos being hardly entered upon his Age of reason the Queen of Bohemia his
Aunt, who lived then in Spain, made one of her Pages, whom he loved above all
the rest, be severely chastised for a very light fault, and he being at that
very time extremely violent in all his passions, complained to her of it with a
great deal of eagerness, and this Princess having threatened to have him whipped,
if he would not hold his peace; Don Carlos, whom one could not more sensibly
injure, then in using him like a child, was so out of pat ence at this
threatening, that he gave her a box on the Ear. As soon as she had left him, he
began to perceive what he had done* and was much disquieted about it; when the
Steward of his Household presented himself before him, melted into Tears. Don
Carlos, to whom al extraordinary objects were susp cious* in the condition he
was in, asked him the Subject of his Tears, and knew by him that his Father had
known his crime, and had condemned him to death: Those that were present with
him observed, that he received indeed this News with some astonishment, but
yet without any other mark of fear, then asking* Whether there were no pardon
to be had for him? One went presently to the King to demand it, and came back
with this Answer, That he had obtained it: but, that he should not be quit
without losing the Hand wherewith he had struck the Queen. It would be a fine
thing indeed (cried he briskly at this Answer) to see a one-handed King. He was
told, That it was happiness enough for him that the King contented himself with
this punishment: But, a person of the Company having represented to him in
private, That if he submitted himself to some voluntary Correction, his Father
might be touched with some pity for him; he approved that Counsel, and sent to
pray the Cardinal Spinosa to come and Whip him; a thing, which without that
consideration, he would never have done.

Some years afterward, just upon his recovery from a Sickness he had had, the
King having taken him aside to reprove him severely for some fault, Don Carlos,
who thought himself blamed wrongfully Dicos y echos, di Philippe 2.
was so livelily touched with what his Father said to him, that he fell into a
relapse of his Fever at that very moment.

So harsh an Education had accustomed the Prince to see all his Sentiments and
Inclinations contradicted; and, as he was of a disposition directly opposite to
that of his Father, he did not ordinarily govern himself after such a manner,
as the King could have desired. This had often obliged Rui Gomez earnestly to
desire that he might be excused from waiting on him any longer; he was afraid
that the King would at last, as Fathers ordinarily do, accuse him of the little
comfort he had in his Son; but, this Favorite knew not, that those people,
who, like his Master, think themselves very wise, and who brag of constancy
above all other virtues, would a thousand times sooner condemn their own
Children, then blame a Man they have once chosen; and, are not so much afraid
of appearing unfortunate in their Families, as unskilful in their judgments.

Rui Gomez seeing the Kings obstinacy, to continue him in his charge, had used
Don Carles with all rigor imaginable, as it were to take away all occasion of
blaming him for his ill conduct, so that he judged well that he was to fear all
things from the resentment of his Scholar; and, being solicited by his Wife,
who, under pretense of taking care of her husbands safety, revenged her
despised fav urs: He did all things possible to obl ge the Duke d' Alva to
join himself with him against Don Carlos, letting him know, how the Prince had
threatened them both.

What earnestness soever the Princess of Eboli showed to have her part in this
combination; her Husband, who had some suspicion of the sincerity of all her
officiousness, did not think it fit to entrust her with so important a secret.
She told him not all she thought she knew concerning the correspondence betwixt
Don Carlos and the Queen. But Rui Gamez, who had a very piercing wit, making
reflection in private upon what she had told him, had soon divined the rest.
But what Idea soever he attempted to make in his mind concerning this
correspondence, he could never form so perfect a conception of it, as when he
thought there was some love at the bottom. A thousand things upon which he had
not reflected at the time when they were done, came then into his memory. He
remembered how he had observed, that when the Queen was spoken of in Don Carlos
his presence, that Prince looked upon those that spoke of her, as if he had
feared, lest they should observe him at that time, and lest that they said of
her had been only to try him. In other occasions, where it seemed, that all
the company disputed who should praise the Queen best, Don Carlos praised her
not at all in his turn, as the others did: and when he must necessarily speak
of her, he was always afraid of saying too little, and his mouth not accustomed
to disguise the sentiments of his heart, could ill do a thing it was ignorant
of. Rui Gomez considered again, that though the Prince had no consideration for
all other women, yet he appeared before the Queen with a certain sweetness and
complaisance, that never belied it self, and that rendered him incapable of
being known to those that were acquainted with his humor. In fine, it was not
hard to believe, that the mavelous beauty of that Princess, from which the
most insensible were forced to turn away their eyes, and against which the
oldest and wisest men of the Court had much ado to defend their reason, should
make upon the heart of a young Prince, who saw her familiarly every day, the
impression it made upon all other.

Rui Gomez was confirmed in his opinion, by communicating it to the Duke D'
Alva, from whom he thought not to hide it. And as it ordinarily happens, that
when one has discovered one part of a secret, the desire one has to know the
rest, makes one endeavor to Divine it, they began to doubt at that very time,
that the Queen answered Don Carlos his passi n. This passion at first flattered
their animosity, they were glad for some moments that they had in their hands
an infallible way of revenging themselves upon this Prince, by discovering his
Love to his Father: But afterward coming to make reflection upon the King's
jealous humor, and upon his natural cruelty, they considered the strange
extremities, to which apparently it would carry him, and were stricken with
horror at that thought. How redoubtable an enemy soever they had in the person
of Don Carlos, they intended not to attaque his life, nor ever thought
themselves capable of such an intent. No body becomes wicked all at once; and
it is not for all sorts of Souls to resolve upon a great piece of villainy the
first time it comes into their thoughts. Vice is arrived to by degrees as well
as Virtue.

These two Ministers apprehended above all things, lest the Queen should
preoccupy her Husband's mind about the affair of Bearn, so that afterward he
would not believe the truth. They judged, that in the inquietude the King was
in, to know how this enterprise had been discovered, he would fix himself upon
the first opinion should be given him of it. This Prince even desperate with
the ill success of his design, looked no more upon the Duke D' Alva with so
favorable an eye as he was wont to do, and perhaps meditated in his own heart
his open disgrace, thereby to discharge himself of the blame of this
conspiracy. To avoid this blow he was forced to discover to him the truth; but
because the end of this discovery was to convince the King, that it was not
through the Duke D' Alva's fault that their attempt had failed, the Duke did
not judge it convenient to speak to him himself. Rui Gomez was not much less
suspected th n he in this affair: he had almost as great a part in it as the
Duke. They thought then that they had need of some third person to render them
that good office: and finding none so proper for their pu pose as Antonio
Perez, the Secretary of State, they resolved to engage him in their
intelligence. This man, who had no interest to hurt either the Prince or Queen,
appeared to them difficult to be gained. Nevertheless Rui Gomez presumed enough
upon his address, to attempt the bringing it about. The thing proved much
easier to him then he thought. Perez was passionately in love with the Princess
of Eboli, and till then he had never been able to obtain any thing of her. He
asked at first whether she were of the secret; and being told that she was not,
after all the refusals he knew he must make, he engaged himself to do all they
desired of him. This dextrous Lover knew how furious the Princess was; he
doubted not but she was almost desperate, that an intrigue of that consequence
should lie hid from her, and knew she was capable of doing any thing to
gratify him that should discover it to her. Rui Gomez went presently to give
an account of his negotiation to the Duke D' Alva, proud of his good success,
and the most contented man in the world to have given his Wife's Gallant an
infallible way of corrupting her. And Perez knew so well how to make use of his
Secret with his Mistress, that he made her buy it as dear as he pleased.

In the mean time the Queen, who proved great with child at her return from
Bayonne, lay in of the Infanta Katherine Michaelle, her Second Daughter, who
was since Duchess of Savoy. The Ministers, who knew the power the Queen's
beauty gave her over her Husband's mind, thought fit to take the time of her
lying in to justify the Duke D' Alva, that so they might give the King the
leisure of forming a resolution upon that they, intended he should know, before
he could have time to talk with the Queen by her self. The charge Perez had of
Foreign Affairs, gave him often opportunity of entertaining his Majesty in
private. On the morrow morning he brought in the discourse of the Conspiracy of
Bearn, upon this account, that they had heard, that the Queen of France seemed
to be very angry at it, and that she began to revenge her self for it in
favoring the Rebels in Flanders, who were then in the first Fits of their
Fury. At fi st he confessed to the King, that he had a long time hesitated to
discover to him what he knew, concerning the ill success of this enterprise,
what obligation soever lay upon him to do it; but that after having well
thought upon it, he believed he could not without a crime continue to be
silent: After that he recounted to him exactly that which the Duke D' Alva had
learned at Bayonne, concerning the manner in which they had been discovered; he
added the discourses which Don Carlos had had upon this business, in presence
of Don John and the Princess of Eboli, against those that were concerned in it;
and he ended, in praying the King to pardon him the secret, he had till then
made him of those things, he could not tell him, without offending in some sort
the Two Persons of the world, who, after his own, ought to be most sacred in
his Subject's hearts.

This discourse put the King's mind into an extraordinary perplexity; and
though as yet he did not suspect the Queen of any thing, his love made him find
the union of sentiments, which by this Affair appeared to be between her and
Don Carlos, very strange. His mind possessed by this first motion of jealousy.
made him look with indifference upon the attempt they had made upon his
Authorit^; and the care of his Grandieur, which was so natural to him upon all
other occasions, gave place, for this once, to a more sensible and more
delicate consideration. He observed then for the first time his Son's assiduity
about his Wife, and he remembered they had been a long while together destined
for each other; but he came presently to himself, and considering the virtue
and courage of the Queen, he wholly condemned all such weak suspicions. She had
already given other marks of the love she conserved for her Country. Some time
before, the difference of the Precedence of the Two Crowns having been decided
at Rome in favor of that of France, she could not so well dissemble the joy
she had of it, but that she let go some small testimony of her mind. Her first
Lady of Honor would have represented to her, that she ought to be more
concerned in the discontent of her Husband upon this occasion. But the Queen
answered her, That as she did not wonder at the King's grief, so neither ought
he to wonder at her joy; and that for her part she was glad to have all the
world know, Father Hilarion of Cossa, in his Elogy of this Queen.
that the House out of which she was issued, was better then that unto which she
had allied her self. The King making reflection upon this discourse, was fully
persuaded, that what she had done against the enterprise of Bearn, proceeded
from the same principle of affection for her Kindred; and he considered this
horrible enterprise, in which Don Carlos seemed to desire to outvie the Queen,
as a generosity pardonable in so young a man.

Yet though he was willing enough to be at quiet in this point, he resolved to
have a clearer knowledge of their commerce for the time to come; but he thought
there was no other jealousy mingled with this resolution, then that he ought
to have of his Authority. He made great changes in the most important Offices
of the Court, that so he might bestow upon the Princess of Eboli the first of
all those of the Queen's household, without making appear any affectation in his
choice. The familiarity this woman had maintained with Don Carlos, ever since
her Husband had been his Governor, rendered her fitter then any other to
penetrate into his secrets. This consideration, joined to that she had already
reported of the threatenings he had made in her presence, contributed as much as
the favor of Rui Gomez, to make her be chosen by the King for this employment.
Don Carlos, who thought still that she loved him, ever since that which had
past between them, was not in the least disturbed at her new promotion; and the
Queen, who knew that her Husband had too many friends in France, to be ignorant
of what she had done, was no way surprised by all this change of Offices. She
imagined the reason of it at fi st, and Don Carlos trying to re-assure her, in
answering for the Princess of Eboli, the Queen pressed him to tell her, from
whence came the great confidence he had in that Woman? but he could never get
leave of his modesty to satisfy her demand. Yet he perceived afterward that
he was deceived, when he saw how carefully the Princess of Eboli watched them.
And he not daring to complain of the inconvenience he received by her presence,
she pleased her self wonderfully in tormenting this poor Prince. She feigned to
have more friendship for him then ever. Never failing to wait upon the Queen,
wheresoever she were, as soon as she knew that he was with her, and she made as
if it had been her that drew her thither. But though this Woman's vigilance was
incredible, the Queen and Don Carlos found a little while after an opportunity
of entertaining one another in particular. The King, who was as much busied
about his Escurial, as one may imagine, by the fearful expense he was a^ for
it, invited the Queen to go see the beginnings of the Proud Structure he was
raising, to be an eternal Monument of the Victory of St. Quintin. All that
renewed in this Princesses soul the remembrance of a Battle, that had been the
fountain of all the misfortunes of her Life ought not apparently to be very
pleasing to her.

Nevertheless, she saw the Preparations tha were made for immortalizing the
memory of that unfortunate day, with all the cheerfulness and expressions of
contentment the King could have desired of her, or that he had in himself. It
was in this place that the Princess of Eboli left the Queen and Prince alone
with the King, and that the King having also left them, to give his order to
some of his Builders. Don Carlos, who could not longer live in such a
constraint, took that time to conjure the Queen to give him some assured means
of talking with her in private, when it should be necessary for their common
interest so to do. He pressed her to it in so touching a manner, that she
consented to him at the very first, seduced by that poor Princes despair; So
that they set themselves to find out some probable ways, but they all appeared
so dangerous to the Queen, that she resolved never to make use of them, how
easy soever Don Carlos would make her believe they were. The state of Affairs
stood thus, when the Marquess of Bergh, and the Baron of Monteigni, Deputies
from Flanders arrived at the Court. And as their Commission was very dangerous,
they had founded their principal hopes upon the report of the Princes
generosity, and the good nature of the Queen. To be unhappy, was enough to
deserve the Protection of that Princess, and he that was virtuous had merit
enough to pretend to the friendship of Don Carlos. The Deputies represented to
them the sad condition of the Nobility of Flanders, since the ill Offices that
the Cardinal of Cranvella, the principal Minister of the Duchess of Parma
their Governess had done them with the King. They exaggerated their innocence
and fidelity in the past troubles. They particularly conjured the Prince not to
abandon so many of the Emperors bravest Servants, and the most dear objects of
his tenderest affections to the violent and precipitate counsels that the
jealousy of their Virtue, and the envy of their Glory inspired the Duke d'Alva
with, and, they assured him* that the report of his courage was the only
consolation they had in their misfortune.

Don Carlos, whose natural inclination for the War had till then been suspended
by the violence of his love, was extremely ashamed at the hearing of this
discourse, that he had never yet done any thing for the getting of Glory; he
was yet more animated by the Letters which the Deputies presented him from the
Count of Egmont: This Count summoned the Prince to make good the Promise he had
given him heretofore, to go in person into Flanders as soon as the War should
be there kindled. He represented the Affairs of those Provinces in so
favorable a disposition for Don Carlos, that the Prince resolved to make the
Government of them to be given to him, and hoped, when he should be there,
quickly to put himself into a condition of undertaking all that his valor and
ambition should counsel him, after that the troubles should be once appeased by
his presence. He had hardly well formed this resolution, when the Image of the
Queen presented it self to his imagination more lovely and charming then he had
ever yet seen her, and made him doubt whether he should ever have the force to
leave her or no; but, making a serious reflection upon the State of his
Affairs, he plainly saw, that all things ought to confirm him in his first
resolution.

At the beginning of their affection the extreme tenderness of the Princesses
Age, had not permitted her to hide from Don Carlos the esteem and pity she was
touched with for him; but afterward, time having made her wiser, and perceiving
that the testimonies of Friendship she gave him, as innocent as they were, did
yet nourish his Love; she represented to him upon all occasions the ill
consequences of this Passion, and the miseries to which it would expose them
both. How much soever he were possessed with it, he could not hinder himself
from acknowledging that she was in the right, and he durst not seem to take it
ill that she lived with him for some days after a more reserved manner then
ordinary. In so cruel a disturbance of mind, he thought, that he ought to make
one generous effort upon himself, to deliver this Princess from an unfortunate
Passion, that gave her so just causes of inquietude; And that he could not
better rid himself of it, then by a long absence, and a great deal of business;
He thought so indeed at first, but he quickly changed his mind at the presence
of the Queen and considering what was the pleasure of seeing her, he well
perceived he should never resolve to see her no more. In this thought he went
and gave her an account of what had passed between the Deputies and him, and of
the project he had formed. He asked her pardon a thousand times over, for being
able to think for some moments that he could live absent from her; but, the
Queen, who aimed at nothing but to cure him of his passion, obliged him*
notwithstanding his resistance to pursue his design of the expedition into
Flanders, and to make him resolve upon it the more easily, she represented to
him, That this Voyage would dissipate the illhumour the King was in, through
his suspicion of their affection; and that, so being less observed at his
return, and more considerable and absolute, by reason of the glory he would
doubtlessly acquire, they might live together with less inquietude. Don Carlos
partly persuaded by these reasons, but much more by the blind obedience he had
sworn to the Queen in all things, declared himself openly in favor of the
Nobility of the Low Countries, to the great scandal of the Inqu sitors, who
held them to be almost all infected with Heresy, and who had not yet forgotten
the business of Charles the Fifth's Will. He made the King be told, That if he
would give him the Government of these Provinces, he would be an werable to him
upon his Life for their O edience. It would be difficult to express to what a
degree Rui Gomez and the Duke d'Alva were alarmed at this design.

The Authority that an employment of that consequence was like to give to the
Heir of the Crown, appeared to them to be their evident ruin. They judged,
That at his return from this expedition, in which he would infallibly have good
success, this Prince would be his Fathers first Minister, and that by
consequence they must depend upon him.

The Duke d'Alva above all, who had the same pretensions with Don Carlos,
engaged Rui Gomez, who was more familiar with the King than he, to make him
consider, How much this enterprise would raise his Son above him in the hearts
of the Flemmings.

Perez, without seeming to act by consent with them, put him also in fear of
the strait League which Don Carlos would doubtless make with France, by the
means of the Queen, if he were once Master of the Low Countries.

These Advertisements made all the impression they were capable of making upon
the mind of a Prince naturally jealous of his Authority, and fearful of his
Sons Ambition.

The King thought no more of any thing, but how to refuse Don Carlos with a
good grace; and so, that he might not take his refusal for an affront.

He made him be told, That he granted his Request; and, that he was ravished
that they had both happened upon the same intention, but that he was resolved to
go himself, and establish him in Flanders, and that they would shortly go away
together for that design: that it would not be handsome for him to live
securely in Spain and in the mean time to expose his only Son to the accidents
of so fu ious a Rebellion; and that he would share the danger with him, and
afterward let him reap all the Glory.

The noise of this Voyage was immediately spread abroad into all parts, by
reason of the preparations the King made for it to deceive Don Carles; yet no
body could believe it.

In the mean time, how groundless soever this noise appeared, it filled the
minds of the Rebels, yet wavering with terror; and the King, to confirm it more
and more, made so considerable an Expense in Equipages, that even Bergh and
Monteigni, who had laughed at it till then, cu st no longer doubt of its t uth.
The Queen and Don Carlos were at first cheated by appearances, as well as the
others, but they undeceived themselves sooner then any.

When the Equipages were finished, the King, who saw that people would soon be
disabus'd, if he began not his Journey, could find no other expedient to excuse
his stay, but the feigning to be sick. This pretense wrought its effect pretty
well in the Countries afar off; but, what care soever he took to make his
sickness be believed in his Court, and what constraint soever this poor Prince
brought himself under, to live after a manner, that might confirm the opinion,
he had a mind to give of himself, he could never deceive his Wife, and his Son.

In this conjuncture, one day that a great deal of company that had been with
the Queen, and had discoursed a long time about the Kings Voyage into Flanders,
were gone out, Don Carlos, Don John, and the Princess of Eboli being left alone
with her, at first they made an observation altogether, How Courtiers do often
torment themselves to divine the Causes, and effects of that which shall never
be. After having some time laughed at those that had spoken of the Voyage, Don
Carlos came insensibly to laugh at the Voyage it self, and at the violence the
King did himself to counterfeit the sick Man; He said, That Charles the Fifth
had made Voyages enough for himself, and his Son too, and that the King would
repose both for himself, and his Father. The Queen did not hear these words,
because she was obliged to talk privately with some persons that had business
with her.

In the mean time, while Don John, and the Princess of Eboli talked softly
together, Don Carlos in a pensive posture set himself to make a little Book, in
which he wrote these words in Capital Letters upon the first page, Brantome in
his Philip the 2d.
The great and admirable Voyages of King Philip; and in every one of the other
pages of the Book he wrote one of the following Titles, The Voyage from Madrid,
to the Escurial, The Voyage from the Escurial to Toledo, from Toledo to Madrid,
from Madrid to the Aranjuez, from the Aranjuez to the Pardo, from the Pardo to
the Escurial. And after this manner, he filled the whole Book with the Kings
Voyages to his Houses of Pleasure, and to some of the greatest Towns in Spain.
The Queen could not keep her self from laughing at this imagination of the
Prince, how dangerous soever she thought it; but as she read this paper, one
came to tell her, that the King was newly fallen into a swoon, and that he was
very ill. At this news she had only the leisure to recommend the Book to Don
Carlos. The Prince, who would needs follow her, as soon as might be, contented
himself to throw it into a little Closet, of which he shut the door after him.
He knew not that the Princess of Eboli had false Keys to all the Queen's Locks.
He was hardly out of the room, but she seized upon his writing; and when she
had seen what it was, she was extremely glad to have in her hands so
considerable a means of prejudicing him in the King's mind. The first thing she
thought of, was, how she might do to keep this Paper without any ones knowing
that she had it. She doubted not, but the Queen had seen the consequence it
might be of, and that she would seek it, as soon as she should be come back.
For this purpose, without losing a moment of time, she caused another little
Book to be made, in all points like that of Don Carlos's, and which contained
the same things. She made the Prince's writing to be perfectly well
counterfeited, and put that false Book in the place of the true, which she gave
her Husband. The Queen, at her return, having found this counterfeit writing in
the same place, that Don Carlos had told her, was in so great haste to burn it,
that she threw it into the fire, almost without reading any thing in it, no
wise doubting this cheat.

In the mean time, the King's dissembling was turned into a reality. At his
coming to himself out of the swoun he had been in, he was found to have a
strong Fever, which soon changed it self into a regular Tertian Ague: but
people gave less credit to his sickness when it was true, then they had done,
whilst it was but feigned. The Rebels of Flandeos seeing that this report had
lasted so long, doubted no more but that it was a trick of that Princes policy.
And in that opinion they pursued their designs with more heat then before.
This news redoubled both the Kings melancholy and his sickness. Don Carlos
seeing that the instances he should make to be sent into Flanders would but
disquiet him more and more, would not renew them; but his Father, who thought
him not so discreet, and who saw him uncessantly by his bedside, took his
assiduity for a dumb solicitation; yet this assiduity had other reasons: The
Queen never abandoning the sick man, Don Carlos could not see her any where
else but living in his presence with great circumspection, and not daring
almost to speak to one another before him. Don Carlos suffered very much by
this constraint, and their interests received a considerable prejudice by it:
In so delicate a conjuncture, they had a great many advices to give one
another, and a great many measures to take by consent. There was no hopes that
the K ng would be cured of a long while, and the Physicians assured them, that
his Ague would be of a great length. The Queen and Don Carlos judging, that
there would be too much danger in writing to one another, resolved to choose
some faithful person, to whom they might safely tell what they would have one
another know. The Prince, who thought that his Uncle Don John had been their
very good friend, cast his eyes upon him, to honor him with this confidence:
But the Queen thought, she had seen diverse times in the eyes of this Uncle,
something that spoke to her of Love; and she had observed some kind of
officiousness in the Princess of Eboli for this same Don John, that showed
there was some intelligence between them. These considerations obliged the
Queen to make Don Carlos change his design, yet without acquainting him with
her reasons. The Prince had not dared to propose to her the Marquise of Posa,
his Favorite, because she knew him not so particularly as she did Don John.
This Favorite was the most accomplished of all the Noblemen, who had been bred
up in the quality of Children of Honor, or Companions to the young Princes.
Although he had a great deal of vivacity, he was one of those naturally regular
Souls, equally capable of force and moderation. Don Carlos, who had an
excellent faculty of discerning, had at first remarked a character of mind, so
rare amongst young people. The Marquis was no less charmed with the ardour that
Don Carlos testified for all great and noble things; and they had formed for
one another an affection, hardly enough to be found between a Prince and a
Courtier, because it was founded upon nothing, but the mutual admiration of
each others virtue. And as there is no Personage at Court more hard ot
dangerous to act, then that of Favorite to the Heir of the Crown, the Marquis
had entreated Don Carlos to make the least noise he could of the privacy,
wherewith he was pleased to honor him. So that though they lived in a perfect
union, there appeared almost nothing of it in public, only that the Prince
found his conversation much more agreeable then that of other people, and all
the world did the like. The mystery they made of their friendship, rendered this
Favorite more fit to serve the Queen and Don Carlos upon this occasion. And
not being known to be so much devoted to the Prince, as indeed he was, the
discourses he should have with the Queen would be much the less suspected. But
she, knowing that Don Carlos was easily to be deceived, would het self examine
the Marquis of Posa, before she would open self to him. The first time she met
him, at the King's Apartment, under pretense of some command she had to lay
upon him, she found the means of engaging him in a particular conversation. His
prudence appeared to her so great, that she was even charmed therewith. He was
not less taken with the Queen's wit; and his natural moderation was never of so
great use to him, as upon this occasion. Considering the manner in which this
Princess made her self known to him in this discourse, which was heightened by
the luster of her beauty, and her charming sweetness, any other man, that had
not been so absolutely Master of himself as he was, would doubtless have fallen
in love with her. But though he did not do so, they could not hinder one
another in the rest of the commerce they had together, from conceiving for each
other all the esteem and friendship they both merited.

We are always apt enough to believe, that people divine those secret
sentiments, that are truly ours; but we fear not being suspected of those we
have not. The Queen, who troubled her head about nothing, but hiding those that
Don Carlos had for her, and who had none for the Marquis of Posa, but what were
very consonant to reason, took not so much care as she ought to have done to
conceal them. She feared not being suspected of having any criminal ones for
that Favorite. The Marquis, that he might answer her goodness as he ought, was
often engaged to show more eagerness for her service, then the exact rules of
Prudence would have permitted to be seen. And as they we e neither of them
without enemies, this carriage quickly made a noise in the world. But they not
imagining it would so do, because they were conscious of their own innocence,
hardly took any notice thereof.

In the mean time the King was cured, and the Queen proved with child. At first
he was extremely glad of it, whether it were out of the hopes of having another
Son besides Don Carlos, or that as yet doubting of the perfect establishment of
his health, this greatness appeared to him to be an assured mark of it; but his
joy was not of long continuance.

The Ministers, who were afraid of the secret favonr of the Marquis of Posa,
ordered the matter so, that the Queen's commerce with this Marquis came quickly
to the knowledge of the King. This suspicious Prince, at the very first notice
thereof, had his mind troubled with jealousy; and not finding his reckoning in
some account of time, he was pleased to make upon the state of his Wife's
greatness, Mayerne Turquett, in his History of Spain.
did not stick to think the Marquis guilty of a crime, that would have drawn
upon him more envy then all his virtues. This thought made a strange disorder
in his heart. All the graces both of body and mind, that nature had so
liberally bestowed on this unfortunate Favorite, and that were capable of
touching the most barbarous Soul, rendered him by so much the more odious to the
King, as that Prince considered no more all those precious Talents, but as so
many criminal charms, that had seduced his Wife's heart. Nevertheless, how
dangerous soever this disposition of the King's mind were, perhaps his reason
would have returned to him, had it not been for a thing that happened at that
very time, and which made him fully believe, what he did but suspect before.

Mr. Mezeray, in his Great History.
Among other public testimonies of joy, that were made for his recovery, there
was a magnificent Tournament, in which every Cavalier was obliged to declare
himself for some Lady of the Court, and to wear her colors. The evening before
this great day, the Marquis of Posa happening to be in the Queen's chamber, which
was full of company, she made him name to her all the Ladies, that had Knights
to defend their beauties. The Prince and Don John were the only men that could
declare themselves to be hers; and they not having done it, perhaps through
fear of discovering something of what they had in their Soul, it so fell out,
when they had done speaking, that the Queen was the only person that had no
body to run for her. She observed it her self, and complaining of it in a
Jesting way, the Marquess, who knew he might use any sort of pleasantry with
her, told her with a wonderful serious look, That she must blame Nature for it;
and, that if she had been Beautiful like the others, she would doubtless have
found some Knight* as they had done.

All the Company applauded this Raillery, and the Queen answered him as
seriously, as he had spoken, That, to punish him for his insolency, she
commanded him to be her Knight, that so he might have the shame of serving the
least beautiful of all the Ladies.

This Gallantry was public, and all the People of the first quality at Court
were witnesses of it.

Yet the King could not keep himself from thinking, that there was some Mystery
in it, and that this conversation was an Artifice of the Queen, to give her
Lover an assured means of declaring himself for her with impunity: Yet, he was
not at first fully confirmed in this opinion; but on the morrow morning, when
he saw the Marquess enter into the Lists, carrying for his Device upon his
Shield a Sun in its highest elevation, with these words, Nothing can see me
without being burnt.

This Prince was fully persuaded of the sad thought that stuck in his mind: The
unfortunate Knight won the Prize of the first Courses, and though that were
ordinary enough with him, the King at this time took his address for an effect
of his Love; and, this imagination touched him so to the quick, that he could
not endure to let the Justing be finished: And he fe^gned that he found himself
ill, to have a pretense of breaking them off, and to hinder People from
perceiving the fury into which this innocent Spectacle had put him.

At first he resolved to give the Marquess of Posa his death in such a manner,
that neither he nor the Queen could be ignorant of its cause; but Rui Gomez,
whom he consulted about it, made him see the consequences of a business of that
nature, and that was like to make so much noise. He let him know the strait
Friendship that was between Don Carlos and this Marquess, and made him
comprehend that there was nothing that was not to be feared from the resentment
of the Prince, for the loss of a Person so dear to him, if once he came to know
the Authors of it.

He contented himself * Mayern Turquet.
to have the Marquess Stabbed some time afterward, one night in the Streets, as
he was retiring himself from Court; the better to keep the truth of the
business from being inspected, when the Assassines saw him dead, they feigned
in the presence of his Attendants, that they had taken him for another Man. The
Queen resented, as she ought, the loss of so perfect a friend, and she saw, at
the very first, all she was consequently to suffer by it. As for Don Carlos, he
could not at first discover the true cause of it, but afterward he considered
the little appearance there was, that a Man so well known, as the dead Man was,
should be taken for another: On the other side, he saw, that there was no body
but his Father that durst undertake such an attempt, so that he did not
hesitate no more then the Queen, to divine, who was the Author of it. In the
mean time they neither of them mistrusted, that it was of the Marquess that the
King had been Jealous, and imagining rather that which was like to have been,
then that which really was; they thought that this Favorite had been killed as
a Confident, and not as a Lover, and that they were discovered. In this
opinion, considering the Kings unmeasurable passion for his Wife, his aversion
for the Prince, and his natural inclination to shed blood, they judged
themselves lost.

And they thought, that the King being well assured that they could not escape
his vengeance, had begun by this Assassinate, that so he might make them feel
it the longer.

There is nothing so secret in Princes Courts that is not discovered by some
people, which one does not distrust. Don Carlos much about this time, sitting
down one day at the Table, found under his Plate a Paper, which contained these
words.

There are some very just Counsels which yet are not given, but one comes not
out of desperate affairs, without extraordinary resolutions. Those, in whom
Heaven has put such qualities, as are to render a great many others happy,
besides those that possess them, are obliged to accomplish their destiny, which
prevails over all other Obligations. Generous Souls perish not but for want
of having an opinion bad enough of the wicked. That Patience, which abandoneth
the days of a Gallant Man to the violence of his Enemies, is weakness,
baseness of heart, crime, and not virtue. Humanity for those that have none, is
the most dangerous sort of folly.

In the mean time the Prince resolved to try one innocent way, before he would
have recourse to the utmost extremity. This way was, to renew with great
earnestness the request he had made to be sent into Flanders, where the state
of Affairs demanded a more present, and speedy remedy then ever; He did it in
terms, that made the King comprehend, that he would have what he desired, and
that there was no safety to refuse him; He judged it his best way to express
his mind in this absolute manner, for he thought, that if he were discovered,
he had nothing more to Husband, and if he were not, it might happen that the
King, solicited by his jealousy, and affrighted by this imperious way of
proceeding, would grant him any thing in the World to be rid of him.

This unfortunate Father, whose mind was more free to see the consequences of
his Cruelty, after he had satisfied it, was again fallen into his natural
timidity: He saw plainly that he must necessarily send an Army into Flanders,
and he was afraid of irritating Don Carlos his resentment, yet fresh for the
death of his Friend, if he refused him the Command of this Army, which he
demanded in such high terms.

Rui Gomez, who had found the King so resolute in the business of the Marquess,
was not a little astonished to see him so unresolved in an occasion of much
greater importance. The Interest which this Minister had in his Masters
welfare, made him look with dread upon the weakness of that Prince, who was
going to put the Arms into his Sons hands, wherewith he was like to have his
own Throat cut the first.

As there is no Reason so strong, as fear, to oblige the most unstable spirits
to determine themselves, the King was ready to resolve himself in favor of Don
Carlos.

Rui Gomez, who saw it well, knew not how to hinder it, but having a very
present wit, he be thought himself all of a sudden of that Book of the Kings
Voyages, which his Wife had found in the Queens Closet, written with Don Carlos
his hand, and which he had looked upon ever since as a Toy, which might yet
prodnce some great effect, if it were employed with discretion; And, now he
thought he had found the occasion of using it.

He told the King, That he thought himself obliged to let him know a little
thing, that till then he had not thought worthy of acquainting him with, but
which in the present conjuncture, would help him much the better* to guess at
the Genius and Sentiments of his Son.

The King* to whom this affair appeared of greater consequence then Rui Gomez
made show of thinking it, would needs examine the Book himself; and, knowing it
to be of his Sons own Writing, he entered into a profound thoughtfulness, in
which this Minister thought it best to leave him.

After that he was a little come to himself, from the first trouble of Mind,
into which so bloody a Raillery, made by two persons so dear unto him, had at
first cast him; his ancient suspicions of Don Carlos, his love for the Queen,
awakened themselves in his Soul with more violence then ever. He could not
comprehend that a Wife and a Son should divert themselves in that manner, at
the cost of a Father and a Husband that was their King, without living in the
most Criminal Familiarity: But, the Marquess of Posa coming presently into his
Mind, he could not believe that the Queen was in Love with them both,
especially, Don Carlos and the Marquess being so united as they were; and, he
concluded, that it must necessarily be, that one was the Lover, and the other
the Confident: yet, what effort of wit soever he could make, he could never
determine in himself which was the Lover. But, which soever of the two it were,
he still found that the death of the Marquess was but too just, and that Don
Carlos was equally culpable.

However the matter went, he would not authorize the Railleries his Son made
upon his manner of life, by giving him the means of leading so different a one
in Flanders.

If this Prince, who had yet done nothing, had the boldness to treat his
Father with so much contempt, what would he not have dared to have done, if
Fortune had been favorable to his ambition?

The King made him be told, That in the fearful disorder in which Flanders was,
he thought he could not send him thither, without exposing his life to
inevitable danger; but, that the Duke d' Alva should go thither with a powerful
Army within a short time, and that as soon as this Army should have rendered his
side the strongest, he should be free to do whatever he would desire.

This refusal fully confirmed the Prince in the opinion he had, that his ruin
was resolved upon, so that he rendered himself to the instances that the Rebels
of Flanders had been a long time making to him by the Count of Egmont and their
Deputies, to go and put himself at their head. They promised him, That if he
would grant them a few things, that were very reasouable, they would obey him
with more fidelity, then the Catholics obeyed the King.

Don Carlos doubted not, but that if he were once Master of this Revolted
People, the King would abandon to him the rest of Flanders, though it were but
to hinder him from possessing himself of it by force, as it would be easy for
him to do.

The Marquess of Bergh and Monteigni had several Conferences with him upon this
Project, and they took together so just and so solid Measures for the executing
of it, that they could not fail of success, provided, that the Prince conserved
to himself the liberty of Acting. It was that to which they exhorted him
principally, and if he had taken their Counsel, he had began his journey at
that very time. But, Don Carlos judged, that there would be too much rashness
in declaring himself after that manner, before he had established the
correspondency that were necessary for him: but, he promised them, that in the
mean time, he would make use of such powerful precautions for the safety of his
person, that he should be able to give them a good account of it. Mr. de Thou.
Besides, a Coffer filled with Fire Arms, which he made be set at his
Beds-head; he caused some little Pistols to be made, of a new Invention, to
carry always about him, without being seen. And that he might hinder himself
from being surprised in his sleep, he commanded a famous French Artist, who
workt at the Escurial, to make a kind of Lock for his Chamber that could not be
opened but on the inside, and he put every night under his Bolster two Swords
and a Case of Pistols.

Whilst this unfortunate Prince hastened perhaps his undoing, by the sole
opinion he had that he was undone; his Enemies forgot nothing to take from him
all ways of reconciling himself with his Father. The King had not yet seen the
Queen in private, since the death of the Marquess of Posa, and they feared that
all their labor would prove to be in vain, if he saw her again, and that she
would easily take out of his heart all that which they had put into it.
Although it might happen that what they feared should not come to pass, yet it
was possible that it might come to pass: And considering the consequence of
which the thing was to them, they ought not to put any thing to the hazard.

To take from this Princess the occasion of undoing in one night, that which
had cost them so much care and time, they bethought themselves of a means
which would appear ridiculous, if it had not succeeded.

Mayerne Turquet, La Planches History; La Places Memoire; Monsieur de Mezerai;
Le Laboureur; Diogenes, etc.
At the Voyage which the Court of France made along the River of Loire in the
time of Francis the Second, there ran a report, That his Servants sought out
little Children to bathe that young King in their blood, whom they feigned to
be troubled with the Disease which is cured by this strange remedy: Nay, and
there were some persons that went some days journeys before the Court, and who
examined carefully the children of the places where it was to pass, to observe
those that they found fit for the use which the Physicians were to make of
them. These unknown persons spread so general a fear in all their way, that all
the people thought no more of any thing, but how to hide from them that which
they pretended to seek. The Queen Mother having discovered the Authors of this
horrible report, made some of them be taken; They discovered at their death by
whom they had been set on; but, those which received their Confession, judged
it not safe for them to divulge it.

If the continual infirmities of the King made so extravagant a calumny be so
easily believed among his own People, it is not hard to judge of the effect it
produced in Foreign Countries, where those sorts of News always find more
credit then in the places where they are done. The King of Spain testified a
great deal of trouble about it. He was afraid that his Wife had some secret
disposition to this same illness, which is often an hereditary distemper. The
Small pox which she had had since that, was accompanied with some equivocal
accidents that were common with that infirmity. They resolved to make the King
believe, That she had had some others, much more dangerous then the former at
this last greatness. And as he had a mind very easy to be wrought upon in that
which concerned his health, they thought that if they strengthened this story by
the testimony of some persons not to be suspected, it would be enough to hinder
him from ever seeing his Wife again in private. The Princess of Eboli was to
give him the first notice of it* she was obliged so to do, by the fidelity she
had promised him, in the employment she had about the Queen. And that same
French-woman for whom Don John had formerly made appear some inclination, was
to confirm that which the Princess should say. This young woman was one of
those meddling spirits, born for the management of an intrigue; and she was
inconsolable, that all the favor she had with her Mistress, had never been
able to interest her in any important confidence. The Princess of Eboli
commanded Don John to counterfeit the Lover a second time, by that means
absolutely to gain to them this dangerous Person. This Prince, who found some
sweetness in troubling the Kings happiness, obeyed with great eagerness. But
the young woman, much offended by the coldness he had had for her, would not
believe him except he gave her some extraordinary assurances. Don John, in
haste to finish his business, did not stick to make her a promise of Marriage*
upon condition that she should tell the King whatsoever they would have her.
The thing succeeded much more easily then they had hoped. The King* whose Love
was already changed into indignation, ran blindly into the Snare they had laid
for him. The Duke d' Alva who had deferred his Voyage, to attend the Success of
this Artifice, went away for Flanders the day after. He took leave of Don
Carlos in terms that were conformable to the answer which the King had made to
that Princes last requests: And Don Carlos treated the Duke very ill for fear
of having his designs suspected, if he had appeared too calm in an occasion,
which ought to touch him so sensibly.

In the mean time this Prince received from all parts the best news he could
have wished for. The Prince of Orange and the Admiral de Chatillon, with whom
he was to consult upon all he had to do, encouraged and hastened him by their
Letters, whether it were to serve him or to undo him, God knows. The revolted
party in the Low Countries, absolutely confiding in his generosity, demanded of
him no conditions. But that which perfected his resolution, was, the assurance
of a considerable Fleet, which the Grand Signior was to send upon the coast of
Flanders, to favor all his designs. But as his principal hope was founded upon
this assistance, it is necessary to consider this business in its first
beginnings.

Mr. de Thou, Strada, etc.
At the time that Queen Mary was Governess of the Low Countries for the
Emperor her Brother, a certain Jew, that was a Portuguez by birth, named John
Miquez, for whom she had a very particular esteem, ravished in her Court a
young Lady of the first Quality, and of an extraordinary beauty. The King of
Spain, who protected the kindred of this fair person, having made the Ravisher
be driven out of all the States of Christendom, where he sought for a
Sanctuary, he retired himself to Constantinople, and from thence into
Caramania, to the Court of Selimus, eldest Son of Soliman the Magnificent. This
young Prince, who was confined to that Country by his Father, according to the
custom of their House, had no other care then how to pass the time as well as
he could in the midst of pleasures and divertisements, in expectation of the
Empire. Miquez, amongst other Talents, possessed the Art of diversifying these
pleasures after a hundred several manners, of which every one had a new and
particular charm. He knew how to give them that sweet point, which makes them
be felt with so much delight, and which is so easily blunted by an unskilful
hand. And having cultivated, by a long and curious exercise, the Genius he had
for that Science, he had carried it to a perfection infinitely beyond the
imagination of Vulgar. Swelled with pride for his skill in these rare Arts, he
doubted not, but he should in a short time have the first place in the favor
of a Prince like Selimus, who understood perfectly the worth of voluptuousness.
This man knew, that those services which make the greatest noise, are not
always those that are most sensible to the hearts of Sovereigns. It seems, that
those one renders them in public, are sufficiently recompensed by the glory
that follows them; but they alone can recompense those which are known by no
body but themselves. The success surpassed Miquez his hopes, and Solomon dying
in this conjuncture, the Jew saw himself by these glorious ways the declared
Favorite of the greatest Prince upon earth. This high degree of power quickly
gave him the occasion of satisfying the desire of revenge, which the
persecution that he had suffered had engraven in his heart against the King of
Spain. One day as he was in a debauch with the Sultan, that Prince having
admired the excellency of the Wine of Cyprus, the Jew fell a laughing at him,
for the passion he showed for a Liquor that grew out of his Empire; and he told
him that he ought to spare it more then he did, because he bought it. Selimus a
little netled with this raillery, swore that he would take Cyprus that very
year; and he added, striking the Jew upon the shoulder with his hand, that
because Miquez loved that mavelous Wine no less then he, he declared him,
from the time they were speaking, King of that Island, which yet, he said, was
but a small part of the gratitude he owed him.

At the time that all things disposed themselves for this enterprise, the Moors
of Granada were preparing that famous rising, which brake forth soon
afterward. They sent their Deputies to the Ottoman Court, to beg its
assistance. Miquez preferring the pleasure of revenging himself, before that of
making himself a King, undertook their business with so much heat, that he made
his Master resolve to send to their succor the redoubtable Navy that was then
Equipping, for the conquest of the Kingdom that was destined to be his. He had
conserved great correspondencies in Flanders, and he presently gave advice to
the Consistory of Antwerp of this important diversion. This Consistory, which
was the principal Council of the Rebels, having received at the same time the
news of Don Carlos his Engagement in their favor, sent word thereof to Miquez:
and to testify how much trust they put in the Prince, they sent him the Jews
Dispatches, and his Cipher, that so he might himself negotiate with him at
Constantinople, if he thought it useful for the common interest so to do. Don
Carlos desired, for the greater surety, that this Fleet, which was to take Land
upon the Coast of Granada, might be landed in Flanders. He wrote of it to the
Ottoman Court, and Miquez answered him, that the Bashaw of the Sea had a secret
Order to do whatsoever the Prince should command; whether it were that the
thing were true, or that they had only a design to make it believed, thereby
to engage Don Carlos, at what price soever it were.

About this time, one night, as he was at play with his Uncle, at the Queen's
Lodgings, they had some difference between them, in which Don John, who was
vexed at his loss, was carried by his passion to say some things against the
Prince, beyond the bounds of liberty that his Play could give him with the Son
of his King. Don Carlos, who knew himself sufficiently, answered him in few
words, with moderation enough; but yet in terms that seemed to reproach him
with the defect of his birth, to make him remember his duty. Don John touched
in so sensible a part, was outraged therewith to the point of answering the
Prince, Brantome in his Discourse of Philip 2d.
That it was true indeed that he was a Bastard, but that which comforted him for
it, was, that he had a better Father then he. This word drew out all Don Carlos
his patience: he treated his Uncle so rudely, that on the morrow morning there
ran a report, that he had given him a box on the ear. The Queen and the
Princess of Eboli, who were present, had much ado to hinder them from coming to
blows. The Queen especially, who was frighted with every thing in this
conjuncture, and as if she had had some secret presentiment of the consequences
of this quarrel, employed all her Authority to oblige them to make up the
difference upon the place: but it was not done with an equal sincerity on both
sides.

The King, to be faithfully instructed of whatsoever passed at the Queen's
apartment, had linked himself in a straight commerce with the Princess of
Eboli: This woman had obliged Don John to observe the Prince's actions more
narrowly then ordinary, ever since the death of the Marquis of Posa.

It was easy to Don John to acquit himself of this Commission. The Prince, who
though him his best friend, had told him something of his design in general
terms; but though Don John had forgot nothing to know the particulars of it, he
had not as yet been able to learn any thing of them. Yet since their
difference, the desire of revenge had made him so clear-sighted, that what care
soever Don Carlos took to furnish himself with Arms in secret, Don John,
Historia de D. Juan d' Austria.
what by address, and what by money, discovered it at the end. The King judged
well, that the Prince did not take all these precautions, to have them always
about him, he comprehended presently, that his Son must either have some design
to steal away, or to do him some violence. He knew not which of the two to
think, when Don Raimond de Taxes, Master of the Post Office, came to advertise
him, that a Frenchman belonging to the Queen, had demanded of him very
secretly three Horses, to be ready to go away at the beginning of the night.
This advice drawing the King out of the doubt in which he was, cast him into a
greater, which was, whether he should content himself to make the Prince be
watched, so that he could not possibly escape; or whether he should all of a
sudden make him to be arrested. But Perez bringing to him at the same time the
news of the Moors rising, which he had newly received; the King affrighted by
so many unhappy conjunctures, resolved to assure himself of his Son's person.

It was true, that the Prince's departure was resolved upon for that night: he
had received a few days before some news out of Flanders, that permitted him no
longer to delay. The Counts d' Egmont and de Horn, trusting to the innocence of
their intentions in their past carriage, and to the merit of their serve ces,
had delivered themselves into the hands of the Duke d' Alva, who made them be
put in prison, and a little while after cut off their heads. So manifest a
piece of treachery had cast the Rebels into despair, and their Leaders, seeing
there was no more safety for them but in their Arms, made Don Carlos easily
see, in acquainting him with these things, that it would shortly be too late to
help them. He wrote forthwith to Don Garcia Alvartz O^orio, who was to be the
companion of his flight, to come incontinently to him. The Prince had sent him
to Sevil, there to receive a considerable sum of money; but not having time to
make use of all the diligence requisite, he brought him Cabrera's History of
Philip 2d. Historia de Dom. Juan d' Austria.
but an hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. As Don Carlos retired himself from
the Queens lodgings, Rui Gomez walked with him, to give him an account on the
King's part of the news they had received from Granada. This Minister
entertained him so late, that the Prince seeing he had not night enough left to
go so far as he desired, before his flight could be discovered, thought it his
best way to put it off till the morrow. Rui Gomez retired himself, after he had
seen him in bed; but being ignorant of the change of his Mr. de Thou, Mayerne,
etc.
resolution, he set some of his most faithful and resolute men at all the
avenues of the Prince's apartment. It had been to be wished for the King's
justification, that Don Carlos had been taken in attempting to escape.

But when they had waited two or three hours, without seeing any appearance of
his coming out, the King resolved to pass on, not thinking that he ought to
hazard all things for a formality. Don John had observed the manner in which
his chamber door was shut, and whilst Don Carlos was yet at the Queen's
chamber, the King had commanded the maker of that extraordinary Lock, to spoil
the spring of it some how or other, that so it might no more shut so close, but
that it might be opened on the outside. Whatsoever this Workman could do, the
spring made a great noise in opening; but the Count of Lerma, whom the King
made enter first into the room, found the unfortunate Prince sleeping so
soundly, that he had the leisure to take away the Swords and Pistols that were
under his bolster, without waking of him. After this, the Count sat down upon
a Coffer that stood by his bedside, and in which Don John thought the Firearms
were kept. Then the King judging by the Count of Lerma's silence, that he had
done what he ought to do, entered himself into the Chamber, preceded by Rui
Gomez, the Duke of Feria, the Great Commander, and Don Diego de Corduba, all
armed with Swords and Pistols. The Prince being awakened with much ado by Rui
Gomez, as soon as he had opened his eyes, cried out that he was dead. The King
told him, That all they did was for his good. But Don Carlos seeing that he
seized on a Box full of Papers, that was under his bed, entered into so furious
a despair, that he was going to throw himself, all naked as he was, into a
great Fire*pan full of Coals, which the extremity of the cold had obliged his
servants to leave lighted in his chimney. They were fain to draw him from it by
force, and he appeared inconsolable, that he had not had the time to smother
himself in it. They presently unfurnished his Chamber, and in stead of so many
magnificent things, which they took out of it, they put into it, for its only
furniture, a scurvy Groundpallet. None of his Officers after that time ever
appeared in his presence. His Guards never let him go out of their sight*
Matthien his History of France. Mr. de Thou, etc.
They caused a mourning Suit to be made for him, and he was no more waited upon,
but by men clothed in the same dress, and who were unknown to him. This
unfortunate Heir of so many Crowns saw no more any thing about him, which did
not represent to his eyes the frightful image of death.

In the mean time the King saw the designs and intelligence of his Son by the
Papers which he had seized. He was astonished at the greatness of the danger he
had run; but, he was yet more touched, when amongst several Letters Mayern's
History of Spain, Duplex's History of France, etc.
of the Queens Handwriting he found one, which appeared to him the most
Passionate and most Amorous in the world. It was that which the Marquess of
Posa had carried to Alcala, and which Don Carlos would never be persuaded to
restore. As the Queen had written it in the first transport of her grief, for
the Mortal Accident that had befallen that Prince, she did not think any
consequence could be drawn from what she could say to a Man, whose life was
despaired of; or, that it could produce any other consequence then to make him
die more contentedly. So that she had abandoned her self to all her tenderness
in writing it, and had in it expressed the dearest and most secret Sentiments
of her heart, with all the violence that so lamentable an occasion could
inspire. Yet it was without any Passionate expressions that could interest her
honor, or so much as offend her Duty.

But the King drew very different consequences from it: The fury he conceived
for it was at first accompanied with so lively a grief, that it would perhaps
have bereaved him of his Life, if the desire of revenge (so natural in those
occasions) had not preserved it.

But reflecting presently in himself, That he was Master of those that had so
cruelly offended him, this agreeable thought made a barbarous joy succeed to
the rage he had in his Soul, which changed his tormenting despair into a
tranquillity full of horror. The same day Monteigni was clapped in prison, to
leave some time after his head upon a scaffold, and the Marquis of Bergh in
favor of Rui Gomez his ancient friend had leave to poison himself. The
intimacy of these Two Noblemen with Don Carlos was known to all the world.
They were both, as well as he, declared enemies of the Cardinal Spinosa
Inquisitor General, and this Enmity was enough in Spain to make a man suspected
for his Religion. They accused this Prelate to be the Author of all those
violent Counsels that the King had taken against their country, but the
Cardinal accused them themselves of having made several Packets of Calvin's
Catechismes he brought out of France, by the help of a Passport from Don
Carlos. All the passionate proceedings of this Prince, against the Inqu^sitors
about the will of Charles the fifth were not as yet forgotten. All these things
joined together did strangely dispose the people to believe the Innocent Prince
engaged in the new opinions, of which he had never so much as heard any body
speak; The King saw well that there was nothing but Religion that could make so
strange an action, as that he had done be endured. He doubted not but that with
these favorable dispositions, and the proofs he had of his Son's intelligences,
he could, if he would, Sacrifice him with impunity to his revenge. In this
belief, he put into the hands of the Cardinal Spinosa all the Originals he had
found in Don Carlos his Cabinet, excepting only the Queen's Letters. He
established the Inquisitors, Sovereign Judges between his Son and him; and he
protested, he would wholly refer himself to their Judgment. He knew that the
choler of that sort of people never dies, and that he should find their
resentment against the Prince as violent, after several years of interval since
their quarrel, as if it had been but a week before.

Although the King had made rigorous prohibitions Cabrera's History of Philp
2d. Hist. D. Juan.
to write of the imprisonment of Don Carlos into Foreign Countries, the news of
it was soon spread abroad. The most part of the Princes of Christendom begged
his pardon; the Empress especially wrote concerning it to the King her Brother,
with all earnestness imaginable. Her eldest Daughter had been promised a long
while before to the Prince of Spain. The King, who feared all that might give
more liberty and credit to his Son, had always deferred the accomplishment of
this Marriage. Amongst other pretenses of this delay, he made a report be
spread, that since Don Carlos his fall at Alcala, the Physicians did not think
he could ever have any children. This report passed for an Artifice, and the
Empress her self did in no wise believe it. In the mean time, it was so much
the easier to the King to draw this Alliance out into length, because Don
Carlos did not press it so much as he might have done. How advantageous soever
it were for his designs, he made a scruple of marrying a Princess that he could
not love. The Empress, who knew not the secret of his heart, could find but
this one Match worthy of her eldest Daughter: and not thinking the Queen of
Spain's death so near as it was, she did not foresee, that this Daughter was to
take the place of that unfortunate Queen, and that the King her Brother, as it
were by a kind of fatality, was to marry all the Princesses, that had been
promised to Don Carlos. The King, who saw further then she, took a particular
care to manage her upon this occasion, Crabrera's History of Philip 2d.
and to justify himself in her opinion. In the mean time this news cast the
Rebels of Flanders and Granada into a despair, that produced very bloody
effects: and they would yet have been more cruel, if the Turks had kept their
word; but Miquez judged not, that without the support of the Prince of Spain,
he ought to hazard the Ottoman Fleets in places so far from all possibility of
help, in case of disadvantage. He yielded himself to the opposition, that other
Ministers of that Court made against the continuation of his enterprise; and it
was changed into that of Cyprus, where he made known, by the mavelous
services he rendered, Cabrera's History of Philip 2d. Mr. de Thou, Strada, etc.
that all his Genius was not shut up within the Walls of the Seraglio; and that
the love of pleasure does not always render those that are possessed with it,
incapable of great actions.

In the mean time the Inquisitors formed the Process of the unfortunate Don
Carlos, with an incredible affection and diligence. Their ancient animosities
against him appeared so openly, that nothing but the interest of Religion,
which was mingled with them, could have made them be supported. Cabrera Hist.
de D. Juan.
They sent to look among the Archives of Barcelona, for the criminal process
that Don John the second of that name, King of Arragon* had caused heretofore
to be made against Don Carlos Prince of Viana, his eldest Son. They made this
Process be translated out of Catalonian into Castilian, to serve them all at
once, both for a Model and a President. The business was proposed to the
Inquisition, under the species of Lewis the Eleventh, Dauphin of France, and
King Charles the Seventh his Father. And all their opinions being the same, one
may judge of them by that of the famous Doctor Navarra, which is inserted
Cabrera in the History of Philp 2d.
in the History of Philip the Second. He decides, that a King, who discovers,
that the presumptive Heir of his Crown will go out of his States, ought to make
him be stopped by force, if his evasion can be a subject of division in the
Kingdom, and that the enemies of the State are in a capacity of drawing any
considerable usefulness from it; but especially if those enemies are Heretics,
and that there be the least reason to fear or suspect that this Prince favors
them. The Sacrifice that the King made of his natural affection, to the repose
of the State, was preferred by the Inquisitors* before the obedience of
Abraham, Mr. le Laboureur upon Castalnau, in his Chapter of Don Carlos.
They compared, all with one voice, this Prince to the Eternal Father, who had
not spared his own Son for the salvation of Mankind.

His Trial could not be long before Judges that were so well disposed. The sole
Letters of the Admiral de Chatillon, the Prince of Orange, the Count of Egmont,
the Consistory of Antwerp, and of John Miquez were sufficient to form his
Sentence; and Don Carlos was Condemned to perpetual Imprisonment. The
resentment he testified for this made all those tremble that had given the King
such Counsel, or that approved it. They thought that they should never escape
his vengeance, if he recovered one day his Liberty, and they had no rest till
they had utterly completed his ruin.

The Cardinal Spinosa remonstrated to the King, That there was Cage strong
enough for this Bird, Campana and Cabrera's Hist. Phil. 2d.
and that he would quickly be necessitated, either quite to rid himself of him,
or else let him fly.

The People, in whose opinion to be justified it is enough to be unfortunate,
testified every day more and more their Passion for the Princes being set at
Liberty. The King, who was afraid of some Sedition, durst no more absent
himself from Madrid; He judged, after a mature deliberation, that there could
not be any safety, neither for him nor his Ministers, in setting the Prince at
Liberty; and, that he could no way avoid all that he had reason to fear from
him, but by putting him to death. During some time, Mr. de Thou, le Laboureur
Mayerne, Duplex, etc.
they mingled in all he took a slow Poison, that was speedily to cause in him a
mortal languishing; they spread some of it upon his wearing Clothes, upon his
Linen, and generally upon all things that he could touch; but, whether it were
that his youth and good constitution were stronger then the Poison* or that
those persons that interested themselves in his life, obliged him to make use
of preservatives, this way did not succeed. They must then explain themselves
more clearly, and the unfortunate Prince was told, Matt. Hist. of France.
That he might choose what kind of death he pleased. He received this strange
news with the indifferency of a man, who loved something else more then his
life, and who feared the same destiny for the person he loved.

Though the Spanish Historians have spoken of the weaknesses and passionate
expressions of this Prince, thereby to blot his memory, and to justify his
Father; yet it is certain that there never came but one thing out of his Mouth
that could pass for a Complaint, which was, that the Queen having by force of
Money found the means of making him be commanded, on her behalf, to ask leave
that he might see the King; as one of his Guards came to him, to tell him, That
his Father was coming; Say my King (answered he) and not my Father. Mr. de
Mezerai in his great Hist.
The submission he had for the Queens Orders, made him resolve to fall upon his
knees before the King, and tell him, That he beseeched him to consider that it
was his own blood he was going to shed. The King answered him coldly; That when
he had bad blood, he gave his Arm to the Surgeon to draw it from him. Don
Carlos even desperate to have done a baseness without effect, rose up briskly
at these words, and asked his Guards Whether the Bath in which he was to die
were ready.

The King, whether it were the longer to feed his eyes with this barbarous
Spectacle, or that perhaps he was a little shaken, and sought how he might
handsomely render himself, asked him, If he had nothing else to say to him. The
Prince, who would willingly have redeemed what he had done at the price of a
thousand other lives, well perceiving that it was now too late to husband any
thing, either for him or the Queen, could not forbear answering once for all,
with all his natural fierceness; If some persons (said he) for whom my
Complaisance ought not to end but with my life, had not obliged me to see you,
I should not have been guilty of the Cowardice of asking you pardon, and I
should have dyed more gloriously then you live. The King retired himself after
this Answer, without showing any disturbance. Don Carlos put himself in the
Bath, Duplex Hist. of France.
and having caused the Veins of his Arms and Legs to be opened, he commanded
all that were present to withdraw. Afterward taking into his hand a Picture of
the Queen in Miniature, which he always wore about his neck, and which had
been the first occasion of his Love, he remained with his eyes fixed upon that
fatal Image, till the cold convulsions of death surprised him in that
contemplation, and his Soul being already half gone out of his body, with his
Blood and Spirits, he lost insensibly his sight, and then his life.

The time of his death is not precisely known: It is only known, that it
arrived a great while before it was published. There was a long Relation of his
Sickness printed, which they said was a Malignant Dysentery, caused by his
disorders*

The Grief of the People, and the despair of the Princes Domestics brake out
so loudly, that the most passionate Historians A Relation Printed at Madrid in
Spanish, and since at Venis in Italian. Campana Cabrera's Hist. of Phil. 2d,
etc.
have not dared to dissemble it. The Count of Lerma, whom the King had entrusted
with the oversight of Don Carlos, whilst he was in prison, had conceived so
extraordinary a Friendship for him, that he appeared inconsolable to the eyes
of all the Court. The King, to whom these regrets were but so many reproaches*
took that way he thought most certain to make them cease; He recompensed
magnificently all Don Carlos his Servants: He gave the Government of Calatrava
to the Count of Lerma, and made him Gentleman of his Bedchamber. It was well
seen that these Liberalities were not grounded upon any gratitude for the
affection they testified for Don Carlos; nevertheless the People diminished
nothing of their eagerness to honor this Princes Memory. And it being known
that the King designed to make his Obsequies with an extraordinary
Magnificence, the Town of Madrid demanded, that they might be permitted to be
at the Expense of them, and that all the care of performing them might be left
to them. Though the King foresaw that this Funeral would be accompanied with
Elegies, which would not be very honorable for the Enemies of the dead Man, he
durst not refuse their Petition. Cabrera's History of Philip the 2d.
The Historians of his time do particularly extol the tranquillity of mind, that
he made appear upon the day of that Pomp, when looking from a Window of his
Palace upon the disposition, and march of the Ceremony, he decided, upon the
place a difficulty, that was raised concerning the Precedence of the different
Councils of State that were there present. The two Sons of the Emperor that
were then at the Court of Spain were the close Mourners. When they were come
near the Church, Cabrera's Hist. of Don John.
the Cardinal Spinosa who went before them, immediately after the Body, took
leave of them, and retired himself, under pretense of a pain that took him in
his head. But as he was known for the most dangerous, and most irreconcilable
Enemy Don Carlos had ever had, there were several Voices heard crying round
about him, Cabrera's Hist. of Don John
That he could not suffer the presence of the Prince, neither dead nor living.
The first thing exposed to sight, was that famous Encomium of the Scripture for
a dead Man, Wisdom.
which was written in great Letters of Gold over the Church Porch. He has been
ravished from us, for fear least the Malice of the Age should have changed his
heart, and least his mind should have been seduced by flattery. All that an
ingenious grief can invent to ease it self, was employed in the proud Mausoleum
where this Prince was Interred. But, as all those Ornaments had a reference to
the Latin Inscription that served him for an Epitaph, it suffices to give the
sense of that Inscription, to make the Invention and design of the whole Pomp
be comprehended: Relazion de la Muerte y essequias del prencipe Dom Carlos.
To the eternal Memory of Charles Prince of the Spaines, of both the Sicilies,
of the Gauls, Belgic and Cisalpine, heir of the New World, incomparable in
greatness of Soul, in Liberality, and in love for the Truth. Thus it was that
the elevated Genius, and heroical inclinations of the unfortunate Don Carlos,
were at last represented under their proper names of Virtues, after having been
so long disguised by his enemies, under those of Vices.

During the time that the King kept Don Carlos his death secret, he resolved to
make the news of it be told to the Queen at the time she should be in Travel:
He hoped, that so sensible a trouble of mind, joined to that of her body, in
the condition she was in, would finish his revenge; but he quickly knew, that
she was better informed then he desired. And as she could not be ignorant that
Don Carlos had been sacrificed to his Father's jealousy, Mr. le Laboureur,
upon Castelnau, in his Chapter of Don Carlos. Mayerne, etc.
she did not at all constrain her self to hide the resentment she had of it. Her
just anger cast her Husband into new inquietudes. He thought, he had much to
fear from her wit and courage, but yet more from the extraordinary
consideration the Court of France had for her, and the straight correspondence
she held with the Queen her Mother.

A few months after the Prince's death, the Duchess d' Alva, who had one of
the chiefest Offices in the Queen's House, came one morning into her chamber
with a Potion in her hand. Mr. le Laboureur. Mayerne* MS. of Mr. Peirese, etc.
The Queen told her, That she was well, and would not take it. But the Duchess
going about to force her to it, the King, who was not far off, came in at the
noise of their contest: At first he blamed the Duchess for her peremptoriness;
but this woman having represented so him, that the Physicians judged this
remedy necessary for the Queen's happy lying in, he rendered himself to their
authority. He told the Queen with great sweetness, that because this Medicine
was of so great importance, she must needs take it. Because you will have it so
(answered she to him) Mr. de Mezerai, in his gr. Hist.
I am contented. He went immediately out of the Chamber, and some time after
came back, Mayerne Furqueit's History of Spain.

M. S. of Mr. Peirese, etc.


clothed in deep Mourning, to know how she did. But whether it were, that there
was some mistake in the Composition of the Drink, or that the extraordinary
disturbance the Queen was in, and the violence she did her self to take it,
gave it a malignity which it had not in its self; she expired the same day in
the midst of violent pains, and after several great fits of vomiting. Her Child
was found dead, Mr. le Laboreur.
with its skul almost quite burned away. She was then at the beginning of the
four and twentieth year of her age, as well as Don Carlos, and in the greatest
perfection of her beauty.

Fortune did so exemplarily revenge the death of these two persons, that it
would be unjust to keep the knowledge of it from posterity. The beauty of the
Princess of Eboli soon changed the confidence the King had in her, into a
violent love. Rui Gomez her Husband, as jealous of the confidences the King
made to his Wife, as of the favors she did the King, resolved to rid himself
of her; but the Princess having discovered his design* prevented it, by ridding
her self of him. S nce that* she kept Don John at a distance from the Court,
under pretense of diverse employments, but in effect, because he would have
treated her with that authority, that their long and familiar commerce had
given him over her; She made the Government of Flanders be given him, in hopes
that he would perish there; as he had done, if the courage and conduct of the
Prince of Parma had not saved him* In this conjuncture she was told, that he
had discovered the ill offices she had done him. The fear she had that he would
ruin her* in letting the King know all that* had passed between them, made her
resolve to show him some Letters of the Prince of Orange, that were of an
extraordinary consequence. They imported, That the marriage of Don John with
the Queen of England was concluded* and that the Rebels of Flanders had engaged
their word to acknowledge him for their Sovereign, as soon as this marriage
should be consummated, and that without any other condition, then Liberty of
Conscience. These Letters were given by Perez to the King, who presently knew
the Prince of Orange his writing; and as he abandoned himself to his fear in
the Princess of Eboli's presence, she took that time to tell him the answer
that Don John had heretofore made to Don Carlos, when he called him Bastard:
She also put the King in mind of the Pride* with which this same Don John had
received the acclamations of the Army of Granada, where the Soldiers, charmed
with some great action that he had done, cried out in his presence, This is the
true Son of the Emperor, She added his obstinacy to make himself King of
Tunis, and the loss of the Goulette, which he had suffered to be taken, to
revenge himself upon the King, for not favoring his designs. These diverse
reflections, joined to the pressing danger of the pretended Match with England,
did penetrate so far into the King's mind, that thinking he had not the least
time to lose, he found a way of making a pair of perfumed walking Boots be sent
to Don John, which cost him his life. Some time after it was discovered, that
the Princess of Eboli had on purpose made the Prince of Orange write those
Letters, which she said were intercepted, and which had been so fatal to Don
John. The King conceived so great a horror for this wickedness, that it
extinguished his Love. The Princess and Perez were confined to a Prison, there
to end their days. Perez afterward making his escape, spent the rest of his
life very miserably, in wandering through all the Princes Courts in Europe. And
last of all, Philip the Second himself, after he was grown old, among the
griefs caused him by so many disasters, was stricken with an Ulcer, which bred
an incredible quantity of Lice, by which he was even eaten up alive, and
stifled, when they found no more wherewithal to nourish themselves upon his
body. After this manner were expiated the ever to be deplored deaths of a
magnanimous Prince, and of the most beautiful and most virtuous Princess that
ever was. And thus it was, that their unfortunate Ghosts were at last fully
appeased by the Tragical Destinies of all the Accomplices of their Death.

FINI^

