A short Abstract OF THE REASONS Against passing the BILL of FORFEITURES, By
way of Inquiry.
Query 1. WHether it be not reasonable, that these Offenders should have the
same Benefit from the Act of Indemnity, as all other greater Offenders? Either
it is, or it is not: If it be, then the Intent of this Paper is answered, which
submits the active Men, and those who were Managers, and had profitable Places,
to refund their Pensions to the public Treasury: If it be not, (as all things
are most humbly submitted to the great Judgment of the Honorable House of
Commons) then indeed they must be contented quietly to submit to the Penalties
due by Law. But,

Query 2. Whether any Penalties be due by Law or not? Since the same Law, the
Ancient; Common, and Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which say, That an Act or
Statute made by King, Lords and Commons, is a Law to this Nation. Does also
say, That the Judges of England are the sole Interpreters of that Law; And that
their Interpretation and Judgment, though ever so Erroneous in it self, and
contrary to the Letter of the Statute, ought not only to be observed, but
reverenced by all inferior Subjects. And the same Law of England which says,
That an Officer omitting the Oaths, shall forfeit 500 l. Does also say, That
the King may pardon that Penalty before Information Filled, which is done
accordingly. Therefore,

Query 3. Whether it be consistent with the Goodness and Clemency of that
Honorable House, to take from them the Benefit of the Law? And to condemn such
a Number of Men, their Wives and Families, by a Bill of Attainder: For the Bill
does not Enact, That all Forfeitures, due by Law, shall be appropriated to the
public Use; but that all Officers who were not duly qualified, shall forfeit
500 l. right, or wrong, without a Trial. Either the Forfeitures are due by Law,
or they are not: If they are not, then this Bill amounts to an Act of
Attainder: If they are due by Law, then there is no prejudice to appropriate
such Forfeitures only as can be recovered by Law, which is all that is desired.

Query 4. Since it is most evident, that this is a Bill of Attainder that does
condemn a Number of Men which are not punishable by any Law besides itself;
Whether it will not introduce a President of very dangerous Consequence, that
may one day or other be severely used against us or our Posterity? Though ill
Men may be concerned now, yet the Case is the same, and good Men may be
concerned hereafter. What are the Laws for, but to guide and protect us? And if
a Law be defective, and ill things done under Umbrage thereof, our wise
Ancestors have corrected the Law, and not the Offender; and that not for the
sake of the Offender, but of themselves, and their Posterity, that all Men may
have fair warning. It is a Fundamental Rule, where there is no Law, there is no
Offense: And therefore if this particular Act does pass, it is hoped that care
shall be taken in this Case, (as it was in the Case of my Lord Strafford) that
the same shall not be made use of for a President against us, or our Posterity
hereafter. But to return,

Query 5. Why is it not reasonable that some of those Officers should reap the
Benefit of the Act of Indemnity, as well as other Offenders? Either these
Offenses are held to be greater than any other, or they are not: If they are
not, then no Reason can be assigned, unless that which is already answered. And
we cannot suppose that any person will maintain, That these Offenders are
greater than Dispensing Judges, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, the Quo
Warranto Lords, the Surrenderers of Charters, and the Subscribers of Addresses
and Papers for taking off the Test, etc. But,

Query 6. Whether the Judges at the Assizes did not openly declare, That all
Dissenters in any Commission who did refuse to act, should be returned into the
Crown-Office; For that the King had, by His Dispensing Power, left them utterly
without Excuse. Your Consciences was formerly your Excuse, say they, but now
you are free from such Pretenses: And those who refuse to accept of the King's
Favor, and to rely upon his Prerogative and Protection, shall be used as utter
Enemies to the Government. It Is not for you to question the judgment of the
Judges; They have given Judgment, and they will maintain it. What shall poor
ignorant Laymen do in this Case? They are forced, against their Wills, to
accept of Offices of Trouble and Charge on one side, and their Families must be
ruined for it on the other; so they are twice punished for the same Offense.
When a Prince positively commands the Service of His Subjects, and has the
Judges of His side, the Subject must obey; and in this Case the Dissenter must
either have have hazarded their Souls, or their Estates. It Is their Misfortune
to think that Unlawful, which others do not: But it is no Fault to refuse to do
a thing contrary to their Judgments. And, it is humbly hoped, whatever becomes
of the active busier Men, yet those who bore only Offices of Trouble and
Charge, as many Justices of Peace, who behaved themselves well in their
Stations, shall not be blamed for following the advice of their Council, who
did assure them, That what Opinion soever they themselves, or a Future
Parliament might have of the Judgment of the Judges, yet it would certainly
protect them until it was Reversed; And therefore an acceptance of the
Commission was the only way left, in that critical Juncture, to secure
themselves.

Query 7. Whether the several Commands, Declarations and Proclamations, by
Virtue, or in pursuance of the Powers and Authorities hereafter mentioned, that
is to say, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, December. 11. of the Four
Parliaments of King Charles II. 31 December. 1688. of the Convention, 22d of
January, of the King and Queen, 14th of February, and of the late Act for
Amoving Papists, That all Protestant Justices (of which Few were duly
qualified) should proceed in the Execution of their Offices, disarming Papists,
securing all suspected or disaffected Persons, and preserving the Peace of the
Country; Be not a tacit Confirmation of their former Proceedings? For the
Bishops, the old Members of Parliament, and His Majesty very well knew, That
the Dissenters could not receive the Sacrament, and take the Oaths, according
to the Form of the Statute. And yet they expected they should act; and if they
had not, no doubt they would have been esteemed by all as Enemies to the
Kingdom, and so they would have been in the Reign of the late King, therefore
there seems (with Submission) some reason to show them Favor in one Case, as
well as in the other; there is no doubt but this acting tended to the
preservation of this Government, and that may atone, in some measure, for their
acting in the last.

Query 8. Whether this Bill be designed as an Expedient to raise more Money,
and prevent Future Taxes upon the People? Or only for the Vindication of
Public Justice? If the latter, then the Exemplary Punishment of a few active
Men may answer that Design in this, as well as in all other Offenses: If the
Former, then the New Proposal for raising more Money toward the speedy
Reduction of Ireland by a general Tax upon all Offenders, seems more equal,
more safe, and more effectual for that purpose. Such a general Law may be so
penned, as to answer all the several Interests of this present Government: For
there are three Things which seem to be our Interest at this Juncture of Time.
1. To make as many Friends as we can. 2. To disable all our Enemies. 3. To
raise more Money, as a Fund, to carry on the War against France, by such a way
as may prevent Future Taxes upon the People. The way to make as many Friends as
we can, is to Indempnifie all those Protestants who behaved themselves
moderately in their respective Stations, continued to do this Duty upon the
change of the Times, for the Service of the present Government, and either have
already, or are willing to take the New Oaths, or a civil Test, and do all
other such Acts as shall be required for the Service of the Government. And
those who have been active and leading Men, and shall persist in their
Wickedness, (tho it is hoped there will be but Few) yet we may conclude, that
under all the long black Catalogue of Offenses, there cannot remain less than
4000, which at 1000 l. a Man, one Offense with another, will amount to Four
Millions, or at 500 l. will amount to Two Millions, to be levied upon Notorious
Offenders, utter Enemies to the present Government, the Discovery whereof is
our Happiness, and their Punishment our Security; so that by such a Bill, with
a Proviso of that Nature, we shall be sure to make many Friends to disable our
Enemies, and to raise a very considerable Fund, and prevent future Taxes upon
the People; and therefore we join Issue with the Irish Proposers, and wish them
good Success in their Paper: For, in that Proposal there is room for mercy, but
here there is room for none; that is equal and just, this alone would seem
unequal and partial, (since it is therein proved that those other Offenses are
punishable by Law, and this is not;) that may answer all the Ends of
Government, this can answer none.

Query 9. Whether it be not reasonable, and most consonant to the method of
Proceedings in Parliament, that such a Number (...) Men should have fair
warning by some Vote or Statute, That the Judgment of Judges shall not be Law,
before they are condemned and ruined with their whole Families? Those who are
guilty of buying and selling of Offices, have had fair warning by a Vote, and
the other Offenders must be sensible of committing a Crime against the great
Law and Custom of Parliament, which is Lex Terrae, as well as the Common Law;
and, it is conceived, they cannot so much as pretend Conscience in the Case: But
it is plain, that the Dissenters had all along refused the Oaths, and many
refused to act in any Commission, till they were frightened with the
Crown-Office on one side, and persuaded by their Council on the other side,
That the Judgment of the Judges was Law, till Reversed: Tho it might be
observed also, that the Members of the Church of England, and the Reverend
Bishops and Clergy did all acknowledge, not long ago, That they were sorry for
the late Persecutions merely upon the account of Religion, and that the same
might justly provoke our weak Brethren against us; and therefore let one
Failing be set against the other, and all true Protestants be at length united
against the Common Enemy.

Query 10. Whether there be not many true Members of the Church of England, who
would be involved in such a general Act of Attainder? Some having by a bare
Neglect, or by Sickness, or other extraordinary Occasions, lapsed the time in
both the late Kings Reigns. Others, who took the Oaths, happened to go away in
the Crowd, without signing the Declaration or Test. Some tendered their
Certificates, and were refused by Popish Justices. Others have performed all
Ceremonies, and the Records of the Sessions are either imbezled, or lost, by
neglect of Officers. Some again, by Mistake, have taken the Oaths in the
King's Bench, instead of Chancery; and signed the short Test, instead of the
long Test. Others, for want of Quarter Sessions, have also incurred the
Penalties. These, and many other Cases, may not be in every persons present
thoughts, and the Dissenter is willing that others should be saved, whatever
becomes of himself.

Query 11. Whether any of the late Justices did act like honest Men in their
Stations? Either they did, or they did not: If they did not, let them be
severel punished according to Law: If they did, Where is the prejudice to the
Government? O but they depended upon the King's Dispensing Power! What then?
Were they not forced to it in their own Defense? They did indeed depend upon
the Judgment of the Judges to be Law, and, for that Reason, were under no
Necessity of complying with the late King in taking off the Test, as some will
have it; No, it was not these Men, but the multitude of Addresses which
deceived the Late King, and brought all those late Miseries upon us.

Query 12. Whether the late Protestant Justices be Friends or Enemies to the
present Government? If Enemies, let them feel the Rigor of the Law: If Friends,
then it is not our Interest to reject or destroy them: No more than it would be
for Londonderry that is besieged, to destory a Fountain of water at one time,
which, by moderate use, would have supplied the Garrison with fresh water the
whole Siege.

Query 13. How shall we do to know who are our Friends, and who are our
Enemies? You may guess by their Religion, by their Interest, and by their
Deportment under this Revolution; and you may also add, to all this, a civil
Test.

Query 14. What Method then shall be taken to raise more Money? Such a Method
as is consistent with our Interest, as will not raise more Dust than it will
lay. Such a Method as will preserve our Friends, and destroy none but Enemies;
as will raise no Pity or Commiseration, and, consequently, no Aversion to the
Government. Such a Method as is proper after so great a Revolution, and may
unite all true Protestants at Home, against the Common Enemy abroad. Such a
Method as may prevent France from being Universal Monarch, and make England the
great Umpire of all Europe. But the particular Method is humbly submitted to
the Honorable Members of the House of Commons.

Query 15. Shall we then impose a certain Fine upon all such as refuse the
Oaths, and in case of a Criminal, that the Fine shall be doubled? The Dissenter
is so charitable as to believe that there are many pious and religious
Prelates, and other Members of the Church of England, who intend to live
quietly under the present Government, tho their Consciences may be tender in
this Point; and hope the Members of the Church of England will have as
favorable Construction of their Proceedings in the Late King's Reign. But it is
presumed that those who say they intend to live quietly under the present
Government, will not refuse to swear it, and to take such a Test as this, viz.

I (A. B.) do Swear, and Solemnly Profess, in the Presence of Almighty God,
That I will not take up Arms, nor by any other Ways or Means, Directly, or
Indirectly, Counsel or Assist any Person or Persons whatsoever against their
present Majesty's KING WILLIAM and QVEEN MARY. So help me God. And if any such
there be in this Kingdom, it may be our Interest to discover them, and very
just to raise a Tax upon them: For he who renounces Subjection, ren(...)
Protection, and, consequently, has not Right by Law to his Life or Estate. By
such (...)d you will oblige your Friends, and disable your Enemies; And either
such a Law will (...)onsiderable Sum, or it will not: If it will ^ot, then you
will have Men instead of Money, you will the better guess at your strength, and
what Measures to take hereafter, the Nation can lose nothing by such a Law: And
His Majesty having been Graciously pleased to intimate his pleasure, That He
shall not have Occasion for more Money till next Sessions, by that time a
better and more effectual Method may be discovered. But if it should so happen,
that by this means a considerable Sum may be raised, (as it is not impossible)
you will not lose or reject one Friend by it; but you only take from your
Enemies that Money which you may be sure will otherwise be made use of against
the Government, as soon as a fair Opportunity offers itself; And you will
thereby gain the great Advantage to make this happy Revolution more easy and
acceptable to the Nation,

By a Just Prevention of Future Taxes on the People.


