A Short ACCOUNT from, AND DESCRIPTION OF THE ISTHMUS OF DARIEN, WHERE THE
Scots Collony Are Settled.

With a Particular MAP of the Isthmus and Entrance to the River of Darien.

According to our late News, and Mr. Dampier, and Mr. Wafer.

EDINBURGH, Printed: And Sold by John Vallange, at his Shop on the North-side
of the Street, a little above the Cross: And by James Wardlaw, at his Shop in
the Parliament Closs, Price 7 Pence. 1699.

A short ACCOUNT of the late NEWS from DARIEN, etc.
THE Welcome News of our African Ships safe Arrival at America being come, I
know no better Way to satisfy the Curious, then by giving the Contents of some
Letters writ from the Place where they are Settled, dated about the End of
December last from New Edinburgh. A Captain of my Acquaintance, whom I know to
be an Intelligent Person writes thus.

We are here Settled in a very Pleasant Soil upon a Bay, perhaps one of the
Pleasantest in the West Indies: In the Division of the two Kingdoms of Mexico
and Peru, where a Thousand of the greatest Ships in Europe may Ride at Anchor
safe from Storms. We are just now making a Fort upon the Point of the Mouth of
the Bay, which will defend us against all Attempts whatsoever. Upon the second
of November last, our Ships came to Anchor in the Bay, and in two Days all our
Men were set on Shore, without any Opposition. The Natives received us very
Kindly, there not being many of them, and their Plantations but a few: However,
from thence they come daily to us with Plantaines, Yams, Potatoes, Sugar Canes,
Cocks and Hens, and such things as the Country affords. Several of our People
have been abroad at their Plantations, and have been very Kindly Entertained by
them. Show all my Friends and Comrades, that I have no less Thoughts of the
Undertaking now then ever, but rather, upon good Ground, far bigger. Both our
Ministers are dead, and their Deaths very much Lamented by us all: Our Officers
are all Alive, save Lieutenant James Inglis, and Lieutenant Hugh Hay. Our
Passage was very good, but somewhat Longsome. We had not near so great Loss of
our Men, as was expected. we have no Reason to doubt, but that there are Gold
Mines in this Place, for the Natives have Plenty of Gold Dust, and Rock Gold
amongst them, although they dare not open the Mines, for fear of the Spainiard.
They do not know the true Value or Use of it, for I saw one give for an Old
Coat, not worth above Twenty Shilling Sterlin, to the Value of Twenty Guineas
of Gold. The next Occasion I shall tell you of a Cargo, shall be worth your
while to come over with.

Other Letters are much of the same Import, As that they Arrived them upon the
second of November, Sounded the Coasts on the third, and Landed on the fourth.
That the Rains were over, before they Arrived there. The Men wear a Plate of
Silver or Gold hanging over their Lip (some whereof ar come Home, and I have
seen one of them) That the Inhabitants live to a great Age, some to a Hundred
and Twenty Years. That the Inhabitants have some Quantity both of Dust and Rock
Gold: And that after Falling of the Rains, the Rivers have a Scum upon them, of
the Color of Gold: And some of the Clay that they find, seems to have a
Mixture of something like Gold. But they are not so busy in Felling of Trees,
and Clearing of the Ground, and Fortifying themselves, that they have had no
Leisure yet to try Experiments: And that they do not doubt, but that they have
Gold Mines near to them.

That it would Rejoice any Scots Heart, in coming in to that Bay, to see two
Scots Flags Flying, one upon their Main Fort, which is pretty well advanced,
and another upon a Redoubt, from whence they have a great Prospect.

My Scale being so small, I hope the Intelligent will not expect it should
Answer to a Nicety, or that there is so great a Distance between the Flags.

I hope these who understand the Expenses of Cutting of Copper Plates, will not
Quarrel the Price of my Book.

There being such Abundance of Letters spread over the Country, I hope it will
not be expected, I should insist much in Repeating of them, so I proceed to Mr.
Dampier's and Mr. Wafer's Description.

A Short Description of the Isthmus of DARIEN, etc:
THE Project of our Scots African Company, being a Design of so great Import,
That upon the Success thereof, the Honor and Happiness of the Nation, does in
a great Measure depend:

Me thinks there will be few True Scots Men but will be concerned to know
something of their Success, and where they Design to Settle, and what is the
Climate, Air, Soil, People, etc. of that place: I have therefore undertaken
this small work for public Satisfaction.

It is generally agreed to, by the most Relations we have had, That they are
Settled, or Design to Settle, at the Isthmus of Darien, Golden Island, or River
of Darien: Of which I shall give you a short account; which that I may do to
the better Satisfaction. I do not insist upon what these Places have been, nor
Consulted some Old Map or Geographer about it: For I know there are great
Changes, within these few Years, upon some of these Parts, by the Pirates or
Buccaneers. As for Instance, That remarkable Town of Nombre de Dios, is nothing
now but the Name of a Town, the Place and Town being desolate.

I have therefore given (...), if not all, of what you have here, out of Two of
the latest Writers, who have both been a considerable time in those Parts, and
have published Two very late Books: viz. Mr. Dampier in Anno School, and Mr.
Wafer this same Year. Which Books, being of a considerable Price, and treating
of several other Parts of the World, and containing some Digressions; I have
thought it would be no unacceptable Work to Extract what relates more
particularly to Our Scots African Company.

This Isthmus of Darien, is that narrow Neck of Land, or narrowest part of the
Isthmus of America, whereby the main Land of North- America and South, are
joined together, (for an Isthmus is nothing else, but a narrow Neck of Land
betwixt two Main Continents, or Main Lands)

NAME
It is called, Isthmus of DARIEN, probably from the great River of that Name,
wherewith its Northern Coast is bounded on the East

LATITUDE.
It is mostly comprehended, (as Mr. Wafer says) betwixt the Latitudes of 8 and
10 North. But its Breadth in the narrowest part, is much about One Degree, or
Threescore Miles.

It is bounded on the North and South, by the North and South Oceans; and is of
a very singular Situation, very Pleasant and Agreeable.

A great many valueable Islands ly scattered along each Coast, the
Bastimento's, and others; but especially the large range of the Sambalo's on
the North side, and the Kings, or Pearl Islands and Perica on the South side in
the Bay of Panama this Bay is caused by the bending of the Isthmus; and for the
Bigness of it, there is not (it may be) a more Pleasant and Advantageous one
any where to be found.

The Land of this Continent is almost every where of an unequal Surface,
distinguished with Hills and Valleys, of great variety for Height, Depth, and
Extent: They are generally watered with Rivers, Brooks, and Perennial Springs,
with which the Country very much abounds, and do most of them come from a
Ridge or Chain of High Hills, in a manner parallel to the North shore; from
whence you may have a fair Prospect of the North-Sea, and its various making of
the Shore.

Betwixt these Hills and the Shore, it is most part covered with Woods.

RIVERS,
The Rivers are some of them indifferent large, tho but few Navigable, as
having Bars and Sholes at the Mouths, and on the North-side their course is
but short, rising from the main Ridge of Hills.

Rivers of DARIEN, CHAGRE, and CONCEPTION.
The River of DARIEN is indeed a very large one; but the Depth at the
Entrance, is not answerable to the Wideness of its Mouth, tho its deep enough
further in: But from thence to CHAGRE, the whole length of this Coast, they are
little better then Brooks: Nor is the River of CONCEPTION any other, which
comes out overagainst La Sounds Key in the Samballo's,

The Soil on this North Coast is various; generally its good Land rising in
Hills; but to the Sea here and there Suamps,

CARET BAY and GOLDEN ISLAND,
Inclusively from Caret Bay, which lies in the River Darien, and is the only
Harbor in it to the Promontory near Golden Island; the Shore of the Isthmus is
indifferently fruitful, partly Sandy Bay, and part of it muddy.

CARET BAY,
Caret Bay, has 2 or 3 Rivulets of fresh Water falling into it, as Mr. Wafer
is informed, but he says he was not there.

To the Westward of the Cape is a Bay; the Entrance whereof is deep Water, and
has three Islands lying before it, which make it an extraordinary good Harbor.

GOLDEN ISLAND.
The Eastermost of these Three, is Golden Island, (where, its Reported our
African Company design to Settle) it is a small Island, with a fair deep
Channel between it and the Main: It is Rocky and and Steep; all round to the
Sea (and thereby Naturally Fortified) except only the Landing Place, which is a
small Sandy-Bay on the South side, toward the Harbor, from which it gently
rises. It is moderatly High, and covered with small Trees or Shrubs. The Land
of the Isthmus opposite to it, is excellent fruitful Land, of a black Mold,
with Sand intermixed, and is pretty level, for 4 or 5 Miles, till you come to
the foot of the Hills.

Mr. Wafer says, He has been a shore, and in the Harbor near it, for a
Fortnight together. Near the Eastern-point of the Bay, which is not above 3 or
4 Furlongs distant from Golden Island; there is a Rivulet of very good Water.
To go to Golden Island Harbor, you most enter by the East End of Golden
Island, between that, and the Main.

To the South of Sancta Maria, and the River of Congo, is the Gold River,
affording Gold Dust in great plenty: For hither the Spainards of Panama, and
Sancta Maria Town, bring up their Slaves to gather up the Gold Dust.

Mr. Wafer says, That during his abode with Lacenta (their King or Chief
Person) he often accompained him a Hunting, wherein he took great Delight: And
that one time accompanying him, they passed by a River where the Spainards were
gathering Gold.

Mr. Dampier takes this River to be one of these which comes from the
South-east, and runs into the Gulf of St. Michael. When they came near the
place where they wrought, they stole softly throw the Woods, and placing
themselves behind the Great Trees, looked on them a good while, the
Gold-Gatherers not seeing them.

The way of gathering GOLD
The manner of their Getting Gold is as follows: They have little wooden
Dishes, which they dip softly into the Water, and and take it up half full of
Sand, which they draw Gently out of the Water, and at every Dipping they take
up Gold mixed with the Sand, and Water, more or less. This they shake, and the
Sand rises, and goes over the brims of the Dish with the Water; but the Gold
settles to the Bottom. This done they bring it out, and dry it in the Sun, and
then Pound it in a Mortar. Then they take it out and spread it on Paper; and
having a Load stone, they move that over it, which draws all the Iron from it;
and this they bottle up: If they meet with good Success, and a favorable Time,
They carry with them, by Report (for Mr. Wafer says* He Learnt these
Particulars of a Spainard whom they took at St. Maria under Captain Sharp)
18000 or 20000 Pound weight of Gold: But whether they Gather more or less, it is
incredible (he says) to Report the store of Gold, which is Yearly washed down
out of Rivers.

Cheapo is a Considerable River, but no good Entry for Shoalls.

WEATHER.
The Weather is Warm, and has a Season of Rain.

TREES.
There Is in this Country, Great Variety of Trees of several Kinds, unknown to
us in Europe, as well Fruit Trees, as others.

COTTON and MACKAW TREES.
The Cotton Tree is the largest of any, and grows in most parts of the Isthmus.
On the Continent on the South Side of the Isthmus, are Mackaw Tree, which the
Indians frequently cut down to get the Berries.

BIBBY TREE.
Here are Bibby Tree, which yields a Potable Liquor: Coco Trees are in the
Islands.

On the Main grows a Tree, that has Fruit like a Cherry, and Plantaines in
Abundance, and Bonano a Fruit Tree.

And in the Islands* Mamee Trees with a Wholesome Delicious Fruit, and
Sapadilla has a pleasant Fruit on the Ma^^; Pine-aple Prickle Pear, and Popes
Head a Plant.

On the Isthmus also Sugar Canes, which the Indians make no other Use of, but
to Chew and Suck out the Juice: There are also Calabash Tree, the largest of
whose Nuts Shells will hold four or five English Quarts, and are made Use of by
the Indians as Vessels. Gourds also, Eatable and Medicinal: An Useful Plant
called Silk Grass for making Stockins of, with many other Sorts of Trees,
Plants, and Tobacco.

BEASTS.
The Country has of its own, a kind of Hog called Pecary, and another called
Waree, both wild and good Meat; Deer, Dogs, Rabbits, Monkeys, an Insect called
Soldiers Insect like a Snail, in great plenty, and delicious Meat, but
poisonous if ^sed with Machaneel Apples, their Oil is an excellent Salve; there
are also Land Crabs, called Guano's.

BIRDS.
They have several Sorts of Birds, some of Kinds unknown to us, remarkable both
for their Beauty and good Relish of their Flesh; such as

Chicaly-Chicaly a large Land Bird. The Quam a large Land Bird, another Shaped
not unlike a Partridge, all Eatable, the last very good Meat. The Corrosow,
large as a Turkey Hen, their Flesh something Tough, otherways very good Meat.
Variety of Parrots, Parakits, Macaw-Birds, a Beautiful Bird which the Indians
Tame, Woodpecker.

DUNGHILL FOWELS.
They have great Plenty of Poultry, as also small Birds, Flying Insects, Bees
which Mr. Wafer inclines to think wants Stings; for he says, he has had many of
them upon his Naked Body, without being Stung.

FISH.
The North Sea Coast abounds in Fish, and has great Variety of them, such as
Tarpoon, Sharks, Dogfish, Oldwives, Paracoods, some of the last Named are
Poisonous, Gar Fish two Foot long, Sculpines one Foot long, with several
others, and Shell Fish.

Mr. Dampier gives Account of a considerable Fish called Manatee, or Sea Cow,
in the River of Darien, an Excellent Fish about the Bigness of a Horse, ten or
twelve Foot long, its Mouth much like the Mouth of a Cow, Eyes no bigger than a
Pea, two large Fins, under each of which, the Female has a small Dug to Suckle
her Young, they live on Grass which grows in the Sea: A Calf that Sucks, is the
most Delicat Meat. He describes the Way of taking them.

The way of Catching Manatee or Sea-Cow.
There are a sort of the Indians called Moskito, Men, Dexterous at stricking of
this, or other Fishes. The way is this, They have always a small Canoa for
their use, which they keep very Neat and Clean. They use no Oars, but Padles
the broad part of which, does not go Tapering toward the Staff or Handle of
it, as in the Oar, nor do they use it in the same manner, by laying it on the
Side of the Vessel, but hold it Perpendicularly, Gripping the Staff hard with
both Hands, and putting back the Water by main Strength, and very quick
Strokes. One of the Moskitoes (for there go but Two in a Canoa) Sits in the
Stern, the other Kneels down in the Head, and both Padle, till they come to the
Place where they expect their Game, then they ly still, or Padle very softly,
looking well about them; and he that is in the Head of the Canoa, lays down his
Padle, and stands up with his Striking Staff in his Hand: This Staff is about
Eight Foot long, almost as big as a Man's Arm at the Great End, in which there
is a Hole to place his Harpoon in, at the other end of his Staff, there is a
piece of Light Wood called Bobwood, with a Hole in it, throw which the small
end of the Staff comes, and on this piece of Bobwood, there is a Line of 10 or
12 Fathom wound neatly about, and the end of the Line made fast to it. The
other end of the Line is made fast to the Harpoon, which is at the great End of
the Staff, and the Moskito Man keeps about a Fathom of it loose in his Hand.
When he strikes, the Harpoon presently comes out of the Staff, and as the
Manatee swims away, the Line runs off from the Bob; and although at first, both
Staff and Bobb may be carried under Water, yet as the Line runs off, it will
rise again. Then the Moskito Men Paddle with all their might, to get hold of
the Bob again, and spend usually a Quarter of an Hour before they get it. When
the Manatee begins to be tired, it lies still, and then the Moskito Men Paddle
to the Bob, and take it up, and begin to hale in the Line. When the Manatee
feels them, he swims away again, with the Canoa after him: Then he that Steers,
must be Nimble, to turn the Head of the Canoa that way that his Consort points,
who being in the Head of the Canoa, and holding the Line, both sees and feels
which way the Manatee is swimming. Thus the Canoa is Towed with a Violent
Motion, till the Manatees Strength decays. Then they gather in the Line, which
they are often forced to let all go to the very End. At length, when the
Creatures Strength is spent, they hale it up to the Canoas Side, and knock it
on the Head, and Tow it to the nearest Shore, where they make it fast, and seek
for another; which having taken, they go on Shore with it, to put it into their
Canoa: For it is so heavy, that they cannot lift it in, but they hale it up in
Shoal-Water, as near the Shore as they can, and then Overset the Canoa, laying
one Side close to the Manatee. Then they Roll it in, which brings the Canoa
upright again, and when they have Heaved out the Water, they fasten a Line to
the other Manatee that lies Afloat, and Tow it after them.

Mr. Dampier says, He has known two Moskito Men for a Week, every day bring
abroad 2 Manatee in this manner, the least of which has not weighted less than
600 Pound, and that in a very small Canoa, that 3 English Men would scarce
adventure to go in. When they strick a Cow that has a young one, they seldom
miss the Calf, for she commonly takes her Young under one of her Fins. But if
the Calf is so big, that she cannot carry it, or so frightened that she only
minds to save her own Life; yet the Young never leaves her till the Moskito Men
have an opportunity to strick her.

The manner of stricking Manatee and Tortoise, is much the same, only when they
seek for Manatee, they padle so Gently, that they have no Noise, and never
touch the side of the Canoa with their Padle; Because it is a Creature that
hears very well. But they are not so Nice where they seek for Tortoise, whose
Eyes are better than his Ears. They strik the Tortoise with a square sharp Iron
peg, the other with a Harpoon. The Moskito men make their own striking
Instruments, as Harpoons, Fishhooks, and Tortoise-Irons or Pegs. These Peggs or
Tortoise-Irons are made 4 square, sharp at one end, and not above an inch in
length, of such a figure as you see on the Margin. The small spike at the broad
end has the Line fastened to it, and goes also into a hole at the end of the
Stricking staff, which when the Tortoise is struck, flies off, the Iron and end
or the Line fastened to it going quite within the Shell, where it is so buiried
that the Tortoise cannot possibly escape.

Of the Indian Inhabitants.
The Indian Inhabitants of the Isthmus are not very Numerous, but they live
thickest on the North Side: The Size of the Men is usually about five or six
Foot: Straight, Clean Limbed, Big Bon'd. The Young Women very Plump, Fat, Well
Shaped, and have a Brisk Eye. The Elder are very ordinary, both Sexes have long
Black Hair down to the Middle of their Back. Their Color is Copper Color, or
Orange Tanny.

Mr. Wafer gives also an Account of a strange sort of People, (whereof there
are but few) whiter in color then any Europeans, much like that of a white
Horse, their-bodies beset all over with a white Down, throw which the Skin
appears it is so thin set, Their Eyelids bend and open in an oblong-Figure,
forming an Arch, or Figure of a crescent: with the points downwards. From
hence, and from their seeing so clear as they do in a Moon-shiny night, they
used to call them Moon eyed: For they see not very well in the Sun; so that in
the Daytime they care not to go abroad. But notwithstanding their being
Sluggish in the Daytime; yet when Moon-shyny Nights come, they are all Life
and Activity, running abroad and into the Woods. He adds, that Lacenta (their
Prince, or chief Person) told him, That it was throw the force of the Mothers
imagination, looking on the Moon at the time of Conception, they came to be
thus White: But he leaves this to others to judge of.

Both these and the Copper colored Indians, use painting their bodies, even of
the sucking Children some times. They make Figures of Birds, Beasts, Men,
Trees, or the like, up and down in every part of the Body, more especially in
the Face. The Women are the Painters. The Colors they use, and like most, are
Red, Yellow, and Blew. Finer Figures they imprint thus; they prick all over
with a sharp Thorn, till the Blood gushes out, then they rub the place with
their Hands first dipped in the color they design, and the Picture so made is
indelible; but scarce one in Forty of them is painted this way.

They wear no Clothes ordinarily, but only the Women have a Clout or piece of
Cloth about their Middle, tied behind with a Thread, and hanging down to their
Knees, or their Ankles if they can get one large enough: They make these of
Cotton: Nothing will oblige the Women more, than to give them Clothes,
especially of Gaudy Colors,

The Men go ordinarily quite naked, and have only a small Vessel of Gold or
Silver, or Plantain leaf, of a Conick Figure, where with they cover the Penis.

Both Sexes are a Modest and cleanly people; when they would go to Stool they
choice always to go into the River, having a great Sense of Shame as to that
particular.

Yet the Men also have a value for Clothes, and if any of them had an old Shirt
given him by any of the Europeans, he would be sure to wear it, and strut about
at no ordinary rate. Besides this, they have a sort of long Cotton Garments,
which they wear at Great Occasions, as attending the King, or at a Feast: The
Women carry those after them, and they put them on when they come to the place.

The Men wear a piece of Plate hanging over their Mouths at all times,
generally of Silver; it is of Ovall Figure, covering their Mouth from Corner to
Corner; the plate is like the figure of a Half Moon, which gently pincheth the
Bridle of the Nose with it is points, it hings dangling from thence; it is about
the thickness of a Guinea. These when they go a Hunting, are smaller: Mr. Wafer
wore such an one among them of Gold.

In stead of this plate, the Women wear a Ring hanging down in the same manner.
It goes throw the Bridle of the Nose. They have also several other Ornaments,
as Strings of Teeth, Shells, Beads, etc. when they would appear in State.

HOUSES
Their Houses ly thin and scattering, and always by a Riverside: Their Building
Irregular, in length about 24 Foot, the Breadth proportionable: No Chimney, but
a hole in the Thatch Several Houses in the Village or Neighborhood, have one
Warehouse or Fort, common to them, which is generally at least 120 or 130 Foot
long, about 25 broad. The Wall about 9 or 10 Foot high: The Sides and Ends of
these Warehouses are full of Holes, each about as Wide as one's Fist. Out of
these they View an Approaching Enemy, and Shoot their Arrows: They have no Way
of Flanking an Enemy: There is a Door-way at each Side, and to Barrocado it, a
Sort of Door made of Bamboes and Maccaw Wood, Split and Bound together with
Withs; it is about a Foot thick. This they have ready set up against an Enemy's
Entrance, and two or three Posts in the Ground to support it: Yet they are
easily set on Fire. And the Spainards Shoot into the Thatch, Arrows with long
Shanks, made Red Hot for that Purpose.

Their HUSBANDRY.
In the Plantations they set so much Plaintaine (which, as I am Informed by one
Mr. B --, another Traveller in those Parts, is a Tree with broad great Leaves,
and has a large fruit, Pale or Straw Colored, almost of the Color of our
Carrets, but not so Reddish or Yellow) as serves their Occasions. The first
thing of their Husbandry, is usually to cut down the Trees, and clear a piece
of Ground: They often let the Trees ly on the place three or four Years after
they are cut down, and then set Fire to them and the Underwood or Stumps,
burning all together; yet in the mean time they plant Maiz (a sort of Indian
Corn, whereof one produces more than 100, and is that which hangs in Skippers,
or Sailers Houses, and is called sometimes Indian W^eat, sometimes Turkish
Corn) among the Trees as they ly. So much of the Roots of the Trees as are
under Ground, they suffer to ly there and Rott, having no Way to Grub them up.
When the Ground is pretty clear, they How it up into little Ridges; in each of
these Hillocks they make a Hole with their Fingers, and throw in two or three
Grains of Maiz, as we do Garden Beans, covering it up with Earth.

The Seed Time is about April, the Harvest about September or October.

An Odd Way of Fermenting Drink. They make a Drink of their Maiz Bruised, which
they call Chichach Co-pach; (for Co-pach signifies Drink.) They Steep in a
Trough of Water, Twenty or Thirty Bushels, till the Water is Impregnated with
the Corn, and begins to turn Sour: Then the Women, usually some Old Women, who
have little else to do, come together, and Chew Grains of Maiz in their Mouths,
which they Spit out, each into a Gourd or Calabash: And when they think they
have a sufficient Quantity of this Spittle and Maiz in the Calabashes, they
Empty them into the Trough of Water, after having first taken out the Maiz that
was Infused into it: And this serves in stead of Barm or Yeast, setting all in
a Ferment: It Tastes like Sour Small Beer. This is their Choice Drink; for
ordinarily they Drink Mislaw, which Mr. Wafer describes at large.

The Women are, in general, the Drudges of the Family; Yet they do it
Cheerfully, and are Well Conditioned, Pitiful, and Courteous to one another,
but especially to Strangers; They observe their Husbands, with all Profound
Respect and Duty upon all Occasions: And on the other Side, their Husbands are
very Kind and Loving to them.

When a Woman is Delivered of a Child, another Woman takes it in her Arms,
within half an Hour or less after it is Born, and takes the Lying-in Woman upon
her Back, and goes with both of them into the River, and Washes them. The
Child, for the first three Months, is Tied upon a Board, and this Piece of
Board, or Maccaw-Wood, is Suathed to the Back of the Child, and their Children
generally grow very Straight. The Mother takes up the Child to give it Suck,
Board and all.

As the Children grow up, the Boys are Bred to their Fathers Exercises,
especially Shooting with the Bow and Arrow, or Throwing a Lance. Mr. Wafer
says, he has seen a little Boy about Eight Years Old, would set a Cane up upon
one End, and going about Twenty Paces from it, would Split it with a Bow and
Arrow, and not miss once in several Essays.

They have a Severe Punishment, if a Man Debauches a Virgin. But the Fact must
be proved by Oath, which is by their Tooth.

Their MARRIAGE.
When they Marry, the Father of the Bride, or next Man of Kin, keeps her
privately in some Apartment with himself, the first seven Nights, and she is
then delivered to her Husband.

When a Man Disposes of his Daughter, he Invites all the Indians within Twenty
Miles round to a Great Feast. which he provides for them. The Men who come to
the Wedding, bring their Axes along with them, to Work with: The Women bring
about half a Bushel of Maiz: The Boys bring Fruit and Roots: The Girls, Fowls
and Eggs; for none come Empty Handed. They set their Presents at the Door of
the House, and go away again, till all the rest of the Guests have brought
theirs, which are all Received in, and Disposed of by the People of the House.

Then the Men return first to the Wedding, and the Bridegroom presents each Man
with a Calabash of Strong Drink, and Conducts them through the House one by
one, into some open Place behind it: The Women come next, who likeways receive
a Calabash of Liquor, and March throw the House: Then come the Boys; and last
of all the Girls, who all Drink at the Door, and go after the rest. Then come
the Fathers of the Young Couple, with their Son and Daughter. The Father of the
Bridegroom leads his Son, and the Father of the Bride leads his Daughter. The
former makes a Speech to the Company, and then Dances about with many Antic
Gestures, till he is all on a Sweat. Then Kneeling down, he gives his Son to
the Bride, whose Father is Kneeling also, and holds her, having Danced himself
into a Sweat as the other. Then the Young Couple take each other by the Hand,
and the Bridegroom returns the Bride to her Father: And thus ends the Ceremony.

Then all the Men take up their Axes, and Run, Shouting and Hollowing, to a
Tract of Wood-Land, which is before laid out for a Plantation for the Young
Couple. There they fall to Work as fast as they can, Cutting down the Woods.
Thus they continue about seven Days. As they clear the Ground, the Women Plant
Maiz, or something else. They Build an House for the new Married Couple.

Then they Feast, and Drink Chicha Co-pah, Drinking Night and Day, till all the
Liquor is spent, which lasts usually three or four Days, some always Drinking,
while others are Drunk and Sleeping. And when all the Drink is out, and they
have recovered their Senses, they all return to their own Homes.

A Map of the ISTHMUS of DARIEN and Bay of PANAMA
To the Right Honorable the COUNCIL GENERAL and COURT of DIRECTORS of the
COMPANY of SCOTLAND Trading to AFRICA and The INDIES This Map Is Humbly
Dedicated



Ia. Aytoun Sculpsit

The Men's EMPLOYMENTS.
The Men, when at Home, trouble themselves with little Business; but, that they
may not be quite Idle, they will often be making their Cups and Baskets,
Arrows, and Heads for them; Lances, Nets, and the like.

When Flesh fails at Home, they go out a Hunting, a Hunting Expedition lasts
sometimes three or four, sometimes ten, twelve, seventeen, or eighteen Days,
according as they meet with Game: They Hunt Pecary, Waree, Quams, Chicaly
Chicalees, Corrosows, or any other Beast or Bird they meet with.

Their TRAVELING.
When they Travel, they Guide themselves either by the Sun when it Shines, or
by Steering to such a Determinat Point, observing the Bending of the Trees
according as the Wind is. If they are at a Loss this Way, they Notch the Bark
of Trees, to see which Side is thickest, which is always the South.

Women's DIVERSIONS.
The Women have Dancings and Merriments by themselves, when their Husbands
Pastimes are over; for they never Feast, nor Play with the Men, but they will
Drink by themselves till they are Fudled.

They take great Care of their Husbands, when they have made themselves Drunk:
For when they perceive him so, they get one or two more Women to Assist them to
take him up, and put him into his Hammock, where, as he lies Snoaring, they
stand by, and Sprinkle Water to Cool him, Washing his Hands, Feet, and Face,
Stroaking off that Water with their Hands, as it grows Warm.

DESCRIPTION of LACENTA's PALACE.
This House is Situat on a Fine little Hill, on which grows a Stately Grove of
Cotton Trees, the Bodies of these Trees were generally six Foot in Diameter,
nay some eight, nine, ten, eleven: For (Mr. Wafer, who gives the Relation,
says) four Indians and his self, took Hand in Hand round a Tree, and could not
Fathom it: Here was likeways a Stately Plaintain Walk, and a Grove of other
small Trees, that would make a Pleasant Artificial Wilderness, if Industry and
Art were bestowed on it.

The Circumference of this Pleasant little Hill, contains at least a Hundred
Acres of Land, and is a Peninsula of an Oval Form, almost Surrounded with two
great Rivers, one coming from the East, the other from the West, which,
approaching within forty Foot of each other at the Front of the Peninsula,
separat again, Embracing the Hill, and meet on the other Side, making there one
pretty large River, which runs very Swift. There is therefore but one Way to
come in to this Seat, which, as is before observed, is not above forty Foot
Wide between the Rivers on each Side: And its Fenced with Hollow Bamboes,
Popes-Heads, and Pricle-Pears, so thick set from one Side the Neck of Land to
the other, that its impossible for any Enemy to approach it.

On this Hill live fifty principal Men of the Country, all under Lacenta's
Command, who is as a Prince over all the South Parts of the Isthmus of Darien.
The Indians both there, and on the North Side also, paying him great Respect.
But the South Side is his Country, and this Hill his Seat or Palace.

There is only one Canoa belonging to it, which serves to Ferry over Lacenta
and the rest of them.

Lacenta having desired Mr. Wafer and his Companions to stay with him, they had
not been long there, before an Occurrence happened, which Tended much to the
Increasing the Good Opinion, Lacenta and his People had Conceived of them, and
brought Mr. Wafer into particular Esteem with them.

The INDIANS WAY OF LETTING BLOOD.
It so happened, that one of Lacenta's Wives, being Indisposed, was to be let
Blood: Which (Mr Wafer says) the Indians perform in this Manner: The Patient is
Seated on a Stone in the River, and one, with a small Bow, Shoo's little Arrows
into the Naked Body of the Patient, up and down, Shooting them as fast as he
can, not missing any part. But the Arrows are Gagged, so that they can Penetrat
no further than we generally Thrust our Lancets: And if by Chance they Hit a
Vein which is full of Blood, and the Blood Spurts out a little, they will Leap
and Skip about, showing many Antic Gestures, by Way of Rejoicing and Triumph.

Mr. Wafer says he was by, while this was performing on Lacenta's Lady: And
perceiving their Ignorance, told Lacenta, that if he pleased, he would show him
a better Way, without putting the Patient to so much Torment; so, at Lacenta's
Allowance or Command, Mr. Wafer Bound up her Arm with a piece of Bark, and with
his Lancet Breathed a Vein: But this Rash Attempt (he says) had like to have
cost him his Life; for Lacenta seeing the Blood Issue out in a Stream, which
used to come only Drop by Drop, got hold of his Lance, and Swore by his Tooth,
that if she did otherwise then well, he would have Mr. Wafers Hearts Blood. Mr.
Wafer says, he desired him to be patient, and drew off about twelve Ounces, and
Bound up her Arm, and desired she might rest till the next Day; by which Means
the Fever Abated, and she had not another Fit.

This gained Mr. Wafer so much Reputation, that Lacenta came to him, and before
all his Attendants, Bowed and Kissed Mr. Wafers Hand: Then the rest came thick
about him, and Kissed his Hand, others his Knee, and some his Foot: After which
he was taken up into a Hammock, and carried on Men's Shoulders, Lacenta himself
making a Speech in his Praise, and Commending him as much superior to any of
their Doctors. Thus he was carried from Plantation to Plantation, and lived in
great Splendour and Repute, Administering both Physic and Phlebotomy to these
that wanted; for tho he had lost his Salves and Plasters, by a Negro's running
away with his Knapsack: Yet he preserved a Box of Instruments, and a few
Medicaments wrapped up in an Oil Cloth, by having them in his Pocket.

He lived thus some Months among the Indians, who in a manner Adored him: Some
of these Indians had been Slaves to the Spaniards, and had made their Escapes,
which he supposes, was the Cause of their expressing a Desire of Baptism: But
more to have an European Name given them, then for any thing they knew of
Christianity.

DESCRIPTION of another Sort of INDIANS.
Mr. Dampier relates, That upon some Islands lying near the Main, called by the
Privateers the Corn Islands, which he says, he takes to be the same, which are
generally called in the Maps, the Pearl-Islands, they went Ashore, but found
none of the Inhabitants; for (says he) here are but a few Poor Naked Indians
that live here; who have been so often Plundered by the Privateers. that they
have but little Provisions; and when they see a Sail, they hide themselves;
otherwise Ships that come here would take them, and make Slaves of them; and I
have seen some of them that have been Slaves. They are People of a mean
Stature, yet strong Limbs; they are of a dark Copper Color, black Hair, full
round Faces, small black Eyes their Eyebrows hanging over their Eyes, low
Foreheads, short thick Noses, not High, but Flattish; full Lips, and short
Chins. They have a Fashion to cut Holes in the Lips of the Boys, when they are
Young, close to their Chin; which they keep open with little Pegs, till they
are fourteen or fifteen Years Old: Then they wear Beards in them, made of
Turtle or Tortoise-shell, in the Form you see in the Copper-plate. The little
Notch at the upper End, they put in through the Lip, where it remains between
the Teeth and the Lip; the under part hangs down over their Chin. This they
commonly wear all Day, and when they Sleep, they take it out. They have
likewise Holes bored in their Ears, both Men and Women, when Young; and by
continual Stretching them with long Pegs, they grow to be as big as a Milled
Five Shilling piece Herein they wear Pieces of Wood, Cut very Round and Smooth,
so that Page ^ 18
The Nose Plate
their Ear seems to be all Wood, with a little Skin about it. Another Ornament
the Women use, is about their Legs, which they are very Curious in; for from
the Infancy of the Girls, their Mothers make fast a piece of Cotton Cloth
about the Small of their Leg, from the Ankle to their Calf, very hard; which
makes them have a very full Calf: This the Women wear to their Dying Day. Both
Men and Women go Naked, only a Clout about their Wastes; yet they have but
little Feet, though they go Barefoot.

The Caution of Mr. Dampier's Crew, in Eating the Fruit of these Countries.
They take this for a General Rule, when they meet with any Fruits that they
have not seen before, if they see them Peck'd by Birds, then they may freely
Eat, but if they see no such Sign, they let them alone.

Mr. Dampier giving an Account, how he went toward the Coast of Cartagena,
That in his Way thither, they passed by the River of Darien, which he says (as
before I noticed) is very broad at the Mouth: And that Captain Coxon went up
this River with a Party of Men, and that every Man carried a small strong Bag
to put his Gold in.

That they Rowed about a Hundred Leagues, before they came to any Settlement,
and then found some Spaniards, who lived there to Truck with the Indians for
Gold; THERE BEING GOLD SCALES IN EVERY HOUSE.

This much for a Taste of the Nature of that Country: They that are Curious,
may Read these Authors, viz. Mr. Dampier and Mr. Wafer, who are both more full
and very pleasant.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. Line 25. Read Mr. Dampier 's third Edition. Page3. Line 27. All within
the Parenthesis deleatur. The Map seems to make Golden Island too near the
Entrance of the River, and a Bay with some Islands, which it might perhaps be
righter if it wanted, and the Flag should not stand upon an Island. The Word
New Edinburgh, and Port Caledonia seem placed too far Eastward.


